Income Tax Appellate Tribunal - Delhi
Lufthansa Cargo India Private ... vs Dcit [Alongwith T.D.S. Appeal ... on 30
June, 2004
Equivalent citations: 2004 91 ITD 133 Delhi, 2005 274 ITR 20 Delhi, (2005) 92
TTJ Delhi 837
Bench: R Gupta, K Prasad
ORDER R.K. Gupta, Judicial Member
1\. These are eight appeals filed by assessee and department against the
orders of CIT (Appeals). Out of eight appeals, five appeals arise from a
consolidated order passed by the CIT (A) for the three Financial Years
1997-98, 1998-99 and 1999-2000 relevant to Assessment years 1998-99 to
2000-01, respectively. The CIT (A) has partly confirmed the orders Under
Section 201/201(1A) passed by the Assessing Officer holding the assessee to be
in default for non-deduction of tax at source on payments made to non-resident
parties for overhaul of its air-crafts, engines and components etc. She
however held that such payments to the residents of UK and USA are not
chargeable to tax keeping in view the provisions of the DTAAs with those
countries. The Assessee is in the appeal before us for all the three years.
The Revenue is in appeal for Financial Years 1998-99 to 1999-00 only. As the
issues are common in all the three years, these appeals are disposed by a
fees for included/technical services as defined in Article 12.4(b) of the US
treaty and Article 13.4(c) of the UK treaty, respectively. The Ld. DR relies
on the order of the Assessing Officer; whereas, according to the Ld. Counsel
for the assessee, the issue is squarely covered in the assessee's favour by
the decision of the ITAT, Bombay Bench 'C', in the case of Raymond Ltd. (2003
80 TTJ (Mumbai) 120). We however do not propose to go into this controversy in
view of our decision that the impugned payments to non-residents for repairs
of components are not chargeable to tax under the Act, and therefore the
assessee was not liable to deduct tax Under Section 195 of the Act. In this
view of the matter, the Revenue's appeals fail.
58\. We now take the appeals filed by assessee relating to penalty Under
Section 271C for assessment years 1997-98, 1998-99 and 1999-2000.
58.1 We have already allowed the appeals of the assessee on quantum, i.e.,
against order Under Section 201/201 (1A). Therefore, these appeals have to be
allowed because the basis on which the penalties Under Section 271C were
imposed have already quashed. Therefore, these appeals of assessee in regard
issues are common in all the three years, these appeals are disposed by a
consolidated order.
2\. The remaining three appeals are by assessee against sustenance of penalty
Under Section 271C for these three years. We will take first the appeals of
the assessee and department in regard to levy of interest Under Section 201
and 201(1A).
3\. The brief facts of the case are that the assessee is a domestic company
which had acquired four Boeing Cargo Aircrafts in mid-1997 from a foreign
company. The assessee obtained license from the Director General of Civil
Aviation (DGCA), the licensing authority, to operate these aircraft on
international routes only. It also engaged crew, technical personnel,
engineers and other ground staff and wet-leased the aircrafts to a foreign
cargo company. The assessee periodically made payments to non-residents on
account of overhaul, repairs of its aircrafts, engines sub-assemblies and
rotables (hereinafter referred to as 'components') in workshops abroad. No tax
was deducted at source on such payments. No application Under Section 195(2)
was filed with the Assessing Officer either. The Assessing Officer held that
such payments were in the nature of 'fees for technical services' as defined
in Explanation 2 to Section 9(1)(vii)(b) of the Act, and were therefore
chargeable to tax on which tax should have been deducted at source Under
Section 195(1) of the act. The Assessing Officer also rejected the plea of the
assessee that the payments for repairs were incurred for earning income from
sources outside India and therefore the assessee's case fell within the
exclusionary clause of Section 9(1)(vii)(b). The Assessing Officer rejected
another plea of the assessee that the business of aircraft leasing was carried
on outside India. The assessee's alternate plea that in any case the payments
made to residents of USA, UK, Israel, Netherlands, Singapore and Thailand
could be taxed as business profits only and not as fees for technical services
keeping in view the relevant provisions of the DTAAs with those countries was
also rejected. The AO passed orders Under Section 201 of the Act deeming the
assessee to be an assessee in default for the Financial years 1997-98 to
1999-2000, and levied tax as well as interest under Section 201 (1A) of the
Act.
4\. In appeal, the CIT (A) also rejected the assessee's contention that the
payments made to the various non-residents for carrying out overhaul repairs
were not chargeable to tax. She treated the payments made to Lufthansa
Technik, a Germany company (hereinafter referred to as Technik), as the model
for considering the question of taxability of payments made to all other
foreign companies. CIT (A) took the view that such repairs require knowledge
of sophisticated technology and trained engineers are employed by the non-
residents for carrying out the overhaul repairs. According to her, the repairs
per se constituted 'fees for technical services' and therefore tax should have
been deducted at source.
4.1 Regarding payments made to residents of UK and USA the CIT (A) held that
the payments were not in the nature of "fees for technical or included
services" as per the relevant Article 12 of the DTAA read with the Memorandum
of Understanding with USA which equally applied to the UK Treaty. Payments
made to the residents of USA and UK were held to be 'business profits' and
since those companies did not have a PE in India, their income was not
chargeable to tax. The Revenue is in appal against the order of the CIT (A) on
this point.
5\. Both the assessee and Revenue have raised several grounds of appeal. The
learned counsel has filed written submissions on issue-wise. Thereafter the
counsel of the assessee argued grounds issue-wise and attention of the Bench
was drawn on various documents placed on record. These documents are in shape
of copy of agreement; copy of written submissions; details of payments; detail
of receipts. Attention of the Bench was drawn on various case laws relied upon
by him. The counsel of the assessee has also invited attention of the Bench on
issue-wise written submissions placed on record. On the other hand, the
learned DR strongly relied upon the orders of Assessing Officer and the
findings of CIT (Appeals) to the extent the order of the Assessing Officer was
confirmed. Heavy reliance was placed on the decisions relied upon by Assessing
Officer and CIT (Appeals) and it was stated that the ratio of the decision of
the Tribunal in case of Sahara Airlines is squarely applicable on the fats of
the present case. Therefore, the order of the Assessing Officer should be
confirmed.
5.1 After having heard the case at length and considered the issues involved,
we feel that the grounds raised by the assessee need to be considered first,
as these go to the very root of the controversy. Accordingly, we proceed to
take up the assessee's appeal first. Several grounds have been raised by the
assessee, which for the sake of convenience; we propose to summarize them as
the issues for our determination. These are:-
1\. Whether payments made to non-resident companies for executing overhaul
repairs are not chargeable to tax for the following reasons:-
(a) The payments made to the foreign companies are for execution of normal
maintenance repairs without any involvement of or consultation with the
assessee, and therefore these do not tantamount to "fees for managerial,
consultancy or technical services" as defined in Explanation 2 to Section
9(1)(vii) of the Act;
(b) The income earned by the assessee from the activity of 'wet-leasing' of
aircrafts is from sources outside India and therefore payments made for
repairs were incurred for earning income from sources outside India.
(c) The payments for overhaul repairs were utilised in the assessee's business
of wet leasing of aircrafts carried on outside India.
The assessee has also raised several alternate Grounds of Appeal. These are:-
2\. In case the grounds relating to chargeability of tax on the payments to
the non-residents fail, payments made to residents of Thailand, Singapore,
Netherlands and Israel are not chargeable to tax keeping in view the relevant
provisions of the DTAAs read with those treaties.
3\. The consideration paid under agreements for purchase/exchange/loan for
spares and components is not attributable to technical services and therefore
is not taxable under Section 9(1)(vii)(b).
4\. Payment made to Ethiopian Airlines, Ethiopia should be taxed @ 15% under
Section 115A of the Act. (This issue is relevant for the Financial Year
1997-98 relevant to assessment Year 1998-99 only).
6\. We will take up first the Issue No. 1. In support of the plea that the
payments to the non-resident workshops are not chargeable to tax under the
provisions of the Act, the assessee has raised three pronged grounds, which
are discussed under Issues No. 1(a), 1(b) & 1(c).
Issue 1(a) "Whether payments made to the foreign companies are for execution
of normal maintenance repairs without any involvement of or consultation with
the assessee, and therefore these do not tantamount to "fees for managerial,
consultancy or technical services" as defined in Explanation 2 to Section
9(1)(vii) of the Act?"
7\. This issue goes to the root of the controversy. The company operates
aircrafts which it had acquired in the middle of 1997 from a foreign company.
It had wet-leased these aircrafts to another foreign company. The CIT (A) has
held that the major payments were covered by a comprehensive 'Technical
Support Services Agreement' as per attachment 'A' of the Contract with
Technik. She held that services rendered by Technik were not in the nature of
routine repairs as they involved modification of aircraft and its designing
for airworthiness etc. which involved knowledge of sophisticated technology
and that highly trained engineers were employed by these foreign companies in
carrying out the repairs. She therefore held that the impugned payments to the
non-residents fell within the ambit of Explanation 2 to Section 9(1)(vi) of
the Act. The CIT(A) was of the view that the facts of the case are similar to
those in the case of Mannesmann Demag Lauchhammer wherein the repair of
machinery was held to be 'fees for technical services' by the ITAT Hyderabad
(26 ITD 198).
8\. The facts may now be stated in greater detail. The assessee started
business of wet-leasing of aircraft sometime in the middle of 1997 after
acquiring four old Boeing aircrafts (727-200 Model) from a non-resident
company outside India. After the aircrafts were duly registered with the DGCA,
the assessee engaged the crew, ground engineers and other technical personnel
for the operation of the air-craft. The assessee was granted the license by
the DGCA to operate these aircrafts on international routes only. It is stated
that the Boeing 727-200 aircraft acquired by the assessee were not used by any
other airlines in India and no facilities existed in India their overhaul
repairs. On the other hand, as per the directives of DGCA the various
components and the aircraft itself was required to undergo the overhaul
repairs periodically before the expiry of the number flying hours prescribed
for each individual component. Overhaul repairs could be carried out only in
such workshops, which are authorised for this purpose by the manufacturer and
duly approved by the DGCA.
9\. All the four aircrafts acquired by the assessee were wet-leased out to a
foreign company, namely, Lufthansa Cargo AG, Germany (hereinafter referred to
as 'LCAG') under an Agreement dated April 28, 1997. "Wet leasing" is a term
which in aviation parlance refers to the leasing of an air-craft along with
the crew in flying condition to a charterer for a period of time. The
responsibility for maintaining the crew and the aircrafts in airworthy
condition is that of the lessor. The lessee is free to direct the flight
operations by nominating the destinations in advance and load any lawful cargo
for carriage. The lessee pays rental on the basis of number of flying hours
during the period subject to a minimum guarantee as per the terms of the
charter party.
10\. The Government of India is party to several International Conventions
governing the maintenance of the aircrafts. Those under the Aircraft Act of
India, 1934 read with Aircraft Rules, 1937, the necessary regulatory and
enforcement powers have been delegated by the Government to the DGCA, which
issues notifications and guidelines etc. from time to time in regard to the
maintenance and upkeep of aircraft. Every aircraft operator has to strictly
abide by these guidelines. Failure to do so would result in immediate
withdrawal of the license and the aircraft would be grounded. It is stated
that since the assessee was under obligation to keep the aircrafts in flying
condition, it had to maintain them in accordance with the guidelines of DGCA
so that it would have a valid airworthiness certificate without which it would
not be possible to carry on the business. It is explained that the engineering
department of the assessee would constantly track the flying hours of every
component. That before the expiry of flying hour, component for overhaul
repairs which ordinary would also involve replacement of parts would be
dismantled by the assessee's engineers and flown to Technik workshops in
Germany. It is stated that parts were supplied by Technik under Separate
agreement of sale, loan or exchange. In due course, the overhauled component
would be dispatched by Technik alongwith airway bill for which the freight
would be paid by the assessee. The overhauled component would be fitted into
aircrafts by the assessee's own personnel.
11\. The Ld. Counsel took us through the provisions of Technik Agreement dated
14.3.1997. The crux of his contention is that the Technik carried out
maintenance repairs without providing technical assistance by way of advisory
or managerial services. The aircrafts wet-leased to LCAG were utilized by LCAG
for transporting its cargo mainly to and from Sharjah to Bombay, Delhi,
Katmandu, Lahore, Calcutta, Chennai, Bangalore and Colombo. Since the license
issued by the DGCA was for operations on international routes only, the
aircrafts were not utilized by the LCAG for carriage of cargo within India.
The LCAG had apparently integrated its international air transport business at
Sharjah with its worldwide network. The cargo brought from South Asian
Countries would be put into wide-body aircrafts and flown from Sharjah to
various destinations in Europe and American continent. The assessee maintained
a base at Sharjah where the aircrafts were normally kept and the crew and the
engineering personnel of the assessee were also stationed at Sharjah. The
accounts of the branch at Sharjah are duly reflected in the audited Annual
Accounts of the Company.
12\. It was submitted that the repairs by way of overhauling of components in
the workshops of Technik in Germany and other foreign workshops were in the
nature of routine maintenance repairs. That no personnel of Technik were ever
deputed to India for rendering any technical or advisory services to the
assessee. Likewise, the technical personnel employed by the assessee did not
participate or involve themselves in the overhaul repairs carried out abroad
by Technik or other foreign workshops.
13\. It was further submitted that the CIT(A) has highlighted certain services
enumerated in attachments 'A' and 'B' of the Technik Contract to say that the
contract envisaged rendering of technical services. These services are:-
(a) Provision of Personnel
(b) Engineering Support service's including:
i) engineering work which include air worthiness.
ii) directives and Alert services
iii) development design and modification
iv) familiarization course.
13.1 It was contended that the CIT (A) has failed to appreciate that the
Article 2 of the Agreement clearly stats that such services would be provided
by Technik at the request of the assessee only. It is submitted that the
agreement that the responsibility for keeping the aircraft in a state of
airworthiness is that of the assessee. Ld. Counsel emphasized before the CIT
(A) that these services were not availed of by the assessee and no payment was
made on this account. Ld. Counsel took us through the invoices raised by
Technik which were filed with the CIT (A) (contained in assessee's Paper Book
B), to show that no payment was made for any of those services. It was
submitted the modification of an aircraft including development design is an
extremely rare event occurring when the manufacturer (Boeing in the present
case) finds something seriously wrong with the aircrafts of a particular model
and issues an International alert. Every licensing authority including DGCA
insists that the prescribed modification or alert service is carried out in an
authorised workshop. It is stated that no such need for modification or alert
service arose during the period that the assessee was in business. Therefore,
no such work was carried out by Technik. It is submitted that the payments for
specific repair work were made in a piecemeal manner on the basis of invoices
raised by the Technik. Regarding training, it is stated that the assessee had
made payments for training of its crew and engineers to another foreign
company, namely, Lufthansa Technical Training GmbH and other US based
companies. That tax was duly deducted at source on all such payments and
deposited with the Government. The assessee also field the Annual TDS Returns
on account in this regard.
14\. Our attention was drawn to para 10 of the order of the CIT (A) which
read:-
"The charges for various services are specified in the agreement. Certain
charges like Engineering condition are on annual basis while other charges are
on a man hour basis. The charges for specialised Services are mentioned at
1700 DM per person and 1500 DM per person whereas the charges for
familiaristion course are at 1000 DM per person. The travel expenses,
transport and cost are to be borne by the Assessee. On perusal of some of the
Bills submitted it is see that Hotel Charges are also paid by the Assessee.
The specialists deputed to the Assessee remained the employees of Lufthansa
Technik but receive work direction from the Assessee".
14.1 It was submitted that the CIT (A) failed to appreciate that no technician
of Technik was ever deputed to India and no payment was made in this regard.
It was stated that the assessee had entered into two major agreements for
overhaul repairs-one with Technik for repair of components and other with ATC
Lasham UK for overhaul the aircraft including the Hull. As regards hotel
bills, it was stated that the CIT (A) has referred to the hotel charges paid
by ATC Lasham, UK, whenever the assessee's crew flew the aircrafts to its
facilities in UK for aircraft overhaul (C-Check). The attention of the Bench
was drawn on the invoices of ATC Lasham at Pages 176 and 180, 250 & 225 of
Paper Book 'B' filed before us which show that hotel charges were paid for
stay in a hotel in UK. It is stated that the assessee's crew had to
necessarily fly the aircraft to UK for "C" check (involving overhaul of the
entire aircraft) and later for flying the aircraft back after the overhaul.
The crew's lodgings etc. in UK were arranged for by the ATC Lasham and were
billed to the assessee. It was explained to the CIT(A) that no hotel bills
were paid for by Technik, as it overhauled components only. The components
were flown to Technik facilities in Germany with airway bills without any
personnel of the assessee accompanying them. However, in so far as payments to
ATC, UK are concerned, the CIT (A) has herself finally held that these
payments did not constitute 'fees for technical services' as per the
provisions of the DTAA with UK. It was further stated that the assessee did
not pay any hotel bill for any personnel of Technik as no employee of Technik
ever visited India for supervising repairs or any consultancy service to the
assessee.
15\. It was explained that as per the International Conventions, every
component containing rotable parts is allotted a unique identity number and
its historical record is maintained in a tag which accompanies the component
throughout its life. Such component including engines needs to be overhauled
periodically in accordance with Boeing's manual. The assessee sends the
components together with tag to the workshop abroad. Technik's workshops in
Germany are duly authorised by the manufacturer, namely, the Boeing USA. Upon
receipt, the Technik overhaul the component in accordance with the
Manufacturer's Manual, as per the requirement of the DGCA. The assessee has no
say in the matter. It does not even know as to what kind of repairs have been
carried out as no employee of the assessee visits Technik's facilities in
connection with the repair work. It is submitted that all that the assessee is
interested in is that Technik returns the overhauled component certifying that
it has carried out the prescribed overhaul repairs. It is evident from the
invoices of Technik, ATC Lasham and others and those workshops replace parts
at their own discretion in the course of overhaul of a component. The replaced
parts however come with tags giving their unique identify number and history.
They also issue warranty for free-of-defect functioning of the component for
the requisite number of flying hours. It is therefore contended that the
repair work carried out by Technik etc. is not in the nature of technical
assistance by way of providing managerial, consultancy or technical services
to the assessee. Technik performs the entire work on an inanimate object
without any involvement or participation of assessee's personnel. That any
mental or physical exertion by the engineers of the Technik is employed on the
components sent to them and not by way of technical or advisory services
rendered to the assessee. In other words, the components are sent out to the
authorised workshops for caring out overhauling of components and not for
seeking any technical or advisory services. The assessee thus satisfies the
requirements of the DGCA for carrying out prescribed maintenance repairs of
the aircraft. These repairs therefore do not constitute 'managerial'
'technical' and 'consultancy services as defined under Explanation 2 to
Section 9(1) (vii)(b) of the Act.
16\. With reference to the decisions relied upon by the authorities below, it
was submitted that those decisions are distinguishable and have no application
to facts of the present case.
17\. The Ld. Counsel, relied on the judgment of Delhi High Court in the case
of SRF Finance Ltd. v. CBDT (1955) 211 ITR 861, wherein the Hon'ble High Court
has observed that "it is most inappropriate to equate the rendering of a
service with carrying out a work" and that, "rendering of a professional
services" which is otherwise described as carrying on a profession is in
contrast to the concept of 'carrying on any work'. Reference was also made to
the Supreme Court decision in the case of Hindustan Aeronautics Ltd. v. State
of Karnataka (55 STC 314), wherein the contract for maintenance repairs of
aircrafts have been held to be works contract. Reliance was also placed upon
the decision of Hon'ble Supreme court in the case of State of Madras v. Ganon
Dunkerley and Company (9 STC 353) and Builders' Association of India v. Union
of India [1989] 73 STC 370 SC, wherein it was held that works contracts
constitute a class of contracts in which the contractor either himself or
through his employee uses certain expertise in performing the work for
achieving the task contracted for. That it is in the process of achieving such
a task that the contractor utilises his expertise. That when the work is
carried out on an inanimate object without any participation or interaction
the assessee, the 'human element' is absent.
18\. The Ld. Counsel also referred to the decision of the Supreme Court in the
case of Birla Cement Works v. CBDT [2001] 248 ITR 216, wherein the Apex Court
has affirmed the decision of the Calcutta High Court holding that the word
"work" means engagement in the performance of a task, duty or the like and "it
covers all forms of physical and mental exertion or both combined for the
overall attainment of some object other than recreation or amusement".
Reliance was also placed on a recent decision of the Supreme Court in the case
of Hindustan Shipyard Ltd. v. State of Andhra Pradesh (119 STC 533) and of the
Lucknow Bench of the ITAT in the case of Somani Iron and Steel 86 ITD 750 in
support of his contention that maintenance repairs out by Technik are 'works
contract' simplicitor.
19\. Shri Kapila fairly brought to our notice a recent decision of Delhi Bench
of the Tribunal in the case of Sahara Airlines Ltd. v. CIT [2002] 83 ITD 11,
which apparently may seem to have taken a contrary view. He referred to
paragraphs 26-31 of the order wherein it has been held that on the basis of
the Agreement entered into by the assessee with Sochata France, the payments
made for repairs of engines and other equipments amounted to fees for
technical services as defined in Explanation-2 to Section 9(1)(vii)(b). It was
submitted that the facts of Sahara Airlines' case are significantly different.
Sahara Airlines, a domestic passenger airline, had acquired a number of
aircrafts for which it needed services of an expert organisation to manage its
inventories including engineering co-ordination for execution of all
considerations for repairs of engines and other equipments. It was further
submitted that the Sahara-Sochata contract stipulates a number of mandatory
services like "repair engineering coordination facilities", "overall material
coordination", "maintenance of current files of all the engines
specification", "providing warehousing and inventories control" and
supervising transportation coordination for Sahara's equipment from India to
France and back. Sochata was obliged to designate to Sahara a 'Liaison
officer' to be stationed in India whose primary responsibilities was be to
ensure successful programme by providing Sahara with engines status reports on
a weekly basis, and any unusual airworthiness related defect. Sochata France
was also to provide "engineering management programme and training at Sochata
facilities." It is contended that for the contracted consideration, Sochata
was obliged to render such services without any request from Sahara. That the
payments were admittedly made to Sochata for such services. The Ld. Counsel
submitted a chart, comparing the terms of Sochata Sahara Contract vis-a-vis
the Technik contract. A copy of this chart was also given to the Ld. DR and he
has not disputed the contents. The chart is reproduced below:-
Comparative Chart of terms of contract between Sochata France & Sahara
Airlines Vis-a-vis Lufthansa Technik, Germany & LCI
\--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
    S.No.  Sochata-Sahara Contract Art II           Technik LCI Contract PB II
    --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
    A.     Repairs--Engineering Coordination--      Repairs of engines and components.
           overall material coordination            No engineering or material
           coordination.
    --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
    B.     Provide parts incorporated into          Provide parts under separate and
           equipment in the course of repairs.      independent individual contracts of
                                                    loan/exchange or sale.
                                                    Material used during the repairs were
                                                    sold and invoiced accordingly.
    --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
    C.     Maintain files on all related            No such requirement. No such facility
           engineering specifications etc.          availed of. No payment was made for
                                                    any such service.
    --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
    D.     Provide warehousing and inventory        No such requirement. No such facility
           control for Sahara.                      availed of. No payment was made for
                                                    any such service.
    --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
    E.     Reserve the right to sub-contract.       Reserves the right to sub-contract
    --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
    F.     i.  Provide historical part repair       Provide history of the part repairs as
                                                    required by the aviation authorities.
           ii. Configuration tracking and           Done by the Engineering Personnel of
               management of Life Limited Parts     LCI.
               Equipment.                           Note: It is mandatory by the civil
                                                    aviation authorities to maintain the
                                                    track record of the history of rotable
                                                    parts used in Aircraft.
    --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
    G.     Provide transportation coordination      Equipment for repair has to be
           for Sahara's Equipment from/to           delivered at Technik's facilities in
           Sahara to/from Sochata.                  Germany. The delivery of the
                                                    repaired equipment has to be taken by
                                                    LCI at Technik's facilities in
                                                    Germany. To and from transportation of
                                                    the equipment has to be managed by
                                                    LCI at its own cost and risk.
    --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
    H.     Sochata to designate to Sahara
          "Specific Customer Service Manager"
           who will
           i. Liaison for successful program,       No such Customer manager was ever
              and                                   designated by Technik to LCI. LCI's
           ii.Provide Sahara with engine status     own technical personnel used to
              reports every week.                   perform these activities.
    --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
    I.    Report any unusual Airworthiness          Responsibility towards airworthiness
          related defect                            is entirely that of LCI.
    --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
    J.    Provide
          i. Engineering Management                 No such requirement
             Program
          ii.Engineering support                    Only at the request of LcI which was
             never made.
          iii. Training at Sochata facilities       Only at the request of LCI which was
                                                    never made. Entire training of LCI's
                                                    personally was conducted by
                                                    Lufthansa Technical Training Gmbh,
                                                    Germany to whom fees was paid
                                                    during R.Y. 1997-98 and 1999-2000
                                                    on which tax was duly deducted
                                                    before remittance. No payment was
                                                    made to Technik
    --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Article III(A)
    --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
    A.    Deliver to Sochata all equipment CFM      No such requirement LCI may send
          56 engines owned by Sahara                for any engine or component to any
          repairs or maintenance                    authorised workshop in any other
                                                    country as indeed it often did so.
    --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
    S.No.  Sochata-Sahara Contract                  Technik LCI Contract PB II
           Art V Prices
    --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
    A.     1.  Labour @ US$ 48 per man hour         For work performed for repair,
                                                    overhaul etc. charges will be as per
                                                    Technik's prevailing man-hour rates.
           2. On-site technical assistance          No technician visited India.
              service on a case by case basis.
    --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
    B.     1. New Parts, material and supplies      For Material consumed List Price +
              at list price plus 10.5% handling     25%.
              charges.
           2. Used serviceable parts @ 8.5% of      New or old parts to be loaned or
              the list price.                       exchanged or sold under separate
                                                    contracts for each and every such part
                                                    on
                                                    1. Rental of 5% of Unit Price +
                                                       1% of the price per day for first
                                                       ten days and 1.5% of the listed
                                                       price per day (P. 437 and 438 of
                                                       PB III).
                                                    2. In case of sale list price + 75%
                                                    3. Cost of packing, custom duty,
                                                       taxes and forwarding to be
                                                       borne by the customer.
    --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Optional Service
    --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
          No Optional service. All support          1. Airworthiness Directive would be
          services including training is covered       carried out on a specific request
          by the consideration under the               of the customer (LCI). No such
          contract. The entire management of           request was ever made. Hence no
          inventories and maintenance to be            such service was performed by
          carried out by Sochata.                      Technik and nor any payment
                                                       therefore made. (Clause 1.2.1 read
                                                       with 3.1 of Technik Contract)
                                                    2. Modification status will be
                                                       advised by the Customer (LCI).
                                                       No such advice was ever issued.
                                                    3. Monitoring of Oil consumption
                                                       and its analysis (ECM). No such
                                                       service was availed of as ECM
                                                       was throughout the period carried
                                                       out by LCI's own engineers at
                                                       Sharjah. (DM 1000 per day on
                                                       this account would be
                                                       chargeable on if the service
                                                       were availed of--since this
                                                       optional service was not availed
                                                       of no bill was ever raised--no
                                                       payment ever made). (Clause 1.3.1
                                                       read with clause 3.2 of Technik
                                                       Contract). Similarly, ECM
                                                       fixed charge of DM 30,000 per
                                                       annum-never neither charged-
                                                       nor paid as this optional service
                                                       was never availed of.
                                                    4. Reliability Tracking and
                                                       Reporting--Not availed of--No
                                                       bill raised--no payment made.
                                                    5. Training--not availed of--no
                                                       bill raised--no payment made.
                                                    6. Development and
                                                       modification--not availed of--
                                                       no bill raised--no payment
                                                       made.
                                                    7. Consulting--Technik's experts
                                                       were not consulted. No
                                                       personnel of Technik was ever
                                                       assigned to India.
    --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
The above chart highlights significant differences in the terms of the two
contracts. It was submitted that the dominant object of the Sahara-Sochata
contract is that of supervision, and management of a successful programme by
Sochata for keeping Sahara's aircrafts in airworthy condition. A Sochata
expert was specifically assigned to India for ensuring smooth running of such
a programme. Thus, elements of managerial, consultancy and advisory services
together with direct participation of personnel constituted "technical
services". These elements are absent in the contract between Technik and the
assessee. Further, whereas in Sahara - Sochata contract the services were
mandatory, all such services in the Technik contract were optional and no such
optional services were utilised by the assessee. it was also contended that in
the Sahara Airline's case the Tribunal has not held that repair work per-se
constitutes "technical services" as defined in Explanation 2 to Section
9(1)(vii).
20\. The Ld. Counsel also pressed into service Circular No. 715 dated 8.8.95
issued by the CBDT in the context of Section 194C of the Act. He submits that
the CBDT has clarified that routine maintenance repair jobs are in the nature
of 'works contract' and not "contract for technical services". Question No. 29
of the circular reads as under:-
"Ques. 29: Whether a maintenance contact including supply of spares would be
covered under Section 194C or 194J of the Act?
Ans.: Routine, normal maintenance contracts which include supply of spares
will be covered Under Section 194C. However, where technical services are
rendered, the provision of Section 194J will apply in regard to tax deduction
at source". (Reproduced from pg. 6530 of Chaturvedi & Pithisaria's Income Tax
Law, Fifth Edition, and Vol. 4).
It was submitted that Technik carried out normal maintenance repairs including
supply of spares, and therefore, had Technik been a domestic company the
payments to it would be covered by the provisions of Section 194C and not by
the provisions of Section 194J, which cover fees for technical services as
defined in Section 9(1)(vii). The Ld. Counsel contends that periodic overhaul
repairs of components carried out in accordance with the instructions issued
by the DGCA were routine normal repairs as against 'out-of-ordinary' repairs
including assignment of technical personnel, which may be required in case of
break-down or accident.
21\. For the Revenue, the Ld. CIT (DR) strongly relied on the orders of the
authorities below. He submits that the decision of Delhi High Court in the
case of SRF Finance (Supra) in fact supports the Revenue's case. According to
the Ld. Dr. the assessee has used sophisticated technical experience and
skills of the personnel of the Technik in the process of repairs and overhaul
carried out by them. Ld. DR vehemently submitted that the CBDT Circular No.
715 is of no relevance as it has been issued in the context of Section 194C
and not Section 9(1)(vii)(b) of the Act. It was contended that the assessee
defaulted in not deducting tax before making payments in accordance with the
provisions of Section 195(1) of the Act and therefore, the assessee cannot now
raise the plea that the receipts in the hands of the non-residents is not
chargeable to tax under the Act.
22\. The Ld. DR submitted that if the assessee was of the view that no tax was
deductible on the payments made to foreign companies it should have made an
application with the AO Under Section 195(2) of the Act. He emphasized that
Section 195(1) is concerned with "payment to non residents" and not with the
taxability of the corresponding "income of the non-resident". Hence, if the
assessee has defaulted by not having deducted tax at source at the time of
payment, it cannot later raise the plea that the corresponding income of the
non-resident was not chargeable to tax. For this proposition, the ld. DR
relied on a decision of Tribunal in the case of Assistant Commissioner of
Income Tax v. Pepsi Food Ltd. [2003] 129 Taxman 73, to which one of us was a
party. Ld. DR drew our attention to the findings of the Ld. CIT (A) that all
payments made were in accordance with the Agreements signed by the Assessee
with Technik. He pointed out that the charges for various services are
specified in the Agreement on annual basis while other charges are on man hour
basis. The charges were for specialized and sophisticated services which fell
squarely within the ambit of "fees for technical services" as envisaged under
Explanation 2 to Section 9(1)(vii) of the Act. He drew our attention to the
various findings recorded in the orders of the CIT (A).
23\. We have considered the rival submissions and have duly considered the
orders of the authorities below and the materials on record. The case of the
Department is that the fee paid to Technik is covered by Explanation 2 to
Section 9(1)(vii) of the Act, which reads as under:-
Explanation 2: For the purposes of this clause 'fees for technical services'
means any consideration (including any lump sum consideration) for the
rendering of any managerial, technical or consultancy services including the
provision of service of technical or other personnel) but does not include
consideration for any construction, assembly, mining or like project
undertaken by the recipient or consideration which would be income of the
recipient chargeable under the head 'Salaries'.
The Explanation defines fees for technical services to mean that any payments
made to a non-resident for rendering services like 'managerial' 'technical' or
'consultancy' services would be treated as "fees for technical services". The
three type of services envisaged above also include the provision of the
services of technical or other personnel.
24\. It cannot be disputed that the assessee is under legal as well as
contractual obligation to keep its aircrafts in airworthy condition. It has
therefore two options available for achieving this object:-
a. to handover the management of maintenance and upkeep of aircrafts and
inventories to a contractor for running a successful programme for keeping
them in airworthy condition on an ongoing basis; or b. manage on its own all
aspects relating to a successful programme for maintenance of aircrafts and
components and send them periodically to authorised workshop for executing
overhaul repairs as per manufactures manual.
If on facts, as in the case of Sahara Airlines, it is found that the
engineering services including management of inventories, material
coordination of the equipment and its transportation is carried out by a
foreign contractor who also deputes to India experts for this purpose, the
dominant object of the contract would be for provision of managerial and
technical services and therefore consideration paid for it would constitute
fees for technical services. The actual work of repairs etc. in such a case
would be incidental to the main object of the contract. If, however, the
engineering management programme is carried out by the assessee itself through
its own technical personnel and the components are flown out to foreign
workshops for prescribed maintenance repairs including supply of parts, such a
contract would be 'works contract' and not a contract for technical or
consultancy services. In the latter case, the human elements by way of advice,
management or supervision is absent.
25\. In this background, the terms of the Technik contract could now be
examined:-
Article 1 of the contract states the objective that "Technik shall perform the
work and render the services stipulated in Article 2."
Article 2 of the agreement gives the "scope of Agreement as under:-
"Engineering support on request in accordance with Attachment 'A'. Personnel
assignment on request in accordance with Attachment 'B'. Components overall in
accordance with Attachment 'C'.
Other relevant clauses of the Technik Agreement, which for our purposes are
relevant, are:
Article 9 (Warranty) "all work covered under this Agreement is performed at
established airline standards. This warranty obligates Lufthansa Technik to
remedy a defect free of charge at one Lufthansa Technik's basis Hamburg or
Frankfurt, provided a detailed claim is raised within 9 months or 1250 flight
hours after redelivery to the Customer, whichever may be first.
The Customer agrees to arrange, at his own risk and expense, for transport of
such parts."
Article 12 'Excusable Delays' "Lufthansa Technik shall not be held responsible
for excess of performance dates and/or non-performance of the agreed work." If
unforeseen major defects on airframe, systems, power plants or components have
to be rectified, if material ordered from suppliers is temporarily or
definitely not supplied, etc....."
Article 14 Legal Provisions 14.1 "This Agreement shall be subject to, and
construed exclusively in accordance with, the existing laws of the Federal
republic of Germany. The exclusive place of jurisdiction for any legal actions
that should arise out of, or in connection with, this Agreement shall be
Hamburg/Germany.
14.3 The place of delivery and redelivery shall be the Lufthansa Technik Base
Performing the work.
14.4 Lufthansa Technik reserves its ownership rights on all components, engine
accessories, and spares supplied until full payment of all invoices has been
made.
14.5 In case of non-payment by the Customer, both parties agrees that
Lufthansa Technik has by virtue of its work performed a right of retention as
well as a contractual lien of the subject matter being in custody of Lufthansa
Technik. The right of retention and the contractual lien as well as a set-off-
right may also be applied on account of claims from previous orders of
supplies or any other claims from customer's business relationship with
DEUTSCHE LUFTHANSA AKTIENGESELLSCHAFT and/or its affiliates.
In cases of controversies between the parties regarding the performance of
work the work in question may be submitted to the manufacturer for judgment
whose decision shall enable the parties to settle the dispute in good faith."
26\. A reading of the Technik Agreement shows that apart from above quoted
general clauses, it also contains three other independent and distinct
sections. Each such section is by itself a self-contained contract dealing
with distinct subject matter stipulating independent and separate terms and
conditions. These three sections are:
a) 'Attachment A' of the Agreement dealing with 'Engineering support services'
on request including provision of training.
b) 'Attachment B' of the Agreement relating to 'Assignment of personnel' on
request by Technik,
c) 'Attachment C' of the Agreement concerning Repairs and overhauls of the
components.
Attachments 'A' & 'B' of the Technik Agreement deal with the engineering
support services including training and assignment of personnel by the
Technik. These are clearly optional services which would be provided by the
Technik for the charges specified in the two 'Attachments' only on the
specific request of the assessee. The assessee has emphasized that none of
these services was availed of and therefore no payment was made on this
account. All the invoices raised by the Technik were produced before the lower
authorities and no instance of payment for training or other optional support
services as per Attachment 'A' and 'B' of the contract has been brought out
either by the Assessing Officer or by the CIT(A). Ld. DR has also not cited
any instance of payment for any of the optional services enumerated in
Attachment 'A' and 'B'. Ld. DR has also could not controvert that payments to
Technik were made for specific job work of repairs and replacement of parts,
and no technician was assigned to India for consultancy or supervision of
repairs. We are therefore of the view that simply because Attachment 'A' and
'B' stipulate charges for optional services, it cannot be said that any
payment is attributable to such services. These services are optional and
could be performed on specific request by the assessee. On the facts brought
out before us such option was not exercised by the assessee. Ld. DR also could
not indicate any clause in the Technik Agreement which would oblige the
assessee to pay the fees towards optional services even if such an option is
not exercised by the assessee. In the circumstances, we hold that CIT (A) was
not correct in making attachments 'A' and 'B' of the Technik Contract as the
basis for concluding that the payments were primarily made for rendering of
technical services. The only relevant part of the Technik contract which needs
consideration is the 'Attachment C' which deals with 'Components Overhaul'.
27\. The relevant terms of the contract by way of Attachment 'C' of the
Technik Agreement are:-
Attachment 'C'
1\. SCOPE OF SERVICES 1.1 Repair, overhaul, modification and test of all
components as far as identical with Lufthansa Technik's own components. In
cases of differences in the dash-number repair/overhaul items shall only be
accepted after Lufthansa Technik's prior telex confirmation;
1.2 Material, supply out of Lufthansa Technik stock for above components
repair/overhaul in accordance with Article 2 hereof.
1.3 Lufthansa Technik shall be entitled to subcontract repair and overhaul of
components in accordance with Article 4 of the GTA.
1.4 Each overhauled component will be redelivered with the following
documentation:
1\. JAA form (Airworthiness Approval Tag)
2\. Workshop Report
3\. Test Reports if applicable
2\. MATERIAL PROVISIONING 2.1 Repairable and consumables required for the work
to be performed on the Customer's components shall be supplied by Lufthansa
Technik on the basis of sale provided Lufthansa Technik's stock permits such
supply.
2.2 Modification material and, if required serialized subassemblies shall be
provided by the Customer.
2.3 If specially requested by the Customer, and if Lufthansa Technik's stock
permits such supply, Lufthansa Technik shall provide rotables out of its stock
under Lufthansa Technik's normal Loan Agreement conditions. A copy of such
Loan Agreement is attached hereto as Annex B.
2.4 If specially requested by the Customer and, if Lufthansa Technik's stock
permits such supply, Lufthansa Technik shall provide repairable out of its
stock on 1.1 basis using Lufthansa Technik's form Exchange 1.1 Agreement Annex
A.
3\. SHIPPING 3.1 Any shipments of the customer's components to and form the
respective Lufthansa Technik Base shall be effected at the Customer's own risk
and expense.
4\. CHARGES Article 4 For the work performed pursuant to Article 1 hereof, the
Customer shall be charged according of Lufthansa Technik's man-hour rates
valid at that time as stipulated in Annex A1 of the GTA.
For material consumed the Customer shall be charged, with the manufacturer's
list prices plus a material handling surcharge of twenty five (25) percent.
Subcontracted work in the sense of Article 4 of the GTA shall be charged
according to the amount payable by Lufthansa Technik to the subcontractor plus
a handling charge of ten (10) percent plus transportation costs, if any.
In case of repair work the Customer shall pay a minimum charge per event of DM
1,000,-.
28\. The law relating to works contracts has been judicially reviewed recently
by the Supreme Court in the case of Hindustan Shipyard Ltd. v. State of Andhra
Pradesh (Supra). After discussing the law on the subject, the Apex Court in
para 15 of the judgment observe.
There may be three categories of contracts:
(i) The contract may be for work to be done for remuneration and for supply of
materials used in the execution of the work for a price;
(ii) It may be a contract for work in which the use of the materials is
ancillary or incidental to the execution of the work; and
(iii) It may be a contract for supply of goods where some work is required to
be done as incidental to the sale.
The first contract is a composite contract consisting of two contracts one of
which is for the sale of goods and the other is for work and labour. The
second is clearly a contract for work and labour not involving sale of goods.
The third is a contract for sale where the goods are sold as chattels and the
work done is merely incidental to the sale."
Attachment "C" of the Technik contract is the first type of "work contract "as
categorised in the above quoted passage.
29\. A Chart was furnished before the CIT (Appeals) and also before us giving
the year-wise breakup of the payments made to Technik and others (Pages. 152
of Paper Book B) under the heads; 'labour', 'material', 'repairs' and 'other'.
It is noticed that 'repairs' and 'materials' account for about 60 percent of
the total amount of payment, and 'labour charges' account about 30 percent.
The balance 10 percent of payments falling under the head 'others' primarily
include airport charges, fuel and parking charges etc. It is clear that the
co-ordination of transportation of the components to the Technik's facilities
in Germany was the assessee's responsibility. Technik carried out the job work
of repairs and replacement of parts at its own discretion. The overhauled
components along with certificate of airworthiness is send back at the
assessee's cost. The Technik also gave warranty for the work executed by it.
Supply of parts for replacement is made under separate agreements for loan
exchange or sale. The proforma agreement of the loan and exchange also form
part Attachment 'C'.
30\. From the above it appears that the Technik contract is primarily for
carrying out routine maintenance of components the use of material being
incidental to the execution of work. As pointed out by Hon'ble Calcutta High
Court in the case of Calcutta Goods Transport Association v. Union of India
(1996) 219 ITR 486:-
"The word 'work' may be used in two senses; it may mean either, labour which a
man bestows upon thing or the thing upon which labour is bestowed".
In other words, in a works contract like the present one in which components
are repaired and overhauled, the technicians of the contractor bestow their
labour upon "things" like engines and aircrafts components or put them through
the machines. Technik carries out these activities in the normal course of its
business at its facilities in Germany without any involvement of the assessee.
From the facts placed on record it appears that there is absence of human
element as there is no interaction between the technicians of Technik and the
assessee's personnel. This is further supported by the fact that the
components are sent for repairs along with airway bills and are redelivered in
the same manner and the invoices are raised by Technik with reference to
specific job-works and supply of parts etc. The payments by the assessee are
clearly business receipts in the hands of Technik.
We will now consider the decisions relied on by the Assessing Officer and the
CIT (A).
31\. The first decision is that of Oberoi Hotels (231 ITR 148), wherein the
Supreme Court has held that professional services like recruitment and
training of staff, promotion of the business of the Hotel in Nepal, and
running and management of the hotel were in the nature of professional
services. The Apex Court held that the expression 'technical services'
embraces professional services. This decision has no application as no such
controversy is involved in the present case.
32\. In GVK Industries (228 ITR 564), relied upon by the Assessing Officer,
the question before the Andhra Pradesh High Court was whether financial
consultancy by way of advice on structuring of an international loan could be
said to be technical services. The Hon'ble High Court held that such financial
consultancy services were technical service by observing:-
"The petitioner-company intended to utilise the expert services of qualified
and experienced professionals who could prepare a scheme for raising the
required finances and tie up the required loan. Being unable to find such a
professional in India, it had to seek the services of a consultant outside
India. The non-resident company offered its services as financial adviser to
the petitioner's project. those services included, inter alia, financial
structure and security package to be offered to the lender, study of various
lending alternatives for the local and foreign borrowings, making an
assessment of export credit agencies world-wide and obtaining commercial bank
support on the most competitive terms, assisting the petitioner company in
loan negotiations and documentation with lenders and structuring, negotiating
and closing the financial for the project in the coordinated and expeditious
manner.
In the above case there was no dispute that the Swiss company provided
advisory services to the Indian company. The only point in dispute was as to
whether such financial consultancy services were "technical" or not. This
decision is clearly not applicable to the facts of the case.
33\. Another decision relied on by the Assessing Officer is that of Cochin
Refineries ltd. (222 ITR 354) which is also not applicable. The head note of
the report gives the facts briefly:-
"Cochin Refineries requested a foreign company, F, to evaluate whether the
coke produced from a blend of vacuum bottoms and clarified oil from Bombay
High crude was suitable for making anodes for the aluminum industry. The tests
were carried out in the USA in regard to which the assessee made payment."
Cochin Refineries had sent mineral oils produced by it to laboratories in USA
for evaluating whether the coke content was suitable for making aluminum
anodes. The American Laboratory sent the report after due evaluation of the
samples. The evaluation report was utilized by the Indian Company in its
refining business. That case clearly involved consultancy services of
technical nature. The evaluation report of the American laboratory is in the
nature of technical advice. For this reason Kerala High Court held that the
payment made to the American Company was covered by the provisions of Section
9(1)(vii)(b). We may add that this decision was given Under Section 9(1)
(vii)(b) of the Act, as there was no DTAA with USA at that time.
34\. As regards the decision of Hyderabad Bench in the case of Mannesmann
Demag Lauchhammer v. CIT (26 ITD 198), the case of the Department was that the
fees paid to DEMAG was covered by Section 9(1)(vii). After setting out
explanation 2 to that section, this reads as follows:
Explanation 2: For the purposes of this clause 'fees for technical services'
means any consideration (including any lump sum consideration) for the
rendering of any managerial, technical or consultancy services including the
provision of services of technical or other personnel) but does not include
consideration for any construction, assembly, mining or like project
undertaken by the recipient or consideration which would be income of the
recipient chargeable under the head 'Salaries'.
The Tribunal observed:-
"It will be clear from this section that any consideration paid to a non-
resident for rendering services like managerial technical services or
consultancy services would be treated as technical fees. The three types of
services would also include the provision of services of technical or other
personnle. It might be possible to argue that in merely repairing certain
machineries for which the warranty period had already expired, there is no
consultancy services either the provision of technical or other personnel.
Normally, managerial or technical consultancy services would be done by a non-
resident company by utilizing the services of their managers and Technicians.
The Company has to act only through its employers or Directors. thus, the
human element in such consultancy services is already implied. But, the
Legislature in their wisdom had decided to add the words in parenthesis and so
the provision of services of technical or other personnel for any purpose
would be treated as technical services, be it for a small repair work or a
large reconstruction work. We, therefore, do not find any reason why the
technical consultancy in respect of repair works cannot be considered as
technical fees." (Emphasis Supplied) We find that in Demag's case, the foreign
company rendered 'technical consultancy' by way deputing a technician to India
for supervising repairs to be carried out on the plant and machinery purchased
by National Mineral Development Corporation. It is not the repair work per se
which has been held to be technical services but it is the provision of the
consultant technician deputed to India for supervising the repairs which has
been treated as consultancy services. The foreign technician stayed on in
India for 44 days to advise and supervise repair work which was obviously
carried out by the engineers and workers of the Indian Company. Thus, the
nature of services rendered by the foreign company was consultancy of
technical nature through the provision of its technician deputed to India. Our
conclusion is supported by the decision of Andhra Pradesh high court in the
same case reported in 238 ITR 861, wherein Hon'ble High Court affirming the
aforesaid decision of the Tribunal held that the Explanation 2 has expanded
the scope of Section 9(1)(vii)(b) by providing that the services of technical
or other personnel would be taxable. It has been repeatedly stated by the
assessee that no foreign Technician was ever deputed of India. The lower
authorities and the DR have not pointed out any instance of a technician
having been assigned of India. This decision therefore is of no assistance to
the Revenue.
35\. As regards, the CBDT Circular No. 715 (para 20, supra) it is clear that
the clarification given in Question 29 deals not only with Section 194C, but
also Section 194J of the Act. Section 194J clearly includes within its ambit
the 'fees for technical services' as defined in Explanation 2 to Section
9(1)(vii)(b). The Section 194J reads as under:-
"(1) Any person, not being individual or a Hindu undivided family, who is
responsible for paying to a resident any sum by way of--
(a) fees for professional services, or
(b) fees for technical services Explanation--for the purpose of this
section,--
a) "..............
b) "fees for technical services" shall have the same meaning as in Explanation
2 to clause (vii) of Sub-section (1) of Section 9".
The said circular excludes 'routine maintenance repairs' from the scope of
Section 194J which deals with TDS on 'fees for technical services'. Both
Section 9(1) (vii) Section 194J rely on the definition given in Explanation 2
to Section 9(1) (vii). Therefore, the clarification issued the Board in the
context of Section 194J with respect to normal maintenance repairs would be
relevant for understanding true import of the said explanation in the context
of Section 9(1)(vii)(b) of the Act.
36\. We also find no merit in the contention of the Ld. Dr that since Section
195 deals only with payment to a non-resident, the assessee cannot raise the
plea that the income of the non-resident on account of such payment was not
chargeable to tax under the provisions of the Act. The law on the subject is
quite clear. If the payments to non-resident are not chargeable to tax, the
assessee can always take this plea even if it has made no application Under
Section 195(2) of the Act. The decision of the ITAT 'E' Bench in the case of
ACIT v. Pepsi Foods cited by the Ld. DR does not help him. In that case,
transfer of technology was admittedly involved and in that context, the
tribunal observed:-
"a bare reading of the provisions of Section 195 clearly shows that if any sum
to be paid by an assessee, not falling within the preceding sections, to any
non-resident, is chargeable to tax under the Act, then assessee is under
obligation to deduct the tax at source either at the time of payment or at the
time of credit in the books of the assessee, whichever is earlier."
The language of Section 195(1) is unambiguous on the subject. It is only such
sums which are "chargeable under the provisions of this Act (not being income
chargeable under the head 'Salaries')" which come within the purview of
Section 195. If the payment is not chargeable to tax, the provisions of
Section 195 are not attracted. This view was recently endorsed by the Supreme
Court in Transmission Corporation of AP Limited v. CIT. (1999) 239 ITR (SC) in
the following words:-
"the scheme of Sub-section (1), (2) & (3) Section 195 and Section 197 leaves
no doubt that the expression 'any other sum chargeable under the provisions of
this Act' would mean 'sum' on which income-tax is leviable. In other words,
the said sum is chargeable to tax and could be assessed to tax under the Act.
The consideration would -- whether payment to the sum of the non-resident is
chargeable to tax under the provisions of the Act or not?"
37\. In conclusion, Technik carried out the repair work in the normal course
of its business in Germany, without any involvement or participation of the
assessee's personnel. The overhaul repairs involved were routine maintenance
repairs. It cannot therefore be said that Technik rendered any managerial,
technical or consultancy service to the assessee. In this view of the matter,
we hold that the payments made by the assessee to non-residents workshops
outside India do not constitute payment of fees for managerial, consultancy or
Technical services as defined in Explanation 2 to Section 9(1)(vii). The
assessee succeeds on this ground.
Issue No. 1 (b) "Whether payments for repairs of aircrafts was made for
earning income from sources outside India and therefore to be excluded from
'fees for technical services Under Section 9(1) (vii) (b) of the Act"?
38\. The assessee's contention is that payment made to the non-resident is for
earning income from sources outside India and these are therefore to be
excluded from 'fees for technical services.' Section 9(1)(vii)(b) of the Act
reads as under:
"A person who is a resident, except where the fees are payable in respect of
services utilised in a business or profession carried on by such person
outside India or for the purposes of making or earning any income from any
source outside India"
To fall within the ambit of the exclusionary provision of Section 9(1) (vii)
(b), the following conditions are required to be fulfilled:-
a) the assessee re resident of India,
b) income is earned from a source outside India, and
c) there exists a direct nexus between the payment (expenditure) and earning
of the income All the three conditions should be cumulatively satisfied for
exempting "fees for technical services' from chargeability of tax. The first
and the third conditions are clearly satisfied. Dispute is in regard to the
second condition. The CIT (A) has taken a view that as pe terms of the
agreement between the assessee and LCAG merely gets priority over others in
the use of the aircraft. That there is no prohibition on the assessee to wet-
leasing of the aircrafts to any third party. According to CIT(A), aircrafts
have been wet-leased solely to LCAG, Germany. But also to other parties and
therefore it cannot be said that the revenues have been earned wholly from a
source outside India. The assessing Officer has held that since the income
from leasing of aircrafts is assessed to the tax in India, the source of
income is situated in India.
39\. Ld. Counsel for assessee has made the following submissions:
i) Section 9(1) (vii) (b) clearly applied to Indian residents only. The
assessee is an Indian company liable to tax on its global income, but this
does not mean that the 'source of income is also in India'.
ii) The assessee's 'source of income' is the activity of wet-leasing of
aircrafts to non-resident companies under contract made outside India and
therefore the source of income is outside India.
iii) The leasing revenues were received in convertible foreign exchange
directly from the foreign charterers abroad by wire-transfers into the
assessee's bank account denominated in US dollars with the Citibank, Connaught
Circus, New Delhi allowed to be maintained by the RBI for this purpose.
iv) Payments made to foreign companies for repairs have a direct nexus with
the earning of income from sources outside India.
v) Payment were made to Technik etc. for maintenance repairs which were
essential for earning income from the activity of wet-leasing of aircrafts.
vi) The CIT (A) is not correct in rejecting the claim merely because leasing
income was not received exclusively from LCAG, but also from other foreign
airlines. Articles 2 & 3 of the contract with LCAG make it clear that it is
only when LCAG informs the assessee in writing well in advance that it may not
require certain capacity for a particular period that the assessee is free to
wet-lease the aircraft to others for that period. In case, the assessee is not
able to do so, and the aircrafts and view remain idle, the LCAG would have to
pay the rent for minimum guaranteed block hours. The assessee is not free to
lease the cargo space to a third party without prior permission of the LCAG.
40\. In support of the contention that the income was earned from sources
outside India, a certificate dated 22nd December, 2000 from Lovelock & Lewes,
Chartered Accountants, was filed with the CIT (A) which reads as under:-
TO WHOMSOEVER IT MAY CONCERN we have verified from books and records
maintained by that M/s Lufthansa Cargo India Limited having Registered Officer
at Radisson Hotel, Commercial Plaza Wing B New Delhi-37 and certify that, the
Company had a Capacity Purchase Agreement for wet lease of the aircrafts with
only foreign companies for the financial year 1997-98, 1998-99 and 1999-2000
for their international air cargo operations. One of the major customer to
whom aircrafts were given on wet lease was Lufthansa Cargo AG of Germany.
Annexure 'A' of the certificate gives the year-wise breakup of the lease
rentals as under:
Details of Traffic Revenue from wet lease of aircrafts by Lufthansa Cargo
India Private Ltd.
                                     F.Y 1997-98      F.Y. 1998-99      F.Y. 1999-2000
    Traffic Revenue from wet
    lease of aircraft's
    received from
    Lufthansa Cargo AG (Germany)     318,513,565      854,612,518          657,569,352
    Singapore Airlines (Aingapore)            --       67,352,333           41,020,195
    Pacific Asia Cargo Airlines               --       26,125,451           37,769,600
    (Indonesia)
    Shareef Express Travels (UAE)             --        2,038,548            1,065,865
    Falcon Air Express Cargo             974,220               --                   --
    Airlines (UAE)
    Total                          319,487,785      950,128,850          737,425,012
41\. Ld. Counsel for assessee, in fairness submitted that though the company
Shareef Express Travel had chartered the aircraft in UAE, it is now found to
be an Indian company. He however, points out that Shareef Travel accounts for
miniscule fraction of gross revenues, being 0.21% and 0.14% for the Financial
Year 1998-99 & 1999-2000, respectively. That the LCAG Germany, accounted for
99%, 90% and 89% of the aggregate lease rentals earned by the assessee for the
Financial Years 1997-98, 1998-99 and 1999-2000, respectively. The balance
income is also earned from non-residents companies outside India; the only
exception being Shareef Travels. It is contended that since 99.8% of the
aggregate leasing income is earned from non-residents remitting payments
directly from outside India, income has been earned from source outside India.
it is argued that just because a miniscule fraction of receipt is from an
Indian party, it cannot provide the Revenue justification for holding that the
income is not earned from sources outside India. It is contended that the
income from Shareef Travel is so insignificant (0.2%) that it should be
ignored. In the alternative, it is submitted that at most 0.2% of the
aggregate payments to Technik etc. would be taxable.
42\. Income can be said to have been earned from a 'source of income' outside
India if the source from which the income is derived is situated outside
India. in the context of an international transaction source can be said to be
'outside India' if:-
i. the payer is a non-resident, or ii. the contract with non-resident is made
outside India; or iii. the activity yielding income takes place outside India.
It was submitted that all the three conditions are satisfied in the present
case. The payers are non-resident, the wet-leasing contracts are made outside
India and the income-yielding activity of wet-leasing has been carried on
outside India. it is pointed out that the Article 10.6 of the LCAG contract
relating to 'Governing Law' clearly states that the law governing the contract
would be German law. In this connection, reliance was placed on a decision of
Supreme Court in the case of Dhanrajmal Gobindram v. Shamji Kalidas & Co.
(1961) 3 SCR 1020, wherein it has been held:-
"Where the proper law is the lex loci contractus or lex loci solutions is a
matter of presumption; but there are accepted rules for determining which of
them is applicable. Where the parties have expressed themselves, the intention
so expressed overrides any presumption."
Reliance was also placed on the decision of the Supreme Court in the case of
Kunwar Trivikram Narain Singh v. State of Uttar Pradesh (1965) 57 ITR 29,
wherein it was held that in certain circumstances the contract itself can be
the 'source of income' Thus, if the wet-leasing contract were to be considered
as the source from which income is earned, the said source is outside India as
the contract has been made outside India. however, if the activity of wet-
leasing were to be considered as the 'source', the same also took place
outside India. Hence the situs of the source of the receipts was outside
India. The Assessee has put its aircrafts to use by wet-leasing them outside
India and earned rental income in US dollars outside India. The activity of
leasing also took place outside India as is evident from LCAG contract and
arrangement with other airlines. If that be so, the source of leasing income
is situated outside India.
43\. It is submitted that the authorities below confused the income-earning
activity of the hirer (LCAG) which is that of international transportation
cargo for freight with the activity the assessee, which is that of wet-leasing
of aircrafts for flying on international routes. In this connection, reliance
was placed on the Supreme Court judgment in the case of Gosalia shipping
wherein it was observed:
"If any guidance is to be sought from the terms of the agreement between the
parties, the conclusion seems inescapable that the amount which the time-
charters were required to pay to the owners of the ship was not payable on
account of the carriage of goods but was payable on account of the use and
hire of the ship". (emphasis supplied)
44\. Reliance was also placed on recent decision of Delhi Tribunal in the case
of Asia Satellite Telecommunications Ltd. v. DCIT (2003) 85 ITD 478, wherein
after reviewing the entire case law relating to situs of the 'source of
income' in the context of international transactions, it is stated in para
6.28 of the decision:-
6.28 Elaborating the work 'source', it was stated that it may encompass the
payer of income or the activity which gives rise to the income. To be more
precise it was sated that source could not refer to the payer but only to the
activity, which resulted in the income. It was explained that the source is
that activity which results into the income.
If the source of any income is situated in India then it is irrelevant whether
the business carried on by such non-resident is in India or elsewhere.
"We are agreeable that the source does not refer to the person who makes the
payment but it refers to the activities which give rise to the income. In the
present context the activity which is resulting into income in the hands of
non-resident customers, namely the TV channels, is the ultimate viewership of
the programmes transmitted by them through the assessee in the footprint areas
including India. Therefore the activity which actually produces the income is
not the uplinking or downlinking of the signals but of the actual viewership."
(Emphasis supplied) It is clarified that the above-quoted observations were
made in the context of a non-resident earning income from a source within
India, Under Section 9(1)(vi)(c), but the principle stated therein is equally
applicable to a resident Under Section 9(1)(vii)(b) of the Act in determining
whether income was earned from a source outside India. Lastly, it is submitted
that it is indisputable that payments to the non-resident have been made for
overhaul repairs for earning from the activity of wet-leasing. There is
therefore a direct nexus between of the payments and the earning of income
from sources outside India.
45\. For the Revenue, Ld. DR stated that it could not be said that the entire
income was earned from sources outside India. he drew our attention to the
relevant paras in the orders of the Assessing Officer and CIT (A), wherein it
was found that the entire income of the assessee could not be said to have
been earned from sources outside India. He Strongly relied upon the findings
in the orders of the authorities below.
46\. We have carefully considered the rival submissions. It would be
appropriate at this stage to set out the terms of the LACG contract dt.
28.4.97.
These are extracted below:-
1\. Scope of Agreement.
This Agreement shall set forth the terms and conditions for the carriage of
LCAG-shipments on LCI operated air-cargo services. This shall include, but not
be limited to the minimum capacities made available by LCI for the carriage of
LCAG-shipments.
the standard and reliability of the services rendered by LCI the block-hour
rates to be charges by LCI and the block hours guaranteed by LCAG.
2.2 BLOCK-HOUR RATES TO BE CHARGED BY LCI The rates to be charged by LCI for
the Cargo Capacities provided including any minimum block hours guaranteed by
LCAG to LCI shall be set forth in the respective Annexes to this Agreement.
3\. STANDARD OF SERVICES RENDERED BY LCI 3.1 Operations The Aircraft employed
shall hold a valid Certificate of Airworthiness issued by the Civil Aviation
Authority of India (DGCA) or by any other country should such issuance become
necessary to perform the obligations of LCI as set forth under this Agreement.
The Aircraft shall remain registered under the registration of LCI during the
entire period of this Agreement. LCI shall ensure that Aircraft registrations
and authorizations are suitable to perform flights to all countries set forth
in the flight schedules hereunder.
LCI shall maintain the Aircraft during the term of this Agreement in
accordance with LCI's maintenance program and schedule as approved by the
Civil Aviation Administration of India or any such program or schedule
mutually agreed upon between the parties.
All flights operated under this Agreement shall be performed under the
operational control of LCI in all respects.
LCI shall obtain and maintain throughout the term of this Agreement all
necessary licenses and permits required for any operation of the Aircraft
under this Agreement.
10.6 Governing Law This Agreement shall be governed by and construed in
accordance with, and any and all disputes arising out of, in connection with
or in relation to this Agreement shall be decided exclusively in accordance
with German law with reference to the choice of law provisions thereof.
Any disputes arising from or in connection with this Agreement shall be
finally settled by internal consultation and/or arbitration between the
parties by three arbitrators according to the rules of the International
Chamber of Commerce, Paris. The arbitration, if so required, shall be held in
the English language. The place of arbitration shall be Geneva, Switzerland or
any place mutually agreed upon between the Parties.
CAPACITIES AND FLIGHT SCHEDULES Annex No-2
1\. Capacities to be made available by LCI should LCAG anticipate that the
capacity provided by LCI under the Agreement cannot be utilised by LCAG in its
entirety in any calendar month, LCAG shall give promptly written notice of
such determination to LCI. In the instance such notice is given more than 60
days before the date of the flight concerned, LCI will use its utmost efforts
to re-market the capacities and flights not to be utilised by LCAG.
Should LCI be able to sell any such capacities on its own behalf, LCAG shall
be entitled to a refunded as set forth in Annex 3 of the Agreement, but only
within the minimum block Hours Guaranteed to LCAG to LCI under this Agreement.
Charges and Payments Annex No-3 As set forth in Article 3.2 of the agreement
the following terms and conditions apply for the calculation and payments of
any charges by the LCIL for the Capacity provided under this agreement.
1\. "Block Hour" is defined as the period of time operated by the Aircraft
gate to gate expressed in hour commencing when the Aircraft moves from the
blocks to begin a flight and ending when the chocks have been inserted under
the wheels after touchdown at the next point of landing. such Block hours
shall be charged and invoiced in accordance of the Movement Messages given by
the respective Flight Deck Crews/OPS Dept.
2\. LCAG shall pay to LCI a guaranteed rate as set forth in this Annex for
each effectively completed Block Hour of operation of fractions thereof. Such
rate (Rate A) shall be:
Until October 31, 1997:
US$ 1,845.00 (US-$ One Thousand Eight Hundred and Forty-Five) per Block Hour
from November 1, 1997:
US-$ 1,630.00 (US-$ One Thousand Six Hundred and Thirty) per Block Hour The
aforementioned price shall apply to all block performed by LCI up to a total
of 960 (nine hundred and sixty) Block Hours performed under this Agreement per
calendar month. Unless otherwise agreed upon in this Capacity Agreement, LCAG
shall guarantee to LCI a payment totaling the amount of 960 (nine hundred and
sixty) Block Hours performed under this Agreement per calendar month.
Should the number of Block Hours actually performed during a calendar month
fall short of the number of Block Hours being in the minimum Block Hours
guaranteed by LCAG, the rate (Rate B) for such Block Hours not actually
performed for reasons not proved to be under the control of LCI shall be US-$
1,225.00 (US-$ One Thousand Two Hundred and Twenty-Five) per Block Hour.
47\. The following conclusions can be drawn from the above quoted terms of the
LCAG contract.
(i) The assessee has to maintain the crew and keep the aircrafts in airworthy
state.
(ii) The assessee company earns rental income on block-hours basis.
(iii) The assessee cannot wet-lease the aircrafts to a third party without a
written permission from the LCAG.
(iv) In case of non-utilisation of aircrafts by the LCAG, it has to pay
minimum guaranteed rental 240 block-hours per month in accordance with Clause
No. 2.2 read with, Annexure 3 of the contract.
(v) The amount of leasing revenues depends on the number of flying hours
utilised by LCAG and not on the value of freight earned by the LCAG.
(vi) The assessee is also assured of minimum rental income in the event LCAG
does not actually use the aircrafts.
48\. In this view of the matter, we are satisfied that the assessee's
immediate source of income is from the activity of wet-leasing of aircrafts
under contracts made outside India to non-resident parties. A miniscule
fraction of the lease rental (0.2%) has been earned from an Indian party. But,
this cannot detract from the fact that virtually entire income has been earned
from non-residents through the activity of wet-leasing of the aircrafts
carried on outside India.
49\. The assessee's activity of wet-leasing of air-crafts is a distinct
activity which constitutes a source form which income has been earned. Revenue
is not correct in identifying this leasing activity with the transportation
activity of the lessee, LCAG, Germany. The following observations of the
Supreme Court in the case of Gosalia Shipping (1978) 113 ITR 307 (SC) are
apposite:-
"If any guidance is to be sought from the terms of the agreement between the
parties, the conclusion seems inescapable that the amount which the time-
charters were required to pay to the owners of the ship was not payable on
account of the carriage of goods but was payable on account of the use and
hire of the ship.
Indeed, the other terms of the charter-party and the general tenor of the
documents show that the payment was in fact to be made by the time-charterers
for use and hire of the ship.
If the charterers are liable to pay the amount irrespective of whether they
carry the goods or not, it would be difficult to say that the amount was
payable on account of the carriage of goods. Under the terms of the charter-
party, the owners of the ship received the amount as charges for the use and
hire of the ship. The character of the payment cannot change according to the
use of which the charterers put the ship or according as to whether the ship
is loaded with goods in a port in India. What is payable as hire charges for
the use of the ship cannot transform itself into an amount payable on account
of the carriage of goods, by reason of the circumstance that the ship was
loaded with goods in India.
That the owners were entitled to payment for the use and hire of the ship,
that the amount was payable irrespective of what use the ship was put to by
the time-charterers or, indeed, whether it was put any use at all and that no
part of the payment can be said to have been made on account of the carriage
of goods."
50\. The above quoted passage is clearly applicable to the facts of the case.
The sources from which the assessee has earned income are therefore outside
India as the income earning activity is situated outside India. It is towards
this income earning activity that the payments for repairs have been made
outside India. The payments therefore fall within the purview of the
exclusionary clause of Section 9(1) (vii) (b). Thus, even assuming that the
payments for such maintenance repairs were in the nature of fees for technical
services, it would not be chargeable to tax.
50.1 We allow the assessee's appeal on this point by holding that the payments
for repairs of aircrafts was made for earning income from sources outside
India and therefore to be excluded from 'fees for technical services' Under
Section 9(1) (vii) (b) of the Act.
Issue 1(c) "The payments have been utilized in the assessee's business of wet
leasing of aircrafts has been carried out outside India and therefore to be
excluded from 'fees for technical services' Under Section 9(1) (vii) (b)"
51\. Ld. Counsel for the assessee submits that Clause (b) of Section 9(1)(vii)
also excludes any payment of fees for technical services if such services are
utilised in a business or profession carried on by the assessee outside India.
It is submitted that the assessee's business of leasing of aircrafts alongwith
crew is carried on outside India. All the aircrafts were acquired by the
assessee outside India--three under hire-purchase agreement and one under dry-
lease lease agreement--from a foreign company for which payments were made in
foreign exchange. The leasing revenues were earned outside India from non-
resident lessees. The Ld. Counsel referred to the Annual Accounts of the
assessee for the three financial years (at pps. P. 122, 132, 144 of the Paper
Book-1) to show that leasing revenues were earned in foreign exchange from
foreign airlines companies. He also submitted a chart indicateing transactions
in foreign exchange for each of the three financial years as obtaining from
the annual Accounts of the assessee. As per this chart the leasing revenues
earned in foreign exchange were 100%, 99.79% and 99.86% for the Financial
Years 1997-98, 1998-99 and 1999-2000, respectively. This chart also gives the
figures of direct operational expenses in foreign exchange on actual payment
basis as culled out from the Annual Accounts of the company for three years
(at pps. 122, 132, 143 of the Paper Book). As per the annual accounts, the
direct expenses are mainly on account of lease rent, travelling and training,
foreign office expenses, maintenance, interest on aircrafts acquired under
hire-purchase, and depreciation. The aggregate of the direct expenditure
incurred outside India works out to 55%, 81% and 67% of the total expenses
debited to Profit & Loss Account of each of the three years. It is submitted
that remaining indirect expenditure was on account of Head Office expenses in
India and expenditure on the ground staff, overnight stay of crew and airport
charges etc. When the aircrafts landed in Indian airports for delivering and
picking up cargo.
52\. The Ld. CIT DR relied on the order the Assessing Officer and contended
that the assessee's business was controlled from India and therefore it cannot
be said that the business was carried on outside India.
53\. We have carefully considered the rival submissions and we have also gone
through the annual accounts of the assessee for the Financial Years ended
31.3.98, 31.3.99 and 31.3.2000 respectively, filed in the Paper Book. The
question whether a business is carried on in India or outside India cannot be
decided by the situs of the Head Office or the place of control of the
business. The assessee, being an Indian company, would have the Head Office or
the place of control in India. We agree that the assessee's business of wet-
leasing of aircrafts have been predominantly carried on outside India. The
assessee's business of wet-leasing of aircrafts is composed of a number of
operations such as acquisition of aircrafts, wet-leasing, maintenance of crew
and engineering personnel, aircrafts maintenance and establishment, etc. It is
settled law that profits of a business cannot be said to accrue only in the
place where sales take place or the revenue is earned, but they are embedded
in each distinct operation of the business, both on the revenue and the
expenditure side. For this legal proposition, we are supported by the decision
of the Supreme court in the case of Anglo French Textile Company Ltd. v. CIT
(1954) 25 IRT 27, where relying on an earlier judgment of the larger bench in
the case of CIT v. Ahmed Bhai Umar Bhai and Co. (18 ITR 472) the Apex Court
explained the legal position in following words:-
'In the case of a composite business, i.e., in the case of a person who is
carrying on a number of businesses, it is always difficult to decide as to the
place of the accrual of profits and their apportionment inter se. For
instance, where a person carries on manufacture, sale, export and import, it
is not possible to say that the place where the profits accrue to him is the
place of sale. The profits received relate firstly to his business as a
munufacturer, secondly to his trading operations, and thirdly to his business
of import and export. Profit or loss has to be apportioned between these
business in a business like manner and according to well established
principles of accountancy in such cases it will be doing no violence to the
meaning of the words "accrue" or "arise" if the profits attributable to the
manufacturing business are said to arise or accrue at the place where the
manufacture is being done and the profits which arise by reason of the sale
are said to arise at the place where the sales are made and the profits in
respect of the import and export business are said to arise at the place where
the business is conducted...."
The above passage is also sufficient in our opinion to establish that the
apportionment of income, profits or gain between those arising from business
operation carried on in the taxable territories and those arising from
business operations carried on without the taxable territories is based not on
the applicability of Section 42(3) of the Act but on general principles of
apportionment of income, profits or gains. That was really the ratio of the
judgment of the majority in Commissioner of Income-tax, Bombay v. Ahmedbhai
Umarbhai and Co., Bombay (1) and any attempt to distinguish that case from the
present one by having resort to the statutory provisions of the Excess profits
Tax Act is really futile." (Emphasis supplied)
54\. The Ld. Counsel for the assessee fairly states that he has no objection
to the apportionment on the basis of the above-quoted decision. He, however,
submits that virtually 100% of the Revenues were earned outside India and the
aggregate direct expenditure incurred outside India is about 71%, and another
10% should atleast be attributed to the business outside India on account of
Head Office expenses incurred in India.
55\. Normally, we would have referred the matter to the Assessing Officer to
verify the figures and work out the apportionment on a reasonable basis.
However, we need not go into this arithmetical exercise because we have
already held that the payments made to Technik and other foreign companies for
maintenance repairs are not in the nature of fees for technical services as
defined in Explanation-2 to Section 9(1) (vii)(b). Further, in any event these
payments are not taxable for the reason that they have been made for earning
income from sources outside India and therefore fall within exclusionary
clause of Section 9(1) (vii)(b).
56\. In view of our decision allowing the main ground relating to
chargeability of tax, the alternate grounds have become academic. We therefore
do not propose to go into them though considerable arguments were advanced on
the alternate grounds.
57\. We now take up the appeals filed by the Revenue.
57.1 The grievance of the Revenue is that the CIT (A) was not correct in
holding that as per the provisions of DTAAs with USA & UK, the payment for
repairs made to the residents of those countries cannot be considered to be
fees for included/technical services as defined in Article 12.4(b) of the US
treaty and Article 13.4(c) of the UK treaty, respectively. The Ld. DR relies
on the order of the Assessing Officer; whereas, according to the Ld. Counsel
for the assessee, the issue is squarely covered in the assessee's favour by
the decision of the ITAT, Bombay Bench 'C', in the case of Raymond Ltd. (2003
80 TTJ (Mumbai) 120). We however do not propose to go into this controversy in
view of our decision that the impugned payments to non-residents for repairs
of components are not chargeable to tax under the Act, and therefore the
assessee was not liable to deduct tax Under Section 195 of the Act. In this
view of the matter, the Revenue's appeals fail.
58\. We now take the appeals filed by assessee relating to penalty Under
Section 271C for assessment years 1997-98, 1998-99 and 1999-2000.
58.1 We have already allowed the appeals of the assessee on quantum, i.e.,
against order Under Section 201/201 (1A). Therefore, these appeals have to be
allowed because the basis on which the penalties Under Section 271C were
imposed have already quashed. Therefore, these appeals of assessee in regard
to penalty levied and confirmed Under Section 271C are hereby allowed by
deleting the penalties for all the years here before us.
59\. In the result, the appeals filed by the assessee succeed and the appeals
filed by the Department are dismissed.
fees for included/technical services as defined in Article 12.4(b) of the US
treaty and Article 13.4(c) of the UK treaty, respectively. The Ld. DR relies
on the order of the Assessing Officer; whereas, according to the Ld. Counsel
for the assessee, the issue is squarely covered in the assessee's favour by
the decision of the ITAT, Bombay Bench 'C', in the case of Raymond Ltd. (2003
80 TTJ (Mumbai) 120). We however do not propose to go into this controversy in
view of our decision that the impugned payments to non-residents for repairs
of components are not chargeable to tax under the Act, and therefore the
assessee was not liable to deduct tax Under Section 195 of the Act. In this
view of the matter, the Revenue's appeals fail.
58\. We now take the appeals filed by assessee relating to penalty Under
Section 271C for assessment years 1997-98, 1998-99 and 1999-2000.
58.1 We have already allowed the appeals of the assessee on quantum, i.e.,
against order Under Section 201/201 (1A). Therefore, these appeals have to be
allowed because the basis on which the penalties Under Section 271C were
imposed have already quashed. Therefore, these appeals of assessee in regard
issues are common in all the three years, these appeals are disposed by a
consolidated order.
2\. The remaining three appeals are by assessee against sustenance of penalty
Under Section 271C for these three years. We will take first the appeals of
the assessee and department in regard to levy of interest Under Section 201
and 201(1A).
3\. The brief facts of the case are that the assessee is a domestic company
which had acquired four Boeing Cargo Aircrafts in mid-1997 from a foreign
company. The assessee obtained license from the Director General of Civil
Aviation (DGCA), the licensing authority, to operate these aircraft on
international routes only. It also engaged crew, technical personnel,
engineers and other ground staff and wet-leased the aircrafts to a foreign
cargo company. The assessee periodically made payments to non-residents on
account of overhaul, repairs of its aircrafts, engines sub-assemblies and
rotables (hereinafter referred to as 'components') in workshops abroad. No tax
was deducted at source on such payments. No application Under Section 195(2)
was filed with the Assessing Officer either. The Assessing Officer held that
such payments were in the nature of 'fees for technical services' as defined
in Explanation 2 to Section 9(1)(vii)(b) of the Act, and were therefore
chargeable to tax on which tax should have been deducted at source Under
fees for included/technical services as defined in Article 12.4(b) of the US
treaty and Article 13.4(c) of the UK treaty, respectively. The Ld. DR relies
on the order of the Assessing Officer; whereas, according to the Ld. Counsel
for the assessee, the issue is squarely covered in the assessee's favour by
the decision of the ITAT, Bombay Bench 'C', in the case of Raymond Ltd. (2003
80 TTJ (Mumbai) 120). We however do not propose to go into this controversy in
view of our decision that the impugned payments to non-residents for repairs
of components are not chargeable to tax under the Act, and therefore the
assessee was not liable to deduct tax Under Section 195 of the Act. In this
view of the matter, the Revenue's appeals fail.
58\. We now take the appeals filed by assessee relating to penalty Under
Section 271C for assessment years 1997-98, 1998-99 and 1999-2000.
58.1 We have already allowed the appeals of the assessee on quantum, i.e.,
against order Under Section 201/201 (1A). Therefore, these appeals have to be
allowed because the basis on which the penalties Under Section 271C were
imposed have already quashed. Therefore, these appeals of assessee in regard
issues are common in all the three years, these appeals are disposed by a
consolidated order.
2\. The remaining three appeals are by assessee against sustenance of penalty
Under Section 271C for these three years. We will take first the appeals of
the assessee and department in regard to levy of interest Under Section 201
and 201(1A).
3\. The brief facts of the case are that the assessee is a domestic company
which had acquired four Boeing Cargo Aircrafts in mid-1997 from a foreign
company. The assessee obtained license from the Director General of Civil
Aviation (DGCA), the licensing authority, to operate these aircraft on
international routes only. It also engaged crew, technical personnel,
engineers and other ground staff and wet-leased the aircrafts to a foreign
cargo company. The assessee periodically made payments to non-residents on
account of overhaul, repairs of its aircrafts, engines sub-assemblies and
rotables (hereinafter referred to as 'components') in workshops abroad. No tax
was deducted at source on such payments. No application Under Section 195(2)
was filed with the Assessing Officer either. The Assessing Officer held that
such payments were in the nature of 'fees for technical services' as defined
in Explanation 2 to Section 9(1)(vii)(b) of the Act, and were therefore
chargeable to tax on which tax should have been deducted at source Under
fees for included/technical services as defined in Article 12.4(b) of the US
treaty and Article 13.4(c) of the UK treaty, respectively. The Ld. DR relies
on the order of the Assessing Officer; whereas, according to the Ld. Counsel
for the assessee, the issue is squarely covered in the assessee's favour by
the decision of the ITAT, Bombay Bench 'C', in the case of Raymond Ltd. (2003
80 TTJ (Mumbai) 120). We however do not propose to go into this controversy in
view of our decision that the impugned payments to non-residents for repairs
of components are not chargeable to tax under the Act, and therefore the
assessee was not liable to deduct tax Under Section 195 of the Act. In this
view of the matter, the Revenue's appeals fail.
58\. We now take the appeals filed by assessee relating to penalty Under
Section 271C for assessment years 1997-98, 1998-99 and 1999-2000.
58.1 We have already allowed the appeals of the assessee on quantum, i.e.,
against order Under Section 201/201 (1A). Therefore, these appeals have to be
allowed because the basis on which the penalties Under Section 271C were
imposed have already quashed. Therefore, these appeals of assessee in regard
issues are common in all the three years, these appeals are disposed by a
consolidated order.
2\. The remaining three appeals are by assessee against sustenance of penalty
Under Section 271C for these three years. We will take first the appeals of
the assessee and department in regard to levy of interest Under Section 201
and 201(1A).
3\. The brief facts of the case are that the assessee is a domestic company
which had acquired four Boeing Cargo Aircrafts in mid-1997 from a foreign
company. The assessee obtained license from the Director General of Civil
Aviation (DGCA), the licensing authority, to operate these aircraft on
international routes only. It also engaged crew, technical personnel,
engineers and other ground staff and wet-leased the aircrafts to a foreign
cargo company. The assessee periodically made payments to non-residents on
account of overhaul, repairs of its aircrafts, engines sub-assemblies and
rotables (hereinafter referred to as 'components') in workshops abroad. No tax
was deducted at source on such payments. No application Under Section 195(2)
was filed with the Assessing Officer either. The Assessing Officer held that
such payments were in the nature of 'fees for technical services' as defined
in Explanation 2 to Section 9(1)(vii)(b) of the Act, and were therefore
chargeable to tax on which tax should have been deducted at source Under
fees for included/technical services as defined in Article 12.4(b) of the US
treaty and Article 13.4(c) of the UK treaty, respectively. The Ld. DR relies
on the order of the Assessing Officer; whereas, according to the Ld. Counsel
for the assessee, the issue is squarely covered in the assessee's favour by
the decision of the ITAT, Bombay Bench 'C', in the case of Raymond Ltd. (2003
80 TTJ (Mumbai) 120). We however do not propose to go into this controversy in
view of our decision that the impugned payments to non-residents for repairs
of components are not chargeable to tax under the Act, and therefore the
assessee was not liable to deduct tax Under Section 195 of the Act. In this
view of the matter, the Revenue's appeals fail.
58\. We now take the appeals filed by assessee relating to penalty Under
Section 271C for assessment years 1997-98, 1998-99 and 1999-2000.
58.1 We have already allowed the appeals of the assessee on quantum, i.e.,
against order Under Section 201/201 (1A). Therefore, these appeals have to be
allowed because the basis on which the penalties Under Section 271C were
imposed have already quashed. Therefore, these appeals of assessee in regard
issues are common in all the three years, these appeals are disposed by a
consolidated order.
2\. The remaining three appeals are by assessee against sustenance of penalty
Under Section 271C for these three years. We will take first the appeals of
the assessee and department in regard to levy of interest Under Section 201
and 201(1A).
3\. The brief facts of the case are that the assessee is a domestic company
which had acquired four Boeing Cargo Aircrafts in mid-1997 from a foreign
company. The assessee obtained license from the Director General of Civil
Aviation (DGCA), the licensing authority, to operate these aircraft on
international routes only. It also engaged crew, technical personnel,
engineers and other ground staff and wet-leased the aircrafts to a foreign
cargo company. The assessee periodically made payments to non-residents on
account of overhaul, repairs of its aircrafts, engines sub-assemblies and
rotables (hereinafter referred to as 'components') in workshops abroad. No tax
was deducted at source on such payments. No application Under Section 195(2)
was filed with the Assessing Officer either. The Assessing Officer held that
such payments were in the nature of 'fees for technical services' as defined
in Explanation 2 to Section 9(1)(vii)(b) of the Act, and were therefore
chargeable to tax on which tax should have been deducted at source Under
Section 195(1) of the act. The Assessing Officer also rejected the plea of the
assessee that the payments for repairs were incurred for earning income from
sources outside India and therefore the assessee's case fell within the
exclusionary clause of Section 9(1)(vii)(b). The Assessing Officer rejected
another plea of the assessee that the business of aircraft leasing was carried
on outside India. The assessee's alternate plea that in any case the payments
made to residents of USA, UK, Israel, Netherlands, Singapore and Thailand
could be taxed as business profits only and not as fees for technical services
keeping in view the relevant provisions of the DTAAs with those countries was
also rejected. The AO passed orders Under Section 201 of the Act deeming the
assessee to be an assessee in default for the Financial years 1997-98 to
fees for included/technical services as defined in Article 12.4(b) of the US
treaty and Article 13.4(c) of the UK treaty, respectively. The Ld. DR relies
on the order of the Assessing Officer; whereas, according to the Ld. Counsel
for the assessee, the issue is squarely covered in the assessee's favour by
the decision of the ITAT, Bombay Bench 'C', in the case of Raymond Ltd. (2003
80 TTJ (Mumbai) 120). We however do not propose to go into this controversy in
view of our decision that the impugned payments to non-residents for repairs
of components are not chargeable to tax under the Act, and therefore the
assessee was not liable to deduct tax Under Section 195 of the Act. In this
view of the matter, the Revenue's appeals fail.
58\. We now take the appeals filed by assessee relating to penalty Under
Section 271C for assessment years 1997-98, 1998-99 and 1999-2000.
58.1 We have already allowed the appeals of the assessee on quantum, i.e.,
against order Under Section 201/201 (1A). Therefore, these appeals have to be
allowed because the basis on which the penalties Under Section 271C were
imposed have already quashed. Therefore, these appeals of assessee in regard
issues are common in all the three years, these appeals are disposed by a
consolidated order.
2\. The remaining three appeals are by assessee against sustenance of penalty
Under Section 271C for these three years. We will take first the appeals of
the assessee and department in regard to levy of interest Under Section 201
and 201(1A).
3\. The brief facts of the case are that the assessee is a domestic company
which had acquired four Boeing Cargo Aircrafts in mid-1997 from a foreign
company. The assessee obtained license from the Director General of Civil
Aviation (DGCA), the licensing authority, to operate these aircraft on
international routes only. It also engaged crew, technical personnel,
engineers and other ground staff and wet-leased the aircrafts to a foreign
cargo company. The assessee periodically made payments to non-residents on
account of overhaul, repairs of its aircrafts, engines sub-assemblies and
rotables (hereinafter referred to as 'components') in workshops abroad. No tax
was deducted at source on such payments. No application Under Section 195(2)
was filed with the Assessing Officer either. The Assessing Officer held that
such payments were in the nature of 'fees for technical services' as defined
in Explanation 2 to Section 9(1)(vii)(b) of the Act, and were therefore
chargeable to tax on which tax should have been deducted at source Under
Section 195(1) of the act. The Assessing Officer also rejected the plea of the
assessee that the payments for repairs were incurred for earning income from
sources outside India and therefore the assessee's case fell within the
exclusionary clause of Section 9(1)(vii)(b). The Assessing Officer rejected
another plea of the assessee that the business of aircraft leasing was carried
on outside India. The assessee's alternate plea that in any case the payments
made to residents of USA, UK, Israel, Netherlands, Singapore and Thailand
could be taxed as business profits only and not as fees for technical services
keeping in view the relevant provisions of the DTAAs with those countries was
also rejected. The AO passed orders Under Section 201 of the Act deeming the
assessee to be an assessee in default for the Financial years 1997-98 to
fees for included/technical services as defined in Article 12.4(b) of the US
treaty and Article 13.4(c) of the UK treaty, respectively. The Ld. DR relies
on the order of the Assessing Officer; whereas, according to the Ld. Counsel
for the assessee, the issue is squarely covered in the assessee's favour by
the decision of the ITAT, Bombay Bench 'C', in the case of Raymond Ltd. (2003
80 TTJ (Mumbai) 120). We however do not propose to go into this controversy in
view of our decision that the impugned payments to non-residents for repairs
of components are not chargeable to tax under the Act, and therefore the
assessee was not liable to deduct tax Under Section 195 of the Act. In this
view of the matter, the Revenue's appeals fail.
58\. We now take the appeals filed by assessee relating to penalty Under
Section 271C for assessment years 1997-98, 1998-99 and 1999-2000.
58.1 We have already allowed the appeals of the assessee on quantum, i.e.,
against order Under Section 201/201 (1A). Therefore, these appeals have to be
allowed because the basis on which the penalties Under Section 271C were
imposed have already quashed. Therefore, these appeals of assessee in regard
