Supreme Court of India
Sri Ramayan Harijan vs State Of West Bengal on 30 October, 1972
Equivalent citations: AIR 1973 SC 758, (1988) IILLJ 423 SC, (1973) 3 SCC 315
Author: Y Chandrachud
Bench: I D Shelat, Y Chandrachud
JUDGMENT Y.V. Chandrachud, J.
1\. By an order dated. 29th October 1971 the District Magistrate,
24-Paraganas, West Bengal, directed that the petitioner be detained under the
Maintenance of Internal Security Act, 26 of 1971, with a view to preventing
him from acting in. any manner prejudicial to the maintenance of supplies and
services essential to the community. The petitioner was arrested on 4th
November 1971 and the grounds of detention were furnished to him on the same
date. The representation made by the petitioner was received by the Government
on 19th November, 1971 and was rejected on 1st December 1971. On the decision,
of the Advisory Board dated 13th January 1672 the detention order was
confirmed by the Government on 19th January, 1972. The correctness of the
detention order is challenged by the petitioner by this petition 'under
Article 32 of the Constitution.
2\. It is contended that the petitioner was in jail on 29th October 1971 when
the detention order was passed, that he was then being prosecuted in respect
under the Maintenance of Internal Security Act, 26 of 1971 and Section 8(1)
thereof provides that the detaining authority shall, as soon as may be,
communicate to the detenu the grounds on which the detention order has been
made so as to afford him the earliest opportunity to make a representation to
the appropriate Government. It would be pointless to give to the detenu the
right to make a representation to the Government unless the Government is
entitled to consider that representation. It is also difficult to understand
how the petitioner has been prejudiced by reason of the fact that his
representation was considered by the State Government.
4\. One of the grounds on which the petitioner was detained is that he
attacked a goods wagon loaded with brass rods valued, at Rs. 50,000/-, with
the object of committing theft. It is urged that brass rods are not an
essential commodity, and therefore the order of detention could not have been
passed as it purports to have been passed for the maintenance of supplies and
services essential to the community. We cannot accept this submission because
apart from the question whether brass rods are an essential commodity, the
the detention order was passed, that he was then being prosecuted in respect
of the same incidents for which the order of detention was passed and
therefore the detention is mala fide. In support of this contention our
attention has been drawn by the learned Counsel to a, decision in Maledath
Bharathan Malyali v. The Commr. of Police . This decision, in our opinion, has
no application because the detention order was passed in that case while the
case was still under investigation. The affidavit filed by Sub-Inspector
Manoranjan Ghosal in our case shows. that the petitioner was caught red-handed
and was arrested on 20th October 1971 and that he was immediately put up
before a Magistrate for charges under Sections 379, 411 and 461 of the Indian
Penal Code. The affidavit further shows that witnesses were unwilling to come
forward in that case and therefore it was considered expedient not to proceed
with the trial. The Investigating Officer therefore requested the learned
Magistrate to discharge the petitioner and It was in anticipation ox the order
of discharge that the present order of detention was passed on 29th October
1971. In Mohd. Salim Khan v. Shri C.C. Bose , Deputy Secretary to the
Government of West Bengal it was held by tills Court that the mere fact that
the detenu was discharged in a criminal case does not mean that a valid order
of detention could not be passed against him in connection with those very
incidents or that such an order can be characterised as mala fide.
3\. There is no substance in the submission that the State Government had no
right to consider the representation made by the petitioner as that right
exclusively belongs to the Advisory Board. The detention order was passed
under the Maintenance of Internal Security Act, 26 of 1971 and Section 8(1)
thereof provides that the detaining authority shall, as soon as may be,
communicate to the detenu the grounds on which the detention order has been
made so as to afford him the earliest opportunity to make a representation to
the appropriate Government. It would be pointless to give to the detenu the
right to make a representation to the Government unless the Government is
entitled to consider that representation. It is also difficult to understand
how the petitioner has been prejudiced by reason of the fact that his
representation was considered by the State Government.
4\. One of the grounds on which the petitioner was detained is that he
attacked a goods wagon loaded with brass rods valued, at Rs. 50,000/-, with
the object of committing theft. It is urged that brass rods are not an
essential commodity, and therefore the order of detention could not have been
passed as it purports to have been passed for the maintenance of supplies and
services essential to the community. We cannot accept this submission because
apart from the question whether brass rods are an essential commodity, the
detention order has been passed for maintenance of supplies as well as
services essential to the community. Breaking open goods-wagons is bound to
cause disruption in the maintenance of services essential to the community.
5\. In the result the petition is dismissed.
under the Maintenance of Internal Security Act, 26 of 1971 and Section 8(1)
thereof provides that the detaining authority shall, as soon as may be,
communicate to the detenu the grounds on which the detention order has been
made so as to afford him the earliest opportunity to make a representation to
the appropriate Government. It would be pointless to give to the detenu the
right to make a representation to the Government unless the Government is
entitled to consider that representation. It is also difficult to understand
how the petitioner has been prejudiced by reason of the fact that his
representation was considered by the State Government.
4\. One of the grounds on which the petitioner was detained is that he
attacked a goods wagon loaded with brass rods valued, at Rs. 50,000/-, with
the object of committing theft. It is urged that brass rods are not an
essential commodity, and therefore the order of detention could not have been
passed as it purports to have been passed for the maintenance of supplies and
services essential to the community. We cannot accept this submission because
apart from the question whether brass rods are an essential commodity, the
the detention order was passed, that he was then being prosecuted in respect
of the same incidents for which the order of detention was passed and
therefore the detention is mala fide. In support of this contention our
attention has been drawn by the learned Counsel to a, decision in Maledath
Bharathan Malyali v. The Commr. of Police . This decision, in our opinion, has
no application because the detention order was passed in that case while the
case was still under investigation. The affidavit filed by Sub-Inspector
Manoranjan Ghosal in our case shows. that the petitioner was caught red-handed
and was arrested on 20th October 1971 and that he was immediately put up
before a Magistrate for charges under Sections 379, 411 and 461 of the Indian
Penal Code. The affidavit further shows that witnesses were unwilling to come
forward in that case and therefore it was considered expedient not to proceed
with the trial. The Investigating Officer therefore requested the learned
Magistrate to discharge the petitioner and It was in anticipation ox the order
of discharge that the present order of detention was passed on 29th October
1971. In Mohd. Salim Khan v. Shri C.C. Bose , Deputy Secretary to the
Government of West Bengal it was held by tills Court that the mere fact that
the detenu was discharged in a criminal case does not mean that a valid order
of detention could not be passed against him in connection with those very
incidents or that such an order can be characterised as mala fide.
under the Maintenance of Internal Security Act, 26 of 1971 and Section 8(1)
thereof provides that the detaining authority shall, as soon as may be,
communicate to the detenu the grounds on which the detention order has been
made so as to afford him the earliest opportunity to make a representation to
the appropriate Government. It would be pointless to give to the detenu the
right to make a representation to the Government unless the Government is
entitled to consider that representation. It is also difficult to understand
how the petitioner has been prejudiced by reason of the fact that his
representation was considered by the State Government.
4\. One of the grounds on which the petitioner was detained is that he
attacked a goods wagon loaded with brass rods valued, at Rs. 50,000/-, with
the object of committing theft. It is urged that brass rods are not an
essential commodity, and therefore the order of detention could not have been
passed as it purports to have been passed for the maintenance of supplies and
services essential to the community. We cannot accept this submission because
apart from the question whether brass rods are an essential commodity, the
the detention order was passed, that he was then being prosecuted in respect
of the same incidents for which the order of detention was passed and
therefore the detention is mala fide. In support of this contention our
attention has been drawn by the learned Counsel to a, decision in Maledath
Bharathan Malyali v. The Commr. of Police . This decision, in our opinion, has
no application because the detention order was passed in that case while the
case was still under investigation. The affidavit filed by Sub-Inspector
Manoranjan Ghosal in our case shows. that the petitioner was caught red-handed
and was arrested on 20th October 1971 and that he was immediately put up
before a Magistrate for charges under Sections 379, 411 and 461 of the Indian
Penal Code. The affidavit further shows that witnesses were unwilling to come
forward in that case and therefore it was considered expedient not to proceed
with the trial. The Investigating Officer therefore requested the learned
Magistrate to discharge the petitioner and It was in anticipation ox the order
of discharge that the present order of detention was passed on 29th October
1971. In Mohd. Salim Khan v. Shri C.C. Bose , Deputy Secretary to the
Government of West Bengal it was held by tills Court that the mere fact that
the detenu was discharged in a criminal case does not mean that a valid order
of detention could not be passed against him in connection with those very
incidents or that such an order can be characterised as mala fide.
under the Maintenance of Internal Security Act, 26 of 1971 and Section 8(1)
thereof provides that the detaining authority shall, as soon as may be,
communicate to the detenu the grounds on which the detention order has been
made so as to afford him the earliest opportunity to make a representation to
the appropriate Government. It would be pointless to give to the detenu the
right to make a representation to the Government unless the Government is
entitled to consider that representation. It is also difficult to understand
how the petitioner has been prejudiced by reason of the fact that his
representation was considered by the State Government.
4\. One of the grounds on which the petitioner was detained is that he
attacked a goods wagon loaded with brass rods valued, at Rs. 50,000/-, with
the object of committing theft. It is urged that brass rods are not an
essential commodity, and therefore the order of detention could not have been
passed as it purports to have been passed for the maintenance of supplies and
services essential to the community. We cannot accept this submission because
apart from the question whether brass rods are an essential commodity, the
the detention order was passed, that he was then being prosecuted in respect
of the same incidents for which the order of detention was passed and
therefore the detention is mala fide. In support of this contention our
attention has been drawn by the learned Counsel to a, decision in Maledath
Bharathan Malyali v. The Commr. of Police . This decision, in our opinion, has
no application because the detention order was passed in that case while the
case was still under investigation. The affidavit filed by Sub-Inspector
Manoranjan Ghosal in our case shows. that the petitioner was caught red-handed
and was arrested on 20th October 1971 and that he was immediately put up
before a Magistrate for charges under Sections 379, 411 and 461 of the Indian
Penal Code. The affidavit further shows that witnesses were unwilling to come
forward in that case and therefore it was considered expedient not to proceed
with the trial. The Investigating Officer therefore requested the learned
Magistrate to discharge the petitioner and It was in anticipation ox the order
of discharge that the present order of detention was passed on 29th October
1971. In Mohd. Salim Khan v. Shri C.C. Bose , Deputy Secretary to the
Government of West Bengal it was held by tills Court that the mere fact that
the detenu was discharged in a criminal case does not mean that a valid order
of detention could not be passed against him in connection with those very
incidents or that such an order can be characterised as mala fide.
under the Maintenance of Internal Security Act, 26 of 1971 and Section 8(1)
thereof provides that the detaining authority shall, as soon as may be,
communicate to the detenu the grounds on which the detention order has been
made so as to afford him the earliest opportunity to make a representation to
the appropriate Government. It would be pointless to give to the detenu the
right to make a representation to the Government unless the Government is
entitled to consider that representation. It is also difficult to understand
how the petitioner has been prejudiced by reason of the fact that his
representation was considered by the State Government.
4\. One of the grounds on which the petitioner was detained is that he
attacked a goods wagon loaded with brass rods valued, at Rs. 50,000/-, with
the object of committing theft. It is urged that brass rods are not an
essential commodity, and therefore the order of detention could not have been
passed as it purports to have been passed for the maintenance of supplies and
services essential to the community. We cannot accept this submission because
apart from the question whether brass rods are an essential commodity, the
the detention order was passed, that he was then being prosecuted in respect
of the same incidents for which the order of detention was passed and
therefore the detention is mala fide. In support of this contention our
attention has been drawn by the learned Counsel to a, decision in Maledath
Bharathan Malyali v. The Commr. of Police . This decision, in our opinion, has
no application because the detention order was passed in that case while the
case was still under investigation. The affidavit filed by Sub-Inspector
Manoranjan Ghosal in our case shows. that the petitioner was caught red-handed
and was arrested on 20th October 1971 and that he was immediately put up
before a Magistrate for charges under Sections 379, 411 and 461 of the Indian
Penal Code. The affidavit further shows that witnesses were unwilling to come
forward in that case and therefore it was considered expedient not to proceed
with the trial. The Investigating Officer therefore requested the learned
Magistrate to discharge the petitioner and It was in anticipation ox the order
of discharge that the present order of detention was passed on 29th October
1971. In Mohd. Salim Khan v. Shri C.C. Bose , Deputy Secretary to the
Government of West Bengal it was held by tills Court that the mere fact that
the detenu was discharged in a criminal case does not mean that a valid order
of detention could not be passed against him in connection with those very
incidents or that such an order can be characterised as mala fide.
3\. There is no substance in the submission that the State Government had no
right to consider the representation made by the petitioner as that right
exclusively belongs to the Advisory Board. The detention order was passed
under the Maintenance of Internal Security Act, 26 of 1971 and Section 8(1)
thereof provides that the detaining authority shall, as soon as may be,
communicate to the detenu the grounds on which the detention order has been
made so as to afford him the earliest opportunity to make a representation to
the appropriate Government. It would be pointless to give to the detenu the
right to make a representation to the Government unless the Government is
entitled to consider that representation. It is also difficult to understand
how the petitioner has been prejudiced by reason of the fact that his
under the Maintenance of Internal Security Act, 26 of 1971 and Section 8(1)
thereof provides that the detaining authority shall, as soon as may be,
communicate to the detenu the grounds on which the detention order has been
made so as to afford him the earliest opportunity to make a representation to
the appropriate Government. It would be pointless to give to the detenu the
right to make a representation to the Government unless the Government is
entitled to consider that representation. It is also difficult to understand
how the petitioner has been prejudiced by reason of the fact that his
representation was considered by the State Government.
4\. One of the grounds on which the petitioner was detained is that he
attacked a goods wagon loaded with brass rods valued, at Rs. 50,000/-, with
the object of committing theft. It is urged that brass rods are not an
essential commodity, and therefore the order of detention could not have been
passed as it purports to have been passed for the maintenance of supplies and
services essential to the community. We cannot accept this submission because
apart from the question whether brass rods are an essential commodity, the
the detention order was passed, that he was then being prosecuted in respect
of the same incidents for which the order of detention was passed and
therefore the detention is mala fide. In support of this contention our
attention has been drawn by the learned Counsel to a, decision in Maledath
Bharathan Malyali v. The Commr. of Police . This decision, in our opinion, has
no application because the detention order was passed in that case while the
case was still under investigation. The affidavit filed by Sub-Inspector
Manoranjan Ghosal in our case shows. that the petitioner was caught red-handed
and was arrested on 20th October 1971 and that he was immediately put up
before a Magistrate for charges under Sections 379, 411 and 461 of the Indian
Penal Code. The affidavit further shows that witnesses were unwilling to come
forward in that case and therefore it was considered expedient not to proceed
with the trial. The Investigating Officer therefore requested the learned
Magistrate to discharge the petitioner and It was in anticipation ox the order
of discharge that the present order of detention was passed on 29th October
1971. In Mohd. Salim Khan v. Shri C.C. Bose , Deputy Secretary to the
Government of West Bengal it was held by tills Court that the mere fact that
the detenu was discharged in a criminal case does not mean that a valid order
of detention could not be passed against him in connection with those very
incidents or that such an order can be characterised as mala fide.
3\. There is no substance in the submission that the State Government had no
right to consider the representation made by the petitioner as that right
exclusively belongs to the Advisory Board. The detention order was passed
under the Maintenance of Internal Security Act, 26 of 1971 and Section 8(1)
thereof provides that the detaining authority shall, as soon as may be,
communicate to the detenu the grounds on which the detention order has been
made so as to afford him the earliest opportunity to make a representation to
the appropriate Government. It would be pointless to give to the detenu the
right to make a representation to the Government unless the Government is
entitled to consider that representation. It is also difficult to understand
how the petitioner has been prejudiced by reason of the fact that his
under the Maintenance of Internal Security Act, 26 of 1971 and Section 8(1)
thereof provides that the detaining authority shall, as soon as may be,
communicate to the detenu the grounds on which the detention order has been
made so as to afford him the earliest opportunity to make a representation to
the appropriate Government. It would be pointless to give to the detenu the
right to make a representation to the Government unless the Government is
entitled to consider that representation. It is also difficult to understand
how the petitioner has been prejudiced by reason of the fact that his
representation was considered by the State Government.
4\. One of the grounds on which the petitioner was detained is that he
attacked a goods wagon loaded with brass rods valued, at Rs. 50,000/-, with
the object of committing theft. It is urged that brass rods are not an
essential commodity, and therefore the order of detention could not have been
passed as it purports to have been passed for the maintenance of supplies and
services essential to the community. We cannot accept this submission because
apart from the question whether brass rods are an essential commodity, the
