Gujarat High Court
Suleman Isubji Dadabhai vs Naranbhai Dahyabhai Patel And ... on 27 July, 1979
Equivalent citations: AIR 1980 Guj 165, (1980) 0 GLR 232
Author: S Sheth
Bench: S Sheth, G Nanavati
JUDGMENT S.H. Sheth, J.
1\. The appellant was the owner of survey Nos. 432. 433, 434 and 461 of
village Kholvad in Kamrej Taluka of Surat District. Respondents I and 2 claim
to be his protected tenants under the provisions of the Bombay Tenancy and
Agricultural Lands Act, 1948, (hereinafter referred to as "the Tenancy Act"
for the sake of brevity). On 12th December 1956, the appellant -3erved upon
respondents 1 and 2 notice terminating under Section 32 of the Tenancy Act
their tenancy in respect of the lands in question. On 31st December 1956, the
appellant created a trust in respect of the lands in question for the purpose
of running a free public dispensary and for giving scholarships to Muslim
students for prosecuting their studies. On 20th January 1957, he made an
application for registration of that trust which was styled as "Dadabhai
Trust- under Section 18 of the Bombay Public Trusts Act, 1950. On 31st January
1967, it was registered under S. 19 of the Bombay public Trusts Act.
Respondents 1 and 2 appealed to the Charity Commissioner against the order of
1 and 2 the ownership of the lands in question. That is not the question,
which was canvassed before the Courts below. We are, therefore, unable to
express any opinion on this question.' If respondents 1and 2 have any rights
res04iing from Section 88E of the Tenancy, Act, it will be open to them to
agitate them in appropriate proceedings before a competent authority.
25\. In light of the conclusions, which we have recorded, we are unable to
uphold the order made by the learned single Judge in First Appeal No. 347 of
1968
26\. The appeal is, therefore, allowed; the impugned order is set aside and
the order made by the District Court, Surat, is restored. There shall be no
order as to costs of this appeal. The cost of the Chanty Commissioner shall
come out of the estate.
27\. Mr. R. N. Shah who appears on behalf of respondents 1 and 2 prays for a
certificate of fitness under Article 133(1) of the Constitution to appeal
against this decision to the Supreme Court. In our opinion, the question,
which we have decided, is a substantial question of law. It is a question,
Respondents 1 and 2 appealed to the Charity Commissioner against the order of
registration of Dadabhai Trust. It was appeal No. 56 of 1957. The appeal was
dismissed. Thereafter an application under Section 72 of the Bombay Public
Trusts Act was made by respondents 1 and 2 to the District Judge at Surat
calling in question the appellate order of the Charity Commissioner. The
District Court dismissed it by its order dated 18th October 1967. That order
was challenged in this High Court in First Appeal No. 247 of 1968, That
appeal, in the first instance, came up for hearing before Mr. Justice T.' U.
Mehta who held that the transaction evidenced by the deed of settlement dated
31st December, 1956, was a gift. Therefore, under Section 85A read with
Section 70(O) of the Tenancy Act, he referred to the Mamlatdar. Karnrej, the
following issue:
"Whether the transaction evidenced by the vesting of the disputed property in
Dadabhai Trust under document dated 31-12-1956, is valid or not in view of the
provisions contained in Section 63 of the Bombay Tenancy Act."
Mr. Justice T.U. Mehta felt that since the transaction in question amounted to
a gift, it might be hit by the provisions of Section 63 of the Tenancy Act
because that transaction was brought about with out the previous permission of
the competent authority specified in Section 63, Upon reference, the
Mamlatdar, Kamrej, held that the gift resulting from the deed of settlement
was not valid because previous t permission of the Collector to make that gift
had not been obtained as required by Section 63 of the Tenancy Act. , We are
now told that the appellant appealed against that order to the Prant Officer.
We are further told that that appeal has been dismissed. We are also told that
a revision application against that appellate order filed by the appellant is
pending before the Gujarat Revenue Tribunal.
2\. However, on 22nd September 1975, that First Appeal came up for final
hearing and disposal before Mr. - Justice J. M. Sheth. Mr. Justice J. M. Sheth
decided the appeal on merits because he was told that no appeal against the
Mamlatdar's judgment had been preferred to the Collector or the Prant Officer.
The learned single Judge, therefore, proceeded to decide the appeal on -the
basis that the Mamlatdar's order had become final and conclusive. He also felt
' that the order made by the Mamlatdar under the Tenancy Act was binding upon
him because he was exercising the jurisdiction of the Civil Court. Since the
Mamlatdar had held that the gift of the lands in question to the trust was bad
in law, he allowed the appeal, set aside the orders made by the Courts below
and held that the land in question had not vested in public trust Dadabhai'
Trust - and that they continued to be the private property of the appellant.
3\. It is that order which is challenged by the appellant in this Letters
Patent Appeal.
4\. Mrs. Mehta who appears on behalf of the appellant has raised before us the
following contentions:
(i) The deed of settlement executed by the appellant on 31st December 1956,
was not a gift within the meaning of Section 122 of the Transfer of Property
Act. 1882
(ii) Under Section 6 of The Indian Trust Act, 1882, there was no transfer of
property but it was only a vesting declaration. Therefore also, the
transaction in question did not amount to gift-
(iii) Section 63 of the Tenancy - Act does not require the previous permission
of the Collector in cases where the property is settled in trust.
(iv) Reference made to the Mamlatdar, Kamrej, by Mr. Justice T. U. Mehta by
his interlocutory order is bad and without jurisdiction.
(v) The jurisdiction of the Charity Commissioner to decide whether particular
properties are public trust proper-a ties or not is not excluded by Section 85
of the Tenancy Act and, therefore, he decided the question correctly and with
jurisdiction.
5\. The first two contentions raised by Mrs, Mehta can be conveniently dealt
with together. Section 122 of the Transfer for Property Act, defines "Gift" in
the following terms:
"Gift" is the transfer of certain existing- moveable or immoveable property
made voluntarily and without consideration, by one person, called the donor,
to another, called the donee, and accepted by or on behalf of the donee".
The rest of the provision of Section 122 is not material for the purpose of
the present case. The deed of settlement executed by the appellant on 31st
December 1956, shows that he created t1ilder that transaction a trust in
respect of the lands in question and appointed himself as the sole trustee. He
has also provided for succession to the trustee after his death. However, that
is not material for the purpose of the present case
6\. The question, which has, therefore, arisen is this: can there be a gift by
a person to himself of his own property.
7\. Mrs. Mehta has argued that for a particular transaction to become a gift,
there must be two persons - the donor and the donee - and that' the gift must
be accepted by donee or by some one on his behalf. In other words, according
to her, it is inconceivable that there can be a gift by a person to himself.
Ex facie, the argument, which Mrs. Mehta has raised, appears to be sound. The
transactions in immovable property dealt with by the Transfer of Property Act
consist of sales, mortgages, leases, exchanges and gifts.. We are not
referring to transfers -of actionable claims provided in Chapter VIII of the
Transfer of Property Act because it has no relevance to the present case.
8.. Now, on a close and meticulous analysis of the definition of "gift" given
in Section 122, we find that in: order that a transaction becomes gift there
must firstly be a transfer of an immoveable property voluntarily and without
consideration. Therefore, (i) there must be a transferor, (ii) there must be a
transferee and (iii) the transfer must be accepted by or on behalf of the
donee. No difficulty arises when the owner of an immoveable property gifts it
to another person. But, can we say that the owner of an immoveable property
can gift the property to himself? We are unable to conceive of a case where
there can be a transfer of an immoveable property by a person to himself,
except indeed in case of a trust, to which we are adverting shortly. As for
example, there cannot be a sale of a property by its owner to himself,
Similarly there cannot be mortgage of an immoveable property by owner or the
mortgagor to himself. Similarly, there cannot be the lease of a property 'from
its owner to himself. Next, an owner of an immoveable property cannot exchange
one property of his with another. Lastly, except in cases of trust there
cannot be a gift of an immoveable property by an owner to himself. We have
said so because transfers, connotes transfer of an immoveable property by an
owner to some one else. -There cannot be a transfer to oneself because such a
transfer is meaningless. A sale in one's own favour, a mortgage in one's own
favour, a lea* in one's own favour, an exchange in one's own favour and a gift
in one's own favour do not bring about any change in the character or
ownership of the property and therefore they are not transfers. Therefore,
there is no transfer at all in the properties so dealt with and all rights
therein remain where they are and do not undergo any transfer or
transformation whatsoever even after a transaction of sale,' mortgage, lease,
gift or exchange has been executed by the owner in favour of himself. It is,
therefore, clear that, in order that a transaction may amount to a gift, there
must be a donor under the deed and there must be a donee. One person cannot be
the donor and the donee. He cannot in his capacity as the donor gift an
immoveable property to himself and accepts it as the donee. We say so because
there is no transfer whatsoever in this case. We are mindful of the definition
of "transfer" given in Section 5 of the Transfer of Property Act. We are
dealing with it shortly. We are, however, clear in our minds that in order
that a transaction may amount to a gift, there must be a transfer from one
legal person to another legal person of an immoveable property and that there
must be two legal persons - one of whom is the donor, another of whom is the
donee and that the donee has accepted the gift or that it has been accepted on
his behalf. Ex facie, therefore, when the appellant appointed himself as the
sole trustee of the lands in question after settling them in trust for public
benefit, he did not gift those properties firstly because there was no
transfer of lands in question amounting to gift and also because there was no
donee as he himself could not become the donor and- the donee and could not
accept the gift on his own behalf.
9\. Mr. Justice T. U, Mehta held that the transaction in question amounted to
gift because of the provisions of Section 5 of the Transfer of Property Act.
We now turn to Section 5 of the Transfer of Property Act in order to find out
whether it conditions or modifies the impact of Section 122 and, if it so
does, to what extent.
10\. Section 5 of the Transfer of Property Act reads as follows:
"In the following sections "transfer of property" means an act by which a
living person conveys property, in present or in future, to one or more other
living persons, or to himself, or to himself and one or more other living
persons, and "to transfer property" is to perform such act".
It is not necessary to refer to paragraph 2 of Section 5 because it is not
relevant for the purpose of the present case. There are three classes of
persons which Section 5 contemplates to whom a property can be transferred:
(i) one or more other living persons to whom a property can be transferred,
(ii) a person can transfer an immoveable property to himself, and (iii) a
person can transfer an immoveable property to himself and one or more living
persons. The expression living person" has been defined in second paragraph of
Section 5 so as to include "a company or association or body of individuals,
whether incorporated or not". In the instant case, assuming that the deed of
settlement executed by the appellant amounted to a transfer, he transferred
the lands in question to himself. Ex facie, therefore, the transaction in
question appears to be satisfying the provisions of Section 5 of the Transfer
of Property Act because it was a transfer of the property by the appellant to
himself. Before Section 5 was amended in 1929, an immoveable property could be
transferred by a person 'to one or more other living persons or to himself and
one or more other living persons. He could not transfer it to himself. It was
by the Amending Act 20 of 1929 that transfer of an immoveable property to
oneself was provided by Section 5. What is this transfer to oneself and how
does it reflect upon Section 122? When a person owns an immoveable property,
he is both its legal owner as well as its beneficial owner. When he sells it
to another person, he transfers both the ownerships to the vendee. When he
mortgages an immoveable property to another person, he transfers all his
rights of legal ownership and beneficial ownership therein to the mortgagee
except the equity of redemption, which he retains. When a person leases out
his immoveable property to another person, he transfers all his rights - legal
and beneficial - to the lessee, except the right to recover rent and the right
of re-entry, which he ' reserves for himself. It is difficult to imagine a
person exchanging in his own favour one property of his for another property
of his. Such a situation in the very nature of things is inconceivable. When a
person gifts a property to another - not by way of trust - he transfers both -
the legal and the beneficial ownership therein -to the donee. Therefore,
ordinarily, 'transfer' of an immoveable property to oneself will be an
exercise in futility in as much as he would not transfer anything nor' he
would transfer any rights of his - legal or beneficial - to a third party. It
is impossible for us to conceive that a person can be a vendor and a vendee, a
mortgagor and a mortgagee, a lessor and a lessee or a donor and a donee.
Therefore, it is only in case of a trust that the concept of 'transfer' to
oneself comes into play, particularly when the settlor appoints himself as the
sole trustee. When a settlor creates a 'trust' by settling some of his
properties and appoints himself as the sole trustee, he bifurcates--his dual
ownership, retains in himself the legal ownership of the and transfers
beneficial or equitable ownership to those for whose benefit he has created
the trust. In other words, in case of a trust, where the settlor appoints
himself the sole trustee, he, in his capacity as the settlor, transfers the
legal ownership of the trust property to himself in his capacity as the sole
trustee and transfers equitable or beneficial ownership to the beneficiaries
of the trust.
11\. The next question, which we are, therefore, required to answer is: Does
this concept of transfer to himself reflect upon the gift as defined by
Section 122 of the Transfer of Property Act?
12\. In other words, if a person, in his capacity as the owner, transfers an
immoveable property to himself in his capacity as the sole trustee, does he
make a gift to his beneficiaries' of that property within the meaning of
Section 122 of the Transfer of Property Act?
13\. If the forms of transfer of immoveable property are only those, which are
specified in the Transfer of Property Act, the question must be answered in
the affirmative. If there are other forms of transfer, then the question need
not necessarily be answered accordingly. The other form of transfer, which we
are able to conceive of, is the creation of a trust. When a person creates a
trust, is there necessarily a 'gift' of his property to a 'trust' as
contemplated by Section 122 of the Transfer of Property Act?
14\. In order to examine this concept, is necessary to turn to Section 6 of
the Indian Trusts' Act, 1882. It specifies the manner in which a trust can be
created. It provides as under:
"Subject to the provisions of Section a trust is created when the author of
the trust indicates with reasonable certainty by any words or acts (a) an
intention on his part to create thereby a trust, (b) the purpose of the trust,
(c) the beneficiary, and (d) the trust-property, and (unless the trust is
declared by will or the author of the trust is himself to be the trustee)
transfers the trust-property to the trustee".
Section 6 of the Trusts Act, in terms, contemplates the 'transfer' of 'the
trust property' except where--the author of the trust or the settlor is
himself the trustee. Therefore, within the meaning of Sec., 6 of the Trusts
Act, 1882, when the settlor or the author of the trust appoints himself as the
sole trustee, there is no transfer. If the transaction amounts to a gift,
there must be a 'transfer'. But, every transfer of a property to himself does
not create a 'gift'. Creation of a trust and transfer to it of the properties
by a person is one more mode of transferring the property, independently of
and dehors the 'gift'. We say so because the gift requires the donor and the
donee and acceptance by and on behalf of the donee. In addition, the donee
must be an individual or an ascertainable class of persons. When a person
creates a trust for the benefit of the members of the public, there is no
ascertainable class of donees.
15\. In Pallayya v. Ramavadhanulu, (1903) 13 Mad LJ 364, it has been laid down
upon the construction of Section 122 of the Transfer of Property Act that the
word "donee" refers to an ascertained or ascertainable person or persons by
whom or on whose behalf the gift can be accepted or refused and has no
application to an unascertained number of persons such as the public. This
decision was rendered in 1903 when Section 5 of the Transfer of Property Act
was in its unamended form in force. In our opinion, the principle laid down by
the Madras High Court in that decision is still applicable to Section 122 of
the Transfer of Property Act because consequent upon amendment to Section 5,
Section 122 has not been amended. We think that Section 5 was amended not with
the object of casting its reflection upon the forms of transfer of immoveable
property specified in the Transfer of Property Act but with the object of
providing for cases in which a person created a trust and appointed himself as
the sole trustee. It was in order to provide for bifurcation of legal
ownership and beneficial ownership in case of such a trust that Section 5 was
amended in 1929.
16\. In Himansu Kumar Roy v. Moulvi Hasem, Ali Khan, AIR 1938 Cal 818, Section
6 of the Trusts Act came up for construction before a Division Bench of that
Court. The learned Judges have expressed their view in the following terms:
"Under Section 6 of the Act subject to the provisions of Section 5 a trust is
created when the author of the trust indicates with reasonable certainty by
any words or acts: (a) an intention on his part to create thereby a trust, (b)
the purpose of the trust, (c) the beneficiary, and (d) the trust property, and
(unless the trust is declared by will or the author of the trust is himself to
be the trustee) transfers the trust property to the trustee. Section 6
therefore contemplates that the author of the trust should transfer the trust
property. The word 'transfer' is to the found also in the Transfer of Property
Act which was passed 'in the same year. The word "transfer" has been used in a
wider sense. It includes sales, mort gages, leases, gifts, but it also
includes vesting declarations. In the case of moveable property, the ownership
of the property is to be transferred. In the case of immoveable property only
a declaration is necessary."
Therefore, in the view of the Calcutta High Court, transfer contemplated by
Section 6 of the Trusts Act not only includes a sale, mortgage, lease,
exchange and gift but also includes a vesting declaration. Therefore, what a
person does by creating a trust mi respect of his immoveable properties and
appointing himself as the sole trustee of the trust is to make a vesting
declaration and not to make a gift of the property. It is this vesting
declaration, which invests him with the legal ownership of the property,
divests him of the beneficial ownership and transfers the latter to the
beneficiaries of the trust.
17\. Therefore, when the appellant created Dadabhai Trust and appointed
himself' as the sole trustee, what he did was to make a vesting declaration
and not to make a gift. Since he appointed himself as the sole trustee, he did
not bring about the transfer of the property as contemplated by Section 122 of
the Transfer of Property Act but produced a situation contemplated by Section
6 of the Trusts Act. If we take a different view and hold- that such a
transfer creates both a gift and a trust, then, we shall be creating a
conflict between Section 122 of the Transfer of Property Act and Section 6 of
the Trusts Act. We say so because, in our opinion, whereas Section 122 in
terms contemplates the transfer of that property to the donee and acceptance
thereof by and on behalf of the donee, Section 6 of the Trusts Act does. not
contemplate the transfer of property to oneself. That, in our opinion, is the
effect of the expression which alpears in brackets in Section 6 of the Trusts.
Act. In our opinion, therefore, what the appellant did was to make a vesting
declaration by creating Dadabhai Trust and to appoint himself as the sole
trustee and did not make a 'gift' of the property. Therefore, the transaction
in question did not amount to 'gift'. With respect, therefore, we are unable
to uphold the conclusion recorded by Mr. Justice T. U. Mehta in his
interlocutory judgment in this case and reported in Naranbhai Dahyabhai Patel
v. Suleman Isapji Dadabhai (1975) 16 GuJ LR 289. The finding recorded by him
La, therefore, set aside.
18\. Turning to the third and the fourth contentions raised by Mrs. Mehta, it
is necessary to find out the transactions to which the provisions of Section
63 of the Tenancy Act apply. Subsection (1) of Section. 63 specify sales,
gifts, exchanges, leases and mortgages of any land or interest therein. It
also specifies agreements made in writing for the sale, gift, exchange, lease
or mortgage of an agricultural land and interest therein and provides that
none of these transactions shall be valid, inter alia, if the permission of
the Collector or an officer authorised by the State Government in that behalf
has not been obtained for it. The first proviso to sub-section (1) further
provides that the Collector may grant permission on such conditions as may be
prescribed. It is not necessary for us to refer to the second proviso to sub-
section (1), because it is not relevant for the purpose of the present case.
Sub-sections (2) and (3) of Section 63 carve out only exceptions to the rule
which has been laid down by the Legislature in sub-section (1) of Section 63.
It is, therefore, clear that the provisions of Section 63 do not apply to a
trust created by a person in respect of his own immoveable properties where he
'has appointed himself as the sole trustee. All that the appellant did in the
instant case was to make a vesting declaration without bringing about the
transfer of his immoveable property within the meaning of Section 122 of the
Transfer of Property Act. Therefore, no question arose under the-provisions of
the Tenancy Act, which was required to be settled, decided or dealt with by
the Marnlatdar or the Tribunal. Therefore, no reference could have been made
by Mr. Justice T. U. Mehta under Section 85A of the Tenancy Act of the issue
to the Mamlatdar, Kamrej. In our opinion, therefore, the reference of the
issue, which he made, was without jurisdiction. The order of reference made by
him is, therefore, set aside. This is the answer to the third and the fourth
contention, which Mrs. Mehta has raised before us.
19\. The last contention which she has raised is that the jurisdiction of the
Charity Commissioner to find out whether the properties in question were the
public trust properties or not, was not excluded by Section 85 of the Tenancy
Act and that, therefore, also, the reference made by Mr. Justice T. U. Mehta
to the Mamlatdar was bad in law. In view of the findings, which we have
recorded on the first contention, it is not necessary for us to express any
opinion on this question.
20\. Before we part with this case, we may refer to the decision of the
Supreme Court in Tulsidas Kilachand v. Commr. of I. -T. AIR 1961 SC 1023. it
has been observed by the Supreme Court in paragraphs 11 and 12 of the report
that under Sections 5 and 6 of the Indian Trusts Act, if the declarer of the
trust is himself the trustee also, there is no need that he must transfer the
property to himself as trustee; but the law Implies that such a transfer has
been made by him, and no overt act except a declaration of trust is necessary.
The capacity of the declarer of trust and his capacity as trustee are
different, and after the declaration of trust; he holds the assets as the
trustee. Under the Transfer of Property Act, there can be a transfer by a
person to himself or to himself and another person or persons. In the context
of Section 16 (3) (b) of the Income-tax Act. 1922, the Supreme Court has
observed in that decision that change of capacity makes the declarer answer
the description "any person". In that case, Tulsidas Kilachand created a trust
and settled his shares upon himself~ as the trustee. In that context, the
Supreme Court observed that the deed of settlement executed by Tulsidas
Kilachand must be regarded as involving a transfer even though the same
individual in his capacity as the transferor and in his capacity as the
trustee was the same. The observations made by the Supreme Court lend support
to the view which we have expressed on the concept (if transfer to himself
incorporated in Section 5 of the Transfer of Property Act.
21\. It has, however, been argued on behalf of the respondents that in view of
the observations made by the Supreme Court that when a person himself is the
transferor and the trustee, he means two distinct personalities and that,
therefore, 'there is a transfer of property by the transferor in that capacity
of his to the trustee which is another capacity of his. Therefore, it has
'been argued on behalf of the respondents that the transaction brought about
by the appellant on 31st December, 19515 must be regarded as a gift. The
Supreme Court- has indeed clearly distinguished between two capacities of the
said individual but has not gone to the extent of saying that the transfer of
property in one capacity to himself in another capacity amounted to a gift.
The learned advocates appearing in the case on behalf of the respondents would
like us to take a step further and hold that that is the necessary corollary
of the decision of the Supreme Court. We are unable to uphold the argument
raised in that behalf because to take the view which has been canvassed on
behalf: of the respondents is to nullify a part of the provision, of Section 6
of the Trusts Act while unduly enlarging the scope of Section 122 of the
Transfer of Property Act.
22\. The next decision to which we may refer is in Chhatra Kumari Devi v.
Mohan Bikram Shah, AIR 1931, PC 1". It was a case in which the Privy Council
was concerned with the application of Section 5 of the Transfer of Property
Act as it was before it was amended. It has been observed in that decision
that the Indian law does not recognize legal and equitable estates and that
therefore there can be but one "owner" and where the property is vested in a
trustee the "owner" must be the trustee. It has been further observed that the
trustee is the owner of the trust property, the right of the beneficiary
-being mi a proper case to call upon the trustee to convey to him. These
observations made by the Privy Council cannot be applied to the facts of the
instant case because we are concerned with amended Section 5 of the Transfer
of Property Act which provides for the concept of 'transfer to himself
projecting its long arms to Section 6 of the Trusts Act.
23\. Reference has been made to the decision of this Court in Village
Panchayat Jaspur v. State of Gujarat (1970) 11 Guj LR 695. In that case, a
Division Bench of this Court has construed th6 expression 'vest' as used in S.
96 of the Gujarat Panchayats; Act, 1961. It has been observed that the word
"vest" has a variety of significations depending on the context in which it is
used. It may mean transfer of proprietary interest in the land or it may mean
transfer of the right to possession of the land or the right to obtain and
deal with the land. The principle, which this Court has laid down in that
behalf is a very general principle to which no exception can be taken. We
cannot, however, apply the meaning of the word "vest" as used in Section 96 of
the Gujarat Panchayats Act, 1961, to the " facts of the instant case, because,
to do so is to violate the principle laid down in that very decision. A word
has got to be construed in light of and in context of the other words with
which it has been used. Therefore, reference to that decision of this Court
does not carry the case further.
24\. Mr. R. N. Shah has, however, tried to argue that Section 88E of the
Tenancy Act abolishes all rights of the appellant and confers upon respondents
1 and 2 the ownership of the lands in question. That is not the question,
which was canvassed before the Courts below. We are, therefore, unable to
express any opinion on this question.' If respondents 1and 2 have any rights
res04iing from Section 88E of the Tenancy, Act, it will be open to them to
agitate them in appropriate proceedings before a competent authority.
25\. In light of the conclusions, which we have recorded, we are unable to
uphold the order made by the learned single Judge in First Appeal No. 347 of
1968
26\. The appeal is, therefore, allowed; the impugned order is set aside and
the order made by the District Court, Surat, is restored. There shall be no
order as to costs of this appeal. The cost of the Chanty Commissioner shall
come out of the estate.
27\. Mr. R. N. Shah who appears on behalf of respondents 1 and 2 prays for a
certificate of fitness under Article 133(1) of the Constitution to appeal
against this decision to the Supreme Court. In our opinion, the question,
which we have decided, is a substantial question of law. It is a question,
which is required to be answered upon the interpretation of three sections of
two different Acts. We, therefore, grant respondents 1 and 2 certificate of
fitness under Article 133(1) Of the Constitution.
28\. Appeal allowed.
1 and 2 the ownership of the lands in question. That is not the question,
which was canvassed before the Courts below. We are, therefore, unable to
express any opinion on this question.' If respondents 1and 2 have any rights
res04iing from Section 88E of the Tenancy, Act, it will be open to them to
agitate them in appropriate proceedings before a competent authority.
25\. In light of the conclusions, which we have recorded, we are unable to
uphold the order made by the learned single Judge in First Appeal No. 347 of
1968
26\. The appeal is, therefore, allowed; the impugned order is set aside and
the order made by the District Court, Surat, is restored. There shall be no
order as to costs of this appeal. The cost of the Chanty Commissioner shall
come out of the estate.
27\. Mr. R. N. Shah who appears on behalf of respondents 1 and 2 prays for a
certificate of fitness under Article 133(1) of the Constitution to appeal
against this decision to the Supreme Court. In our opinion, the question,
which we have decided, is a substantial question of law. It is a question,
Respondents 1 and 2 appealed to the Charity Commissioner against the order of
registration of Dadabhai Trust. It was appeal No. 56 of 1957. The appeal was
dismissed. Thereafter an application under Section 72 of the Bombay Public
Trusts Act was made by respondents 1 and 2 to the District Judge at Surat
calling in question the appellate order of the Charity Commissioner. The
District Court dismissed it by its order dated 18th October 1967. That order
was challenged in this High Court in First Appeal No. 247 of 1968, That
appeal, in the first instance, came up for hearing before Mr. Justice T.' U.
Mehta who held that the transaction evidenced by the deed of settlement dated
31st December, 1956, was a gift. Therefore, under Section 85A read with
Section 70(O) of the Tenancy Act, he referred to the Mamlatdar. Karnrej, the
following issue:
"Whether the transaction evidenced by the vesting of the disputed property in
Dadabhai Trust under document dated 31-12-1956, is valid or not in view of the
provisions contained in Section 63 of the Bombay Tenancy Act."
Mr. Justice T.U. Mehta felt that since the transaction in question amounted to
a gift, it might be hit by the provisions of Section 63 of the Tenancy Act
because that transaction was brought about with out the previous permission of
the competent authority specified in Section 63, Upon reference, the
Mamlatdar, Kamrej, held that the gift resulting from the deed of settlement
1 and 2 the ownership of the lands in question. That is not the question,
which was canvassed before the Courts below. We are, therefore, unable to
express any opinion on this question.' If respondents 1and 2 have any rights
res04iing from Section 88E of the Tenancy, Act, it will be open to them to
agitate them in appropriate proceedings before a competent authority.
25\. In light of the conclusions, which we have recorded, we are unable to
uphold the order made by the learned single Judge in First Appeal No. 347 of
1968
26\. The appeal is, therefore, allowed; the impugned order is set aside and
the order made by the District Court, Surat, is restored. There shall be no
order as to costs of this appeal. The cost of the Chanty Commissioner shall
come out of the estate.
27\. Mr. R. N. Shah who appears on behalf of respondents 1 and 2 prays for a
certificate of fitness under Article 133(1) of the Constitution to appeal
against this decision to the Supreme Court. In our opinion, the question,
which we have decided, is a substantial question of law. It is a question,
Respondents 1 and 2 appealed to the Charity Commissioner against the order of
registration of Dadabhai Trust. It was appeal No. 56 of 1957. The appeal was
dismissed. Thereafter an application under Section 72 of the Bombay Public
Trusts Act was made by respondents 1 and 2 to the District Judge at Surat
calling in question the appellate order of the Charity Commissioner. The
District Court dismissed it by its order dated 18th October 1967. That order
was challenged in this High Court in First Appeal No. 247 of 1968, That
appeal, in the first instance, came up for hearing before Mr. Justice T.' U.
Mehta who held that the transaction evidenced by the deed of settlement dated
31st December, 1956, was a gift. Therefore, under Section 85A read with
Section 70(O) of the Tenancy Act, he referred to the Mamlatdar. Karnrej, the
following issue:
"Whether the transaction evidenced by the vesting of the disputed property in
Dadabhai Trust under document dated 31-12-1956, is valid or not in view of the
provisions contained in Section 63 of the Bombay Tenancy Act."
Mr. Justice T.U. Mehta felt that since the transaction in question amounted to
a gift, it might be hit by the provisions of Section 63 of the Tenancy Act
because that transaction was brought about with out the previous permission of
the competent authority specified in Section 63, Upon reference, the
Mamlatdar, Kamrej, held that the gift resulting from the deed of settlement
1 and 2 the ownership of the lands in question. That is not the question,
which was canvassed before the Courts below. We are, therefore, unable to
express any opinion on this question.' If respondents 1and 2 have any rights
res04iing from Section 88E of the Tenancy, Act, it will be open to them to
agitate them in appropriate proceedings before a competent authority.
25\. In light of the conclusions, which we have recorded, we are unable to
uphold the order made by the learned single Judge in First Appeal No. 347 of
1968
26\. The appeal is, therefore, allowed; the impugned order is set aside and
the order made by the District Court, Surat, is restored. There shall be no
order as to costs of this appeal. The cost of the Chanty Commissioner shall
come out of the estate.
27\. Mr. R. N. Shah who appears on behalf of respondents 1 and 2 prays for a
certificate of fitness under Article 133(1) of the Constitution to appeal
against this decision to the Supreme Court. In our opinion, the question,
which we have decided, is a substantial question of law. It is a question,
Respondents 1 and 2 appealed to the Charity Commissioner against the order of
registration of Dadabhai Trust. It was appeal No. 56 of 1957. The appeal was
dismissed. Thereafter an application under Section 72 of the Bombay Public
Trusts Act was made by respondents 1 and 2 to the District Judge at Surat
calling in question the appellate order of the Charity Commissioner. The
District Court dismissed it by its order dated 18th October 1967. That order
was challenged in this High Court in First Appeal No. 247 of 1968, That
appeal, in the first instance, came up for hearing before Mr. Justice T.' U.
Mehta who held that the transaction evidenced by the deed of settlement dated
31st December, 1956, was a gift. Therefore, under Section 85A read with
Section 70(O) of the Tenancy Act, he referred to the Mamlatdar. Karnrej, the
following issue:
"Whether the transaction evidenced by the vesting of the disputed property in
Dadabhai Trust under document dated 31-12-1956, is valid or not in view of the
provisions contained in Section 63 of the Bombay Tenancy Act."
Mr. Justice T.U. Mehta felt that since the transaction in question amounted to
a gift, it might be hit by the provisions of Section 63 of the Tenancy Act
because that transaction was brought about with out the previous permission of
the competent authority specified in Section 63, Upon reference, the
Mamlatdar, Kamrej, held that the gift resulting from the deed of settlement
1 and 2 the ownership of the lands in question. That is not the question,
which was canvassed before the Courts below. We are, therefore, unable to
express any opinion on this question.' If respondents 1and 2 have any rights
res04iing from Section 88E of the Tenancy, Act, it will be open to them to
agitate them in appropriate proceedings before a competent authority.
25\. In light of the conclusions, which we have recorded, we are unable to
uphold the order made by the learned single Judge in First Appeal No. 347 of
1968
26\. The appeal is, therefore, allowed; the impugned order is set aside and
the order made by the District Court, Surat, is restored. There shall be no
order as to costs of this appeal. The cost of the Chanty Commissioner shall
come out of the estate.
27\. Mr. R. N. Shah who appears on behalf of respondents 1 and 2 prays for a
certificate of fitness under Article 133(1) of the Constitution to appeal
against this decision to the Supreme Court. In our opinion, the question,
which we have decided, is a substantial question of law. It is a question,
Respondents 1 and 2 appealed to the Charity Commissioner against the order of
registration of Dadabhai Trust. It was appeal No. 56 of 1957. The appeal was
dismissed. Thereafter an application under Section 72 of the Bombay Public
Trusts Act was made by respondents 1 and 2 to the District Judge at Surat
calling in question the appellate order of the Charity Commissioner. The
District Court dismissed it by its order dated 18th October 1967. That order
was challenged in this High Court in First Appeal No. 247 of 1968, That
appeal, in the first instance, came up for hearing before Mr. Justice T.' U.
Mehta who held that the transaction evidenced by the deed of settlement dated
31st December, 1956, was a gift. Therefore, under Section 85A read with
Section 70(O) of the Tenancy Act, he referred to the Mamlatdar. Karnrej, the
following issue:
"Whether the transaction evidenced by the vesting of the disputed property in
Dadabhai Trust under document dated 31-12-1956, is valid or not in view of the
provisions contained in Section 63 of the Bombay Tenancy Act."
Mr. Justice T.U. Mehta felt that since the transaction in question amounted to
a gift, it might be hit by the provisions of Section 63 of the Tenancy Act
because that transaction was brought about with out the previous permission of
the competent authority specified in Section 63, Upon reference, the
Mamlatdar, Kamrej, held that the gift resulting from the deed of settlement
was not valid because previous t permission of the Collector to make that gift
had not been obtained as required by Section 63 of the Tenancy Act. , We are
now told that the appellant appealed against that order to the Prant Officer.
We are further told that that appeal has been dismissed. We are also told that
a revision application against that appellate order filed by the appellant is
pending before the Gujarat Revenue Tribunal.
2\. However, on 22nd September 1975, that First Appeal came up for final
hearing and disposal before Mr. - Justice J. M. Sheth. Mr. Justice J. M. Sheth
decided the appeal on merits because he was told that no appeal against the
Mamlatdar's judgment had been preferred to the Collector or the Prant Officer.
The learned single Judge, therefore, proceeded to decide the appeal on -the
1 and 2 the ownership of the lands in question. That is not the question,
which was canvassed before the Courts below. We are, therefore, unable to
express any opinion on this question.' If respondents 1and 2 have any rights
res04iing from Section 88E of the Tenancy, Act, it will be open to them to
agitate them in appropriate proceedings before a competent authority.
25\. In light of the conclusions, which we have recorded, we are unable to
uphold the order made by the learned single Judge in First Appeal No. 347 of
1968
26\. The appeal is, therefore, allowed; the impugned order is set aside and
the order made by the District Court, Surat, is restored. There shall be no
order as to costs of this appeal. The cost of the Chanty Commissioner shall
come out of the estate.
27\. Mr. R. N. Shah who appears on behalf of respondents 1 and 2 prays for a
certificate of fitness under Article 133(1) of the Constitution to appeal
against this decision to the Supreme Court. In our opinion, the question,
which we have decided, is a substantial question of law. It is a question,
Respondents 1 and 2 appealed to the Charity Commissioner against the order of
registration of Dadabhai Trust. It was appeal No. 56 of 1957. The appeal was
dismissed. Thereafter an application under Section 72 of the Bombay Public
Trusts Act was made by respondents 1 and 2 to the District Judge at Surat
calling in question the appellate order of the Charity Commissioner. The
District Court dismissed it by its order dated 18th October 1967. That order
was challenged in this High Court in First Appeal No. 247 of 1968, That
appeal, in the first instance, came up for hearing before Mr. Justice T.' U.
Mehta who held that the transaction evidenced by the deed of settlement dated
31st December, 1956, was a gift. Therefore, under Section 85A read with
Section 70(O) of the Tenancy Act, he referred to the Mamlatdar. Karnrej, the
following issue:
"Whether the transaction evidenced by the vesting of the disputed property in
Dadabhai Trust under document dated 31-12-1956, is valid or not in view of the
provisions contained in Section 63 of the Bombay Tenancy Act."
Mr. Justice T.U. Mehta felt that since the transaction in question amounted to
a gift, it might be hit by the provisions of Section 63 of the Tenancy Act
because that transaction was brought about with out the previous permission of
the competent authority specified in Section 63, Upon reference, the
Mamlatdar, Kamrej, held that the gift resulting from the deed of settlement
was not valid because previous t permission of the Collector to make that gift
had not been obtained as required by Section 63 of the Tenancy Act. , We are
now told that the appellant appealed against that order to the Prant Officer.
We are further told that that appeal has been dismissed. We are also told that
a revision application against that appellate order filed by the appellant is
pending before the Gujarat Revenue Tribunal.
2\. However, on 22nd September 1975, that First Appeal came up for final
hearing and disposal before Mr. - Justice J. M. Sheth. Mr. Justice J. M. Sheth
decided the appeal on merits because he was told that no appeal against the
Mamlatdar's judgment had been preferred to the Collector or the Prant Officer.
The learned single Judge, therefore, proceeded to decide the appeal on -the
1 and 2 the ownership of the lands in question. That is not the question,
which was canvassed before the Courts below. We are, therefore, unable to
express any opinion on this question.' If respondents 1and 2 have any rights
res04iing from Section 88E of the Tenancy, Act, it will be open to them to
agitate them in appropriate proceedings before a competent authority.
25\. In light of the conclusions, which we have recorded, we are unable to
uphold the order made by the learned single Judge in First Appeal No. 347 of
1968
26\. The appeal is, therefore, allowed; the impugned order is set aside and
the order made by the District Court, Surat, is restored. There shall be no
order as to costs of this appeal. The cost of the Chanty Commissioner shall
come out of the estate.
27\. Mr. R. N. Shah who appears on behalf of respondents 1 and 2 prays for a
certificate of fitness under Article 133(1) of the Constitution to appeal
against this decision to the Supreme Court. In our opinion, the question,
which we have decided, is a substantial question of law. It is a question,
