Delhi High Court
M/S Sunrise Industries & Ors. vs M/S Roshan Lal Aggarwal & Anr. on 8 February,
2012
Author: S. Muralidhar
                 IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
                                    ARB. P. 309/2010
                                              Reserved on: 31st January, 2012
                                              Decision on: 8th February, 2012
      M/S SUNRISE INDUSTRIES & ORS.                  ..... Petitioners
                    Through: Mr. Pradeep Dhingra and
                              Mr. Sachin Sood, Advocates.
                          versus
      M/S ROSHAN LAL AGGARWAL & ANR.                ..... Respondents
                   Through: Mr. Rajiv Aneja and
                            Mr. Asit Tewari, Advocates.
      CORAM: JUSTICE S. MURALIDHAR
                                   JUDGMENT
8.02.2012
1\. This Petition under Section 11 of the Arbitration & Conciliation Act, 1996
('Act') seeks the appointment of an arbitrator to adjudicate disputes between
surviving partner of the erstwhile Petitioner No.1 firm that was registered,
pronounced the said firm as 'dissolved' and constituted a new firm in the same
name with his own sons as partners, the said 'mistake' could somehow be
rectified and the erstwhile firm revived. Added to this is the fact that
Petitioner Nos. 2, 3 and 5 were not parties to the Agency Agreement dated 22nd
November 2008 containing the arbitration clause and therefore cannot seek to
maintain a petition under Section 11 of the Act invoking the said clause.
15\. Under Section 11 of the Act, the Court is not bound to appoint an
arbitrator notwithstanding the legal status and locus standi of the
petitioners seeking such relief. It is necessary for the Court to examine the
validity of the arbitration agreement that is pleaded and be prima facie
satisfied that it a legally tenable document on the basis of which an
arbitrator can be appointed. In the present case, this requirement is not
satisfied.
16\. The petition is accordingly dismissed. This will, however, not preclude
ARB. P. 309 of 2010 Page 9 of 10 all or any of the Petitioners from seeking
('Act') seeks the appointment of an arbitrator to adjudicate disputes between
the Petitioners and the Respondents arising out of an Agency Agreement dated
22nd November 2008.
2\. Petitioner No.1 is a partnership firm M/s Sunrise Industries. It is shown
as being represented by its partners, Shri Raj Kumar Aggarwal and Shri Ravi
Chander Aggarwal, Petitioners 2 and 3 respectively. Petitioner No. 4 is 'Shri
Dharam Pal Gupta @ Shri Dharam Pal Aggarwal'. The case of the Petitioners is
that the aforesaid Agency Agreement was first executed between the parties on
1st April 2006 and was renewed on 22nd November 2008\. It contained an
arbitration clause whereby "disputes arising between the parties referring to
this agency agreement or vacating the premises or any other matters referred
in this agreement shall be decided by arbitration."
ARB. P. 309 of 2010 Page 1 of 10
3\. The petition states that the Petitioners own property at Plot No. D-6,
SMA, Cooperative Industrial Estate, G.T. Karnal Road, Delhi - 110033
(hereafter 'the property in question'). It was allotted by the DDA to the
Petitioner No.1 firm by a perpetual lease deed dated 10th March 1978. It is
stated that sheds were constructed on the property in question and were fitted
with electrical connections and sanitary fittings. It is stated that the
Respondents, i.e., M/s. Roshan Lal Aggarwal (HUF) (Respondent No.1) and M/s.
Prekom Industries (Respondent No. 2) a proprietary concern of which Shri
Roshan Lal Aggarwal is the sole proprietor, had been handed over part-
possession of the sheds in the property in question admeasuring about 3000 sq.
ft. on the ground floor by the said Agency Agreement dated 22nd November 2008
for manufacturing steel fabrications. The Petitioners were appointed as the
sole selling agent for selling all products manufactured in the premises. The
price was to be fixed by the Respondents and the Petitioners were to get two
per cent commission on the sale price of all goods sold by the Respondents.
The Agreement was for the period from 22nd November 2008 till 21st March 2013.
4\. It is stated that a family arrangement took place between the partners by
a Family Settlement Deed ('FSD') dated 8th May 2010 which was confirmed by
this Court by an order dated 11th May 2010 in CS (OS) No. 350 of 2009. In
terms of Clause 17 of the FSD, Shri Raj Kumar Aggarwal and Shri Ravi Chander
Aggarwal were authorised to initiate proceedings to get the property in
question vacated. Thereafter a legal notice was sent on 20th September 2010 to
the Respondents stating that the Agency Agreement stood terminated and that
the Respondents should hand over vacant and peaceful possession of the portion
under their occupation on or before 30th October 2010. The Petitioner also
proposed Shri Alok Bhola, Advocate, to act as the sole Arbitrator.
ARB. P. 309 of 2010 Page 2 of 10
5\. The Respondents replied on 11th October 2010 rejecting the request for
appointment of the said sole Arbitrator and denied that there was any dispute.
The Respondents suggested the name of Shri B.L. Garg, retired Additional
District Judge ('ADJ') as their Arbitrator. In the circumstances, the present
petition was filed.
6\. In response to the notice issued in this petition on 2nd November 2010,
the Respondents have filed a reply in which there are several preliminary
objections raised. The first is that Petitioner No.1 is not a registered firm.
It is pointed out that the partnership deed dated 15th May 2010 enclosed with
the petition is not registered either. It is stated that the present
proceedings under Section 11 of the Act are, therefore, barred in terms of
Section 69(2) of the Partnership Act, 1932 ('PA'). Secondly, it is pointed out
that Petitioner Nos. 2, 3 and 5 are not signatories to the Agency Agreement
dated 22nd November 2008 containing the arbitration clause. Consequently,
Petitioner Nos. 2, 3 and 5 lack locus standi to file the present petition.
Thirdly, it is submitted that the petition has not been signed, verified and
instituted by persons duly authorized to represent the Petitioner No.1 firm.
Particularly, it is pointed out that Petitioner Nos. 2 and 3 who have sworn
affidavits in support of the petition were not partners of Petitioner No.1 on
the date of the Agency Agreement i.e. 22nd November 2008\. It is submitted
that the Petitioners in their Partnership Deed dated 15th May 2010 have
claimed to run the Petitioner No.1 firm but in Clauses 11 and 12 of the FSD
have disclosed their intention to sell the property in question and
reconstitute Petitioner No.1. It is stated that in view of the contradictory
pleas, the petition ought to be dismissed.
7\. Shri Pradeep Dhingra, learned counsel for the Petitioner submitted that
the Respondents have conceded to the existence of the arbitration agreement
and have, in fact, proposed the name of Shri B.L. Garg as sole ARB. P. 309 of
2010 Page 3 of 10 Arbitrator. Consequently, they ought not to object to the
appointment of an arbitrator by this Court. Secondly, it is submitted that
under Section 11(6) of the Act, all that has to be seen is whether there is a
valid arbitration clause. The other disputes as regards the partnership firm
and its status can be decided by the learned Arbitrator. Reliance is placed on
judgment in Ashok Traders v. Gurumukh Das Saluja, AIR 2004 SC 1433. It is
submitted that in terms of the Delhi Partnership (Registration of Firms)
Rules, 1972 a partnership can be said to have been dissolved only when the
name of the firm is struck off from the register of firms. That event is yet
to occur. Relying on the judgment in Sharad Vasant Kotak v. Ramniklal Mohanlal
Chawda AIR 1998 SC 877, it is submitted that the change in the partnership due
to induction of legal heirs, after the death of a partner, does not affect the
registration of the firm. It is then submitted that a statutory right of
seeking eviction of an unauthorized occupant from the premises in question can
be sought to be enforced even by an unregistered firm. Reliance is placed on
the decision in Haldiram Bhujiawala v. Anand Kumar Deepak Kumar AIR 2000 SC
1287. It is stated that even if a partnership firm is dissolved, it can sue
for its property and Section 69(2) or Section 9(3) would not come in the way
of such proceedings being instituted. Reliance is placed on the decisions in
Kamal Pushp Enterprises v. D.R. Construction Co. (2000) 6 SCC 659 and Raptakos
Brett & Co. Ltd. v. Ganesh Property (1998) 7 SCC 184. It is sought to be
explained that Shri Dharam Pal Gupta is also known as Shri Dharam Pal Aggarwal
and has throughout remained a partner of the Petitioner No.1 firm and,
therefore, can maintain the present petition on behalf of the firm. It is
submitted that a mere change in the constitution of the firm does not affect
its essential character as a registered partnership firm. Reference is made to
the decision in International Business Corporation v. Bhagirath Dolkheria, 159
(2009) DLT 145. Lastly, it is submitted that another family partnership
concern of the Petitioner M/s. Gauri Mal Shyam Sunder had ARB. P. 309 of 2010
Page 4 of 10 filed Arbitration Petition No. 310 of 2010 in this Court against
certain other licensees with whom agency agreements had also been entered
into. By a judgment dated 27th July 2007, this Court appointed an Arbitrator
in terms of Clause 14 in those proceedings.
8\. Shri Rajiv Aneja, learned counsel for the Respondent, on the other hand,
pointed out that the pleas of the Petitioners were inconsistent and
contradictory. In a partnership deed dated 2nd July 2001, between Petitioner
No.4 Shri Dharam Pal Aggarwal and his two sons Shri Rajeev Kumar Aggarwal and
Shri Brij Mohan Aggarwal it was stated that the earlier partnership stood
dissolved under Section 42 (c) PA after the death of Shri Shyam Sunder
Aggarwal, father of Shri Dharam Pal Aggarwal and that a new firm, in the same
name M/s. Sunrise Industries was being constituted. Admittedly that new firm
was not registered. It is submitted that therefore the bar under Section 69 PA
applies and the said firm cannot maintain the present petition or any other
suit or proceedings in a court. Reference is made to the decisions in Ess Vee
Traders v. Ambuja Cement Rajasthan Limited 2006 VIII AD (Delhi) 164, Kanahi
Ram v. Kartar Singh 72 (1998) DLT 740 and S Parvathammal v. Commissioner of
Income-Tax 1984 Law Suit (Mad) 3. It is submitted that the entire petition is
mala fide since there were inter se disputes between the partners themselves
with criminal cases being instituted by one faction of the family against the
other. With there being highly disputed questions of fact, even as to the
validity of the partnership deed, the present petition was per se not
maintainable.
9\. The first issue that arises for consideration is the status of Petitioner
No.1 firm, M/s. Sunrise Industries as that in turn will determine if the
present petition can be maintained by it. The documents placed on record by
the Petitioner show that initially Petitioner No.1 firm was registered on ARB.
P. 309 of 2010 Page 5 of 10 4th June 1982. A copy of the extract of Form-A in
the Register of Firms shows that the firm had two partners, Shri Shyam Sunder
and Shri Dharam Pal. The other curious feature is that Shri Dharam Pal
Aggarwal is arrayed as Petitioner No.4 with the alias of Shri Dharam Pal
Gupta. Counsel for the Petitioners suggests that these names of Petitioner
No.4 can and are used interchangeably. Be that as it may, an affidavit dated
21st July 2011 has been filed by Shri Dharam Pal Gupta. According to this
affidavit a partnership deed dated 1st April 1982 was executed by Shri Shyam
Sunder Gauri Mal (father of Shri Dharam Pal Gupta) and Shri Dharam Pal Gupta
with a shareholding of 60% and 40%. This deed was registered on 4th June
1982\. It is then stated that "for the purpose of effective tax management"
the same arrangement continued till the death of Shri Shyam Sunder Aggarwal
(who presumably used an alternative name of Shri Shyam Sunder Gauri Mal) on
28th June 2001. It is stated that Shri Shyam Sunder Aggarwal left behind his
wife and three sons, namely, Shri Dharam Pal Gupta, Shri Raj Kumar Aggarwal
and Shri Ravi Chander Aggarwal. It is then stated in para 3.5 of the affidavit
as under:
> "That not knowing, that my father has left a will, unknowingly, I wrongly
> entered into a partnership deed dated 2nd day of July, 2001, wherein I
> wrongly against the provisions of Hindu Succession Act, as well as due to my
> ignorance about will, inserted my sons as partners and when this mistake was
> realized, the said deed dated 2nd July, 2001 was replaced with Deed dated
> 15th May, 2010, to give effect to the, will of Late Sh. Shyam Sunder
> Aggarwal."
10\. It is then claimed that the agency agreement was entered into with the
Respondent on 1st April 2006 for a period of three years which was renewed on
22nd November 2008.
11\. A perusal of the partnership deed dated 2nd July 2001 indicates that it
was between Shri Dharam Pal Aggarwal (as party No.1) and his sons Shri Rajiv
Kumar Aggarwal, Shri Brij Mohan Aggarwal and Shri Naveen ARB. P. 309 of 2010
Page 6 of 10 Kumar Aggarwal. Two recitals in the deed which are relevant read
as under:
> "Whereas parties no. one above had been carrying on business of indenting
> commission, knitting wools and engineering goods and leasing, etc. under the
> name & style of M/s. Sunrise Industries, at no.355, Press Street, Sadar
> Bazar, Delhi and with its factory at no.D-6, SMA Cooperative Industrial
> Estate, G.T. Karnal Road, Delhi - 33. In partnership with Shri Shyam Sunder
> Aggarwal, son of Late Shri Gaurimal Aggarwal, R/o G- 98, Ashok Vihar,
> Phase-I, Delhi under deed of partnership dated 01.04.1999.
> And whereas the said Shri Shyam Sunder Aggarwal died on 28.06.2011 the
> partnership stood dissolved on that date under section 42(c) of the Indian
> Partnership Act, 1932.
> And whereas the surviving partner has constituted a new partnership deed
> along with partners Shri Rajeev Kumar Aggarwal, Shri Brij Mohan Aggarwal and
> Shri Naveen Kumar Aggarwal the partners of 2nd and 3rd and 4th parts and
> have also agree to take over all the assets and liabilities of the business
> of the old firm M/s. Sunrise Industries, at no.355, Press Street, Sadar
> Bazar, Delhi and with its factory at no.D-6, SMA Cooperative Industrial
> Estate, G.T. Karnal Road, Delhi - 33 as a going concern and to continue the
> said business as such in the partnership w.e.f. today the 2nd day of July,
> 2001 on the terms and conditions mutually agreed them and now appearing
> herein below."
12\. The above 'newly' constituted firm was admittedly not a registered one.
It is clear from a reading of the above partnership deed that reference was
made to Section 42(c) of the PA claiming dissolution of the erstwhile
partnership firm of the same name M/s. Sunrise Industries with the demise of
Shri Shyam Sunder Aggarwal. It was the above firm, which was re- constituted,
that was a party to the agency agreement dated 1st June 2006 which was renewed
on 22nd November 2008. Clearly therefore, at the time when the agency
agreement was executed, the firm was not a registered one. In fact, the
agreement of agency clearly states that "M/s. Sunrise Industries is
represented by its Managing Partner, Dharam Pal Aggarwal, ARB. P. 309 of 2010
Page 7 of 10 who is authorized to bind the firm." As of that date, even
according to Shri Dharam Pal Aggarwal, this was a newly constituted firm in
place of the erstwhile registered one which stood dissolved on the death of
Shri Shyam Sunder Aggarwal. In other words the firm that entered into the
agency agreement was not the same firm which stood registered on 4th June
1982. Clearly therefore the bar under Section 69 (2) PA was attracted as far
as the institution of the present proceedings by an unregistered firm of
doubtful validity is concerned. The subsequent denouncement of the
constitution of the 'new' firm by the partnership deed dated 2nd July 2001 as
a 'mistake' and "against the provisions of Hindu Succession Act" and due to
the "ignorance" of Shri Dharam Pal Dupta alias Shri Dharam Pal Aggarwal, only
makes the problem worse for the Petitioners.
13\. It is not clear whether the family settlement subsequently arrived at in
May 2010 had the effect of reviving the erstwhile firm that was registered and
which was apparently dissolved in terms of the partnership deed dated 2nd July
2001, which Shri Dharam Pal Gupta now terms a 'mistake'. Whether this is a
self-serving plea to get out of a difficult situation will require a detailed
examination and perhaps is a matter for evidence. It is also interesting that
in the body of this very affidavit of Shri Dharam Pal Gupta dated 20th July
2011, in para 3.13 is set out a "List of Additional Documents" filed on behalf
of the Petitioners' and Sl. No. 6 states 'After death of Father, Mr. Dharam
Pal fraudulently entered into a deed with his son against the Fathers Will."
Further, Sl. No.8 describes the partnership deed dated 15th May 2010 as "Fresh
Deed to give effect to Fathers Will and cancelling the fraudulent deed dated
2.07.2001." The said 'fresh partnership deed' dated 15th May 2010 in para 5
recites an admission by Dharam Pal Gupta @ Dharam Pal Aggarwal that he had
entered into a partnership deed dated 2nd July 2001 in violation of the Will
by Late Shyam Sunder Aggarwal. Thereafter, the said deed states "that the
partnership ARB. P. 309 of 2010 Page 8 of 10 business has been and shall
continue to be carried on under the name and style of M/s. Sunrise
Industries." Whether the erstwhile firm can be sought to be revived in this
manner, with all manner of self-contradictory and self- inculpatory statements
of questionable legality will again be a matter for evidence. Suffice it to
say, it is unsafe for this Court to proceed to act on such documents and
statements and grant the relief of appointment of an arbitrator under Section
11 of the Act.
14\. All of the above statements and documents also give rise to disputed
questions of fact concerning the status of Petitioner No.1 firm. The cases
cited by the learned counsel for the Petitioners do not help his submission
that notwithstanding the fact that Shri Dharam Pal Aggarwal, the only
surviving partner of the erstwhile Petitioner No.1 firm that was registered,
pronounced the said firm as 'dissolved' and constituted a new firm in the same
name with his own sons as partners, the said 'mistake' could somehow be
rectified and the erstwhile firm revived. Added to this is the fact that
Petitioner Nos. 2, 3 and 5 were not parties to the Agency Agreement dated 22nd
November 2008 containing the arbitration clause and therefore cannot seek to
maintain a petition under Section 11 of the Act invoking the said clause.
15\. Under Section 11 of the Act, the Court is not bound to appoint an
arbitrator notwithstanding the legal status and locus standi of the
petitioners seeking such relief. It is necessary for the Court to examine the
validity of the arbitration agreement that is pleaded and be prima facie
satisfied that it a legally tenable document on the basis of which an
arbitrator can be appointed. In the present case, this requirement is not
satisfied.
16\. The petition is accordingly dismissed. This will, however, not preclude
ARB. P. 309 of 2010 Page 9 of 10 all or any of the Petitioners from seeking
other appropriate remedies that may be available to them in accordance with
law.
S. MURALIDHAR, J.
February 8, 2012 s.pal ARB. P. 309 of 2010 Page 10 of 10
surviving partner of the erstwhile Petitioner No.1 firm that was registered,
pronounced the said firm as 'dissolved' and constituted a new firm in the same
name with his own sons as partners, the said 'mistake' could somehow be
rectified and the erstwhile firm revived. Added to this is the fact that
Petitioner Nos. 2, 3 and 5 were not parties to the Agency Agreement dated 22nd
November 2008 containing the arbitration clause and therefore cannot seek to
maintain a petition under Section 11 of the Act invoking the said clause.
15\. Under Section 11 of the Act, the Court is not bound to appoint an
arbitrator notwithstanding the legal status and locus standi of the
petitioners seeking such relief. It is necessary for the Court to examine the
validity of the arbitration agreement that is pleaded and be prima facie
satisfied that it a legally tenable document on the basis of which an
arbitrator can be appointed. In the present case, this requirement is not
satisfied.
16\. The petition is accordingly dismissed. This will, however, not preclude
ARB. P. 309 of 2010 Page 9 of 10 all or any of the Petitioners from seeking
('Act') seeks the appointment of an arbitrator to adjudicate disputes between
the Petitioners and the Respondents arising out of an Agency Agreement dated
22nd November 2008.
2\. Petitioner No.1 is a partnership firm M/s Sunrise Industries. It is shown
as being represented by its partners, Shri Raj Kumar Aggarwal and Shri Ravi
Chander Aggarwal, Petitioners 2 and 3 respectively. Petitioner No. 4 is 'Shri
Dharam Pal Gupta @ Shri Dharam Pal Aggarwal'. The case of the Petitioners is
that the aforesaid Agency Agreement was first executed between the parties on
1st April 2006 and was renewed on 22nd November 2008\. It contained an
arbitration clause whereby "disputes arising between the parties referring to
this agency agreement or vacating the premises or any other matters referred
in this agreement shall be decided by arbitration."
ARB. P. 309 of 2010 Page 1 of 10
3\. The petition states that the Petitioners own property at Plot No. D-6,
SMA, Cooperative Industrial Estate, G.T. Karnal Road, Delhi - 110033
(hereafter 'the property in question'). It was allotted by the DDA to the
Petitioner No.1 firm by a perpetual lease deed dated 10th March 1978. It is
stated that sheds were constructed on the property in question and were fitted
with electrical connections and sanitary fittings. It is stated that the
Respondents, i.e., M/s. Roshan Lal Aggarwal (HUF) (Respondent No.1) and M/s.
surviving partner of the erstwhile Petitioner No.1 firm that was registered,
pronounced the said firm as 'dissolved' and constituted a new firm in the same
name with his own sons as partners, the said 'mistake' could somehow be
rectified and the erstwhile firm revived. Added to this is the fact that
Petitioner Nos. 2, 3 and 5 were not parties to the Agency Agreement dated 22nd
November 2008 containing the arbitration clause and therefore cannot seek to
maintain a petition under Section 11 of the Act invoking the said clause.
15\. Under Section 11 of the Act, the Court is not bound to appoint an
arbitrator notwithstanding the legal status and locus standi of the
petitioners seeking such relief. It is necessary for the Court to examine the
validity of the arbitration agreement that is pleaded and be prima facie
satisfied that it a legally tenable document on the basis of which an
arbitrator can be appointed. In the present case, this requirement is not
satisfied.
16\. The petition is accordingly dismissed. This will, however, not preclude
ARB. P. 309 of 2010 Page 9 of 10 all or any of the Petitioners from seeking
('Act') seeks the appointment of an arbitrator to adjudicate disputes between
the Petitioners and the Respondents arising out of an Agency Agreement dated
22nd November 2008.
2\. Petitioner No.1 is a partnership firm M/s Sunrise Industries. It is shown
as being represented by its partners, Shri Raj Kumar Aggarwal and Shri Ravi
Chander Aggarwal, Petitioners 2 and 3 respectively. Petitioner No. 4 is 'Shri
Dharam Pal Gupta @ Shri Dharam Pal Aggarwal'. The case of the Petitioners is
that the aforesaid Agency Agreement was first executed between the parties on
1st April 2006 and was renewed on 22nd November 2008\. It contained an
arbitration clause whereby "disputes arising between the parties referring to
this agency agreement or vacating the premises or any other matters referred
in this agreement shall be decided by arbitration."
ARB. P. 309 of 2010 Page 1 of 10
3\. The petition states that the Petitioners own property at Plot No. D-6,
SMA, Cooperative Industrial Estate, G.T. Karnal Road, Delhi - 110033
(hereafter 'the property in question'). It was allotted by the DDA to the
Petitioner No.1 firm by a perpetual lease deed dated 10th March 1978. It is
stated that sheds were constructed on the property in question and were fitted
with electrical connections and sanitary fittings. It is stated that the
Respondents, i.e., M/s. Roshan Lal Aggarwal (HUF) (Respondent No.1) and M/s.
surviving partner of the erstwhile Petitioner No.1 firm that was registered,
pronounced the said firm as 'dissolved' and constituted a new firm in the same
name with his own sons as partners, the said 'mistake' could somehow be
rectified and the erstwhile firm revived. Added to this is the fact that
Petitioner Nos. 2, 3 and 5 were not parties to the Agency Agreement dated 22nd
November 2008 containing the arbitration clause and therefore cannot seek to
maintain a petition under Section 11 of the Act invoking the said clause.
15\. Under Section 11 of the Act, the Court is not bound to appoint an
arbitrator notwithstanding the legal status and locus standi of the
petitioners seeking such relief. It is necessary for the Court to examine the
validity of the arbitration agreement that is pleaded and be prima facie
satisfied that it a legally tenable document on the basis of which an
arbitrator can be appointed. In the present case, this requirement is not
satisfied.
16\. The petition is accordingly dismissed. This will, however, not preclude
ARB. P. 309 of 2010 Page 9 of 10 all or any of the Petitioners from seeking
('Act') seeks the appointment of an arbitrator to adjudicate disputes between
the Petitioners and the Respondents arising out of an Agency Agreement dated
22nd November 2008.
2\. Petitioner No.1 is a partnership firm M/s Sunrise Industries. It is shown
as being represented by its partners, Shri Raj Kumar Aggarwal and Shri Ravi
Chander Aggarwal, Petitioners 2 and 3 respectively. Petitioner No. 4 is 'Shri
Dharam Pal Gupta @ Shri Dharam Pal Aggarwal'. The case of the Petitioners is
that the aforesaid Agency Agreement was first executed between the parties on
1st April 2006 and was renewed on 22nd November 2008\. It contained an
arbitration clause whereby "disputes arising between the parties referring to
this agency agreement or vacating the premises or any other matters referred
in this agreement shall be decided by arbitration."
ARB. P. 309 of 2010 Page 1 of 10
3\. The petition states that the Petitioners own property at Plot No. D-6,
SMA, Cooperative Industrial Estate, G.T. Karnal Road, Delhi - 110033
(hereafter 'the property in question'). It was allotted by the DDA to the
Petitioner No.1 firm by a perpetual lease deed dated 10th March 1978. It is
stated that sheds were constructed on the property in question and were fitted
with electrical connections and sanitary fittings. It is stated that the
Respondents, i.e., M/s. Roshan Lal Aggarwal (HUF) (Respondent No.1) and M/s.
surviving partner of the erstwhile Petitioner No.1 firm that was registered,
pronounced the said firm as 'dissolved' and constituted a new firm in the same
name with his own sons as partners, the said 'mistake' could somehow be
rectified and the erstwhile firm revived. Added to this is the fact that
Petitioner Nos. 2, 3 and 5 were not parties to the Agency Agreement dated 22nd
November 2008 containing the arbitration clause and therefore cannot seek to
maintain a petition under Section 11 of the Act invoking the said clause.
15\. Under Section 11 of the Act, the Court is not bound to appoint an
arbitrator notwithstanding the legal status and locus standi of the
petitioners seeking such relief. It is necessary for the Court to examine the
validity of the arbitration agreement that is pleaded and be prima facie
satisfied that it a legally tenable document on the basis of which an
arbitrator can be appointed. In the present case, this requirement is not
satisfied.
16\. The petition is accordingly dismissed. This will, however, not preclude
ARB. P. 309 of 2010 Page 9 of 10 all or any of the Petitioners from seeking
('Act') seeks the appointment of an arbitrator to adjudicate disputes between
the Petitioners and the Respondents arising out of an Agency Agreement dated
22nd November 2008.
2\. Petitioner No.1 is a partnership firm M/s Sunrise Industries. It is shown
as being represented by its partners, Shri Raj Kumar Aggarwal and Shri Ravi
Chander Aggarwal, Petitioners 2 and 3 respectively. Petitioner No. 4 is 'Shri
Dharam Pal Gupta @ Shri Dharam Pal Aggarwal'. The case of the Petitioners is
that the aforesaid Agency Agreement was first executed between the parties on
1st April 2006 and was renewed on 22nd November 2008\. It contained an
arbitration clause whereby "disputes arising between the parties referring to
this agency agreement or vacating the premises or any other matters referred
in this agreement shall be decided by arbitration."
ARB. P. 309 of 2010 Page 1 of 10
3\. The petition states that the Petitioners own property at Plot No. D-6,
SMA, Cooperative Industrial Estate, G.T. Karnal Road, Delhi - 110033
(hereafter 'the property in question'). It was allotted by the DDA to the
Petitioner No.1 firm by a perpetual lease deed dated 10th March 1978. It is
stated that sheds were constructed on the property in question and were fitted
with electrical connections and sanitary fittings. It is stated that the
Respondents, i.e., M/s. Roshan Lal Aggarwal (HUF) (Respondent No.1) and M/s.
Prekom Industries (Respondent No. 2) a proprietary concern of which Shri
Roshan Lal Aggarwal is the sole proprietor, had been handed over part-
possession of the sheds in the property in question admeasuring about 3000 sq.
ft. on the ground floor by the said Agency Agreement dated 22nd November 2008
for manufacturing steel fabrications. The Petitioners were appointed as the
sole selling agent for selling all products manufactured in the premises. The
price was to be fixed by the Respondents and the Petitioners were to get two
per cent commission on the sale price of all goods sold by the Respondents.
The Agreement was for the period from 22nd November 2008 till 21st March 2013.
4\. It is stated that a family arrangement took place between the partners by
a Family Settlement Deed ('FSD') dated 8th May 2010 which was confirmed by
surviving partner of the erstwhile Petitioner No.1 firm that was registered,
pronounced the said firm as 'dissolved' and constituted a new firm in the same
name with his own sons as partners, the said 'mistake' could somehow be
rectified and the erstwhile firm revived. Added to this is the fact that
Petitioner Nos. 2, 3 and 5 were not parties to the Agency Agreement dated 22nd
November 2008 containing the arbitration clause and therefore cannot seek to
maintain a petition under Section 11 of the Act invoking the said clause.
15\. Under Section 11 of the Act, the Court is not bound to appoint an
arbitrator notwithstanding the legal status and locus standi of the
petitioners seeking such relief. It is necessary for the Court to examine the
validity of the arbitration agreement that is pleaded and be prima facie
satisfied that it a legally tenable document on the basis of which an
arbitrator can be appointed. In the present case, this requirement is not
satisfied.
16\. The petition is accordingly dismissed. This will, however, not preclude
ARB. P. 309 of 2010 Page 9 of 10 all or any of the Petitioners from seeking
('Act') seeks the appointment of an arbitrator to adjudicate disputes between
the Petitioners and the Respondents arising out of an Agency Agreement dated
22nd November 2008.
2\. Petitioner No.1 is a partnership firm M/s Sunrise Industries. It is shown
as being represented by its partners, Shri Raj Kumar Aggarwal and Shri Ravi
Chander Aggarwal, Petitioners 2 and 3 respectively. Petitioner No. 4 is 'Shri
Dharam Pal Gupta @ Shri Dharam Pal Aggarwal'. The case of the Petitioners is
that the aforesaid Agency Agreement was first executed between the parties on
1st April 2006 and was renewed on 22nd November 2008\. It contained an
arbitration clause whereby "disputes arising between the parties referring to
this agency agreement or vacating the premises or any other matters referred
in this agreement shall be decided by arbitration."
ARB. P. 309 of 2010 Page 1 of 10
3\. The petition states that the Petitioners own property at Plot No. D-6,
SMA, Cooperative Industrial Estate, G.T. Karnal Road, Delhi - 110033
(hereafter 'the property in question'). It was allotted by the DDA to the
Petitioner No.1 firm by a perpetual lease deed dated 10th March 1978. It is
stated that sheds were constructed on the property in question and were fitted
with electrical connections and sanitary fittings. It is stated that the
Respondents, i.e., M/s. Roshan Lal Aggarwal (HUF) (Respondent No.1) and M/s.
Prekom Industries (Respondent No. 2) a proprietary concern of which Shri
Roshan Lal Aggarwal is the sole proprietor, had been handed over part-
possession of the sheds in the property in question admeasuring about 3000 sq.
ft. on the ground floor by the said Agency Agreement dated 22nd November 2008
for manufacturing steel fabrications. The Petitioners were appointed as the
sole selling agent for selling all products manufactured in the premises. The
price was to be fixed by the Respondents and the Petitioners were to get two
per cent commission on the sale price of all goods sold by the Respondents.
The Agreement was for the period from 22nd November 2008 till 21st March 2013.
4\. It is stated that a family arrangement took place between the partners by
a Family Settlement Deed ('FSD') dated 8th May 2010 which was confirmed by
surviving partner of the erstwhile Petitioner No.1 firm that was registered,
pronounced the said firm as 'dissolved' and constituted a new firm in the same
name with his own sons as partners, the said 'mistake' could somehow be
rectified and the erstwhile firm revived. Added to this is the fact that
Petitioner Nos. 2, 3 and 5 were not parties to the Agency Agreement dated 22nd
November 2008 containing the arbitration clause and therefore cannot seek to
maintain a petition under Section 11 of the Act invoking the said clause.
15\. Under Section 11 of the Act, the Court is not bound to appoint an
arbitrator notwithstanding the legal status and locus standi of the
petitioners seeking such relief. It is necessary for the Court to examine the
validity of the arbitration agreement that is pleaded and be prima facie
satisfied that it a legally tenable document on the basis of which an
arbitrator can be appointed. In the present case, this requirement is not
satisfied.
16\. The petition is accordingly dismissed. This will, however, not preclude
ARB. P. 309 of 2010 Page 9 of 10 all or any of the Petitioners from seeking
