Madras High Court
Commissioner Of Income-Tax, ... vs L.G. Ramamurthi And Ors. on 26 October,
1976
Equivalent citations: 1977 110 ITR 453 Mad
Author: Ismail
Bench: Ismail, Sethuraman
JUDGMENT Ismail, J.
1\. In T. C. No. 229 of 1972, the Income-tax Appellate Tribunal, Madras Bench,
under Section 256(1) of the Income-tax Act, 1961, has referred the following
question of law for the opinion of this court:
"Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Appellate
Tribunal was right in holding that the amounts represented by cross-gifts were
not held by the donees as benamidars of the respective donor-Hindu undivided
families but in their own right and that the income attributable to the cross-
gifts is not assessable in the hands of the donors ?"
2\. In the application made to the Tribunal, the Commissioner of Income-tax
had requested the Tribunal to refer four questions, of which the question
actually referred was question No. 1. The Tribunal did not refer the other
three questions and referred the only question which we have extracted above.
Thereupon, the Commissioner of Income-tax approached this court in T.C.Ps.
case wanted to take an opinion different from the one taken by the earlier
Bench, it should have placed the matter before the President of the Tribunal
so that he could have referred the case to a Full Bench of the Tribunal,
consisting of three or more members for which there is provision in the Act
itself.
29\. Under these circumstances, we are clearly of the opinion that the
Tribunal completely erred in coming to the conclusion it did, at variance with
and opposed to the conclusion of the Tribunal on the earlier occasion, namely,
that the gifts in the present cases constituted real gifts and not sham ones.
30\. The result is, we answer the question referred to us in T.C. No. 229 of
1972 in the negative and against the assessee.
31\. In view of this conclusion of ours, namely, that the earlier finding of
the Tribunal that the gifts were sham could not be varied by the Tribunal on
the present occasion, it becomes unnecessary for us to answer the second
question, namely, the question covered by T. C. No. 64 of 1975, which question
proceeds on the basis of there being real gifts, and, therefore, we decline to
Thereupon, the Commissioner of Income-tax approached this court in T.C.Ps.
Nos. 16 to 18 of 1973 and by an order dated February 18, 1974, this court
directed the Tribunal to refer the following question also for the opinion of
this court:
"Whether the Tribunal was right in refusing to entertain and adjudicate upon
the contention of the department that the alleged gifts were void in law ?"
T.C. No. 64 of 1975 covers the above question.
Both the questions referred to above relate to the same assessment year,
namely, 1963-64.
3\. The short facts are : There were four brothers by name L.G. Bala-krishnan,
L.G. Varadarajulu, L.G. Ramamurthy and L.G. Nityanand and they constituted a
partnership with the firm name of L.G. Balakrishnan and Brothers. In the
accounting year ending 31st March, 1958, relevant to the assessment year
1958-59, the Income-tax Officer found the following deposits in the books of
the firm called L.G. Balakrishnan and Brothers and the said deposits were made
by debiting the capital account of the partners and crediting the account of
the minor children as shown below :
Donor Date Amount Rs.
Name of donee in whose name credited
1\. L. G. Balakrishnan 1-2-58 50,000 Miss V. Vanitha, daughter of I,. G.
Varadarajulu
2\. L. G. Varadarajulu 3-2-58 50,000 Miss : R. Chitra, daughter of L. G.
Ramamurthy
3\. L. G. Ramamurthy 5-2-58 50,000 B. Vijayakumar, son of L, G. Balakrishnan
4\. The firm paid interest on these credits to the respective persons referred
to above. In the assessment proceedings for 1958-59, the Income-tax Officer
considered these gifts to be really in the nature of cross-gifts and he was of
the opinion that though there were no direct transfers of assets by the
fathers to the minor children these transactions amounted to indirect
transfers within the meaning of the said expression in Section 16(3)(a)(iv) of
the Indian Income-tax Act, 1922. He, therefore, included the interest on the
sum of Rs. 50,000 in the respective assessments of the three persons who
figured as donors. We may mention in this context that all the four were
partners of the firm as karta of their respective joint families.
5\. As far as the assessment year 1958-59 is concerned, of the three persons
in whose total income, interest on Rs. 50,000 is included, L.G. Balakrishnan
alone pursued the matter all through up to the High Court. The Appellate
Assistant Commissioner held that the process of gifting had been so devised as
to circumvent the provisions of Section 16(3)(a)(iv) and that the inclusion
was justified. In the further appeal preferred to the Tribunal, the Tribunal
also affirmed the inclusion. While doing so, the Tribunal pointed out:
"All these so-called gifts are really no gifts at all. They are in effect only
transfers in the books camouflaged as cash entries on different dates carried
out in such a manner that the cash position of the business was not affected
at all. In fact the business had no adequate cash to spare for all the gifts
totalling, Rs. 2 lakhs if in fact it was the real intention of the parties to
give away the amounts as gifts or donations."
6\. When the matter was taken up to this court on a reference by L.G.
Balakrishnan, this court in L.G. Balakrisknan v. Commissioner of Income-tax
[1963] 49 ITR 102 (Mad) observed at page 106 :
"The finding of the department as well as of the Tribunal is that there was an
indirect transfer of assets by L.G. Balakrishnan to his minor son,
Vijayakumar. This, is certainly based on the evidence on record and it seems
to us that this finding is fully justified and warranted."
7\. Subsequently, two other debit and credit entries were found as follows:
Donor Date Amount Rs.
Donee in whose name credited L. G. Varadarajulu 24-3-59 75,000 R. Chitra,
daughter of L. G. Ramamurthi L. G. Ramamurthi 30-4-59 1,00,000 Sudarshan, son
of L. G. Varadarajulu
8\. For the assessment years 1959-60 and 1960-61, in addition to the inclusion
of the interest already referred to, interest on these further amounts also
were included. The assessment for 1959-60 in the case of L.G. Ramamurthy was
in the status of an individual, while in the case of others, it was in the
status of Hindu undivided family. In the appeals preferred by these persons
before the Appellate Assistant Commissioner it was held by that officer that
the gifts were merely cross-gifts and that the Income-tax Officer was
justified in including the income derived from the assets so transferred under
Section 16(3)(a)(iv). However, on further appeals preferred to the Tribunal,
it was contended that in all these cases except one, the assessments had been
made in the status of Hindu undivided family and that, therefore, the
provisions of Section 16(3)(a)(iv) could not be applied. The Tribunal accepted
this contention of the assessees and observed:
"The provisions of Section 16(3)(a)(iv) refer to transfer by individuals and
are not applicable to Hindu undivided families. As the assessments in these
cases except that of L.G. Ramamurthi for 1959-60 had been made in the status
of a Hindu undivided family, we consider that the inclusion of the interest
from assets transferred by the individuals with that of the Hindu undivided
family is not justified."
9\. When the assessment proceedings for 1961-62 and 1962-63 were taken up, the
Income-tax Officer took the view that the gifts themselves were not real and
that they were only sham. For this purpose he referred to the observations of
the Tribunal which we have extracted relating to the assessment year 1958-59.
In view of this, his conclusion was that in all the three cases, the gifts
were merely sham and nominal and that the amounts continued to remain only
with the respective Hindu undivided families. Consequently, he assessed the
interest referable thereto only in the hands of the Hindu undivided families.
The assessees took the matter on appeal to the Appellate Assistant
Commissioner. It was contended before him that the interest aforesaid had
originally been included by applying the provisions of Section 16(3)(a)(iv)
and that the said provisions were not applicable to the case of a Hindu
undivided family, as has been held already. The Appellate Assistant
Commissioner, relying on the immediately preceding decision of the Tribunal,
directed the deletion of interest referable to those amounts. The department
preferred appeals to the Income-tax Appellate Tribunal and the Tribunal
allowed the appeals, holding that the gifts were sham and that the funds which
earned interest really belonged to the family and, therefore, the Income-tax
Officer was justified in including such interest in the income of the
respective families.
10\. For the assessment year 1963-64, the Income-tax Officer included the
interest income referable to the amounts gifted in each case in the assessment
of the respective Hindu undivided families following the order of the Tribunal
in the case of the assessment years 1961-62 and 1962-63. On appeal, the
Appellate Assistant Commissioner confirmed the order of the Income-tax Officer
in that behalf. The assessee took the matter on further appeal to the Income-
tax Appellate Tribunal and the Tribunal held that the gifts were real, that
the gifts having been made by the Hindu undivided families, Section
16(3)(a)(iv) was not attracted and that, therefore the order of the Appellate
Assistant Commissioner was not right, with the result the appeals were
allowed. It is the correctness of this conclusion of the Tribunal that is
challenged in the form of the questions extracted already.
11\. Before proceeding further, we may point out that the observations which
the Tribunal has made and which have given rise to the question referred in
T.C. No. 64/75 are found in paragraph 20 of its order. The Tribunal after
referring to the contention of the department that even if there was a real
gift, that gift was not valid in law because a Hindu undivided family cannot
make a gift of its properties to any individual, observed in paragraph 20 as
follows :
"As regards the argument that the Hindu undivided family cannot make gift
also, we agree with the counsel for the assessee that Sri L.G. Ramamurthi
being a sole surviving coparcener at the material time, his right of
disposition over the Hindu undivided family property is unfettered. As regards
the gifts by the other two brothers also we are of the opinion that apart from
the fact that such a question requires investigation of facts, whether or not
such gifts were reasonable having regard to the attending circumstances of the
family, it cannot be allowed to be raised at this stage; the position in law,
as we understand, is that such gifts are voidable at the option of the
affected members and not void ab initio. That apart, all concerned having come
to the conclusion that the gifts are, as a matter of fact, made by the
respective Hindu undivided families, to the members of their own family, the
case will have to be examined not from the point of view whether a karta of a
Hindu undivided family could out of his joint family funds make gifts to his
nephews or nieces but from the point of view whether he could make gifts to
his own sons and daughters. In this connection it may not be out of place to
mention here that the department's stand is contradictory. If that is the
stand of the department, the gifts would be bad in entirety and would not be
subjected to gift-tax at all. Moreover, it is here that the departments's
conduct in the past and in the subsequent income-tax and wealth-tax
proceedings assumes importance. The department cannot blow hot and cold at the
same time. Both the contentions of the departmental representative are,
therefore, liable to be rejected."
12\. We shall first deal with the question raised in T.C. No. 229 of 1972,
before we refer to the question covered by T.C. No. 64 of 1975. We have
already extracted the question covered by T.C. No. 229 of 1972, and it relates
to the correctness of the conclusion of the Tribunal with regard to the nature
of the gifts involved in these cases. Before we deal with this question, it is
desirable to refer to certain things which had happened previously.
13\. We have already referred to the assessment in regard to 1958-59, having
been brought up to this court by L.G. Balakrishnan. Similarly, when the
Tribunal held in respect of the assessment years 1961-62 and 1962-63, that the
gifts were sham and not real, the matter was brought up to this court in the
form of a reference in L.G. Ramamurthi v. Commissioner of Income-tax [1970] 1
ITJ 740 (Mad). In that case, the question actually referred to this court was
;
"Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Tribunal is
justified in law in holding that the income derived by the minor children from
gifts made to them by their uncles is includible in the total income of the
assessee-Hindu undivided family ?"
14\. In view of the general terms in which the question was couched, a vast
line of argument was sought to be advanced before this court on behalf of the
assessee. As a matter of fact, as we have pointed out already, with reference
to these years, the finding of the Tribunal was that the gifts were sham. If
so, the gifts were never made and had no existence in law and, consequently,
it would immediately follow that the income referable to those amounts was
liable to be assessed only in the hands of the donors. Therefore, if the
question raised in that reference was to be construed as excluding any
consideration of the correctness or otherwise of the finding of the Tribunal
on the question of gifts being sham and non est, the question would answer
itself and no further discussion would have been necessary. It is only in this
context a vast amount of reference has been made to the scope of the
jurisdiction of this court under Section 66(1) of the Indian Income-tax Act,
1922, corresponding to Section 256(1) of the Income-tax Act, 1961, and
arguments were advanced on behalf of the assessees on the merits of the case.
While referring to the limitations placed on the jurisdiction of this court in
references made under the Income-tax Act, this court, after referring to the
decision of the Supreme Court in Sree Meenakshi Mills Ltd. v. Commissioner of
Income-tax [1957] 31 ITR 28 (SC) observed --[See [1970] 1 ITJ 740, 747 (Mad)]:
"If this principle is borne in mind, the Tribunal in this case considered the
primary facts which revolved round the scheme or device adopted by the
assessees and ultimately when they found that the money came back to the minor
son of each of the assessees by way of a cross-gift, they came to the
conclusion after appraising the overall picture and taking into consideration
their cumulative effect that the money came back to the coffers of the joint
family. May be one view is that the money came back to be owned by the minor
who is a coparcener of the family and, therefore, it did not literally come
back to the Hindu undivided family. But this cannot be said to be the only
view that is possible. In such circumstances, the High Court cannot review the
finding given by the Tribunal as the other inference drawn by them is also
possible and certainly not perverse or unreasonable."
15\. After referring to the decisions of the Supreme Court in A.V. Thomas and
Co. Ltd. v. Commissioner of Income-tax [1963] 48 ITR 67 (SC) and Commissioner
of Income-tax v. M. Ganapathi Mudaliar [1964] 53 ITR 623 (SC) and the decision
of the Privy Council in Griffiths (Inspector of Taxes) v. J. P. Harrison
(Watford) Ltd. [1965] 58 ITR 328 (PC), this court further observed--[See
[1970] 1 ITJ 740, 747 (Mad)]:
"It, therefore, follows that if an alternative conclusion is plausible, then
the finding is not perverse or unreasonable. We are also satisfied that such
funnelling back of the assets into the joint family, though ostensibly through
the minor, is absolutely an artificial transaction made with the intent to
avoid tax and is, therefore, bound to be characterised as a sham one which
need not be taken notice of by the revenue."
16\. Finally, this court wound up with the following statement--[See [1970] 1
ITJ 740, 751 (Mad)]:
"Whilst, therefore, accepting the finding of fact noticed by the Tribunal in
their order and which have not been challenged by specific questions and after
noticing the Tribunal's order and their reasoning we are satisfied that the
Tribunal is justified in law in holding that the income derived by the minor
children from gifts made to them by their uncles is includible in the total
income of the assessee's Hindu undivided family."
17\. It is in view of this judgment only that both the sides before the
Tribunal in the present case tried to put forward conflicting arguments basing
themselves on certain statements contained in the judgment of this court in
L.G. Ramamurthi v. Commisssioner of Income-tax [1970] 1 ITJ 740 (Mad) referred
to already. The contention advanced on behalf of the assessees before the
Tribunal was that this court in the earlier reference, namely, in the decision
referred to above, did not actually decide the question whether the gifts were
sham or not because that finding of the Tribunal was not challenged by raising
appropriate questions and that, therefore, it was open to the Tribunal to go
into the question again and to find out whether the gifts were real or sham.
On the other hand, on behalf of the revenue it was contended before the
Tribunal that this court in the earlier reference had actually accepted and
approved the finding of the Tribunal that the gifts were sham and that,
therefore, the Tribunal could not go behind that decision of the High Court.
For this purpose they relied on the extracts from the judgment of this court
which we ourselves have given above. After referring to these arguments and
after giving the above and other extracts, the Tribunal proceeded to observe
in paragraph 11 of its order :
"It is, no doubt, true that in the aforesaid passages, the High Court has
observed that the finding of fact that the gift transactions in the cases
under appeal were sham or non est was not perverse and was based on the facts
on record. It is, however, equally true that having regard to their earlier
observations that it was not open to their Lordships, in the absence of a
specific question raised on behalf of the assessee, to examine the finding of
fact given by the Tribunal, the observations made herein have to be taken as
casual observations only. That apart, the jurisdiction of the High Court with
regard to the findings of fact given by the Tribunal is, it is significant to
note, limited to such cases only where the finding of fact is perverse in the
sense that no reasonable person can come to that conclusion or is based on
irrelevant material or is arrived at by ignoring relevant material. Under the
circumstances, the mere fact that the High Court has not upset the finding of
fact given by the Tribunal in the given facts and circumstances would not
necessarily lead to the conclusion that the finding of fact has become a
finding of fact by the High Court, so that it cannot be reconsidered by lower
Tribunals in subsequent proceedings. In other words, there might arise cases
where the High Court would not upset the finding of fact given by the Tribunal
on the ground that the same was neither perverse nor based on irrelevant
material nor arrived at by ignoring relevant material in spite of the fact
that their Lordships feel that if they had to reappraise the evidence, they
would, perhaps, have come to a different conclusion. It would, therefore,
depend on the language used in each decision as to what their Lordships have
really held. It is, thus, not correct to say that a finding of fact not upset
by the High Court in each and every case gets the stamp of approval of the
High Court and that the Tribunal cannot in any circumstance reappraise the
value of the evidence that may be placed before it in the proceedings for the
subsequent years."
18\. To say the least, we are surprised at these observations of the Tribunal,
having regard to the passages in the judgment of this court, which we have
extracted already. It was not merely a negative finding of this court that the
finding of the Tribunal on the earlier occasion was not perverse or
unreasonable. But this court went further and stated that this court was
satisfied that such a funnelling back of the assets into the joint family
though ostensibly through the minor, was absolutely an artificial transaction
made with intent to avoid tax and was, therefore, bound to be characterised as
a sham one which need not be taken notice of by the revenue. In addition,
towards the end of the judgment, this court also stated that it had accepted
the finding of fact noticed by the Tribunal. Whether the observations recorded
by this court were correct or not is not relevant for the purpose of this
case. What is surprising is that, notwithstanding the categorical statements
made by this court, the Tribunal had chosen to characterise these statements
as casual observations and that this court has not upset the finding, when
this court positively stated that it accepted the finding and that having
regard to the facts, the gifts were bound to be characterised as sham ones
which need not be taken notice of by the revenue. Therefore, it will follow
from this that the Tribunal committed a clear error in law in ignoring the
conclusion of this court in respect of the identical transaction with
reference to earlier assessment years.
19\. Mr. Swaminathan, learned counsel for the assessees, very strenuously
contended that the principle of res judicata has no application to proceedings
under the Income-tax Act, since each assessment is considered to be a separate
and independent transaction and that, therefore, any finding recorded by any
authority in respect of one year will not be binding in respect of subsequent
years. However, we are of the opinion that having regard to the facts of the
present case, the issue involved is more fundamental than the question of res
judicata. Even assuming that this court "on the earlier occasion had not given
any finding with regard to the nature of the gift, whether it was real or
sham, and merely went on to consider the question of law embedded in the
question actually referred, to this court, still we are of the opinion that no
Tribunal of fact has any right or jurisdiction to come to a conclusion
entirely contrary to the one reached by another Bench of the same Tribunal on
the identical facts. It may be that the members who constituted the Tribunal
and decided on the earlier occasion are different from the members who decided
the case on the present occasion. But what is relevant is not the personality
of officers presiding over the Tribunal or participating in the hearing, but
the Tribunal as an institution. If it is to be conceded that simply because of
the change in the personnel of the officers who manned the Tribunal, it is
open to the new officers to come to a conclusion totally contradictory to the
conclusion which had been, reached by the earlier officers manning the same
Tribunal on the same set of facts, it will not only shake the confidence of
the public in judicial procedure as such, but it will also totally destroy
such confidence.
The result of this will be conclusions based on arbitrariness and whims and
fancies of the individuals presiding over the courts or the Tribunals and not
reached objectively on the basis of the facts placed before the autho rities.
In this particular case, we are clearly of the opinion that the Tribunal has
come to a conclusion totally different from the one which the Tribunal reached
in respect of the assessment years 1961-62 and 1962-63 on the identical facts
and circumstances. As we have pointed out already, in respect of the
assessment years 1961-62 and 1962-63, the Tribunal held that the gifts were
sham. For the assessment year 1963-64, the Tribunal has held that the gifts
were real. The question for consideration is whether the Tribunal can do so.
20\. When we pointed out this position to the learned counsel for the
assessees, the learned counsel had to concede that the Tribunal cannot come to
a different conclusion on the same facts, but that if there are new facts, the
Tribunal can certainly come to a different conclusion and the learned counsel
endeavoured to convince us that new facts were placed before the Tribunal. As
a matter of fact, to a specific question put by us to the learned counsel as
to whether the Tribunal anywhere in the course of its order had stated that
facts which were not placed before the earlier Bench had been placed before it
and, therefore, on a consideration of such facts, it had corne to a different
conclusion, he had to admit that the Tribunal had not said so anywhere in the
course of its long order and yet the argument of the learned counsel for the
assessee is that new facts were placed before the Tribunal and it is on the
basis of those fresh facts the Tribunal came to a different conclusion. We
shall now consider the correctness of this submission.
21\. In this context, stress was made on four facts as being relevant to the
determination of the question whether the gifts were real or sham. One is that
the donors had paid gift-tax in respect of the amounts in question. The second
is that the donees themselves have been assessed to wealth-tax on those
amounts. The third is that the donees have paid tax on interest accruing on
these amounts. Lastly, the donees themselves have withdrawn these amounts from
the accounts of L.G. Balakrishnan and Brothers for fresh investments. As far
as the first three facts are concerned, the same facts were before the
Tribunal when it disposed of the appeals relating to the assessment years
1961-62 and 1962-63 and the same is not in dispute. Only with regard to the
last fact, namely, the fact of withdrawal, there is no reference to the same
in the earlier order of the Tribunal. With regard to this, Mr. Swaminathan,
learned counsel for the assessees, drew our attention to four statements
contained in the order of the Tribunal in the present case, namely:
(1) the statement that occurs in paragraph 13 of the order of the Tribunal
where it has stated :
"The departmental representative's contention, in fact, is that if the
assessee desires the Tribunal to take a different view, it must produce some
material of unimpeachable character that can lead to an inference that the
transaction was not sham. In reply, the counsel for the assessee has taken us
through the accounts of the donees maintained in the books of the firm, L.G.
Balakrishnan & Bros., for various years to show that in the subsequent years
the amounts were withdrawn and utilised in some other investments."
(2) the statement that occurs in paragraph 16 of the order of the Tribunal,
where it has stated :
"It has been emphasised that the money all along remained with the respective
families. Here again with great respect we think that this is not proved to be
the position. From the manner in which the Hindu undivided family's current
account in the firm's books are maintained it appears that the firm, L.G.
Balakrishnan and Bros., has been acting as a sort of bankers of the respective
Hindu undivided families."
(3) the statement which is found in paragraph 19 of the order, where the
Tribunal has observed:
"Sri Swaminathan had also, it may be stated, relied on the income-tax and
wealth-tax assessments made on the donees by the department in subsequent
years, the gift-tax assessments on the brothers and the withdrawals made by
the donees in subsequent years from the firm and then making investments,
etc., in support of his argument that the gifts were very much genuine and
that the donees did not hold the moneys as benami-dars of the respective Hindu
undivided families."
and (4) the statement that occurs in paragraph 20 of the order of the Tribunal
to the following effect:
"We have looked into the statement showing the cash position of the firm on
the relevant dates and find on verification from the cash book that the firm
did not possess on each such date sufficient cash to enable a partner if he so
desired to physically withdraw the cash for the purpose. Having regard to this
factual position and the case laws relied upon by the counsel for the
assessee, we have little hesitation in holding that the gifts cannot be held
invalid on this score."
22\. We are unable to hold that these statements contain any reference to any
new facts. We have already referred to the fact that the assessment to gift-
tax, assessment to wealth-tax and the assessment of interest in the hands of
the donees were very much before the Tribunal when it disposed of the matter
on the earlier occasion. We have also referred to the fact that the Tribunal,
when it disposed of the appeal relating to the assessment year 1958-59, itself
referred to the fact that the firm did not have sufficient cash amounting to
Rs. two lakhs for the purpose of payment in cash. Under these circumstances,
the only material which, if at all, can be called a new material is the
withdrawal of the monies by the donees from the accounts of L.G. Balakrishnan
and Bros. We are of the opinion that this will not advance the case of the
assessees any further for the simple reason that the same is as much voluntary
and unilateral as the return for gift-tax as the return for wealth-tax and as
well as the return for income-tax in respect of interest concerned. Further,
there is nothing to show that the accounts of the "donees" in the books of
L.G. Balakrishnan & Bros. were not produced on the earlier occasion. On the
other hand, a perusal of the earlier orders will show that all the accounts
were very much before the authorities.
23\. It is only on realising this position Mr. Swaminathan invited our
attention to a decision of the Bombay High Court stating that there need not
be even new facts. The decision relied on is H. A. Shah and Co. v.
Commissioner of Income-tax [1956] 30 ITR 618, 625 (Bom). The observation of
the Bombay High Court on which reliance is placed is as follows :
"Nor are we satisfied that in order to enable the second Tribunal to depart
from the finding of the first Tribunal it is essential that there must be some
fresh facts which must be placed before the second Tribunal which were not
placed before the first Tribunal. If the first Tribunal failed to take into
consideration material facts, facts which had a considerable bearing upon the
ultimate decision, and if the second Tribunal was satisfied that the decision
was arrived at because of the failure to take into consideration those
material facts and that if these material facts had been taken into
consideration the decision would have been different, then the second Tribunal
would be in the same position to revise the earlier decision as if fresh facts
had been placed before it. On principle there is not much difference between
fresh facts being placed before the second and the second Tribunal taking into
consideration certain material facts which the first Tribunal failed to take
into consideration."
24\. We are unable to hold that this represents the correct position of law
and that it is binding on us. In the first place, this court in a Full Bench
decision in T.M.M. Sankaralinga Nadar and Brothers v. Commissioner of Income-
tax AIR 1930 Mad 209, 214 ; 4 ITC 226 [FB] observed :
"It seems to us that where income-tax officials have, after enquiry, proceeded
to assess the assessee on a certain basis, though they may be entitled to
reopen the enquiry; they cannot arbitrarily change the assessment simply on
the ground that the succeeding officer does not agree with :the preceding
officer's finding. The position is just like the position of any two parties
who have proceeded on a certain basis in their relations. It may be open to
one party to reopen the matter. But, if he wants to do so, there should be
facts which would entitle him to do it. If fresh facts come to light which on
an investigation would entitle the Income-tax Officer to come to a different
conclusion from that of his predecessor, we think he is entitled to reopen the
question. But if there are no fresh facts it is difficult to see how he can
arbitrarily go behind the finding of his predecessor. The same principles of
natural justice or judicial dealing, which courts impose upon Income-tax
Officers, would prevent them capriciously setting aside the orders of their
predecessors based on enquiry."
25\. The above observation of this court in the Full Bench decision referred
to above was dissented from by the decision of the Bombay High Court relied on
by the learned counsel for the assessees referred to already on the ground
that far from there being uniformity, different High Courts have taken
different views and they have put a gloss on the observations of the Full
Bench decision of this court referred to already. So long as the Full Bench
decision of this court stands and has not been reversed or dissented from by
the Supreme Court or reversed by a Fuller Bench of this court, the same is
binding on us and, therefore, we cannot rely on the observation of the Bombay
High Court which had dissented from the Full Bench decision of this court.
Secondly, even assuming that the observations of the Bombay High Court
referred to above can be relied on, still the position is that the succeeding
Tribunal must refer to the facts which were before the former Tribunal, but
which were not taken into account by that Tribunal and must observe that if
those facts had been taken into account by the former Tribunal the former
Tribunal itself would have come to a different conclusion. Such a statement in
the order of the succeeding Tribunal is required in the interest of comity of
judicial precedents as well as in the maintenance of judicial decorum and
decency. Otherwise, it will lead to an assumed superiority on the part of the
succeeding Tribunal as if it had discovered something which had escaped the
attention of the former Tribunal and it alone was able to find out the truth,
while the former Tribunal was not able to do so.
26\. In this particular case, in the whole of the order of the Tribunal, there
is not a single sentence as to what facts were brought to its notice for the
first time or as to what facts which were placed before the former Tribunal
and which were not taken into account by that Tribunal in arriving at the
conclusion which it did and if it had taken those facts into consideration, it
would have come to a different conclusion. On the other hand, the only reason
which the Tribunal has on this occasion given for coming to a different
conclusion is to be found in paragragh 14 of its order where it has stated:
"As we understand the situation, the case was perhaps not presented before the
Tribunal in a proper perspective."
27\. Mr. Swaminathan who had all along appeared for the assessees in these
cases and who also appeared before the Tribunal on the earlier occasion
represented to us that it was merely a compliment to the counsel who appeared
on the earlier occasion, but he had to admit that it did not refer to any new
or different facts. Apart from this one sentence, we are not able to discover
any other reason given by the Tribunal for taking a view totally different
from and entirely opposed to the view which was previously taken by the
Tribunal. Consequently, even on the assumption of the validity of the
observation of the Bombay High Court relied on by the learned counsel, the
requirements of those observations have not been fulfilled in the present
case, because nowhere the Tribunal has stated that it was relying on a
particular fact which was before the Tribunal on the earlier occasion and
which was overlooked by the Tribunal and that if it was taken into
consideration by the Tribunal on the earlier occasion, the conclusion itself
would have been different. We are expressing this for the simple reason that
there could not have been any such fact because all the matters on which Mr.
Swaminathan sought to rely were before the authorities all along, namely, the
account books of L.G. Balakrishnan & Bros., in which alone entries of debits
and credits as well as withdrawals are to be found.
28\. It is worthwhile emphasising that if a Bench of a Tribunal on the
identical facts is allowed to come to a conclusion directly opposed to the
conclusion reached by another Bench of the Tribunal on an earlier occasion,
that will be destructive of the institutional integrity itself. That is the
reason why in a High Court, if a single judge takes a view different from the
one taken by another judge on a question of law, he does not finally pronounce
his view and the matter is referred to a Division Bench. Similarly, if a
Division Bench differs from the view taken by another Division Bench, it does
not express disagreement and pronounce its different views, but has the matter
posted before a Fuller Bench for considering the question. If that is the
position even with regard to a question of law, the position will be a
fortiori with regard to a question of fact. If the Tribunal in the present
case wanted to take an opinion different from the one taken by the earlier
Bench, it should have placed the matter before the President of the Tribunal
so that he could have referred the case to a Full Bench of the Tribunal,
consisting of three or more members for which there is provision in the Act
itself.
29\. Under these circumstances, we are clearly of the opinion that the
Tribunal completely erred in coming to the conclusion it did, at variance with
and opposed to the conclusion of the Tribunal on the earlier occasion, namely,
that the gifts in the present cases constituted real gifts and not sham ones.
30\. The result is, we answer the question referred to us in T.C. No. 229 of
1972 in the negative and against the assessee.
31\. In view of this conclusion of ours, namely, that the earlier finding of
the Tribunal that the gifts were sham could not be varied by the Tribunal on
the present occasion, it becomes unnecessary for us to answer the second
question, namely, the question covered by T. C. No. 64 of 1975, which question
proceeds on the basis of there being real gifts, and, therefore, we decline to
answer that question.
32\. The Commissioner is entitled to his costs. Counsel's fee Rs. 750 (Rupees
seven hundred and fifty only), one set, to be paid by the three assessees in
equal amounts.
case wanted to take an opinion different from the one taken by the earlier
Bench, it should have placed the matter before the President of the Tribunal
so that he could have referred the case to a Full Bench of the Tribunal,
consisting of three or more members for which there is provision in the Act
itself.
29\. Under these circumstances, we are clearly of the opinion that the
Tribunal completely erred in coming to the conclusion it did, at variance with
and opposed to the conclusion of the Tribunal on the earlier occasion, namely,
that the gifts in the present cases constituted real gifts and not sham ones.
30\. The result is, we answer the question referred to us in T.C. No. 229 of
1972 in the negative and against the assessee.
31\. In view of this conclusion of ours, namely, that the earlier finding of
the Tribunal that the gifts were sham could not be varied by the Tribunal on
the present occasion, it becomes unnecessary for us to answer the second
question, namely, the question covered by T. C. No. 64 of 1975, which question
proceeds on the basis of there being real gifts, and, therefore, we decline to
Thereupon, the Commissioner of Income-tax approached this court in T.C.Ps.
Nos. 16 to 18 of 1973 and by an order dated February 18, 1974, this court
directed the Tribunal to refer the following question also for the opinion of
this court:
"Whether the Tribunal was right in refusing to entertain and adjudicate upon
the contention of the department that the alleged gifts were void in law ?"
T.C. No. 64 of 1975 covers the above question.
Both the questions referred to above relate to the same assessment year,
namely, 1963-64.
3\. The short facts are : There were four brothers by name L.G. Bala-krishnan,
L.G. Varadarajulu, L.G. Ramamurthy and L.G. Nityanand and they constituted a
partnership with the firm name of L.G. Balakrishnan and Brothers. In the
accounting year ending 31st March, 1958, relevant to the assessment year
1958-59, the Income-tax Officer found the following deposits in the books of
the firm called L.G. Balakrishnan and Brothers and the said deposits were made
by debiting the capital account of the partners and crediting the account of
the minor children as shown below :
Donor Date Amount Rs.
Name of donee in whose name credited
1\. L. G. Balakrishnan 1-2-58 50,000 Miss V. Vanitha, daughter of I,. G.
case wanted to take an opinion different from the one taken by the earlier
Bench, it should have placed the matter before the President of the Tribunal
so that he could have referred the case to a Full Bench of the Tribunal,
consisting of three or more members for which there is provision in the Act
itself.
29\. Under these circumstances, we are clearly of the opinion that the
Tribunal completely erred in coming to the conclusion it did, at variance with
and opposed to the conclusion of the Tribunal on the earlier occasion, namely,
that the gifts in the present cases constituted real gifts and not sham ones.
30\. The result is, we answer the question referred to us in T.C. No. 229 of
1972 in the negative and against the assessee.
31\. In view of this conclusion of ours, namely, that the earlier finding of
the Tribunal that the gifts were sham could not be varied by the Tribunal on
the present occasion, it becomes unnecessary for us to answer the second
question, namely, the question covered by T. C. No. 64 of 1975, which question
proceeds on the basis of there being real gifts, and, therefore, we decline to
Thereupon, the Commissioner of Income-tax approached this court in T.C.Ps.
Nos. 16 to 18 of 1973 and by an order dated February 18, 1974, this court
directed the Tribunal to refer the following question also for the opinion of
this court:
"Whether the Tribunal was right in refusing to entertain and adjudicate upon
the contention of the department that the alleged gifts were void in law ?"
T.C. No. 64 of 1975 covers the above question.
Both the questions referred to above relate to the same assessment year,
namely, 1963-64.
3\. The short facts are : There were four brothers by name L.G. Bala-krishnan,
L.G. Varadarajulu, L.G. Ramamurthy and L.G. Nityanand and they constituted a
partnership with the firm name of L.G. Balakrishnan and Brothers. In the
accounting year ending 31st March, 1958, relevant to the assessment year
1958-59, the Income-tax Officer found the following deposits in the books of
the firm called L.G. Balakrishnan and Brothers and the said deposits were made
by debiting the capital account of the partners and crediting the account of
the minor children as shown below :
Donor Date Amount Rs.
Name of donee in whose name credited
1\. L. G. Balakrishnan 1-2-58 50,000 Miss V. Vanitha, daughter of I,. G.
case wanted to take an opinion different from the one taken by the earlier
Bench, it should have placed the matter before the President of the Tribunal
so that he could have referred the case to a Full Bench of the Tribunal,
consisting of three or more members for which there is provision in the Act
itself.
29\. Under these circumstances, we are clearly of the opinion that the
Tribunal completely erred in coming to the conclusion it did, at variance with
and opposed to the conclusion of the Tribunal on the earlier occasion, namely,
that the gifts in the present cases constituted real gifts and not sham ones.
30\. The result is, we answer the question referred to us in T.C. No. 229 of
1972 in the negative and against the assessee.
31\. In view of this conclusion of ours, namely, that the earlier finding of
the Tribunal that the gifts were sham could not be varied by the Tribunal on
the present occasion, it becomes unnecessary for us to answer the second
question, namely, the question covered by T. C. No. 64 of 1975, which question
proceeds on the basis of there being real gifts, and, therefore, we decline to
Thereupon, the Commissioner of Income-tax approached this court in T.C.Ps.
Nos. 16 to 18 of 1973 and by an order dated February 18, 1974, this court
directed the Tribunal to refer the following question also for the opinion of
this court:
"Whether the Tribunal was right in refusing to entertain and adjudicate upon
the contention of the department that the alleged gifts were void in law ?"
T.C. No. 64 of 1975 covers the above question.
Both the questions referred to above relate to the same assessment year,
namely, 1963-64.
3\. The short facts are : There were four brothers by name L.G. Bala-krishnan,
L.G. Varadarajulu, L.G. Ramamurthy and L.G. Nityanand and they constituted a
partnership with the firm name of L.G. Balakrishnan and Brothers. In the
accounting year ending 31st March, 1958, relevant to the assessment year
1958-59, the Income-tax Officer found the following deposits in the books of
the firm called L.G. Balakrishnan and Brothers and the said deposits were made
by debiting the capital account of the partners and crediting the account of
the minor children as shown below :
Donor Date Amount Rs.
Name of donee in whose name credited
1\. L. G. Balakrishnan 1-2-58 50,000 Miss V. Vanitha, daughter of I,. G.
case wanted to take an opinion different from the one taken by the earlier
Bench, it should have placed the matter before the President of the Tribunal
so that he could have referred the case to a Full Bench of the Tribunal,
consisting of three or more members for which there is provision in the Act
itself.
29\. Under these circumstances, we are clearly of the opinion that the
Tribunal completely erred in coming to the conclusion it did, at variance with
and opposed to the conclusion of the Tribunal on the earlier occasion, namely,
that the gifts in the present cases constituted real gifts and not sham ones.
30\. The result is, we answer the question referred to us in T.C. No. 229 of
1972 in the negative and against the assessee.
31\. In view of this conclusion of ours, namely, that the earlier finding of
the Tribunal that the gifts were sham could not be varied by the Tribunal on
the present occasion, it becomes unnecessary for us to answer the second
question, namely, the question covered by T. C. No. 64 of 1975, which question
proceeds on the basis of there being real gifts, and, therefore, we decline to
Thereupon, the Commissioner of Income-tax approached this court in T.C.Ps.
Nos. 16 to 18 of 1973 and by an order dated February 18, 1974, this court
directed the Tribunal to refer the following question also for the opinion of
this court:
"Whether the Tribunal was right in refusing to entertain and adjudicate upon
the contention of the department that the alleged gifts were void in law ?"
T.C. No. 64 of 1975 covers the above question.
Both the questions referred to above relate to the same assessment year,
namely, 1963-64.
3\. The short facts are : There were four brothers by name L.G. Bala-krishnan,
L.G. Varadarajulu, L.G. Ramamurthy and L.G. Nityanand and they constituted a
partnership with the firm name of L.G. Balakrishnan and Brothers. In the
accounting year ending 31st March, 1958, relevant to the assessment year
1958-59, the Income-tax Officer found the following deposits in the books of
the firm called L.G. Balakrishnan and Brothers and the said deposits were made
by debiting the capital account of the partners and crediting the account of
the minor children as shown below :
Donor Date Amount Rs.
Name of donee in whose name credited
1\. L. G. Balakrishnan 1-2-58 50,000 Miss V. Vanitha, daughter of I,. G.
Varadarajulu
2\. L. G. Varadarajulu 3-2-58 50,000 Miss : R. Chitra, daughter of L. G.
Ramamurthy
3\. L. G. Ramamurthy 5-2-58 50,000 B. Vijayakumar, son of L, G. Balakrishnan
4\. The firm paid interest on these credits to the respective persons referred
to above. In the assessment proceedings for 1958-59, the Income-tax Officer
considered these gifts to be really in the nature of cross-gifts and he was of
the opinion that though there were no direct transfers of assets by the
fathers to the minor children these transactions amounted to indirect
transfers within the meaning of the said expression in Section 16(3)(a)(iv) of
the Indian Income-tax Act, 1922. He, therefore, included the interest on the
case wanted to take an opinion different from the one taken by the earlier
Bench, it should have placed the matter before the President of the Tribunal
so that he could have referred the case to a Full Bench of the Tribunal,
consisting of three or more members for which there is provision in the Act
itself.
29\. Under these circumstances, we are clearly of the opinion that the
Tribunal completely erred in coming to the conclusion it did, at variance with
and opposed to the conclusion of the Tribunal on the earlier occasion, namely,
that the gifts in the present cases constituted real gifts and not sham ones.
30\. The result is, we answer the question referred to us in T.C. No. 229 of
1972 in the negative and against the assessee.
31\. In view of this conclusion of ours, namely, that the earlier finding of
the Tribunal that the gifts were sham could not be varied by the Tribunal on
the present occasion, it becomes unnecessary for us to answer the second
question, namely, the question covered by T. C. No. 64 of 1975, which question
proceeds on the basis of there being real gifts, and, therefore, we decline to
Thereupon, the Commissioner of Income-tax approached this court in T.C.Ps.
Nos. 16 to 18 of 1973 and by an order dated February 18, 1974, this court
directed the Tribunal to refer the following question also for the opinion of
this court:
"Whether the Tribunal was right in refusing to entertain and adjudicate upon
the contention of the department that the alleged gifts were void in law ?"
T.C. No. 64 of 1975 covers the above question.
Both the questions referred to above relate to the same assessment year,
namely, 1963-64.
3\. The short facts are : There were four brothers by name L.G. Bala-krishnan,
L.G. Varadarajulu, L.G. Ramamurthy and L.G. Nityanand and they constituted a
partnership with the firm name of L.G. Balakrishnan and Brothers. In the
accounting year ending 31st March, 1958, relevant to the assessment year
1958-59, the Income-tax Officer found the following deposits in the books of
the firm called L.G. Balakrishnan and Brothers and the said deposits were made
by debiting the capital account of the partners and crediting the account of
the minor children as shown below :
Donor Date Amount Rs.
Name of donee in whose name credited
1\. L. G. Balakrishnan 1-2-58 50,000 Miss V. Vanitha, daughter of I,. G.
Varadarajulu
2\. L. G. Varadarajulu 3-2-58 50,000 Miss : R. Chitra, daughter of L. G.
Ramamurthy
3\. L. G. Ramamurthy 5-2-58 50,000 B. Vijayakumar, son of L, G. Balakrishnan
4\. The firm paid interest on these credits to the respective persons referred
to above. In the assessment proceedings for 1958-59, the Income-tax Officer
considered these gifts to be really in the nature of cross-gifts and he was of
the opinion that though there were no direct transfers of assets by the
fathers to the minor children these transactions amounted to indirect
transfers within the meaning of the said expression in Section 16(3)(a)(iv) of
the Indian Income-tax Act, 1922. He, therefore, included the interest on the
case wanted to take an opinion different from the one taken by the earlier
Bench, it should have placed the matter before the President of the Tribunal
so that he could have referred the case to a Full Bench of the Tribunal,
consisting of three or more members for which there is provision in the Act
itself.
29\. Under these circumstances, we are clearly of the opinion that the
Tribunal completely erred in coming to the conclusion it did, at variance with
and opposed to the conclusion of the Tribunal on the earlier occasion, namely,
that the gifts in the present cases constituted real gifts and not sham ones.
30\. The result is, we answer the question referred to us in T.C. No. 229 of
1972 in the negative and against the assessee.
31\. In view of this conclusion of ours, namely, that the earlier finding of
the Tribunal that the gifts were sham could not be varied by the Tribunal on
the present occasion, it becomes unnecessary for us to answer the second
question, namely, the question covered by T. C. No. 64 of 1975, which question
proceeds on the basis of there being real gifts, and, therefore, we decline to
