Delhi High Court
Michael Heath Nathan Johnson vs Subhash Chandra And Ors. on 1 November, 1995
Equivalent citations: 60 (1995) DLT 757
Author: K Ramamoorthy
Bench: K Ramamoorthy
JUDGMENT K. Ramamoorthy, J.
(1) The plaintiff has filed the application for injunction restraining the
defendants-respondents their servants and agents by an order of permanent
injunction from in any manner directly and/or indirectly through themselves
and/or through^ their business associates and/or other group of Companies in
any manner disclosing, utilising, exploiting and/or implementing the Smpc
system, having the characteristics identified in the Affidavit of the
Applicant/Plaintiff annexed to the plaint (Annexure A), and based on the
Applicant's valuable and unique confidential information; and to confirm the
aforesaid order after hearing the parties. There are seven defendants in the
suit. First defendant is contesting the case. 7th defendant Stephen Moss,
without filing any reply to the application for injunction, has filed an
affidavit in support of the first defendant.
(2) I have heard learned Counsel for the plaintiff and the first defendant for
a considerable length of time.
before me. And that is the reason for this long order. I hope I have not
omitted to refer to all the materials. I have come to my own conclusion and
naturally it would be against one of the parties. I agree with the views
expressed by Justice Kitto of the Court in Australia when he said in
Wolanski's Design (1953) 88 Clr 278 (Aus) - "It is no doubt true, as, in
LeatheriesLtd.v. Lycett Saddle& Motor Accessories Co Ltd. (1909) 26 Rpc 166 at
171, Eve) rejoiced to find himself able to say on the authority of Lord
Herschell, that when the Judge has arrived at a conclusion upon such an issue
of fact, it is not to be expected that he will be able, at any rate
satisfactorily to the litigants or to one of the litigants, to indicate in
detail the grounds which have led him to the conclusion. And I cannot say that
the present case is any exception to the rule that the eye, like the heart
according to Pascal, has its reasons that reason does not know."
(97) In fine, on the materials placed before me, I find no difficulty in
coming to the prima facie conclusion that the plaintiff has not established
that he had any intellectual property rights in any system, he did not hand
a considerable length of time.
(3) Mr. Ashok Desai, learned Senior Counsel, appearing for the plaintiff,
started cerebral debate on Intellectual Property Rights. I heard him at length
because of the attempt made by him collecting all facts in favor of his client
presenting a configuration, as it were, of the various points in favor of the
plaintiff to enable me to appreciate his arguments. Though at the first blush,
I could not on a perusal of the plaint fully appreciate the case of the
plaintiff, the dexterity and alacrity with which Mr. Ashok Desai, learned
Senior Counsel made his submissions marshalling the facts, illumined the dark
corners of the plaintiff's case. Though the arguments extended to a number of
days, in the ultimate analysis the point distilled down to a very specific
one. The same became discernible to me very early. The plaintiff's claim could
be characterised even at the out set as something we try to spot in a milky
way on a clear sky and something which cannot be easily comprehended or
visualised in cyber space by a casual Observer. Mr. Ashok Desai, learned
Senior Counsel made a full disquisition, as it were, on Satellite Mobile
Personal Communication System (SMPC) venture loquising what is stated by the
plaintiff. The plaintiff claims to be a trendsetter in this type of technology
bringing the peoples of the world closer over a hand set at moderate cost
saving lot of time. When the space technology in the globe is in incandescent
stage providing amenities to people which human ingenuity could not conceive
of thus far, the plaintiff is trying to scuttle the attempt of the first
defendant to do something with the able assistance of the U.S. Advance
Technology Expertise. Though the plaintiff through a long plant has made an
attempt to project himself as a reincarnation of great geniuses whose
contribution had been the basis for the modem technological advance but
analysis of the materials provided by the plaintiff do not show him in
iridescent colours. The plaintiff expects a great nugget for his so called
system conceived by him by a process of configuration and seeks to completely
destroy all attempts of the first defendant to proceed with his work.
(4) Before I notice the pleadings in the case I would like to refer to the
events chronologically, that had taken place from the date of the filing of
the plaint till 6.8.95. 25.3.95 Plaint was presented - The documents filed
along with the plaint are :- (i) Undated joint venture proposal between the
plaintiff and the African (Tele Communication Ltd.) (ii) Investment proposal
dated December 1993. (iii) Agenda faxed by Mr. Roger dark to the plaintiff on
24.1.94. (iv) Undated fax cover sheet from plaintiff to the first defendant,
(without address of the first defendant). (v) Letter dated March 30, 1994 with
invoice dated March31,1994. It is not stated when these documents were sent to
first defendant. (It is the case of the first defendant that it was sent only
on 19.10.1994). (vi) Letter dated October 26, 1994 alleged to have been
written by the 760 plaintiff to first defendant and others. In the beginning
of the letter this is what is written :- To Subhash Chandra Stevemols 3, Roger
dark Ted McForland From Michael Johnson. "Each of you know that the Satellite
Mobile Personal Communications System project you are working on was created
and authored by me. That is a fact. Each of you know, that I introduced the
project to each of you in turn and at different times. That is a fact. Roger
also knows that the project was introduced to both the Us manufacturers by me
long before it was exposed to any of you (including myself). That is a fact.
Ted knows that I introduced the concept to Hughes and briefed them extensively
in the U.S., once again long before any of you were involved. That is a fact
involving many personalities. " (vii) Letter dated November 23,1994 by the
Solicitor of the first defendant called Deacons to the plaintiff calling upon
the plaintiff to pay the sum of 300,000 Us Dollars and other claims. 27.3.95
The plaintiff filed additional documents. (i) Letter dated February 4, 1995
from plaintiff to first defendant. (No address of the first defendant is
given, no record filed to show the letter was sent by the plaintiff to the
first defendant). (ii) Letter dated March 26, 1995 from Mr. Prentiss Q. Yancey
to plaintiff wherein it is stated by Mr. Yancey as under:- " I am writing to
confirm the following facts: (1) The Satellite Mobile Personal Communications
(SMPC) System is the only Personal Communications System utilizing both a
Geostationary Satellite and small cellular type handsets known to Africom. The
Smpcs was and is to the best knowledge of African a proprietary work product
created by Michael Johnson. (2) The Smpc System and its application to Africa
was first generally described by Michael Johnson and African Director Gregory
Brown to At & T executive Richard Moore in June of 1993. (3) The Smpc System
was first presented in detail to At & T in September of 1993 as part of an
investment proposal which was the subject of a Non-Disclosure Agreement
between Africom and At & T dated January 27,1994. (4) Africom has at all times
sought to protect any confidentiality, proprietary rights and copyright which
exist in the Smpc system. 761 (5) The Smpc System was included in the Joint
Business Case produced by At & T and Africom between January and May of 1994
and again is the subject of a non-disclosure, confidentiality and non-complete
agreement between Africom and At & T January 21, 1994. (6) It is recognized by
Africom that the confidentiality of the Smpc System is crucial and Africom has
and will continue to uphold this position." (iii) An undated document between
Skybird Co. Ltd. and Yellow gold. (There is no material to show that this was
ever given to the first defendant). (Yellow Gold was an Operational Company
brought into existence by the plaintiff and 7th defendant Mr. Roger Clark
pursuant to service agreement executed between the parties. The execution of
service agreement is not disputed by the plaintiff). 30.3.95 News item dated
January 18, 1995 in the Times of India about the agreement between the first
defendant and foreign Co. (This document was already filed as Annexure B along
with the plaint. The plaintiff filed his affidavit setting out his
technological system claiming to be his brain born child). 1.5.95 Replies by
defendants 1 and 2 to IA. 2773/95. 6.7.95 Affidavit of Mr. Paramjit Singh
Bains, an expert on behalf of the first defendant 21.7.95 Written statement on
behalf of defendants I and 2. 3 7.7.95 Plaintiff filed two volumes of
documents in a trunk box running into about 1300 pages. 23.7.95 Mr. Roger
Clark filed an affidavit in support of the plaintiff. 22.7.95 Rejoinder
affidavit in I.A. 2773/95 Along with documents running into about 200 pages.
2.8.95 Affidavit of plaintiff in answer to the affidavit of Mr. Paramjit Singh
Bains. 8.8.95 Affidavit of Mr. David Greenwood, an expert, according to the
first defendant with annexures running into about 700 pages. 11.8.95 Mr.
Stephen Moss (Defendant No. 7) filed an affidavit in support of the first
defendant. 16.8.95 Two affidavits filed by the plaintiff controverting the
facts stated in the affidavit of Mr. David Greenwood and Mr. Stephen Moss.
(5) It appears that the first defendant, plaintiff, Mr. Roger Clark and Mr.
Stephen Moss wanted to do something in common in the space technology and
wanted to make money by doing business. There was some misunderstanding
amongst them. I am not able to resist inference that they had been moving
together without having confidence among each other and one wanted to over-
reach the other. They had conceived an idea of floating Companies. Mr. Ashok
Desai, learned Senior Counsel said that in some foreign countries one can just
go and take from the shelf some companies registered under the Companies Act
and use them 762 for one's business. What will be the legal effect of such
actions, we need not go into? But what happened on the basis of the
adventurous experiment of these four people has to be noticed because that
seems to be the genesis of the bitterness among the parties. As per the
understanding Mr. Roger Clark, Principal of Wittering Company, Mr. Stephen
Moss. Principal of jussen Company, plaintiff. Principal of Outwood, Esher
Company to consist of all the three above Companies, first defendant to be the
Principal of Rubies Company, This Esher Company, Wittering, Jussen, Outwood
along with Rubies to form a Company called Roadgold, and a Company called
Yellow Gold, to be the Operational Company. An agreement called shareholders
agreement is dated 1.1.94 was executed. A reading of the shareholders
agreement would show how the parties were trying to take advantage of the
situation obtaining in foreign countries and to my mind the contents of this
agreement appear to be wholly unrealistic but that is not relevant to the
case. However, the plaintiff having been a party to this agreement claims
something contrary to the contents against the first defendant apparently when
things did not materialise as the parties contemplated at the time of entering
into such an agreement. As I said above, persons belonging to different parts
of the globe without any faith and confidence amongst themselves masquerading
as the proverbial 'Three Musketeers' had come to an adhoc understanding which
appears to me to be unnatural and artificial and which has been done for the
sake of business with avidity and avarice, and, therefore, in the natural
course of events the parties have not been able to achieve anything lasting
and useful not only to the peoples of the world but also to themselves. It is
stated in the shareholders agreement, Rubies Overseas Ltd. is a Company
incorporated in the British Virgin Islands. A shareholding Company also is
incorporated in the British Virgin Islands. Roadgold Enterprises was also
incorporated in British Virgin Islands. It is stated "the parties desired to
enter into this agreement to provide for the ownership, management and
activities of Roadgold Enterprises Ltd. 'Operational Company' is designed as
"Yellow Gold Co. Ltd., a wholly owned subsidiary Company. Company means
Roadgold Enterprises." Service agreement is defined as "the agreement between
the Company and each of Wittering Holding, Jassen International Ltd. and
Outwood Investment Ltd. in the form annexed hereto as Ex. A, B and C." Clause
6 provides the business of the Company. 6.1 States the business of the Company
is to act as the holding of the Company for 100% of the issue share capital of
the Operational Company and to raise funds for the Operational Company. 6.2
Provides contemporaneously with the appointment of the Directors in Clause 3.2
the Company shall enter into the Service Agreements with Jassen International
Limited, Outwood Investments Limited and Wittering Holdings Inc. under the
terms of which inter alia the Company shall pay to each of such companies the
sum of US$ 3,00,000 on or before the execution of such. 6.3 Provides The
business of Operational Company shall be to establish, develop and operate a
telecommunications and media consultancy which shall seek equity and fee
remuneration from large scale projects in exchange for the provision of its
expertise and to carry on any other business agreed to by the parties. The
other sub clauses in those would provide for as to how the parties are to 763
secure funds for the Operational Company. 12.1 refers to the parties getting
things in confidence i.e. called confidentiality clause. The same is as
follows :- "12.1 The parties hereto shall and shall procure the Company to
keep and shall procure that their respective agents and employees and the
agents and employees of the Company shall keep confidential all trade secrets,
technical date or other information of a confidential nature beginning to or
obtained from the other until the same shall have become generally known to
companies engaged in similar business otherwise than through disclosure on the
part of the Company. Clause 16.1 reads as follows:- "This Agreement contains
the entire understanding between the parties hereto and supersedes any prior
understanding and/or agreements between the parties hereto respecting the
subject matter of this Agreement. There are no representations agreements
arrangements or understandings oral or written between the parties hereto
relating to the subject matter of this Agreement which are not fully expressed
herein." By this the parties had made it clear that they are governed only by
the terms of the agreement and nothing else other than what is contended in
the agreement would prevail. In the shareholders agreement it is to be noticed
that under Clause 3.3 it is stated "the parties shall forthwith after the
execution of this agreement procure the appointment as directors of those
persons referred to in Clause 3.2." By letter dated 1.1.94 first defendant
wrote to 1. Outwood Investments Limited 2. Wittering Holdings Inc. 3. Jassen
International That the ultimate 100% shareholders, owner and sole principal of
Rubies Overseas Ltd. is the first defendant. There are service agreements
dated 1.1.94 between Roadgold Enterprises Ltd. and Wittering hold Ltd. Under
this agreement a non refundable signing fee of 300,000 dollars has been paid
to the Principal of Wittering (Mr. Roger dark). Mr. Roger dark representing
Wittering Holding by letter dated 1.1.94 wrote to 1. Subhash Chandra 2. Rubies
Overseas Limited 3. Roadgold Enterprises Limited that he is the sole principal
for that company. 5. There is Another service agreement between Roadgold
Enterprises Ltd. represented by the first defendant and Jassen International
Ltd.; represented by D. Shera St. Moss. Here also a non refundable signing fee
of 300,000 Us Dollars was paid to the 7th defendant. As to how the services
are to be rendered as mentioned in the agreement. Defendant No. 7 Mr. Stephen
Moss representing Jassen International Ltd. by letter dated 1.1.94 wrote to;
1. Subhash Chandra 764 2. Rubies Overseas Limited 3. Roadgold Enterprises
Limited that he was the ultimate 100% shareholder owner and sole principal of
Jassen International Ltd. This is what is called a side letter. There is yet
another agreement dated 1.1.94 between Roadgold Enterprises Ltd., represented
by defendant No. 1 and Outward Investment Ltd., represented by the plaintiff.
Here also a non refundable signing fee of 300,000 Us Dollars was paid to the
plaintiff. The plaintiff alone did not execute any side letter and the non
execution of side letter would entitle the First defendant to get back 300,000
Us Dollars paid under the service agreement. Whether the parties to this
agreement and the shareholders agreement acted in accordance with terms
thereof is not a matter before me but the relevancy of that fact is the
parties to the agreement had only thought of doing some consultancy work and
there was no other understanding between the plaintiff and the first defendant
with regard to any other matter. On 18.3.94 7th defendant wrote to Mr. Eric
Philips, A.T. and T Development Projects of Africa and Middle East. This
letter is stated to have been written by the 7th defendant on behalf of the
first defendant Subhash Chandra. What is stated by the 7th defendant in this
letter is of some interest because he complaints that the plaintiff had
disclosed some material to third parties. The relevant portion reads as
follows:- "Please be advised that Mr. Stephen Moss and - Mr. Roger dark, and
their respective consultants and support staff, are not involved in Africom
and have no relationship with it. Both individuals and their teams since
January 1, 1994 have been part of ASCOM's core staff, in which capacity they
have been engaged in developing ASCCOM's own plans for satellite
telecommunications in Asia and Africa. These plans have been shaped with the
participation of spacecraft manufacturers Martin Marietta Astro Space and
Hughes Communications which companies have supplied to Ascom on a confidential
basis, inter alia, detailed technical proposals. We believe that
notwithstanding our best efforts to preserve and safeguard all proprietary
information, the technical proposal developed by Martin Marietta Astro Space
may have been improperly disclosed to Africom and may have been used in part,
in their submission to At & T. We appreciate that At & T may have no knowledge
of this situation and may not carrying out its obligations under its agreement
with At & T. However, under these circumstances, it is appropriate that we
inform you that (a) no authority has been given by us to permit use by Africom
of any information supplied to us or developed by us, (b) that we will
institute proceedings in appropriate jurisdictions seeking injunctive relief
and/or restraining orders against any parties receiving, making unauthorised
use, or participating in unauthorised use of such information. In any such
proceedings, we will also seek damages against all relevant parties for
consequential losses incurred as a consequence of such unlawful use. You will
appreciate that we are also bound by confidentiality agreements with Martin
Marietta in this respect." The plaintiff was aware of this letter in March
1994. No argument was advanced that plaintiff was not aware of it. Therefore,
the inference is that by March 1994 itself the disputes between parties had
come to the surface. There was a news item on 765 18.5.94 in Financial Times
about the first defendant company placing orders with Hughes of the United
States for geostationary sattelite. This is only to show that in May 1994
itself the arrangement between first defendant and Hughes had become public.
On 25.10.94 Mr. Prentiss Q. Yancey of Africom Telecommunications, on behalf of
the plaintiff wrote to defendant No. 5/defendant No.6 asking them not to use
the proprietary name "OBSIDAN" for its Mobile Satellite Base Telecommunication
System. On 26.10.94 the plaintiff would appear to have written a letter to
defendant No. 1. He emphasised "Each of you know that the satellite Mobile
Personal Communications System project you are working on was created and
authored by me-". Roger also knows that the project was introduced to both of
the Us manufacturers by me long before it was exposed to any of you.
(including myself)". He further states that "Ted knows that I introduced the
concept to Hughes and briefed them extensively in the U.S. once again long
before any of you were involved." Therefore, Hughes knows about the system is
admitted by the plaintiff in October 1994. Whether Hughes had it from
plaintiff is a matter to be proved by him. The plaintiff in this letter would
not also say that what exactly was his complaint except saying that the four
persons came to know of 'this project' through the efforts of the plaintiff.
The plaintiff for reasons best known to him would not specify what is the
project in that letter. Project is a word of great import. It cannot be said a
project is an invention of any person and that is not the claim of the
plaintiff also. Why I am mentioning this aspect at this stage is when I refer
to the pleadings and the other documents which have come on record after
filing of the suit would show how the plaintiff had been labouring hard to
project a case as if no one else on earth could have conceived of a particular
mechanisim, as it were, to go on with a project that is done by the first
defendant. He would not in the letter disguise his rancour and would say that
the four persons are attempting to steal and that just cannot work.
(6) By letter dated 23.11.1994 the Counsel for the first defendant Deacons
wrote to the plaintiff to return the sum of Us $ 300,000 paid under the
service agreement as the plaintiff did not sign the side letter which was
agreed to be signed by the plaintiff. Subsequently, it seems proceedings were
initiated against the plaintiff in a Court of law in Hongkong. On 18.1.95
there was a news item in Times of India, New Delhi that Mr. Subhash Chandra
will sign $700m deal with either Hughes Aircraft Corporation of Martin
Marietta for setting up a geostationary based, mobile communications system.
It is also stated in the news item that new system which will be ready by 1998
will provide competition to two other satellite systems being put up: Inmarsat
put up by the International Telecommunications Union and Globe star by a
combined Motorola. On 23.1.95 there was a news item in the Asian Wall Street
Journal stating that Hughes Aircraft Company has been given a contract by
India-based Afro Asian Satellite Communications Ltd. to set up mobile
telephone service to hand-held receivers in parts of the Asia as well as
Africa.
(7) On 4.2.95, according to the plaintiff, he wrote to the first defendant
stating "I note that inspite of several reminders you have failed and refused
to settle my outstanding invoices. I also note the rather amateurish attempt
by you to hijack my project and to take credit for my work, my designs and my
15 years of effort. I have already put you on notice in October that I will
not tolerate this abuse. It has recently come to my notice that you have
signed or are about to sign an Mou with 766 Hughes as part of an Smpc System
for India. You arc clearly not entitled to do so. I hereby put you on notice
that any attempt to do so will be taken very seriously indeed. For the sake of
the record I hereby revoke any express or implied license to use any of my
confidential and or proprietary information in relation to the Smpc System and
any attempt to implement such will be met with vigorous legal proceedings". It
is not stated to which address the letter was sent and I am only referring to
the contents of the letter to show that the mind of the plaintiff even in
October 1994 itself and the plaintiff was aware of the contract between the
first defendant and Hughes. He has assumed in the letter that he had the
proprietary information in relation to the same P.C. System and that he was
revoking any express or implied license. This shows that the plaintiff was not
sure of his ground.
(8) On 24.3.95 the plaint was presented praying for the following reliefs :-
"(a) declare that the plaintiff is entitled to a declaration that the
information, technology, equipment and structural analysis more particularly
outlined in the plaintiff's annexed Affidavit Annexure 'A' is proprietary
information, know how and knowledge of a confidential nature, the proprietary
rights of which vest in the plaintiff and that the defendants are not entitled
to disclose, use and /or implement and /or exploit the same without prior
permission; and (b) restrain the defendants, their servants and agents by an
order of permanent injunction from in any manner directly and/or indirectly
through themselves and/or through their business associates and/or other group
of Companies in any manner disclosing, utilizing, exploiting and/or
implementing the Smpc system, having the characteristics identified in the
annexed Affidavit (Annexure 'A'), and based on the plaintiff's valuable and
unique confidential information; and (e) to award mesne, compensatory and
penal damages to the plaintiff for the sum to be computed by the plaintiff
along with interest thereon at the rate of 18% per annum from the date of
filing of this suit; and (d) award the costs of the instant proceedings to the
plaintiff; and (e) grant such other and further reliefs as the nature and
circumstances of the cases may require."
(9) The whole emphasis is laid by the plaintiff according to law on two
important matters. One is that the plaintiff has been a very experienced
person in the field and that he had invented a system which was not known to
the humanity before and that invention by him is used by the first defendant
with the help of Hughes. He would set out in detail his career right from the
beginning and the projects in which he had worked and how he came to invent
this system. In paragraph 6 at page 18 of the plaint he would give how he came
to have the system discovered which reads as under :- "Combined with his past
experience and know how including inter alia on Asia Sat and Star Tv, and
Cedar wood and the years of living in Asia and Africa, the plaintiff was
uniquely placed to review and evaluate Satellite based Tele-communications
Systems. In this process, the plaintiff found that there were three basic
approaches to 767 the problem of global satellite to transceiver communication
each of which had its advantages and disadvantages: (a) By utilisation of the
Low-Earth-Orbiting Satellite System (LEO) (b) By utilisation of Medium-Earth-
Orbiting Satellite Systems (MEO). (e) By utilisation of Geo-Stationary-Earth-
Orbiting Systems (GEO). The plaintiff concluded that Geostationary Satellite
based Telecommunications Systems were in many ways the most cost effective but
had been ruled out due to certain technical problems related inter alia to
service area and spectrum allocation, satellite distance and Time Delay (Echo)
and Satellite Distance and the size of then current and planned transceivers
on Earth (for Geo Systems) and the historical evolution of this approach. The
plaintiff then used his experience and know how and did some original
thinking, and, also identified various available technologies and recombined
and reconfigured them in a new design which would deal with the said problems
above in a satisfactory manner. The plaintiff's perception of market potential
and opportunity was also then at variance with others. The plaintiff thus
generated the following unique solutions: (i) The plaintiff gave his system an
unique name Satellite Mobile Personal Communications ("SMPC") System; (ii) and
identified 3 unique satellite "FOOTPRINTS" System; (iii) combined achieve
coverage of nearly 70% of the earth's population at; (iv) less than 20% of the
projected cost of the Iridium Project and as much as (v) two years before any
competitor; (vi) Time delays of 300 msec are in fact acceptable for this
service; (vii) The elimination of Double-hop delays of more than 600 msec are
accomplishable by utilisation of On Board Switching systems for "In system"
handset to handset calls; (viii) The utilization of higher power L-Band
traveling Wave Tubes or the division of the Footprint into smaller spot beams
would increase the radiated power on the ground; (ix) Increase in the size of
the deployable parabolic antenna to greater than 5 meters; and (x) Combing the
higher powered satellite with higher power L-Band traveling Wave Tubes; or
(xi) the utilization of an amalgamation of smaller spot beams in conjunction
with a greater than 5 meter deployable parabolic antenna; (xii) would enable
the system to operate with small cellular type handsets; (xiii) Created an
unique parallel construction program in order to maximize the opportunity of
the earliest possible service commencement date; and 768 (xiv) minimize the
historical risk of launch failure as a delay of service start; (xv) The
Interconnection between the 3 Systems enables this to be extended to nearly
70% of the earth's population at a cost which contains no premium for distance
of topography between to Smpc users on the system; (xvi) The plaintiff also
configured a small light weight consumer transcribing device which is
essentially a; (xvii) Gsm cellular device with a; (xviii) L-Band "front end"
and which is flexible; (xix) multi-functional; and (xx) can be either "mobile"
or "fixed" (xxi) yet accomplishes the connectivity for voice, data or fax and
is not presently provided in this form by any one."
(10) He would state that he had dealt with this aspect in greater detail in
his affidavit dated 24.3.95, marked as Annexure A.2 to the plaint. It is
broadly stated that the plaintiff came into contact with the first defendant
and the first defendant came to know about the system and using the system the
first defendant is now entering into contract with Hughes. On a reading of the
plaint, my impression is that the plaintiff is not prepared to disclose all
the facts. He would not give particulars about how the first defendant came to
know the system except stating that plain tiff was forced to disclose to the
first defendant. It is not specifically stated in the plaint that the
plaintiff had the documents relating to the system and those documents were
given to the first defendant. The plaintiff has indulged in prolixity in
setting out the facts with a view to making the reader not to see the real
facts. The plaintiff does not refer to the effect of the shareholders
agreement, the service agreement and the side letter to be executed by the
parties. The averments in the plaint and the contents of the shareholders'
agreement and the service agreement do not correlate to each other and the
plaintiff is attempting to weave out a story totally different from those
agreements. About the payment of 300,000 Us $, the plaintiff would state at
page 35 of the plaint as under :- "The plaintiff said that he would require
defendant No. I to make a good faith payment to him of US$ 300,000 to
underwrite the cost of his leaving Hong Kong and attempting to put a deal
together between the African Smpc System and the Technical Consultancy.
Defendant No. 1 agreed to make this payment as he understood the value of the
plaintiff's confidential information." He would further state at page 36 as
under :- "Subsequent to the above meetings an undated letter was signed by the
plaintiff and defendant No. 1 in or around November 1993 recording the
Agreement of Defendant No. 1 to pay the sum of US$ 300,000 in anticipation of
formal documentation being entered. The Plaintiff was to repay the sum only in
certain circumstances. The Plaintiff believes that Defendants No. 1 based k7
were setting a systematic trap to unearth and extract information 769 relating
to the Plaintiffs Smpc Systems from the Plaintiff in a covert and disguised
fashion." The fact that on 9.12.93 the plaintiff received US$ 300,000 is
admitted in paragraph 18 of the plaint but the plaintiff, for reasons best
known to him, would not refer to even the terms of the service agreement. In
paragraph 19 at page 37 of the plaint how the plaintiff puts his case makes an
interesting reading and it is as follows:- "The Plaintiff believes that
Defendants Nos. 1,6 and 7 were setting a systematic trap to unearth and
extract information relating to the Smpc systems from the Plaintiff in a
covert and disguised fashion." This clearly shows that the plaintiff did not
either of his own accord or, by mutual agreement himself and the first
defendant, hand over any materials relating to Smpc system to the first
defendant. The other facts related by the plaintiff in the plaint are not of
any consequence when I am dealing with an interlocutory application because
they require further evidence to deserve any consideration. The further case
of the plaintiff is that defendants Nos. 1,6 and 7 have committed a breach of
agreement. The plaintiff would not state what is the agreement. It is stated
to page 53 of the plaint ignoring what he has stated in his letter dated
4.2.95 wherein he has stated that in October 1994 itself he has warned the
first defendant. The plaintiff would state as under :- "It is clear that at
Delhi unauthorised disclosures have been made. It was the Press Report from
the Delhi (Exhibit 'B', also distributed inter alia in Delhi) with first drew
the Plaintiff's attention to the misappropriation and unauthorised and un
credited disclosure and to commercial exploitation in stages of the
Plaintiff's said system and valuable confidential information." This itself
shows that the plaintiff is not prepared to tell us the facts.
(11) The fulcrum of the plaintiff's case is his own affidavit filed as
Annexure A. He would state that his meeting with Mr. Subhash Chandra, first
defendant and the 7th defendant Mr. Stephen Moss were held in strict privacy
due to confidentiality of his information. He would state that the business
relationship did not proceed along the lines originally agreed to between the
first defendant and himself. Here, I have to note that the plaintiff would not
state what was originally agreed to between the parties. According to him, his
experience in the field enabled him to evolve a system in which he had a
proprietary right. He posed himself four problems. (1) Service Area and
Spectrum Allocation; (2) Satellite Distance and Time Delay; (3) Satellite
Distance and Power; (4) The Process of Solution. According to the plaintiff.
Geostationary Satellite would mean the Satellite sent into the orbit to a
distance of about 36,000 Kms from earth and the Satellite would have the same
velocity or the speed of the earth rotating itself. In other words, the
Satellite sent into the orbit would be traveling in the same speed as the
earth and the effect of it would be that Satellite could be spotted in the
same place and that is called Geostationary. The system evolved would make the
communication very quick and from Satellite it will straight away reach the
hand set without any intermediary stations. In the affidavit the plaintiff
would offer solutions and he would state at page 72 of Part I of the file as
under :- "In response to this aspect I evolved a unique program of parallel
satellite 770 construction whereby two satellites would be constructed at the
same time and three different Footprint configurations constructed so as to
enable the first or second spacecraft to be employed over either of two
markets. (13) Created a unique parallel construction program in order to
maximize the opportunity of the earliest possible service commencement date
and (14) minimize the historical risk of launch failure as a delay of service
start, by construction of 3 antenna "feed horn" configurations. I evolved my
own concept of Consumer utilization and product functionality for the system
based upon my experience as described in above. The core proposition of the
Smpc System rests upon a unique matrix evolved by me of product functionality,
consumer need and systems cost as follows: (a) Connectivity-The system
provides for connectivity across a large continental land mass. The
interconnection between the 3 System enables this to be extended to nearly 70%
of the earth's population at a (15) cost which contains no premium for
distance or topography between to Smpc users on the system. (b) I also
configured a small light weight consumer transcribing device which is
essentially a (17) Gsm cellular device with a (18) L-Band "front end" and
which is flexible. (19) multi-functional and (20) can be either "mobile" or
"fixed" (21) yet accomplishes the connectivity for voice data or fax and is
not presently provided in this form by anyone. (16) Thus, I sum up my unique
solutions as set out below : (i) I gave my system an unique name Satellite
Mobile Personal Communications System ("SMPC"); (ii) 3 unique satellite
"FOOTPRINT'S" which when; (iii) combined achieve coverage of nearly 70% of the
earth's population at; (iv) less than 20% of the projected cost of the Iridium
Project and as much as; (v) two years before any competitor; (vi) Time delays
of 300 msec are in fact acceptable for this service; (vii) The elimination of
Double-hop delays of more than 600 msec are accomplishable by utilization of
On Board Switching systems for "In system" handset to handset calls; (viii)
The utilization of higher power L-Band traveling Wave Tubes or the division of
the Footprint into smaller spot beams would increase the radiated power on the
ground; (ix) Increase in the size of the deployable parabolic antenna to
greater than 5 meters; and (x) Combing the higher powered satellite with
higher power L-Band traveling Wave Tubes; or (xi) the utilization of an
amalgamation of smaller spot beams in conjunction with a greater than 5 meter
deployable parabolic antenna; 771 (xii) would enable the system to operate
with small cellular type handsets; (xiii) Created an unique parallel
construction program in order to maximize the opportunity of the earliest
possible service commencement date; and (xiv) minimize the historical risk of
launch failure as a delay of service start; (xv) The interconnection between
the 3 Systems enables this to be extended to nearly 70% of the earth's
population at a cost which contains no premium for distance of topography
between to Smpc users on the system; (xvi) I also Configured, as a component
of the total system, a small light weight consumer transcribing device which
is essentially a; (xvii) Gsm cellular device with a; (xviii) L-Band "front
end" and which is flexible; (xix) multi-functional and (xx) can be either
"mobile" or "fixed" (xxi) yet accomplishes the connectivity for voice, data or
fax and is not presently provided in this form by any one."
(12) On 26.3.95 the plaintiff gets a letter from Mr. Prentiss Q.Yancey, which
has already been extracted by me, stating that a Smpc system is to the best of
his knowledge a proprietary work product created by Mr. Michael Johnson
(plaintiff). The assertion by Mr. Yancey cannot prove the case of the
plaintiff. After the replies filed by defendants Nos. 1 and 2 and after the
affidavit of Mr. Paramjit Singh Bains was filed on behalf of the first
defendant and the written statement was filed and the plaintiff had filed two
big volumes of documents on 27.7.95 an affidavit from Mr. Roger Clark, stated
to be by an expert, was filed in this Court. As I have noticed above, Mr.
Roger dark is one of those parties to the shareholders agreement and the
service agreement along with the plaintiff, first defendant and the 7th
defendant. In this affidavit he would not say anything as an expert on the
Smpc system and it is very curious that he has been asked to deny the case of
the first defendant and to assert that the case of the plaintiff to be true.
It is dear that he has been asked to file the affidavit to support the
plaintiff. In paragraph 7, Mr. Roger dark states "Defendant No. 1 alleges that
the present suit is a "counterblast" to Hong Kong proceedings issued by
defendants Nos. 1 and 3. I agree with the response by the Plaintiff to such
allegation. In particular I agree with the Plaintiff as to the reasons why US$
300,000 each was paid to myself, the Plaintiff and Moss. In my view there is
no basis for a claim against the Plaintiff for repayment of the US$ 300,000 as
all conditions relating to the same were satisfied. I further concur and agree
with the explanation given by the Plaintiff with regard to all the stated
facts relied on by the Plaintiff with regard to such". He would go to the
extent of saying that there has been a complete distortion of facts by the
first defendant and he would concur and agree with the version of events and
those facts set out by the plaintiff. He would state "I agree with the
plaintiff's claim in this suit, that he has, in fact, invented an unique
system which is known as the Smpc system". Mr. Roger dark has not said, it is
noteworthy, that the plaintiff gave any documents to the first defendant
disclosing the system to the first defendant. A crucial fact is missing. To
such an affidavit, the learned Counsel for the plaintiff would attach so much
importance 772 and would urge that Mr. Roger Clark, who had played a vital
role along with the plaintiff, has come forward with truth and his affidavit
must be accepted in to to and the case of the plaintiff, prima facie, stands
proved by the affidavit of Mr. Roger Clark. No doubt, Mr. Roger Clark has
given full particulars about his qualifications as an Engineer and his
experience but that is not relevant here.
(13) Three volumes of documents have been filed by the plaintiff. First volume
consists of letters and fax messages running to 397 pages. Volume 2 in the
file, the continuation of pages from 398 to 792 and volume 3 contains the
pages from 793 to 1320. In Volume I, in the index items I to 13,15,78-103 they
are all after suit. Other items in Volume I are relating to the correspondence
and they do not throw any light on the point at issue. In Volume 2 pages are
from 398 to 794. Here various diagrams and notes made by plaintiff from 3.3.93
up to 11.11.93. On this the argument by Mr. Kapil Sibal, learned Senior
Counsel, is that the plaintiff using his computer had brought about these
documents just to show that he had been working on it. Some of the documents
show that the plaintiff had recorded those diagrams or notes even during late
nights and early mornings. In the last page 792 it is noted that on 11.11.93
created by Michael Johnson at 04.21. Unless the plaintiff is able to prove all
these things, the Court cannot act on these documents as they are, as they
have been filed long after the filing of the suit. One may ask whether these
documents would have been accepted if they had been filed along with the
plaint. The answer is even then the position is the same. These documents
repeat themselves. The explanation given by Mr. Ashok Desai, learned Senior
Counsel is that in various editions of Text Books there will be repetitions in
the subsequent editions and that would not mean that the author had not
bestowed any thoughts on those things. In my view, the analogy is not at all
apposite. Therefore, when I am considering the matter prima facie, these
documents cannot at all be taken into consideration.
(14) Volume 3 are pages from 793 to 1320. Here also the plaintiff has noted
down the notes and other diagrams and there is lot of repetition. Unless these
documents are proved in accordance with law I cannot act on them. After
perusing these three volumes, I feel I am not wholly unjustified in coming to
a prima fade view that the plaintiff has produced these arid materials without
any supporting evidence to substantiate the probative value of these
documents. I may also note the oatmeal 'Eurekas' may happen.
(15) Before I go to the written statement and other materials produced by the
defendants I and 2 I want to refer to the documents submitted by the first
defendant to the Foreign Investment Promotion Board. The point urged on behalf
of the plaintiff is that the affidavit Annexure A to the plaint and what is
contained in this document submitted by the first defendant to Foreign
Investment Board correspond and, therefore, it is clear that the first
defendant had copied the system invented by the plaintiff. This document was
submitted by the plaintiff on 17.8.95. In giving the summary of the proposed
venture, it is stated in the document as under:- "This venture will create a
world-class Indian company to operate and manage a state-of-the-art mobile
satellite telecommunications service called OBSIDIAN. This service has been
developed by Afro-Asian Satellite 773 communications Limited (ASCOM), a
company formed by an experienced group of satellite communication
professionals with the support of leading satellite technology companies
Martin Marietta and Hughes Communications from the United States. Ascom has
the support of international financing institutions and has the expertise and
capability to implement this high technology business ahead of competitive
systems such as Iridium and Teledesis." The plaintiff must have come into
possession of these documents even on the date of the filing of the suit. But
it was not filed along with the plaint because this document was submitted in
1994. It is not the case of the plaintiff anywhere that the plaintiff came
into possession of this document only in August 1995.1 do not go into the
question whether the same document was the one filed by the first defendant. I
assume for the purpose of this case for, prima facie, consideration of the
materials i.e. the one filed by the first defendant before the Govt. of India.
It is at all subject to proof at the time of trial of the case. The learned
Senior Counsel Mr. Ashok Desai compared What is contained in page 12 of this
document with the page 241 of the compilation filed by the plaintiff at the
time of the argument. According to the learned Senior Counsel the first
defendant had taken it from the plaintiff as contained in page 241 which was
conceived by the plaintiff on 4.12.93 and what is found in page 12 of the
document produced to the Government of India is the same as in page 241 of the
compilation. On a perusal of these two documents, I am unable to agree with
the submission of the learned senior Counsel. No material has been produced by
the plaintiff to show that what is contained in page 241 of the compilation is
what was thought by the plaintiff and was drawn by the plaintiff. In the
absence of any clinching material, I cannot come to a conclusion that I can
act on what is contained in p.241. What is not proved cannot form the basis of
the plaintiff's claim?
(16) At page 55 of the document in Appendices the Hughes communication
proposals is given. Therefore, what I find from this document is the first
defendant has relied on the work of Hughes, United States. At page 62
reference is made to Obsidian Mobile Satellite Proposal. What is stated by the
learned Senior Counsel for the plaintiff is that Obsidian is the name invented
by the plaintiff and that has been now, without his permission, taken away by
the first defendant. There is absolutely no material to prove this contention.
(17) A comparative study of Annexure A, the affidavit of the plaintiff filed
along with the plaint and these documents submitted by the first defendant to
the Foreign Investment Promotion Board does not show that first defendant has
done any copying of the system, alleged to have been invented by the
plaintiff. Why I am saying this before referring to what has been stated by
the defendants 1 and 2 is when I notice the written statement and affidavit of
Mr. Paramjit Singh Bains and Mr. Greenwood and other materials produced by the
first defendant, the case of the first defendant could be well appreciated.
(18) The first defendant filed the written statement traversing the
allegations in the plaint. The first defendant has also taken the point of
jurisdiction. I expressed my view to the learned Senior Counsel that the point
of jurisdiction cannot be gone into on mere affidavits and, therefore, I did
not propose to go into that question. The learned Senior Counsel, therefore,
did not address any arguments on the 774 question of jurisdiction. That will
be dealt with at the time of the trial of the case.
(19) In paragraph 4 of the written statement first defendant clearly stated
that the claim of the plaintiff is not at all acceptable in law and it is not
true. Paragraph 4 reads as follows :- "With reference to paragraph 4 of the
plaint, it is denied that based on the alleged experience of the plaintiff,,
he developed the alleged unique and proprietary design for a new satellite
system for providing voice, data and fax communication via a small handset and
utilising a geo stationery satellite as alleged which is allegedly named as
Satellite Mobile Personal Communication System (SMPC) as alleged or at all.
The documents produced by the plaintiff themselves clearly prove that the
joint Venture proposal he allegedly submitted through Africom similar to the
one claimed in the plaint as his alleged exclusive concept and invention is
based on two space craft options; Hughes Model Hs 601 spacecraft as being used
by American Mobile Satellite Corporation "AMSC" or Martin Marietta Model Mm
7000 as used by Inmarsat. Defendant No. I states that the alleged joint
venture proposal allegedly submitted by the plaintiff through Africom is a
self defeating document of the plaintiff's alleged claim of Unique and
Proprietary design for a new satellite system namely SMPC. The system set out
in the alleged Joint Venture proposal, inter alia, states that the system is
based on existing Inmarsat service or planned Iridium service. Defendant No. I
submits that the claim of the plaintiff that he has invented the alleged
telecommunication system named Smpc is devoid of any merits. In fact the press
release issued by Inmarsat dated 28.7.1993 clearly shows that Inmarsat had
decided to choose between Geo or Leo Systems for provision of its proposed
global hand held satellite telephone service. Defendant No. I further states
that a paper presented at the International Mobile Satellite Conference in
Pasandena, California in June 1993 and published by Ios press-space
communications 11 (1993) with the permission of the sponsors clearly show that
what is claimed by the plaintiff as his alleged unique and invented system was
in the public domain. Defendant No. I states that Smpc is generic and not
specific. Defendant No. 1 states that the concept of geo stationery mobile
communication was in the public domain and there is nothing unique or invented
by the plaintiff. In fact prior to May, 1993, the Us based space and
Communication Company Martin Marietta Astro Space was independently designing
geostationary earth orbiting L-Band Satellite to Handset mobile communication
systems and had undertaken extensive development in all aspects of technology
as had been admitted by the plaintiff in his alleged proposal of Joint
Venture. Defendant No. 1 submits that what is claimed by the plaintiff in the
plaint appears to be only an idea conceived by the plaintiff to set up a
project for setting up a telecommunication system by using geostationary
satellites which are already in use. The plaintiff has not demonstrated any
new concept or idea capable of being protected under the Copyright Act.
Significantly, the plaintiff has deliberately omitted to produce all the
documents referred to in the plaint." In paragraph 6 the first defendant has
stated as under :- 775 "The plaintiff's alleged work allegedly illustrated in
documents 1 and 2 appears to be a copy with minor variations from the
presentation made by Hughes to the plaintiff in 1993 while the plaintiff was
in the employment of Richard Li." In paragraph 6 (a) the first defendant
stated thus :- "One of the major pioneers from 1988-93 of satellite to-handset
Geo technology was the European Space and defense Contractor Matra Marconi;
the Matra Marconi Hand Book has a major study programme dealing with
Geostationary mobile satellite technology and development of L-Band systems
for direct satellite to hand-set use. All of these studies were during the
period prior to that claimed by the plaintiff for development of his alleged
technology." In paragraph 8(c) the defendant had asserted "Indeed the so
called unique solutions claimed in the plaint by the plaintiff were already
well known to Hughes as a result of its development of the Amsc Project and
associated research development and investment in Amt, all the technology for
which was and is the proprietary information of Hughes. The plaintiff became
familiar with the research and development carried out by Hughes in this field
in early 1993 when Hughes provided such a solution to the employees of the Li
Shing group of companies including the plaintiff, who was an employee at the
relevant time." In paragraph 8(d) the first defendant has specifically pointed
out "significantly the plaintiff has not filed any document or design or
technical drawing in support of his outrageous claim." At page 24 the first
defendant referred to handsets in the following terms:- "The handsets claimed
by the plaintiff on an original invention were in fact proposed by Marconi and
Martin Marietta in their Transition System proposal to Immersed in January
1993. The defendant in any case has no idea or knowledge of any such device
allegedly developed by the plaintiff, the development of which in any event is
denied, and will rely on the handsets developed by the specialist suppliers,
such as The Technology Partnership Ltd., P A Consultants, Loral, Ibm and
Hughes Network Systems. The characteristics claimed by the plaintiff as unique
are simply generic features applicable to all handsets and arc not proprietary
items of technology." About the payments made under the service agreement, the
first defendant had referred to what exactly happened in the following terms
:- "It is stated that in December, 1993, after meetings were held and
discussions took place, defendant No. 7, plaintiff and the said Clark with a
view to further defining the business relationship and arranging for finance
by defendant No. I, agreed that defendant No. 7, the plaintiff and the said
Clark would enter into a Service Agreement with the Company of defendant No.
1. It was further agreed that the signing fee of US$ 300,000 each would be
paid to the plaintiff, defendant No. 7 and the said Clark. It was further
agreed that in the event formal documentation consisting of the service
agreement and letter of undertaking was not completed and signed by any of
them by 15.1.1994, they would refund the said signing fee. It was further
agreed that defendant No. 776 I shall have 40% of the shareholding of the
joint venture and defendant No. 7, the plaintiff and the said Clark would
collectively hold 60%. The Joint Venture would pay annual service fees of US$
5,00,000 per year to each of them. The Joint Venture would be funded to the
extent of US$ 5 Million by defendant No. 1. It was agreed that the said Esher
would attempt to bring additional funds into the Joint Venture enabling the
Joint Venture to repay the initially funded amount of US$ 5 Million by
defendant No. 1 so that the Joint Venture would become self-financing. It was
further agreed that if this could not be achieved within 2 months i.e. by 28th
February 1994 ownership interest would change and defendant No. 1 would be
entitled to 60% of the Joint Venture and others would hold 40%. It was further
agreed that the Joint Venture would also establish an operating Company which
would develop the mobile satellite communications business in Asia. It was
anticipated that if this new Joint Venture could be successfully promoted, all
the parties would be able to secure direct equity interest in the new mobile
satellite communications business." The first defendant also pointed out the
default committed by the plaintiff (20) The fact that plaintiff, Mr. Roger
Clark and the 7th defendant each of them was paid US$ 300,000 is referred to
by the first defendant.
(21) The first defendant has also stated in para 20 of the written statement
how the plaintiff had acted contrary to the shareholders agreement and the
service agreement, which reads as under :- 777 "The defendant No. 1 states
that on around January 1994 a meeting took place when it was agreed that
defendant No. I through his company Rubies Overseas Limited (hereinafter
referred to as "Rubies") would enter into an Agreement with Esher Holdings
Inc. (hereinafter referred to as "Esher") a company floated by defendant No.
7, the plaintiff and the said dark regarding share holding of the Joint
Venture to be set up in the name of Roadgold Enterprises (hereinafter referred
to as "Roadgold"). It was further agreed that Defendant No. 7, the plaintiff
and the said dark would enter into a service agreement with the said Joint
Venture through their respective companies. An Agreement between Rubies and
Esher for controlling the shareholdings of the Joint Venture Roadgold and
three agreements with the Joint Venture (Roadgold) and each of the companies
of Defendant No. 7, the plaintiff and the said dark were executed on 1.1.1994.
All these arrangements were prepared jointly by the Solicitors of defendant
No. 1 and the said Mr. Gordon Oldham, Solicitor for Defendant No. 7, the
plaintiff and the said dark. Mr. Oldham signed on behalf of Esher and the said
three companies of Defendant No. 7, plaintiff and the said dark. On completion
of the formal documentation agreed to, defendant No. 7 and the said dark also
executed a letter of undertaking which became an integral part of the
agreement dated 1.1.1994 confirming that they own their respective companies
and they would provide exclusive and full time service through the said
companies as provided in the service agreement. The plaintiff had also agreed
to sign such undertaking but avoided signing as he had left Hongkong for an
undisclosed destination. He spoke to defendant No. 1 on the phone and
confirmed that he would sign the undertaking when they next met. The plaintiff
in fact did not sign the said undertaking then or later."
The first defendant has also stated in paragraph 25 that "Sometime in the
first week of February (1994) the plaintiff met defendant Nos. 1 and 7 in
London and apologised for his behavior for the period prior thereto and
requested that he may participate in the project. The defendant subsequently
realised that this was a device on the part of the plaintiff to remove vital
documents from the office of the defendant No. 5 relating to the mobile
satellite communication project." This is a complaint by the first defendant
against the plaintiff.
(22) The first defendant has categorically denied the assertion by the
plaintiff that any private meeting on the evening of February 1994 in London
in the residential property, belonging to the first defendant, that the
plaintiff had been induced to part with his developmental ideas and
information on the project and he was also induced to part with his
intellectual property rights, on his ideas on the structuring, implementation
and the execution of the Smpc system. The first defendant has also denied the
meeting at Heathrow Airport, London in which the defendant made it clear that
he was going to attempt the implementation of the plaintiff's Smpc system for
India. These are all matters I may note at this stage itself can be decided
only on oral evidence. In paragraph 30 of the written statement, the first
defendant has also referred to the demand for US$ 3,650,000 towards payment of
license fee by the plaintiff. According to the first defendant, the demand was
made in a fax received by him on 18th October, 1994 while the letter is dated
31.3.94. The first defendant has also stated that "It is also no secret that
the satellite 778 manufacturers such as Hughes, Aerospace and Martin Marietta
are willing to provide necessary technology and know-how on a turn key basis."
I need not refer to the other averments in the written statement while I am
dealing with the application for injunction as I feel they are not necessary
at this moment. The averments in the reply to the application for injunction
are more or less on the same terms in the written statement and it will be
wholly burdening this judgment if I extract those averments also. The first
defendant has secured an affidavit from Mr. Paramjit Singh Bains, stated to be
an expert in the field. As stated above, the affidavit was filed in this Court
on 6.7.95. Mr. Bains is stated to be a resident of 8326 Regis Way, Los
Angeles, California 90045, Usa and he is the General Manager for all
Commercial Programs at Hughes Space and Communications Company, a business
unit of Hughes Aircraft Company, located at California. U.S.A. According to
him, he has a Bachelor of Science degree in Electrical Engineering from the
University of California at Berkeley in December 1970, he received a Master of
Science degree in Electrical Engineering from the University of California at
Los Angeles in May 1973. He joined Hughes in August 1973. He is now aged 48
years. He has been working with Hughes for nearly 22 years. Prima facie, I
feel that he is a competent person to speak about the system, now claimed by
the plaintiff. About the footprint in page 8 of his affidavit, what he says is
relevant and it is as under:- "The plaintiff claims that he has identified 3
unique satellite 'footprints'. In this regard I state that all satellites have
'footprints' and the identification of an appropriate 'footprint' is central
to any business plan. A 'footprint' is nothing but the area of Earth covered
by any satellite. Learned Judge is no doubt aware that in India, Star Tv is
relayed by Asiasati, Cnn from Apstar I, and Doordarshan Channel 2 from Inset
2B. All these satellites have overlapping footprints. This is the equivalent
of stating that the plaintiff has decided to locate his shop in Connaught
Place, New Delhi as opposed to say South Extension, New Delhi because he
believes that the Connaught Place location better suits the needs of his
client. While this may be the basis of a business plan or a financial model,
there can be no Intellectual Property Rights in the location of a shop or in
the identification of a 'footprint'. Many satellites may use the same or very
similar 'footprints'. He would explain the system in the following terms :-
"In any event, I state that satellite coverage has been studied in great depth
well before the first communication satellite was sent up in orbit in 1963.
There is a huge wealth of published material which describe the available
possibilities and the technological parameters in this regard. By way only of
illustration, the following materials consider the precise claim of the
plaintiff: (a) HK. Aghvami etal - "Land Mobile Satellites Using the Highly
Elliptic Orbits - The Uk T-SAT Mobile Payload," 4th International Conference
on Satellite Systems for Mobile Communications and Naviation. 17-19 October
1988 - which states that 3 satellites in the geostationary orbit provide
virtually global coverage with latitudes + or-75 degree latitudes. (b) J.
Draim, "Three and Four Satellite continuous Coverage Constellations," J.
Guidance, vol. 8, No. 6, November - December 1985 - which 779 states that
continues coverage can be provided to most of the world's populated land
masses with 3 satellites. (e) J. Draim, "Satellite Continuous Coverage
Constellations." U.S. Patent No. 4,809,935 (issued March 7, 1989) - which
shows that 3 satellites could cover most of the earth's land masses and 4
satellites would provide continuous global coverage. (d) J. Benedictoet et
al.. "MAGSS-14: A Medium-Altitude Global Mobile Satellite System for Personal
Communications at L-band". Esa Journal. Vol. 16,117-133,1992- which describes
a variety of solutions and satellite positions which are capable of providing
continuous global coverage. (e) M. Horstein, "Cellular Telephone Satellite
System," Epa, published October 28, 1992 - which discloses many available
option for positioning satellites which would be capable of providing
continuous global coverage." He would state Iridium is a system utilizing
satellites in Low Earth Orbit (LEO). He also explains the cost aspect and that
is no invention of anything. The claim of the plaintiff that time delays of
300 msec are in fact acceptable for the service, (mille seconds). About this
aspect, he says that is discussed in publication by M. Horstein, "Cellular
Telephone Satellite System". Epa, published in October 28, 1992. About the
claim of the plaintiff that On-Board Switching would reduce the problem of
double hop delays, he would explain the position thus :- "I state that this is
obvious as what is contemplated is that switching is not done on the ground.
In layman's terms, this may be explained as follows. All telephonic
communications must route through a telephone exchange which does the physical
work of connecting two people. The signal therefore travels from sender to
satellite to exchange ('hop I') to satellite to receiver ('hop II') in one bit
of conversation. It then goes in the other direction by the same process when
the call receiver speaks. This is a double hop each way. It follows that one
hop each way can be eliminated if the connectivity function normally provided
by a telephone exchange can be performed in the satellite itself. This
connectivity function an be provided in the satellite using digital
electronics. The problem is twofold. The amount of digital electronics in the
past have been much too large and heavy to be carried in satellites.
Considerable work has been done in miniaturizing digital electronics in recent
years. This is a field of high technology and the plaintiff does not claim
that he is an inventor of sub-miniaturized digital electronics." He asserts
that the idea of On-Board Switching is not a new one and in 1985 Nasa (USA)
the Organisation which put man on the moon designed a satellite called 'SATS'
which employed on board switching and this satellite was placed in orbit in
1993.
(23) The claim of the plaintiff about the utilising of higher power L-Band
traveling Wave Tubes are the division of the footprint into smaller spot beams
would increase the radiator power on the ground. Mr. Bains would state that
the plaintiff has no detailed knowledge of mobile communication. He would 780
characterise this as a mere idea but not a very good one. About use of
multiple spot, Mr. Bains would state that already the issue had been discussed
in the following works:- (a) J. Benedictoetet al.."MAGSS-14: A Medium-Altitude
Global Mobile Satellite System for Personal Communications at L-Band." Esa
Journal, Vol. 16, 117-133, 1992. (b) A. Mallinckrodt, "Integrated Cellular
Communications System," U.S. Patent 5,073,900 (issued December 17, 1991). (e)
M. Horstein, "Cellular Telephone Satellite System," Epa, published October
28,1992." About the antenna design, the deponent in the affidavit would state
this is again subject matter of discussion earlier in the following works:-
"D. Sward, "Mobile Satellite Service for Canada, "Proc. of the Mobile
Satellite Conference, May 3-5,1988. (b) C. Agnew et al., "The Amsc Mobile
Satellite System,". (e) M. Zuliani et al., "MSAT A New Dimension in Satellite
Communications," 37 Cong. of the International Astron. Fed. October 4-11,
1988. (d) J. Benedictoet et al., "MAGSS-14: A Medium-Altitude Global Mobile
Satellite System for Personal Communications at L-Band" Esa Journal, Vol.
16,117-133,1992." Mr. Bains also referred to the two works to demolish the
claim of the plaintiff, which are as under:- "(a) A. Mallinckrodt, "Integrated
Cellular Communications, "U.S. Patent 5,073,900 (issued December 17, 1991).
(b) M. Horstein, "Cellular Telephone Satellite System," Epa, Published October
28,1992." He asserts the whole industry has been taking about satellite to
handsets communication for the last 10 years. Considerable work has been done
in this field by many persons and following are the works in the field :- "(a)
R. Rusch et al., "Odyssey. A Constellation for Personal Communications," 14th
Aiaa International Comm. Satellite Systems Conference & Exhibit March 22-26,
Aiaa 1992. (b) M. Horstein, "Cellular Telephone Satellite System," Epa,
Published October 28,1992. (e) J. Benedictoet et al., "MAGSS-14: A Medium-
Altitude Global Mobile Satellite System for Personal Communications at L-band"
Esa Journal, Vol. 16,117-133,1992." About the parallel construction programs,
it is stated that the following satellite construction programs have adopted
parallel construction programs :- "(a) R. Rusch et al., "Odyssey. A
Constellation for Personal Communications," 14th Aiaa International Comm.
Satellite Systems Conference & Exhibit March 22-26, Aiaa 1992. 781 (b) M.
Horstein, "Cellular Telephone Satellite System," Epa, Published October
28,1992. (e) J. Benedictoet et al., "MAGSS-14: A Medium-Altitude Global Mobile
Satellite System for Personal Communications at L-band" Esa Journal, Vol.
16,117-133,1992." About the claim of the plaintiff relating technology in
voice, data or fax communication which is not at present provided in this form
by anyone. Mr. Bains would state that plaintiff himself has not provided any
such system and this is not the same as saying that industry is not moving in
that direction. According to him, the following programs are currently in
advance state of designing and construction for such systems:- "(a) Inmarsat
(b) Iridium (e) AMSC" In any event, according to Mr. Bains the following works
would show that everybody knows about it or otherwise it is in public domain
:- "(a) C. Agnw et al., "The Amsc Mobile Satellite System." (b) M. Horstein,
"Cellular Telephone Satellite System," Epa, Published October 28,1992. (e) R.
Rusch et al., "Odyssey. A Constellation for Personal Communications," 14th
Aiaa International Comm. Satellite Systems Conference & Exhibit March 22-26,
Aiaa 1992. (d) S. Shindo, "A Multi-Beam Mobile Satellite Communications System
in Japan." Satellite Integrated Comm. Networks, 1988. (e) S. Shindo et al.
"NTT's Program of Experimental Mobile Satellite System (EMSS) Using
Engineering Test Satellite-V (ETS-V)," Review of the Electrical Communications
Laboratories, vol. 36, No. 3, 1988." Mr. Bains has concluded in the following
terms:- "It is my considered opinion that a composite reading of the
attributes of the plaintiff's alleged Smpc system reveals a certain
familiarity with the broad features that any satellite based mobile
communication system would have but the material disclosed fails to address
itself to a variety of technological issues that require solution before such
a system can be put into operation. Each of the solutions is proprietary to
these players but the plaintiff has not disclosed any such solutions. It is my
considered opinion that the following organizations are in all probability in
a position to launch a satellite based communications system: (a) Lockheed
Martin (b) Hughes (e) Isro (d) Matra Marconi 782 (e) Loral Space Systems In
fact Hughes under contract with Amsc (signed December 1990) has successfully
launched a mobile communication systems satellite under the program name
American Mobile Satellite Communication which is success- fully operating.
Based on the data provided in the suit it is my considered opinion that the
plaintiff is not one among them. I state by way of ample precaution that the
foregoing opinion is based purely on the claim of the ownership of proprietary
'technology' and Intellectual Property by the plaintiff and I have neither
considered nor believe myself to be an expert on any other question arising in
the suit including any question of contractual liability." The first defendant
has also secured an affidavit from Mr. David Alan Green Wood resident of
United Kingdom. He says he has read the affidavit of Mr. Roger dark dated
17.7.95 filed in support of the plaintiff and he has also read the rejoinder
of the plaintiff. About his experience he would state in the following terms
:- " I was employed by Marconi Space Systems in Portsmouth, England (later
Matra Marconi Space Systems after their joint venture with Matra in 1990) from
June 1983 to December 1994 as a specialist in the design of telecommunications
satellites for mobile applications such as are the subject of this plaint. I
became Division Engineering Manager of the Communications Payload Division in
May 1989, and Chief Engineer (Payloads) as well as Division Manager of the
Payload Engineering Division in March 1993. In these several capacities as
lead engineer for communications satellite payload design I was responsible
for all of the engineering and all of the engineers working on communications
satellite payload system and hardware design in the Marconi Space Systems
company. This group of engineers under my direct responsibility numbered in
size from 70 to 250 engineers through this period. The engineers under my
direct responsibility carried out all of the design engineering of all of the
communications satellite payload projects at Matra Marconi Space Systems up to
my leaving the company in December 1994. These projects include communications
payload designs for Military applications in the X Band such as Skynet 4, Nato
4, and Skynet 5; communications payload designs for Fixed Service and
Television applications in the C and the Ku Bands such as Eutelsat 11;
Intelsat Fos, Koreasat and Europesat; as well as communications payload
designs for Mobile Service applications such as Aramis, Inmarsat 3 and
Inmarsat P21 in the mobile bands. Specifically of relevance in these
proceedings engineers under my direct leadership carried out Payload designs
for :- -The European Mobile Service payload between 1988 and 1991. -The Esa
Digital Beam former Proposal, and European/Africa continental coverage payload
between November 1992 and March 1993. -The Inmarsat Transition System payload
proposal between September 1992 and April 1993. 783 -The Inmarsat P21 Mobile
net generation Gso system and Meo system designs between February 1992 and
December 1993 (in two phases)." He states in paragraph 7H his association with
first defendant and how he contacted Martin Marietta and Hughes. Paragraph 7H
is as follows :- " I joined Asc from Matra Marconi in December 1994 as Chief
Engineer bringing my experience and understanding of Mobile satellite system
with me; specifically my experience in the design of the Inmarsat Gso
Transition System and also my experience in the designs of the Inmarsat Gso
P21 systems. It is this background and experience which I used in December
1994 to generate an Rfp (Request for Proposal) to be sent to Martin Marietta
and Hughes, and which Si have used during 1995 to help successfully bring
Hughes into contract for a Turnkey system procurement. Since joining Asc in
December 1994 (and prior to reading all of the historical documents at Asc
during recent weeks for the purposes of understanding the Plaint in these
proceedings) I have not come across any documents or correspondence existing
at Asc which indicate that the documents relied upon in the plaint were
submitted to Asc, or any documents before December 1994 which have bearing on
the technology and system design of this mobile satellite system. The work
that I have carried out since joining Asc has been based entirely on my own
background and experience." In paragraph 9-C, he would state about the Turnkey
System as under:- "The system design carried out by Hughes for Asc is a full
turnkey system design in which Hughes retain and own all the intellectual
property rights. The design uses 245 spot beams and so is well able to provide
communications to a small handheld mobile terminal. The plaintiff alleged Smpc
system which is merely a business plan, with only 15 spot beams as proposed by
the plaintiff (apart from being entirely inadequate) makes me believe that the
plaintiff has no understanding of the actual technology requirements for a
system to communicate to small handheld terminals." He deals with the
allegations in the rejoinder filed by the plaintiff and a reading of this
affidavit gives a general idea to a layman like me that the claim made by the
plaintiff is not that much an original system designed by the plaintiff.
Whether the plaintiff would be able to make all these points in trial is a
different matter but as things stand at present, nothing was said on behalf of
the plaintiff which could persuade me to reject the affidavit by Mr. Green
Wood though he is employed under the first defendant. His qualification and
experience in the field cannot be doubted. His assurance, prima fade, appear
to me to be full of force. I cannot reject the affidavit of Mr. Green Wood as
being blindly in support of the first defendant, as contended for by the
plaintiff. There is difference between the affidavit of Mr. Roger Clerk on the
one hand and the affidavit of Mr. Bains and Mr. Green Wood on the other hand.
I have attempted to make a brief analysis of what they have stated in their
respective affidavits.
(24) Now comes the affidavit of the 7th defendant Mr. Moss. He filed the
affidavit on 11.8.95. He says he has got experience in international
communications for more than 30 years. He is a BSC. Economics from the London
School of 784 Economics and an Mba from the Harvard Graduate School of
Business Administration. He was involved in senior level in communications
projects in Europe, North America and Asia including the start up of Star TV.
Between March 1991 and 1993 he was employed in various capacities by Mr.
Richard Li in his various companies. He says he worked along with the
plaintiff under the directions of Mr. Richard Li. The plaintiff was employed
in a non-technical line function for Star as an advisor and corporate
strategist and later as an advisor to Mr. Richard Li. The plaintiff's work was
in non-technical areas supporting corporate and competitive strategy.
Plaintiff was not routinely consulted on technical matters and when technology
issues came up in general discussion, his comments were considered as non
expert opinion. He states that Mr. Richard Li started a new company called
Pacific Century Group (PCG) based in Hong Kong till December 1993. Plaintiff
was employed on a full time basis as an employee and not as a Consultant by
Companies controlled by or affiliated with Richard Li. In paragraph 11 Mr.
Moss states that the plaintiff asked him to approach the first defendant to
see if first defendant might be interested in financing a mobile satellite
communications project for Asia and Africa. He contacted the first defendant
and no materials were supplied by the plaintiff to me or to the first
defendant. He states that in around the middle of 1993 a discussion took place
between the first defendant and Ex. Star Team comprising myself, Mr. Roger
dark and the plaintiff. The Star Team understood that the first defendant had
recently completed the sale of part of his Hong Kong television interests to
Mr. Rupert Murdoch and was interested in new projects. And no original
materials, documents or presentations of a confidential or proprietary nature
were ever provided by the plaintiff or any member of the Star Team to the
first defendant. First defendant on principle accepted the Team commitment if
the members of the Star Team would work with the first defendant for his
project. Again Mr. Moss reiterated on Saturday, 4th December 1993 plaintiff
and the 7th defendant met the first defendant at the Grand Hyatt Hotel in Hong
Kong to finalise the agreement. At the meeting Mr. John Richardson, a
solicitor and partner with the firm of Deacons of Hong Kong was also present.
First defendant agreed to back the project provided that clear legal
documentation was signed by all parties. It is again asserted by Mr. Moss, the
plaintiff did not provide any documentation, materials, project plans, or
business plans of any kind to the first defendant. Nor did the plaintiff make
any representations about the confidentiality or proprietary nature of any
information. As a matter of fact, business requirements and plans for
undertaking to work were not at all discussed. Mr. Moss also states Mr. Gordon
Oldham (Counsel of the plaintiff) was asked to sign the shareholders agreement
on behalf of the plaintiff and other members of the Star Team. He also states
that there was service agreement. One crucial aspect, about which the 7th
defendant has stated is as under :- "Therefore, in specific response to the
plaintiff's request, the defendant No. I agreed to make an up-front payment of
US$300,000 each to myself, the plaintiff and dark provided that each of us
would sign a letter acknowledging receipt of the funds and stating that if
formal documentation along the lines agreed was not entered into by 15th
January, 1994, the amounts would be returned." He also states that plaintiff
has no training in engineering or technology, had no 785 substantive technical
or engineering knowledge and had only a layman's understanding of technical
matters. He also speaks about the reason for misunderstanding. That when the
plaintiff was reluctant to work for the project and insisted that the
plaintiff should not take the money now given by the first defendant unless he
was prepared to openly and honestly coming to the project the plaintiff became
angry. He has also given an information that in early December 1993 prepared
to complete agreed documentation, the plaintiff received sum of US$ 300,000
from the first defendant. He left Hong Kong without completing the formal
documentation stating that Mr. Oldham would sign the documents on his behalf.
The documents, the shareholders agreement and the service agreement were
signed at Mandaran Hotel in Hong Kong with Richardson (Deacons) Oldham
(lawyers of plaintiff), 7th defendant and Mr. Roger Clark. Mr. Oldham was
authorised to sign the shareholders agreement and service agreement on behalf
of Wittering, Yancey, Outwood. However, the side letters that each member of
the service Companies was the principal officer of the respective Companies
were to be signed by the members. The plaintiff left Hong Kong without signing
such a side letter confirming that he was the principal officer of the service
Company. Mr. Oldham, the plaintiff's lawyer promised to get the letter signed
from the plaintiff. This was never done by the plaintiff. Mr. Moss would
further state that since the plaintiff did not sign the said letter he should
have returned the sum of US$ 300,000 to the first defendant.
(25) The plaintiff thereafter went to U.S. to contact Matin Marietta and At &
T who were interested in a mobile satellite system over Africa. Mr. Moss would
state that he was under impression that plaintiff was doing all this pursuant
to the shareholders agreement and the service agreement entered into by
himself, plaintiff, Mr. Roger dark and the first defendant. The plaintiff also
requested Mr. Roger dark and Another Consultant Mr. Gary Goodchild, who were
under contract with the first defendant and were being paid on a full time
basis by the first defendant to travel to Us to support plaintiff's initiative
to raise funds for first defendant's project. What Mr. Moss has stated in
paragraph 25 would clearly bring out the conduct of the plaintiff. Paragraph
25 reads as under :- " I then became aware that the plaintiff had been
communicating with At & T solely on behalf of Africom Telecommunications Ltd.
(Africom) and not on behalf of the joint venture. Moreover once dark and
Goodchild were in the Us, I became aware that the plaintiff was using their
presence to raise money directly and sole for Africom without the knowledge of
myself and defendant No. 1. The plaintiff represented to the Us spacecraft
manufacturers Martin Marietta and to At & T plaintiff that dark was part of
the Africom team and included dark's name in Africom proposals to At & T. The
plaintiff had dark attend meetings on behalf of Africom and with At & T. With
dark's support, the plaintiff obtained funds from At & T, none of which was
ever offered to the defendant No. I, notwithstanding the fact that it was the
defendant No. 1 who had at all times being paying for the professional
services of dark and Goodchild."
(26) Therefore, the complaint by the first defendant against the plaintiff
that he was trying to over reach the first defendant though on a first
impression I had my own doubts, the assertion by the 7th defendant confirms
that the plaintiff had not 786 been acting bona fide and, as a matter of fact,
was acting contrary to the shareholders agreement and the service agreement.
This is my, prima facie, view and whole thing would depend upon what emerges
after the examination of the parties at the trial of the suit.
(27) Mr. Moss would also state that the plaintiff attempted to persuade him
also to travel to Us to support his Africom project but he refused to go as
that would be contrary to the agreement entered into between the parties. He
would also state that he persuaded Mr. dark and Mr. Goodchild to remain with
the First defendant. This was achieved, and himself. Mr. dark and Mr.
Goodchild began to work for the project of the first defendant in London
towards the end of January 1994. He would also state that out of US$ 15
million to be potentially raised from At & T, the plaintiff proposed to
transfer only US$ 5 million to the joint venture and retain US$ 10 million for
himself in Africom. This was not the intention when the shareholders agreement
and the service agreement were signed. As a matter of fact, US$ 15 million was
not raised and only an amount less than US$ one million was offered.
(28) 7TH defendant would further state that in February and early March 1994 a
meeting took place at No. Ii Berkeley Court, London where the first defendant
had established a project office. During the discussions it became apparent to
the first defendant that the plaintiff was not willing to participate in the
joint venture project which he had committed himself and it became clear to
the plaintiff that the first defendant was not interested in Africom. At this
point plaintiff abruptly left the apartment taking with him proprietary
documents, that were lying at the Fax receiving station. These documents
included a report on Satellite Tv Project and a full copy of the international
regulatory filings for the first defendant's project, which were under
preparation by the consultant of the first defendant, Mr. John Christensen.
The 7th defendant had stated that the plaintiff had completely reneged from
the service agreement and he denies the case of the plaintiff. He asserts that
to his knowledge the plaintiff never supplied any information to the first
defendant.
(29) The other allegations in the affidavit are not necessary for the present
purpose.
(30) Mr. Roger dark, whose affidavit I had considered earlier, it may be
noticed does not give any details as given by the 7th defendant, though he had
also worked with the 7th defendant for the first defendant. A reading of the
two affidavits would show that Mr. Roger dark who had defected to the
plaintiff's side from the first defendant is not prepared to tell us the
truth, for reasons best known to himself. A reading of the affidavit of the
7th defendant makes me feel that 7th defendant has come forward with the facts
as they had happened and there is absolutely no motive on the part of the 7th
defendant to act against the plaintiff or there is no special reason except
that he is working with the first defendant, that he is completely supporting
the first defendant.
(31) Therefore, on the materials placed by the parties, which have been
referred to by me above, expressing my, prima fade, view then and there, I now
proceed to discuss the submissions made by the learned Senior Counsel for the
parties.
(32) Mr. Ashok Desai, learned Senior Counsel for the plaintiff submitted that
787 the plaintiff is not basing his claim on any copyright. The plaintiff
S.No. 755/95 possesses what is called an intellectual proprietary right in the
system invented by the plaintiff by a configuration on materials covered by
various source by virtue of intelligence, experience, peculiar skill and a
great labour. That intellectual proprietary right was given by him to the
first defendant. Using that, the first defendant is trying to make a lot of
money out of it. He referred to the springboard doctrine. Elaborating his
arguments what he submitted that plaintiff's case involves three 'Cs', (1)
confidentiality, (2) communication of information to the first defendant, (3)
copying of the same by the first defendant.
(33) He referred to the decision reported in Saltman Engineering Coy. Ld.,
Ferotec Ltd. and Monarch Engineering Coy. (Mitcham), LD. v. Campbell
Engineering Coy., Ld., 65 R.P.C. 203. In this case the matter was decided by
the Court after full trial. Briefly stated the facts are, the plaintiffs were
the owners of the copyrights in certain drawings of tools for the manufacture
of leather punches. Such drawings were delivered to the defendants by a
director of the Company. At the time the drawings were delivered there was an
implied condition that the defendants should treat the same as confidential.
The main part of the case was based on breach of confidence and the argument
was that such a right may be infringed without there being a contractual
relationship. The Court on evidence held that it was satisfied that in
manufacturing some sets of tools the confidential information was made use of.
What the Court had observed to highlight the principle that they were
considering is relevant and the same is as follows :- "I think that I shall
not be slating the principle wrongly if I say this with regard to the use of
confidential information. The information, to be confidential, must, I
apprehend, apart from contract, have the necessary quality of confidence about
it, namely, it must not be something which is public property and public
knowledge. On the other hand, it is perfectly possible to have a confidential
document, be it a formula, a plan, a sketch, or something of that kind, which
is the result of work done by the maker upon materials is the fact that the
maker of the document has used his brain and thus produced a result which can
only be produced by somebody who goes through the same process. What the
defendants did in this case was to dispense in certain material respects with
the necessity of going through the process which had been gone through in
compiling these drawings, and thereby to save themselves a great deal of
labour and calculation and careful draughtsmanship. No doubt, if they had
taken the finished article, namely, the leather punch, which they might have
bought in a shop, and given it to an expert draughtsman, that draughtsman
could have produced the necessary drawings for the manufacture of machine
tools required for making that particular finished article. In at any rate a
very material respect that saved themselves that trouble by obtaining the
necessary information either from the original drawings or from the tools made
in accordance with them. That, in my opinion, was a breach of confidence."
Ultimately, injunction was granted and that is a different matter.
(34) Next Mr. Desai, learned Senior Counsel referred to the decision in 788
Cranleigh Precision Engineering Ltd. v. Bryant and Another, 1966 R.P.C. 81.
The facts that are relevant to be noticed are these. An engineer of the
Company invented some system by which he developed a method of above ground
swimming pool. That system had two unique features namely, a plastic clamping
strip clamping the inside lining to the outside wall, and an overlapping inter
fit of vertical steel panels forming the frame of the pool. The very same
engineer formed a different Company and after having formed the Company he
started using the system owned by the Stol, erstwhile Company in which he was
employed. The plaintiff Company brought the action against the engineer who
was the Managing Director of the Company and his name was Stephen Bryant. The
Managing Director after coming away from his Company formed that Company by
name Cranleigh Production Engineering Ltd., similar to name of the plaintiff
which was Cranleigh Precision Engineering Ltd. The question arose whether that
Bryant was under an obligation or duty of a confidence to the plaintiff
Company. It was held by the Court that the knowledge about the two special
features of the tool was a trade secret of the plaintiff and was confidential,
and Bryant owed a duty to the Company. At page 85 the Court noted the
arguments of the Counsel for the defendant in the following terms:- "There are
two distinct and separate branches of the law of confidential information: (1)
Where there is a contractual obligation; (2) Where there is no contractual
obligation, and the plaintiff must ray in aid and equitable doctrine to
protect his interests. In most of the reported cases on, (1) the relationship
was one of master and servant, and these again fell into two classes: (a)
where there was an express term about confidentiality (in which case the
matter becomes one of construction); and (b) where there was none (in which
case the question becomes one of deciding what term the law annexes to the
contract of employment." At page 90 the learned Judge of the Queen's Bench
held as under :- "In my judgment the plaintiffs are correct in their
contentions upon this issue. I think the knowledge that this particular
clamping strip was the right type of damping strip to use for this particular
purpose, coupled with the knowledge of how to define to a plastics
manufacturer what was required for this particular purpose and what plastics
manufacturer could readily supply this particular form of strip, is and was a
trade secret of the plaintiffs. I take the same view in relation to the inter
fit of the plates, which it is worth noting that Bryant and the defendant
company in their leaflet have described as "unique". Accordingly, it follows
that if Bryant acquired this knowledge in confidence as the plaintiffs'
Managing Director, he is not entitled to make use of it in breach of his
obligation of confidence to the plaintiffs." At page 91 the learned Judge
concluded as under :- "Bryant, in my judgment, acquired this information,
which, as I have held, was confidential information, as the plaintiffs'
managing director, and he acquired it in confidence. He has sought to take
advantage of it since he left the plaintiffs to his own advantage and to that
of the defendant company. In my judgment, that, on the authorities, involves a
breach of his duty of confidence to the plaintiffs, and he should be
restrained from committing 789 such breach and the defendant company should
also be restrained from taking advantage of that breach." Therefore, there
were clear materials to base the conclusion in the above case about the nature
of the invention, about the conveying of the information to the defendant and
also copying of the same by the defendant. Learned Senior Counsel for the
defendant also relied upon the passages from Saltman Engineering Coy.
LD/scase. The learned Judge had no difficulty in holding on facts that a
person who had obtained information in confidence cannot be allowed to use it
as a springboard for activities detrimental to the interests of the persons
who had made the confidential communication. Therefore, in my view, this case
is of no assistance to the plaintiff.
(35) He then referred to Merchant Adventurers Limited v. M. Grew & Company
Limited (1973) R.P.C. 1. The action was brought by the plaintiff in this case
for an interlocutory injunction stating that the defendants had infringed the
plaintiff's copyright in drawings for their electric light fittings named as
"Trimling 1020 series" and the "Trimling 1030 series". The plaintiff claims
copyrights in the drawings. Graham, J, who decided the matter, held as under
;- "Many drawings whether sectioned or not are so simple that any reasonably
intelligent person can visualise what they represent in three-dimensional
form. On the other hand, there are drawings, both sectioned and otherwise
which are extremely difficult to understand and which many non-experts would
get little or nothing out of at all. These drawings are, to my mind, in the
first category and not the second, and would I think be readily understood by
a non-expert, who would, in my judgment, be entitled to look at the whole
series of drawings, including the legends which say in general terms what the
drawings are representing. That he would be entitled to look at the series is
I think clear from the "Popeye" case, where there was a very large number of
drawings representing "Popeye" in various attitudes and forms, and it was not
possible to say that the infringement was the same as any one drawing in
particular. So here, in my judgment, an inspection of the drawings produces in
the mind a clear impression of cylindrical and square fittings with clean side
lines produced by the form of snap-on joints illustrated, the proportions and
angles being also illustrated. This impression is embodied both in the
plaintiffs' and defendants' fittings. For the reasons I have given, the
plaintiffs have in my judgment made out a prima facie case of infringement of
their copyright." I am not able to see how this case helps the plaintiff. The
learned Senior Counsel for the plaintiff relied on the decision reported in
Temple Instruments Limited v. Hollis Heels Limited, (1973) R.P.C. 15. This is
also a case of claim on the basis of copyright. The plaintiffs prayed for an
interim injunction to restrain the defendant from infringing the copyright in
a drawing of a 'divan legs' stating that the divan legs manufactured and sold
by the defendant were substantially similar to divan legs produced by the
plaintiff in accordance with the design shown in the drawing. Graham, J.
sitting in Chancery Division granted injunction in favor of the plaintiff on
the basis of the drawings produced by the parties. The learned Judge opined
that the balance of convenience lay in granting injunction because the damage
that would be caused to the plaintiff by continue to sale of the defendant's
790 goods and the consequence disruption of the plaintiff's business which
will be very difficult to estimate. Here also, the dictum laid down by the
learned Judge is different. The learned Senior Counsel for the plaintiff then
relied upon the decision of the Supreme Court of South Africa reported in
Harvey Tiling Company (Pty.) Limited v. Rodomac (Pty.) Limited and Another,
(1977) R.P.C. 399. The question posed before that Court was about trade
secrets in the process of manufacturing tiles. That was a case of employee
using the process after his release from the employer. After referring to the
Saltman Engineering Co. Ltd.' s case granting an injunction the Court held :-
1. There was substantial identity between the plaintiff's and the defendant
company's plant; 2.The first defendant did not have to go through the
expensive process of designing its own plant and suffer the effort and delay
of getting into production as we had the information from the employer and
that saved great deal of time and money; 3. That the first defendant had
copied the drawings from the plaintiff. This is also a case not useful to the
plaintiff. The learned Senior Counsel for the plaintiff then relied upon the
decision reported in Elanco Products Limited and Another v. Mandops
(AgroChemical Specialists) Limited and Another, (1980) R.P.C. 213. This is a
judgment of the Court of Appeal in England.. The facts can be stated in the
following terms:- "The plaintiffs are members of a group of which the parent
is an American company called Eli Lilly (U.S.), which held an English patent
for a selective herbicide, Trifluralin, which, unlike some weedkillers, acts
not directly by application to the weeds themselves but by incorporation into
the soil, and it was, I think, the first of its kind. In order to make this
new product a viable commercial proposition, it was necessary for the
plaintiffs to decide which weeds would be susceptible to this treatment, which
plants or crops would most benefit, or indeed might be harmed, which would be
likely to afford a profitable market, what would be the most appropriate
method of application, what depth would be suitable, and whether it should or
should not be combined with some other, and if so what, herbicides. Then they
had to obtain approval from two public bodies, the Pesticide Safety Precaution
Scheme, referred to as "PSPS", and the Agricultural Chemical Approval Scheme,
referred to as "ACAS". The former, as its name implies, is concerned with the
safety of the public, and the latter with the validity of the claims made by
the producers of herbicides as to their effects. For this purpose they
conducted a considerable number of field tests and carried on other research
work over a very considerable period of time. They refer to it in their
evidence as "a Herculean effort". Having done all that, they then complied
certain sales literature, consisting in part of what they put upon the
containers and in part of separate leaflets giving on all relevant matters and
such warnings as might be necessary. The action arises out of alleged copying
by the respondents of the appellants' sales literature." It was contended on
behalf of the plaintiff-appellant that their literature was a 791 compilation
of information discovered or selected by them in which they have acquired
copyright on the principles laid down by House of Lords in 1964 (1) Weekly Law
Report 273 (Football Coupon's case). The learned Judges also noted that the
appellants had established and the respondents were not. The learned Judges
concluded on facts on the evidence produced that what the respondents had
produced to be a blatant copy of the plaintiff's mail and, therefore,
injunction should be granted. Buckley Lord Justice posited in the following
terms:- "As I understand the law in this case, the defendants were fully
entitled to make use of any information, of a technical or any other kind,
which was available to them in the public domain, for the purpose of compiling
their label and their trade literature, but they were not entitled to copy the
plaintiffs' label or trade literature thereby making use of the plaintiffs'
skill and judgment and saving themselves the trouble, and very possibly the
cost, of assembling their own information, either from their own researches or
from sources available in documents in the public domain, and thereby making
their own selection of material to put into that literature and producing
their own label and trade literature." This is also not of any assistance to
the plaintiff.
(36) The learned Counsel for the plaintiff referred to the decision reported
in William Hill (Football) Limited v. Ladbroke (Football) Limited, (1980)
R.P.C. 539 the judgment of Court of Appeal in the Football Coupon's case which
I had already referred to. It is only to be noticed that decision of Court of
Appeal was affirmed by the House of Lords in (1964) I W.L.R. 273 : (1964) All
E.R. 465.
(37) The learned Senior Counsel for the plaintiff then referred to the
judgment reported in Eraser and others v. Thames Television Ltd. and Others,
1983 (2) All England Reports 101=1984 Q.B.D.44. The facts are as follows - "In
1973 the second plaintiffs, three female actresses, formed a rock group with
the assistance of the first plaintiff, who was their manager and also their
composer. The actresses and the manager developed an idea for a television
series which was to portray the formation of a three-girl rock group and the
members' subsequent experiences. The series was to be part fact and part
fiction, the factual part being based on the actresses' own experiences, and
was to focus on both the group and the individual members' lives to contrast
their collective character with their individual characters. The three
actresses intended that they would appear in the series as the three signers
and that their manager would compose music for the series. Oral discussions
took place between the actresses, the manager, a representative of the first
defendant, a television company (Thames), the second defendant, the
scriptwriter, and the third defendant, the producer, in which the idea for the
series was disclosed to the defendants in confidence with a view to its
realisation. As a result of those discussions and in consideration of a
payment by Thames of pounds 500 the actresses and the manager granted Thames
an oral option which was later confirmed in writing. The confirming letter
stated that Thames was to 'acquire an option on your services in connection
with a possible new series', that the actresses were to have first refusal
should the series be proceeded with, and that if they declined the offer
Thames was to 792 have the right to make the series with three other
actresses. In January 1975 one of the actresses. A, was engaged to play in a
musical which was to begin in April. In February Thames renewed the option and
commissioned the scriptwriter to write scripts for the series after deciding
to make the series in September 1975. Unsuccessful efforts were made by A's
agent to obtain her release from the musical. The actresses and the manager by
letter agreed to participate in the series in accordance with the terms of the
option. A stormy meeting between "Thames, the producer and the manager
followed and soon after that Thames informed the manager by letter that unless
A was free of all other work commitments by the next morning the parts in the
series would be recast. The release from the musical was not obtained in time
and the series was subsequently made with three other actresses in the leading
roles. The actresses and the manager sued Thames, the scriptwriter and the
producer claiming damages (i) that the manager had acted merely as agent for
the three actresses and not as a principal party to the agreement and was
therefore not entitled to sue in his own right, (ii) that the contract related
only to the services of the actresses and did not embrace rights in the idea
for the series, (iii) that the actresses' and the manager's conduct amounted
to a constructive refusal of an offer of parts, and (iv) that the law of
confidence did not extend to an idea which had been expressed orally." At page
116 Hirst J., Queen's Bench decision, expressed the view copyright law is an
essence concerned with the negative right of preventing the copying of
physical material existing in the field of literature or the arts. The learned
Judge also referred to Saltman Engineering Co. Ltd. 's case. About the
reliance of mere information, the learned Judge observed as follows :- "With
regard to the requirements of form and degree of development of information or
ideas. Counsel for the plaintiffs placed strong reliance on Seagerv. Copydex
Ltd. (1967) 2 All ER415, (1967) I Wlr 923. In this case the plaintiff, in the
course of discussion with the defendants of a carpet grip which he had
invented, orally volunteered to the defendants what Salmon Lj described as
"the germ of the idea' for a different form of carpet grip which the plaintiff
had devised. Later the defendants developed and marketed a carpet grip which
was unwittingly based on the plaintiff's alternative type of grip. The Court
of Appeal concluded that the plaintiff's idea was the 'springboard' which
enabled the defendants to devise their own grip and held that the defendants
were liable for breach of confidence. Counsel for the plaintiffs submitted
that this case is a strong authority (albeit in a different field) that
confidence can attach to an oral idea and that even comparatively undeveloped
ideas are capable of protection. I find this case of great assistance." In Sir
Robert Megarry V.C: Coco v. A.N. dark (Engineers) Ltd., (1969) R.P.C. 41 the
Court observed as under :- "Something that has been constructed solely from
materials in the public domain may possess the necessary quality of
confidentiality: for something new and confidential may have been brought into
being by the application of the skill and ingenuity of the human brain.
Novelty depends on the thing itself, and not upon the quality of its
constituent parts. Indeed, often the more striking the novelty, the more
commonplace its components." 793 In Thomas Marshall (Exports) Ltd. v. Guinle,
(1978) 3 All Er 193 the position of law is stated thus :- "if one turns from
the authorities and looks at the matter as a question of principle, I think
(and I say this very tentatively, because the principle has not been argued
out) that four elements may be discerned which may be of some assistance in
identifying confidential information or trade secrets which the Court will
protect. I speak of such information or secrets only in an industrial or trade
setting. First, I think that the information must be information the release
of which the owner believes would be injurious to him or of advantage to his
rivals or others. Second, I think the owner must believe that the information
is confidential or secret, i.e. that it is not already in the public domain.
It may be that some or all of his rivals already have the information; but as
long as the owner believes it to be confidential I think he is entitled to try
and protect it. Third, I think that the owner's belief under the two previous
heads must be reasonable. Fourth, I think that the information must be judged
in the light of the usage and practices of the particular industry or trade
concerned." Mr. Ashok Desai, learned Senior Counsel relied on the following
passage "Nor do I accept Counsel for the defendants' argument that an idea
which is capable of development in more than one format is not entitled to
protection. In my judgment the precise format is a matter for the writer to
decide, and the fact that it is develop abic in more than one format in no way
diminishes its intrinsic value." Ultimately, the Court granted injunction. In
my view, the subject matter in that case is different from the subject matter
of this case. In my view, the quantum of proof required on the basis of the
quality of the materials produced would largely depend on the subject matter
in which the claim is made, especially Intellectual Property Rights. I am
quite unable to understand how the view taken by the Court in the above case
would be of any help to the plaintiff. Again the facts are so clear in that
case. On a reading of that judgment I feel no other conclusion would be
possible than that was taken by the learned Judge. He relied upon the judgment
of the Court of Appeal of New Zealand where copyright was claimed in moulded
plastic disk which were used for manufacture of toys which are in form
supplying disk known as "Frisbee". Mr. Ashok Desai, learned Senior Counsel
relied on what is stated at page 160:- "The meaning of "original" is not
defined in the Act but it was discussed (in relation to literary work and his
judgment is equally applicable to an artistic work) by Peterson J. in
University of London Press Ltd. v. University Tutorial Press Ltd. (1916) 2 Ch.
601 at 608, and his judgment has been frequently cited with approval in
subsequent cases :- "The word "original" does not in this connection mean that
the work must be the expression of original or inventive thought. Copyright
Acts are not concerned with the originality of ideas, but with the expression
of thought, and, in the case of literary work', with the expression of thought
in printer writing. The originality which is required that the expression must
be in an 794 original or novel form, but that the work must not be copied from
another work-that it should originate from the author." The question of
originality was further discussed by Lord Atkinson in Macmillan & Co. Ltd. v.
Cooper (K b J) (1923) 40 T.L.R. 186: "It will be observed that it is the
product of the labour, skill, and capital of one man which must not be
appropriated by Another, not the elements, the raw material, if we may use the
expression, upon which the labour and skill and capital of the first have been
expended. To secure copyright for the product it is necessary that labour,
skill, and capital should be expended sufficiently to impart to the product
some quality or character which the raw material did not possess, and which
differentiates the product from the raw material." Lord Atkinson then
referred, with approval, to a decision of the Supreme Court of the United
States bearing on the same point, and continued: "It brings out clearly the
distinction between the materials upon which one claiming copyright has worked
and the product of the application of his skill, judgment, labour, and
learning to these materials, which product, though it may be neither novel nor
ingenious, is the claimant's original work in that it originates from him, and
is not copied." The originality that is required by the Act relates to the
manner in which the . claimant to the copyright has expressed his thought or
ideas. The Act does not require that the work be novel in form but that it
should originate from the author and not be copied from another work. The idea
of a flying disc may not have been novel at the time when Wham-O produced its
Frisbee but the particular forms in which they were produced were original in
that they were the works of their authors and regarded as entire entities or
as a whole were not copied from any other materials. In the instant case it is
not simply the creation of the ribs or rings by drawing, wooden modelling, or
injection moulding which is original but rather the whole of these materials
which in their respective forms produce the work of their respective creators.
The works are the whole works: the ribs or rings are only parts of them. The
question of novelty is immaterial where the author has produced the result
without reference to any pre-existing subject matter because he has not
copied. Where, however, the author has made use of such pre-existing subject
matter it has to be determined whether he has exercised such independent skill
and labour to justify copyright protection for the result: Martin v. Polyplas
Manufacturers Ltd. (1969) N.Z.L.R. 1046; Ladbroke (Football) Ltd. v. William
Hill (Football Ltd. (1964) I W.L.R. 273." The learned trial Judge granted
injunction and that was affirmed by the Court of Appeal. This is again on the
materials placed before the Court and on evidence. I do not find anything
useful in the above case.
(38) The learned Senior Counsel for the plaintiff brought to my notice the
decision of this Court reported in John Richard Brady and Others v. Chemical
795 Process Equipments P. Ltd. and Another. . The learned Judge stated the
facts briefly in the first paragraph itself, which are as under :- "By this
application under Order 39, Rules 1 and 2 read with Section 151 Civil
Procedure Code . plaintiffs have prayed for an ad interim injunction to
restrain the defendants from manufacturing, selling, offering for sale,
advertising, directly or indirectly dealing in Machines that are substantial
imitation and reproduction of the design, manuals and Drawings of the
plaintiffs' Fodder Production Unit and thereby amounting to infringement of
the plaintiffs' copyright therein, or from dealing in those Machines made on
the basis of information and know how disclosed to them by the plaintiffs in
conditions of strict confidence, and from doing any other thing as is likely
to lead to passing off the defendants' products as those of the plaintiffs."
The plaintiffs helped the defendants to set up a Fodder Production Unit in
India. The plaintiffs sought quotations from the first defendant for the
supply of thermal panels, manufactured by it. The panels required were of
highly specialised type. To enable the defendants to send their quotations the
plaintiffs supplied all technical material, detailed know how, drawings and
specifications concerning the Fodder Production Unit under the expressed
condition that it must maintain strict confidentiality regarding the know how.
The learned Judge had noted "discussions between the parties culminated in an
agreement whereby defendant No. 1 agreed to supply the specialised thermal
panels, required by the plaintiffs. Terms and conditions of the agreement were
set out in a letter dated 13.1.84, written by defendant No. I to plaintiff No.
2. The plaintiffs came forward with a complaint that the machine produced by
the defendants is entirely based upon the disclosures made by the plaintiffs
and they have committed breach of confidence reposed on them. The learned
Judge has also extracted what the defendants had agreed relating to the
confidentiality, which is as under :- "We solemnly undertake that during the
pendency of the Contract we would not manufacture these panels for anybody
else nor would be instrumental in divulging the details and the specifications
furnished to us." Before discussing the case on the point the learned Judge
opined as under:- "This is just the situation in which the Courts must enforce
the general rules of equity and restrain breach of confidence as recommended
in the leading Saltman's case, Saltman Engineering Coy. Ltd., Ferotec Ltd. and
Monarch Engineering Coy. (MITCHAM) Ld. v. Campbell Engineering Coy. Ld.,
(1948) 65 Rpc 203, by Patrick Heam in his book the Business of Industrial
Licensing, by Roskill, J. in Cranleigh Precision Engineering Ltd. v. Bryant,
1966 Rpc 81, by Lord Denning, M.R. in Seagerv. Copydex Limited, 1967 Rpc 349
and also by S. Ranganathan J. of this Court in Konrad Wiedemann Gmbh & Co. v.
Standard Castings P. Ltd. and Others" The learned Judge relied upon Saltman's
case. The learned Judge also had compared the work of the plaintiffs and the
defendants' machine and had come to the conclusion 'that apart from the
striking general similarity between the defendants' Machine and the Drawings
of the plaintiffs being obvious to the eye, though the defendants' claim that
there are some functional differences between their 796 Machine and the Fpu,
the defendants had access to the Drawings of the plaintiffs as discussed
above, and, the rapidity with which the defendants have produced the Machine
lead to the inference that the defendants have copied the Drawings of the
plaintiffs. It is significant to point out that the defendants have not shown
how in fact they had arrived at their Machine. In such circumstances, the
inference is unescapable that the plaintiffs have established a prima fane
case of copying to which the defendants have to answer. This prima facie view
formed by me is supported by the principles laid down by the' House of Lords
in L.B. (Plastics) Limited v. Swish Products Limited, 1979 Rpc 551. The
learned Judge expressed the view that Drawings and other technical information
regarding the plaintiffs' Fpu entrusted to them under express condition of
strict confidentiality, which they have apparently used as a 'spring-board' to
jump into the business Field to the detriment of the plaintiffs'. With great
respect to the learned Judge, the view expressed by His Lordship is the only
one that can be taken on the facts of that case.
(39) The learned Senior Counsel for the plaintiff then referred to the
decision in Water low Directories Limited v. Reed Information Services
Limited, 1992 Fleet Street Reports 409. That case involved the complaint of
Telephone Directory. The plaintiff published the Solicitors and Barristers
Directory and claimed copyright in it. The defendant published Butterworths
Law Directory. Having regard to the subject matter of the case, I do not think
I will be justified in dealing with it in greater detail.
(40) The learned Senior Counsel for the plaintiff referred to Cleek & Lindsell
on Torts Sixteenth Edition 1989. He drew my attention to the passage at page
1648, which reads as under:- "Most confidential information actions are
concerned with these. Where, for instance, two parties enter into an agreement
to exploit an industrial process or invention a relationship of
confidentiality is readily inferred. Likewise when apparatus, drawings, or
specifications are provided for use for a specific purpose, their use for any
other purpose will be restrained." The Author has referred to the springboard
doctrine in the following terms:- "Very often, part of the confidential
information is in the public domain and part is not, or the complete package
of confidential information, as such, is not in the public domain but could be
arrived at by diligent enquiry or routine research,. Where the owner of the
confidential information has himself made it public, for instance by
publishing it in a patent specification, no difficulty arises; relief will be
refused. But where a material amount of work would have to be done to arrive
at it, the position is different. It is here that the springboard doctrine
arises; the Courts will not permit someone who has come into possession of
such information to take a short cut and make use of it in order to steal a
march on his competitors or to complete with the person from whom he obtained
it in confidence. Thus, one who has obtained possession of such a package may
actually be put in a worse position than his competitors; he will not be
permitted to make use of it unless he obtains it independently from a
legitimate source. But such a disability will not be continued indefinitely;
an 797 injunction will only be granted over the period during which the unfair
advantage continues."
(41) There is no difficulty in appreciating the principles laid down on the
basis of the springboard doctrine but difficulty would arise only in its
application to the facts of a given case.
(42) The learned Senior Counsel for the plaintiff referred to the decision in
Mithlesh Gupta v. Mahipal and Another, 1989 (3) Delhi Lawyer 27 by way of
answer to the contentions of the learned Senior Counsel for the first
defendant that documents filed by the plaintiff are not true and they have
been concocted for this case. Mr. Ashok Desai, learned Senior Counsel relying
upon this case contended the question whether the documents had been created
or not can be decided only after the trial of the suit and prima facie the
Court has to proceed on the materials made available by the plaintiff. I am
not able to accept the proposition contended for by the learned Senior Counsel
in its very widest form. Even at the interlocutory stage probative value of
the documents has to be considered prima facie for the purpose of deciding the
interim relief. The facts of the case relied on by the learned Senior Counsel
are entirely different.
(43) The learned Senior Counsel for the plaintiff relied on passages from
Worldwide Trade Secrets Law. I refer to the following passages out of due
deference to the learned Senior Counsel, though in my view, they do not help
me in deciding the issue in this case :- "In principle, an employer's customer
lists can qualify as trade secrets and a misappropriator can be enjoined from
using them in his business, although the Courts tend to scrutinize closely
claims involving customer lists. After termination of an agency relationship,
an agent has no duty not to compete with the principal, but does have a duty
"knot to use or disclose to third persons, on his own account or on account of
others, in competition with the principal or to his injury, trade secrets,
written lists of names, or other similar confidential matters given to him
only for the principal's use or acquired by the agent in the violation of
duty." The agent is entitled to use general information concerning the method
of business of the principal and the names of customers retained in his
memory, if not acquired in violation of his duty as agent. As stated above,
trade secret protection is not limited to technical and scientific
information. Business information, such as cost and pricing, projected capital
investments, inventory, marketing strategies, and customelists, may qualify as
trade secrets. Customer lists have been said to lie at the periphery of trade
secret protection. From a policy standpoint, they are perceived as
problematic, because protecting them tends to reduce competition by reducing
the possibility that a former employee, or his new employer, will be able to
compete effectively with the former employer. In addition, customer lists are
generally prepared in the ordinary course of business and do not require the
kind of extra investment in time and money that the trade secret laws are
designed to encourage. 798 What the foregoing means is that customer lists may
receive protection, but that claims for trade secret status will be carefully
scrutinized."
(44) The learned Senior Counsel for the plaintiff also relied upon Copinger
And Skonejames Copyright Thirteenth Edition 1991. At page 720, it read as
under:- "There is a broad and developing equitable doctrine that he who has
received information in confidence shall not take unfair advantage of it or
profit from the wrongful use or publication of it. He must not make any use of
it to the prejudice of him who gave it, without obtaining his consent or, at
any rate, without paying him for it. It has for long been clear that the
Courts can restrain a breach of confidence arising out of a contract or any
right to property." The learned Author has stated the principles affecting
breach of confidence were fully considered by the House of Lords for the first
time in Attorney-General v. Guardian Newspapers, 1990 A.C. 109 at page 722
about the obligation of the party receiving information the learned Author has
stated as under :- "In general, it is thought that in such circumstances an
obligation not to use or disclose would be implied, and this would extend to a
plot or elaborated idea which would not, in general, be protected under the
law of copyright. Whereas copyright protects material which has been reduced
to a permanent form, the general law of confidence may protect either written
or oral confidential communications. Copyright is good against the world
generally, while confidence operates against those who receive information or
ideas in confidence. Copyright has a fixed, statutory time limit which does
not apply to confidential information, though in practice the obligation of
confidence usually ceases when the information or idea becomes public
knowledge. There may also be differences as to the ownership of copyright in a
work and the entitlement to restrain a breach of confidence in respect of it."
The learned Author has also laid down the following elements of action for
breach of confidence:- "In some cases, the Courts have paid attention to
considerations which also arise in cases where they have to determine whether
copyright subsists in a particular work; for example, the amount of time,
skill and labour expended on its creation.. Thus, it has been said that what
makes a document confidential is the fact that the maker of the document has
used his brain and has produced a result which can only be produced by
somebody who goes through the same process; and a person breaches that
confidence when he dispenses with the necessity of going through the process
which has been gone through in compiling the document or collecting the
information and avails himself of the fruits of the other's efforts, thereby
saving himself a great deal of labour and calculation. This consideration has
been emphasised in the various cases in which news agencies have sought to
protect the improper acquisition and use of information supplied by them to
subscribers. Thus, in the case of Exchange Telegraph Co. Ltd. v. Central News
Ltd. Stirling J. said: "By the expenditure of labour and money the plaintiffs
had acquired this information, and it was, in their hands, valuable property
in this sense -that 799 persons to whom it was not known were willing to pay,
and did pay, money to acquire it." On the other hand: "Equity ought not to be
invoked to protect trivial title-tattle, however confidential. There must be
brought into existence, by the application of the skill and ingenuity of the
human brain, some novel or confidential information." The learned Senior
Counsel for the plaintiff relied upon the following passage :- 'The principle
is clear enough when the whole of the information is private. Difficulties can
arise when the information is in part public and in part private, as, for
example, when some of the information is published in the form of a patent
specification. "When the information is mixed, being partly public and partly
private, then the recipient must take special care to use only the material
which is in the public domain. He should go to the public source and get it,
or, at any rate, not be in a better position than if he had gone to the public
source. He should not get a start over others by using the information which
he received in confidence. At any rate, he should not get a start without
paying for it." It has been said that this "springboard" principle extends so
far as to prevent a person who has received information in confidence from
using that information even after it has been published by or with the consent
of the person from whom the information was originally acquired .Thus in
Terrapin Ltd. v. Builders' Supply Co. (Hayes) Ltd. Roxburgh J. said; "As I
understand it, the essence of this branch of the law, whatever the origin of
it may be, is that a person who has obtained information in confidence is not
allowed to use it as a springboard for activities detrimental to the person
who made the confidential communication, and springboard it remains even when
all the features have been published or can be ascertained by actual
inspection by any member of the public." Similarly in the Saltman case Lord
Greene pointed out that while the recipient of the confidential information
could, like any one else, buy the article, measure it and make his own mould,
he could not lawfully shorten his labours by resort to the confidential know-
how he had learned. On this view the recipient of the confidential information
is placed under a special and permanent disability in the field of competition
in order to ensure that he does not get an unfair start."
(45) The learned Senior Counsel also brought to my notice the Modern Law of
Copyright by Hugh Laddie at page 32, the Author has stated in the following
terms about the protection :- "On consideration it will be perceived that any
literary or dramatic work contains a combination of detailed ideas, thoughts
or information expressed in a particular language or notation; and once it is
conceded that the protection is not confined to the actual language or
notation used, it must follow that what remains, and is protected, consists of
that collection of ideas, thoughts or information." Nobody can take any
exception to the proposition. The learned Senior Counsel then relied upon the
judgment of the Supreme Court reported in R.G. Anand v. M/s. Delux Films and
Others, . Mr. Kapil Sibal, learned senior Counsel for the first defendant also
relied upon this case. The case of the plaintiff in that case was that his
play 'Hum Hindustani' which was very popular and 800 received great
approbation from the press. On coming to know of this, the defendants
approached him for taking a feature film on the basis of the play. The
plaintiff gave them the materials of his play. Thereafter, without his
knowledge borrowing his ideas and themes produced his play as picture known it
as 'New Delhi' and thus defendants infringed his rights. The Supreme Court
affirmed the decision of the learned Courts negativing the claim of the
plaintiff after analysing the evidence on record. The Supreme Court laid down
the following propositions:- "1. There can be no copyright in an idea,
subject-matter, themes, plots or historical or legendry facts and violation of
the copyright in such cases is confined to the form, manner and arrangement
and expression of the idea by the author of the copyrighted work. 2. Where the
same idea is being developed in a different manner, it is manifest that the
source being common, similarities are bound to occur. In such a case the
Courts should determine whether or not the similarities are on fundamental or
substantial aspects of the mode of expression adopted in the copyrighted work.
If the defendant's work is nothing but a literal imitation of the copyrighted,
work with some variations here and there it would amount to violation of the
copyright. In other words, in order to be actionable the copy must be a
substantial and material one which at once leads to the conclusion that the
defendant is guilty of an act of piracy. 3. One of the surest and the safest
test to determine whether or not there has been a violation of copyright is to
see if the reader, spectator or the viewer after having read or seen both the
works i clearly of the opinion and gets an unmistakable impression that the
subsequent work appears to be a copy of the original. 4. Where the theme is
the same but is presented and treated differently so that the subsequent work
becomes a completely new work, no question of violation of copyright arises.
5. Where however apart from the similarities appearing in the two works there
are also material and broad dissimilarities which negative the intention to
copy the original and the coincidences appearing in the two works are clearly
incidental no infringement of the copyright comes into existence. 6. As a
violation of copyright amounts to an act of piracy it must be proved by clear
and cogent evidence after applying the various tests laid down by the case law
discussed above. 7. Where, however, the question is of the violation of the
copyright of stage play by a film producer or a Director the task of the
plaintiff becomes more difficult to prove piracy. It is manifest that unlike a
stage play a film has a much broader perspective, wider field and a bigger
background where the defendants can by introducing a variety of incidents give
a colour and complexion different from the manner in which the copyrighted
work has expressed the idea. Even so, if the 801 viewer after seeing the film
gets a totality of impression that the film is by and large a copy of the
original play, violation of the copyright may be said to be proved."
(46) On the basis of the above case, it was vehemently contended by Mr. Ashok
Desai, learned Senior Counsel for the plaintiff, that on the materials
produced by the plaintiff the confusion is irresistible that the springboard
doctrine would apply and the plaintiff has made out a case for the grant of
interim injunction pending the suit.
(47) The principle relating to confidentiality is succinctly stated the text
book Equity Doctrines & Remedies, Third Edition by M/s. Meagher Gummow Lehane.
At page 867 in paragraph 4105 the statement of law is in the following terms
:- "There is now an abundance of decisions where there was no contract but
relief was given, expressly on equitable grounds. In Moorgate Tobacco Co Ltd.
v. Philip Morris Ltd. (No. 2) (1984) 156 Clr 414 at 438, Deane J, delivering
the judgment of the High Court, said that a general equitable jurisdiction to
grant relief against actual or threatened abuse of confidential information,
nor involving any tort or breach of contract or some wider fiduciary duty,
should now be accepted. That passage was adopted by Scott, J., at first
instance, in Attorney-General v. ObservserLtd. [1990] 1 Ac 109 at 147, and by
Binghaml J in the Court of Appeal, supra at 216. But what seems so plain today
was not always so. The first two decisions of the English Court of Appeal
plainly and exclusively relying on an equitable duty of confidence are
comparatively recent. The first (often quoted since) was Saltman Engineering
Co Ltd. v. Campbell (1948) 65 Rpc 203. The defendant was restrained from
manufacturing tools from drawings put into his hands by the third plaintiff
for the limited purpose of manufacturing tools for the first plaintiff. The
Court of Appeal (reversing Vaisey J) held "that there was a contract between
the defendant and third plaintiff. But Lord Greene Mr went out of his way to
hold that even if this were not so the defendant would still be accountable,
because an equitable obligation of confidence could arise independently of
contract. In the present case, "the defendants got those drawings into their
hands, knowing or knowing shortly afterwards that they belonged to Saltman,
that they were obviously confidential matter and they knew that they had got
them..-for a strictly limited purpose" (65 Rpc at 216). These words were
accepted and applied by the same Court in Seager v. Copyde Ltd. (1967) 2 All
Er 415, where there was no question of any contract. The plaintiff there had a
patent for a carpet grip he called the "Klent". Through the medium of a
television program titled "Get Ahead", he became known to the defendants. Long
negotiations ensued with a view to the defendants exploiting the invention
commercially by arrangement with the plaintiff. In the course of those
abortive discussions, the plaintiff, who was deaf but garrulous, volunteered
(without being asked to do so) details of a new un patented grip of his
devising which he called "Invisigrip". Later, the defendants sought to patent
for themselves the Invisigrip and the plaintiff, appearing for himself before
Lord Denning Mr, Salmon and Winn Ljj, refused an injunction to restrain use of
the information imparted as to the Invisigrip, but obtained an inquiry as to
damages The Master of the Rolls purported to apply the "broad 802 principle of
equity that he who has received information in confidence shall not take
unfair advantage of it". At page 870 the learned Authors have made a
comparison between equity and common law in the following terms :-- "Equity
and common law in this field operate to produce different consequences. First,
equity may afford remedy where the disclosure was in the course of
negotiations that never produced a contract: Seager v. Copy (lex Ltd. (1967) 2
All Er 415; Ab Consolidated Ltd. v. Europe Strength Food Co. (1978) NZLR515;
Lac Minerals Ltd v International Corona Resources Ltd (1990) Fsr 441.
Secondly, where injunctive or other equitable relief is sought in the
exclusive jurisdiction, the plaintiff need not show legal remedies to be
inadequate (there will be none); nor, need it be shown that the plaintiff has
any proprietary right, so that, for example, the plaintiff in Argyll v. Argyll
(1967) Ch 302 at 322 had standing to enjoin newspaper publication of
matrimonial confidences without showing any proprietary right in them.
Thirdly, equitable remedies are susceptible of adjustment to the particular
case in a way the law does not envisage, by, for example, the imposition of
terms on a successful plaintiff and equity has its own scheme of defenses, for
example, unclean hands and delay, which may defeat in equity a plaintiff who
would prevail at law. If the values protected at law are seen as absolutes,
those in equity tend to be relative." About the springboard doctrine, the
learned Authors have expressed the following view:- "This "doctrine" is
attributed to Roxburgh J in Terrapin Ltd. v. Builders Supply Co (Hayes) Ltd.
(1967) Rpc 375; the Court of Appeal in the same case (1960) Rpc 128 at 130)
expressed the principle as forbidding use of information by a defendant "as a
springboard" for activities detrimental to the plaintiff, even when all the
information has otherwise reached the public domain; because he has a start
over other members of the public, the defendant must be placed under a special
disability in the field of competition. He, therefore, may be restrained from
user for that period which competitors would need to put their produce on the
market by, for example, "tooling-up" and organizing production and
distribution: Potters-Balloting v. Weston-Baker (1977) Rpc 202 at 206;
Harrison v. Project & Design Co. (Redcar) Ltd. (1978) Fsr 81. If the defendant
has only known of and has not wrongly used the information before it became
public, then the doctrine does not apply to him and he is subject to no
special restraint thereafter: Peter Pan Manufacturing Corp. v. Corset
Silhouette Ltd. (1963) 3 All Er 402 at 408." The authorities on this subject
were reviewed by the New South Wales Court of Appeal in United States Surgical
Corporation v. Hospital Products International Pvt. Ltd. (1983) 2 Nswlr 157 at
228-33; rev'd on other grounds 156 Clr 41. The Court concluded that the
"springboard" doctrine was "not based on some artificial or arbitrary doctrine
to be applied regardless of the facts of the case" and concluded: "In a
principle applied in confirmity with the more general principle that a person
misusing confidential information must answer for his default accord- 803 ing
to his gain. A head start may often be the gain in these cases. If it is the
gain, damages will be assessed accordingly and any other relief suh as
injunction will be moulded. If it is not the gain, the method of assessing
damages or the appropriateness of some other remedy has to be considered in
the light of what that gain is." The learned Authors have stated that the
position in Australia is the same. They have stated at page 878 as under :-
"In this welter of distinguished disputation, it was Owen Cj in Eq who got to
the heart of the matter in seeing that equity acted on the conscience of the
defendant not in aid of any proprietary right. This view now represents
settled doctrine in Australia. In Moorgate Tobacco Co Ltd. v. Philip Morris
Ltd. (No. 2) (1984) 156 Clr 414 at 437, Deane, J. said of the law of breach of
confidence: Like most heads of the exclusive equitable jurisdiction, its
rational basis does not lie in proprietary right. It lies in the notion of an
obligation of conscience arising from circumstances in or through which the
information was communicated or obtained."
(47) On 1.9.95 the learned Senior Counsel for the plaintiff submitted 'Note on
Sequences of plaintiff's System Iteration'. In paragraph 2 this is what he
stated :- "As a result of his own knowledge and experience, plaintiff denied a
series of specifications relating to his vision for a specific Mobile
Satellite System which he calls Smpcs and which are recited in the plaint
paras 4 and 7 (and plaintiff's rejoinder para 4.29 pages 47 and 48, para 4.32
(iv) (v) page 51, para 7.1 page 79, para 16 (xi) page 86, para 4.10 page 116
and para 6.9 page 125 and affidavit of Roger dark). These parameters and
specifications included, inter alia, what he presented to the two
manufacturers Hughes and Martin Marietta in order to obtain a proposal from
them relative to technical execution, costs and timing. (Plaint page 21 para 8
rejoinder page 116)." In paragraph 3, it is stated thus :- "While the
plaintiffs filed documents contain an extensive and detailed progression of
the iterations over time which clearly establish plaintiffs line of
progressive thought. Plaintiffs own system criteria and specifications are
included, embodied and given both form and content in 4 documents, I of which
was filed with the plaint as (Document No. 2 in the list of documents filed on
25.3.95) and three others (filed documents Volume 2, items 127 and 128 pages
735-791 and filed documents Volume 3, item 146 page 1255 and 1256." This is
only a repetition of what the plaintiff had given in the documents in three
volumes. This was only to lay emphasis on the case of the plaintiff. The
thrust of the argument of the plaintiff is stated in the following terms :-
"The Smpc Systems description and specifications contained in these 4 items
constitute the plaintiffs intellectual property and confidential information
and fulfilll the requirements with which a Satellite System Customer can
approach manufacturers for detailed construction proposals (Rejoinder page 86,
116, 48, 51, 52, 60)." 804 The plaintiff also gave the Iterative Sequence of
plaintiffs Smpc's with Martin Marietta, Hughes, Africom and ASCOM. On 1.9.95
the learned Senior Counsel also' submitted notes with a title "Plaintiffs
Reply to Defendants Submission No. Iv entitled "PLAINTIFF'S Smpc System
Borrows Existing System DESIGNS'. In particular, Mr. Ashok Desai, learned
Senior Counsel dealt with the affidavit of Mr. Greenwood. He submitted that no
doubt others in the Field knew about the system now protected by the plaintiff
but according to him they also kept it confidential. Therefore, we have to
infer that the plaintiff has been aware of the fact that he was not the
originator of the system or the ideas but had already become a matter of
public domain. The fact that the plaintiff's system is unique is a matter for
evidence. The plaintiff did not make any attempt to disguise that he is not an
Engineer by profession in electronics or related subjects or has had any
practical training in the manufacture of electronics goods or any other allied
products. His case is that he has been in the business of telecasting
including its viability and that gave him an incitation to innovate and his
constant and persistence cudgeling his brains over the process made him
conceive of the ideas to evolve a system which he thought he could give to the
world towards the end of the 20th century. Mr. Ashok Desai, learned Senior
Counsel for the plaintiff, contended that Mr. Greenwood has spoken to very
important aspects of the system from documents which are confidential for
Matra. It is not for the plaintiff to make a grievance about it. Mr.
Greenwood, according to the learned Senior Counsel, has made the position of
Matra most vulnerable. The point is whether Mr. Greenwood had disclosed to the
Court about the existence of the system elsewhere and this Court is not
concerned with the propriety or the conduct of Mr. Greenwood in informing this
Court about what others had done in the field. In the notes the plaintiff
states that Mr. Greenwood has been kind enough to share with us all of his
confidential documents from Matra. What is stated in the notes would make the
position in this case very transparent, which read as under:- "What is clear
from all of this is that during January- March 1993L INMAR- Sat was studying
all its possible alternatives (GEO, Meo And LEO) and that one of its many
contractors was Martin Marietta while the European Space Agency was also
studying its possible alternatives {Global v. Regional etc.) and that the Esa
issued an invitation to Tender on 21 January 1993 regarding digital beam
framing techniques for a possible payload configuration which Matra Marconi
Space responded to-on the 24 March, 1993 with a highly confidential proposal.
One month later on the 6 May, 1993 Martin Marietta Astro Space and its
subcontractor Matra Marconi made a presentation to Inmarsat which combined two
elements: The beam framing techniques of Matra developed in response to the
Esa tender, and The Geo concept given to Martin Marietta by Inmarsat in its
direct contract to study a Geo based system. Fearing a negative decision on
Geo by Inmarsat, Martin and Matra presented with Eric son the proposal to be
found as Annexure 13 of the Greenwood Affidavit page 189. 805 Mr. Greenwood
had access to these documents by virtue of his employment. See page 125 of
Annexure 12 - This document was a highly confidential document and not
available to the public or in the public domain. See page 189 of Annexure 13 -
This document was a confidential document and was not available to the general
public or in the public domain."
(48) What the plaintiff wants to convey, I feel is that each person knowing
the system kept it secret to himself and it has not become a matter of public
domain. I find it difficult to accept this case of the plaintiff.
(49) The first defendant had produced before this Court a booklet captioned
"Inmarsat Transition System". In the first page giving the contents of the
booklet it is stated as follows :- "Prepared for: International Maritime
Satellite Organization Prepared by: Martin Marietta Astro Space Proposal No.
104290-A Submitted: May 6,1993 Martin Marietta Confidential and Proprietary:
Information contained in this document is considered as confidential and
proprietary to the Offerer and shall not be copied, disclosed, or used, in
whole or in part, except by Inmarsat for evaluation purposes, without the
express written authorization of Martin Marietta Corporation. Inmarsat may
disclose this document, including proprietary information, in confidence to
appropriate persons only for evaluation purposes. The foregoing does not apply
to information obtainable lawfully without restriction from another source or
which either is or becomes available in the public domain." I have to state
that Eric son is one of the leading manufacturers of hand sets. At page 30 of
the booklet in the beginning itself, the following information is given :-
"Our users terminal concept, developed by Ericsson Ge provides features
essential to the handheld market." The publishers of the booklet did not
consider this as confidential. The original book was shown to me by Mr. Kapil
Sibal, learned Senior Counsel for the first defendant and later on a copy was
furnished to the Court.
(50) On 16.8.95 the plaintiff filed 'Brief, Preliminary Affidavit by Plaintiff
in response to the Reply Affidavit by defendant No. 7." In paragraph 10 that
is what he states:- "That I have no personal knowledge of any presentations
(pages 3 & 4) as alleged, or otherwise by Hughes or Martin Marietta to Pcg in
late 1993. To the best of my personal knowledge and understanding of the
industry position at the time and based on the first systems offered by Hughes
and Martin Marietta to me up to 1994 I would not credence such alleged
presentations 806 and I say that Mr. Moss must prove his affirmations or be
held liable for perjury." He also states that he was not required to sign the
letter of undertaking.
(51) It is really surprising to notice that the plaintiff contrary to what is
stated in the shareholders agreement that each of the party should sign a
letter of understanding or what is described as side letter would now say a
different thing.
(52) The argument by Mr. Kapil Sibal, learned Senior Counsel, was that the
party was bound by the shareholders agreement and the service agreement and
the plaintiff is saying something what was not agreed to by the parties as
disclosed in the documents and he further submitted that the documentation
itself provides that whatever that was agreed orally would stand superseded.
In this affidavit the plaintiff recognises that, but attempts to apply to
different stand to the 7th defendant and altogether a different stand to
himself. In paragraph 13 at page 8 this is what he states :- "That I deny any
Verbal Agreement as alleged by Mr. Moss. I specifically deny that I either
initiated contact with Mr. Chander (page 5 and 21), or that I induced him to
participate in the Joint Venture (page 6) or that I committed myself to repay
his investment (page 6) or to work exclusively with him on a mobile satellite
telecommunications project for Asia or any other region (page 8) and I say
that Mr. Moss must prove the same in this Hon'ble Court. Indeed I have never
believed that Mr. Chandra is capable of executing such a project. In any event
I am advised by Counsel that any such unproved verbal agreement as alleged
(and denied) would have been superseded by the express provisions of the
formal documentation."
(53) Therefore, the plaintiff admits that the rights and obligations of all
the parties to the documentation are governed by it. And to my mind, the
plaintiff is aware that the averments in the plaint run counter to the former
documentation signed by the parties. This affidavit betrays the real
intentions of the plaintiff.
(54) I am not able to appreciate the stand of the plaintiff with what he
states in paragraph 19 of the affidavit :- "I say that during the chain of
events described by me above and in my earlier pleadings I disclosed to the
defendants in terms of expressed, written and oral confidentiality, my
inherently confidential and original Smpc System and in terms of implied
confidentiality since it was acted upon by the defendants for commercial gain.
It is from their access to my Smpc System that the defendant's have developed
their so called project in infringement of my rights in my Smpc 'System as
described by me. All the meetings between the parties were held in privacy due
not to my alleged employment with Richard Li at such time but arose strictly
to protect such confidentiality of such information." On the same day
(16.8.95) the plaintiff filed "Brief, Preliminary Affidavit by plaintiff in
response to the Affidavit by Mr. Greenwood, of Asc (Defendant No. 5) filed on
behalf of defendants No.'s 1 and 2". At page 5 that is what the plaintiff
states:- "Mr. Bains from Hughes was an Expert in "Feed Horns" a part of the
Antenna 807 Assembly of a Satellite and Mr. Greenwood is a specialist in
Payloads which are once again a Component of a satellite which is of course is
yet a Component of a Satellite SYSTEM. Mr. Greenwood (like Mr. Bains) have
together placed before the Court credentials which would appear to make them
indisputable "Experts' on Satellite (capital "S") System (capital "S") as they
are endlessly opining on such, however this is simply not the case as: (a)
Deponent is a highly specialised engineer who has by his own Admissions
dedicated his life and career to an individual facet of a satellites' (small
"S") construction, "...The design of mobile satellite payloads is an extremely
specialised and limited field of expertise..." (see para 7F page 5) (b)
Deponent now attempts to take his entirely Micro engineering experience and
apply it across the board to the realm of complete Satellite Systems, by which
I mean the Social, Commercial, Cultural and Political aspects whereby any
given technology connects to society and Deponent has, out of a pedantic lack
of experience and complete ignorance of this crucial interface - not simply
ignored it but sought to be-little it - "They are neither engineers nor
experts in the field..." (page 5 para 7E) "Their business plan does not
address in any way systems design and engineering of a mobile personal
satellite system..." (page 5 para 7E) "..the alleged experience of the
plaintiff and Roger dark does not in any way qualify them to design Mobile
Satellite systems..." Even allowing for the obvious prejudice of a deponent
who is dependent for his living on the defendant No. I in this case, these
statements are ludicrous and are denied. The credentials of Plaintiff are well
covered in the plaint and the rejoinder and Roger Clark's Cv and engineering
credentials are annexed to this Affidavit. (e) I maintain that the deponent
has absolutely no experience whatsoever in the establishment of a Satellite
System irrespective of the particular configuration of its given "payload".
What is stated in para 7 appears to me to be very important. Para 7 runs as
follows:- "I state that in all the 699 pages of submissions and exhibits by
Greenwood not one complete "Satellite System" with the same specific
combination of essential technical and commercial elements as those arrived at
by me for my Smpc System has been identified as either in existence or
antedating my Smpc System, though there is one unidentified exhibit which
contains a number of pages which does resemble one of my early drafts of the
Smpc System. The deponent must explain how he came to exhibit the said
document from the records of the Defendant No. 5." Mr. Ashok Desai, learned
Senior Counsel did not say anything when addressing arguments on behalf of the
plaintiff. Mr. Kapil Sibal, learned senior Counsel for the first defendant, in
his reply stated in the affidavit filed by Mr. Greenwood he has referred to a
document which contained number of pages which is similar to the 808 drafts
filed by the plaintiff. It was argued that the plaintiff had taken the
documents with other documents from the person originally conceived the
system.
(55) In answering Mr. Sibal, learned Senior Counsel, Mr. Desai, learned Senior
Counsel argued staling that the first defendant must have taken it from the
plaintiff. On this aspect of the case, I cannot come to any decision on the
mere averments and it can be decided only after the evidence is taken as to
who has come forward with the truth. But the plaintiff is not justified in
saying what he has stated in the last sentence in the above para extracted. In
para 15 the plaintiff would state:- "It is of great significance that Mr.
Greenwood has exhibited a number of documents which the owners appear to
consider highly confidential and proprietary and of current value."
(56) I do not understand why should the plaintiff harp upon his theory that
others kept their things also confidential.
(57) Submitting that the Court should not accept the affidavit of Mr.
Greenwood and he is not an expert at all and he has given only his opinion,
Mr. Ashok Desai, learned Senior Counsel cited the decision reported in
Florence A. Deeks v. H.G. Wells and Others Air 1933 Privy Council 26. The
Privy Council held - "Depositions of expert witnesses as to the result of
their opinions, and as to the effect of them, does not come within the domain
of expert evidence atall." He also cited the decision reported in Balkrishna
Das Agarwal v. Smt. Radha Devi and Others, . The Division Bench of the
Allahabad High Court was dealing with the evidence of the handwriting, here
the situation is entirely different. Mr. Bains and Mr. Greenwood have tried to
explain the system now to be performed by the plaintiff and has apprised this
Court about system already existing in the field. They are persons competent
in their fields cannot be doubted. The plaintiff's main argument is that they
depend upon the first defendant for their livelihood, therefore, affidavits
have to be taken with a pinch of salt. I am afraid, that the plaintiff is
feeling very desperate and desolate in the light of the materials placed by
the first defendant before this Court. Otherwise, the phraseology used by the
plaintiff in condemning the affidavits of these two persons is not
understandable.
(58) The learned Senior Counsel Mr. Ashok Desai referred to Bal Gangadhar
Tilak and Others v. Shriniwas Pandit and Another, 42 Indian Appeals 135,
Bisnudeo Narain & Anotherv. Seogeni Rai and Others, and T)ie Union of India v.
P.K. More, 1962 S.C. 630 about the case of fraud set up by the first defendant
and contended that the first defendant has not satisfied the requirements of
Order 6 Rule 4 Civil Procedure Code . and, therefore, first defendant has not
made out any case on this aspect of the matter. But I do not want to deal with
in case of fraud at the moment. That is a matter to be decided at the time of
the trial of the case.
(59) In answer to the arguments of Mr. Sibal that the rejoinder filed by the
plaintiff cannot form part of the pleadings, relying on the decision of this
Court reported in Anant Const. Co. vs. Ram Niwas, 1995 R.L.R. 20 Mr. Desai,
learned Senior Counsel, submitted that the rejoinder was filed pursuant to the
orders passed by this Court and the Rules of this Court for filing of
rejoinder. I have also 809 referred to the averments in the rejoinder.
Therefore, there is little difficulty in rejecting arguments of Mr. Sibal,
learned Senior Counsel, that rejoinder cannot at all be entertained.
(60) Mr. Ashok Desai, learned Senior Counsel relied upon the decision reported
in Sri-la Sri Subramania Desika Gnanasambanda Pandarasannidi v. State of
Madras and Another, that the plea raised in the rejoinder should be accepted.
The Supreme Court had to deal with a question whether the point raised in the
rejoinder in a writ petition can be ignored, as was done by the High Court.
The Supreme Court setting aside the judgment of the High Court observed as
follows :- "That takes us to the consideration of the question as to whether
the two reasons given by the High Court in support of this decision are valid.
The first reason, as we have already indicated, is that the High Court though
that the plea in question had not been raised by the appellant in his writ
petition. This reason is no doubt, technically right in the sense that this
plea was not mentioned in the first affidavit filed by tile appellant in
support of his petition but in the affidavit-in-rejoinder filed by the
appellant this plea has been expressly taken. This is not disputed by Mr.
Chetty, and when the matter was argued before the High Court, the respondents
had full notice of the fact that one of the grounds on which the appellant had
challenged the validity of the impugned Order was that he had not been given a
chance to show cause why the said notification should not be issued. We are,
therefore, satisfied that the High Court was in error in assuming that the
ground in question had not been taken at any stage by the appellant before the
matter was argued before the High Court."
(61) The point in the instant case is different. Whether the point is taken in
the rejoinder or in the plaint I had considered the points on the merits and I
don't think I should get detained on this technical point.
(62) Mr. Desai, learned Senior Counsel, filed a Note to bring to the notice of
this Court about the Hongkong proceedings wherein first defendant is stated to
have taken action to recover money from the plaintiff. It was also contended
by Mr. Sibal that some case is pending against the plaintiff in the United
States also. I want to make it very clear I don't want to go into the question
of the conduct of the parties at the stage without enough materials on record
to come to a conclusion one way or the other.
(63) On 4.9.95 Mr. Ashok Desai, learned Senior Counsel filed two volumes of
typed sets. Volume I contains replies to notes submitted by the first
defendant. In Volume Ii he has culled out materials from the pleadings as
written submissions of the plaintiff. I don't think it necessary again to
refer to the contents of these two documents. While winding up his arguments,
learned Senior Counsel Mr. Ashok Desai submitted that the three elements,
confidential, communication and copying have been prima fade proved by the
plaintiff and the plaintiff has made out prima fade case on merits. It is also
contended that the balance of convenience is in favor of the plaintiff in the
facts and circumstances of the case. It was contended by the learned Senior
Counsel though the plaintiff had claimed some amounts in his letter dated
31.3.94 that was only up to that point and that cannot form any basis for 810
assessing the damages. Suppose injunction is not granted, the learned senior
Counsel argued, the first defendant would complete his projects and at the
time of the trial of the case the claim of the plaintiff may become stale and
this Court would not be in a position to put him in the same position that he
had on the date of the suit. On the other hand, the argument ran if interim
injunction is made absolute the first defendant would not be put to any
prejudice if an early date is fixed for trial of the case, where all the
matters could be thrashed out in the trial. The learned Senior Counsel for the
plaintiff submitted that damages would not be an adequate relief for the
plaintiff. He maintained that the interim order should be made absolute.
(64) Mr. Kapil Sibal, learned Senior Counsel also addressed arguments at
length running to a few days. He formulated the following propositions for
argument:- (1) The plaintiff in this case does not rely upon any copyright
law; (2) For an action under copyright law to succeed, the following must be
established before a Court of law :- (a) The infringing literary/artistic work
is a reproduction or a substantial copy of the original literary /artistic
work of the plaintiff; (b) There must be evidence on record which is not
disputed and there exists a literary/artistic work which was given to the
defendant; (e) It must be established that the infringing copy is a
reproduction of the literary/artistic work and the source is that of the
plaintiff. (3) While dealing with a claim of copyright the Court must have
before it the original literary/artistic work and the infringing copy and the
Court should determine for itself looking at the two as to whether the latter
is an infringement of the former; (4) It is well established proposition of
law that a concept or an idea cannot be subject matter of projection by a
Court of law. The relief sought for by the plaintiff is neither with reference
to a product nor with reference to the form of the concept and, therefore,
neither the patent law nor the copyright law would apply to the case of the
plaintiff; (5) On the claim of confidentiality, the plaintiff must prove that
there is an agreement of confidentiality and that the information know-how and
knowledge was disclosed to the defendant on the basis of agreement of
confidentiality and that the quality of information know-how and knowledge is
such that it can be regarded as confidential in nature."
(65) The agreements namely, the shareholders agreement and the service
agreement dated January 1, 1994 are contrary to the claim of the plaintiff and
the plaintiff cannot be heard to say anything contrary to the terms of those
documents.
(66) The plaintiff seeks an injunction directing the defendant not to disclose
use, employment and exploit the information and there is no evidence that the
Turnkey Project of the first defendant on contract with Hughes, Arrow Space
Communication Ltd. is based on the system of the plaintiff. 811 (67) The
grievance by the plaintiff can be only against Hughes because it is Hughes
that is doing the Turnkey Project and the relief claimed by the plaintiff
against the defendants is of no avail to him.
(68) The documents filed by the plaintiff do not show that information know-
how and knowledge are of confidential nature owned by the plaintiff.
(69) The case of the plaintiff that the defendants committed the breach of the
agreement dated 1.1.94 is not within the scope of the suit.
(70) The reliefs claimed in the suit are not on the basis of any contractual
obligations.
(71) At best the plaintiff allegedly undertook an exploratory study and is now
seeking an injunction to prevent the manufacturers, who are in the field, from
using their own information, technology and know-how. The learned Senior
Counsel filed a note of transaction between the parties. It is stated that on
9.12.93 the plaintiff was paid 300,000 Us Dollars. The other two parties, who
were signatories to the shareholders agreement and under the service
agreements Mr. Roger dark and Mr. Stephen Moss, were also each paid 300,000 Us
Dollars. It was specifically agreed that if the undertaking letter or side
letter was not executed the money should be returned. I have already dealt
with these aspects and I do not want to relate them over again.
(72) The learned Senior Counsel submitted a note 'plaintiff's averments in the
plaint with respect to alleged transmission of documents and information in
relation to the Smpc system to the defendants.' It was emphasised that at page
31 para 15 of the plaint, plaintiff has stated :- "Plaintiff was induced to
show defendant No. I a copy of his Smpc presentation." Therefore, it is
submitted by the learned Senior Counsel that no documents were given by the
plaintiff to the first defendant. The averments in the plaint, which is
extracted above, is not true. No contemporaneous document by way of evidence
is produced by the plaintiff to substantiate his averment in the plaint.
(73) The learned Senior Counsel filed a note "Documents filed in Court which
refer to the alleged Smpc system." I have already referred to the documents
filed in three volumes by the plaintiff running into 1320 pages. They have to
be proved in accordance with law before anything could be said on the basis of
those documents.
(74) It was also contended by Mr. Kapil Sibal, learned Senior Counsel for the
first defendant that in the list of dates given by the learned Senior Counsel
for the plaintiff a remark is made that 'documents later on given to the first
defendant' is not proper and no documents were given by the plaintiff to the
first defendant. This is a matter for proof by the plaintiff in the trial of
the case.
(75) The learned Senior Counsel then submitted a note 'Plaintiff's Spmc System
Borrows Existing System License'. First defendant has given a comparative
study of the systems existing with that of the plaintiff. I have already
referred to the affidavit of Mr. Greenwood and, therefore, except staling that
there is nothing on record to show that the first defendant had been supplied
with any material by the plaintiff, no comparative study need be made now. 812
(76) The learned Senior Counsel then gave a note 'Plaintiff's System Borrows
Heavily from a Proprietary Proposition made by Martin Marietta to Hutchison in
July 1993. This is again based on affidavit of Mr. Greenwood, which I have
already referred to.
(77) The learned Senior Counsel submitted a note 'Analysis of Project the
Africom with reference to Pleadings and Correspondence exchanged between the
parties'. The point that was attempted to be made was that the plaintiff
agreed to work as per the shareholders agreement and the service agreements
and he acted quite contrary to them and, therefore, analysis of the Africom
Project was put forth before me only to show that the plaintiff had undertaken
himself prejudicing the interest of the first defendant and others. To come to
a decision on this aspect would require a lot of evidence and I do not want to
say anything on this aspect now. The main point is whether the first defendant
had committed the breach of confidential agreement in entering into a contract
with Hughes for the Turnkey Project.
(78) The learned Senior Counsel submitted a note on 'Use of the Obsidian
name". Mr. Greenwood in his affidavit has clearly stated that the name
Obsidian was thought of earlier and there is no evidence to show that the name
Obsidian was taken from the plaintiff.
(79) The learned Senior Counsel next submitted a note "Inconsistencies between
the Plaint and Rejoinder", I. Hongkong PROCEEDINGS: ^ (i) Plaint No mention of
the Defendant No.1's suit in Hongkong against the plaintiff for recovery of Us
$300,000 (ii) Rejoinder Plaintiff states that he came to know about the
Hongkong proceedings on or around March 30, 1995 when defendants' advocate
informed Plaintiff's advocate, (page 8, para 4.2) [This could not be so since
the instant suit was filed on March 25,1995 and admittedly the Defendants Nos.
1 and 2 were served only on March 28,1995. II. Joint Venture 2.1 Verbal
Agreements: (i) Plaint T No mention of "verbal agreement" in November, 1993 or
at all. (ii) Rejoinder (a) Plaintiff states that a "verbal agreement was
reached in or about the last week of November" [page 18 para 4.9(i)] (b)
Plaintiff refers to paras 16, 14, and 15 at pages 27-33 of the plaint for the
terms of the verbal agreement [pages 18 and 19, para 4.9(i)] [However, these
paragraphs contain no averment of an agreement 813 having been reached by the
Plaintiff, Defendant No. I and Roger Clark] 2.2 Time for Plaintiff to Bring
US$ 5 million (i) Plaint No mention of number of days in which Plaintiff was
to bring in LJS$ five million. (ii) Rejoinder Plaintiff states that it is 120
days from verbal agreement, i.e. from December 14, 1993 to April 14, 1994
[page 20, para 4.9(i)(e)]. Whereas in the Shareholders Agreement, it is up to
February 28, 1994 and it is for Esher and not the Plaintiff. 2.3 Undated
Letter: (i) Plaint Plaint states that the undated letter was signed in or
around November, 1993 and thereafter Defendant No. I made the payment to him
of US$ three hundred thousand [page 36, para 17(e)]. (ii) Rejoinder Plaintiff
states that undated letter signed some 7 days or so after the verbal agreement
on or around 14th December, 1993 [page 22, para 4-9(ii)]. 2.4 Use of Plans,
Charts, Drawings, etc. (i) Plaint In paras 14,15,16and 17, Plaintiff does not
state that J.V. would use his plans, charts, drawings etc. (ii) Rejoinder
Plaintiff states that J.V. would use plans, charts, drawings, etc. [page 20,
para 4.9(i)(f)] 2.5 Tile Five Agreements (i) Plaint No mention of the five
agreements. (ii) Rejoinder Plaintiff states that formal documents comprised of
five agreements, i.e. verbal. Shareholders, Service, license and
Confidentiality Agreements [page 44, para 423 (ii)] 2.6 Defendant No. 2
Signing Agreements (i) Plaint Plaintiff states that various agreements signed
between Defendant Nos. 1, 2 and 7 and Mr. Clark for the Technical Consultancy
while he was not in Hongkong. Plaintiff does not give dates (page 37, para
20). (ii) Rejoinder 814 Plaintiff states that agreements between Defendants
No. 1,7 and Clark and for and on behalf of Plaintiff on January 6,1994 and the
agreements were back dated to January 1, 1994 (page 23, para 4.9(vi)J 2.7
Details and Circumstances of various Agreements (i) Plaint Plaintiff does not
provide details and circumstances in which the various agreements were signed.
(ii) Rejoinder Plaintiff now provides details and circumstances in which the
agreements were signed [page 24, para 4.9(vii)] 2.10 Averments in Plaint (i)
Plaint No averments that documents, charts, illustrations, etc. given to
Defendant No. 1. (ii) Rejoinder Plaintiff states that the documents, charts,
illustrations, etc. were given to Defendant No. I (page 38, para 4.13; page
53, para 4.33). III. Smpc Technoloy: 3.1 (i) Plaint Plaintiff states that he
developed a unique and proprietory design for a new Satellite System (page 14,
para 4). (ii) Rejoinder Plaintiff states that Smpc is an outgrowth of
previously existing technology (page 47, para 4.29) 3.2 Receipt of Information
by Hughes (i) Plaint Plaintiff states that Defendant No. 6, the then Far East
representative of Hughes has received the technology [page 30, para 14(e)]
(ii) Rejoinder Plaintiff states that certain employees of Hughes, including
Defendant No. 6, obtained the Smpc technology. Plaintiff has commenced
proceedings against Hughes which are pending [page 53, para 4.32 (x)] 3.3
Allegation of Plaintiff against Hughes (i) Plaint No allegation of theft
against Hughes (ii) Rejoinder Allegations of theft of Smpc technology by
Hughes [at page 51, para 4.32(vi) page 52, para 4.32 (xi), page 53, para 4.32
(x), page 115, para 409]. 815 IV. Confidentiality Agreement 4.1 (i) Plaint No
reference to Confidentiality Agreement. (ii) Rejoinder A whole section of
Confidentiality Agreement (pages 53-57, paras 4.33-4.40). Above analysis would
show that the plaintiff has been prevaricating and he has no consistent case
on any aspect of the matters.
(80) Mr. Kapil Sibal, learned Senior Counsel relied upon a few cases in
support of his submissions. He referred to Nichrothem Electrical Company Ld.
and Others v. Percy, 1957 R.P.C. 207. The facts are as follows - "It was
during a conversation between Mr. Drew, one of the Plaintiffs, and Mr. Percy,
the Appellant, on the 6th June, 1952 that the idea was born, to use a neutral
phrase, of the artificial pig rearer with which we are concerned. For some
five and a half months the Plaintiff. Mr. Drew and his Co-plaintiff, Mr. Cox,
who own and control between them the Plaintiff Company. Nichrotherm Electrical
Coy., Ltd. and its business of heating engineers, on the one hand and the
Appellant on the other hand, collaborated in confidence together towards the
end of producing and marketing a satisfactory device. They had reached the
stage when working drawings for commercial manufacture of the pig reader in
the form of what has been called prototype No. 2 had been prepared. Could they
have gone on a little further in the way they had done previously, they might
well together have provided a useful article for agriculture at a good reward
to themselves; but on the 24th November, 1952, they quarrelled. The breach was
not healed, and I am indeed not sure that they any attempt was made to heal
it. The Appellant went headlong upon his own course of manufacturing and
marketing in his own name a device which substantially, if not exactly, was
copied from prototype No. 2 and from the working plans, being, as the learned
Judge thought, and as I think also, firmly convinced that he was entitled to
do what he did. The result has been this litigation." At page 211 it was
noticed by the Court in the following terms:- "Meanwhile, working drawings-
over 40 of them-had been prepared by the last plaintiff. Mr. Francis, on
instructions or on behalf of the other Plaintiffs. Of those drawings, one of
them called P.I, which I understand was a comprehensive drawing of prototype
Np. 2, was, apparently, on an occasion about the 22nd November left
accidentally at the appellant's house. The other drawings were handed by the
Plaintiffs to the Second Defendant for manufacturing purposes about the 26th
November." At page 213 the passage relied on by Mr. Ashok Desai in reply is as
follows:- "If, on the other hand, the confidence infringed is one imposed by
the rules of equity, then the remedy would be, prima fade, by way of
injunction or damages in lieu of an injunction under Lord Gaims's Act." 816
The Court referred to Saltrnan Engineering's case. Except the general
propositions which cannot be disputed by anybody, this case cannot be said to
be closer to the case.
(81) Learned Senior Counsel Mr. Kapil Sibal then referred to John Zinc Company
Limited v. Lloyds Bank Limited and Air oil Burner Company (G.B.) Limited, 1974
Fleet Street Report 401. Mainly the action was by defendants to strike out a
statement of plaint and mainly the complaint was by the employer against the
erstwhile employee. Therefore, there is no use in discussing this case in
detail.
(82) The learned Senior Counsel for the first defendant then referred to
Joanna Christina Glee-son and Glee-son Shirt Company Limited v. H.R. Denne
Limited, 1975 R.P.C. 471. This is a judgment of Court of Appeal in England. At
page 482 Whitford, ). referred to the claim of the plaintiff relating to the
drawing about the shares. This case mainly dealt with the law of copyrights
and I do not want to say anything more on this.
(83) The learned Senior Counsel then referred to the judgment of the Supreme
Court reported in R.G. Anand v. M/s. Delux Films and others, which I have
already referred to.
(84) The learned Senior Counsel referred to L.B. (Plastics) Limited v. Swiss
Products Limited, 1975 R.P.C. 551 judgment of the House of Lords. The facts
are as follows:- "The plaintiffs were the designers and manufacturers of a
plastic knock- down drawer system known as the Sheer glide. The Sheer glide
design was from the ti me it first went into production a success in the field
of knock-down plastic furniture. Much of the plaintiffs' business was done
with furniture makers who purchased Sheer glide drawers in component form for
the purpose of fitting them into car cases of their own manufacture. One such
customer was G.P. Ltd., a company linked with the defendants by common
ownership of shares. In December 1972, after the Sheer glide had been in
production for approximately fourteen months. G.P. Ltd. suggested that the
defendants might embark upon the production of a knock-down drawer system
suitable for use in furniture car cases produced by G.P. Ltd. G.P. Ltd.
required any drawer produced by the defendants to be interchangeable with the
Sheer glide drawer in G.P. Ltd.'s existing range of car cases. Between 1972
and 1975 the defendants made four separate attempts to produce an acceptable
design. In March 1975 the defendants produced a design known as the Swish
design. The plaintiffs sued for infringement of artistic copyright in the
production drawings which depicted their Sheer glide design. A number of the
features present in the Swish design were also present in some one or more of
the defendants' earlier unsuccessful designs. Although they admitted having
had access to the plaintiffs' products and those of other manufacturers, the
defendants denied copying and further denied that the Swish design reproduced
anything more than the idea behind the Sheer glide design. In addition they
relied on the defense afforded by Section 9(8) of the Copyright Act, 1956. At
first instance it was held that the defendants had infringed the plaintiffs'
817 copyright by copying many of those features which gave the Sheer glide
drawer its specific individuality; it was further held that the defendants
were unable to resist a finding of infringement by relying on Section 9(8) of
the Copyright Act, 1956. In so holding, the trial Judge rejected the
defendants' contention that the plaintiffs' production, drawings were neither
original nor artistic within the meaning of the Copyright Act, 1956. The
defendants appealed. It was conceded in the Court of Appeal that artistic
copyright subsisted in the drawings relied on by the plaintiffs and that the
plaintiffs were the owners of that copy right.The Court of Appeal held that
the plaintiffs had failed to discharge the onus of establishing that the
defendants had copied the Sheer glide design to any substantial extent, and
held in the alternative that Section 9(8) of the Copyright Act, 1956 afforded
the defendants a defense against the claim for infringement of copyright even
assuming that to have been established. The plaintiffs appealed to the House
of Lords." This case again is of a copyright action. At page 602 Buckley, L.J.
referred to the original character of the work. At page 610 dealing with the
role of the Court the learned Judges observed that there must be such a degree
of similarity as would lead one to say that the alleged infringement is a copy
or reproduction of the original. But that is not the situation here at all.
The basis according to the Court is that the basis of copyright is that a
defendant should not appropriate the property of another, that property is the
skill judgment and labour which goes into a work. In other words, the Court
had in mind the springboard doctrine. At page 619 the Court observed as under
:- "That copying has taken place is for the plaintiff to establish and prove
as a matter of fact. The beginning of the necessary proof normally lies in the
establishment of similarity combined with pr(wf of access to the plaintiffs'
production." At page 624 the Court observed as follows :- "My own view,
fortified by this concurrence, is that they were so alike as to give rise to
the shift in the evidential burden described by Lord W right in King Features
Syndicate Inc. v. O & M.Kleeman Ltd.(1941)A.C.417whcnhesaid at page 436: "Here
the only evidence of actual copying, direct or indirect, is similarity with
regard to the figure, which is a substantial part of the sketch, between the
copyright work and the alleged infringement. I think, however, that where
there is substantial similarity, that similarity is prima fade evidence of
copying which the party charged may refute by evidence that notwithstanding
the similarity, there was no copying but independent creation." In reply Mr.
Desai, teamed Senior Counsel relied upon the observation of Lord Salmon (Lord
Right). At page 633 the Court observed as follows :- "There is, of course, an
idea or concept behind every working drawing. It is trite law that there can
be no copyright in an idea or concept; but it is hardly necessary to say that
this does not mean that once the idea or concept has been translated into a
working drawing the drawing cannot enjoy copyright. 818 otherwise it would
mean that copyright could not attach to any drawing; for every drawing is the
child of an idea or concept." The House of Lords really approved of the view
taken by the Courts in earlier cases.
(85) The learned Senior Counsel referred to Kleeneze Ltd. and Another v.
D.R.G. (U.K.) Ltd. and Another, (1984) Fleet Street Reports 399. This case
involved the infringement relating to letterbox draught excluder. The learned
Judge on facts held that the plaintiff has failed to established copying and
otherwise this case is of no use to the first defendant.
(86) The learned Senior Counsel Mr. Kapil Sibal submitted that in the facts
and circumstances the plaintiff has miserably failed to prove that whatever
the name we give it to the plaintiff's system, he has not established the
same. The plaintiff has not produced any document to show that any materials
were given to the first defendant showing his system. The plaintiff has not
produced any document to show confidential nature of the system. The plaintiff
has not established and that his system and Turnkey Project of Hughes resemble
each other. I had already discussed this aspect and I do not want again to go
into it.
(87) It is a misnomer to call the right claimed by the plaintiff as an
intellectual property right. May be putting the best in his favor he is the
20th century Archimedes. But that would not cloth him with any proprietary
right in the so called system. I ask myself the question what are the
parameters of the intellectual property rights, and whether opening new
frontiers and making innovations would make them a property of an individual.
In the soft and hardware technology the speed with which improvements and
innovations are made is staggering and it is also mind boggling. Man's quest
for excellence will be halted if anyone makes an attempt to claim a right over
a trivial addition to an existing system assuming that there was any. We see
in the field of medicine the strides made which are tremendous. The ailments
which were considered to be incurable in the past are cured within a short
time with no suffering to the patients by employing tools which have been
discovered by man. Man's sojourn on earth is made happier by the innovative
thinking process bestowed on him. The exploration in all fields by human
ingenuity is infinite. Man cannot boast of having reached a final stage in any
matter. When such is the position of man on this planet, towards the end of
the 20th century a person claiming intellectual property right in a part of a
gigantic process and that too which is well-known in the field, prima fade, is
not appreciable. And that he should hope that Court should recognise his
rights can be characterised only as dreamy.
(88) The learned Senior Counsel for the plaintiff took pains to explain to me
various aspects of the plaintiff's action, ideas striking him late nights and
plaintiff's continuous bestowal of thoughts over the matters. I was waiting to
hear from the learned Senior Counsel for the plaintiff as to how did the
plaintiff fit in his work with intellectual property right. I am free to
confess that from the arguments of the plaintiff's Counsel I could not get any
tangible idea that the plaintiff had intellectual property right in the system
projected by him. I know the plaintiff thought that he had attempted to
charter a course to a place where thus far human beings had not even thought
of treading. I appreciate the approach of the plaintiff but alas, the Courts
are not the right place for adventurists. The Courts have to function within
819 the bounds of law and the materials placed before it. I do not suggest for
a moment that novelty should not be tested on the anvil of the principles of
jurisprudence. But the question is whether the novelty in the instant case is
so arresting, awesome provoking the thinking of the Court. I am not able to
say having heard the matter at length and having gone through the documents
filed in this case that the plaintiff has proved his case. I am very happy to
note that the principles evolved by great Judges in the past have helped me to
understand the problems posed in this case. For the purpose of understanding
the question I also read the following cases :- Pitman's Application 1969
R.P.C. 646 Improver Corporation v. Remington Consumer Products 1989 R.P.C. 69
(Court of Appeal). I had read the affidavit of Mr. Roger dark. No doubt he is
an engineer in the field. From his affidavit I am not able to get any
assistance. I had already referred to the Affidavits of Mr. Paramjit Singh
Bains and Mr. David Greenwood filed on behalf of the first defendant. I cannot
ignore their affidavits as contended for by the learned Counsel for the
plaintiff. Their affidavits definitely made me appreciate the question and but
for the affidavits I would have found it difficult to follow the case of the
plaintiff in the light of voluminous documents filed by the plaintiff, after
the filing of the suit. As I have already observed, I do not attach any
importance to the affidavits of the 7th defendant, except to the extent
indicated by me above. I took into consideration each of the affidavits with
reference to what and how facts have been stated in the affidavits and I was
not swayed by the deponents of the affidavits. And this is only a prima facie
view.
(89) In England the general view is that a patents give temporary protection
to the technological inventions and designs right to the appearance of mass
produced goods, copyrights case long-lasting rights in, for instance literary,
artistic and mistake creations; trade mark are protected against imitations so
long as appearance as it continue to be employed in trade and there is no
single generic term that satisfactorily covers them all. Now people use
"Intellectual Property Rights". It does not take him trade marks and other
rights. It is said that this is a branch of law which protects some of the
finer manifestation of human achievements. The United Nations Organisation has
established an Organisation for this purpose i.e. called World Intelligent
Property's Rights Organisation.(WIPRO) (90) Having regard to the voluminous
documents filed by the plaintiff and the affidavits filed by the parties, I
had to consider the matter in detail. We have to have our weather eye open in
the context of the persons who are trying to exploit the situation in the
world. I have to sift materials flowing from all quarters to decide on the
rights of the parties. As stated in 1973 R.P.C. I (supra) the question still
remains one of facts and the Court must do the best it can to put itself into
the position of a non-expert in which unfortunately it usually is, and must
come to a conclusion on the matter having regard to the evidence and all the
relevant surrounding circumstances. I have no hesitation in coming to the
conclusion that the plaintiff has not proved his case that he is the
originator of the system, that he had anything of confidential nature, that
the plaintiff communicated the same to the first defendant and that the first
defendant had copied the system from the plaintiff. I may note here that in
the Hindustan Times dated 2nd of October 1995 at page 19 there is an
advertisement in the following terms :- 820 "Odyssey telephone system
launched" New Delhi: Odyssey Telecommunications International Inc., a joint-
venture Trw and Teleglobe, has announced the launch of a satellite-based
telecommunications system- Odyssey. Odyssey is a telephone system by
subscription, composed of 12 satellites with the capacity to offer telephone
services, guaranteeing access anywhere in the world, even in areas that are
now outside the reach of conventional or cellular telephone systems." This is
also a system. Therefore/it is clear there is nothing new in what the
plaintiff claims.
(91) Mr. Kapil Sibal, learned Senior Counsel, submitted that after all, the
first defendant had entered into a contract with Hughes for a Turnkey Project
and the entire work is being done by Hughes and it is quite understandable as
to how the plaintiff can seek an injunction against Hughes by praying for an
injunction against the first defendant. The plaintiff cannot pretend that he
is not aware of the Turnkey Project because the plaintiff himself had filed
the documents submitted by the first defendant to the Govt. of India. The
plaintiff claims to be in close contact with Hughes also. Therefore, I feel
there is considerable force in the arguments of Mr. Kapil Sibal, learned
Senior Counsel, the plaintiff is trying to do something indirectly by trying
to praying for a relief against first defendant alone leaving Hughes. In that
way, I would say that the plaintiff is praying for a relief, even if it is
granted, would become futile. The arguments of Mr. Kapil Sibal, learned senior
Counsel, for the first defendant arc irrefreagable.
(92) The assertion of the plaintiff about his invention of a system by his own
exertions reminds me for what is said in 88 Quarterly Law Review page 507;
that sweat of a man's brows and the exudations of a man's brains, are as much
a man's own property as the breeches upon back side.
(93) Therefore, I find that the plaintiff has not established a prima facie
strong case on the merits. He is not entitled to an order of injunction.
(94) I still thought over the matter whether damages would be an adequate
relief for the plaintiff in the event of his succeeding after the trial of the
case. The learned Senior Counsel for the plaintiff contended in this case
damages would not be an adequate relief because the first defendant would
complete the project and would commence business before the matter is decided
by this Court. As I had already said that the plaintiff can claim damages,
therefore, here is a matter where the plaintiff can be compensated in money in
the event of his succeeding ultimately in the suit. There will be no
difficulty in assessing the damages at the time of the trial of the case.
Principles relating to the assessment of damages in similar matters are laid
down by the House of Lords in General Tire ami Rubber Co. v. firestone Tyre
and Rubber Co. Ltd 1975 2 All England Report-173 : 1975 I Wlr Si 9 :1976 Rpc
187.
(95) About the copyright law and claims made by persons without any
justification whatsoever had been subject of comment by Justice Per Thomas of
the High Court of New Zealand. He said in Franklin Machinery Ltd v. Albany
Farm Centre Ltd (1991), 23 Ifr 649 "The law relating to copyright has got
quite out of hand Claims for copyright 821 protection arc all too often raised
and applied in circumstances which do not serve the objectives of copyright
law... Copyright has now invaded the field of industrial design in a manner
which has been dramatic. The most banal of industrial or technical drawings,
which involve little more originality than that which accompanies many routine
domestic tasks, has come to attract an aggressive claim to copy right
protection ...the Courts, lawyers, commentators and textbook writers have
created a regime which no longer serves its legitimate purpose and is thought
by many to operate to the detriment of the public interest. Like ants in the
forest, they have constructed a misshapen anthill of enormous proportions
which is of no use nor value to anyone or anything save other ants and the
parasites that feed upon their indulgent labours. It serves no social or
economic purpose, and it demeans the Courts to be called upon to examine the
fine distinctions which has become necessary for defendants to draw."
(96) The scope of the exercise of discretion by Courts at the interlocutory
stage has been considered by the Supreme Court in a number of cases. In Dalpat
Kumar and Another v Prahlad Singh and others, . The Supreme Court has posited
in paragraph 5 at page 505 in the following terms:- "Therefore, the burden is
on the plaintiff by evidence filed by affidavit or otherwise, that there is "a
prima facie case" in his favor which needs adjudication at the trial. The
existence of the prima fade right and infraction of the enjoyment of his
property or the right is a condition for the grant of temporary injunction.
Prima fade case is not to be confused with prima fade title which has to be
established, on evidence at the trial. Only prima fade case is a substantial
question raised, bona fide, which needs investigation and a decision on
merits. Satisfaction that there is a prima fade case by itself is not
sufficient to grant injunction. The Court further has to satisfy that
noninterference by the Court would result in "irreparable injury" to the party
seeking relief and that there is no other remedy available to the party except
one to grant injunction and he needs protection from the consequences of
apprehended injury or dispossession. Irreparable injury, however, does not
mean that there must be no physical possibility of repairing the injury, but
means only that the injury must be a material one, namely one that cannot be
adequately compensated by way of damages. The third condition also is that
"the balance of convenience" must be in favor of granting injunction. The
Court while granting or refusing to grant injunction should exercise sound
judicial discretion to find the amount of substantial mischief of injury which
is likely to be caused to the parties, if the injunction is refused and
compare it with that it is likely to be caused to the other side if the
injunction is granted. If on weighing competing possibilities or probabilities
of likelihood of injury and if the Court considers that pending the suit, the
subject matter should be maintained in status quo, an injunction would be
issued. Thus the Court has to exercise its sound judicial discretion in
granting or refusing the relief of ad interim injunction pending the suit."
The Supreme Court further observed in the following manner :- "The phrases
"prima fade case"; "balance of convenience and irreparable 822 loss" are not
rhetoric phrases for incantation, but words of width and elasticity, to meet
myriad situations presented by man's ingenuity in given facts and
circumstances, but always is hedged with sound exercise of judicial discretion
to meet the ends of justice." In Shi-v Kumar Chadha v. Municipal Corporation
of Delhi and Others, the Supreme Court again laid down in the following
manner:- "It has been pointed out repeatedly that a party is not entitled to
an order of injunction as a matter of right or course. Grant of injunction is
within the discretion of the Court and such discretion is to be exercised in
favor of the plaintiff only if it is proved to the satisfaction of the Court
that unless the defendant is restrained by an order of injunction, an
irreparable loss or damage will be caused to the plaintiff during the pendency
of the suit. The purpose of temporary injunction is, thus, to maintain the
status quo. The Court grants such relief according to the legal principles-ex
debate justitiae. Before any such order is passed the Court must be satisfied
that a strong prima facie case has been made out by the plaintiff including on
the question of maintainability of the suit and the balance of convenience is
in his favor and refusal of injunction would cause irreparable injury to him."
It is also well known that the House of Lords in American Cynamyd case (1975)
I All Er 504 had laid down the principles in a beautiful way. When I put my
pen to paper to write this order I tried my best to be very brief, as far as
possible. But having regard to the documents filed by the parties, affidavits
tendered by the parties and the arguments advanced by the learned Senior
Counsel for the parties I thought I should consider all the materials placed
before me. And that is the reason for this long order. I hope I have not
omitted to refer to all the materials. I have come to my own conclusion and
naturally it would be against one of the parties. I agree with the views
expressed by Justice Kitto of the Court in Australia when he said in
Wolanski's Design (1953) 88 Clr 278 (Aus) - "It is no doubt true, as, in
LeatheriesLtd.v. Lycett Saddle& Motor Accessories Co Ltd. (1909) 26 Rpc 166 at
171, Eve) rejoiced to find himself able to say on the authority of Lord
Herschell, that when the Judge has arrived at a conclusion upon such an issue
of fact, it is not to be expected that he will be able, at any rate
satisfactorily to the litigants or to one of the litigants, to indicate in
detail the grounds which have led him to the conclusion. And I cannot say that
the present case is any exception to the rule that the eye, like the heart
according to Pascal, has its reasons that reason does not know."
(97) In fine, on the materials placed before me, I find no difficulty in
coming to the prima facie conclusion that the plaintiff has not established
that he had any intellectual property rights in any system, he did not hand
over any materials to the first defendant in respect of the system and there
is no question of first defendant copying from any system of the plaintiff.
(98) For all these reasons, IA.2773/95 for injunction is dismissed. However,
there shall be no order as to costs.
before me. And that is the reason for this long order. I hope I have not
omitted to refer to all the materials. I have come to my own conclusion and
naturally it would be against one of the parties. I agree with the views
expressed by Justice Kitto of the Court in Australia when he said in
Wolanski's Design (1953) 88 Clr 278 (Aus) - "It is no doubt true, as, in
LeatheriesLtd.v. Lycett Saddle& Motor Accessories Co Ltd. (1909) 26 Rpc 166 at
171, Eve) rejoiced to find himself able to say on the authority of Lord
Herschell, that when the Judge has arrived at a conclusion upon such an issue
of fact, it is not to be expected that he will be able, at any rate
satisfactorily to the litigants or to one of the litigants, to indicate in
detail the grounds which have led him to the conclusion. And I cannot say that
the present case is any exception to the rule that the eye, like the heart
according to Pascal, has its reasons that reason does not know."
(97) In fine, on the materials placed before me, I find no difficulty in
coming to the prima facie conclusion that the plaintiff has not established
that he had any intellectual property rights in any system, he did not hand
a considerable length of time.
(3) Mr. Ashok Desai, learned Senior Counsel, appearing for the plaintiff,
started cerebral debate on Intellectual Property Rights. I heard him at length
because of the attempt made by him collecting all facts in favor of his client
presenting a configuration, as it were, of the various points in favor of the
plaintiff to enable me to appreciate his arguments. Though at the first blush,
I could not on a perusal of the plaint fully appreciate the case of the
plaintiff, the dexterity and alacrity with which Mr. Ashok Desai, learned
Senior Counsel made his submissions marshalling the facts, illumined the dark
corners of the plaintiff's case. Though the arguments extended to a number of
days, in the ultimate analysis the point distilled down to a very specific
one. The same became discernible to me very early. The plaintiff's claim could
be characterised even at the out set as something we try to spot in a milky
way on a clear sky and something which cannot be easily comprehended or
visualised in cyber space by a casual Observer. Mr. Ashok Desai, learned
Senior Counsel made a full disquisition, as it were, on Satellite Mobile
Personal Communication System (SMPC) venture loquising what is stated by the
plaintiff. The plaintiff claims to be a trendsetter in this type of technology
bringing the peoples of the world closer over a hand set at moderate cost
saving lot of time. When the space technology in the globe is in incandescent
before me. And that is the reason for this long order. I hope I have not
omitted to refer to all the materials. I have come to my own conclusion and
naturally it would be against one of the parties. I agree with the views
expressed by Justice Kitto of the Court in Australia when he said in
Wolanski's Design (1953) 88 Clr 278 (Aus) - "It is no doubt true, as, in
LeatheriesLtd.v. Lycett Saddle& Motor Accessories Co Ltd. (1909) 26 Rpc 166 at
171, Eve) rejoiced to find himself able to say on the authority of Lord
Herschell, that when the Judge has arrived at a conclusion upon such an issue
of fact, it is not to be expected that he will be able, at any rate
satisfactorily to the litigants or to one of the litigants, to indicate in
detail the grounds which have led him to the conclusion. And I cannot say that
the present case is any exception to the rule that the eye, like the heart
according to Pascal, has its reasons that reason does not know."
(97) In fine, on the materials placed before me, I find no difficulty in
coming to the prima facie conclusion that the plaintiff has not established
that he had any intellectual property rights in any system, he did not hand
a considerable length of time.
(3) Mr. Ashok Desai, learned Senior Counsel, appearing for the plaintiff,
started cerebral debate on Intellectual Property Rights. I heard him at length
because of the attempt made by him collecting all facts in favor of his client
presenting a configuration, as it were, of the various points in favor of the
plaintiff to enable me to appreciate his arguments. Though at the first blush,
I could not on a perusal of the plaint fully appreciate the case of the
plaintiff, the dexterity and alacrity with which Mr. Ashok Desai, learned
Senior Counsel made his submissions marshalling the facts, illumined the dark
corners of the plaintiff's case. Though the arguments extended to a number of
days, in the ultimate analysis the point distilled down to a very specific
one. The same became discernible to me very early. The plaintiff's claim could
be characterised even at the out set as something we try to spot in a milky
way on a clear sky and something which cannot be easily comprehended or
visualised in cyber space by a casual Observer. Mr. Ashok Desai, learned
Senior Counsel made a full disquisition, as it were, on Satellite Mobile
Personal Communication System (SMPC) venture loquising what is stated by the
plaintiff. The plaintiff claims to be a trendsetter in this type of technology
bringing the peoples of the world closer over a hand set at moderate cost
saving lot of time. When the space technology in the globe is in incandescent
before me. And that is the reason for this long order. I hope I have not
omitted to refer to all the materials. I have come to my own conclusion and
naturally it would be against one of the parties. I agree with the views
expressed by Justice Kitto of the Court in Australia when he said in
Wolanski's Design (1953) 88 Clr 278 (Aus) - "It is no doubt true, as, in
LeatheriesLtd.v. Lycett Saddle& Motor Accessories Co Ltd. (1909) 26 Rpc 166 at
171, Eve) rejoiced to find himself able to say on the authority of Lord
Herschell, that when the Judge has arrived at a conclusion upon such an issue
of fact, it is not to be expected that he will be able, at any rate
satisfactorily to the litigants or to one of the litigants, to indicate in
detail the grounds which have led him to the conclusion. And I cannot say that
the present case is any exception to the rule that the eye, like the heart
according to Pascal, has its reasons that reason does not know."
(97) In fine, on the materials placed before me, I find no difficulty in
coming to the prima facie conclusion that the plaintiff has not established
that he had any intellectual property rights in any system, he did not hand
a considerable length of time.
(3) Mr. Ashok Desai, learned Senior Counsel, appearing for the plaintiff,
started cerebral debate on Intellectual Property Rights. I heard him at length
because of the attempt made by him collecting all facts in favor of his client
presenting a configuration, as it were, of the various points in favor of the
plaintiff to enable me to appreciate his arguments. Though at the first blush,
I could not on a perusal of the plaint fully appreciate the case of the
plaintiff, the dexterity and alacrity with which Mr. Ashok Desai, learned
Senior Counsel made his submissions marshalling the facts, illumined the dark
corners of the plaintiff's case. Though the arguments extended to a number of
days, in the ultimate analysis the point distilled down to a very specific
one. The same became discernible to me very early. The plaintiff's claim could
be characterised even at the out set as something we try to spot in a milky
way on a clear sky and something which cannot be easily comprehended or
visualised in cyber space by a casual Observer. Mr. Ashok Desai, learned
Senior Counsel made a full disquisition, as it were, on Satellite Mobile
Personal Communication System (SMPC) venture loquising what is stated by the
plaintiff. The plaintiff claims to be a trendsetter in this type of technology
bringing the peoples of the world closer over a hand set at moderate cost
saving lot of time. When the space technology in the globe is in incandescent
before me. And that is the reason for this long order. I hope I have not
omitted to refer to all the materials. I have come to my own conclusion and
naturally it would be against one of the parties. I agree with the views
expressed by Justice Kitto of the Court in Australia when he said in
Wolanski's Design (1953) 88 Clr 278 (Aus) - "It is no doubt true, as, in
LeatheriesLtd.v. Lycett Saddle& Motor Accessories Co Ltd. (1909) 26 Rpc 166 at
171, Eve) rejoiced to find himself able to say on the authority of Lord
Herschell, that when the Judge has arrived at a conclusion upon such an issue
of fact, it is not to be expected that he will be able, at any rate
satisfactorily to the litigants or to one of the litigants, to indicate in
detail the grounds which have led him to the conclusion. And I cannot say that
the present case is any exception to the rule that the eye, like the heart
according to Pascal, has its reasons that reason does not know."
(97) In fine, on the materials placed before me, I find no difficulty in
coming to the prima facie conclusion that the plaintiff has not established
that he had any intellectual property rights in any system, he did not hand
a considerable length of time.
(3) Mr. Ashok Desai, learned Senior Counsel, appearing for the plaintiff,
started cerebral debate on Intellectual Property Rights. I heard him at length
because of the attempt made by him collecting all facts in favor of his client
presenting a configuration, as it were, of the various points in favor of the
plaintiff to enable me to appreciate his arguments. Though at the first blush,
I could not on a perusal of the plaint fully appreciate the case of the
plaintiff, the dexterity and alacrity with which Mr. Ashok Desai, learned
Senior Counsel made his submissions marshalling the facts, illumined the dark
corners of the plaintiff's case. Though the arguments extended to a number of
days, in the ultimate analysis the point distilled down to a very specific
one. The same became discernible to me very early. The plaintiff's claim could
be characterised even at the out set as something we try to spot in a milky
way on a clear sky and something which cannot be easily comprehended or
visualised in cyber space by a casual Observer. Mr. Ashok Desai, learned
Senior Counsel made a full disquisition, as it were, on Satellite Mobile
Personal Communication System (SMPC) venture loquising what is stated by the
plaintiff. The plaintiff claims to be a trendsetter in this type of technology
bringing the peoples of the world closer over a hand set at moderate cost
saving lot of time. When the space technology in the globe is in incandescent
stage providing amenities to people which human ingenuity could not conceive
of thus far, the plaintiff is trying to scuttle the attempt of the first
defendant to do something with the able assistance of the U.S. Advance
Technology Expertise. Though the plaintiff through a long plant has made an
attempt to project himself as a reincarnation of great geniuses whose
contribution had been the basis for the modem technological advance but
analysis of the materials provided by the plaintiff do not show him in
iridescent colours. The plaintiff expects a great nugget for his so called
system conceived by him by a process of configuration and seeks to completely
destroy all attempts of the first defendant to proceed with his work.
(4) Before I notice the pleadings in the case I would like to refer to the
before me. And that is the reason for this long order. I hope I have not
omitted to refer to all the materials. I have come to my own conclusion and
naturally it would be against one of the parties. I agree with the views
expressed by Justice Kitto of the Court in Australia when he said in
Wolanski's Design (1953) 88 Clr 278 (Aus) - "It is no doubt true, as, in
LeatheriesLtd.v. Lycett Saddle& Motor Accessories Co Ltd. (1909) 26 Rpc 166 at
171, Eve) rejoiced to find himself able to say on the authority of Lord
Herschell, that when the Judge has arrived at a conclusion upon such an issue
of fact, it is not to be expected that he will be able, at any rate
satisfactorily to the litigants or to one of the litigants, to indicate in
detail the grounds which have led him to the conclusion. And I cannot say that
the present case is any exception to the rule that the eye, like the heart
according to Pascal, has its reasons that reason does not know."
(97) In fine, on the materials placed before me, I find no difficulty in
coming to the prima facie conclusion that the plaintiff has not established
that he had any intellectual property rights in any system, he did not hand
a considerable length of time.
(3) Mr. Ashok Desai, learned Senior Counsel, appearing for the plaintiff,
started cerebral debate on Intellectual Property Rights. I heard him at length
because of the attempt made by him collecting all facts in favor of his client
presenting a configuration, as it were, of the various points in favor of the
plaintiff to enable me to appreciate his arguments. Though at the first blush,
I could not on a perusal of the plaint fully appreciate the case of the
plaintiff, the dexterity and alacrity with which Mr. Ashok Desai, learned
Senior Counsel made his submissions marshalling the facts, illumined the dark
corners of the plaintiff's case. Though the arguments extended to a number of
days, in the ultimate analysis the point distilled down to a very specific
one. The same became discernible to me very early. The plaintiff's claim could
be characterised even at the out set as something we try to spot in a milky
way on a clear sky and something which cannot be easily comprehended or
visualised in cyber space by a casual Observer. Mr. Ashok Desai, learned
Senior Counsel made a full disquisition, as it were, on Satellite Mobile
Personal Communication System (SMPC) venture loquising what is stated by the
plaintiff. The plaintiff claims to be a trendsetter in this type of technology
bringing the peoples of the world closer over a hand set at moderate cost
saving lot of time. When the space technology in the globe is in incandescent
stage providing amenities to people which human ingenuity could not conceive
of thus far, the plaintiff is trying to scuttle the attempt of the first
defendant to do something with the able assistance of the U.S. Advance
Technology Expertise. Though the plaintiff through a long plant has made an
attempt to project himself as a reincarnation of great geniuses whose
contribution had been the basis for the modem technological advance but
analysis of the materials provided by the plaintiff do not show him in
iridescent colours. The plaintiff expects a great nugget for his so called
system conceived by him by a process of configuration and seeks to completely
destroy all attempts of the first defendant to proceed with his work.
(4) Before I notice the pleadings in the case I would like to refer to the
before me. And that is the reason for this long order. I hope I have not
omitted to refer to all the materials. I have come to my own conclusion and
naturally it would be against one of the parties. I agree with the views
expressed by Justice Kitto of the Court in Australia when he said in
Wolanski's Design (1953) 88 Clr 278 (Aus) - "It is no doubt true, as, in
LeatheriesLtd.v. Lycett Saddle& Motor Accessories Co Ltd. (1909) 26 Rpc 166 at
171, Eve) rejoiced to find himself able to say on the authority of Lord
Herschell, that when the Judge has arrived at a conclusion upon such an issue
of fact, it is not to be expected that he will be able, at any rate
satisfactorily to the litigants or to one of the litigants, to indicate in
detail the grounds which have led him to the conclusion. And I cannot say that
the present case is any exception to the rule that the eye, like the heart
according to Pascal, has its reasons that reason does not know."
(97) In fine, on the materials placed before me, I find no difficulty in
coming to the prima facie conclusion that the plaintiff has not established
that he had any intellectual property rights in any system, he did not hand
