Intellectual Property Appellate Board
Bal Krishan Jindal vs Mohinder Singh And Anr. on 16 November, 2006
Equivalent citations: 2007 (34) PTC 136 IPAB
Bench: Z Negi, S O Rahaman
JUDGMENT Z.S. Negi, Vice-Chairman
1\. These two CO. being Nos. 18 of 1999 and 24 of 1998, which were filed under
Sections 46, 56 and 107 of the Trade and Merchandise Marks Act, 1958
(hereinafter referred to as the Act) in the High Court of Delhi, have been
transferred by that High Court to the Intellectual Property Appellate Board
pursuant to the provisions of Section 100 of the Trade Marks Act, 1999 and the
Board numbered them as TRA/136/2004/TM/DEL and TRA/155/TM/DEL, respectively.
2\. Since both the parties have filed petitions/applications for cancellation
of each others trade marks, therefore, for the purpose of convenience, instead
of referring the parties in the applications as petitioner/applicant and
respondent No. 1, the last names of the parties are being referred to as "Shri
Kishan" and "Shri Singh" in conjunction with the applicant or, as the case may
be, the respondent No. 1.
3\. Shri Kishan, the applicant seeks for rectification/cancellation of the
entry relating to registered trade mark 'Citizen', under No. 423100 as of
11.6.1984 in respect of electric bulbs included in class 11, in the name of
Singh, the applicant in his affidavit evidence has filed a number of copies
Trade Marks Journal advertisements, including search report of Trade Mark
Registry to show that there are number of word trade marks Citizen registered
and also advertised for registration in respect of electrical and electronic
goods. It is material to remember that this being an application for
cancellation, the onus is upon the applicant. The Apex Court has in National
Bell Co. and Anr. v. Metal Goods Mfg. Co. (P) Ltd. and Anr. PTC (Suppl) (1)
586 (SC) has held : Section 56 deals with the power to cancel or vary
registration and to rectify the register. Sub-section (2) thereof confers a
right to any person "aggrieved" by any.... The words "without sufficient
cause" in the Section have clearly relation to the time of original
registration. Therefore, a person can apply for cancellation on the ground
that the trade mark in question was not at the date of the commencement of the
proceedings distinctive in the sense of Section 9(3). The burden of proof,
however, in such a case as aforesaid, is on the applicant applying under
Section 56. It is needle JS to observe that the applicant has miserably failed
11.6.1984 in respect of electric bulbs included in class 11, in the name of
Shri Singh, the respondent No. 1 and Shri Singh, the applicant seeks for
cancellation Of registered trade mark 'Citizen', under Nos. 350335 as of
13.6.1979 in class 11 in respect of electric heating appliances, electric
lamps, electric fans and brackets (hanging) and 350336 as of 13.6.1979 in
class 9 in respect of wires (electric), cables (electric), holders (electric
coil) switches (electric), chokes, fuses, kitkat (electric) and plug, tops
(electric), respectively, in the name of Shri Kishan, the respondent No. 1,
4\. Shri Kishan, the applicant states that M/s. Citizen Electrical is his sole
proprietorship firm which is the prior adopter of the trade marks Citizen and
the said marks have been renewed from time to time and are valid, subsisting
and conclusive throughout the country. He is using the said mark since 1976
(within the knowledge of Shri Singh, the respondent No. 1) extensively,
continuously and uninterruptedly throughout the length and breadth of this
country. Shri Kishan, the applicant claims that the trade mark Citizen on
account of long, continuous, extensive use, extensive marketing network and
extensive advertisement campaign and excellent quality of goods has acquired
enviable reputation and goodwill amongst the purchasing public and trade which
has become distinctive of the goods and business of the applicant. He claims
to a person aggrieved because of filing of a Suit by Shri Singh, the
respondent No. 1 against him before the District Judge, Delhi. The main
grounds of application are that the impugned registration of trade mark in the
name of Shri Singh, the respondent No. 1 is unlawful and contrary to the
various provisions of the Act and registration thereof is without any bona
fide intention of use as immediately preceding this application five years has
expired during which there has not been any bona fide use of the trade mark in
respect of goods in which it is registered. The use of the impugned trade mark
by Shri Singh, the respondent No. 1 is likely to cause confusion and deception
amongst the public and trade and as such the impugned registration offends
against the provisions of Section 11(a) of the Act. Further, Shri Singh, the
respondent No. 1 is not the proprietor of the trade mark, the registration of
the impugned trade mark was obtained by making false statement about ownership
of the mark as well as misleading claim and as such the registration is a
fraud upon his vested and legal rights in the trade mark Citizen. The adoption
of impugned trade mark Citizen on the part of Shri Singh, the respondent No. 1
is dishonest and existence of such trade mark on the register affects the
purity of the register.
5\. Shri Singh, the applicant states that he is the sole proprietor of M/s.
Aay Kay Lights (India) engaged in the business of manufacturing and selling of
electric bulbs since 1980. He claims to have honestly and bona fidely adopted
the trade mark Citizen in 1980 and since then using the mark regularly,
continuously, uninterruptedly and without hindrance, whatsoever, from any
corner. Shri Singh, the applicant claims that he has been using that trade
mark since 1980. From 1980 to 1986, Citizen is the only trade mark used by the
him in respect of electric bulbs and from 1986 till today, his major sales
relates to electric bulbs under that trade mark. He is the registered
proprietor of trade mark Citizen under No. 423100 as of 11.6.1984 in respect
of electrical bulbs included in class 11 and that registration is valid,
subsisting and in force. On account of superior quality of electric bulbs and
due to continuous use of trade mark Citizen it has acquired unique reputation
and goodwill in public and trade and the goods under that mark are exclusively
associated with his goods by the trade and purchasing public. Any trade mark
identical and/or similar thereto for electric bulbs is bound to cause
confusion and deception in the course of trade. It is further averred that
Shri Singh, the applicant has filed a Suit No. 44 of 1996 against Shri Kishan,
the respondent No. 1 for perpetual injunction restraining infringement of
trade mark, passing off which is pending before the Additional District Judge,
Delhi and Shri Kishan, the respondent No. 1 has filed a counter claim in the
said suit claiming himself to be the registered proprietor of the trade mark
under Nos. 350335 in class 11 and 350336 in class 9. Shri Singh, the applicant
claims to be person aggrieved by the registration of trade mark Nos. 350335
and 350336 by the respondent No. 2 in favour of Shri Kishan, the respondent
No. 1 and such registration is a threat to his right of exclusive use of the
trade mark. The grounds of application for removal of impugned marks are that
Shri Kishan, the respondent No. 1 is not the proprietor of the trade marks and
has obtained the impugned registration by giving false statements, affidavits,
and by making wrong averments before the Registrar for obtaining registration;
that Shri Kishan, the respondent No. 1 committed fraud upon the Trade Marks
Registry in securing registration by concealing material facts and misleading
averments; that the 'electric bulb' was not part of the applicant for
registration and its subsequent addition is illegal and obtained by fraud;
that the registration of trade marks in favour of Shri Kishan, the respondent
No. 1 is the contravention of the provisions Sections 9, 11 and 18 of the Act;
that the impugned mark is not distinctive on the date of commencement of the
legal proceedings; that there has in fact no bona fide use of the trade mark
by Shri Kishan, the respondent No. 1 in relation to goods in respect whereof
the marks were registered by the registered proprietor for a period up to a
date one month before the date of present petition for a continuous period of
five years or more; that the registration of such mark was made without any
sufficient cause and the same remains on the register without any sufficient
cause and that the existence of the impugned registration on the register
affects the purity of such register.
6\. Shri Kishan, the respondent No. 1 filed in March, 2001 his reply to the
petition (of Shri Singh) controverting all the material averments made in the
petition, rejoinder to the reply in May, 2002 and evidence by way of affidavit
in March, 2006. Likewise in the other rectification petition of Shri Kishan,
the applicant, Shri Singh, the respondent No. 1 filed in November, 1999 his
reply controverting all the material averments made the petition, rejoinder to
the reply in September, 2000 and evidence by way of affidavit in February,
2006.
7\. Prior to the transfer of C.O. No. 18 of 1999 and C.O. No. 24 of 1998, the
High Court of Delhi on an consolidation application LA. No. 9184 of 2002 in
C.O. No. 24 of 1998 had, on the ground that both the petitions are for
cancellation to trade mark of each other and the facts of both the petitions
are similar, ordered that both the petitions be consolidated and the evidence
led in C.O. No. 24 of 1998 be read in C.O. No. 18 of 1999 as the evidence in
both the petitions shall be substantially common.
8\. After completion of the procedural formalities, the applications came up
for hearing before the Circuit Bench at New Delhi on 3.5.2006, when learned
Counsel Shri M.R. Bhale Rao appeared for Shri Kishan, the applicant/respondent
No. 1 and learned Counsel Shri A.K. Goel appeared for Shri Singh, the
respondent No. 1/applicant.
9\. Each learned Counsel submitted the applicants to be persons aggrieved
within the meaning of Sections 46 and 56 of the Act. In the averments also,
both applicants are alleging each other as not to be proprietor of the
impugned mark. In order to be a person aggrieved, the person must be
proprietor of the mark and, therefore, the proprietorship and person aggrieved
are inter-connected which is required to be dealt with in consolidation.
Learned Counsel for Shri Kishan, the applicant contended that the mark of Shri
Singh, the respondent No. 1 was owned by the partnership firm and at the time
of dissolution of the firm in 1988, Shri Singh, the respondent No. 1 had not
been granted any right pertaining to trade mark, hence he is not the
proprietor of the mark. As such he has no locus standi to file application or
is not a person aggrieved. Ld. counsel for Shri Singh, the respondent No. 1 in
reply, denying this, drew our attention to Ext. D-l and D-2 of Shri Singh's
type set and pages 83-84 of Shri Kishan, the applicant's type set Volume-2.
Ext. D-1 is a photocopy of letter dated 10.8.1999 from the Trade Marks
Registry annexing therewith a photocopy of the entry in Register of Trade
Marks relating to Trade Mark No. 423100 in class-11 (Ext. D-2) in the name of
Shri Singh, the respondent No. 1. Pages 83-84 are the photocopy of Dissolution
Deed dated 5.9.1988 which shows that Shri Singh, the respondent No. 1 has been
authorised 'to apply/use for factory licence or any other licence or trade
mark or patent if he so desire to continue the business.' Therefore, the
contention that Shri Singh, the respondent No. 1 is not proprietor of the mark
does not sustain. Learned Counsel for Shri Singh, the applicant also contended
that Shri Kishan, the respondent No. 1 is not proprietor of the marks on the
ground that he has assigned the marks without goodwill in 1985 for
consideration to a third party and as such he is neither proprietor nor a
person aggrieved. As such he has no locus standi to file this application. Ld.
Counsel for Shri Kishan, the respondent No. 1 in reply, denying this,
submitted that the marks were re-assigned to Shri Kishan, the respondent No. 1
and drew our attention to Ex. B-1 and P-2 of type set volume-I of Shri Kishan,
the applicant to show that both the trade marks are renewed up to 2000 in the
name of Shri Kishan. Ld. Counsel for Shri Singh, the respondent No. 1 also
drew our attention to Ext. C5, C6 and C7 of the type set filed by Shri Singh,
the respondent No. 1 which shows that both the trade marks were by a Deed of
Assignment dated 23.3.1985 assigned without goodwill and name of the business
to Shri Subash Chand (assignor's brother) for rupees five hundred. Shri Subash
Chand, the assignee/purchaser has filed Form TM-24 on 27.3.1985 (Ext. C35 &
C36 of type set of Shri Singh, the respondent No. 1). In para 10 of the
rejoinder, Shri Kishan, the applicant states that "As already explained above
the trade mark once assigned by the petitioner has been reassigned to it.
Therefore, it is for the respondent to prove that how the petitioner has no
locus standi to file the present suit." Shri Singh, the respondent No. 1 has
by filing evidence of assignment proved the assignment and now the onus shifts
on Shri Kishan, the applicant to prove reassignment. Since the assignment is
without goodwill, the assignee was required under Section 41 of the Act to
file Form TM-20 within six months from the date of assignment or within such
extended time as the Registrar may allow. As per Section 41 of the Act the
assignment without goodwill shall not take effect unless Form TM-20 is filed
by the assignee inter alia for Registrar's direction with respect to the
advertisement of assignment. There is no evidence available on record
regarding recordal of assignment, or filing of Form TM-20 or reassignment of
marks. In the absence of such evidence (except on the face of renewed
certificate of trade marks in the name of applicant), we have no option but to
conclude that,prima facie, Shri Kishan, the applicant is the proprietor of the
impugned trade marks.
10\. Now, we would come to issue of person aggrieved. The requirement provided
for in the statute is that a person to seek relief under Sections 46 and 56 of
the Act should be a person aggrieved. It is observed by the Apex Court in
National Bell Co. (P) Ltd. and Anr. v. Metal Goods Mfg. Co. Ltd. and Anr. PTC
(Suppl) (1) 586 (SC) at p. 593 thus : 'The expression "aggrieved person" has
received liberal construction from the Courts and includes a person who has,
before registration, used the trade mark in question as also a person against
whom an infringement action is taken or threatened by the registered
proprietor of such a trade mark'. A person aggrieved also includes the rivals
in the same trade who are aggrieved by the entry of rival's mark in the
register of trade marks or persons who are in some way or the other
substantially interested in having the mark removed from the register or
person who would be substantially damaged if the mark remained on the
register. By applying the aforesaid principles, both the applicants are
'persons' aggrieved.
11\. There is no dispute that the registration of trade marks of both parties
were obtained more than seven years before the filing of these applications
and as such Section 32 of the Act is clear in the matter of its applicability
to an application under Section 56 of the Act. It provides that in all legal
proceedings relating to a trade mark registered in Part A of the register
(including applications under Section 56), the original registration of the
trade mark shall, after the expiration of seven years from the date of such
registration, be taken to be valid in all respects unless it is proved-
(a) that the original registration was obtained by fraud; or
(b) that the trade mark was registered in contravention of provisions of
Section 11 or offends against the provisions of that Section on the date of
commencement of the proceedings; or
(c) that the trade mark was not, at the commencement of the proceedings,
distinctive of the goods of the registered proprietor.
Since both the applicants have averred fraud committed by their opposite
parties for obtaining registration of trade marks and also obtained the same
in contravention of provisions Section 11 of the Act, we would take up the
grounds under Clauses (a) and (b) of Section 32 to see whether the impugned
trade mark be expunged from the register on those grounds. The expression
"fraud", in the context of Section 32 of the Act, seems to involve some
element of actual deception by the applicant for registration. It is not
sufficient merely to allege fraud but it must be pleaded and particulars
given. Shri K.S. Shavaksha in his book on the Trade and Merchandise Marks Act
1958 (Third Edition) at pages 147-48 stated the law as under:
Fraud : If the original registration has been obtained by fraud, as for
instance, by wrong statements deliberately made in affidavits submitted to the
Registrar, the mark can be removed from the register. Simply alleging fraud is
not sufficient, for the absence of particulars, the application would be
incompetent. Re Om Parkash : Zenith Colour Trading Co. v. Taherally (1956) 58
Bom. LR 912 p. 916. It has to be noted that the fraud, referred to in this
Section, is fraud committed before registration. Fraudulent use of a
registered mark after registration is subject to a different principle of law.
Contrary to the facts of the application on hand, it might be a fraud for a
person to procure the registration of a trade mark which he knows is in use by
another trader or by his principal who is a foreign manufacturer. Gynomin
(1961) RPC 408 at 414.
An applicant for rectification must prove that the entry he is attacking has
been obtained on committing fraud and the mark was registered in contravention
of the provisions of Section 11 of the Act. The applicants have neither given
any particulars of fraud in the pleadings nor adduced any evidence therefor.
Learned Counsel also did not reveal or cite any incidence of fraud during the
course of hearing. Shri Singh, the applicant has not produced any evidence to
prove his averment that the subsequent amendment made to add 'electric bulb'
in the specification of goods in the application for registration was illegal
and obtained by fraud. In these circumstances, we are inclined to agree with
the reply filed by the respective respondents denying the averments of the
respective applicants. We can, therefore, unhesitatingly say that the
respective applicants have miserably failed to discharge the onus to prove
fraud and that the marks were registered in contravention of the provisions of
Section 11 of the Act. As such we reject the applications under Clauses (a)
and (b) of Section 32 of the Act.
Shri Singh, the applicant has averred that the impugned marks of Shri Kishan,
the respondent No. 1 were not distinctive on the date of commencement of the
present proceedings. If the objection of Shri Singh, the applicant is that the
mark of respondent is not distinctive on the date of commencement of the
present proceedings his mark is not distinctive either because both marks are
Citizen. The applicant has not substantiated about this in his pleadings.
Further, the burden of proof is on the applicant who comes to the Court for
rectification of the mark on the ground that the trade mark was not
distinctive of the goods of the registered proprietor on the date of
commencement of the legal proceedings. In this case Shri Singh, the applicant
has not produced any documentary evidence in support of his averment regarding
that the trade mark was not, at the time of commencement of proceedings,
distinctive of the goods of the respondent No. 1. It is needless to hold that
Shri Singh, the applicant has miserably failed to discharge the onus and
accordingly, we reject his application on this count also, i.e. under Clause
(c) of Section 32 of the Act.
12\. Since Section 32 of the Act is subject to the provisions of Section 35
and 46 and the applications are, amongst others, under Section 46 of the Act,
now we will come to an applicant's objection (objections are common in both
applications) under that Section on the grounds that (i) the trade mark was
registered without any bona fide intention on the part of respondent No. 1 to
use in relation to those goods by him, (ii) there is in fact no bona fide use
of that trade mark in relation to those goods by the proprietor thereof for
the time being up to a date of one month before the date of the application,
and (iii) that upto a date one month before the date of application, a
continuous period of five years or longer time had elapsed during which the
trade marks were registered and during which there were no bona fide use
thereof in relation to those goods by the proprietor thereof for the time
being. In order to bring this objection within the ambit of Section 46 (1)(a)
& (b) of the Act it must be shown that the trade mark was registered without
any bona fide intention on the part of applicant for registration to use it by
himself, that there was no bona fide use of the mark one month before the date
of application and there were no bona fide use of the mark for five years and
one month before the date of the application. Want of intention to use may be
inferred from non-use and the onus of proving non-use during the relevant
period is on the applicant for rectification. Both the applicants have filed
affidavit evidence but the contents of both affidavits mention only about use
of their own trade marks instead of challenging the non-use of the trade marks
of their opposite side registered proprietors (respondents). Shri Singh, the
applicant has in his affidavit evidence filed a sales figures (Exhibit A) from
1980-81 to 1988-89 (1989-90 to 1990-91 stated to be not readily available) and
1991-92 to 1997-98. The sale figure of 1997-98 is to the tune of about six and
one half lakh rupees. The said affidavit evidence contains also few copies of
sales vouchers (Ext. B 1 to B 88) showing goods sold under trade mark Citizen
and copies of three bills (Ext. C1 to C3 dated 27.3.1981, 20.6.1982 and
4.7.1982, respectively) of, packaging material in respect of product under
trade mark Citizen. Ld. Counsel for Shri Kishan, the respondent No. 1 has
raised doubt that the words Citizen appears subsequently inserted in the
vouchers but he did not object when counsel for Shri Singh, the applicant
clarified that the original vouchers have been filed in the Court and there is
no such objection/doubt raised by the Court. Shri Kishan, the applicant has in
his affidavit evidence filed statement of sale account (Ex. P-3) from 1997-98
to 2003-04 (there is no explanation for not furnishing sale account of earlier
period) which is about eleven and one half lakh rupees in 2003-04. The
affidavit contains also copies of sale invoices (Ex. P-5) pertaining to the
sale under the trade mark Citizen and copies of advertisements. The
documentary evidence proves that both the applicants got the marks registered
with bona fide intention to use in relation to goods for which registrations
were made, there have been bona fide use and they were using their respective
trade marks till these applications were filed. In view of this, the grounds
provided under Sub-section (1) of Section 46 of the Act are not available to
both the applicants and their respective applications under Section 46 of the
Act fail.
13\. Now, we will come to Section 56 of the Act which provides for power to
cancel or vary registration and to rectify the register. Both the applicants
have made more or less similar averments that the registrations of the
impugned marks in favour of Shri Singh, the respondent No. 1 or, as the case
may be, Shri Kishan, the respondent No. 1 were in contravention of the
provisions Sections 9, 11 and 18 of the Act, the entry relating to the
impugned marks were made without any sufficient cause and the impugned trade
marks in the names of respondents are wrongly remaining on the register. The
respective respondent denied all the averments in his respective reply.
Learned Counsel for Shri Kishan, the respondent submitted that Shri Kishan,
the respondent No. 1 is prior adopter, prior user of the marks and got the
registration as of 1979 whereas Shri Singh, the applicant is subsequent
adopter and user of the mark. There was no question of registration against
the provisions of all or either Section 9 or Section 11 or Section 18 of the
Act. It may be remembered that the averments and contentions that registration
of marks were in contravention of provisions of Section 11 of the Act were not
proved under Section 32 of the Act by the respective applicants. It is found
that there are bona fide use of marks by the respective applicants and there
have been no evidence before us nor are there any evidence on record to show
any incidence of deception and confusion among the public and trade. Shri
Singh, the applicant in his affidavit evidence has filed a number of copies
Trade Marks Journal advertisements, including search report of Trade Mark
Registry to show that there are number of word trade marks Citizen registered
and also advertised for registration in respect of electrical and electronic
goods. It is material to remember that this being an application for
cancellation, the onus is upon the applicant. The Apex Court has in National
Bell Co. and Anr. v. Metal Goods Mfg. Co. (P) Ltd. and Anr. PTC (Suppl) (1)
586 (SC) has held : Section 56 deals with the power to cancel or vary
registration and to rectify the register. Sub-section (2) thereof confers a
right to any person "aggrieved" by any.... The words "without sufficient
cause" in the Section have clearly relation to the time of original
registration. Therefore, a person can apply for cancellation on the ground
that the trade mark in question was not at the date of the commencement of the
proceedings distinctive in the sense of Section 9(3). The burden of proof,
however, in such a case as aforesaid, is on the applicant applying under
Section 56. It is needle JS to observe that the applicant has miserably failed
to discharge the burden of proving his case the application is rejected on
these counts also.
14\. In view of above, both the applications for cancellation/rectification of
trade marks fail. Accordingly, we dismiss both the applications without costs.
Singh, the applicant in his affidavit evidence has filed a number of copies
Trade Marks Journal advertisements, including search report of Trade Mark
Registry to show that there are number of word trade marks Citizen registered
and also advertised for registration in respect of electrical and electronic
goods. It is material to remember that this being an application for
cancellation, the onus is upon the applicant. The Apex Court has in National
Bell Co. and Anr. v. Metal Goods Mfg. Co. (P) Ltd. and Anr. PTC (Suppl) (1)
586 (SC) has held : Section 56 deals with the power to cancel or vary
registration and to rectify the register. Sub-section (2) thereof confers a
right to any person "aggrieved" by any.... The words "without sufficient
cause" in the Section have clearly relation to the time of original
registration. Therefore, a person can apply for cancellation on the ground
that the trade mark in question was not at the date of the commencement of the
proceedings distinctive in the sense of Section 9(3). The burden of proof,
however, in such a case as aforesaid, is on the applicant applying under
Section 56. It is needle JS to observe that the applicant has miserably failed
11.6.1984 in respect of electric bulbs included in class 11, in the name of
Shri Singh, the respondent No. 1 and Shri Singh, the applicant seeks for
cancellation Of registered trade mark 'Citizen', under Nos. 350335 as of
13.6.1979 in class 11 in respect of electric heating appliances, electric
lamps, electric fans and brackets (hanging) and 350336 as of 13.6.1979 in
class 9 in respect of wires (electric), cables (electric), holders (electric
coil) switches (electric), chokes, fuses, kitkat (electric) and plug, tops
(electric), respectively, in the name of Shri Kishan, the respondent No. 1,
4\. Shri Kishan, the applicant states that M/s. Citizen Electrical is his sole
proprietorship firm which is the prior adopter of the trade marks Citizen and
the said marks have been renewed from time to time and are valid, subsisting
and conclusive throughout the country. He is using the said mark since 1976
(within the knowledge of Shri Singh, the respondent No. 1) extensively,
continuously and uninterruptedly throughout the length and breadth of this
country. Shri Kishan, the applicant claims that the trade mark Citizen on
account of long, continuous, extensive use, extensive marketing network and
extensive advertisement campaign and excellent quality of goods has acquired
enviable reputation and goodwill amongst the purchasing public and trade which
has become distinctive of the goods and business of the applicant. He claims
to a person aggrieved because of filing of a Suit by Shri Singh, the
Singh, the applicant in his affidavit evidence has filed a number of copies
Trade Marks Journal advertisements, including search report of Trade Mark
Registry to show that there are number of word trade marks Citizen registered
and also advertised for registration in respect of electrical and electronic
goods. It is material to remember that this being an application for
cancellation, the onus is upon the applicant. The Apex Court has in National
Bell Co. and Anr. v. Metal Goods Mfg. Co. (P) Ltd. and Anr. PTC (Suppl) (1)
586 (SC) has held : Section 56 deals with the power to cancel or vary
registration and to rectify the register. Sub-section (2) thereof confers a
right to any person "aggrieved" by any.... The words "without sufficient
cause" in the Section have clearly relation to the time of original
registration. Therefore, a person can apply for cancellation on the ground
that the trade mark in question was not at the date of the commencement of the
proceedings distinctive in the sense of Section 9(3). The burden of proof,
however, in such a case as aforesaid, is on the applicant applying under
Section 56. It is needle JS to observe that the applicant has miserably failed
11.6.1984 in respect of electric bulbs included in class 11, in the name of
Shri Singh, the respondent No. 1 and Shri Singh, the applicant seeks for
cancellation Of registered trade mark 'Citizen', under Nos. 350335 as of
13.6.1979 in class 11 in respect of electric heating appliances, electric
lamps, electric fans and brackets (hanging) and 350336 as of 13.6.1979 in
class 9 in respect of wires (electric), cables (electric), holders (electric
coil) switches (electric), chokes, fuses, kitkat (electric) and plug, tops
(electric), respectively, in the name of Shri Kishan, the respondent No. 1,
4\. Shri Kishan, the applicant states that M/s. Citizen Electrical is his sole
proprietorship firm which is the prior adopter of the trade marks Citizen and
the said marks have been renewed from time to time and are valid, subsisting
and conclusive throughout the country. He is using the said mark since 1976
(within the knowledge of Shri Singh, the respondent No. 1) extensively,
continuously and uninterruptedly throughout the length and breadth of this
country. Shri Kishan, the applicant claims that the trade mark Citizen on
account of long, continuous, extensive use, extensive marketing network and
extensive advertisement campaign and excellent quality of goods has acquired
enviable reputation and goodwill amongst the purchasing public and trade which
has become distinctive of the goods and business of the applicant. He claims
to a person aggrieved because of filing of a Suit by Shri Singh, the
Singh, the applicant in his affidavit evidence has filed a number of copies
Trade Marks Journal advertisements, including search report of Trade Mark
Registry to show that there are number of word trade marks Citizen registered
and also advertised for registration in respect of electrical and electronic
goods. It is material to remember that this being an application for
cancellation, the onus is upon the applicant. The Apex Court has in National
Bell Co. and Anr. v. Metal Goods Mfg. Co. (P) Ltd. and Anr. PTC (Suppl) (1)
586 (SC) has held : Section 56 deals with the power to cancel or vary
registration and to rectify the register. Sub-section (2) thereof confers a
right to any person "aggrieved" by any.... The words "without sufficient
cause" in the Section have clearly relation to the time of original
registration. Therefore, a person can apply for cancellation on the ground
that the trade mark in question was not at the date of the commencement of the
proceedings distinctive in the sense of Section 9(3). The burden of proof,
however, in such a case as aforesaid, is on the applicant applying under
Section 56. It is needle JS to observe that the applicant has miserably failed
11.6.1984 in respect of electric bulbs included in class 11, in the name of
Shri Singh, the respondent No. 1 and Shri Singh, the applicant seeks for
cancellation Of registered trade mark 'Citizen', under Nos. 350335 as of
13.6.1979 in class 11 in respect of electric heating appliances, electric
lamps, electric fans and brackets (hanging) and 350336 as of 13.6.1979 in
class 9 in respect of wires (electric), cables (electric), holders (electric
coil) switches (electric), chokes, fuses, kitkat (electric) and plug, tops
(electric), respectively, in the name of Shri Kishan, the respondent No. 1,
4\. Shri Kishan, the applicant states that M/s. Citizen Electrical is his sole
proprietorship firm which is the prior adopter of the trade marks Citizen and
the said marks have been renewed from time to time and are valid, subsisting
and conclusive throughout the country. He is using the said mark since 1976
(within the knowledge of Shri Singh, the respondent No. 1) extensively,
continuously and uninterruptedly throughout the length and breadth of this
country. Shri Kishan, the applicant claims that the trade mark Citizen on
account of long, continuous, extensive use, extensive marketing network and
extensive advertisement campaign and excellent quality of goods has acquired
enviable reputation and goodwill amongst the purchasing public and trade which
has become distinctive of the goods and business of the applicant. He claims
to a person aggrieved because of filing of a Suit by Shri Singh, the
respondent No. 1 against him before the District Judge, Delhi. The main
grounds of application are that the impugned registration of trade mark in the
name of Shri Singh, the respondent No. 1 is unlawful and contrary to the
various provisions of the Act and registration thereof is without any bona
fide intention of use as immediately preceding this application five years has
expired during which there has not been any bona fide use of the trade mark in
respect of goods in which it is registered. The use of the impugned trade mark
by Shri Singh, the respondent No. 1 is likely to cause confusion and deception
amongst the public and trade and as such the impugned registration offends
against the provisions of Section 11(a) of the Act. Further, Shri Singh, the
respondent No. 1 is not the proprietor of the trade mark, the registration of
Singh, the applicant in his affidavit evidence has filed a number of copies
Trade Marks Journal advertisements, including search report of Trade Mark
Registry to show that there are number of word trade marks Citizen registered
and also advertised for registration in respect of electrical and electronic
goods. It is material to remember that this being an application for
cancellation, the onus is upon the applicant. The Apex Court has in National
Bell Co. and Anr. v. Metal Goods Mfg. Co. (P) Ltd. and Anr. PTC (Suppl) (1)
586 (SC) has held : Section 56 deals with the power to cancel or vary
registration and to rectify the register. Sub-section (2) thereof confers a
right to any person "aggrieved" by any.... The words "without sufficient
cause" in the Section have clearly relation to the time of original
registration. Therefore, a person can apply for cancellation on the ground
that the trade mark in question was not at the date of the commencement of the
proceedings distinctive in the sense of Section 9(3). The burden of proof,
however, in such a case as aforesaid, is on the applicant applying under
Section 56. It is needle JS to observe that the applicant has miserably failed
11.6.1984 in respect of electric bulbs included in class 11, in the name of
Shri Singh, the respondent No. 1 and Shri Singh, the applicant seeks for
cancellation Of registered trade mark 'Citizen', under Nos. 350335 as of
13.6.1979 in class 11 in respect of electric heating appliances, electric
lamps, electric fans and brackets (hanging) and 350336 as of 13.6.1979 in
class 9 in respect of wires (electric), cables (electric), holders (electric
coil) switches (electric), chokes, fuses, kitkat (electric) and plug, tops
(electric), respectively, in the name of Shri Kishan, the respondent No. 1,
4\. Shri Kishan, the applicant states that M/s. Citizen Electrical is his sole
proprietorship firm which is the prior adopter of the trade marks Citizen and
the said marks have been renewed from time to time and are valid, subsisting
and conclusive throughout the country. He is using the said mark since 1976
(within the knowledge of Shri Singh, the respondent No. 1) extensively,
continuously and uninterruptedly throughout the length and breadth of this
country. Shri Kishan, the applicant claims that the trade mark Citizen on
account of long, continuous, extensive use, extensive marketing network and
extensive advertisement campaign and excellent quality of goods has acquired
enviable reputation and goodwill amongst the purchasing public and trade which
has become distinctive of the goods and business of the applicant. He claims
to a person aggrieved because of filing of a Suit by Shri Singh, the
respondent No. 1 against him before the District Judge, Delhi. The main
grounds of application are that the impugned registration of trade mark in the
name of Shri Singh, the respondent No. 1 is unlawful and contrary to the
various provisions of the Act and registration thereof is without any bona
fide intention of use as immediately preceding this application five years has
expired during which there has not been any bona fide use of the trade mark in
respect of goods in which it is registered. The use of the impugned trade mark
by Shri Singh, the respondent No. 1 is likely to cause confusion and deception
amongst the public and trade and as such the impugned registration offends
against the provisions of Section 11(a) of the Act. Further, Shri Singh, the
respondent No. 1 is not the proprietor of the trade mark, the registration of
Singh, the applicant in his affidavit evidence has filed a number of copies
Trade Marks Journal advertisements, including search report of Trade Mark
Registry to show that there are number of word trade marks Citizen registered
and also advertised for registration in respect of electrical and electronic
goods. It is material to remember that this being an application for
cancellation, the onus is upon the applicant. The Apex Court has in National
Bell Co. and Anr. v. Metal Goods Mfg. Co. (P) Ltd. and Anr. PTC (Suppl) (1)
586 (SC) has held : Section 56 deals with the power to cancel or vary
registration and to rectify the register. Sub-section (2) thereof confers a
right to any person "aggrieved" by any.... The words "without sufficient
cause" in the Section have clearly relation to the time of original
registration. Therefore, a person can apply for cancellation on the ground
that the trade mark in question was not at the date of the commencement of the
proceedings distinctive in the sense of Section 9(3). The burden of proof,
however, in such a case as aforesaid, is on the applicant applying under
Section 56. It is needle JS to observe that the applicant has miserably failed
