Delhi High Court
Izuk Chemical Works vs Babu Ram Dharam Prakash on 11 May, 2007
Equivalent citations: MIPR 2007 (3) 8, 2007 (35) PTC 28 Del
Author: G Mittal
Bench: G Mittal
JUDGMENT Gita Mittal, J.
Page 2015
1\. By this judgment, I propose to decide I.A. No. 2516/2006 filed by the
plaintiff under Order 39 Rule 1 and 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure in the
suit filed by it against the defendant seeking the relief of permanent
injunction to restrain the defendant from infringement of its registered
trademark and copyright and also from passing off its goods as those having an
association with the goods of the plaintiff and delivery up of offending
material as well as rendition of accounts.
2\. The suit is premised on the averments that the plaintiff is engaged in the
business of manufacturing and trading bleaching preparations and other
substances for laundry use, cleaning, polishing, scouring and abrasive
preparation as well as soap, perfumary, essential oil, cosmetics, hair dyes
and dentifrices since the year 1917. The plaintiff is since conducting its
business under the trademark 'MOONSTAR' and has adopted a device of a star in
adoption of the word 'Star' as aprt of its trademark by the defendant as also
the device star would be persuaded to believe that the product of the
defendant is associated with that of the plaintiff.
For all the foregoing reasons, I am of the view that the present application
deserved to be allowed.
Page 2029 Accordingly, the defendants, proprietors, promoters, retailers,
their agents, partners, servants, assigns, representatives, successors,
distributors and all others acting for and on their behalf are hereby
restrained from using the plaintiff's trademark 'MOONSTAR' or any part thereof
for manufacturing, selling, offering for sale, advertising or displaying
directly or indirectly or dealing in any other manner for its products or
business. The defendants, proprietors, promoters, retailers, their agents,
partners, servants, assigns, representatives, successors, distributors and all
others acting for and on their behalf are also hereby restrained from using
the device of star in the lap of the moon or any portion thereof for its
products or business. The defendants are also restrained from using any other
business under the trademark 'MOONSTAR' and has adopted a device of a star in
the lap of the moon. The plaintiff has been using the trademark by itself and
also in an artistic label.
3\. The plaintiff had applied for the registration of the trademark as well as
the device and the label under the provisions of the Trademarks Act and it has
obtained several registrations of the same which have been detailed in the
Annexure to the plaint and copies whereof have been filed on record:
      S.                        Trademark Class                   Date of Registration
     No.                    No.                              and status
    1 Moon and Star device     82128    Hair dyes associated    5th July, 1943
                                        with 82129 and 82130
    2 Word Mark Moon and Star  82129    Hair dyes class-3       registered on 25th July,
                                                                1943 which stands rene-
                                                                wed even till date
    3 Label containing device  1300553  Cosmetics including     4th August, 2004 which
      moon and star, the word           henna for export only   stands renewed even on
      mark moonstar, and all            under class-3 (the      date
    Page 2016
    other essential features          plaintiff's application
      of the label                      for registration of the
                                        moonstar label under
                                        No. 1300551 and moonstar
                                        under No. 673897 in 
                                        class-3 are stated to be
                                        pending)
    4 The moon and star label   521932  Bleaching preparations  28th December, 1989
                                        etc., perfumary soaps,
                                        cosmetics, hair lotions
                                        etc. in class-3
4\. The plaintiff has placed before this Court documents showing that it had
engaged the services of M/s Chauhan Graphics, South Market, Kidwai Nagar East,
New Delhi-110023 to create and author the art work in the label. The bills of
payment which were made to this concern as well as its processing by M/s
International Print-O-Pac Limited, B-204, Okhla Industrial Area, Phase-I, New
Delhi have been placed before this Court. It is thus claimed that the label
and trademark constitute an original artistic work within the meaning of the
same under the Copyright Act and the plaintiff is the only owner and
proprietor thereof. The application for registration of such art work and
copyright is pending.
5\. By virtue of long, continuous, extensive and exclusive use of the
trademark since 1917 and of the label since 1998, the trademark and label have
become distinctive and are associated with the goods and business of the
plaintiff. The plaintiff has acquired tremendous goodwill and reputation in
the market and it has voluminous trade under this trademark and label. The
annual export turnover of the plaintiff under these trademarks in the year
1998-99 was to the tune of Rs. 15,07,637/- which decreased to Rs. 5,44,047/-
in 1999-2000 but has thereafter gone up to Rs. 8,77,712/- in the year
2003-2004. The annual turnover in the domestic market of the plaintiff's
business under these trademarks and label has gone up from Rs. 5,41,200/- in
the year 1998-99 to Rs. 16,37,250/- in the year 2003-2004.
The plaintiff has also placed before this Court the copies of the
advertisements printed by it in newspapers and also the expenditure incurred
on advertising of its products under this trademark and label. Invoices of the
supplies of its products including henna under the 'MOONSTAR' label have been
placed before this Court in support of the figures of the sales which have
been tabulated. The plaintiff has thus claimed that the trademarks and the
label of the plaintiff are well known trademarks within the meaning of this
expression in Section 2(1)(zg) of the Trademarks Act, 1999.
6\. It has also been pointed out that the partnership firm as constituted in
1943 saw changes in the constitution due to partners leaving the firm on
account of demise etc. and others joining. The sequence of these changes has
been duly recorded in the certificates issued by the Trademark registry upon
appropriate requests being made as per law. At present, the partnership
consists of two partners namely Aftab Ahmed and Anwar Ahmed.
Page 2017
7\. The plaintiff has complained of dishonest, mala fide and fraudulent acts
on the part of the defendant who is stated to be engaged in the manufacture
and trade of hair dyes. Thus, the defendant is also engaged in the same
business and trade as that of the plaintiff. It has been contended that the
defendant has dishonestly and fraudulently copied all essential and striking
features of the plaintiff's trademark and label and is trading henna under the
trademark 'SUPERSTAR'.
8\. When the suit was filed, the plaintiff was aggrieved by the similarity
between the cartons in which the plaintiff was marketing its products and
those adopted by the defendant. The same colour scheme, device of a woman and
the expressin 'herbal henna' were displayed in an identical position on the
front of the carton as they appeared on the plaintiff's cartons. The defendant
had also copies the device of the star and displayed the same in a similar
manner as displayed by the plaintiff with the mark of registration of the
trademark and had printed the word 'SUPERSTAR' in the same colour and style as
the plaintiff's 'MOONSTAR' on its carton. The back of the defendant's carton
was almost identical to that of the plaintiff with same identical changes in
the language in which the printed material was displayed and the contents of
the information which was given. The plaintiff has claimed that it has gained
knowledge of the defendant upon a search conducted of the Trademark Registry
whereupon it was revealed that the defendant has applied for registration of
the trademark 'SUPERSTAR' with label against application No. 1403177 for goods
in class-3.
9\. The suit has been filed urging that the defendant has dishonestly and
illegally infringed the trademark of the plaintiff and also the copyright in
the trademark and label by substantially reproducing the marks and label of
the plaintiff and thereby also passing off its goods and business as that of
the plaintiff, thereby violating both the statutory and proprietary rights of
the plaintiff in the trademark, label and copyright and also the common law
rights of the plaintiff in the same.
10\. Pending adjudication in the suit, the plaintiff has filed this
application seeking interim relief of an injunction against the defendant from
persisting with its offending acts on the plea that the plaintiff shall suffer
irreparable loss and damage if the interim injunction against the defendant
from persisting with its offending acts is not granted.
11\. So far as consideration of such application is concerned, the judicial
parameters within which the same has to be considered are well settled. In the
instant case, the trademark adopted by the defendant is not identical to that
of the plaintiff. Even the label which has been adopted and the device which
is being utilised by the defendant is not identical. The plaintiff has
therefore urged not only infringement of its proprietary rights based on its
registration in the trademark that is the word mark as well as device but also
in its label and has also urged that the defendant is dishonestly passing off
its goods as those having an association with those of the plaintiff.
12\. In the instant case, the defendant has however changed the label and its
packaging. A copy of the changed label has been placed on record along with an
affidavit dated 3rd October, 2006 wherein it has given an undertaking Page
2018 that it would not use the packaging produced as Annexure 'A' to the
written statement filed with the list of documents dated 24th April, 2006. In
this view of the matter, this Court has recorded the following order on the
13th February, 2007:
+IA No. 2516/2006 in CS (OS) No. 390/2006 The defendant has filed an affidavit
dated 3rd October, 2006 placing an amended label as annexure B Along with.
This affidavit has been sworn by Mr. Dharam Prakash as sole proprietor of the
defendant wherein he has stated that so far as the label which was complained
of by the plaintiff is concerned, the defendant has stopped user of the
alphabet "R" in a circle which was appearing on its lable and the pouches and
packages. It has further been deposed that the pictures and the words which
would appear on the pouches and packages of the defendant would be in the form
and style as described in the amended lable which has been placed Along with
affidavit as annesxure B. The defendant has also altered the print of the word
"Herbal Henna" and its colour has been changed from the colour black in place
of the colour white which was earlier being used. It is clearly stated in the
affidavit that the defendant is using the label as amended and has
discontinued the label which was enclosed as annexure A to the written
statement. In this view of the matter, Mr. Bansal, learned Counsel for the
plaintiff submits that so far as the complaint of the plaintiff against the
label and packaging of the defendant was concerned, the same does not survive
for adjudication and the relief in this behalf stands satisfied. He submits
that the plaintiff however is entitled to press its relief based on the
complaint that the user by the defendant of the word and device "Star" is
illegal and violates the rights of the plaintiff is concerned, the same
survives for adjudication.
Mr. Singla, learned senior counsel for the defendant submits that this
objection is contrary to the pleadings. In the light of this statement, the
consideration in the present case stands confines to the contention of the
plaintiff that the use of the trademark, superstar and star is violative of
the plaintiff's rights for its trademark Moonstar and device of moonstar and
star.
For these reasons, the prayer of the plaintiff so far as the label is
concerned, stands satisfied. However, the plaintiff's grievance with regard to
use of the word 'star' as part of the defendant's trademark and display of the
device 'star' remains and has to be adjudicated in the light of the law.
13\. In a case of infringement of trademark, the plaintiff may establish that
the plaintiff's trademark is identical with or so nearly resembles the
plaintiff's work either visually or phonetically or otherwise, that it is
likely to deceive or cause confusion in relation to the case in respect of
which the plaintiff got his mark registered. The requirement that the
plaintiff has to satisfy in order to make out a case of infringement of its
mark by the defendant and in a passing of action have been succinctly laid
down by the Division Bench of this Court in its pronouncement reported at 2nd
1973 1 Page 2019 Delhi 393 Atlas Cycle Industries Ltd. v. Hind Cycles Limited
wherein the court held thus:
Therefore, the aforesaid requirement in (b) may be made out by the plaintiff
by showing that the defendant's mark is identical with or so nearly resembles
the plaintiff's mark either visually, phonetically or otherwise that it is
likely to deceive or cause confusion in relation to the goods in respect of
which the plaintiff got his mark registered. In other words, if the essential
features of the trade mark of the plaintiff have been adopted by the
defendant,t he fact that there are some additional features in the defendant's
mark which show marked differences is immaterial in an action for
infringement. An action for passing off, on the other hand, is in substance an
action in common law for actual or probable passing of by the defendant of his
own goods a those of the plaintiff. In such an action, the use by the
defendant of the trade mark of the plaintiff as such is not essential. The
plaintiff has only to show that the similarity of the defendant's mark or
goods is such that the defendant can pass off his goods as those of the
plaintiff. The defendant may escape liability in an action for passing off if
he can show that his mark or goods, besides the essential features which are
sufficient to distinguish the same from that of the plaintiff. Thus, while in
an action for infringement of a registered trade mark the plaintiff has to
establish either an use of his registered trade mark as such or of an
identical mark or of a deceptively similar mark by the defendant, he has to
establish in an action for passing off that the defendant's mark or goods are
such that the defendant can pass off his goods as those of the plaintiff.
14\. It is equally well settled that what has to be seen is not that there is
not a possibility of confusion but that the resemblance is such that there is
a reasonable probability of deception. So far as the judgment on this test is
concerned, in AIR 1943 Lahore 196 Modi Sugar Mills Limited v. Tata Oil Mills
Ltd., the Privy Council approving the test laid down by Niamat Ullah J. in
Thomas Bear and Sons (India) Ltd. v. Pravag Narain observed that "in the
judging of the probability of deception, the test is not whether the ignorant
the thoughtless, or the incautious purchaser is likely to be misled, but we
have to consider the average purchaser buying with ordinary caution."
15\. The principle in this behalf was further elucidated by the Division Bench
of this Court in the Atlas Cycle Industries case (supra). Placing reliance on
James Chadwick and Bros. Ltd. v. The National Sewing Thread Co. Ltd. , Chagla
CJ and Bhagwati; referring to the words "likely to deceive or cause confusion"
in Section 10 of the Trade Marks Act, 1940, observed at page 152 as follows:
Now in deciding whether a particular trade mark is likely to deceive or cause
confusion, it is not sufficient merely to compare it with the trade Page 2020
mark which is already registered and whose proprietor is offering opposition
to the registration of the former trade mark. What is important is to find out
what is the distinguishing or essential feature of the trade mark already
registered and what is the main feature of the main idea underlying that trade
mark, and if it is found that the trade mark whose registration is sought
contains the same distinguishing or essential feature or conveys the same
idea, then ordinarily the Registrar would be right if he came to the
conclusion that the trade mark should not be registered. The real question is
as to how a purchaser who must be looked upon as an average man of ordinary
intelligence, would react to a particular trademark, what association he would
form by looking at the trademark, and in what respect he would connect the
trade mark with the goods which he would be purchasing. It is impossible to
accept that a man looking at a trade mark would take in every single feature
of the trademark. The question would be, what would he normally retain in his
mind after looking at the trade mark? What would be the salient feature of the
trade mark which in future would lead him to associate the particular goods
with that trademark?
The court had thereafter culled out the principles which would apply as
hereunder:
In an action for an alleged infringement of a registered trade mark, it has
first to be seen whether the impugned mark of the defendant is identical with
the registered mark of the plaintiff. If the mark is found to be identical, no
further question arises, and it has to be held that there was infringement. If
the mark of the defendant is not identical, it has to be seen whether the mark
of the defendant is deceptively similar in the sense that it is likely to
deceive or cause confusion in relation to goods in respect of which the
plaintiff got his mark registered. For that purpose, the two marks have to be
compared, "not by placing them side by side, but by asking itself whether
having due regard to relevant surrounding circumstances, the defendant's mark
as used is similar to the plaintiff's mark as it would be remembered by
persons possessed of an average memory with its usual imperfections", and it
has then to be determined whether the defendant's mark is likely to deceive or
cause confusion. for such determination, the distinguishing or essential
features (and not every detail) of the two marks and the main idea, if any,
underlying the two marks which a purchaser of average intelligence and
imperfect memory would retain in his mind after seeing the marks, have to be
noticed. It has then to be seen whether they are broadly the same or there is
an overall similarity or resemblance, and whether the resemblance or
similarity is such that there is a reasonable probability of deception or
confusion. In doing so, the approach has to be from the point of view of
purchaser of average intelligence and imperfect memory or recollection, and
not an ignorant, thoughtless and incautious purchaser. In an action for
passing off, the test for deceptive similarity, i.e. as to the likelihood of
confusion or deception arising from similarity of the marks of the get up,
packing Page 2021 etc. is practically the same as in an action for
infringement (vide Edwards v. Dennis (1885) 30 Ch.D 454 471(9) Lambert and
Butler Ltd. v. Goodbody (1902) 19 R.P.C. 377, 383(10) Addley Bourne v. Swan
and Edgar Ltd; (1903) R.P.C.105, 117(11) and Tavener Rut Ledge Ltd. v.
Specters Ltd. (1959) R.P.C. 355, 360(12), except that it has also to be seen
whether the defendant's mark or the get up, packing, etc. of his goods has
besides the essential features of the plaintiff's mark or goods, any
additional features which distinguish it from the plaintiff mark or goods, and
whether it is likely of reasonably probable that the defendant can pass off
his goods as those of the plaintiff to a purchaser of average intelligence and
imperfect memory or recollection.
16\. Yet another pronouncement which would have bearing on the issues raised
was reported at Amritdhara Pharmacy v. Satya Deo Gupta. In this case, the
question raised was whether the trade name "Lakshmandhara" was likely to
deceive the public or cause confusion to trade in view of the trade name
"Amritdhara" which had already been registered as a trade name. The Supreme
Court referring to the earlier decision in Corn Products Refining Co. v.
Shangrila Food Products Ltd; , held that the overall similarity of the two
composite words must be considered, that the question has to be approached
from the point of view of a man of average intelligence and imperfect
recollection, and that to such a man the overall structural and phonetic
similarity of the two names "Amritdhara" and "Lakshmandhara" was likely to
deceive or cause confusion. In the Armitdhara case supra, the court has held
thus:
As we said in Corn Products Refining Co. v. Shangrila Food Products Ltd. the
question has to be approached from the point of view of a man of average
intelligence and imperfect recollection. To such a man the overall structural
and phonetic similarity of the two names "Amritdhara" and "Lakshmandhara" is,
in our opinion, likely to deceive or cause confusion. We must consider the
overall similarity of the two composite words "Amritdhara" and
"Lakshmandhara". We do not think that the learned Judges of the High Court
were right in saying that no Indian would mistake one for the other. An unwary
purchaser of average intelligence and imperfect recollection would not, as the
High Court supposed, slot the name into its component parts and consider the
etymological meaning thereof or even consider the meaning of the composite
words as 'current of nectar' or 'current of Lakshman'. He would go more by the
overall structural and phonetic similarity and the nature of the medicine he
has previously purchased, or has been told about, or about which has otherwise
learnt and which he wants to purchase.... We are aware that the admission of a
mark is not to be refused, because usually stupid people, "fools or idiots",
may be deceived. A critical comparison of the two names may disclose some
points of the two names may disclose some points of difference but an unwary
purchaser of average intelligence and imperfect recollection would be deceived
by the overall similarity of the two names Page 2022 having regard to the
nature of the medicine he is looking for with a somewhat vague recollection
that he had purchased a similar medicine on a previous occasion with a similar
name.
17\. The principles laid down by the Division Bench in K.R. Chinna Krishna
Chettiar v. Sri Ambal and Co. and Anr. are also topical and instructive in
this behalf. The plaintiff had urged that the trademark 'Sri Andal' being
adopted by the defendant was deceptively similar to the trademark 'Sri Ambal'
of the plaintiff and an injunction was prayed for. It was held by the court
that there was striking similarity and affinity of sound between the words
'Andal' and 'Ambal'. The court held that though there was no visual
resemblance between the two marks but ocular comparison is not always the
decisive test. The resemblance between the two marks must be considered with
reference to the ear as well as eye. The name Andal does not cease to be
deceptively similar because it is used in conjunction with a pictorial device.
The court placed reliance on the observations of the court in De Cordova v.
Vick Chemical Coy 68 RPC 103, in which M/s Vick Chemical Coy were the
proprietors of the registered trademark consisting of the word 'Vaporub' and
another registered trademark consisting of a design of which the words 'Vick
Vaporub Salve' formed a part. The defendants had advertised their ointment as
'Karsote Vapour Rub'. It was held that the defendants had infringed the
registered marks. In this case, Lord Radcliffe said "...a mark is infringed by
another trader if, even without using the whole of it upon or in connection
with his goods, he uses one or more of its essential features.
The court considered the realities of the fact that even though 'Sri Andal'
and 'Sri Ambal' were two divinities and that the pictorial devices on the
goods of the respondent were different, however, the fact that the customers
of the plaintiff were persons of religious denominations other than Hindus
whose business was not confined to South of India where the people may know
the difference between the two divinities could not be lost track of. The
trademarks had no direct reference to the character and quality of snuff and
consequently, the customers would have a recollection of only the essential
features. The court was therefore persuaded to grant an injunction in favor of
the plaintiff against the use of the trademark by the defendant.
18\. In a Division Bench pronouncement of the Madras High Court reported at
2006 (32) PTC 434 (Madras) (DB) Devi Pesticides Pvt. Ltd. v. Shiv Agro
Chemicals Industries, claiming exclusive proprietorship over the trademark
BOOMPLUS and BOOM FLOWER, an injunction was prayed for by the plaintiff
against the defendant who was selling its goods by use of the trademark
SUPERBOOM. The defendant's trademark SUPERBOOM was an unregistered mark. It
was also noticed that phonetic similarity would constitute trademark
infringement and that the users of the products of the parties being
illiterate farmers and the common man, it was held that an ordinary average
person would not be able to make out the difference Page 2023 between the
plaintiff's goods and the defendant's goods. Placing reliance on Section 29(5)
of the Trademark Act, it was held that the statutory provisions make it clear
that even if a part of the registered trademark is used by the defendant, it
would amount to infringement. In this case, BOOM was an essential part of the
registered trademark of the plaintiff which was incorporated in the
defendant's trademark.
19\. The courts have also protected rights of a trader who is claiming
proprietary rights over numeral trademarks. In 2003 (27) PTC 63 (Delhi) Shaw
Wallace & Co. Ltd. and Anr. v. Superior Industries Ltd., the plaintiff had
urged that the defendant's trademark 'HAYWARDS 5000' was an illegal
infringement of its registered trademark 'HAYAWARDS 5000 SUPER STRONG BEER'.
It was primarily urged that the use of the numeral 5000 by the defendant was
with the intention of cashing in on the reputation of the plaintiff acquired
in the business which it was conducting under its registered trademark of
which 5000 was an essential part. Reiterating the test laid down in the
judicial pronouncements afore-noticed, apart from regard being had to the
relevant surroundings, the consensus in order to assess as to whether the
defendant's mark is similar to the plaintiff, the court had emphasised the
imperfect memory of an average consumer. In this behalf, it was urged that in
an action for infringement, for the success by the plaintiff, he need not
prove that the whole of his registered trademark has been copied. He can also
succeed, if, he shows that the mark used by the defendant is similar to the
mark of the plaintiff as it would be remembered by persons possessed of an
average memory with its usual imperfection or that its essential particulars
or the distinguishing or essential feature has been copies. Placing reliance
on the earlier pronouncement of this Court reported at 2nd 197 (II) Delhi 225
Jagan Nath Prem Nath v. Bhartiya Dhoop Karvalaya, it was held that a person
may have right of trademark in a numeral as well.
20\. To the same effect was the pronouncement rendered by the learned single
Judge in AIR 1987 Delhi 312 Vrajlal Manilal and Co. v. N.S. Bidi Co. and Anr.
In this behalf, I may also usefully advert to the provisions of Section
2(1)(J) wherein the word 'Mark' has been defined to include numeral or any
combination thereof.
21\. Learned Counsel for the plaintiff has placed strong reliance on the
judicial pronouncement in 1997 PTC 17 134 William Grant and Sons Ltd. v. Mc.
Dowell and Co. Ltd.; Parle Products P. Ltd. v. J.P. and Co., Mysore in support
of the submission that the label of the defendant had incorporated all
essential features of the plaintiff's label deliberately and dishonestly with
the intention of bringing similarity between the products of the plaintiff and
defendant so as to confuse the purchasers and the consumers.
Page 2024
22\. Learned Counsel for the plaintiff has also placed reliance on the
pronouncement of the learned single Judge in Glaxo Operations UK Ltd. v.
Samrat Pharaceuticals, wherein the plaintiff had claimed copyright over its
cartons and proprietary rights in the registered trademark Glucose-D and urged
that the action of the defendant has infringed the rights of the plaintiff
therein.
Objection to the grant of interim protection was inter alia urged on ground of
delay and that the carton of the defendant was also registered as an artistic
work under the Copyright Act. It is well settled that copyright exists whether
registration is done or not and that registration is merely a piece of
evidence as to when the author started copyright in some artistic work or some
other work. Further, the court negated the objection of the defendant on the
ground that the plaintiff was not entitled to injunction against the defendant
on grounds of delay.
23\. Mr. S.K. Bansal, learned Counsel for the plaintiff has placed reliance on
the pronouncement of the Apex Court reported at 2004 (28) PTC 121 (SC) Midas
Hygiene Industries P. Ltd. and Anr. v. Sudhir Bhatia and Ors., wherein the
court has held that delay in bringing the suit shall not defeat an action for
infringement of a registered trademark.
24\. So far as the plea of the defendant based on bonafide concurrent user is
concerned, in Metro Playing Card Co. v. Wazir Chand Kapoor , it was held by
the court that even in a case where the defendant was able to get a
registration for a concurrent user but till the date of registration of the
trademark, there can be no doubt that the plaintiff's trademark is infringed
by the defendant and thereby the plaintiff's statutory rights under Section 28
of the Act are violated. Consequently, so long as the registration of the
plaintiff's trademark subsists, it is not open to the defendant to violate the
same.
25\. Again in 1996 PTC (16) DB (Delhi) Hitachi Ltd. v. Ajay Kr. Agarwal and
Ors., the Division Bench of this Court has held that the courts cannot allow a
trader to use a trademark which bears a close or deceptive similarity,
affinity and proximity in sound/looks with the trademarks belonging to others,
whether by prior use or prior registration, in order to maintain purity and
morality in trade and to protect the unaware customers from being misled in
buying the product which he did not intend to buy. An infringer or plagiarist
of a trademark cannot be allowed to thrive on somebody else's reputation and
goodwill.
26\. Before this Court also, an objection has been taken by the defendant that
the defendant has been bona fide using the trademark `SUPERSTAR' since 1st
April, 1988. I find that the defendant has not disclosed the date on which it
adopted the trademark `SUPERSTAR' or commenced its use. The Page 2025
defendant gives no reason as to why the defendant found it necessary to adopt
this trademark or device. It has also not disclosed the date on which the
label which has been complained of by the plaintiff was created. Not a single
document is on record in th is behalf. There is no evidence of any publicity
having been undertaken and no advertisements are also forthcoming on record.
The few bills and invoices placed by the defendant on record do not disclose
the trade of any goods under the offending trademark. Some of the documents do
advert to the product `henna' but there is nothing to inducate that this henna
was being traded under the trademark `SUPERSTAR'. There is no evidence of
concurrent use even let alone the prior use of the trademark adopted by the
defendant.
27\. In the facts which have been placed before this Court, I find that there
is no evidence of such use as is claimed by the defendant of the trademark
complained of. For this reason, the pronouncement reported at Uniply
Industries Ltd. v. Unicon Plywood Pvt. Ltd. and Ors. has no bearing on this
matter.
28\. This plank of the defendant's objection is based on the statutory
provisions of Sections 12 and 127 of the Trademarks Act, placing reliance on
Rubber Co. Ltd. v. Durex Products (Incorporated) and Anr. and Gopal Hossiery
v. The Dy. Registrar of Trademarks and Ors., it is urged that the Registrar is
empowered to register more than one trademark if the same are being
concurrently used.
29\. Concurrent use has to be established by documents which may include
bills, invoices, transportation and sales proofs etc. Use includes physical
and non-physical use. Advertisements and other promotional activities and
materials relating to a trade mark are covered under non-physical use. (Ref:
Hardie Trading Ltd. v. Addisons Paint and Chemicals Ltd. ).
30\. The defendant has placed reliance on an application made for registration
of its trademark. Copy of this document which has been placed on record shows
that the application has been filed only on 2nd December, 2005. As discussed
hereinabove, there is no evidence placed before this Court of concurrent use,
let alone prior use of trademark, in any form by the defendant. In any case,
the trademark of the defendant has not been registered till date. The pendency
of the application for registration would thus have no bearing on the
infringement of the plaintiff's trademark by the defendant.
This contention of the defendant thus deserves to be rejected.
31\. Mr. A.K. Singla, learned senior counsel for the defendant has also urged
that the application of the defendant seeking registration of the trademark
Page 2026 is pending before the Registrar and for this reason, this
adjudication has to await and abide consideration of such application by the
prescribed forum under the competent statute. Placing reliance on the
pronouncement of the court reported at Maddada Chayanna v. Karnam Narayana;
State Electricity Board and Anr. v. Ashwani Kumar; and 1999 (1) SCC 156 State
of Mizoram v. Biakchhawna, it has been urged that the present suit ought not
to be proceeded with, and the Registrar of Trademarks is the appropriate and
competent authority to deal with the matter. In my view, this objection is
wholly misconceived.
32\. So long as the plaintiff has registered trademarks, it is legally
entitled to seek interim relief against the defendant for infringement thereof
under the statute. The plaintiff has placed copies of its trademark
registration which prima facie established its legal right to protection of
the infringement on the part of the defendant. This issue has in any case been
considered in the judicial pronouncements reported at 1996 (16) PTC 262 (DB)
(Del) Hitachi Ltd. v. Ajay Kr. Agarwal and Ors. The defendant has no legal
right whatsoever in the trademark which may be identical or deceptively
similar to a registered trademark till such time it gets registration in
accordance with law.
33\. In the instant case, there can be no doubt that the trademark `MOONSTAR'
adopted by the defendant is not descriptive of the goods for which it is being
used. Both the words `Moon' or `Star' have also no association with the
products. They also do not describe the nature or character of the products of
the plaintiff in any manner. The plaintiff's registration of this trademark
and its device of a star in the lap of the moon remains valid and binding and
has not been objected to or revoked by the Registrar of Trademarks. The
plaintiff has also prima facie established its extensive trade and reputation
in its business under such trademark. The trademark and the device as also the
plaintiff's label stands registered thereby conferring enforceable rights on
the plaintiff by the present action urging infringement. The word and device
of star are certainly essential and distinctive part of the trademark and of
the label of the plaintiff.
34\. Even in the Atlas Cycle Industries Ltd. case (supra), the plaintiff had
alleged that the trademark 'ROYAL STAR' of the defendant No. 1 was an
infringement of his registered trademark 'EASTERN STAR'. It was submitted by
the defendant in this case, that the plaintiff having admitted the words
'EASTERN STAR' as its trademark, he should not be allowed to make a contrary
allegation that it was entitled to the use of the word 'STAR' which was only a
part of the registered name, and the name did not consist of any Page 2027
particular part but consisted of the combination of two words 'EASTERN' and
'STAR'. The court stated that the proper approach in deciding the question is
to consider the overall and phonetic similarity of the two names 'EASTERN
STAR' and 'ROYAL STAR'. The court further stated that the meaning of neither
word, whether 'EASTERN' or 'STAR' has any relation at all to cycles, and are
thus not descriptive or suggestive of the goods i.e. cycles and therefore, the
most important thing that has to be noticed is that both names, when uttered
end in the same sound. Therefore, a person of average intelligence and
imperfect memory would logically remember only the sound of the ending word
'STAR' and is therefore likely to be deceived or confused between the two
names or marks. Therefore, the court held that since the two marks have an
overall structural and phonetic similarity and considering their use in
respect of the same kinds of goods i.e. cycles, the use of the defendant's
trademark is likely to cause deception or confusion as discussed under Section
29 of the Trade and Merchandise Act, 1958.
35\. In the instant case, there is no dispute that the trademark adopted by
the defendant is not registered. Therefore, the use of the mark (r) i.e.
placing R on its label has been urged to be tainted with dishonesty.
There is force in this submission inasmuch as by printing this device as part
of its trademark, the defendant has attempted to dishonestly create an
impression that its trademark was registered. The device is placed at an place
identical to where it is placed in the label of the plaintiff which has been
urged as infringement of its registered trademark by the defendant.
Certainly, there is strength to the contention of the plaintiff that these
acts of the defendant are tainted with dishonesty and mala fide and intended
to cause deception and confusion in the minds of the purchasing public.
36\. The pronouncement reported at Novartis AG v. Wanbury Ltd. and Anr.
therefore would have no application to the instant case.
37\. In the light of the principles laid down in Atlas Cycle Industries Ltd.
v. Hind Cycles Industries Ltd. 2nd (1973) I Delhi 393; K.R. Chinna Krishna
Chettiar v. Sri Ambal And Co. and Anr. Devi Pesticides Pvt. Ltd. v. Shiv Agro
Chemicals Industries; and the statutory provisions of Section 29(5) of the
Trademarks Act, 1999, the plaintiff has a legal right to object to the
infringement of even a part of its trademark which is undoubtedly distinctive.
38\. Prima facie, it would appear that the defendant has fraudulently copied
an essential part of trademark of the plaintiff when it has used 'STAR' as
part of its trademark. It has also dishonestly copied an essential and
integral part of the device of the plaintiff when it uses the device of star
for Page 2028 its products. From the documents placed on record and the
averments made, it is evident that the plaintiff has proprietary rights over
the same by virtue of prior user of the trademark since 1917 and registration
of its trademark since 1943 and the defendant has not been able to establish
any such use. The registration of the plaintiff effected on 5th July, 1943
relates to the product hair dyes and even the device of moon and star also
stands registered in its name. There is no force in the defendant's objection
that the plaintiff does not hold registration of the trademark or copyright
with regard to the label which is the subject matter of the suit.
39\. Placing reliance on the pronouncement reported at AIR 1998 Delhi 114
Mahant Purshottam Dass v. Harnarayan and Sarjiwan Singh v. Delhi Vidyut Board,
it has been urged that the plaintiff has not sought any declaration for labels
which are similar to that of the plaintiff and consequently, no injunction
could be granted.
40\. The arguments deserve to be noticed only for the sake of rejection. The
plaintiff in the instant case is basing its rights on its registered trademark
and has urged that the defendant has infringed the same. The plaintiff has
based its entitlement to injunction on detailed averments to this effect in
its pleadings. In such a case, the findings relating to the acts of the
infringement on the part of the defendant in so trading are inherent in the
very nature of the lis and consequently, no separate declaration is required
to be sought.
In any case, the legal rights of the plaintiff are based on its registered
trademark and are statutorily recognised thereby. There is no declaration of
status or title as envisaged under the Specific Relief Act, 1963 is required
to be sought. For these reasons, this objection is devoid of substance.
41\. In the light of the well settled principles of law and the above
discussion, I find that the plaintiff has prima facie established a case of
infringement of its registered trademark by the defendant. The trademark
adopted by the defendant contains an essential part of the plaintiff's
trademark as also of the device by which the plaintiff is trading.
42\. I also find that the defendant is trading in the same goods as that of
the plaintiff and the infringing trademark is being used for the sale of the
very goods which are being sold by the plaintiff. The plaintiff has prima
facie also established reputation and goodwill in its business under such
trademark which would undoubtedly suffer irreparable loss and damage if the
defendant is not restrained from continuing with its offending acts. The
balance of convenience, interest of justice and equity lie in favor of the
plaintiff and against the defendant. The purchasing public would consist of
literate, semi-literate and even illiterate people who by virtue of the
adoption of the word 'Star' as aprt of its trademark by the defendant as also
the device star would be persuaded to believe that the product of the
defendant is associated with that of the plaintiff.
For all the foregoing reasons, I am of the view that the present application
deserved to be allowed.
Page 2029 Accordingly, the defendants, proprietors, promoters, retailers,
their agents, partners, servants, assigns, representatives, successors,
distributors and all others acting for and on their behalf are hereby
restrained from using the plaintiff's trademark 'MOONSTAR' or any part thereof
for manufacturing, selling, offering for sale, advertising or displaying
directly or indirectly or dealing in any other manner for its products or
business. The defendants, proprietors, promoters, retailers, their agents,
partners, servants, assigns, representatives, successors, distributors and all
others acting for and on their behalf are also hereby restrained from using
the device of star in the lap of the moon or any portion thereof for its
products or business. The defendants are also restrained from using any other
trademark or device identical or deceptively similar to that of the plaintiff
amounting to infringement of plaintiff's registered trademark; or violating
the plaintiff's common law rights in the trademark.
This application is allowed in the above terms.
adoption of the word 'Star' as aprt of its trademark by the defendant as also
the device star would be persuaded to believe that the product of the
defendant is associated with that of the plaintiff.
For all the foregoing reasons, I am of the view that the present application
deserved to be allowed.
Page 2029 Accordingly, the defendants, proprietors, promoters, retailers,
their agents, partners, servants, assigns, representatives, successors,
distributors and all others acting for and on their behalf are hereby
restrained from using the plaintiff's trademark 'MOONSTAR' or any part thereof
for manufacturing, selling, offering for sale, advertising or displaying
directly or indirectly or dealing in any other manner for its products or
business. The defendants, proprietors, promoters, retailers, their agents,
partners, servants, assigns, representatives, successors, distributors and all
others acting for and on their behalf are also hereby restrained from using
the device of star in the lap of the moon or any portion thereof for its
products or business. The defendants are also restrained from using any other
business under the trademark 'MOONSTAR' and has adopted a device of a star in
the lap of the moon. The plaintiff has been using the trademark by itself and
also in an artistic label.
3\. The plaintiff had applied for the registration of the trademark as well as
the device and the label under the provisions of the Trademarks Act and it has
obtained several registrations of the same which have been detailed in the
Annexure to the plaint and copies whereof have been filed on record:
      S.                        Trademark Class                   Date of Registration
     No.                    No.                              and status
    1 Moon and Star device     82128    Hair dyes associated    5th July, 1943
                                        with 82129 and 82130
    2 Word Mark Moon and Star  82129    Hair dyes class-3       registered on 25th July,
                                                                1943 which stands rene-
                                                                wed even till date
    3 Label containing device  1300553  Cosmetics including     4th August, 2004 which
      moon and star, the word           henna for export only   stands renewed even on
      mark moonstar, and all            under class-3 (the      date
    Page 2016
    other essential features          plaintiff's application
      of the label                      for registration of the
adoption of the word 'Star' as aprt of its trademark by the defendant as also
the device star would be persuaded to believe that the product of the
defendant is associated with that of the plaintiff.
For all the foregoing reasons, I am of the view that the present application
deserved to be allowed.
Page 2029 Accordingly, the defendants, proprietors, promoters, retailers,
their agents, partners, servants, assigns, representatives, successors,
distributors and all others acting for and on their behalf are hereby
restrained from using the plaintiff's trademark 'MOONSTAR' or any part thereof
for manufacturing, selling, offering for sale, advertising or displaying
directly or indirectly or dealing in any other manner for its products or
business. The defendants, proprietors, promoters, retailers, their agents,
partners, servants, assigns, representatives, successors, distributors and all
others acting for and on their behalf are also hereby restrained from using
the device of star in the lap of the moon or any portion thereof for its
products or business. The defendants are also restrained from using any other
business under the trademark 'MOONSTAR' and has adopted a device of a star in
the lap of the moon. The plaintiff has been using the trademark by itself and
also in an artistic label.
3\. The plaintiff had applied for the registration of the trademark as well as
the device and the label under the provisions of the Trademarks Act and it has
obtained several registrations of the same which have been detailed in the
Annexure to the plaint and copies whereof have been filed on record:
      S.                        Trademark Class                   Date of Registration
     No.                    No.                              and status
    1 Moon and Star device     82128    Hair dyes associated    5th July, 1943
                                        with 82129 and 82130
    2 Word Mark Moon and Star  82129    Hair dyes class-3       registered on 25th July,
                                                                1943 which stands rene-
                                                                wed even till date
    3 Label containing device  1300553  Cosmetics including     4th August, 2004 which
      moon and star, the word           henna for export only   stands renewed even on
      mark moonstar, and all            under class-3 (the      date
    Page 2016
    other essential features          plaintiff's application
      of the label                      for registration of the
adoption of the word 'Star' as aprt of its trademark by the defendant as also
the device star would be persuaded to believe that the product of the
defendant is associated with that of the plaintiff.
For all the foregoing reasons, I am of the view that the present application
deserved to be allowed.
Page 2029 Accordingly, the defendants, proprietors, promoters, retailers,
their agents, partners, servants, assigns, representatives, successors,
distributors and all others acting for and on their behalf are hereby
restrained from using the plaintiff's trademark 'MOONSTAR' or any part thereof
for manufacturing, selling, offering for sale, advertising or displaying
directly or indirectly or dealing in any other manner for its products or
business. The defendants, proprietors, promoters, retailers, their agents,
partners, servants, assigns, representatives, successors, distributors and all
others acting for and on their behalf are also hereby restrained from using
the device of star in the lap of the moon or any portion thereof for its
products or business. The defendants are also restrained from using any other
business under the trademark 'MOONSTAR' and has adopted a device of a star in
the lap of the moon. The plaintiff has been using the trademark by itself and
also in an artistic label.
3\. The plaintiff had applied for the registration of the trademark as well as
the device and the label under the provisions of the Trademarks Act and it has
obtained several registrations of the same which have been detailed in the
Annexure to the plaint and copies whereof have been filed on record:
      S.                        Trademark Class                   Date of Registration
     No.                    No.                              and status
    1 Moon and Star device     82128    Hair dyes associated    5th July, 1943
                                        with 82129 and 82130
    2 Word Mark Moon and Star  82129    Hair dyes class-3       registered on 25th July,
                                                                1943 which stands rene-
                                                                wed even till date
    3 Label containing device  1300553  Cosmetics including     4th August, 2004 which
      moon and star, the word           henna for export only   stands renewed even on
      mark moonstar, and all            under class-3 (the      date
    Page 2016
    other essential features          plaintiff's application
      of the label                      for registration of the
                                        moonstar label under
                                        No. 1300551 and moonstar
                                        under No. 673897 in 
                                        class-3 are stated to be
                                        pending)
    4 The moon and star label   521932  Bleaching preparations  28th December, 1989
                                        etc., perfumary soaps,
                                        cosmetics, hair lotions
                                        etc. in class-3
4\. The plaintiff has placed before this Court documents showing that it had
engaged the services of M/s Chauhan Graphics, South Market, Kidwai Nagar East,
adoption of the word 'Star' as aprt of its trademark by the defendant as also
the device star would be persuaded to believe that the product of the
defendant is associated with that of the plaintiff.
For all the foregoing reasons, I am of the view that the present application
deserved to be allowed.
Page 2029 Accordingly, the defendants, proprietors, promoters, retailers,
their agents, partners, servants, assigns, representatives, successors,
distributors and all others acting for and on their behalf are hereby
restrained from using the plaintiff's trademark 'MOONSTAR' or any part thereof
for manufacturing, selling, offering for sale, advertising or displaying
directly or indirectly or dealing in any other manner for its products or
business. The defendants, proprietors, promoters, retailers, their agents,
partners, servants, assigns, representatives, successors, distributors and all
others acting for and on their behalf are also hereby restrained from using
the device of star in the lap of the moon or any portion thereof for its
products or business. The defendants are also restrained from using any other
business under the trademark 'MOONSTAR' and has adopted a device of a star in
the lap of the moon. The plaintiff has been using the trademark by itself and
also in an artistic label.
3\. The plaintiff had applied for the registration of the trademark as well as
the device and the label under the provisions of the Trademarks Act and it has
obtained several registrations of the same which have been detailed in the
Annexure to the plaint and copies whereof have been filed on record:
      S.                        Trademark Class                   Date of Registration
     No.                    No.                              and status
    1 Moon and Star device     82128    Hair dyes associated    5th July, 1943
                                        with 82129 and 82130
    2 Word Mark Moon and Star  82129    Hair dyes class-3       registered on 25th July,
                                                                1943 which stands rene-
                                                                wed even till date
    3 Label containing device  1300553  Cosmetics including     4th August, 2004 which
      moon and star, the word           henna for export only   stands renewed even on
      mark moonstar, and all            under class-3 (the      date
    Page 2016
    other essential features          plaintiff's application
      of the label                      for registration of the
                                        moonstar label under
                                        No. 1300551 and moonstar
                                        under No. 673897 in 
                                        class-3 are stated to be
                                        pending)
    4 The moon and star label   521932  Bleaching preparations  28th December, 1989
                                        etc., perfumary soaps,
                                        cosmetics, hair lotions
                                        etc. in class-3
4\. The plaintiff has placed before this Court documents showing that it had
engaged the services of M/s Chauhan Graphics, South Market, Kidwai Nagar East,
adoption of the word 'Star' as aprt of its trademark by the defendant as also
the device star would be persuaded to believe that the product of the
defendant is associated with that of the plaintiff.
For all the foregoing reasons, I am of the view that the present application
deserved to be allowed.
Page 2029 Accordingly, the defendants, proprietors, promoters, retailers,
their agents, partners, servants, assigns, representatives, successors,
distributors and all others acting for and on their behalf are hereby
restrained from using the plaintiff's trademark 'MOONSTAR' or any part thereof
for manufacturing, selling, offering for sale, advertising or displaying
directly or indirectly or dealing in any other manner for its products or
business. The defendants, proprietors, promoters, retailers, their agents,
partners, servants, assigns, representatives, successors, distributors and all
others acting for and on their behalf are also hereby restrained from using
the device of star in the lap of the moon or any portion thereof for its
products or business. The defendants are also restrained from using any other
