Kerala High Court
Deputy Commissioner vs Rama Shenoy on 10 September, 2002
Equivalent citations: 2003 (1) KLT 720, 2004 138 STC 323 Ker
Author: G Sivarajan
Bench: G Sivarajan, C R Nair
JUDGMENT G. Sivarajan, J.
1\. The question that arises for consideration in this Tax Revision Case is as
to whether 'sugar candy' sold by the assessee falls within Entry 56 of the
Third Schedule to the Kerala General Sales Tax Act (hereinafter referred to as
'the Act') eligible for exemption from payment of sales tax under the Act.
2\. The Revenue is the revision petitioner. Respondent-assessee is engaged in
the business as Indian Drugs Merchants. In the assessment under the Act for
the year 1992-93 the assessee claimed exemption on the sales turnover of
'sugar candy'. The assessee's contention that 'sugar candy' is an item falling
in category of sugar under Entry 56 of the Third Schedule to the Act was not
accepted by the assessing authority. Assessee's appeal before the first
appellate authority was unsuccessful. However, the Tribunal by order dated
23rd July, 1997 in T.A. No. 49 of 1996 allowed the appeal of the assessee
holding that "sugar will include sugar candy" and, therefore, it is exempted
from payment of sales tax under Entry 56 of the third schedule to the Act.
rejected. A Division Bench of the Karnataka High Court in Praveen Corporation
v. Commissioner of Commercial Taxes ((1977) 107 STC 614), reversing the
judgment of the Single Bench reported in 107 ITR 290 which held the view that
'sugar candy' is not 'sugar' under Entry 31-B of the Fifth Schedule to the
Karnataka Sales Tax Act held that sugar candy made from sugar contains more
than 90 per cent of sucrose and therefore it definitely falls within the
statutory definition of sugar as set out for the purpose of the Additional
Duties of Excise (Goods of Special Importance) Act, 1957 and the Central
Excise Tariff Act, 1985. It was accordingly held that sugar-candy is also
covered by Entry 31-B of the Fifth Schedule to the said Act.
9\. The other decisions relied on by the Government Pleader are also
distinguishable.
10\. In the present case 'sugar candy' does not find a place in any of the
entries in the First and Second Schedules to the Act. There is no other entry
in the said Schedules under which 'sugar candy' can be brought in. Applying
the principles laid down in the decision of the Supreme Court in Sakarwala
from payment of sales tax under Entry 56 of the third schedule to the Act.
3\. The learned Government Pleader appearing for the revision petitioner
submits that 'sugar candy' has never been understood in common parlance as
'sugar' since 'sugar candy' is commercially a different commodity from sugar.
He in support of the said contention, relied on the decisions of the Orissa
and Karnataka High Court and also the decisions of the Supreme Court in
Annapurna Biscuit Manufacturing Company v. Commissioner of Sales Tax, Lucknow,
U.P. ((1981) 48 STC 254) and State of Kerala v. Vattukalam Chemicals
Industries ((2002) 10 KTR 69 (SC)). He also sought to rely on the dictionary
meaning of the word 'sugar'. He, on the basis of the aforesaid decisions and
the dictionary meaning submitted that the Tribunal had erred in holding that
the 'sugar candy' will fall within Entry 56 of the Third Schedule to the Act.
The learned Counsel for the respondent submitted that 'sugar candy' is nothing
but sugar falling under Entry 56 of the Third Schedule to the Act. He
submitted that Entry 56 is not 'sugar' but the 'sugar covered under sub-
headings 1701-20, 1701-31, 1701-39 and 1702-11 of the Schedule to the Central
Excise Tariff Act, 1985' and submitted that by virtue of the provisions of
Chapter 17 of the Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985 'sugar-candy' will fall
under Entry 56 of the Third Schedule to the Act. He also relied on the
decision of the Supreme Court in State of Gujarat v. Sakarwala Brothers
((1967) 19 STC 24) and submitted that the principles laid down in the said
decision will squarely apply.
4\. In order to appreciate the rival contentions, it is necessary to refer to
the relevant provisions of the Act and also the relevant provisions of the
Central Excise Tariff Act to which reference is made in Entry 56 of the Third
Schedule to the Act. Entry 56 of the Third Schedule to the Act reads as
follows:
"Sugarcoveredundersub-heading 1701-20, 1701-31, 1701-39 and 1702-11 of the
Schedule to the Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985."
Chapter 17 of the Central Excise Tariff Act deals with 'sugar' and sugar
confectiotiary'. Paragraph 2 of the said Chapter reads as follows:
"For the purpose of sub-heading Nos. 1701-10, 1701-20, 1701-31 and 1701-39,
'sugar' means any form of sugar in which the sucrose content, if expressed as
a percentage of the material dried to constant weight at 105 C would be more
than 90,"
The relevant sub-heading of the Schedule to the Central Excise Tariff Act,
1985 also reads as follows:
Heading No. Sub-heading No. Description of goods Rate of duty Basic Additional
1701-10 Sugar, in or in relation to the manufacture of which no process is
ordinaily carried on with the aid of power Nil 1701-20 Khandsari sugar, sugar
other than Khandsari sugar Nil 1701-31 Required by the Central Government to
be sold under Cl. (f) of sub-s. (2) of S.3 of the Essential Commodities Act,
1955 (10 of 1955) Rs. 17 per quintal Rs. 21 per quintal 1701-39 Other Rs. 34
per quintal Rs. 37 per quintal 1702-11 Palmyra sugar Nil Nil
5\. A contention similar to the one taken by the revenue was considered by the
Supreme Court in State of Gujarat v. Sakarwala Brothers ((1967) 19 STC 24).
The decision of the Gujarat High Court under appeal was appended to the said
decision at pages 25 to 30. The main question which arose for consideration in
that case was as to whether the sale of patasa, harda and alchidana (small
lumps of sugar) are exempt form the payment of sales tax by virtue of Entry 47
in Schedule A of the Bombay Sales Tax Act, 1959. The learned Advocate General
appearing for the State of Gujarat raised a contention in the High Court that
the word 'sugar' in Entry 47 has been used in the same sense in which it used
in common parlance and that in common parlance, "patasa", "harda" and
"alchidana" are not commercially known as and cannot be asked for or obtained
as sugar. Entry 47 of Schedule A of the Bombay Sales Tax Act, 1959 reads as
follows:
"Sugar detined in item 8 of the First Schedule to the Central Excise and Salt
Act, 1944". Item 8 defines sugar "sugar means any form of sugar containing
more than 90 per cent of sucrose", Gujarat High Court observed that the
Advocate General was right when he says that the articles known as patasa,
harda and alchidana bear a distinct and different name from sugar and are not
commercially purchased or sold as sugar. The High Court, however, observed as
follows:
'The Legislature, in Entry 47, does not use the word sugar simpliciter. It has
in terms stated that what is covered is sugar as defined in item No. 8 of the
First Schedule to the Central Excise and Salt Act, 1944. When we turn to the
definition appearing in the aforesaid item No. 8 that definition is not
intended merely to cover sugar as known in common parlance. As stated by us
earlier, it is intended to cover all forms of sugar. It is further intended to
cover only sugar in any form which contains more than 90 percent of sucrose. A
definition which refers to the chemical contents of an article cannot be said
to be a definition which is intended to cover the article as understood in
common parlance."
6\. In the appeal against the said judgment the Supreme Court at page 30 of
the said report dealt with the position as follows:
"The question which we have to consider is whether patasa, harda and alchidana
are 'forms of sugar containing more than 90 per cent of sucrose' and hence are
covered by the definition of Entry 47 of Schedule A to the Bombay Sales Tax
Act. It is not disputed that patasa, harda and alchidana contain more than 90
per cent of sucrose. It is contended, however, by Mr. Bindra on behalf of the
appellant that they are not 'forms of sugar' but they are products of sugar
and do not fall within Entry 47 of Schedule A. We are unable to accept this
argument as correct. It is not disputed on behalf of the appellant that the
chemical composition of patasa, harda and alchidana is the same as that of
sugar, viz., there is more than 90 percent of sucrose. Mr. Bindra, however,
laid stress on the argument that patasa, harda and alchidana were sweets used
on festive occasions. But this circumstance has no relevance on the question
of legal classification for the purpose of the Bombay Sales Tax Act. On the
other hand, it appears from the judgment of the Tribunal that it is possible
to convert these articles into sugar by dissolving them in water and by
subjecting the solution to an appropriate process. It is stated by the
Tribunal that these articles can be put to the same use to which sugar-candy
can be put. It is, therefore, manifest that patasa, harda and alchidana are
only different forms of refined sugar with the requisite sucrose contents. It
is argued by Mr. Bindra that the phrase 'any form of sugar' referred to any
variety of sugar and the phrase cannot be taken to mean sugar in any form. It
is not possible to accept this argument as correct. If the Legislature had
intended to refer to 'any variety of sugar' there is no reason why it should
not have used that expression in item No. 47."
The Supreme Court ultimately upheld the decision of the Gujarat High Court.
The position obtained in the instant case is similar to the one considered by
the Supreme Court.
7\. We have already extracted the relevant provisions of the Act viz. Entry 56
of Third Schedule to the Act and the relevant sub-heading in the Schedule to
the Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985. C1.2 of Chapter 17 of the Central Excise
Tariff Act has clearly stated that for the purposes of sub-heading Nos.
1701-10, 1701-20, 1701-31 and 1701-39, 'Sugar' means any form of sugar in
which the sucrose content, if expressed as percentage of the material dried to
constant weight at 105C would be more than 90. Further the said sub-headings
take in all forms of sugar. Entry 56 of the Third Schedule to the Act is not
'sugar' simpliciter. It is sugar covered under subheadings of the Schedule to
the Central Excise Tariff Act. In view of the decision of the Supreme Court in
Sakarwala Brothers case ((1967) 19 STC 24) mentioned above it is not the
common parlance theory that has to be applied to find out as to whether the
sugar covered under the sub-heading of the Schedule to the Central Excise
Tariff Act will take in sugar candy. The said question has to be considered
only in the light of the provisions of the Central Excise Tariff Act which we
have already extracted above.
8\. Thus the only question to be considered is as to whether 'sugar candy'
dealt with by the respondent contains more than 90 per cent sucrose content.
In the instant case, the Tribunal has found that the sugar-candy dealt with by
the assessee satisfied the definition of sugar in Clause 2 of Chapter 17 of
the Central Excise Tariff Act. We do not find any illegality in the order of
the Tribunal. However, the Government Pleader appearing for the revision
petitioner, as already noted, relied on the decisions reported in Una Subba
Rao v. State of Orissa and Anr. ((1986) 61 STC 49), Kaypee Industries v.
Commercial Tax Officer and Anr. ((1992) 84 STC 384), Praveen Corporation v.
Commissioner of Commercial Taxes and Anr. ((1997) 107 STC 290), State of
Orissa v. Laxmi Industries ((1991) 81 STC 43) to contend that even going by
the provisions of the Central Excise Tariff Act, sugar candy will not fall
within the definition of sugar. In Una Subba Rao's case ((1986) 61 STC 49) a
contention was taken before the Orissa High Court that 'sugar' includes 'sugar
candy' and since sugar is exempted from payment of sales tax under the Act
'sugar candy' is also exempted from payment of sales tax. The Court noted that
the said contention is supported by the decision of the Supreme Court in
Sakarwala Brothers' case ((1967) 19 STC 24), decision of the Orissa High Court
in State of Orissa v. Satyabadi Sahu and Sons ((1982) 51 STC 75) and other
decision of other High Courts Paro and Co. v. State of Andhra Pradesh ((1970)
25 STC 34 (A.P.), Madanlal Khaitan v. Commercial Tax Officer ((1972) 29 STC
625 (Cal.)), Commissioner of Sales Tax v. Nangumal Ram Kishore ((1981) 48 STC
277) (Del.), Dulal Chandra Bhur v. Commercial Tax Officer ((1976) 37 STC 576
(Cal.), and so on. With reference to its earlier decision the Orissa High
Court in State of Orissa v. Satyabadi Sahu and Sons ((1982) 51 STC 75) noted
that at that time 'sugar candy' was not included in the list of goods subject
to sales tax. The Orissa High Court held that in view of the amendment made
subsequently by which 'sugar candy' was included in item 86 of the List C
goods subject to sales tax the claim of exemption pleaded was rightly
rejected. A Division Bench of the Karnataka High Court in Praveen Corporation
v. Commissioner of Commercial Taxes ((1977) 107 STC 614), reversing the
judgment of the Single Bench reported in 107 ITR 290 which held the view that
'sugar candy' is not 'sugar' under Entry 31-B of the Fifth Schedule to the
Karnataka Sales Tax Act held that sugar candy made from sugar contains more
than 90 per cent of sucrose and therefore it definitely falls within the
statutory definition of sugar as set out for the purpose of the Additional
Duties of Excise (Goods of Special Importance) Act, 1957 and the Central
Excise Tariff Act, 1985. It was accordingly held that sugar-candy is also
covered by Entry 31-B of the Fifth Schedule to the said Act.
9\. The other decisions relied on by the Government Pleader are also
distinguishable.
10\. In the present case 'sugar candy' does not find a place in any of the
entries in the First and Second Schedules to the Act. There is no other entry
in the said Schedules under which 'sugar candy' can be brought in. Applying
the principles laid down in the decision of the Supreme Court in Sakarwala
Brothers case ((1967) 19 STC 24) we hold that 'sugar candy' dealt with by the
assessee falls under Entry 56 of the Third Schedule to the Act. We accordingly
confirm the order of the Tribunal.
This Tax Revision case is accordingly dismissed.
rejected. A Division Bench of the Karnataka High Court in Praveen Corporation
v. Commissioner of Commercial Taxes ((1977) 107 STC 614), reversing the
judgment of the Single Bench reported in 107 ITR 290 which held the view that
'sugar candy' is not 'sugar' under Entry 31-B of the Fifth Schedule to the
Karnataka Sales Tax Act held that sugar candy made from sugar contains more
than 90 per cent of sucrose and therefore it definitely falls within the
statutory definition of sugar as set out for the purpose of the Additional
Duties of Excise (Goods of Special Importance) Act, 1957 and the Central
Excise Tariff Act, 1985. It was accordingly held that sugar-candy is also
covered by Entry 31-B of the Fifth Schedule to the said Act.
9\. The other decisions relied on by the Government Pleader are also
distinguishable.
10\. In the present case 'sugar candy' does not find a place in any of the
entries in the First and Second Schedules to the Act. There is no other entry
in the said Schedules under which 'sugar candy' can be brought in. Applying
the principles laid down in the decision of the Supreme Court in Sakarwala
from payment of sales tax under Entry 56 of the third schedule to the Act.
3\. The learned Government Pleader appearing for the revision petitioner
submits that 'sugar candy' has never been understood in common parlance as
'sugar' since 'sugar candy' is commercially a different commodity from sugar.
He in support of the said contention, relied on the decisions of the Orissa
and Karnataka High Court and also the decisions of the Supreme Court in
Annapurna Biscuit Manufacturing Company v. Commissioner of Sales Tax, Lucknow,
U.P. ((1981) 48 STC 254) and State of Kerala v. Vattukalam Chemicals
Industries ((2002) 10 KTR 69 (SC)). He also sought to rely on the dictionary
meaning of the word 'sugar'. He, on the basis of the aforesaid decisions and
the dictionary meaning submitted that the Tribunal had erred in holding that
the 'sugar candy' will fall within Entry 56 of the Third Schedule to the Act.
The learned Counsel for the respondent submitted that 'sugar candy' is nothing
but sugar falling under Entry 56 of the Third Schedule to the Act. He
submitted that Entry 56 is not 'sugar' but the 'sugar covered under sub-
headings 1701-20, 1701-31, 1701-39 and 1702-11 of the Schedule to the Central
Excise Tariff Act, 1985' and submitted that by virtue of the provisions of
Chapter 17 of the Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985 'sugar-candy' will fall
under Entry 56 of the Third Schedule to the Act. He also relied on the
decision of the Supreme Court in State of Gujarat v. Sakarwala Brothers
rejected. A Division Bench of the Karnataka High Court in Praveen Corporation
v. Commissioner of Commercial Taxes ((1977) 107 STC 614), reversing the
judgment of the Single Bench reported in 107 ITR 290 which held the view that
'sugar candy' is not 'sugar' under Entry 31-B of the Fifth Schedule to the
Karnataka Sales Tax Act held that sugar candy made from sugar contains more
than 90 per cent of sucrose and therefore it definitely falls within the
statutory definition of sugar as set out for the purpose of the Additional
Duties of Excise (Goods of Special Importance) Act, 1957 and the Central
Excise Tariff Act, 1985. It was accordingly held that sugar-candy is also
covered by Entry 31-B of the Fifth Schedule to the said Act.
9\. The other decisions relied on by the Government Pleader are also
distinguishable.
10\. In the present case 'sugar candy' does not find a place in any of the
entries in the First and Second Schedules to the Act. There is no other entry
in the said Schedules under which 'sugar candy' can be brought in. Applying
the principles laid down in the decision of the Supreme Court in Sakarwala
from payment of sales tax under Entry 56 of the third schedule to the Act.
3\. The learned Government Pleader appearing for the revision petitioner
submits that 'sugar candy' has never been understood in common parlance as
'sugar' since 'sugar candy' is commercially a different commodity from sugar.
He in support of the said contention, relied on the decisions of the Orissa
and Karnataka High Court and also the decisions of the Supreme Court in
Annapurna Biscuit Manufacturing Company v. Commissioner of Sales Tax, Lucknow,
U.P. ((1981) 48 STC 254) and State of Kerala v. Vattukalam Chemicals
Industries ((2002) 10 KTR 69 (SC)). He also sought to rely on the dictionary
meaning of the word 'sugar'. He, on the basis of the aforesaid decisions and
the dictionary meaning submitted that the Tribunal had erred in holding that
the 'sugar candy' will fall within Entry 56 of the Third Schedule to the Act.
The learned Counsel for the respondent submitted that 'sugar candy' is nothing
but sugar falling under Entry 56 of the Third Schedule to the Act. He
submitted that Entry 56 is not 'sugar' but the 'sugar covered under sub-
headings 1701-20, 1701-31, 1701-39 and 1702-11 of the Schedule to the Central
Excise Tariff Act, 1985' and submitted that by virtue of the provisions of
Chapter 17 of the Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985 'sugar-candy' will fall
under Entry 56 of the Third Schedule to the Act. He also relied on the
decision of the Supreme Court in State of Gujarat v. Sakarwala Brothers
rejected. A Division Bench of the Karnataka High Court in Praveen Corporation
v. Commissioner of Commercial Taxes ((1977) 107 STC 614), reversing the
judgment of the Single Bench reported in 107 ITR 290 which held the view that
'sugar candy' is not 'sugar' under Entry 31-B of the Fifth Schedule to the
Karnataka Sales Tax Act held that sugar candy made from sugar contains more
than 90 per cent of sucrose and therefore it definitely falls within the
statutory definition of sugar as set out for the purpose of the Additional
Duties of Excise (Goods of Special Importance) Act, 1957 and the Central
Excise Tariff Act, 1985. It was accordingly held that sugar-candy is also
covered by Entry 31-B of the Fifth Schedule to the said Act.
9\. The other decisions relied on by the Government Pleader are also
distinguishable.
10\. In the present case 'sugar candy' does not find a place in any of the
entries in the First and Second Schedules to the Act. There is no other entry
in the said Schedules under which 'sugar candy' can be brought in. Applying
the principles laid down in the decision of the Supreme Court in Sakarwala
from payment of sales tax under Entry 56 of the third schedule to the Act.
3\. The learned Government Pleader appearing for the revision petitioner
submits that 'sugar candy' has never been understood in common parlance as
'sugar' since 'sugar candy' is commercially a different commodity from sugar.
He in support of the said contention, relied on the decisions of the Orissa
and Karnataka High Court and also the decisions of the Supreme Court in
Annapurna Biscuit Manufacturing Company v. Commissioner of Sales Tax, Lucknow,
U.P. ((1981) 48 STC 254) and State of Kerala v. Vattukalam Chemicals
Industries ((2002) 10 KTR 69 (SC)). He also sought to rely on the dictionary
meaning of the word 'sugar'. He, on the basis of the aforesaid decisions and
the dictionary meaning submitted that the Tribunal had erred in holding that
the 'sugar candy' will fall within Entry 56 of the Third Schedule to the Act.
The learned Counsel for the respondent submitted that 'sugar candy' is nothing
but sugar falling under Entry 56 of the Third Schedule to the Act. He
submitted that Entry 56 is not 'sugar' but the 'sugar covered under sub-
headings 1701-20, 1701-31, 1701-39 and 1702-11 of the Schedule to the Central
Excise Tariff Act, 1985' and submitted that by virtue of the provisions of
Chapter 17 of the Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985 'sugar-candy' will fall
under Entry 56 of the Third Schedule to the Act. He also relied on the
decision of the Supreme Court in State of Gujarat v. Sakarwala Brothers
((1967) 19 STC 24) and submitted that the principles laid down in the said
decision will squarely apply.
4\. In order to appreciate the rival contentions, it is necessary to refer to
the relevant provisions of the Act and also the relevant provisions of the
Central Excise Tariff Act to which reference is made in Entry 56 of the Third
Schedule to the Act. Entry 56 of the Third Schedule to the Act reads as
follows:
"Sugarcoveredundersub-heading 1701-20, 1701-31, 1701-39 and 1702-11 of the
Schedule to the Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985."
Chapter 17 of the Central Excise Tariff Act deals with 'sugar' and sugar
confectiotiary'. Paragraph 2 of the said Chapter reads as follows:
rejected. A Division Bench of the Karnataka High Court in Praveen Corporation
v. Commissioner of Commercial Taxes ((1977) 107 STC 614), reversing the
judgment of the Single Bench reported in 107 ITR 290 which held the view that
'sugar candy' is not 'sugar' under Entry 31-B of the Fifth Schedule to the
Karnataka Sales Tax Act held that sugar candy made from sugar contains more
than 90 per cent of sucrose and therefore it definitely falls within the
statutory definition of sugar as set out for the purpose of the Additional
Duties of Excise (Goods of Special Importance) Act, 1957 and the Central
Excise Tariff Act, 1985. It was accordingly held that sugar-candy is also
covered by Entry 31-B of the Fifth Schedule to the said Act.
9\. The other decisions relied on by the Government Pleader are also
distinguishable.
10\. In the present case 'sugar candy' does not find a place in any of the
entries in the First and Second Schedules to the Act. There is no other entry
in the said Schedules under which 'sugar candy' can be brought in. Applying
the principles laid down in the decision of the Supreme Court in Sakarwala
from payment of sales tax under Entry 56 of the third schedule to the Act.
3\. The learned Government Pleader appearing for the revision petitioner
submits that 'sugar candy' has never been understood in common parlance as
'sugar' since 'sugar candy' is commercially a different commodity from sugar.
He in support of the said contention, relied on the decisions of the Orissa
and Karnataka High Court and also the decisions of the Supreme Court in
Annapurna Biscuit Manufacturing Company v. Commissioner of Sales Tax, Lucknow,
U.P. ((1981) 48 STC 254) and State of Kerala v. Vattukalam Chemicals
Industries ((2002) 10 KTR 69 (SC)). He also sought to rely on the dictionary
meaning of the word 'sugar'. He, on the basis of the aforesaid decisions and
the dictionary meaning submitted that the Tribunal had erred in holding that
the 'sugar candy' will fall within Entry 56 of the Third Schedule to the Act.
The learned Counsel for the respondent submitted that 'sugar candy' is nothing
but sugar falling under Entry 56 of the Third Schedule to the Act. He
submitted that Entry 56 is not 'sugar' but the 'sugar covered under sub-
headings 1701-20, 1701-31, 1701-39 and 1702-11 of the Schedule to the Central
Excise Tariff Act, 1985' and submitted that by virtue of the provisions of
Chapter 17 of the Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985 'sugar-candy' will fall
under Entry 56 of the Third Schedule to the Act. He also relied on the
decision of the Supreme Court in State of Gujarat v. Sakarwala Brothers
((1967) 19 STC 24) and submitted that the principles laid down in the said
decision will squarely apply.
4\. In order to appreciate the rival contentions, it is necessary to refer to
the relevant provisions of the Act and also the relevant provisions of the
Central Excise Tariff Act to which reference is made in Entry 56 of the Third
Schedule to the Act. Entry 56 of the Third Schedule to the Act reads as
follows:
"Sugarcoveredundersub-heading 1701-20, 1701-31, 1701-39 and 1702-11 of the
Schedule to the Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985."
Chapter 17 of the Central Excise Tariff Act deals with 'sugar' and sugar
confectiotiary'. Paragraph 2 of the said Chapter reads as follows:
rejected. A Division Bench of the Karnataka High Court in Praveen Corporation
v. Commissioner of Commercial Taxes ((1977) 107 STC 614), reversing the
judgment of the Single Bench reported in 107 ITR 290 which held the view that
'sugar candy' is not 'sugar' under Entry 31-B of the Fifth Schedule to the
Karnataka Sales Tax Act held that sugar candy made from sugar contains more
than 90 per cent of sucrose and therefore it definitely falls within the
statutory definition of sugar as set out for the purpose of the Additional
Duties of Excise (Goods of Special Importance) Act, 1957 and the Central
Excise Tariff Act, 1985. It was accordingly held that sugar-candy is also
covered by Entry 31-B of the Fifth Schedule to the said Act.
9\. The other decisions relied on by the Government Pleader are also
distinguishable.
10\. In the present case 'sugar candy' does not find a place in any of the
entries in the First and Second Schedules to the Act. There is no other entry
in the said Schedules under which 'sugar candy' can be brought in. Applying
the principles laid down in the decision of the Supreme Court in Sakarwala
