Delhi High Court
Roshan Lal Oil Mills Ltd. vs Assam Company Ltd. on 13 September, 1996
Equivalent citations: 64 (1996) DLT 52, 2003 (39) DRJ 470
Author: . M Sharma
Bench: M Sharma
JUDGMENT Dr. M.K. Sharma, J.
1\. The plaintiff has instituted a suit for perpetual injunction restraining
infringement of trade mark, passing off and rendition of accounts in respect
of the trade mark of the plaintiff 'JUMBO LABEL' with device of Aeroplane in
relation to edible oils (Mustard Oil). The main relief sought for in the suit
is for a permanent injunction restraining the defendant, its servants, agents
and others working on its behalf from manufacturing, marketing, selling or
offering for sale or otherwise dealing in Tea or any other allied and cognate
goods under the trade mark 'JUMBO LABEL' or any other trade mark which may be
deceptively similar to the plaintiff's trade mark 'JUMBO LABEL'.
2\. In the suit the plaintiff has also filed an application under Order 39
Rules 1 & 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure seeking for an ad interim
injunction restraining the defendants in the aforesaid terms from
manufacturing the aforesaid articles under the trade mark 'JUMBO LABEL' which
may be identical and/or deceptively similar to the plaintiff's trade mark.
of Coca Cola Company of Canada Ld. v. Pepsi Cola (1942 (59) RPC 127). In that
case the question was whether the word 'COLA' was descriptive and commonly
adopted in naming of beverages. It was held that 'Cola' was descriptive and
commonly used by the manufacturers of non-alcoholic drinks. It was held that :
"The distinguishing feature of the mark Coca Cola was Coca and not Cola. For
the same reason the distinguishing feature of the mark Pepsi Cola was Pepsi
and not Cola. It was not likely that any one would confuse word Pepsi with
coca."
17\. On analysis of all decisions placed before me including the decision in
Vishnu Das Trading (supra) wherein it is stated by the Supreme Court that if a
trader or manufacturer trades in one or some articles coming under a broad
classification, such trader or manufacturer cannot be permitted to enjoy
monopoly, and applying the said principles of law to the facts of the present
case, I am prima facie of the opinion that issuance of interim injunction at
this stage is not called for in the present case. Accordingly, the application
filed by the plaintiff and registered as I.A. 8444/1994 stands dismissed. It
may be identical and/or deceptively similar to the plaintiff's trade mark.
3\. This court, while issuing summons to the defendants considered it fit to
issue only a notice to the defendants on the injunction application and did
not grant any ad interim injunction as prayed for by the defendants at that
stage. Now the said injunction application has come up for consideration and
final disposal.
4\. In order to appreciate the points and issues urged by the Counsel for the
parties it is necessary to delineate and recapitulate certain facts giving
rise to the suit.
5\. It is stated that the plaintiff is the proprietor of the trade mark 'JUMBO
LABEL' with device of aeroplane in relation to edible oils (Mustard Oil) and
is registered in class 29 from 7.5.1980 in respect of edible oils. The
plaintiff adopted the said trade mark in respect of aforesaid goods from April
1973, and has been continuously using the same till date. The business carried
on by the plaintiff is very extensive and the aforesaid trade mark 'JUMBO
LABEL' with device of aeroplane has become distinctive and associated with
business of the plaintiff. The plaintiff has given vide publicity to the said
trade mark and in view of the same the said trade mark came to acquire a
unique reputation and enviable goodwill among the public and trade.
6\. The defendants are engaged in the business of processing, offering for
sale and marketing tea and has adopted the trade mark 'JUMBO LABEL' with
device of elephant in respect of its product tea. The user of identical and/or
deceptively similar trade mark by the defendants of 'JUMBO LABEL' in relation
to the same good or goods of the same and cognate description is in clear and
flagrant violation of the plaintiff's legal, vested and statutory rights.
According to the plaintiff the initial knowledge of the plaintiff of the
defendant using identical and/or deceptively similar trade mark was in the
month of August, 1994.
7\. The defendants contested the suti by filing a written statement contending
inter alia that the trade mark of the defendant is entirely different to that
of the plaintiff as also the goods which are of different description.
According to the defendants 'JUMBO LABEL' is commonly used in all trades and
is descriptive of the goods having no trade mark value, and therefore, the
plaintiff is not entitled to claim exclusive use of the word 'JUMBO LABEL'
which is common to trade and publicity juris. According to the defendant the
trade mark of the defendant consists of 'JUMBO LABEL' containing a device of
elephant which is being used from 1977 to mean an elephant with the word
'JUMBO LABEL' which is a dictionary word and has no connection or relevance to
the meaning or impression of a 'JUMBO' aeroplane conveyed by the trade mark of
the plaintiff.
8\. It is stated that the defendant has been openly using the said trade mark
for a long time and there could be no confusion or deception on the part of
any one as the two trade mark cannot be said to be either visually or
phonetically similar, and also as the goods dealt with by the plaintiff and
defendants are dissimilar.
9\. The principles governing the law of infringement and passing off and its
distinction and similarity is no longer res integra in view of the decisions
of the Supreme Court and the High Court in K. B. Chinna Krishna Chettiar v.
Sri Ambal & Co. and another , Ruston & Hornby Ltd. v. Zamindara Engineering
Co. . K. R. Chinnikrisha Chetty v. K. Venkatesa Mudaliar and another . East
End Hosiery Mills Pvt. Ltd. v. M/s. Agarwal Textile Mills .
10\. The principle governing the grant of injunction in the matter of trade
mark is also by now well settled by the decisions of the Supreme Court and the
High Courts, which in my opinion, need no reiteration.
11\. Learned Counsel for the plaintiff also drew my attention to the various
provisions of the Trade & Merchandise Marks Act and on the basis thereof as
also on the basis of the decisions of the Supreme Court and this court the
Counsel submitted that although the device might be different, yet the use of
the very word 'JUMBO' can also amount to a similarity which might cause
deception or confusion in the minds of customers and purchasers of these
article which are purchased from the market by all classes of persons
including the illiterate persons. In support of his submission the learned
Counsel relied upon the decision of the Supreme Court in K. B. Chinna Krishna
Chettiar v. Sri Ambal & Co. and another (supra), Ruston & Hornby Ltd. v.
Zamindara Engineering Co. (supra), and of Bombay High Court in M/s. Eagle
Potteries Pvt. Ltd. v. M/s. Eagle Flask, Industries Pvt. Ltd. and in Kirloskar
Diesel Reacon Pvt. Ltd. v. Kirloskar Proprietory Ltd. (1996 (1) Arb. LR 636),
and of this Court in Roshan Lal Oil Mills Ltd. v. Shakti Industries (1995 PTR
140).
12\. On the other hand the contentions of the defendant are that the word
'JUMBO' is commonly used and descriptive in nature. The word 'JUMBO' with
device of elephant used by the defendant and 'JUMBO' with device of aeroplane
used by the plaintiff, both are descriptive words and therefore, there cannot
be a case of passing off or an infringement in the present case. According to
the defendants the colour combination and lettering of both the trade marks
are different and they are also different in design and layout and the goods
are also different and not allied goods. He also relied upon various decisions
of the Supreme Court in F. Hoffman Lr. Roche & Co. Ltd. v. Geoffery Manners &
Co. , where the words 'Dropovit' and 'Protovit' were held to be not
deceptively similar. The learned Counsel also relied upon the decision of the
Supreme Court in the case of J. R. Kapoor v. Micronix India (1994 PTC 260),
where the words 'MICROTEL' and 'MICRONIX' were also held to be not deceptively
similar.
13\. Learned Counsel for the defendants also drew my specific attention to a
decision of the Privy Council in Thomas Bear and Sons. v. Prayag Narayan and
another , wherein it was held that there cannot be a monopoly in the use of a
trade mark in respect of different goods. The same principle came to be
reiterated by the Supreme Court in a recent decision in Vishnudas Trading v.
The Wazir Sultan . He also relied upon the decision of this court in Nestle's
Products Ltd. v. M/s. Milkmade Corporation and another , wherein, it was held
that in absence of trade connection the use of same and similar words cannot
constitute infringement of trade mark. He also relied upon the decisions of
Calcutta High Court in S. M. Chopra and Sons v. Rajendra Prasad Srivastava ,
wherein the concerned words were "RAJA" & "MAHARAJA" and it was held that they
are not deceptively similar and also in Rustom Ali Molla v. Bata Shoes Company
, where it was held that a person acquiring exclusive right to a mark in
connection with particular good cannot prohibit use to that mark in different
goods.
14\. I have given my thoughtful consideration to the submissions made by the
Counsel for the parties. The question that arises for my consideration is
whether the words 'JUMBO LABEL' with device of aeroplane and 'JUMBO' with
device of elephant could be said to be descriptive and common in the business
parlance and/or whether these two words are deceptively similar to each other.
The two words although have a common word 'JUMBO', but they do not look to be
similar. The average or ordinary purchaser would be able to know the
difference between the two when he goes to the market to buy the said product.
From the visual point of view as shown to me by the learned counsel for the
defendants during the course of arguments the two trade marks as used by them
in their respective goods appear to be also visually dissimilar and therefore,
the decision of the Supreme Court relied upon by the learned counsel for the
plaintiff are not applicable. The two decisions of Bombay High Court in Eagle
Flask Industries Ltd. (supra) and Kirloskar Diesel (supra) and the decision of
this court in Roshan Lal Oil Mills (supra) are also distinguishable on the
facts and circumstances of the case, inasmuch, as in the present case goods in
question are different and fall in different class and the device used by both
are also different and visually the two marks are different.
15\. In my opinion could be said that there is an innocent resemblance of the
word 'JUMBO' between the two trade marks but it cannot be said that the
defendants have deceptively copied the trade mark in its letter and its
essential features. It appears to me the trade mark of the plaintiff denotes
'JUMBO' aeroplane whereas that of the defendant denotes 'JUMBO' elephant. The
idea is to convey superpower or strength in strength in edible oils and tea
respectively and, therefore, it cannot be said that there is an imitation by
the defendant of the plaintiff's trade mark and that the defendant is using
the same with the sole object of diverting the business of plaintiff.
16\. In this connection I may appropriately refer to the decision in the case
of Coca Cola Company of Canada Ld. v. Pepsi Cola (1942 (59) RPC 127). In that
case the question was whether the word 'COLA' was descriptive and commonly
adopted in naming of beverages. It was held that 'Cola' was descriptive and
commonly used by the manufacturers of non-alcoholic drinks. It was held that :
"The distinguishing feature of the mark Coca Cola was Coca and not Cola. For
the same reason the distinguishing feature of the mark Pepsi Cola was Pepsi
and not Cola. It was not likely that any one would confuse word Pepsi with
coca."
17\. On analysis of all decisions placed before me including the decision in
Vishnu Das Trading (supra) wherein it is stated by the Supreme Court that if a
trader or manufacturer trades in one or some articles coming under a broad
classification, such trader or manufacturer cannot be permitted to enjoy
monopoly, and applying the said principles of law to the facts of the present
case, I am prima facie of the opinion that issuance of interim injunction at
this stage is not called for in the present case. Accordingly, the application
filed by the plaintiff and registered as I.A. 8444/1994 stands dismissed. It
is made clear that the findings arrived at by me herein are my tentative and
prima facie opinion and shall not be treated as my final and conclusive
opinion on the merits of the case.
18\. I.A. dismissed.
of Coca Cola Company of Canada Ld. v. Pepsi Cola (1942 (59) RPC 127). In that
case the question was whether the word 'COLA' was descriptive and commonly
adopted in naming of beverages. It was held that 'Cola' was descriptive and
commonly used by the manufacturers of non-alcoholic drinks. It was held that :
"The distinguishing feature of the mark Coca Cola was Coca and not Cola. For
the same reason the distinguishing feature of the mark Pepsi Cola was Pepsi
and not Cola. It was not likely that any one would confuse word Pepsi with
coca."
17\. On analysis of all decisions placed before me including the decision in
Vishnu Das Trading (supra) wherein it is stated by the Supreme Court that if a
trader or manufacturer trades in one or some articles coming under a broad
classification, such trader or manufacturer cannot be permitted to enjoy
monopoly, and applying the said principles of law to the facts of the present
case, I am prima facie of the opinion that issuance of interim injunction at
this stage is not called for in the present case. Accordingly, the application
filed by the plaintiff and registered as I.A. 8444/1994 stands dismissed. It
may be identical and/or deceptively similar to the plaintiff's trade mark.
3\. This court, while issuing summons to the defendants considered it fit to
issue only a notice to the defendants on the injunction application and did
not grant any ad interim injunction as prayed for by the defendants at that
stage. Now the said injunction application has come up for consideration and
final disposal.
4\. In order to appreciate the points and issues urged by the Counsel for the
parties it is necessary to delineate and recapitulate certain facts giving
rise to the suit.
5\. It is stated that the plaintiff is the proprietor of the trade mark 'JUMBO
LABEL' with device of aeroplane in relation to edible oils (Mustard Oil) and
is registered in class 29 from 7.5.1980 in respect of edible oils. The
plaintiff adopted the said trade mark in respect of aforesaid goods from April
1973, and has been continuously using the same till date. The business carried
on by the plaintiff is very extensive and the aforesaid trade mark 'JUMBO
LABEL' with device of aeroplane has become distinctive and associated with
business of the plaintiff. The plaintiff has given vide publicity to the said
trade mark and in view of the same the said trade mark came to acquire a
unique reputation and enviable goodwill among the public and trade.
6\. The defendants are engaged in the business of processing, offering for
of Coca Cola Company of Canada Ld. v. Pepsi Cola (1942 (59) RPC 127). In that
case the question was whether the word 'COLA' was descriptive and commonly
adopted in naming of beverages. It was held that 'Cola' was descriptive and
commonly used by the manufacturers of non-alcoholic drinks. It was held that :
"The distinguishing feature of the mark Coca Cola was Coca and not Cola. For
the same reason the distinguishing feature of the mark Pepsi Cola was Pepsi
and not Cola. It was not likely that any one would confuse word Pepsi with
coca."
17\. On analysis of all decisions placed before me including the decision in
Vishnu Das Trading (supra) wherein it is stated by the Supreme Court that if a
trader or manufacturer trades in one or some articles coming under a broad
classification, such trader or manufacturer cannot be permitted to enjoy
monopoly, and applying the said principles of law to the facts of the present
case, I am prima facie of the opinion that issuance of interim injunction at
this stage is not called for in the present case. Accordingly, the application
filed by the plaintiff and registered as I.A. 8444/1994 stands dismissed. It
may be identical and/or deceptively similar to the plaintiff's trade mark.
3\. This court, while issuing summons to the defendants considered it fit to
issue only a notice to the defendants on the injunction application and did
not grant any ad interim injunction as prayed for by the defendants at that
stage. Now the said injunction application has come up for consideration and
final disposal.
4\. In order to appreciate the points and issues urged by the Counsel for the
parties it is necessary to delineate and recapitulate certain facts giving
rise to the suit.
5\. It is stated that the plaintiff is the proprietor of the trade mark 'JUMBO
LABEL' with device of aeroplane in relation to edible oils (Mustard Oil) and
is registered in class 29 from 7.5.1980 in respect of edible oils. The
plaintiff adopted the said trade mark in respect of aforesaid goods from April
1973, and has been continuously using the same till date. The business carried
on by the plaintiff is very extensive and the aforesaid trade mark 'JUMBO
LABEL' with device of aeroplane has become distinctive and associated with
business of the plaintiff. The plaintiff has given vide publicity to the said
trade mark and in view of the same the said trade mark came to acquire a
unique reputation and enviable goodwill among the public and trade.
6\. The defendants are engaged in the business of processing, offering for
of Coca Cola Company of Canada Ld. v. Pepsi Cola (1942 (59) RPC 127). In that
case the question was whether the word 'COLA' was descriptive and commonly
adopted in naming of beverages. It was held that 'Cola' was descriptive and
commonly used by the manufacturers of non-alcoholic drinks. It was held that :
"The distinguishing feature of the mark Coca Cola was Coca and not Cola. For
the same reason the distinguishing feature of the mark Pepsi Cola was Pepsi
and not Cola. It was not likely that any one would confuse word Pepsi with
coca."
17\. On analysis of all decisions placed before me including the decision in
Vishnu Das Trading (supra) wherein it is stated by the Supreme Court that if a
trader or manufacturer trades in one or some articles coming under a broad
classification, such trader or manufacturer cannot be permitted to enjoy
monopoly, and applying the said principles of law to the facts of the present
case, I am prima facie of the opinion that issuance of interim injunction at
this stage is not called for in the present case. Accordingly, the application
filed by the plaintiff and registered as I.A. 8444/1994 stands dismissed. It
may be identical and/or deceptively similar to the plaintiff's trade mark.
3\. This court, while issuing summons to the defendants considered it fit to
issue only a notice to the defendants on the injunction application and did
not grant any ad interim injunction as prayed for by the defendants at that
stage. Now the said injunction application has come up for consideration and
final disposal.
4\. In order to appreciate the points and issues urged by the Counsel for the
parties it is necessary to delineate and recapitulate certain facts giving
rise to the suit.
5\. It is stated that the plaintiff is the proprietor of the trade mark 'JUMBO
LABEL' with device of aeroplane in relation to edible oils (Mustard Oil) and
is registered in class 29 from 7.5.1980 in respect of edible oils. The
plaintiff adopted the said trade mark in respect of aforesaid goods from April
1973, and has been continuously using the same till date. The business carried
on by the plaintiff is very extensive and the aforesaid trade mark 'JUMBO
LABEL' with device of aeroplane has become distinctive and associated with
business of the plaintiff. The plaintiff has given vide publicity to the said
trade mark and in view of the same the said trade mark came to acquire a
unique reputation and enviable goodwill among the public and trade.
6\. The defendants are engaged in the business of processing, offering for
sale and marketing tea and has adopted the trade mark 'JUMBO LABEL' with
device of elephant in respect of its product tea. The user of identical and/or
deceptively similar trade mark by the defendants of 'JUMBO LABEL' in relation
to the same good or goods of the same and cognate description is in clear and
flagrant violation of the plaintiff's legal, vested and statutory rights.
According to the plaintiff the initial knowledge of the plaintiff of the
defendant using identical and/or deceptively similar trade mark was in the
month of August, 1994.
7\. The defendants contested the suti by filing a written statement contending
inter alia that the trade mark of the defendant is entirely different to that
of the plaintiff as also the goods which are of different description.
of Coca Cola Company of Canada Ld. v. Pepsi Cola (1942 (59) RPC 127). In that
case the question was whether the word 'COLA' was descriptive and commonly
adopted in naming of beverages. It was held that 'Cola' was descriptive and
commonly used by the manufacturers of non-alcoholic drinks. It was held that :
"The distinguishing feature of the mark Coca Cola was Coca and not Cola. For
the same reason the distinguishing feature of the mark Pepsi Cola was Pepsi
and not Cola. It was not likely that any one would confuse word Pepsi with
coca."
17\. On analysis of all decisions placed before me including the decision in
Vishnu Das Trading (supra) wherein it is stated by the Supreme Court that if a
trader or manufacturer trades in one or some articles coming under a broad
classification, such trader or manufacturer cannot be permitted to enjoy
monopoly, and applying the said principles of law to the facts of the present
case, I am prima facie of the opinion that issuance of interim injunction at
this stage is not called for in the present case. Accordingly, the application
filed by the plaintiff and registered as I.A. 8444/1994 stands dismissed. It
may be identical and/or deceptively similar to the plaintiff's trade mark.
3\. This court, while issuing summons to the defendants considered it fit to
issue only a notice to the defendants on the injunction application and did
not grant any ad interim injunction as prayed for by the defendants at that
stage. Now the said injunction application has come up for consideration and
final disposal.
4\. In order to appreciate the points and issues urged by the Counsel for the
parties it is necessary to delineate and recapitulate certain facts giving
rise to the suit.
5\. It is stated that the plaintiff is the proprietor of the trade mark 'JUMBO
LABEL' with device of aeroplane in relation to edible oils (Mustard Oil) and
is registered in class 29 from 7.5.1980 in respect of edible oils. The
plaintiff adopted the said trade mark in respect of aforesaid goods from April
1973, and has been continuously using the same till date. The business carried
on by the plaintiff is very extensive and the aforesaid trade mark 'JUMBO
LABEL' with device of aeroplane has become distinctive and associated with
business of the plaintiff. The plaintiff has given vide publicity to the said
trade mark and in view of the same the said trade mark came to acquire a
unique reputation and enviable goodwill among the public and trade.
6\. The defendants are engaged in the business of processing, offering for
sale and marketing tea and has adopted the trade mark 'JUMBO LABEL' with
device of elephant in respect of its product tea. The user of identical and/or
deceptively similar trade mark by the defendants of 'JUMBO LABEL' in relation
to the same good or goods of the same and cognate description is in clear and
flagrant violation of the plaintiff's legal, vested and statutory rights.
According to the plaintiff the initial knowledge of the plaintiff of the
defendant using identical and/or deceptively similar trade mark was in the
month of August, 1994.
7\. The defendants contested the suti by filing a written statement contending
inter alia that the trade mark of the defendant is entirely different to that
of the plaintiff as also the goods which are of different description.
of Coca Cola Company of Canada Ld. v. Pepsi Cola (1942 (59) RPC 127). In that
case the question was whether the word 'COLA' was descriptive and commonly
adopted in naming of beverages. It was held that 'Cola' was descriptive and
commonly used by the manufacturers of non-alcoholic drinks. It was held that :
"The distinguishing feature of the mark Coca Cola was Coca and not Cola. For
the same reason the distinguishing feature of the mark Pepsi Cola was Pepsi
and not Cola. It was not likely that any one would confuse word Pepsi with
coca."
17\. On analysis of all decisions placed before me including the decision in
Vishnu Das Trading (supra) wherein it is stated by the Supreme Court that if a
trader or manufacturer trades in one or some articles coming under a broad
classification, such trader or manufacturer cannot be permitted to enjoy
monopoly, and applying the said principles of law to the facts of the present
case, I am prima facie of the opinion that issuance of interim injunction at
this stage is not called for in the present case. Accordingly, the application
filed by the plaintiff and registered as I.A. 8444/1994 stands dismissed. It
