Central Government Act
Section 144 in The Income- Tax Act, 1995
144\. Best judgment assessment
(1) 1 ] If any person-
(a) fails to make the return required 2 under sub- section (1) of section 139]
and has not made a return or a revised return under subsection (4) or sub-
section (5) of that section,] or
(b) fails to comply with all the terms of a notice issued under subsection (1)
of section 142 3 or fails to comply with a direction issued under sub- section
(2A) of that section], or
(c) having made a return, fails to comply with all the terms of a notice
issued under sub- section (2) of section 143, the 4 Assessing] Officer, after
taking into account all relevant material which the 5 Assessing] Officer has
gathered, 6 shall, after giving the assessee an opportunity of being heard,
make the assessment] of the total income or loss to the best of his judgment
and determine the sum payable by the assessee 7 ] on the basis of such
assessment: 8 Provided that such opportunity shall be given by the Assessing
Officer by serving a notice calling upon the assessee to show cause, on a date
and time to be specified in the notice, why the assessment should not be
completed to the best of his judgment: Provided further that it shall not be
(c) having made a return, fails to comply with all the terms of a notice
issued under sub- section (2) of section 143, the 4 Assessing] Officer, after
taking into account all relevant material which the 5 Assessing] Officer has
gathered, 6 shall, after giving the assessee an opportunity of being heard,
make the assessment] of the total income or loss to the best of his judgment
and determine the sum payable by the assessee 7 ] on the basis of such
assessment: 8 Provided that such opportunity shall be given by the Assessing
Officer by serving a notice calling upon the assessee to show cause, on a date
and time to be specified in the notice, why the assessment should not be
completed to the best of his judgment: Provided further that it shall not be
necessary to give such opportunity in a case where a notice under sub- section
(1) of section 142 has been issued prior to the making of an assessment under
this section.]
(2) 9 The provisions of this section as they stood immediately before their
amendment by the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 1987 (4 of 1988 ), shall
apply to and in relation to any assessment for the assessment year commencing
completed to the best of his judgment: Provided further that it shall not be
necessary to give such opportunity in a case where a notice under sub- section
(1) of section 142 has been issued prior to the making of an assessment under
this section.]
(2) 9 The provisions of this section as they stood immediately before their
amendment by the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 1987 (4 of 1988 ), shall
apply to and in relation to any assessment for the assessment year commencing
on the 1st day of April, 1988 , or any earlier assessment year and references
in this section to the other provisions of this Act shall be construed as
references to those provisions as for the time being in force and applicable
to the relevant assessment year.]
(c) having made a return, fails to comply with all the terms of a notice
issued under sub- section (2) of section 143, the 4 Assessing] Officer, after
taking into account all relevant material which the 5 Assessing] Officer has
gathered, 6 shall, after giving the assessee an opportunity of being heard,
make the assessment] of the total income or loss to the best of his judgment
and determine the sum payable by the assessee 7 ] on the basis of such
assessment: 8 Provided that such opportunity shall be given by the Assessing
Officer by serving a notice calling upon the assessee to show cause, on a date
and time to be specified in the notice, why the assessment should not be
completed to the best of his judgment: Provided further that it shall not be
necessary to give such opportunity in a case where a notice under sub- section
(1) of section 142 has been issued prior to the making of an assessment under
this section.]
(2) 9 The provisions of this section as they stood immediately before their
amendment by the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 1987 (4 of 1988 ), shall
apply to and in relation to any assessment for the assessment year commencing
completed to the best of his judgment: Provided further that it shall not be
necessary to give such opportunity in a case where a notice under sub- section
(1) of section 142 has been issued prior to the making of an assessment under
this section.]
(2) 9 The provisions of this section as they stood immediately before their
amendment by the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 1987 (4 of 1988 ), shall
apply to and in relation to any assessment for the assessment year commencing
on the 1st day of April, 1988 , or any earlier assessment year and references
in this section to the other provisions of this Act shall be construed as
references to those provisions as for the time being in force and applicable
to the relevant assessment year.]
(c) having made a return, fails to comply with all the terms of a notice
issued under sub- section (2) of section 143, the 4 Assessing] Officer, after
taking into account all relevant material which the 5 Assessing] Officer has
gathered, 6 shall, after giving the assessee an opportunity of being heard,
make the assessment] of the total income or loss to the best of his judgment
and determine the sum payable by the assessee 7 ] on the basis of such
assessment: 8 Provided that such opportunity shall be given by the Assessing
Officer by serving a notice calling upon the assessee to show cause, on a date
and time to be specified in the notice, why the assessment should not be
completed to the best of his judgment: Provided further that it shall not be
necessary to give such opportunity in a case where a notice under sub- section
(1) of section 142 has been issued prior to the making of an assessment under
this section.]
(2) 9 The provisions of this section as they stood immediately before their
amendment by the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 1987 (4 of 1988 ), shall
apply to and in relation to any assessment for the assessment year commencing
completed to the best of his judgment: Provided further that it shall not be
necessary to give such opportunity in a case where a notice under sub- section
(1) of section 142 has been issued prior to the making of an assessment under
this section.]
(2) 9 The provisions of this section as they stood immediately before their
amendment by the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 1987 (4 of 1988 ), shall
apply to and in relation to any assessment for the assessment year commencing
on the 1st day of April, 1988 , or any earlier assessment year and references
in this section to the other provisions of this Act shall be construed as
references to those provisions as for the time being in force and applicable
to the relevant assessment year.]
(c) having made a return, fails to comply with all the terms of a notice
issued under sub- section (2) of section 143, the 4 Assessing] Officer, after
taking into account all relevant material which the 5 Assessing] Officer has
gathered, 6 shall, after giving the assessee an opportunity of being heard,
make the assessment] of the total income or loss to the best of his judgment
and determine the sum payable by the assessee 7 ] on the basis of such
assessment: 8 Provided that such opportunity shall be given by the Assessing
Officer by serving a notice calling upon the assessee to show cause, on a date
and time to be specified in the notice, why the assessment should not be
completed to the best of his judgment: Provided further that it shall not be
necessary to give such opportunity in a case where a notice under sub- section
(1) of section 142 has been issued prior to the making of an assessment under
this section.]
(2) 9 The provisions of this section as they stood immediately before their
amendment by the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 1987 (4 of 1988 ), shall
apply to and in relation to any assessment for the assessment year commencing
completed to the best of his judgment: Provided further that it shall not be
necessary to give such opportunity in a case where a notice under sub- section
(1) of section 142 has been issued prior to the making of an assessment under
this section.]
(2) 9 The provisions of this section as they stood immediately before their
amendment by the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 1987 (4 of 1988 ), shall
apply to and in relation to any assessment for the assessment year commencing
on the 1st day of April, 1988 , or any earlier assessment year and references
in this section to the other provisions of this Act shall be construed as
references to those provisions as for the time being in force and applicable
to the relevant assessment year.]
(c) having made a return, fails to comply with all the terms of a notice
issued under sub- section (2) of section 143, the 4 Assessing] Officer, after
taking into account all relevant material which the 5 Assessing] Officer has
gathered, 6 shall, after giving the assessee an opportunity of being heard,
make the assessment] of the total income or loss to the best of his judgment
and determine the sum payable by the assessee 7 ] on the basis of such
assessment: 8 Provided that such opportunity shall be given by the Assessing
Officer by serving a notice calling upon the assessee to show cause, on a date
and time to be specified in the notice, why the assessment should not be
completed to the best of his judgment: Provided further that it shall not be
necessary to give such opportunity in a case where a notice under sub- section
(1) of section 142 has been issued prior to the making of an assessment under
this section.]
(2) 9 The provisions of this section as they stood immediately before their
amendment by the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 1987 (4 of 1988 ), shall
apply to and in relation to any assessment for the assessment year commencing
completed to the best of his judgment: Provided further that it shall not be
necessary to give such opportunity in a case where a notice under sub- section
(1) of section 142 has been issued prior to the making of an assessment under
this section.]
(2) 9 The provisions of this section as they stood immediately before their
amendment by the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 1987 (4 of 1988 ), shall
apply to and in relation to any assessment for the assessment year commencing
on the 1st day of April, 1988 , or any earlier assessment year and references
in this section to the other provisions of this Act shall be construed as
references to those provisions as for the time being in force and applicable
to the relevant assessment year.]
(c) having made a return, fails to comply with all the terms of a notice
issued under sub- section (2) of section 143, the 4 Assessing] Officer, after
taking into account all relevant material which the 5 Assessing] Officer has
gathered, 6 shall, after giving the assessee an opportunity of being heard,
make the assessment] of the total income or loss to the best of his judgment
and determine the sum payable by the assessee 7 ] on the basis of such
assessment: 8 Provided that such opportunity shall be given by the Assessing
Officer by serving a notice calling upon the assessee to show cause, on a date
and time to be specified in the notice, why the assessment should not be
completed to the best of his judgment: Provided further that it shall not be
necessary to give such opportunity in a case where a notice under sub- section
(1) of section 142 has been issued prior to the making of an assessment under
this section.]
(2) 9 The provisions of this section as they stood immediately before their
amendment by the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 1987 (4 of 1988 ), shall
apply to and in relation to any assessment for the assessment year commencing
