Delhi High Court
Mukund Limited vs Tyazhprom Export And Others on 14 May, 1996
Author: S Mahajan
Bench: S Mahajan
JUDGMENT S.K. Mahajan, J.
1\. Due to the alleged existence of a negative covenant in the agreement
stated to have been arrived at between the plaintiff and defendant No. 1, the
plaintiff, by this suit, wants to restrain defendant No. 1, from in any manner
directly or indirectly pursuing or making any other agreements with defendant
No. 2 or with any other party with respect to the contract for Sinter Plant 3
(Package SP 3-2), raw material, storage and handling system at Bhilai Steel
Plant of defendant No. 2. Alternatively, the plaintiff has claimed a decree
for Rs. 5 crores against defendant No. 1 along with the pendente lite
interest. Along with the suit, an application for injunction was filed for
restraining defendant No. 1 from directly or indirectly pursuing or making any
other agreements with defendant No. 2 or with any other person with respect to
the aforesaid contract and further directing the said defendant to exclusively
deal and cooperate with the plaintiff for the performance of the said
contract, as contained in the consortium agreement dated August 19, 1995.
Brief facts giving rise to the present suit are :
will necessarily affect the project which is being undertaken by defendant No.
2. It is not only that interest of defendant No. 2 will suffer but, in my
opinion, even the national interests will be affected, in case an injunction
is granted. It is, in public interest that steel plant should be upgraded. It
is not a case of two rival competitors who are trying to project their own
personal image or are trying to derive benefits for the personal gains, but it
is a project which will be in national interest and the same cannot be allowed
to be stopped at an interim stage merely because there was any alleged
negative covenant in an agreement which had been entered into between the
plaintiff and defendant No. 1 by which the said defendant had agreed to
execute the project in exclusivity with the plaintiff. Work has already been
awarded on 10th January, 1996 even before the filing of the suit and a final
contract has come into existence, and, in my opinion, therefore, it will not
be proper to pass any order of injunction in favour of the plaintiff. Assuming
that there was a breach of the agreement, as contended by the plaintiff. I,
prima facie, feel that the plaintiff can be compensated in terms of money and
Brief facts giving rise to the present suit are :
2\. That defendant No. 1 invited global tenders for pre-qualification for
constructing a main Sinter Plant machine and raw material storage and handling
system at their Bhilai Steel Plant for Sinter Plant-3 (in short referred to as
the "project") and defendant No. 1 got pre-qualified in February 1995 for the
said project. Proposals for the said project were thereafter to be submitted
to defendant No. 2 and it was at that stage that a Memorandum of Understanding
was allegedly entered into between the plaintiff and defendant No. 1 on March
7, 1995 whereby they agreed to jointly participate in the submission of
tenders for the said project. Thereafter on March 20, 1995 another Memorandum
of Understanding (in short referred as "MOU") was entered into between the
plaintiff, defendant No. 1 and defendant No. 4 whereby they agreed to act as
consortium and collaborate on "exclusive right basis in preparation and
submission of the proposals for the said project and in case the same was
awarded to execute the same. The plaintiff and defendant No. 1 were already
working jointly for the BOF shop of the Rourkela Steel Plant. It is alleged
that the parties had agreed to frame a detailed consortium agreement similar
to the one signed between them for the Rourkela Steel Plant. It is further
alleged that at the request of defendant No. 1, the plaintiff got two bank
guarantees issued in the sum of dollars 80,000 each required for the two
tenders : that when an application was made for the bank guarantees, the
Reserve Bank of India had insisted that defendant No. 3 should satisfy itself
that the plaintiff was involved in the execution of the project and in the
event the guarantees were invoked, the plaintiff shall have recourse to
defendant No. 1, that defendant No. 1 confirmed in writing by letter dated
April 25, 1995 that in case of revocation of bank guarantees furnished by the
plaintiff, defendant No. 1 undertakes to reimburse the said amount of bank
guarantees to the plaintiff; subsequently, defendant No. 5 was also made a
member of the consortium and in August, 1995 a consortium agreement was
alleged to have been entered into whereby the parties had jointly collaborated
to work on "exclusive right basis" for preparation and submission of their
proposals for the project and in the event of award, for execution of the
same. Reliance in the suit has been placed upon the "Exclusivity Clause" as
contained in article 13 of the consortium agreement which is as under :
13.1. The Members shall collaborate on an exclusive basis in the framework of
this consortium.
13.2. From the date of signing of this Agreement and during validity of this
Agreement, the Members shall cooperate exclusively within the framework of
this Agreement and shall not, directly or indirectly make any other Agreements
with the Customer or with any third party with respect to the proposal of
contract, if the later is signed. Any additional portion of work of any
further Addenda to the contract shall be performed within the framework of the
Agreement.
13.3. Terms of Article 13.2 do not debar Members from the right to enter into
any temporary associations with Indian/foreign companies with the aim of
performing their share under the Contract, in consultation with Mem bers."
3\. An abridged agreement is stated to have been made out for submission to
defendant No. 2 to satisfy its formal requirement and the said agreement was
submitted on August 26, 1995 to the said defendant. Consortium's Techno
Commercial bid was stated to have been found in order and defendant No. 2 had,
therefore, invited price bids on 29th September and October 19, 1995 for the
two packages under the project. The price bids were submitted by the
consortium for each of the two bids and the package of the consortium was
found to be third lowest for the first package and lowest for the second
package i.e., raw material storage and handling system at Bhilai Steel Plant.
It is alleged that defendant No. 2 then requested the consortium to give their
best possible discount in price for this second package by December 19, 1995.
It is alleged that though the consortium had agreed to give a discount of 5%
spread over two instalments of initial 4% and subsequent 1% which was also
communicated by joint letter dated December 20, 1995 to defendant No. 1, the
said defendant had started attempts to exclude the consortium members and
instead joined some other persons for execution of the contract and the
plaintiff is alleged to have been shocked to receive a letter from defendant
No. 1 on December 20, 1995 alleging that as no price reduction was given by
other consortium members, defendant No. 1, had solely prepared and submitted a
revised offer to defendant No. 2.
4\. That defendant No. 1 has subsequently introduced another member by the
name of M/s. Tyazhprom India Pvt. Ltd. as its associate in the execution of
the project. It is, therefore, alleged that as the plaintiff had been involved
with the project right from its inception and had expanded considerable time,
effort and money in bidding and getting the project awarded to the consortium
and as the members of the consortium had agreed to collaborate on "Exclusive
Right Basis" in the execution of the project, defendant No. 1 did not have any
right to execute the project with any person other than the members of the
consortium and the reliefs as mentioned earlier were claimed in the suit.
5\. While written statement has been filed by defendant No. 2, defendant No. 1
has filed reply to the application. Defendant No. 2 in the written statement
has stated that the relief of injunction has become infructuous in as much as
defendant No. 2 had already awarded the contract in favour of defendant No. 1
vide letter of intent dated December 29, 1995 and a formal contract has
already been executed between defendant No. 2 on the one hand and defendant
No. 1 and its Indian associate, namely, M/s. Tyazhprom India Private Limited,
on the other hand. It is also stated that there was no privity of contract
between the plaintiff and defendant No. 2 and as such no relief can be granted
in favour of the plaintiff which would in fact operate against defendant No.
2. It is further stated that in the consortium agreement furnished to
defendant No. 2, there was no clause regarding the joint collaboration of the
members of the consortium on "exclusive right basis" and, therefore, there was
no question of the plaintiff being entitled to be associated with the project
on "exclusivity basis" as alleged in the plaint. It is also alleged that no
decree for mandatory injunction under Section 39 of the Specific Relief Act
can be granted in favour of the plaintiff and the suit was also stated to be
bad for non-joinder of necessary parties, namely, M/s. Tyazhprom India Pvt.
Ltd. It is also alleged that the plaintiff has suppressed the material fact of
its having also participated in the pre-qualification bid and having not
qualified therein. It is, therefore, stated that the plaintiff having not come
to the court with clean hands, was not entitled to any injunction.
6\. In its reply to the application for injunction, defendant No. 1 has taken
the preliminary objection that there was no concluded contract or consortium
agreement between the parties and the alleged agreement was inchoate and did
not go beyond negotiations and not a mere contract to negotiate cannot be
enforced in law. It is also alleged that any consortium which was to be formed
by the parties was necessarily to be approved by defendant No. 2 and as no
such approval has been given, the alleged consortium did not come into
existence. Bank guarantees submitted along with the bid to defendant No. 2
were stated to have been given at the instance of defendant No. 1 did not the
plaintiff as alleged in the plaint; that the suit was bad for mis-joinder of
parties in as much as not only that defendant No. 2 was not a necessary party
to the suit but M/s. Tyazhprom India Private Limited and other associates and
sub-contractors who had joined defendant No. 1 in the execution of the project
were stated to be necessary parties and the suit, according to defendant No.
1, deserved to be dismissed on account of the said parties having not been imp
pleaded and no orders against them could be passed at their back. Certain
other pleas have also been taken and it is stated that the plaintiff itself
has not asked for specific performance of the alleged agreement and there was,
therefore, no question of any injunction being granted in favour of the
plaintiff.
7\. The main thrust of the argument of Mr. Mukul Rohtagi, Senior Advocate,
appearing on behalf of the plaintiff was that as the parties had agreed to
form a consortium on "exclusive right basis" and the understanding was that
defendant No. 1 was to deal only with the plaintiff and nobody else, the said
defendant cannot be allowed to execute the project with any person other than
the plaintiff. The contention of Mr. Rohtagi is that the plaintiff has spent
considerable time and effort in preparing the scope of work, etc. and it was
only with the efforts of the plaintiff that defendant No. 1 was able to secure
the project which it has now agreed to execute with the assistance of M/s.
Tyazhprom India Private Limited. Defendant No. 1 having taken advantage of
hard work and labour of the plaintiff cannot, according to the plaintiff, be
allowed to wash its hand off the agreement which had been arrived at between
the parties. Relying upon the "exclusivity clause" as contained in Article 13
of the consortium agreement, the plaintiff contends that plaintiff is entitled
to an injunction restraining the defendant from executing the project with any
person other than the plaintiff. Relying upon the judgment reported as Gujarat
Bottling Co. Ltd. and others v. Coca Cola Co. and others , Mr. Rohtagi seeks
to argue on the following prepositions :
(i) If the contract is clear and unambiguous and the breach was also clear
then the injunction must follow as a matter of course on proof of breach;
(ii) Courts will not use its discretion to grant or not to grant an injunction
in case of a negative covenant and the injunction does nothing more than
sanction what the parties had with open eyes agreed to do or not to do;
(iii) In such a case balance of convenience will not be considered by the
court and even if the issue of an injunction is against public interest, court
will not take the same into consideration; and finally
(iv) Injunction ought to be granted even if it has the effect of specific
performance of the affirmative contract.
8\. Under Section 41 of the Specific Relief Act, an injunction cannot be
granted to prevent the breach of a contract, the performance of which would
not be specifically enforced. Section 42 of the Act, however, is an exception
to Section 41(e). Section 42 of the Act reads as under :
"Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (e) of Section 41, where a
contract comprises an affirmative agreement to do a certain act, coupled with
a negative agreement, express or implied, not to do a certain act, the
circumstance that the court is unable to compel specific performance of the
affirmative agreement shall not preclude it from grant an injunction to
perform the negative agreement."
9\. The judgment in Gujarat Bottling Co. Ltd. and others v. Coca Cola Co. and
others, (supra) is being relied upon by both the parties, Mr. Rohtagi placed
reliance upon the following observations of the Supreme Court in this case, in
support of his contention that the plaintiff is entitled to the grant of an
injunction against the defendant :
"In the matter of grant of injunction, the practice in England is that where a
contract is negative in nature, or contains an express negative stipulation,
breach of it may be restrained by injunction and injunction is normally
granted as a matter of course, even though the remedy is equitable and thus,
in principle a discretionary one and a defendant cannot resist an injunction
simply on the ground that observance of the contract is burdensome to him and
its breach would cause little or no prejudice to the plaintiff and that breach
of an express negative stipulation can be restrained even though the plaintiff
cannot show that the breach will cause him any loss, (See : Chitty on
Contracts, 27th Edn., Vol. 1, General Principles, paragraph 27-40 at p. 1310;
Halsbury's Law of England, 4th Edn., Vol. 24, paragraph 992). In India Section
42 of the Specific Relief Act, 1963 prescribes that notwithstanding anything
contained in clause (e) of Section 41, where a contract comprises an
affirmative agreement to do a certain act, coupled with a negative agreement,
express, or implied not to do a certain act, the circumstance that the court
is unable to compel specific performance of the affirmative agreement shall
not preclude it from granting an injunction to perform the negative agreement.
This is subject to the proviso that the plaintiff has not failed to perform
the contract so far as it is binding on him. The court is, however, not bound
to grant an injunction in every case and an injunction to enforce a negative
covenant would be refused if it would indirectly compel the employee either to
idleness or to serve the employer. (See : Ehrman v. Bartholomew : N. S.
Golikari at p. 389)."
10\. It is further contended that in case an injunction is not granted, the
plaintiff would suffer an irreparable injury in as much as award of the
contract would have added to the reputation of the plaintiff and conversely
non-award would result in the loss of reputation : moreover, the plaintiff has
provided technical data and research work in the preparation of the bid, the
same was the intellectual property of the plaintiff and the defendant could
not be allowed to divulge the secrets of the plaintiff to the third parties
and it was only on account of the information and data and research work
prepared by the plaintiff that defendant No. 1 was able to get the contract.
It is in this context that Mr. Rogtagi contends that the plaintiff is entitled
to issue of an injunction even if the same was against the public interest and
has the effect of specific performance of the affirmative contract. In support
of his prepositions, reliance is again placed upon the following observations
of the Supreme Court in Gujarat Bottling's case :
"The interim injunction granted by the High Court has been assailed by the
appellants on the ground that as a result of refusal by Coca Cola to continue
with the supply of essence/syrup and/or materials the bottling plants of GBC
at Ahmedabad and Rajkot, would remain idle and a large number of workmen who
were employed in the said plants would be rendered unemployed. We cannot lose
sight of the fact that this complaint is being made by Pepsi through the mouth
of the appellants. It is difficult to appreciate how Pepsi can ask Coca Cola
to part with its trade secrets to its business rival by supplying the
essence/syrup etc., for which Coca Cola holds the trade marks, to GBC which is
under effective control of Pepsi. Pepsi took a deliberate decision to take
over GBC with the full knowledge of the terms of the 1993 Agreement. It did so
with a view to paralyse the operations of Coca Cola in that region and promote
its products. In view of the negative stipulation contained in paragraph 14 of
the 1993 Agreement which has been enforced by the High Court, Pepsi has not
succeeded in this effort. It must suffer the consequences of the failure of
the effort and it cannot assail the interim injunction granted by the High
Court by invoking the plight of the workmen who are employed in the bottling
plants of GBC.
11\. Mr. Reddy, Additional Solicitor General, appearing on behalf of defendant
No. 2 has argued that as there was no privity of contract between the
plaintiff and defendant No. 2, any order which may be passed against defendant
No. 1 would have the effect of paralysing the project of defendant No. 2 which
will also be against the public interest. It is submitted that the plaintiff
himself had applied for being short listed and it was only after the plaintiff
had failed in his effort to be short listed that it started negotiations with
defendant No. 1 for forming a consortium to execute the project in case it was
awarded to the said defendant. According to Mr. Reddy, techno commercial bid
was given only by defendant No. 1 and defendant No. 2 cannot recognise any
other person other than defendant No. 1 for execution of the project which had
been awarded to the said defendant. It is also the contention of Mr. Reddy
that the consortium agreement which had been given to it by defendant No. 1
did not contain any exclusivity clause and as such the plaintiff could not
invoke the same so as to be entitled to an injunction against defendant No. 1.
Moreover, the bank guarantee which had been furnished was furnished by
defendant No. 1 and nowhere it had been remotely suggested that the same had
been given at the instance of the plaintiff. It is his submission that in case
the plaintiff had any grievance against defendant No. 1 it had an opportunity
to write to defendant No. 2 and may be that on receipt of such a communication
from the plaintiff, defendant No. 2 might have taken an action not to award
the work to defendant No. 1, however, now that the work has already been
awarded and is in progress, the plaintiff cannot be allowed to stop the work
in between so as to cause loss not only to defendant No. 2 but which will also
be against the public interest. He also submits that final offer of giving
rebate was received by defendant No. 1 on December 21, 1995 and the next day
said defendant gave a letter confirming its overall responsibility in
execution of the project. On December 29, 1995 letter of intent had been
issued to defendant No. 1 and actual contract had been signed on January 10,
1996. It is contended by Mr. Reddy that the plaintiff having slept over his
rights for a considerable time and having no correspondence with defendant No.
2, it is too late a stage now to cause hindrances in the work so as to
adversely affect the interest of defendant No. 2. It is also submitted that
the plaintiff in fact acquiesced in the award of work to defendant No. 1 and
cannot now at this stage object to the same. Reliance is being placed by Mr.
Reddy on paragraph 2009 and 2010 Vol. I. 26th edition of Chitty on Contracts,
which reads as under :
"Acquiescence. "If a person having a right, and seeing another person about to
commit, or in course of commiting, an act infringing upon that right, stands
by in such a manner as really to induce the person committing the act, and who
might otherwise have abstained from it, to believe that he assents to its
being committed, he cannot afterwards be heard to complain of the act." In
this sense of the term (which has been described as the only proper one)
acquiescence by the plaintiff amounts to the waiver of his rights and raises a
species of estoppel preventing him from subsequently enforcing them. The
conduct of the plaintiff need not necessarily bear any relation to lapse of
time, because it may take place before or at the time when his rights are
violated. The essential ingredients of a defense of acquiescence are, however,
by no means clear. In Willmott V. Barber, Fry J. laid down no less than five
requirements for such a defense. But it has been said that more recent cases
indicate "a very much broader approach which is directed rather at
ascertaining whether, in particular individual circumstances, it would be
unconscionable for a party to be permitted to deny that which, knowingly or
unknowingly, he has allowed or encouraged another to assume to his detriment
than to inquiring whether the circumstances can be fitted within the confines
of some preconceived formula serving as a universal yardstick for every form
of unconscionable behviour."
"Latches. The essence of the doctrine of latches is that if the plaintiff has
not been reasonably diligent in seeking relief, it will be inferred that he
has acquiesced in the state of affairs of which he complains, and so will be
denied relief. What amounts to reasonable diligence varies greatly with the
type of relief sought and the circumstances of each particular case."
12\. Referring to the judgment of the Supreme Court in Gujarat Bottling Co.
Ltd. and others v. Coca Cola Co. and others (supra), it is submitted by Mr.
Reddy that paragraph 42 of the judgment on which reliance has been placed by
the plaintiff is not what has been held by the court.
13\. Mr. Chandhiok, appearing on behalf of defendant No. 1, argues almost on
the same lines as Mr. Reddy and further submits that defendant No. 1 has been
short listed on the basis of his own strength, experience and technology; bank
guarantees, had been issued at the instance of defendant No. 1 and not the
plaintiff and that parties were only at the negotiating stage and no concluded
agreement had been arrived at between them.
14\. The first question which arises for consideration is as to whether there
was a concluded contract between the parties and as to whether such a contract
contain a negative covenant or an "exclusivity clauses" so as to restrain
defendant No. 1 from executing the contract without associating the plaintiff
with it ? Though in paragraph 8 of the plaint it is mentioned that on March
20, 1995 a Memorandum of Understanding was entered into between the parties
whereby the parties had agreed to act as a consortium, and cooperate on
exclusive right basis. However, the detailed consortium agreement was still to
be framed. The fact that in March 1995 no agreement had come into existence is
also clear from the averments made in paragraph 17 of the plaint wherein the
plaintiff states that on August 19, 1995 pursuant to detailed discussion and
negotiations, the consortium agreement was entered into between the four
consortium members. In case, the consortium agreement was entered into on
August 19, 1995 there could not have been any agreement in March, 1995 and it
is this agreement of August, 19, 1995 that the plaintiff is relying upon.
Though in the agreement dated August 19, 1995 there is an "exclusivity clause"
as contained in Article 13, however, in the agreement which was provided to
defendant No. 2 which also bears the same date as the earlier agreement, no
such "exclusivity clause exists. It was on the basis that it was argued by
Mrs. Reddy that the alleged exclusivity clause cannot be enforced so as to
stop the work which had been awarded by defendant No. 2 to defendant No. 1.
Moreover, as on December 19, 1995 parties were still negotiating about the
rebate which was to be offered and though it is the case of the plaintiff that
they had agreed upon a rebate of 5% defendant's No. 1's case is that no such
rebate was offered and it was on the failure of the plaintiff to agree to a
rebate that defendant No. 1 decided to go ahead with the project independently
of the plaintiff.
15\. Though on the basis of the material on record it, prima facie, appears
that no concluded agreement had been arrived at between the parties, however,
I am not basing my decision on this application simply on the ground that no
concluded agreement had been arrived at and I am proceeding on the assumption
that the parties had agreed to work in a consortium for execution of the
project which was to be awarded by defendant No. 2. The question which I am to
consider is whether there was any negative covenant in the agreement and
secondly, whether the plaintiff is entitled to an injunction ? As observed
above, admittedly in the agreement which had been forwarded to defendant No.
2, the exclusivity clause did not exist. Even, assuming, that it was an
abridged agreement, as argued by Mr. Rohtagi, the impression which had been
given by the parties to defendant No. 2 was that there was no exclusivity
clause or a negative covenant and the said defendant was at liberty to deal
with defendant No. 1 in any manner it likes. Had this clause been appearing in
the agreement which had been forwarded to defendant No. 2. The said defendant
could have been put to guard not to deal with any other person and in that
eventuality defendant No. 2 would have been dealing with the said party with
open eyes knowing fully that a negative covenant is existing and as held by
the Supreme Court, it must suffer the consequences. However, in the absence,
of a negative covenant appearing in the agreement forwarded to defendant No.
2, in my opinion, it could not be expected of the said defendant not to deal
with defendant No. 1 in isolation of the other members of the consortium which
is alleged to have been formed for execution of this project. Defendant No. 2,
therefore, having already entered into a contract with defendant No. 1, I feel
that the plaintiff is not entitled to any injunction restraining the execution
of the project by defendant No. 1.
16\. Moreover, on the facts and circumstances of the case, I do not feel that
the plaintiff is entitled to an injunction even assuming that a negative
covenant did exist in the agreement between the parties, I am not in agreement
with Mr. Rohtagi that on proof of breach injunction must follow as a matter of
course or that court will not take into consideration even the public interest
in such a case. As already observed above, the Supreme Court in Gujarat
Bottling Co. Ltd. and others v. Coca Cola Co. and others, (supra) had in
paragraph 42 referred to the practice in England but it has not been said that
the same practice has to be followed in India. The Supreme Court had held that
the grant of an interlocutory injunction requires the exercise of discretion
by the court and while exercising such discretion, the court must apply tests
which are otherwise applicable for the grant of an injunction under Order 39
Rules 1 and 2 CPC. The relevant observations of the Supreme Court are as under
:
"The grant of an interlocutory injunction during the pendency of legal
proceedings is a matter requiring the exercise of discretion of the court.
While exercising the discretion the court applies the following tests (i)
whether the plaintiff has a prima facie case : (ii) whether the balance of
convenience is in favour of the plaintiff; (iii) whether the plaintiff would
suffer an irreparable injury if his prayer for interlocutory injunction is
disallowed. The decision whether or not to grant an interlocutory injunction
has to be taken at a time when the existence of the legal right assailed by
the plaintiff and its alleged violation are both contested and uncertain and
remain uncertain till they are established at the trial on evidence. Relief by
way of interlocutory injunction is granted to mitigate the risk of injustice
to the plaintiff during the period before that uncertainty could be resolved.
The object of the interlocutory injunction is to protect the plaintiff against
injury by violation of his right for which he could not be adequately
compensated in damages recoverable in the action if the uncertainty were
resolved in his favour at the trial. The need for such protection has,
however, to be weighed against the corresponding need of the defendant to be
protected against injury resulting from his having been prevented from
exercising his own legal rights for which he could not be adequately
compensated. The court must weigh one need against another and determine where
the "balance of convenience" lies, (See : Wander Ltd. v. Antox India (P.) Ltd.
(SCC at pp. 731-32). In order to protect the defendant while granting an
interlocutory injunction in his favour the court can require the plaintiff to
furnish an undertaking so that the defendant can be adequately compensated if
the uncertainty were resolved in this favour at the trial."
17\. In case, an injunction is granted in favour of the plaintiff, it is not
only that interest of defendant No. 1 will suffer but defendant Nos. 4 and 5
will also be affected. Moreover, M/s. Tyazhprom India Pvt. Ltd., which has now
been associated for the execution of the project with defendant No. 1 is not a
party to the suit and any order of injunction which may be passed on the
application of the plaintiff will necessarily affect the said party. The
plaintiff having chosen not to implead M/s. Tyazhprom India Pvt. Ltd. as a
party to the suit, in my opinion, it is not entitled to grant of an injunction
as claimed in the suit. Moreover, the plaintiff does not have any privity of
contract with defendant No. 2 and any order passed against defendant No. 1
will necessarily affect the project which is being undertaken by defendant No.
2. It is not only that interest of defendant No. 2 will suffer but, in my
opinion, even the national interests will be affected, in case an injunction
is granted. It is, in public interest that steel plant should be upgraded. It
is not a case of two rival competitors who are trying to project their own
personal image or are trying to derive benefits for the personal gains, but it
is a project which will be in national interest and the same cannot be allowed
to be stopped at an interim stage merely because there was any alleged
negative covenant in an agreement which had been entered into between the
plaintiff and defendant No. 1 by which the said defendant had agreed to
execute the project in exclusivity with the plaintiff. Work has already been
awarded on 10th January, 1996 even before the filing of the suit and a final
contract has come into existence, and, in my opinion, therefore, it will not
be proper to pass any order of injunction in favour of the plaintiff. Assuming
that there was a breach of the agreement, as contended by the plaintiff. I,
prima facie, feel that the plaintiff can be compensated in terms of money and
there is no case for specific performance of the same.
18\. For all the above reasons, the application of the plaintiff is dismissed.
19\. Any observation made in this order will, however, have no bearing on the
merits of the case.
will necessarily affect the project which is being undertaken by defendant No.
2. It is not only that interest of defendant No. 2 will suffer but, in my
opinion, even the national interests will be affected, in case an injunction
is granted. It is, in public interest that steel plant should be upgraded. It
is not a case of two rival competitors who are trying to project their own
personal image or are trying to derive benefits for the personal gains, but it
is a project which will be in national interest and the same cannot be allowed
to be stopped at an interim stage merely because there was any alleged
negative covenant in an agreement which had been entered into between the
plaintiff and defendant No. 1 by which the said defendant had agreed to
execute the project in exclusivity with the plaintiff. Work has already been
awarded on 10th January, 1996 even before the filing of the suit and a final
contract has come into existence, and, in my opinion, therefore, it will not
be proper to pass any order of injunction in favour of the plaintiff. Assuming
that there was a breach of the agreement, as contended by the plaintiff. I,
prima facie, feel that the plaintiff can be compensated in terms of money and
Brief facts giving rise to the present suit are :
2\. That defendant No. 1 invited global tenders for pre-qualification for
constructing a main Sinter Plant machine and raw material storage and handling
system at their Bhilai Steel Plant for Sinter Plant-3 (in short referred to as
the "project") and defendant No. 1 got pre-qualified in February 1995 for the
said project. Proposals for the said project were thereafter to be submitted
to defendant No. 2 and it was at that stage that a Memorandum of Understanding
was allegedly entered into between the plaintiff and defendant No. 1 on March
7, 1995 whereby they agreed to jointly participate in the submission of
tenders for the said project. Thereafter on March 20, 1995 another Memorandum
of Understanding (in short referred as "MOU") was entered into between the
plaintiff, defendant No. 1 and defendant No. 4 whereby they agreed to act as
consortium and collaborate on "exclusive right basis in preparation and
submission of the proposals for the said project and in case the same was
awarded to execute the same. The plaintiff and defendant No. 1 were already
working jointly for the BOF shop of the Rourkela Steel Plant. It is alleged
that the parties had agreed to frame a detailed consortium agreement similar
to the one signed between them for the Rourkela Steel Plant. It is further
alleged that at the request of defendant No. 1, the plaintiff got two bank
guarantees issued in the sum of dollars 80,000 each required for the two
will necessarily affect the project which is being undertaken by defendant No.
2. It is not only that interest of defendant No. 2 will suffer but, in my
opinion, even the national interests will be affected, in case an injunction
is granted. It is, in public interest that steel plant should be upgraded. It
is not a case of two rival competitors who are trying to project their own
personal image or are trying to derive benefits for the personal gains, but it
is a project which will be in national interest and the same cannot be allowed
to be stopped at an interim stage merely because there was any alleged
negative covenant in an agreement which had been entered into between the
plaintiff and defendant No. 1 by which the said defendant had agreed to
execute the project in exclusivity with the plaintiff. Work has already been
awarded on 10th January, 1996 even before the filing of the suit and a final
contract has come into existence, and, in my opinion, therefore, it will not
be proper to pass any order of injunction in favour of the plaintiff. Assuming
that there was a breach of the agreement, as contended by the plaintiff. I,
prima facie, feel that the plaintiff can be compensated in terms of money and
Brief facts giving rise to the present suit are :
2\. That defendant No. 1 invited global tenders for pre-qualification for
constructing a main Sinter Plant machine and raw material storage and handling
system at their Bhilai Steel Plant for Sinter Plant-3 (in short referred to as
the "project") and defendant No. 1 got pre-qualified in February 1995 for the
said project. Proposals for the said project were thereafter to be submitted
to defendant No. 2 and it was at that stage that a Memorandum of Understanding
was allegedly entered into between the plaintiff and defendant No. 1 on March
7, 1995 whereby they agreed to jointly participate in the submission of
tenders for the said project. Thereafter on March 20, 1995 another Memorandum
of Understanding (in short referred as "MOU") was entered into between the
plaintiff, defendant No. 1 and defendant No. 4 whereby they agreed to act as
consortium and collaborate on "exclusive right basis in preparation and
submission of the proposals for the said project and in case the same was
awarded to execute the same. The plaintiff and defendant No. 1 were already
working jointly for the BOF shop of the Rourkela Steel Plant. It is alleged
that the parties had agreed to frame a detailed consortium agreement similar
to the one signed between them for the Rourkela Steel Plant. It is further
alleged that at the request of defendant No. 1, the plaintiff got two bank
guarantees issued in the sum of dollars 80,000 each required for the two
will necessarily affect the project which is being undertaken by defendant No.
2. It is not only that interest of defendant No. 2 will suffer but, in my
opinion, even the national interests will be affected, in case an injunction
is granted. It is, in public interest that steel plant should be upgraded. It
is not a case of two rival competitors who are trying to project their own
personal image or are trying to derive benefits for the personal gains, but it
is a project which will be in national interest and the same cannot be allowed
to be stopped at an interim stage merely because there was any alleged
negative covenant in an agreement which had been entered into between the
plaintiff and defendant No. 1 by which the said defendant had agreed to
execute the project in exclusivity with the plaintiff. Work has already been
awarded on 10th January, 1996 even before the filing of the suit and a final
contract has come into existence, and, in my opinion, therefore, it will not
be proper to pass any order of injunction in favour of the plaintiff. Assuming
that there was a breach of the agreement, as contended by the plaintiff. I,
prima facie, feel that the plaintiff can be compensated in terms of money and
Brief facts giving rise to the present suit are :
2\. That defendant No. 1 invited global tenders for pre-qualification for
constructing a main Sinter Plant machine and raw material storage and handling
system at their Bhilai Steel Plant for Sinter Plant-3 (in short referred to as
the "project") and defendant No. 1 got pre-qualified in February 1995 for the
said project. Proposals for the said project were thereafter to be submitted
to defendant No. 2 and it was at that stage that a Memorandum of Understanding
was allegedly entered into between the plaintiff and defendant No. 1 on March
7, 1995 whereby they agreed to jointly participate in the submission of
tenders for the said project. Thereafter on March 20, 1995 another Memorandum
of Understanding (in short referred as "MOU") was entered into between the
plaintiff, defendant No. 1 and defendant No. 4 whereby they agreed to act as
consortium and collaborate on "exclusive right basis in preparation and
submission of the proposals for the said project and in case the same was
awarded to execute the same. The plaintiff and defendant No. 1 were already
working jointly for the BOF shop of the Rourkela Steel Plant. It is alleged
that the parties had agreed to frame a detailed consortium agreement similar
to the one signed between them for the Rourkela Steel Plant. It is further
alleged that at the request of defendant No. 1, the plaintiff got two bank
guarantees issued in the sum of dollars 80,000 each required for the two
tenders : that when an application was made for the bank guarantees, the
Reserve Bank of India had insisted that defendant No. 3 should satisfy itself
that the plaintiff was involved in the execution of the project and in the
event the guarantees were invoked, the plaintiff shall have recourse to
defendant No. 1, that defendant No. 1 confirmed in writing by letter dated
April 25, 1995 that in case of revocation of bank guarantees furnished by the
plaintiff, defendant No. 1 undertakes to reimburse the said amount of bank
guarantees to the plaintiff; subsequently, defendant No. 5 was also made a
member of the consortium and in August, 1995 a consortium agreement was
alleged to have been entered into whereby the parties had jointly collaborated
to work on "exclusive right basis" for preparation and submission of their
will necessarily affect the project which is being undertaken by defendant No.
2. It is not only that interest of defendant No. 2 will suffer but, in my
opinion, even the national interests will be affected, in case an injunction
is granted. It is, in public interest that steel plant should be upgraded. It
is not a case of two rival competitors who are trying to project their own
personal image or are trying to derive benefits for the personal gains, but it
is a project which will be in national interest and the same cannot be allowed
to be stopped at an interim stage merely because there was any alleged
negative covenant in an agreement which had been entered into between the
plaintiff and defendant No. 1 by which the said defendant had agreed to
execute the project in exclusivity with the plaintiff. Work has already been
awarded on 10th January, 1996 even before the filing of the suit and a final
contract has come into existence, and, in my opinion, therefore, it will not
be proper to pass any order of injunction in favour of the plaintiff. Assuming
that there was a breach of the agreement, as contended by the plaintiff. I,
prima facie, feel that the plaintiff can be compensated in terms of money and
Brief facts giving rise to the present suit are :
2\. That defendant No. 1 invited global tenders for pre-qualification for
constructing a main Sinter Plant machine and raw material storage and handling
system at their Bhilai Steel Plant for Sinter Plant-3 (in short referred to as
the "project") and defendant No. 1 got pre-qualified in February 1995 for the
said project. Proposals for the said project were thereafter to be submitted
to defendant No. 2 and it was at that stage that a Memorandum of Understanding
was allegedly entered into between the plaintiff and defendant No. 1 on March
7, 1995 whereby they agreed to jointly participate in the submission of
tenders for the said project. Thereafter on March 20, 1995 another Memorandum
of Understanding (in short referred as "MOU") was entered into between the
plaintiff, defendant No. 1 and defendant No. 4 whereby they agreed to act as
consortium and collaborate on "exclusive right basis in preparation and
submission of the proposals for the said project and in case the same was
awarded to execute the same. The plaintiff and defendant No. 1 were already
working jointly for the BOF shop of the Rourkela Steel Plant. It is alleged
that the parties had agreed to frame a detailed consortium agreement similar
to the one signed between them for the Rourkela Steel Plant. It is further
alleged that at the request of defendant No. 1, the plaintiff got two bank
guarantees issued in the sum of dollars 80,000 each required for the two
tenders : that when an application was made for the bank guarantees, the
Reserve Bank of India had insisted that defendant No. 3 should satisfy itself
that the plaintiff was involved in the execution of the project and in the
event the guarantees were invoked, the plaintiff shall have recourse to
defendant No. 1, that defendant No. 1 confirmed in writing by letter dated
April 25, 1995 that in case of revocation of bank guarantees furnished by the
plaintiff, defendant No. 1 undertakes to reimburse the said amount of bank
guarantees to the plaintiff; subsequently, defendant No. 5 was also made a
member of the consortium and in August, 1995 a consortium agreement was
alleged to have been entered into whereby the parties had jointly collaborated
to work on "exclusive right basis" for preparation and submission of their
will necessarily affect the project which is being undertaken by defendant No.
2. It is not only that interest of defendant No. 2 will suffer but, in my
opinion, even the national interests will be affected, in case an injunction
is granted. It is, in public interest that steel plant should be upgraded. It
is not a case of two rival competitors who are trying to project their own
personal image or are trying to derive benefits for the personal gains, but it
is a project which will be in national interest and the same cannot be allowed
to be stopped at an interim stage merely because there was any alleged
negative covenant in an agreement which had been entered into between the
plaintiff and defendant No. 1 by which the said defendant had agreed to
execute the project in exclusivity with the plaintiff. Work has already been
awarded on 10th January, 1996 even before the filing of the suit and a final
contract has come into existence, and, in my opinion, therefore, it will not
be proper to pass any order of injunction in favour of the plaintiff. Assuming
that there was a breach of the agreement, as contended by the plaintiff. I,
prima facie, feel that the plaintiff can be compensated in terms of money and
