Orissa High Court
Shree Jagannath Packers And Ors. vs State Of Orissa And Ors. on 14 September,
2004
Equivalent citations: 2005 141 STC 26 Orissa
Author: A Patnaik
Bench: A Patnaik, M Das
JUDGMENT A.K. Patnaik, J.
1\. This batch of writ petitions relate to withdrawal of sales tax incentives
granted by the State Government of Orissa under different Industrial Policy
Resolutions (in short, "IPR"). Since common questions of fact and law arise in
these writ petitions, they were heard analogously and are being disposed of by
this common judgment.
Facts of individual cases as stated in the writ petitions:
2\. O.J.C. No. 9967 of 1999 (Petitioner--Shree Jagannath Packers) :
By IPR, 1989 the Government of Orissa declared, inter alia, that exemption
will be allowed to new small-scale industrial units set up in the State of
Orissa from tax on purchases of spare parts of machinery, raw materials and
packing materials and on sale of finished products for a period of 7 years
from the date of commencement of commercial production. This was followed up
by Finance Department notifications under the Orissa Sales Tax Act, 1947
exemption from payment of custom duty to the imports meant for power projects
engaged in production of power as an end-product meant for public distribution
as such while denying a similar benefit to the imports referable to power
plants generating electricity for captive consumption only."
Hence, we do not find any merit in the challenge to the impugned notifications
dated July 30, 1999 and February 17, 2000 on the ground of discrimination.
69\. In the result, we are not inclined to quash the impugned notifications
dated July 30, 1999 and February 17, 2000 issued by the State Government and
we declare the said notifications to be valid in law. All interim orders
passed by this Court in these cases are vacated. It will be, however, open for
the petitioners to contend before the competent authority of the State
Government or the competent authority under the Orissa Sales Tax Act and the
Central Sales Tax Act that despite the impugned notifications dated July 30,
1999 and February 17, 2000 which we have held to be valid, the petitioners are
still entitled to exemption from tax or deferment of payment of tax, as the
case may be.
by Finance Department notifications under the Orissa Sales Tax Act, 1947
granting the said exemptions. Encouraged by the said declaration, the
petitioner set up a small-scale industrial unit for manufacturing of card-
board boxes and corrugated card-board boxes by investing money from his own
personal resources as well as from out of the loans from the State Bank of
India in the year 1991. A permanent registration certificate thereafter was
granted by the General Manager, District Industries Center, Cuttack indicating
therein that the date of commercial production of the small-scale industrial
unit of the petitioner is September 11, 1993 and the petitioner was entitled
to enjoy the aforesaid benefits of exemption from sales tax for a period of
seven years up to September 11, 2000. The petitioner enjoyed the said benefits
of sales tax exemption from September 11, 1993 but on July 30, 1999
Notifications Nos. 622 of 1999, 623 of 1999, 624 of 1999 and 625 of 1999 were
issued by the Government of Orissa in the Finance Department withdrawing all
such benefits with effect from the 1st August, 1999. Aggrieved, the petitioner
has filed this writ petition praying for quashing the said notifications dated
30th of July, 1999.
3\. O.J.C. No. 13017 of 1999 (Petitioner--Larsen Toubro Co. Ltd.) :
Under IPR 1989 the State Government of Orissa declared, inter alia, that
pioneer industrial units set up in zone "C" will be allowed deferment of
payment of sales tax collected on finished products for a period of 9 years
from the date of commercial production and in lieu of such deferment such
pioneer industrial unit can opt for exemption of sales tax on finished
products for a period of seven years from the date of commercial production.
This was followed by notifications issued by the State Government of Orissa
granting deferment of payment of tax under the Orissa Sales Tax Act, 1947 and
under the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956 for a period of seven years from the
date of commercial production. Encouraged by the said declarations, the
petitioner set up a new industry at mouza-Arda in Jharsuguda located in Zone
"C" named M/s. L & T Cement works with a capacity of 0.7 million tones per
annum at a purchase cost of Rs. 80 crores and started commercial production
with effect from September 10, 1993. Hence, the petitioner was entitled to
deferment of payment of tax under the Orissa Sales Tax Act and the Central
Sales Tax Act for a period of seven years up to September 9, 2000 and
accordingly the petitioner applied to the Director of Industries, Orissa, for
necessary certificate. But the notifications S.R.O. Nos. 623 and 624 of 1999
dated July 30, 1999 were issued withdrawing the benefit of deferment of
payment of tax under the Orissa Sales Tax Act and the Central Sales Tax Act.
Aggrieved, the petitioner has prayed for quashing the said two notifications
issued by the State Government in the Finance Department.
4\. O.J.C. No. 2718 of 2000 (Petitioner--IFGL Refractories Ltd.) :
Under IPR 1989 the State Government of Orissa declared, inter alia, that large
scale industrial units would be eligible for deferment of payment of tax under
the Orissa Sales Tax Act and the Central Sales Tax Act for a period of seven
years from the date of commercial production. This was followed by appropriate
notifications and Rules for deferment of tax under the Orissa Sales Tax Act
and the Central Sales Tax Act. Encouraged by the said policy declarations and
notifications, the petitioner made investment of Rs. 25,36,809 on acquisition
of land and a further investment of Rs. 2,117.35 lakhs on construction of
factory buildings and installation of plant and machinery and set up an
industry with an installation capacity of manufacturing 1,920 metric tonnes of
continuous casting refractories and started commercial production on 1st
February, 1993. The Director of Industries, Orissa, also issued a certificate
of eligibility in favour of the petitioner certifying that the industrial unit
of the petitioner was a large scale industrial unit and was eligible for
deferment of payment of tax for a period of seven years from the date of
commercial production as per IPR 1989. For availing benefit of deferment of
sales tax, the petitioner executed an agreement with the Industrial Promotion
and Investment Corporation of Orissa Ltd. on 23rd of August, 1993 agreeing to
the various terms and conditions for availing sales tax deferment facilities
for the period from 1st February, 1993 to 31st January, 1995. Thereafter the
petitioner enjoyed the sales tax deferment facilities on the finished products
for a period of 5 years from 1st February, 1993. The petitioner then requested
the Director of Industries, Orissa, to issue the eligibility certificate for
the sixth year from the date of commercial production by letter dated 23rd
July, 1999, but the petitioner was informed in January, 2000 that the
requisite eligibility certificate for deferment of payment of tax for the
sixth and seventh years after commercial production cannot be issued in view
of the Notifications S.R.O. Nos. 623, 624 and 625 dated July 30, 1999,
withdrawing the benefit of deferment with effect from 1st of August, 1999.
Aggrieved, the petitioner has filed this writ petition for quashing the said
three notifications.
5\. O.J.C. No. 4297 of 2000 [Petitioner--Kali Oil Mills (P) Ltd.] :
Under IPR 1989, the State Government announced, inter alia, that sales tax
exemption on purchases of raw materials, spare parts and packing materials and
on sale of finished products shall be allowed for a period of seven years from
the date of commercial production to new small-scale industries. Accordingly,
Notification No. 27662-CTA-560/90-F dated August 16, 1990 was issued under
Section 6 of the Orissa Sales Tax Act, 1947 providing such exemption for a
period of seven years from the date of commercial production on the purchase
of raw materials, packing materials, spare parts of machinery, etc., as well
as on the sale of finished products. Encouraged by the said exemptions, the
petitioner set up a small-scale industrial unit at Jatni in district Khurda
after December 1, 1989 for manufacturing of edible oil, oil cakes, groundnut
kernel and went into commercial production on April 1, 1994. The Project
Manager, District Industries Centre, Bhubaneswar issued eligibility
certificates in favour of the petitioner certifying that the petitioner was
entitled to exemption of sales tax on purchase of raw materials, spare parts
of machinery and packaging materials as well as on sale of finished products
under the Orissa Sales Tax Act and the Central Sales Tax Act for the period of
April 1, 1994 to March 31, 2000 and the petitioner continued to enjoy the said
exemptions as per the eligibility certificates, but the said exemptions were
withdrawn by notifications dated July 30, 1999 and February 17, 2000. The
petitioner has therefore prayed for quashing the said notifications dated July
30, 1999 and February 17, 2000.
6\. O.J.C. No. 6297 of 2000 (Petitioner--Noble Pharma Care Ltd.) :
The petitioner has set up a medium scale industry for manufacture of
sterilized disposable syringe at Chandaka Industrial Estate, Patia,
Bhubaneswar pursuant to the IPR 1986 and commenced commercial production on
May 9, 1998 and is a continuing industrial unit of IPR 1986 and was entitled
under IPR 1989 to exemptions from sales tax on sale of finished products. The
petitioner was accordingly issued with the eligibility certificate certifying
that the petitioner was exempted from sales tax on sale of finished products
for a period of five years from May 9, 1998 and the petitioner was availing
such exemption from sales tax on sale of its finished products under the
Notification No. 790 of 1990 dated August 16, 1990 and Notification No. 1013
of 1990 dated November 12, 1990 under the Orissa Sales Tax Act and the Central
Sales Tax Act which were issued to implement the IPR 1989. Thereafter
Notifications S.R.O. No. 623 of 1999 and S.R.O. No. 624 of 1999 were issued on
July 30, 1999 withdrawing the said exemptions under the Orissa Sales Tax Act
and the Central Sales Tax Act with effect from August 1, 1999. Aggrieved, the
petitioner has filed this writ petition with a prayer to quash the said
notifications dated July 30, 1999.
7\. O.J.C. No. 962 of 2001 (Petitioner--Agarwala Fabricators) :
The petitioner is a proprietorship concern and has set up a small-scale
industrial unit at Atabira in district Sambalpur for carrying out general and
structural fabrication and manufacturing agricultural units and it was
registered with the D.I.C., Bargarh. Under the IPR 1989, small-scale
industrial units undertaking expansion/modernisation/diversification after
December 1, 1989 on the basis of an exclusive project report duly appraised by
a financing institution were entitled to exemption from tax on purchase of raw
materials, spare parts of machinery and packing material and exemption of tax
on sale of finished products for a period of seven years from the date of
commercial production. The petitioner undertook such
expansion/modernisation/diversification and started commercial production on
June 27, 1993 and was issued with a certificate of eligibility for the said
exemption for seven years from June 27, 1993 by the General Manager, District
Industries Center, Bargarh. The petitioner was allowed the exemption as per
the said eligibility certificate on sale of his finished products up to July
31, 1999 for the assessment period 1993-94 to 1998-99 but has not been allowed
exemption for the period from August 1, 1999 because of the withdrawal of the
exemption by the finance department notifications dated July 30, 1999.
Aggrieved, the petitioner has filed this writ petition praying for quashing
the said notifications dated July 30, 1999 and the order of assessment for the
period 1999-2000 made under Section 12 of the Orissa Sales Tax Act in so far
as it disallows the exemption for the period after July 30, 1999 and for a
direction to renew the eligibility of the petitioner to exemption of tax for
the period 1999-2000 to 2000-2001.
8\. O.J.C. No. 2761 of 2001 (Petitioner--Ponni Sugar and Chemicals Ltd.) :
By IPR 1989 the Government of Orissa declared, inter alia, that new large
scale industrial units will be allowed to defer payment of sales tax collected
on their finished products for a period of seven years in zones "B" and "C"
and nine years in zone "A" from the date of commercial production and in lieu
of such deferment can opt for exemption of sales tax on finished products for
a period of five years in zones "B" and "C" and for a period of seven years in
zone "A" from the date of commercial production. IPR 1989 was followed by a
notification S.R.O. No. 790 of 1990 dated August 16, 1990 effective from
December 1, 1989 which indicated the restrictions and conditions under which a
large scale industrial unit could either enjoy the benefit of deferment of
payment of sales tax or in lieu of deferment could claim exemption from
payment of tax admitted as payable in respect of sale of finished products
produced by such industrial units. Encouraged by the said declarations in the
IPR 1989, the petitioner set up a large industrial unit for manufacture of
sugar and molasses in the district of Bolangir and commenced commercial
production on 16th of February, 1994 and applied to the Director of
Industries, Orissa opting for exemption from payment of sales tax in lieu of
deferment of sales tax. Eligibility certificates were issued by the Director
of Industries declaring that the petitioner was entitled to exemption from
payment of sales tax on its finished products either sugar or molasses
produced for a period of seven years from the date of commercial production.
The petitioner was also granted a certificate of eligibility for sales tax
concession on purchase of raw materials, spare parts of machinery and packing
materials for the said period of seven years. Thereafter the petitioner
availed the said benefits and in the regular assessment for years 1996-97 and
1997-98 the petitioner was allowed exemption from payment of sales tax on sale
of sugar and molasses produced by the petitioner. But before completion of
seven years for which the exemption was allowed, Notifications S.R.O. No. 623
of 1999, S.R.O. No. 624 of 1999, and S.R.O. No. 625 of 1999 dated 30th July,
1999 were issued withdrawing the said exemptions. Thereafter notifications
were issued on February 17, 2000 by the Government of Orissa in the Finance
Department directing that no exemption for payment of sales tax and no
deferment of payment of sales tax shall be allowed except to existing
industrial units already in receipt of exemption and deferment as on January
1, 2000 and to industrial units in pipeline as on January 1, 2000 subject to
the criteria mentioned in the said notifications. Aggrieved, the petitioner
has filed this writ petition praying for quashing the said notifications dated
July 30, 1999 and February 17, 2000 and for declaring that the petitioner is
entitled to benefit of sales tax exemption in lieu of deferment for a full
term of seven years from the date of commercial production.
9\. O.J.C. No. 5122 of 2001 (Petitioners--Mahanadi Distilleries Pvt. Ltd. and
another) :
Under IPR 1996 effective from March 1, 1996 various incentives were allowed
for setting up industries in the State of Orissa. On September 23, 1997
petitioners submitted an application to the Excise Department of the
Government of Orissa for permission to set up an IMFL Bottling Plant in the
State of Orissa. On September 7, 1997 the State Government in the Excise
Department accorded such permission to the petitioners. The petitioners
negotiated with the O.S.F.C. for purchasing the assets of M/s. Suki Industries
Pvt. Ltd. at Allipur Road, Narayanpur taken over by the O.S.F.C. under Section
29 of the State Financial Corporation Act, 1951 and paid a price of Rs. 23.50
lakhs to the O.S.F.C. and invested further in land and machinery and converted
the said assets into a Bottling Unit of I.M.F.L. The petitioners obtained a
provisional registration certificate registering the petitioner No. 1 as a
small-scale industry and also obtained registration certificates registering
the petitioner No. 1 as a registered dealer under the Orissa Sales Tax Act and
the Central Sales Tax Act on May 26, 1999. But by notifications dated 30th of
July, 1999 issued by the Government of Orissa in the Finance Department the
sales tax benefits were withdrawn with effect from August 1, 1999. On 9th of
October, 2000 the unit of the petitioner started its commercial production and
on November 24, 2000 the industrial unit of the petitioner granted permanent
registration certificate by the General Manager, District Industries Centre,
Ganjam, Berhampur. On November 28, 2000 the petitioner No. 1 company applied
to the General Manager, District Industries Centre, Ganjam, Berhampur for
issuing sales tax exemption as envisaged under IPR 1996, but on December 27,
2000 the General Manager, District Industrial Centre, Ganjam, Berhampur
intimated the petitioner No. 1 company that it will not be entitled to any
sales tax incentives in view of the aforesaid Government of Orissa, Finance
Department notifications dated 30th of July, 1999. Aggrieved, the petitioner
has prayed for quashing the said communications dated December 27, 2000 of
General Manager, District Industries Centre, Ganjam, Berhampur to the
petitioner annexed to the writ petition as annexure 15 and for a mandamus on
the opposite parties to forthwith grant to the petitioner No. 1 company the
various incentives granted under IPR 1996 and the Finance Department
Notification No. 477 of 1996 dated July 26, 1996.
Facts common to the writ petitions as stated in the counter-affidavit on
behalf of the State of Orissa :
10\. For promoting industries of the State Government of Orissa, the State
Government of Orissa adopted IPRs from time to time, namely, IPR 1980, IPR
1986, IPR 1989, IPR 1992 and IPR 1996. Under the aforesaid IPRs some sales tax
related incentives were also to be given to new and existing industries. To
give effect to the IPRs, notifications were issued from time to time by the
Finance Department under Section 6 of the Orissa Sales Tax Act, 1947 granting
exemption from sales tax for 5 to 7 years and notifications were also issued
under Section 7 of the Orissa Sales Tax Act allowing deferment of payment of
tax for 5 to 7 years. The fiscal position of the State Government deteriorated
because of the increasing gap between the revenue receipts and the revenue
expenditure. In 1998-99, the revenue deficit rose to an alarming level of Rs.
2,265 crores. Due to such fiscal deficit, the State Government Account was
overdrawn and the State Government had to approach the Government of India to
bail it out from the overdraft situation for help. The Government of India in
the Ministry of Finance, however, agreed to provide the required help to the
State Government on the condition that the State Government withdraws the
fiscal incentives to industries, reduces the non-plan revenue expenditure and
adopts resource mobilization measures and accordingly a Memorandum of
Understanding (MOU) was signed on April 9, 1994 on behalf of the State
Government and the Government of India. After the signing of the MOU, the
State Government took detailed review of tax related incentives granted to
industries in the State. The State Government set up a Task Force comprising
of the Commissioner of Commercial Taxes, the Special Secretary to Government
of Orissa, Industries Department, the Managing Director, IPICOL, and the
Director of Industries and the Task Force unanimously recommended withdrawal
of sales tax incentives under all IPRs up to IPR 1989 and for enlarging the
list of ineligible industries under IPR 1996 keeping in view the ineligible
list of the IPR 1999 and for consulting the Finance Department before
sanctioning any sales tax incentives for revival of sick industries under IPR
1996. A white paper on State Finance was laid in the Orissa Legislative
Assembly in July, 1999 in which the deteriorating finances of the State were
depicted and fiscal corrective measures were suggested. One such fiscal
corrective measure suggested was that all tax concessions/deferrals/exemptions
extended under different Government Policies should be reviewed and wherever
necessary abolished immediately. A self-explanatory Cabinet Memorandum on
withdrawal of sales tax concessions was prepared and was vetted by the
Industries Department on July 5, 1999 for being placed before the Council of
Ministers. In anticipation of approval of the cabinet, however, the Chief
Minister approved withdrawal of sales tax concession on July 27, 1999.
Thereafter the impugned notifications S.R.O. No. 622 of 1999, S.R.O. No. 623
of 1999, S.R.O. No. 624 of 1999 and S.R.O. No. 625 of 1999--all dated July 30,
1999--were issued withdrawing some sales tax incentives and concession in the
public interest.
11\. The Cabinet Memorandum was thereafter placed in the meeting of the
Council of Ministers held on October 14, 1999 and the counsel of Ministers did
not approve the incentives indicated in the Memorandum and observed that the
incentives may be restored subject to the following stipulations :
(a) List of ineligible industries under IPR 1992 and IPR 1996 may be expanded
as has been suggested in the Memorandum ;
(b) Benefit under IPR 1989 should be extended to industrial units who have not
already availed of the same before August 1, 1999 ;
(c) Industrial units to which benefits under IPR 1989 have already been
extended by July 31, 1989 should be scrutinized to ensure that only genuine
cases eligible under IPR 1989 get the benefit under the said IPR.
On December 21, 1999, however, the Law Department opined that after the issue
of the impugned notifications dated July 30, 1999, concessions notified under
IPR 1980, IPR 1986 and IPR 1989 cannot be revived and a fresh notification is
necessary for revival of the sales tax incentives under the said IPRs.
Accordingly, fresh draft notifications were prepared but the notifications
could not be issued as the general elections intervened and the Election
Commissioner did not approve the proposal for issue of the fresh
notifications.
12\. In the meanwhile, the Union Finance Minister convened a Conference of
Chief Ministers and Finance Ministers of all States and Union Territories on
November 16, 1999 and at the said Conference the State and Union Territories
were required to implement the recommended uniform floor rate of sales tax and
to discontinue sales tax incentives under IPRs with effect from January 1,
2000. The Government of India also constituted a Standing Committee to monitor
the implementation of the aforesaid decision and the standing Committee in
their meeting held on December 20, 1999 unanimously recommended that deterrent
action should be taken against the State not falling in the line with the said
unanimous decisions and failure to implement the unanimous decisions was to be
treated as a negative revenue measure by the Finance Commission and planning
Commission. Two notifications were issued on February 17, 2000 by the
Government of Orissa in the Finance Department under Sections 6 and 7 of the
Orissa Sales Tax Act directing that no exemption from payment of tax and no
deferment of payment of sales tax shall be allowed except to existing
industrial units already in receipt of the exemption and deferments as on
January 1, 2000 and to industrial units in pipeline as on January 1, 2000
subject to their fulfilling the criteria mentioned in the notifications. After
the elections, the new Government assumed office on March 5, 2000 and the
Cabinet of the new Government in its meeting held on April 22, 2000 annulled
the decisions of the Council of Ministers taken on October 14, 1999 and
ratified the four impugned notifications S.R.O. Nos. 622, 623, 624 and 625 of
1999 dated 30th July, 1999.
Submissions of learned counsel for the petitioners :
13\. Mr. Yasobant Das, learned counsel for the petitioner in O.J.C. No. 9967
of 1999 submitted that relying on the exemption from sales tax on purchase of
spare parts of machinery, raw materials and packing materials and on sale of
finished products granted pursuant to the IPR 1989, the petitioner has set up
its industry and has expanded the same and the Government cannot withdraw the
sales tax exemption at this stage as it is bound by the principle of
promissory estoppel laid down by the Supreme Court in various decisions to
keep its promise of exemption. In support of this contention, Mr. Das cited
the decisions of the Supreme Court in Union of India v. Anglo Afghan Agencies
AIR 1968 SC 718, Motilal Padampat Sugar Mills Co. Ltd. v. State of Uttar
Pradesh [1979] 44 STC 42 ; AIR 1979 SC 621, Union of India v. Godfrey Philips
India Ltd. AIR 1986 SC 806, Pournami Oil Mills v. State of Kerala [1987] 65
STC 1 (SC), Amrit Banaspati Co. Ltd. v. State of Punjab [1992] 85 STC 493 ;
(1992) 2 SCC 411, Dr. Ashok Kumar Maheshwari v. State of U.P. (1998) 2 SCC 502
and Dai-Ichi Karkaria Ltd. v. Union of India (2000) 119 ELT 516 (SC).
14\. Mr. Das further submitted that the sales tax incentives pursuant to the
IPR 1989 were granted in the public interest and the State Government can
withdraw such incentives only on the ground of supervening public interest. He
further submitted that "public interest" has to be defined in the light of the
aims and objectives of the scheme of the IPR and any definition of "public
interest" without taking into account the aims and objectives of the IPR
should not be accepted by the court. He submitted that the IPR 1989 was
formulated by the State Government after approval of the State Cabinet and the
issuance of the notification under the Orissa Sales Tax Act granting the
exemptions by the Finance Department was with a view to carry out the objects
and the policy decisions in the IPR itself and the impugned notifications
issued under the Orissa Sales Tax Act by the Finance Department withdrawing
the exemption are repugnant to the IPR of the State Government and must be
held not to be in public interest and to that extent bad. He submitted that
augmentation or loss of revenue cannot constitute supervening public interest
for withdrawal of the exemptions. In support of this contention, Mr. Das cited
the decisions of the Supreme Court in Shri Digvijay Cement Co. v. State of
Rajasthan [1997] 106 STC 11 ; (1997) 4 JT 340 (SC), State of Bihar v.
Suprabhat Steel Ltd. [1999] 112 STC 258 ; (1998) 8 JT 2 (SC), State of
Rajasthan v. Mahaveer Oil Industries [1999] 115 STC 29 ; (1999) 3 JT 212 (SC),
Commissioner of Sales tax v. Industrial Coal Enterprises [1999] 114 STC 365 ;
(1999) 2 SCC 607 and Administrator, Nagar Palika v. Bharat (2001) 9 SCC 232.
15\. Mr. Das next submitted that even if the State Government had the power to
withdraw the exemptions, this power cannot be exercised without giving notice
to persons likely to be affected by such withdrawal and before issuing the
notifications dated 30th July, 1999 withdrawing the exemptions of sales tax,
the petitioner who was likely to be affected by the withdrawal of the
exemptions from sales tax was not given any notice. In support of this
argument Mr. Das cited the decision of the Supreme Court in National Buildings
Construction Corporation v. S. Raghunathan (1998) 6 JT 21 (SC).
16\. Mr. Das further submitted that the impugned notifications dated 30th
July, 1999 issued by the Finance Department of the Government of Orissa were
not ratified by the Council of Ministers in their meeting held on October 14,
1999 and consequently became null and void. He argued that the Council of
Ministers in its subsequent meeting held on April 22, 2000 sought to annul the
decision of the Council of Ministers taken on October 14, 1999 and ratify the
two notifications dated 30th July, 1999, but by April 22, 2000 the
notifications dated 30th July, 1999 were already dead and could not be revived
retrospectively. Mr. Das submitted that in the Task Force constituted by the
State Government, the Director of Industries opined that withdrawal of sales
tax incentives to small-scale industries would adversely affect the
industrialists of the State but this opinion of the Director of Industries was
not taken into account before the impugned notifications dated 30th July, 1999
were issued in the garb of public interest. He finally submitted that the
court should hold that industries which were already availing the sales tax
benefits when the impugned notifications dated July 30, 1999 were issued
cannot be deprived of the sales tax benefits and the withdrawal of sales tax
benefits would be only applicable to new industries which are set up after the
impugned notifications dated July 30, 1999 were issued.
17\. Mr. Gangadhar Rath, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner in
O.J.C. No. 13017 of 1999, submitted that pursuant to IPR 1989 notifications
were issued under Section 7 of the Orissa Sales Tax Act granting deferment of
payment of sales tax collected by the petitioner on finished products under
the Orissa Sales Tax Act and the Central Sales Tax Act for a period of seven
years from the date of commercial production and the petitioner was enjoying
the said benefit of deferment of payment of sales tax. He submitted that while
Section 6 of the Orissa Sales Tax Act empowers the State Government to issue a
notification granting exemption and withdrawing such exemption, Section 7 of
the said Act empowers the State Government to issue a notification allowing
any class of dealers to defer payment of sales tax but does not empower the
State Government to withdraw such benefit of deferment of payment of sales
tax. In this context, he submitted that in Sales Tax Officer v. Shree Durga
Oil Mills [1998] 108 STC 274 (SC) ; AIR 1998 SC 591, the Supreme Court upheld
the withdrawal of exemption from sales tax because the withdrawal of exemption
from sales tax impugned in that case was in exercise of powers of the State
Government under Section 6 of the Orissa Sales Tax Act to withdraw an
exemption and does not apply to the case of the petitioner as the State
Government has no such power under Section 7 of the Orissa Sales Tax Act to
withdraw the benefit of deferment of payment of sales tax. Mr. Rath argued
that in the absence of any such express power vested in the State Government
in Section 7 of the Orissa Sales Tax Act empowering the State Government to
withdraw the benefit of deferment of payment of sales tax granted under
Section 7 of the Act, the State Government cannot withdraw the benefit of
deferment of payment of sales tax and the Notifications Nos. 623 and 624 dated
July 30, 1999 are ultra vires the Orissa Sales Tax Act.
18\. Mr. Rath next submitted that it will be clear from the preliminary
counter-affidavit filed by the State-opposite parties that the Chief Minister
approved the withdrawal of the sales tax concession on July 27, 1999 in
anticipation of the approval of the Cabinet, but the Council of Ministers in
their meeting held on October 14, 1999 did not approve of the said withdrawal
of sales tax concession and instead observed that the sales tax incentives may
be restored subject to some stipulations. He argued that once the Council of
Ministers refused to approve the withdrawal of sales tax concession in their
meeting held on October 14, 1999, the impugned notifications dated 30th July,
1999 became dead and could not be revived subsequently by the new Council of
Ministers which assumed office on March 5, 2000.
19\. Mr. S.C. Lal, learned counsel for the petitioners in O.J.C. No. 2718 of
2000 and in O.J.C. No. 2761 of 2001, submitted that in the absence of any
express provision in Section 7 of the Orissa Sales Tax Act conferring power on
the State Government to withdraw sales tax exemption granted to a class of
dealers or deferment of payment of tax, such power of withdrawal cannot be
exercised by the State Government. He further submitted that Section 22 of the
Orissa General Clauses Act provides that where by an Orissa Act a power to
make or issue notifications is conferred, then that power includes a power
exercisable in the like manner and subject to the like sanction and
conditions, if any, to rescind any notification so made or issued. He pointed
out that similar provision in Section 19 of the Punjab General Clauses Act was
interpreted by the Supreme Court in Gopi Chand v. Delhi Administrations AIR
1959 SC 609, and it was held therein that the power to cancel the notification
under the said Section 19 of the Punjab General Clauses Act must inevitably be
exercisable within the limits prescribed by the provision conferring the said
power. According to Mr. Lal, since power has been conferred to withdraw an
exemption under Section 6 of the Orissa Sales Tax Act but no such power has
been vested on the State Government to withdraw an exemption to a class of
dealers or a deferment of payment of sales tax under Section 7 of the said
Act, the State Government cannot withdraw either exemption to a class of
dealers or deferment of payment of sales tax to dealers granted under Section
7 of the said Act.
20\. Mr. Lal also relied on the decision of the Supreme Court in State of
Bihar v. Suprabhat Steel Ltd. [1999] 112 STC 258 in which it was held that a
notification issued by the State Government in exercise of powers under
Section 7 of the Bihar Finance Act to the extent it is repugnant to the
Industrial Policy Resolution of the Government of Bihar is bad. He submitted
that since withdrawal notifications dated 30th July, 1999 are bad inasmuch as
they have, contrary to the IPR 1989, discontinued deferment of payment of
sales tax before completion of the period of seven years from the date of
commercial production of the petitioners. He submitted that the High Court
should hold that the petitioners are entitled to such benefit of deferment of
payment of sales tax for the remaining period of seven years in accordance
with the IPR 1989 and cited the decision of the Supreme Court in Tungabhadra
Industries Ltd. v. Union of India (2000) 5 SCC 501, in support of this
submission.
21\. In O.J.C. No. 4297 of 2000 Mr. N. Paikray, learned counsel for the
petitioner, submitted that although the petitioner being a new small-scale
industrial unit established pursuant to the IPR 1989 was entitled to sales tax
incentives for the full period of seven years from the date of its commercial
production, the Government of Orissa in the Finance Department has by the
impugned notifications dated 30th July, 1999 withdrawn the said sales tax
incentives on unreasonable and erroneous grounds and that the impugned
notification S.R.O. No. 622 of 1999 dated 30th July, 1999 deleting entries
26-F, 30-FFF and other entries from the Tax-free List with effect from 1st
August, 1999 are not sustainable in the eye of law. Alternatively, Mr. Paikray
submitted that by a fresh notification dated February 17, 2000 issued by the
Government of Orissa in the Finance Department and in particular under the
first proviso thereof new small-scale industrial units who are in receipt of
sales tax incentives immediately before 1st January, 2000 under the Finance
Department notification No. 20206-CTA-14/76-F dated April 23, 1976 as amended
by notification No. 27662-CTA-56/90-F dated August 16, 1990 shall continue to
avail the incentives for the full period of seven years as per the said
notification dated August 16, 1990. According to Mr. Paikray, even a small-
scale industrial unit set up pursuant to IPR 1989 such as the unit of the
petitioner falls within the first proviso to the notification dated February
17, 2000 and is entitled to avail the benefits for the full period of seven
years as per the said Finance Department notification dated April 23, 1976 as
amended by the notification dated August 16, 1990. Hence, a declaration be
issued by the Court that the petitioner is entitled to the exemption of sales
tax on purchase of raw materials, spare parts of machinery and packaging
materials and on sale of finished products for the full period of seven years
from the date of its commercial production, i.e., April 1, 1994.
22\. Mr. B.K. Mahanti, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner in O.J.C.
No. 6297 of 2000, took us through the Industrial Policy Resolutions of the
Government of Orissa made from time to time to show that the object of the
said Industrial Policy Resolutions was to encourage the entrepreneurs to
establish industrial units in the State of Orissa for the purpose of creating
employment and developing the State. He submitted that the Industrial Policy
(sic) power under Article 162 of the Constitution and that such Industrial
Policy Resolutions can only be reversed or withdrawn by another Industrial
Policy Resolutions by the State Government in exercise of its powers under
Article 162 of the Constitution and that neither the Finance Department of
Government of Orissa nor the Chief Minister could withdraw the sales tax
incentives granted under the Industrial Policy Resolutions. He relied on the
decision of the Supreme Court in State of Bihar v. Suprabhat Steel Ltd. [1999]
112 STC 258 where it has been held that a notification issued by the Finance
Department granting exemption has to be consistent with the Industrial Policy
Resolution. He submitted that the Council of Ministers have been
democratically elected to power and the Industrial Policy Resolutions made by
the Council of Ministers cannot be undone by the impugned notifications issued
by the bureaucrats so long as the Industrial Policy Resolutions are in force.
23\. Mr. Mahanti next submitted that in Motilal Padampat Sugar Mills Co. Ltd.
v. State of Uttar Pradesh [1979] 44 STC 42 ; AIR 1979 SC 621, the Supreme
Court has held that a promise of sales tax incentives granted by the State
Government cannot be withdrawn except in public interest and the Government
has to satisfy the court by placing relevant materials that the departure from
the promise was necessary in the public interest. He argued that in the
present case the only reason given by the State Government in their counter-
affidavit for withdrawing from the promise of sales tax incentives under the
Industrial Policy Resolutions is that the State Government will suffer
financial loss if the sales tax incentives continue, but this reason should
not be accepted by the court because the State Government knew at the time
when the Industrial Policy Resolutions were made that grant of sales tax
incentives would cause revenue loss to the State Government and also because
sales tax incentives have been restored to the industries by notifications
dated February 17, 2000 resulting in loss of revenue to the State Government.
24\. Mr. Mahanti next submitted that the counter-affidavit filed on behalf of
the State Government would show that a Cabinet Memorandum was prepared for
withdrawal of sales tax incentives for being placed before the Council of
Ministers and in anticipation of approval of the Cabinet, the Chief Minister
approved withdrawal of sales tax concession on July 27, 1999 and the
notifications dated July 30, 1999 were issued withdrawing the sales tax
incentives, but on October 14, 1999 the Council of Ministers did not approve
the withdrawal of the sales tax incentives and instead directed restoration of
sales tax incentives subject to some stipulations. He submitted that all
justifications for withdrawal of sales tax incentives now pleaded before the
court by the State Government were considered by the Council of Ministers in
its meeting held on October 14, 1999 but found not correct and therefore the
impugned notifications dated July 30, 1999 now cannot be justified by the
State Government before the court on the ground that they were issued in
public interest.
25\. Mr. Mahanti submitted that the notifications dated February 17, 2000
restored sales tax incentives under notifications of the Government of Orissa
in Finance Department No. 41267-CTA-106/92-F dated September 23, 1992 and No.
33382-CTA-72/96 dated July 26, 1996 permitting the existing industrial units
who were enjoying the same immediately before 1st January, 2000 for the period
of their eligibility under the said notifications but did not restore the
sales tax incentives under the Notifications No. 27665-CTA-56/90 dated August
16, 1990 granted under Section 7 of the Orissa Sales Tax Act to the new
industries, continuing industries set up on or after the 1st of April, 1986,
continuing industrial units set up on or after 1st August, 1980, industries
set up on or after 1st December, 1989, expansions of units set up on or after
April 1, 1986 but before 1st December, 1989 and has gone into commercial
production after April 1, 1986 on the basis of a project report appraised by
financial institutions and expansions of units undertaken between August 1,
1980 and March 31, 1986 and has gone into commercial production after April 1,
1986 on the basis of a project report of appraisal by financial institution.
He argued that such denial of benefits under the notification dated August 16,
1990 under Section 7 of the Orissa Sales Tax Act to the aforesaid categories
of industries while at the same time restoring sales tax benefits to existing
industrial units under the notifications dated September 23, 1992 and July 26,
1996 who were enjoying incentives immediately before 1st January, 2000 is
based on a classification having no rational nexus with the object sought to
be achieved and is discriminatory and violative of Article 14 of the
Constitution.
26\. Mr. Mahanti finally argued that the State Government must follow some
morality while dealing with its subjects and institutions and morality
requires that the State Government fulfils its promises of sales tax
incentives to the industrial units both existing and new made in the
Industrial Policy Resolutions and this is also a legitimate expectation of the
subjects. Hence, the impugned notification S.R.O. No. 623 of 1999 dated July
30, 1999 withdrawing the benefits granted to the petitioner by notification
dated August 16, 1990 be quashed by the court.
27\. Mr. Jagabandhu Sahoo, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner in
O.J.C. No. 962 of 2001, submitted that the petitioner undertook modernisation
and expansion of his industrial unit pursuant to IPR 1989 and was entitled to
exemption from tax on purchase of raw materials, spare parts of machinery and
packing materials and on sale of finished products for a period of seven years
from the date of commercial production, i.e., up to June, 2000, but the
exemptions were withdrawn with effect from August 1, 1999 by the impugned
notification dated July 30, 1999. He argued that the notification of
exemption, though issued under Section 6 of the Orissa Sales Tax Act, was
actually a notification of exemption granted under Section 7 of the said Act
and Section 7 of the said Act did not vest any express power in the State
Government to withdraw any exemption granted thereunder. He also relied on the
decision of the Supreme Court in Gopi Chand v. Delhi Administration AIR 1959
SC 609 wherein it has been held that the power to cancel a notification must
inevitably be exercised within the limits prescribed by the provision
conferring the said power.
28\. Mr. Sahoo next submitted that the impugned notifications dated July 30,
1999 were issued without the prior approval of the State Cabinet and the said
notifications were ratified by the State Cabinet only on April 22, 2000.
According to Mr. Sahoo, the impugned notifications dated July 30, 1999 having
been issued without the prior approval of the State Cabinet were invalid and
have to be struck down by the court.
29\. Mr. Sahoo cited a division Bench judgment of this Court delivered on May
1, 1992 in the case of Mansfield Electronics v. State of Orissa (O.J.C. No.
4153 of 1990) holding that sales tax benefits granted for a period of five
years cannot be denied to the industrial unit for the said period of five
years. He also relied on the decisions of the Supreme Court in Pournami Oil
Mills v. State of Kerala [1987] 65 STC 1 and in State of Bihar v. Usha Martin
Industries Ltd. [1987] 65 STC 430, for the proposition that industrial units
which have already been set up prior to the change of the policy should be
allowed exemption for the full period for which they were entitled under the
old policy.
30\. Mr. Sahoo contended that a promise of exemption from sales tax can only
be withdrawn in the public interest and the Government has to place all
materials to satisfy the court that the withdrawal was in the public interest.
He argued that mere widening of fiscal deficit taken as a ground for
withdrawal of the exemptions by the notifications dated July 30, 1999 cannot
be considered to be public interest. In support of this contention, he relied
on the decisions of the Supreme Court in Amrit Banaspati Co. Ltd. v. State of
Punjab [1992] 85 STC 493, Pawan Alloys and Casting Pvt. Ltd. v. U.P. State
Electricity Board (1997) 7 SCC 251 and Shrijee Sales Corporation v. Union of
India (1997) 3 SCC 398. He also cited the decision of the Supreme Court in
Motilal Padampat Sugar Mills Co. Ltd. v. State of Uttar Pradesh [1979] 44 STC
42 ; AIR 1979 SC 621 for the proposition that the Government must satisfy the
court by placing relevant materials that the withdrawal of a promise was in
public interest and the court will apply a rigorous test while allowing the
Government to withdraw the benefit in public interest.
31\. Mr. Sahoo finally submitted that law has been settled in the case of
Kunnathat Thathunni Moopil Nair v. State of Kerala AIR 1961 SC 552, that a
fiscal statute can be challenged on the ground that it is discriminatory and
violative of Article 14 of the Constitution. He argued that in this case the
State Government while withdrawing the sales tax exemptions from industrial
units as that of the petitioner set up pursuant to IPR 1989 by the impugned
notifications dated July 30, 1999 has allowed sales tax incentives to existing
units and industrial units in pipeline under the notifications dated February
17, 2000 and this amounts to discrimination and the impugned notification
dated July 30, 1999 is liable to be quashed for violation of Article 14 of the
Constitution.
32\. Mr. Ashok Parija, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner in O.J.C.
No. 5122 of 2001, submitted that no materials have been placed before the
court to show that withdrawal of the sales tax incentives under the impugned
notifications dated July 30, 1999 was in the public interest and only a bald
contention is raised in the counter-affidavit that such withdrawal was
necessary to take care of the fiscal deficit. Mr. Parija placed great reliance
on the decision of the Supreme Court in Motilal Padampat Sugar Mills Co. Ltd.
v. State of Uttar Pradesh [1979] 44 STC 42 ; AIR 1979 SC 621 for the
proposition that a mere claim of change of policy would not be sufficient to
exonerate the Government from its liability under the principle of promissory
estoppel and the Government would have to show what precisely is the changed
policy and also its reasonable justification so that the court can judge for
itself which way the public interest lies and what the equity of justice
demands and it is only if the court is satisfied on proper and adequate
material placed by the Government that overriding public interest requires
that the Government should not be held bound by the promise but should be free
to act unfettered by it that the court would refuse to enforce the promise
against the Government. Mr. Parija submitted that in Dai-Ichi Karkaria Ltd. v.
Union of India (2000) 4 SCC 57 ; (2000) 119 ELT 516, the Supreme Court after
considering the affidavit filed by the Government for issuing the impugned
notification purportedly in the public interest held that the Government has
failed to discharge its statutory obligations while issuing the impugned
notifications and the justifications offered were far too naive to be accepted
and the reasons set out does not carry the case of the Government further at
all and so holding struck down the impugned notifications. Mr. Parija argued
that in the present case also the counter-affidavit filed on behalf of the
State Government does not make out a case for withdrawal of the sales tax
benefits which were granted under the IPR 1996 for various purposes such as
harnessing Orissa's vast natural resources and potential for accelerated
industrial growth, attracting and facilitating large investments in
infrastructure and industries, generating employment in industrial/commercial
activities, developing backward areas/regions of the State through industrial
and mining ventures, strengthening the rural economy through development of
agro-industries, small industries, village and cottage industries, etc.,
stimulating and strengthening local entrepreneurial base and developing
skill/expertise in the State of Orissa.
33\. Mr. Parija submitted that by notification S.R.O. No. 141/ 2000 dated
February 17, 2000 issued under Section 6 of the Orissa Sales Tax Act, the
State Government has allowed sales tax incentives to pipeline industries if
they satisfied the criteria mentioned therein. He submitted that the industry
of the petitioner was also a pipeline industry and satisfied the criteria
mentioned in the said notification and is entitled to sales tax exemption
under the said notification. He submitted that M/s. Hindustan Cocacola
Beverage Pvt. Ltd., which had set up its unit under IPR 1996 and had become
disentitled to sales tax exemption by the impugned notification dated July 30,
1999 like the petitioner has been granted the benefit of sales tax exemption
under IPR 1996 as a pipeline industry under the notification dated February
17, 2000 of the State Government and the petitioner is similarly entitled as a
pipeline industry to the benefit of sales tax exemption under the notification
dated February 17, 2000 and the court should issue a declaration accordingly.
Submissions of the learned Advocate-General and the learned Senior Standing
Counsel (Commercial Taxes) :
34\. Mr. Sovesh Roy, learned Advocate-General and Mr. Ashok Mohanty, learned
Senior Standing Counsel (Commercial Taxes), submitted that the facts stated in
the counter-affidavit on behalf of the State of Orissa by the Secretary to
Government, Finance Department, and the materials produced before the court
would show that the impugned notifications dated 30th July, 1999 were issued
because the State Government was passing through a grave financial imbalance
caused by mounting revenue and fiscal deficiencies and immediate measures had
to be taken to reduce the loss of revenue on account of sales tax incentives
and concessions granted under the IPRs and improve the revenue receipts from
sales tax. They pointed out that by the impugned notification S.R.O. No. 622
of 1999 dated 30th July, 1999 issued under Section 6 of the Orissa Sales Tax
Act exemptions granted under entries 26, 26-A, 26-D, 26-F, 26-FF, 30-FF,
30-FFF, 30-FFFF, 30-FFFFF, 30-FFFFFF, 35-1 and 35-J pursuant to the IPR 1980,
IPR 1986 and IPR 1989 were withdrawn and by the said notification S.R.O. No.
622 of 1999 dated 30th July, 1999 some more categories of industries were
added under items 48 to 52 in the list of industries which were ineligible to
get the concessions under the IPR 1980, IPR 1986, IPR 1989, IPR 1992 and IPR
1996. Mr. Roy and Mr. Mohanty further pointed out that by the impugned
Notification S.R.O. No. 623 of 1999 dated 30th July, 1999 the State Government
rescinded the notification of the Government of Orissa in the Finance
Department dated 16th August, 1990 as amended from time to time under which
exemption from sales tax and deferment of payment of sales tax on sale of
finished products to new, existing and continuing industrial units of IPR 1980
and IPR 1986 in the medium and large scale sectors had been granted pursuant
to IPR 1989. They pointed out that by the impugned notification S.R.O. No. 624
of 1999 dated 30th July, 1999 issued under Section 13(3) of the Central Sales
Tax Act read with Sections 7 and 9(2) (sic) of the Orissa Sales Tax Act the
State Government rescinded the Central Sales Tax (Deferment of Payment of
Taxes) Orissa Rules, 1990, as amended from time to time and by the impugned
Notification S.R.O. No. 625 of 1999 dated 30th July, 1999 issued under Section
8(5) of the Central Sales Tax Act the State Government rescinded the
notification dated 12th November, 1990 as amended from time to time under
which exemptions had been granted under Sub-section (5) of Section 8 of the
Central Sales Tax Act, 1956 on sale of finished products to various categories
of new, existing and continuing industrial units of IPR 1980 and IPR 1986 in
the small-scale sector. Mr. Roy and Mr. Mohanty submitted that the effect of
these four impugned notifications dated 30th July, 1999 was that the exemption
from tax and deferment of payment of tax granted pursuant to IPR 1980, IPR
1986 and IPR 1989 were withdrawn in the public interest, but the exemption
from tax and deferment of payment of tax pursuant to the IPR 1992 and IPR 1996
were continued. Both Mr. Roy and Mr. Mohanty vehemently argued that the facts
stated in the counter-affidavit filed on behalf of the State as well as the
impugned notification themselves would show that the said four impugned
notifications were issued because of supervening public interest. Mr. Roy and
Mr. Mohanty submitted that the Supreme Court has held that if a concession has
been granted by the Government in public interest, such a concession can also
be withdrawn for supervening public interest and estoppel cannot be pleaded
against supervening public interest. They cited the decisions of the Supreme
Court in Kasinka Trading v. Union of India AIR 1995 SC 874, Shrijee Sales
Corporation v. Union of India (1997) 3 SCC 398, Sales Tax Officer v. Shree
Durga Oil Mills [1998] 108 STC 274 ; AIR 1998 SC 591, State of Rajasthan v.
Mahaveer Oil Industries [1999] 115 STC 29 ; AIR 1999 SC 2302 and a decision of
a division Bench of this Court in Laxmi Udyog Rock Cement Pvt. Ltd. v. State
of Orissa AIR 2001 Orissa 51, in support of this submission.
35\. Mr. Ashok Mohanty, learned Senior Standing Counsel, further explained
that under the IPR 1980, IPR 1986 and IPR 1989 promises were made to grant
exemption from tax and deferment of payment of tax to new industries and
industries undertaking expansion/diversification/modernisation for a certain
period and such industries have already availed the said exemptions from
tax/deferment of payment of tax during the promised period. He submitted that
IPR 1980 came into effect on August 1, 1980 and came to an end on April 1,
1986, IPR 1986 came into effect on April 1, 1986 and came to an end on
December 1, 1989 and IPR 1989 came into effect on December 1, 1989 and was to
remain operative for a period of five years and thus came to an end on
November 30, 1994.
36\. Mr. Roy and Mr. Mohanty argued that Industrial Policy Resolutions of the
State Government by themselves cannot confer any right on the petitioners to
claim exemption from tax or deferment of payment of tax unless notifications
are issued under the Orissa Sales Tax Act and the Central Sales Tax Act and in
any case a provision in the Industrial Policy Resolution cannot override a
statutory notification under the said Acts and a notification cannot be struck
down as ultra vires the Industrial Policy Resolution.
37\. Mr. Sovesh Roy and Mr. Ashok Mohanty further submitted that paragraph 4
of the counter-affidavit filed on behalf of the State Government in the case
of Shree Jagannath Packers (O.J.C. No. 9967 of 1999) would show that while the
IPR 1992 and IPR 1996 envisaged incentives subject to financial ceiling linked
to total fixed capital investment, IPR 1989 envisaged exemption from
tax/deferment of payment of sales tax for 5 to 7 years without any financial
ceiling and this open ended facility of IPR 1989 resulted in a serious erosion
of the tax base and for this reason the exemption from tax and deferment of
payment of sales tax under IPR 1989 were withdrawn by the impugned
notifications dated 30th July, 1999, whereas those under IPR 1992 and IPR 1996
were continued. They further submitted that by the impugned notifications
dated 30th July, 1999 not a single industrial unit set up pursuant to the IPR
1980, IPR 1986 and IPR 1989 was allowed to avail the benefit of exemption from
tax or deferment of payment of tax and only the industrial units set up
pursuant to IPR 1992 and IPR 1996 were allowed to enjoy the sales tax benefits
granted under the said IPRs. There was therefore classification of the
categories of industrial units which were not allowed and which were allowed
the benefits of exemption from tax and deferment of payment of tax under the
impugned notifications dated 30th July, 1999 and such classification had
rational nexus sought to be achieved and the impugned notifications dated 30th
July, 1999 therefore cannot be held to be discriminatory and violative of
Article 14 of the Constitution. They cited a recent decision of the Supreme
Court in Union of India v. Indian Charge Chrome AIR 1999 SC 3504, in which it
has been held that where a notification was issued granting exemption from
customs duty to power projects generating electricity for distribution while
denying it to power plants generating electricity for captive consumption
only, the notification was based on a reasonable classification and cannot be
challenged as being violative of Article 14 of the Constitution.
38\. Mr. Roy and Mr. Mohanty next submitted that even though the impugned
notifications dated 30th July, 1999 were issued by the State Government in the
Finance Department pursuant to orders of the Chief Minister in anticipation of
approval by the Council of Ministers, the facts stated in the counter-
affidavit filed on behalf of the State Government would show that all the four
impugned notifications were subsequently ratified by the Council of Ministers
in a meeting held on April 22, 2000. They argued that on account of the
subsequent ratification by the Council of Ministers, the impugned four
notifications dated July 30, 1999 cannot be held to be null and void because
the defects, if any, at the time of the issue of the impugned notifications
stood cured by the said ratification of the impugned notifications by the
Council of Ministers on April 22, 2000.
39\. Mr. Roy and Mr. Mohanty submitted that Section 7 of the Orissa Sales Tax
Act, it is true, does not contain an express provision empowering the State
Government to withdraw an exemption from tax or deferment of payment of tax
granted thereunder, but Section 7 has to be read along with Section 22 of the
Orissa General Clauses Act, 1937 which provides that where by an Orissa Act a
power to issue a notification is conferred, then that power includes the power
exercised in the like manner and subject to like sanction and conditions to
rescind any such notification. Hence, under Section 7 of the Orissa Sales Tax
Act the State Government cannot only issue a notification granting exemption
from tax or deferment of payment of tax but can also rescind such notification
of exemption of tax and/or deferment of payment of tax. They also pointed out
that Section 25 of the Customs Act provides for the powers of the Central
Government to grant exemption from duty but does not expressly provide for
withdrawal of such exemption of duty and yet the Supreme Court has upheld the
power of the Central Government to withdraw exemptions under the said Section
25 of the Act in Kasinka Trading v. Union of India AIR 1995 SC 874.
40\. Mr. Ashok Mohanty, learned Senior Standing Counsel (Commercial Taxes),
explained that the counter-affidavit filed on behalf of the State Government
would further show that on account of the developments after the impugned
notifications were issued on 30th July, 1999, the State Government had to take
a decision to restrict such sales tax incentives only to industrial units
which were in receipt of such incentives immediately before 1st January, 2000
or which were in pipeline as on 1st January, 2000 and accordingly the State
Government issued Notifications S.R.O. No. 140 of 2000 and S.R.O No. 141 of
2000 dated 17th February, 2000. Mr. Mohanty explained that by the said
Notifications S.R.O. No. 140 of 2000 and S.R.O. No. 141 of 2000 dated 17th
February, 2000, the notifications S.R.O. No. 622 of 1999, 623 of 1999, 624 of
1999 and 625 of 1999 dated 30th July, 1999 have not been rescinded or
superseded and therefore the exemption from tax and deferment of payment of
tax which were withdrawn by the said notifications dated 30th July, 1999 have
not been restored to any industrial unit but all existing industrial units of
IPR 1992 and IPR 1996 which were in receipt of the incentives as on 1st
January, 2000 and new industrial units which were in pipeline as on 1st
January, 2000 if they satisfied the criteria mentioned therein were entitled
to the sales tax incentives mentioned in the said two notifications dated 17th
February, 2000.
Questions which arise for consideration and decisions thereon,
41\. The first question which arises for consideration in this batch of writ
petitions is whether the petitioners have enjoyed the sales tax incentives
during the promised period as contended on behalf of the State of Orissa or
whether the petitioners were unable to enjoy the sales incentives for the full
promised period because of the impugned notifications dated July 30, 1999.
42\. In O.J.C. No. 9967 of 1999, the case of the petitioner, Shree Jagannath
Packers, is that under IPR 1989 exemption from sales tax was to be allowed to
its new small-scale industrial unit on purchase of spare parts of machinery,
raw materials and packing materials and on sale of finished products for a
period of seven years from the date of commencement of commercial production.
The small-scale industrial unit set up by the petitioner commenced commercial
production on September 11, 1993 and therefore the promised period for
exemption from sales tax was up to September 11, 2000, but by the impugned
notifications dated July 30, 1999, the said exemption was withdrawn with
effect from 1st August, 1999.
43\. In O.J.C. No. 13017 of 1999, the case of the petitioner, Larsen & Toubro
Company Ltd., is that under IPR 1989 deferment of payment of tax under the
Orissa Sales Tax Act and the Central Sales Tax Act was allowed for a period of
seven years from the date of commercial production to new pioneer industries
set up in Zone "C" and the new pioneer industry of the petitioner was set up
in Zone "C" at Arda in Jharsuguda, which went into commercial production on
September 10, 1993. Hence the petitioner was entitled to deferment of payment
of tax for the promised period of seven years up to September 9, 2000, but the
said benefit of deferment of payment of tax was withdrawn with effect from
August 1, 1999 by the impugned notifications dated July 30, 1999.
44\. In O.J.C. No. 2718 of 2000, the case of the petitioner, IFGL Refractories
Limited, is that under IPR 1989 large scale industrial units were eligible for
deferment of payment of tax under the Orissa Sales Tax Act and the Central
Sales Tax Act for a period of seven years from the date of commercial
production. The large scale industrial unit of the petitioner set up pursuant
to the IPR 1989 went into commercial production on February 1, 1993 and thus
the promised period of seven years of such deferment of payment of tax was up
to January 31, 2000, but the said benefit of deferment of payment of tax was
withdrawn with effect from 1st August, 1999 by the impugned notifications
dated July 30, 1999.
45\. In O.J.C. No. 4297 of 2000, the case of the petitioner, Kali Oil Mills
(P) Ltd., is that under IPR 1989 new small-scale industries were entitled to
sales tax exemption on spare parts of machinery, raw materials and packing
materials and on sale of finished products with effect from the date of
commercial production. Pursuant to IPR 1989, the petitioner set up a small-
scale industrial unit which went into commercial production on April 1, 1994
and was entitled to such exemption for the promised period up to March 31,
2000, but by the impugned notifications dated July 30, 1999 the said exemption
from sales tax was withdrawn with effect from 1st August, 1999.
46\. In O.J.C. No. 6297 of 2000, the case of the petitioner, Noble Pharma Care
Limited, is that pursuant to IPR 1986 the petitioner set up a medium scale
industry which went into commercial production on May 9, 1998. Under IPR 1989
the aforesaid medium scale industry of the petitioner was entitled as a
continuing industrial unit of IPR 1986 to exemption of sales tax on sale of
finished products for a period of five years with effect from May 9, 1998.
Thus, the promised period of such exemption was up to April 8, 2003, but the
said exemption was withdrawn by the impugned notifications dated July 30, 1999
with effect from 1st August, 1999.
47\. In O.J.C. No. 962 of 2001, the case of the petitioner, Agarwala
Fabricators, is that under IPR 1989 small-scale industrial units undertaking
expansion/modernisation/diversification on the basis of exclusive project
report duly appraised by financial institutions were entitled to such
exemption on spare parts of machinery, raw materials and packing materials and
on sale of finished products for a period of seven years from the date of
commercial production. The petitioner undertook such
expansion/modernisation/diversification and started commercial production on
June 27, 1993 and was thus entitled to the exemption for the promised period
up to June 26, 2000, but the said exemption was withdrawn by the impugned
notifications dated July 30, 1999 with effect from 1st August, 1999.
48\. In O.J.C. No. 2761 of 2001, the case of the petitioner, Ponni Sugars and
Chemicals Ltd., is that under IPR 1989 new large scale industrial units were
to be allowed deferment of payment of tax collected on finished products for a
period of seven years in zones "B" and "C" and nine years in zone "A" from the
date of commercial production and in lieu thereof such industrial unit could
opt for exemption from sales tax on finished products for a period of five
years in zones "B" and "C" for a period of seven years in zone "A" from the
date of commercial production. Pursuant to the IPR 1989 the petitioner set up
a large scale unit in zone "A" in the district of Bolangir and commenced
commercial production on February 16, 1994 and opted for exemption from tax on
sale of its finished products and the promised period of seven years of such
exemption was up to January 15, 2001, but by the impugned notifications dated
July 30, 1999 the said exemption was withdrawn with effect from 1st August,
1999.
49\. In O.J.C. No. 5122 of 2001, the case of the petitioners, Mahanadi
Distilleries Pvt. Ltd. and another, is that under IPR 1996 effective from
March 1, 1996 various incentives including sales tax incentives were allowed
to new industries in the State of Orissa. The petitioners purchased the assets
of M/s. Suki Industries Pvt. Ltd. from the O.S.F.C. and invested further in
land and machinery and converted the said assets into a Bottling Unit of
I.M.F.L. which went into commercial production on November 24, 2000. The
petitioner No. 1 company applied to the General Manager, District Industries
Centre, Ganjam, Berhampur, for issuing sales tax exemption envisaged under IPR
1986, but on October 27, 2000 the General Manager, District Industries Center,
Ganjam, Berhampur, intimated the petitioner No. 1 company that it will not be
entitled to sales tax exemption in view of the impugned notifications dated
July 30, 1999 withdrawing the sales tax incentives with effect from 1st
August, 1999.
50\. Thus, in each of the cases of the petitioners as discussed above, before
the promised period of exemption from tax or deferment of payment of tax the
exemption from tax or deferment of payment of tax was withdrawn by the
impugned notifications dated July 30, 1999 with effect from 1st August, 1999.
The contention of Mr. Ashok Mohanty, learned Senior Standing Counsel
(Commercial Taxes) that the petitioners have enjoyed the exemption during the
promised period under the Industrial Policy Resolutions is therefore not
correct.
51\. The second question which arises for consideration is whether the State
Government could withdraw the exemption of tax or deferment of payment of tax
before the promised period under the Industrial Policy Resolutions by the
impugned notifications dated July 30, 1999 with effect from 1st August, 1999.
In Motilal Padampat Sugar Mills Co. Ltd. v. State of Uttar Pradesh [1979] 44
STC 42 ; AIR 1979 SC 621, the Supreme Court held that the Government cannot
claim to be immune to the applicability of the principle of promissory
estoppel and if the Government makes a promise and the promisee acts in
reliance upon it and alters its position, there is no reason why the
Government should not be compelled to make good such promise like any other
private individual. But in the said decision the Supreme Court also observed
that since the doctrine of promissory estoppel is an equitable doctrine, it
must yield when the equity so requires and if it can be shown by the
Government that having regard to the facts as they have subsequently
transpired, it would be inequitable to hold the Government to the promise made
by it, the court would not raise an equity in favour of the promisee and
enforce the promise against the Government. The Supreme Court further
clarified that where the Government claims that on account of change of policy
due to facts which have transpired since the making of the promise, public
interest would be prejudiced if the Government were required to carry out the
promise, the Government would have to show what precisely the changed policy
is and also its reason and justification so that the court can judge for
itself which way the public interest lies and what the equity of the case
demands. The relevant portion of the said judgment of the Supreme Court on
which the counsel for the petitioners have placed great reliance is quoted
herein below :
"Mere claim of change of policy would not be sufficient to exonerate the
Government from the liability ; the Government would have to show what
precisely is the changed policy and also its reason and justification so that
the court can judge for itself which way the public interest lies and what the
equity of the case demands. It is only if the court is satisfied, on proper
and adequate material placed by the Government, that overriding public
interest requires that the Government should not be held bound by the promise
but should be free to act unfettered by it, that the court would refuse to
enforce the promise against the Government...."
The crux of the law laid down by the Supreme Court in the aforesaid case is
that the court should compel the Government to make good its promise to its
subjects on grounds of equity or morality, but where the court is satisfied on
materials placed before it that due to change in circumstances overriding
public interest demands that the promise should not be enforced against the
Government, the court will not enforce such promise against the Government on
grounds of superior equity or morality.
52\. The aforesaid law as laid down by the Supreme Court in the case of
Motilal Padampat Sugar Mills Co. Ltd. [1979] 44 STC 42 ; AIR 1979 SC 621 was
applied by the Supreme Court in Kasinka Trading v. Union of India AIR 1995 SC
874 wherein the action of the Union of India in withdrawing a time-bound
exemption from customs duty on import of PVC resins was challenged. The
Supreme Court found that PVC resins were manufactured in India and also
imported from abroad and with a view to equalising sale price of the
indigenous and imported material and to make the commodity available to the
consumers at a uniform price and keeping in view the trends in supply of
materials, the Central Government had exempted import of PVC resins from
customs duty by the Notification No. 66 dated March 15, 1979 under Section
25(1) of the Customs Act, 1962 and the said notification of exemption was to
remain in force up to March 31, 1981, but subsequently when it was found that
the international prices of products were falling and consequently the import
prices had become lower than the ex-factory prices of the indigenous
materials, the matter was examined again by the Central Government and it was
decided in the public interest to withdraw the exemption by Notification No.
205 dated October 16, 1980 issued under Section 25 of the Customs Act, 1962.
The case of the appellants before the Supreme Court was that they had acted on
the promise held out in the said notification that it will remain in force up
to March 31, 1981, but the Supreme Court held that the Union of India had
disclosed the circumstances under which the exemption was initially granted as
well as the change of circumstances which warranted the withdrawal of the
exemption notification and the reasons given by the Union of India justifying
the withdrawal of exemption notification were not irrelevant to the exercise
of power in public interest nor were insufficient to support the exercise of
that power and the appellants cannot invoke the doctrine of promissory
estoppel to question the withdrawal notification issued under Section 25 of
the Customs Act, 1962.
53\. The aforesaid decisions of the Supreme Court in the cases of Motilal
Padampat Sugar Mills Co. Ltd. [1979] 44 STC 42 (SC) ; AIR 1979 SC 621 and
Kasinka Trading AIR 1995 SC 874 were followed in Shrijee Sales Corporation v.
Union of India (1997) 3 SCC 398 wherein the very same Notification No. 205
dated October 16, 1980 withdrawing the exemption from customs duty on import
of PVC resins was challenged on the ground that on the faith of the solemn
assurance given in the exemption Notification No. 66 dated March 15, 1979 that
no duty of customs is leviable on the import of the PVC resins up to March 31,
1981, the appellant had entered into arrangements for import of PVC resins as
actual user with U.P. Export Corporation Company and opened Letters of Credit
against the foreign suppliers and goods had also arrived at Bombay Port on
November 18, 1980. The Supreme Court held that the facts of the economic
situation explained in the judgment in Kasinka Trading AIR 1995 SC 874 have
not been controverted nor is it alleged by the appellant that public interest
did not call for supersession of the exemption Notification No. 66. The
Supreme Court further observed :
"...Once public interest is accepted as the superior equity which can override
individual equity, the principle should be applicable even in cases where a
period has been indicated...."
54\. In Pawan Alloys and Casting Pvt. Ltd. v. U.P. State Electricity Board
(1997) 7 SCC 251, by notifications dated October 24, 1982, July 13, 1984 and
January 21, 1986, the U.P. State Electricity Board in exercise of its powers
under Section 49 of the Electricity Supply Act had promised to new industrial
units seeking to establish industries in different parts of U.P. that on
charges of electricity consumed by them, they will be given 10 per cent rebate
for a period of three years from the date of commencement of the supply of
electricity to them for the first time, but the Board had prematurely
withdrawn the said rebate of 10 per cent by a subsequent notification dated
July 31, 1986 and the appellant Pawan Alloys & Casting Pvt. Ltd., challenged
the said premature withdrawal of the said 10 per cent rebate on, inter alia,
the ground that the withdrawal was contrary to the principles of promissory
estoppel. The Supreme Court after discussing the law laid down in its earlier
decisions in Motilal Padampat Sugar Mills Co. Ltd. [1979] 44 STC 42 ; AIR 1979
SC 621, Kasinka Trading AIR 1995 SC 874 and Shrijee Sales Corporation (1997) 3
SCC 398 held :
"It is, therefore, obvious that even though it may be found that the
Government or any other competent authority had held out any promise on the
basis of which the promisee might have acted, if public interest required
recall of such a promise and such a public interest outweighed the interest of
the promisee then the doctrine of promissory estoppel against the Government
would lose its rigour and cannot be of any avail to such promisee...."
In the facts of the case of Pawan Alloys and Casting Pvt. Ltd. v. U.P. State
Electricity Board, however, the Supreme Court held in para 32 at page 278 of
the judgment reported in (1997) 7 SCC 251 that it was not the case of the
respondent Board that it has sought to withdraw the development incentive
rebate made available earlier to new industrial units on the ground of public
interest as nowhere it was even whispered that the Board had to withdraw this
development incentive rebate midstream on account of some overriding public
interest.
55\. In Sales Tax Officer v. Shree Durga Oil Mills [1998] 108 STC 274 (SC) ;
AIR 1998 SC 591, the law laid down by the Supreme Court in Kasinka Trading
(1995) 1 SCC 274 and Shrijee Sales Corporation (1997) 3 SCC 398 was applied to
a case of withdrawal of exemption of sales tax under the Orissa Sales Tax Act.
Under the Industrial Policy Resolution dated July 18, 1979 promulgated by the
Industries Department of Government of Orissa, sales tax was not payable by a
new industry on purchase of raw materials for a certain period. The respondent
therein M/s. Shree Durga Oil Mills set up an industry in terms of the said
Industrial Policy Resolution and was allowed exemption from sales tax on
purchase of raw materials under the earlier exemption notifications issued on
November 11, 1969 and April 23, 1976 under Section 6 of the Orissa Sales Tax
Act, but by a notification dated September 25, 1977 the said two earlier
notifications were abrogated. The State Government again restored the earlier
two notifications by notification dated September 9, 1977 but the exemption
was limited to the industries which had started production prior to April 1,
1976. Since the industry of the respondent commenced production only on March
19, 1980 it was not eligible for the exemption under the notification dated
September 9, 1977. The petitioner challenged the said notification dated
September 9, 1977 before this Court in a writ petition and this Court allowed
the writ petition on the ground that in the Industrial Policy Resolution a
clear and unequitable promise had been made on the basis of which the
respondent set up its industry and there was no way for the State Government
to back out from such promise made in the IPR after the respondent had
actually set up its industry pursuant to the IPR which was effective for the
period from 1977 to 1983. The Supreme Court discussed its earlier views in
Kasinka Trading (1995) 1 SCC 274 and Shrijee Sales Corporation (1997) 3 SCC
398 in para 22 of the judgment as reported in Sales Tax Officer v. Shree Durga
Oil Mills [1998] 108 STC 274 (SC) ; AIR 1998 SC 591 which is quoted herein
below :
"The view taken by this Court in Kasinka's case (1995) 1 SCC 274 was
reiterated by a Bench of three-Judge in the case of Shrijee Sales Corporation
v. Union of India (1977) 3 SCC 398. It was laid down in that case that the
determination of applicability of promissory estoppel against the Government
hinges upon balance of equity or public interest. In case there is a
supervening public equity, the Government would be allowed to change its stand
; it would then be able to withdraw from the representation made by it which
induced persons to take certain steps which may have gone adverse to the
interest of such persons on account of such withdrawal. Once public interest
was accepted as the superior equity which can override individual equity, the
aforesaid principle should be applicable even in cases where a period had been
indicated for operation of the promise.
After discussing the aforesaid law that a promise could be withdrawn by the
Government by change of policy for overriding public interest, the Supreme
Court held that the plea of change of policy on the basis of resource crunch
of the State Government should have been sufficient for dismissing the
respondent's case based on the doctrine of promissory estoppel.
56\. The aforesaid law laid down by the Supreme Court in Kasinka Trading
(1995) 1 SCC 274 and Shrijee Sales Corporation (1997) 3 SCC 398 was again
applied by the Supreme Court in State of Rajasthan v. Mahaveer Oil Industries
[1999] 115 STC 29 to withdrawal of exemptions from tax given under a sales tax
incentives scheme for new industries. By two notifications dated 23rd May,
1987 issued under Section 4(2) of the Rajasthan Sales Tax Act, 1954, and under
Section 8(5) of the Central Sales Tax Act, the State Government of Rajasthan
notified a sales tax incentives scheme under which new industrial units were
exempted from Rajasthan sales tax and Central sales tax respectively on sale
of goods in the State of Rajasthan and on inter-State sale of goods
manufactured by them in the State of Rajasthan during the period from 5th
March, 1987 to 31st March, 1992. After the said notifications, the respondent
M/s. Mahaveer Oil Industries set up an industry for oil extraction and oil
manufacturing in the State of Rajasthan. Thereafter, two notifications dated
7th May, 1990 were issued under the Rajasthan Sales Tax Act and the Central
Sales Tax Act amending the aforesaid two notifications dated 23rd May, 1987
and as a result of the said amendments, the benefit of the sales tax
incentives scheme were withdrawn from oil extracting and manufacturing
industries. Subsequently, however, a notification dated July 26, 1991 was
issued restoring the benefit of exemption of Central sales tax to oil
industries and oil manufacturing industries to the extent indicated therein.
The result was that new industrial units established after 1990 and before
July 26, 1991 alone were not entitled to the benefit of incentive scheme under
the Central Sales Tax Act in respect of inter-State sale of their goods. The
respondents M/s. Mahaveer Oil Industries which commenced production on 17th
February, 1991, contended that by framing the sales tax incentives scheme the
State of Rajasthan had held out a promise that the benefits of the scheme
would be available to all new industries set up during the period March 5,
1987 to March 31, 1992 and relying upon this promise the respondents had taken
all effective steps to set up the new industrial unit within that period and
hence the doctrine of promissory estoppel would be attracted and it will not
be open to the State of Rajasthan to withdraw the benefit of the scheme during
the subsistence of the said scheme by the notification dated May 7, 1990. The
Supreme Court negatived the contention thus :
"14. Are the respondents justified in holding the State to the promise made by
it in the form of an incentive scheme which is made available for a specified
period of time, when new industries are set up on the basis of that scheme
relying on the promise of benefits held out by it ? Public interest requires
that the State be held bound by the promise held out by it in such a
situation. But this does not preclude the State from withdrawing the benefit
prospectively even during the period of the scheme, if public interest so
requires. Even in a case where a party has acted on the promise, if there is
any supervening public interest which requires that the benefit be withdrawn
or the scheme be modified, that supervening public interest would prevail over
any promissory estoppel."
Applying the aforesaid law to the facts of that case, the Supreme Court found
from the affidavit filed by the State Government in the connected Civil Appeal
No. 5738 of 1994 in State of Rajasthan and Anr. v. Gopal Oil Mills and Anr.
reported in [1998] 115 STC 25 (SC) that the sales tax incentive scheme had
adversely affected existing industrial units in the State because tax
liability of new industries was much less than the tax liability of old ones
and the old units had gradually started closing down while new units started
coming up and the closure of old units and their replacement by new units
resulted in blockage of capital and funds invested in old units and on these
facts the Supreme Court held that withdrawal of the benefits of the incentive
scheme in respect of oil industries was in the public interest and the
notification dated May 7, 1990 was issued on account of supervening public
interest.
57\. The law laid down in Kasinka Trading (1995) 1 SCC 274 and Shrijee Sales
Corporation (1997) 3 SCC 398 was again taken note of by the Supreme Court in
Dai-Ichi Karkaria Ltd. v. Union of India (2000) 119 ELT 516 (SC). The
discussion is para 6 at page 62 of the judgment as reported in (2000) 4 SCC 57
; para 7, page 519 of (2000) 119 ELT 516 (SC) runs thus :
"The law on the matter is now well-settled that even in respect of exemptions
that may have been made by the Government the doctrine of promissory estoppel
will not be applicable if the change in the stand of the Government is made on
account of public policy. This position has been explained in detail by this
Court in Kasinka Trading (1995) 1 SCC 274 and reiterated in Shrijee Sales
Corporation v. Union of India (1997) 3 SCC 398. In both these cases this Court
is concerned with notifications issued under Section 25 of the Customs Act. In
Kasinka Trading case (1995) 1 SCC 274 it is stated that the exemptions granted
under Section 25(1) of the Customs Act in public interest is designed to
offset the excess price which the local entrepreneurs were required to pay for
importing PVC resin at a time when the difference between the indigenous
product and the imported product was substantial and at a time when the
notification was withdrawn by the Government there was no scope for any loss
to be suffered by the importers and, therefore, the change of policy was
permissible. This decision is the same as in Shrijee Sales Corporation (1997)
3 SCC 398 wherein it was noticed that once public interest is accepted as the
superior equity which can override individual equity, the principle would be
applicable even in cases where a period has been indicated for which period
the notification would remain in force and the Government is competent to
resile from a promise...."
In the said case of Dai-Ichi Karkaria Ltd. (2000) 4 SCC 57 ; (2000) 119 ELT
516 (SC), by Notification No. 210 of 1982 dated September 10, 1982 issued
under Section 25(1) of the Customs Act, the Government of India exempted raw
materials and components for manufacture of goods to be supplied to some
organisations from payment of customs duty and additional duty of customs. By
subsequent notifications the benefit of the said exemption Notification No.
210 of 1982 was extended to import of raw materials and components required
for manufacture and supply of products to Oil & Natural Gas Commission (ONGC),
Oil India Limited (OIL) and Gas Authority of India Limited (GAIL). The said
exemption was to remain in force till September 30, 1987, but by Notification
No. 517 of 1986 dated December 30, 1986, the exemption Notification No. 210 of
1982 dated September 10, 1982 was amended so as to withdraw the said exemption
on import of raw materials and components required for manufacture and supply
of products to ONGC, OIL or GAIL. As a result, the appellant who was a
manufacturer and supplier of goods to ONGC became liable to pay duty to the
extent of 25 per cent for the period between December 30, 1986 and September
10, 1987 and the appellant contended that public interest did not demand the
variation during the period the exemption under Notification No. 210 of 1982
was in force. In the counter-affidavit filed by the Union of India it was
stated that it was believed that the imposition of a nil rate of duty on
import of raw materials and components required for manufacture and supply of
products to ONGC, OIL and GAIL would lead to misuse, specially by the private
contractors who have other interests, in addition to the supplies to the oil
sector. The Supreme Court held that the circumstances relating to public
interest disclosed in the counter-affidavit of the Union of India cannot stand
close scrutiny because the appellant could not misutilise the exemption
inasmuch as the appellant was obliged only to import goods for the purpose of
supplying them to ONGC and the licence issued under the policy to the
appellant reflected export obligation imposed on the appellant and the
finished product Diatrolite manufactured from raw materials imported under
licence is highly specialised product and could be sold only to ONGC, OIL and
others. The Supreme Court held that the factors taken into consideration by
the Government appear to be wholly irrelevant and did not subserve public
interest.
58\. Keeping in mind the aforesaid law as laid down by the Supreme Court, we
may now examine the circumstances leading to the change of policy and the
consequent withdrawal by the State Government of the exemption from tax and
deferment of payment of sales tax before the expiry of the promised period as
pleaded in these cases by the State of Orissa. In the counter-affidavit filed
on behalf of the State of Orissa, it is stated that the fiscal position of the
State Government deteriorated because of the increasing gap between the
revenue receipts and the revenue expenditure and in 1998-1999 the revenue
deficit rose to an alarming level of Rs. 2,625 crores and due to such huge
fiscal deficit the State Government account was overdrawn and the Government
of India in the Ministry of Finance agreed to provide the required finance to
the State Government, inter alia, on the condition that the State Government
withdraws the fiscal incentives to industries and adopts resource mobilization
measures. Accordingly, an M.O.U. was signed on 9th April, 1994 on behalf of
the State Government and the Government of India and in accordance with the
M.O.U. the State Government made a detailed review of the tax related
incentives granted to the industrial units in the State. The State Government
set up a High Level Task Force which unanimously recommended withdrawal of
sales tax incentives under all IPRs up to IPR 1989 and for enlarging the list
of ineligible industries under IPR 1996 keeping in view the ineligible list of
the IPR 1999. A white paper on the State Finance was also laid in the Orissa
Legislative Assembly in July, 1999 which depicted the deteriorating finance of
the State and suggested corrective measures including review of all tax
concessions/deferral/exemptions under different IPRs and their abolitions, if
necessary. Thereafter, a Cabinet Memorandum on sales tax withdrawal was
prepared and vetted by the Finance Department on July 5, 1999 for being placed
before the Council of Ministers and in anticipation of approval of the
Cabinet, the Chief Minister approved the withdrawal of sales tax concession on
July 27, 1999 and on July 30, 1999 the impugned notifications S.R.O. Nos. 622
of 1999, 623 of 1999, 624 of 1999 and 625 of 1999 were issued withdrawing the
sales tax incentives in the public interest. The aforesaid circumstances
leading to the withdrawal of the sales tax incentives and concessions by the
impugned notifications dated July 30, 1999 are the supervening circumstances
which have arisen after the State Government issued the IPRs 1980, 1986, 1989,
1992 and 1996 and for these supervening circumstances, the State Government
had to issue the said impugned notifications withdrawing the sales tax
benefits and concessions before the expiry of the period during which the said
concessions and incentives were promised to the concerned industries.
59\. The argument of the learned counsel for the petitioners, however, is that
exemption from tax or deferment of payment of sales tax were granted under the
IPRs for the growth of industries in the State of Orissa and for generating
employment in the State and the court should not accept the plea of change of
policy due to revenue deficit as a plea of overriding public interest. But as
we have indicated above, in the case of Shree Durga Oil Mills [1998] 108 STC
274, the Supreme Court has held that a plea of change of policy on the basis
of resource-crunch is sufficient for dismissing a case based on doctrine of
promissory estoppel as public interest in such case demanded modification of
the IPR. In the language of the Supreme Court in the said case of Shree Durga
Oil Mills [1998] 108 STC 274 :
"17. Moreover, it is well-settled that any IPR can be changed if there is an
overriding public interest involved. It has been stated on affidavit by the
State of Orissa that after a package of incentives was given to the
industries, the Government was faced with a severe resource-crunch. On a
review of its financial position, it was felt that for the sake of the economy
of the State, it was necessary to limit the scope of exemption granted to
various industries. Accordingly, further notifications were issued under
Section 6 of the Orissa Sales Tax Act, 1947 from time to time. Because of this
new perception of the economic scenario, the scope of the earlier
notifications was restricted by subsequent notifications issued under Section
6. This also led to issuance of the Second IPR dated July 31, 1980.
24\. In our opinion, the plea of change of trade policy on the basis of
resource crunch should have been sufficient for dismissing the respondent's
case based on the doctrine of promissory estoppel. Public interest demanded
modification of the earlier IPR."
It will be clear from the aforesaid judgment of the Supreme Court that severe
resource-crunch and review of financial position warranting limitations on the
scope of sales tax incentives to various industries can constitute overriding
public interest justifying withdrawal of such sales tax incentives before the
expiry of the period for which they were promised. Moreover, by the impugned
notifications dated July 30, 1999 though the sales tax incentives granted
under IPRs 1980, 1986 and 1989 were withdrawn, the sales tax incentives
granted to new industries under IPRs 1992 and 1996 continued and a few more
industries were added to the list of ineligible industrial units in the State.
Thus, the State Government continued the policy of encouraging industries in
the State of Orissa but discontinued the sales tax incentives for industries
which were set up pursuant to IPRs 1980, 1986, 1989 on the ground that such
withdrawal was necessary to improve the financial position of the State
Government. We are thus of the view that since the impugned notifications
dated July 30, 1999 withdrawing the sales tax incentives with effect from
August 1, 1999 were issued due to supervening and overriding public interest,
the court cannot compel the State Government to continue the said sales tax
incentives for the period for which they were promised under the IPRs 1980,
1986 and 1989 on the principle of promissory estoppel.
60\. The third question which arises for consideration is whether the State
Government was obliged to give notice to persons likely to be affected by the
impugned notifications dated 30th July, 1999 withdrawing the exemptions from
sales tax or deferment of payment of sales tax before issuing the impugned
notifications. In National Buildings Construction Corporation v. S.
Raghunathan (1998) 6 JT 21 (SC) cited by Mr. Yasobant Das, learned counsel for
the petitioner in O.J.C. No. 9967 of 1999, the Supreme Court held that claims
based on legitimate expectation are similar to claims based on promissory
estoppel and referred to Lord Diplock's judgment in Council of Civil Services
Union v. Minister for the Civil Services 1985 AC 374 on the doctrine of
legitimate expectation which, inter alia, requires that before withdrawing a
benefit which a person had been enjoying, the decision-maker must give such
person an opportunity to comment, or advance reasons as to why the benefit
should not be withdrawn. But in Union of India v. Hindustan Development
Corporation AIR 1994 SC 988, the Supreme Court after examining the decisions
of the English and the Indian Courts on legitimate expectation held that
legitimate expectation cannot be enforced where overriding public interest
requires otherwise. In the language of the Supreme Court :
"On examination of some of these important decisions it is generally agreed
that legitimate expectation gives the applicant sufficient locus standi for
judicial review and that the doctrine of legitimate expectation is to be
confined mostly to right of a fair hearing before a decision which results in
negativing a promise or withdrawing an undertaking is taken. The doctrine does
not give scope to claim relief straightaway from the administrative
authorities as no crystallized right as such is involved. The protection of
such legitimate expectation does not require the fulfilment of the expectation
where an overriding public interest requires otherwise. In other words where a
person's legitimate expectation is not fulfilled by taking a particular
decision then decision-maker should justify the denial of such expectation by
showing some overriding public interest...."
Similarly in the case of Motilal Padampat Sugar Mills Co. Ltd. [1979] 44 STC
42 ; AIR 1979 SC 621, the Supreme Court relying on the English decision in
Ajayi v. Driscoe [1964] 3 All ER 556, held that where there is no overriding
public interest for resiling from a promise, it may still be competent to
Government to resile from the promise on giving reasonable notice. This would
imply that where there is overriding public interest, the promise can be
withdrawn without notice to the persons likely to be affected by such
withdrawal. Accordingly, in the case of Shrijee Sales Corporation (1997) 3 SCC
398, the Supreme Court held that since there was supervening public interest,
it would not be mandatory for the Government to give notice for withdrawing
the exemption. In the facts of the present case, since we have found that due
to supervening and overriding public interest the impugned notifications dated
July 30, 1999 were issued withdrawing the sales tax incentives and
concessions, the Government was not required to issue notice to the
petitioners who were likely to be affected by such withdrawal.
61\. The next question which arises for consideration is whether the impugned
notifications dated July 30, 1999 are bad being contrary to IPRs 1980, 1986
and 1989. The learned counsel for the petitioners placed great reliance on the
decision of the Supreme Court in the case of State of Bihar v. Suprabhat Steel
Ltd. [1999] 112 STC 258 ; (1998) 8 JT 2 (SC) wherein it was held that a
notification issued in exercise of powers under Section 7 of the Bihar Finance
Act cannot authorise the State Government to negate the incentives and the
benefits which an industrial unit would otherwise be entitled to under the
Industrial Policy Resolution of the State Government and to the extent such
notification is found repugnant to the Industrial Policy Resolution declared
by the Government, such notification must be held to be bad. The reason for
the said decision of the Supreme Court as indicated in para 7 at page 7 of the
judgment as reported in (1998) 8 JT 2 (SC) (para 7, page 273 of [1999] 112 STC
258) is quoted hereinbelow :
"...The Industrial Incentive Policy is issued by the State Government after
such policy is approved by the Cabinet itself. The issuance of the
notification under Section 7 of the Bihar Finance Act is by the State
Government in the Finance Department which notification is issued to carry out
the objectives and the policy decisions taken in the industrial policy itself.
In this view of the matter, any notification issued by the Government Order in
exercise of power under Section 7 of the Bihar Finance Act, if is found to be
repugnant to the Industrial Policy declared in a Government Resolution, then
the said notification must be held to be bad to that extent...."
Thus, the reason given in the aforesaid judgment of the Supreme Court in the
case of State of Bihar v. Suprabhat Steel Ltd. [1999] 112 STC 258 ; (1998) 8
JT 2 (SC) is that the Industrial Policy Resolution is issued by the State
Government after the Policy Resolution is approved by the Cabinet itself
whereas the notification under Section 7 of the Bihar Finance Act is issued by
the State Government in the Finance Department to carry out the objectives and
the policy decisions taken in the Industrial Policy Resolution itself and
therefore such notification cannot be repugnant to the Industrial Policy
Resolution of the State Government. But in the facts of the present case we
find that the impugned notifications dated July 30, 1999 were issued by the
State Government in the Finance Department withdrawing the sales tax
incentives under the IPRs 1980, 1986 and 1989, but the said notifications were
subsequently ratified by the Cabinet of the State Government in its meeting
held on April 22, 2000. The legal effect of "ratification" is stated in
Black's Law Dictionary, Seventh Edition, page 1268 as thus :
"ratification, n. 1. Confirmation and acceptance of a previous act, thereby
making the act valid from the moment it was done...."
With the ratification by the State Cabinet on April 22, 2000, the impugned
notification dated July 30, 1999 would be treated as having been validly made
with the approval of the State Cabinet and the reason given in the judgment of
the Supreme Court in the case of State of Bihar v. Suprabhat Steel Ltd. [1999]
112 STC 258 ; (1998) 8 JT 2 (SC) for holding the notification issued under
Section 7 of the Bihar Finance Act as bad in law is not available in the facts
of the present case.
62\. This takes us to the next question as to whether the impugned
notifications dated July 30, 1999 were still-born or were dead and therefore
could not be revived by subsequent ratification by the Cabinet in its meeting
held on April 22, 2000. The discussion on law that is still-born and cannot be
revived, in H.M. Seervai's "Constitutional Law of India", Third Edition at
page 249 paragraph 8.18 is extracted hereunder :
"(1) There is a distinction between a law unconstitutional for lack of
legislative power and a law unconstitutional because violative of provisions
of the Constitution other than those which relate to the distribution of
legislative power.
(2) A law which is unconstitutional for lack of legislative competence is void
ab initio : a law which is unconstitutional for violation of constitutional
limitations is unenforceable as long as it continues to violate constitutional
limitations. Such a law, whether pre-Constitution or post-Constitution, is not
wholly void if it violates fundamental rights ; it is merely eclipsed by the
fundamental right and remains, as it were, in a moribund condition as long as
the shadow of fundamental rights falls upon it. When that shadow is removed
the law begins to operate proprio vigore from the date of such removal unless
it is retrospective.
(3) A law void for lack of legislative competence is not revived if
legislative power is subsequently given to the Legislature which enacted it ;
a law partly void because of violation of constitutional limitations operates
proprio vigore when the limitations are removed."
The aforesaid discussion on the law on the subject would show that where a law
is made by a Legislature which lacked the legislative competence to make the
law, such a law is still-born and cannot be revived by subsequently vesting in
the Legislature the power to make the said law and after vesting of such power
on the Legislature the law has to be re-enacted. Applying this law to
notifications issued under an Act, if under the Act, as it was in force at the
time when the notification was issued, the authority issuing notification
lacked the power to issue the notification, such a notification would be void
ab initio and still-born and cannot be revived by conferring on such authority
subsequently such power to issue the notification by a subsequent amendment
and after such amendment conferring the power the notification has to be re-
issued. The State Government had the power under the Orissa Sales Tax Act and
the Central Sales Tax Act to issue the impugned notifications dated July 30,
1999. The said notifications, however, were not issued with the prior approval
of the State Cabinet but with the orders of the Chief Minister in anticipation
of the approval of the State Cabinet and though in their meeting held on
October 14, 1999 the Council of Ministers did not approve the impugned
notifications, in the meeting held on April 22, 2000 the State Cabinet
ratified the impugned notifications dated July 30, 1999, and as has been
explained in Black's Law Dictionary, Seventh Edition, quoted above, such
ratification had the effect of making the notifications valid from the moment
the notifications were issued. The impugned notifications dated July 30, 1999
therefore cannot be held to be still-born and dead.
63\. We may now consider the question whether the impugned notifications dated
July 30, 1999 issued by the Finance Department cannot override such Industrial
Policy Resolutions made in exercise of the executive power under Article 162
of the Constitution. We will consider this question along with the connected
question raised by the learned counsel for the petitioners that under the
scheme of our Constitution bureaucrats in the Finance Department cannot be
allowed to override the decision of the Council of Ministers. Article 161 of
the Constitution provides that subject to the provisions of the Constitution,
the executive power of a State shall extend to matters with respect to which
the Legislature of the State has power to make laws. Article 154(1) of the
Constitution provides that the executive power of the State shall be vested in
the Governor and shall be exercised by him either directly or through officers
subordinate to him in accordance with the Constitution. Article 154(2) further
provides that nothing in Article 154(1) of the Constitution shall be deemed to
transfer to the Governor any function conferred by any existing law or by any
other authority or prevent the Parliament or the Legislature of the State from
conferring by law functions of any authority subordinate to the Governor.
Article 163 of the Constitution further provides that there shall be a Council
of Ministers with the Chief Minister as the head to aid and advance the
Governor in the exercise of his functions, except in so far as he is by or
under the Constitution required to exercise the functions or any of them in
his discretion. Article 166(3) of the Constitution provides that the Governor
shall make rules for the more convenient transaction of the business of the
Government of the State and for the allocation among Ministers of the said
business. Hence, the executive power of the State has to be exercised by the
Governor with the aid and advice of the Council of Ministers with the Chief
Minister as its head in accordance with the Rules of Business made under
Article 166(3) of the Constitution and may also be exercised by any authority
or officer subordinate to the Governor if any existing law or law made by the
Parliament or the Legislature of a State confers such power on the authority
or the officer. In the facts of the present case, even though the Industrial
Policy Resolutions were adopted by the State of Orissa in exercise of the
executive power under Article 161 of the Constitution presumably with the
approval of the State Cabinet, the impugned notifications dated July 30, 1999
were issued by the authorities under the provisions of the Orissa Sales Tax
Act and the Central Sales Tax Act made by the State Legislature and by the
Parliament respectively. The impugned notifications have the approval of the
Chief Minister and the Cabinet which is a committee of the Council of
Ministers constituted under the Rules of Business made by the Governor under
Article 166(3) of the Constitution. We cannot therefore hold that the impugned
notifications have been issued in a manner contrary to the provisions of the
Constitution.
64\. The next question to be decided relates to the scope of the power of the
State Government under Sections 6 and 7 of the Orissa Sales Tax Act. The said
Sections 6 and 7 of the Orissa Sales Tax Act are quoted hereinbelow :
"6. Tax-free goods.--The State Government may, by notification, subject to
such conditions and exceptions, if any, exempt from tax the sale or purchase
of any goods, or class of goods and likewise withdraw any such exemption.
7\. Powers of the State Government to exempt dealers from tax and to defer
payment of tax.--Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, in this Act, the
State Government may subject to such restrictions and conditions including
conditions as to registration and registration fees, by notification, exempt
in whole or in part, any class of dealers from the payment of tax or allow any
class of dealers to defer payment of tax."
The contention of the learned counsel for the petitioners is that while under
Section 6 the State Government may exempt from tax the sale or purchase of any
goods or class of goods and also withdraw such exemption, under Section 7 of
the Act the State Government can exempt in whole or in part any class of
dealers from the payment of tax or allow any class of dealers to defer payment
of tax, but the State Government cannot withdraw such exemption or deferment
of payment of tax once granted. The decision of the Supreme Court in Gopi
Chand v. Delhi Administration AIR 1959 SC 609 has been cited by the learned
counsel for the petitioners for the proposition that the power to cancel a
notification issued under the Act has to be exercised within the limits
prescribed by the provision conferring the power to issue the notification.
The provisions of the Orissa Sales Tax Act have to be read along with the
provisions of the Orissa General Clauses Act, 1937. Section 22 of the Orissa
General Clauses Act, 1937 contains the following provision relating to
interpretation of an Orissa Act :
"22. Power to make to include power to add to, amend, vary or rescind orders,
rules or by-laws.--Where, by any Orissa Act, a power to make or issue
notifications, orders, schemes, rules, by-laws or forms, is conferred, then
that power includes a power exercisable in the like manner and subject to the
like sanction and conditions (if any) to add to, amend, vary or rescind any
notifications, orders, schemes, rules, by-laws or forms so made or issued."
It would be clear from the aforesaid provisions in Section 22 of the Orissa
General Clauses Act, 1937 that where, by an Orissa Act, a power to make or
issue notification is conferred then that power includes a power exercisable
in the like manner and subject to the like sanction and conditions (if any),
to rescind a notification so made or issued. Reading this provision along with
Section 7 of the Orissa Sales Tax Act, the court will have to hold that the
State Government can rescind a notification exempting in whole or in part any
class of dealers from payment of tax or allowing any class of dealers to defer
payment of tax issued under Section 7 of the Act even if Section 7 does not
expressly empower the State Government to rescind a notification of exemption
of tax or deferment of payment of tax issued thereunder. It is in exercise of
this power under Section 7 of the Orissa Sales Tax Act, read with Section 22
of the Orissa General Clauses Act that the State Government has by
notifications S.R.O. No. 623 of 1999 and S.R.O. No. 624 of 1999 rescinded the
notification of the Government of Orissa in the Finance Department dated 16th
August, 1980 as amended from time to time and the notification of the
Government of Orissa in the Finance Department dated 12th November, 1990
earlier issued under Section 7 of the Orissa Sales Tax Act. Section 6 of the
Orissa Sales Tax Act, it is true, empowers the State Government to issue a
notification exempting sale or purchase of any goods or class of goods from
tax and also expressly empowers the State Government to likewise withdraw such
exemption, but in our considered view, the fact that there is no express
provision in Section 7 of the said Act to withdraw an exemption of tax or
deferment of payment of tax granted thereunder will not make a difference in
view of the clear provision in Section 22 of the Orissa General Clauses Act
that the power to make or issue a notification will include a power
exercisable in the like manner and subject to the like sanction and
conditions, if any, to rescind such notification so made or issued.
65\. In Gopi Chand v. Delhi Administration AIR 1959 SC 609, under Section 20
of the East Punjab Public Safety Act, the Provincial Government was authorised
to declare the whole or any part of the province as may be specified in the
notification to be a dangerously disturbed area and under Section 36(1) of the
said Act the Provincial Government was empowered to certify the offences under
the said Act. Four notifications were issued under Section 20 of the said Act.
By the first notification issued on 8th July, 1949, the whole of the province
of Delhi was declared to be a dangerously disturbed area. This first
notification was cancelled with effect from 1st October, 1950 by the second
notification issued on 28th September, 1950. Third notification was issued on
6th October, 1950 modifying the aforesaid second notification dated 28th
September, 1950 by inserting the words "except as respect things done or
omitted to be done before the date of this notification". In other words, this
third notification purported to introduce an exception to the cancellation of
the first notification caused by the second notification and in effect, the
third notification purported to treat the Province of Delhi as a dangerously
disturbed area in respect of things done or omitted to be done before the date
of the said notification. The fourth notification was issued on 7th April,
1951 by the Chief Commissioner of Delhi in exercise of powers conferred by
Section 36(1) of the Act certifying as being triable under the said Act in any
area within the State of Delhi any offence under any law other than the
aforesaid Act of which cognizance had been taken by a Magistrate in Delhi
before 1st October, 1950 and the trial in respect of which was pending in any
court immediately before 1st October, 1950 and had not concluded before the
date of certificate issued under the said notification. An argument was
advanced on behalf of the Delhi Administration that the competent authority
was entitled to modify any notification issued by it under Section 19 of the
Punjab General Clauses Act, 1898 which is similarly worded as Section 21 of
the General Clauses Act, 1897 as also Section 22 of the Orissa General Clauses
Act, 1937. The Supreme Court held :
"...In our opinion, this argument is not well-founded. Section 19 of the
Punjab General Clauses Act, like Section 21 of the General Clauses Act,
embodies a rule of construction, the nature and extent of the application of
which must inevitably be governed by the relevant provisions of the statute
which confers the power to issue the notification. The power to cancel the
notification can be easily conceded to the competent authority and so also the
power to modify or vary it be likewise conceded ; but the said power must
inevitably be exercised within the limits prescribed by the provision
conferring the said power. Now Section 20 empowers the Provincial Government
to declare the whole or any part of the Province to be dangerously disturbed
area ; and if a notification is issued in respect of the whole or any part of
the province it may be either cancelled wholly or may be modified restricting
the declaration to a specified part of the province. The power to cancel or
modify must be exercised in reference to the areas of the province which it is
competent for the provincial Government to specify as dangerously disturbed.
The power to modify cannot obviously include the power to treat the same area
as dangerously disturbed for persons accused of crimes committed in the past
and not disturbed for others accused of the same or similar offences committed
later. That clearly is a legislative function which is wholly outside the
authority conferred on the delegate by Section 20 or Section 36(1). We must,
therefore, hold that the third and the forth notifications are invalid and a
result of the second notification the whole of the Province of Delhi ceased to
be a dangerously disturbed area from October 1, 1950."
Thus, in the aforesaid case, the Supreme Court held the two notifications to
be invalid because they were wholly outside the authority conferred on the
delegate by Section 20 or Section 36(1) of the aforesaid Act. But in the
present batch of cases, it is not disputed that the State Government had
issued the earlier notifications for exemption of tax and deferment of payment
of tax under the Orissa Sales Tax Act. Therefore the State Government also had
the power under the Orissa Sales Tax Act read with Section 22 of the Orissa
General Clauses Act to rescind such notification of exemption of tax or
deferment of payment of tax and the impugned Notifications S.R.O. No. 624 of
1999 and S.R.O. No. 625 of 1999 cannot be held to be beyond the power of the
State Government as a delegate of the State Legislature under Section 7 of the
Orissa Sales Tax Act.
66\. The next question is whether the impugned notifications dated 30th July,
1999 and the impugned notifications dated 17th February, 2000 are
discriminatory and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution. The contention
of the petitioners with regard to the impugned notifications dated 30th July,
1999 is that while industries set up pursuant to IPR 1992 and IPR 1996
continued to enjoy the sales tax incentives granted to them under the said
IPRs, the petitioners who were granted sales tax incentives under IPR 1989 as
new industries or continuing industries of IPRs 1980 and 1986 have been denied
the sales tax incentives by the impugned notifications dated 30th July, 1999
before the period for which the exemption was to be in force under the said
IPRs. Similarly, the contention with regard to the impugned notifications
dated February 17, 2000 is that while existing industries which are in receipt
of the sales tax incentives as on 1st January, 2000 and industries which are
in pipeline as on that date have been allowed sales tax incentives under the
said notifications, the petitioners have been deprived of similar sales tax
incentives. It is not disputed that under the impugned notifications dated
30th July, 1999 all new industries and continuing industries of IPRs 1980 and
1986 which were granted sales tax incentives under the IPR 1989 have been
treated equally and have not been allowed the sales tax incentives with effect
from 1st August, 1999 by virtue of the impugned notifications dated July 30,
1999 whereas industries set up pursuant to IPRs 1992 and 1996 except those
categorised as ineligible industries were allowed the sales tax incentives
under the said IPRs even after 1st August, 1999. There was therefore a
classification of industries "which would" and "which would not" be allowed
sales tax incentives after August 1, 1999 by virtue of the impugned
notifications dated July 30, 1999. The reason for such differential treatment
given in the counter-affidavit filed on behalf of the State Government is that
IPR 1992 and IPR 1996 envisaged incentives subject to financial ceiling linked
to total fixed capital investment whereas IPR 1989 envisaged exemption from
tax/deferment of payment of tax for a period of 5 to 7 years without any
financial ceiling and this open-ended facility of IPR 1989 resulted in a
serious erosion of tax base contributing to the deterioration of the fiscal
position of the State Government. Thus, the classification of the industries
adopted by the State Government while issuing the impugned notifications dated
July 30, 1999 and February 17, 2000 appear to have a rational nexus with the
objective of improving the financial position of the State and the
classification does not seem to be unreasonable so as to make the said
notifications discriminatory.
67\. It is now well-settled that in taxation matters a very wide latitude is
given to the Government to pick and choose districts, objects, persons,
methods and even rates for taxation and a heavy burden is cast on the person
who assails a taxation provision as discriminatory to show that the
classification adopted by the provision of the taxation law is not a valid
classification. In East India Tobacco Company v. State of Andhra Pradesh
[1962] 13 STC 529 ; AIR 1962 SC 1733, the Supreme Court held :
"It should, in this connection, be remembered that under the law it is for the
person who assails a legislation as discriminatory to establish that it is not
based on a valid classification and it is well-settled that this burden is all
the heavier when the legislation under attack is a taxing statute. 'In
taxation even more than in other fields', it was observed by the Supreme Court
of United States in Madden v. Kentucky (1940) 309 US 83 ; 84 Law Ed. 590
'Legislatures possess the greatest freedom in classification. The burden is on
the one attacking the legislative arrangement to negative every conceivable
basis which might support it'."
The aforesaid law will equally apply to notifications for exemption from tax
and deferment of payment of tax and withdrawal of such exemption and
deferment. The burden therefore is on the petitioners to show that the
aforesaid classification of industries in respect of which the sales tax
incentives were withdrawn by the impugned notifications dated July 30, 1999
and February 17, 2000 and industries in respect of which such sales tax
incentives were continued under the said impugned notifications dated July 30,
1999 and February 17, 2000 were not reasonable classifications and the
impugned notifications therefore were discriminatory and violative of Article
14 of the Constitution. But the petitioners in this batch of cases have not
discharged the burden of showing that the classifications made under the
impugned notifications dated July 30, 1999 and February 17, 2000 had no
rational nexus with the object sought to be achieved and were unreasonable and
the impugned notifications were hit by Article 14 of the Constitution.
68\. In Union of India v. Indian Charge Chrome AIR 1999 SC 3504, notifications
were issued under Section 25 of the Customs Act, 1962 granting exemption from
customs duty to Power Project generating electricity for distribution while
denying such exemption to power plants generating electricity for captive
consumption only and the notification was challenged on the ground that it was
discriminatory and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution. The Supreme
Court repelling the challenge held :
"What is prohibited by Article 14 of the Constitution is class legislation. If
the Legislature takes care to reasonably classify persons for legislative
purposes, so long as the classification is founded on an intelligible
differentia which lays down a perceptible differentiation between the two
groups and the differentiation has a rational relation with the object sought
to be achieved, such a classification does not fall foul of Article 14 of the
Constitution. We have already held that the two classes in the case at hand
have a well defined differentiation. There is nothing wrong in the Central
Government forming an opinion that it was in public interest to grant
exemption from payment of custom duty to the imports meant for power projects
engaged in production of power as an end-product meant for public distribution
as such while denying a similar benefit to the imports referable to power
plants generating electricity for captive consumption only."
Hence, we do not find any merit in the challenge to the impugned notifications
dated July 30, 1999 and February 17, 2000 on the ground of discrimination.
69\. In the result, we are not inclined to quash the impugned notifications
dated July 30, 1999 and February 17, 2000 issued by the State Government and
we declare the said notifications to be valid in law. All interim orders
passed by this Court in these cases are vacated. It will be, however, open for
the petitioners to contend before the competent authority of the State
Government or the competent authority under the Orissa Sales Tax Act and the
Central Sales Tax Act that despite the impugned notifications dated July 30,
1999 and February 17, 2000 which we have held to be valid, the petitioners are
still entitled to exemption from tax or deferment of payment of tax, as the
case may be.
70\. With the aforesaid observations, the writ petitions are disposed of. No
Costs.
M.M. Das, J.
71\. I agree.
exemption from payment of custom duty to the imports meant for power projects
engaged in production of power as an end-product meant for public distribution
as such while denying a similar benefit to the imports referable to power
plants generating electricity for captive consumption only."
Hence, we do not find any merit in the challenge to the impugned notifications
dated July 30, 1999 and February 17, 2000 on the ground of discrimination.
69\. In the result, we are not inclined to quash the impugned notifications
dated July 30, 1999 and February 17, 2000 issued by the State Government and
we declare the said notifications to be valid in law. All interim orders
passed by this Court in these cases are vacated. It will be, however, open for
the petitioners to contend before the competent authority of the State
Government or the competent authority under the Orissa Sales Tax Act and the
Central Sales Tax Act that despite the impugned notifications dated July 30,
1999 and February 17, 2000 which we have held to be valid, the petitioners are
still entitled to exemption from tax or deferment of payment of tax, as the
case may be.
by Finance Department notifications under the Orissa Sales Tax Act, 1947
granting the said exemptions. Encouraged by the said declaration, the
petitioner set up a small-scale industrial unit for manufacturing of card-
board boxes and corrugated card-board boxes by investing money from his own
personal resources as well as from out of the loans from the State Bank of
India in the year 1991. A permanent registration certificate thereafter was
granted by the General Manager, District Industries Center, Cuttack indicating
therein that the date of commercial production of the small-scale industrial
unit of the petitioner is September 11, 1993 and the petitioner was entitled
to enjoy the aforesaid benefits of exemption from sales tax for a period of
seven years up to September 11, 2000. The petitioner enjoyed the said benefits
of sales tax exemption from September 11, 1993 but on July 30, 1999
Notifications Nos. 622 of 1999, 623 of 1999, 624 of 1999 and 625 of 1999 were
issued by the Government of Orissa in the Finance Department withdrawing all
such benefits with effect from the 1st August, 1999. Aggrieved, the petitioner
has filed this writ petition praying for quashing the said notifications dated
30th of July, 1999.
3\. O.J.C. No. 13017 of 1999 (Petitioner--Larsen Toubro Co. Ltd.) :
Under IPR 1989 the State Government of Orissa declared, inter alia, that
pioneer industrial units set up in zone "C" will be allowed deferment of
exemption from payment of custom duty to the imports meant for power projects
engaged in production of power as an end-product meant for public distribution
as such while denying a similar benefit to the imports referable to power
plants generating electricity for captive consumption only."
Hence, we do not find any merit in the challenge to the impugned notifications
dated July 30, 1999 and February 17, 2000 on the ground of discrimination.
69\. In the result, we are not inclined to quash the impugned notifications
dated July 30, 1999 and February 17, 2000 issued by the State Government and
we declare the said notifications to be valid in law. All interim orders
passed by this Court in these cases are vacated. It will be, however, open for
the petitioners to contend before the competent authority of the State
Government or the competent authority under the Orissa Sales Tax Act and the
Central Sales Tax Act that despite the impugned notifications dated July 30,
1999 and February 17, 2000 which we have held to be valid, the petitioners are
still entitled to exemption from tax or deferment of payment of tax, as the
case may be.
by Finance Department notifications under the Orissa Sales Tax Act, 1947
granting the said exemptions. Encouraged by the said declaration, the
petitioner set up a small-scale industrial unit for manufacturing of card-
board boxes and corrugated card-board boxes by investing money from his own
personal resources as well as from out of the loans from the State Bank of
India in the year 1991. A permanent registration certificate thereafter was
granted by the General Manager, District Industries Center, Cuttack indicating
therein that the date of commercial production of the small-scale industrial
unit of the petitioner is September 11, 1993 and the petitioner was entitled
to enjoy the aforesaid benefits of exemption from sales tax for a period of
seven years up to September 11, 2000. The petitioner enjoyed the said benefits
of sales tax exemption from September 11, 1993 but on July 30, 1999
Notifications Nos. 622 of 1999, 623 of 1999, 624 of 1999 and 625 of 1999 were
issued by the Government of Orissa in the Finance Department withdrawing all
such benefits with effect from the 1st August, 1999. Aggrieved, the petitioner
has filed this writ petition praying for quashing the said notifications dated
30th of July, 1999.
3\. O.J.C. No. 13017 of 1999 (Petitioner--Larsen Toubro Co. Ltd.) :
Under IPR 1989 the State Government of Orissa declared, inter alia, that
pioneer industrial units set up in zone "C" will be allowed deferment of
exemption from payment of custom duty to the imports meant for power projects
engaged in production of power as an end-product meant for public distribution
as such while denying a similar benefit to the imports referable to power
plants generating electricity for captive consumption only."
Hence, we do not find any merit in the challenge to the impugned notifications
dated July 30, 1999 and February 17, 2000 on the ground of discrimination.
69\. In the result, we are not inclined to quash the impugned notifications
dated July 30, 1999 and February 17, 2000 issued by the State Government and
we declare the said notifications to be valid in law. All interim orders
passed by this Court in these cases are vacated. It will be, however, open for
the petitioners to contend before the competent authority of the State
Government or the competent authority under the Orissa Sales Tax Act and the
Central Sales Tax Act that despite the impugned notifications dated July 30,
1999 and February 17, 2000 which we have held to be valid, the petitioners are
still entitled to exemption from tax or deferment of payment of tax, as the
case may be.
by Finance Department notifications under the Orissa Sales Tax Act, 1947
granting the said exemptions. Encouraged by the said declaration, the
petitioner set up a small-scale industrial unit for manufacturing of card-
board boxes and corrugated card-board boxes by investing money from his own
personal resources as well as from out of the loans from the State Bank of
India in the year 1991. A permanent registration certificate thereafter was
granted by the General Manager, District Industries Center, Cuttack indicating
therein that the date of commercial production of the small-scale industrial
unit of the petitioner is September 11, 1993 and the petitioner was entitled
to enjoy the aforesaid benefits of exemption from sales tax for a period of
seven years up to September 11, 2000. The petitioner enjoyed the said benefits
of sales tax exemption from September 11, 1993 but on July 30, 1999
Notifications Nos. 622 of 1999, 623 of 1999, 624 of 1999 and 625 of 1999 were
issued by the Government of Orissa in the Finance Department withdrawing all
such benefits with effect from the 1st August, 1999. Aggrieved, the petitioner
has filed this writ petition praying for quashing the said notifications dated
30th of July, 1999.
3\. O.J.C. No. 13017 of 1999 (Petitioner--Larsen Toubro Co. Ltd.) :
Under IPR 1989 the State Government of Orissa declared, inter alia, that
pioneer industrial units set up in zone "C" will be allowed deferment of
payment of sales tax collected on finished products for a period of 9 years
from the date of commercial production and in lieu of such deferment such
pioneer industrial unit can opt for exemption of sales tax on finished
products for a period of seven years from the date of commercial production.
This was followed by notifications issued by the State Government of Orissa
granting deferment of payment of tax under the Orissa Sales Tax Act, 1947 and
under the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956 for a period of seven years from the
date of commercial production. Encouraged by the said declarations, the
petitioner set up a new industry at mouza-Arda in Jharsuguda located in Zone
"C" named M/s. L & T Cement works with a capacity of 0.7 million tones per
annum at a purchase cost of Rs. 80 crores and started commercial production
exemption from payment of custom duty to the imports meant for power projects
engaged in production of power as an end-product meant for public distribution
as such while denying a similar benefit to the imports referable to power
plants generating electricity for captive consumption only."
Hence, we do not find any merit in the challenge to the impugned notifications
dated July 30, 1999 and February 17, 2000 on the ground of discrimination.
69\. In the result, we are not inclined to quash the impugned notifications
dated July 30, 1999 and February 17, 2000 issued by the State Government and
we declare the said notifications to be valid in law. All interim orders
passed by this Court in these cases are vacated. It will be, however, open for
the petitioners to contend before the competent authority of the State
Government or the competent authority under the Orissa Sales Tax Act and the
Central Sales Tax Act that despite the impugned notifications dated July 30,
1999 and February 17, 2000 which we have held to be valid, the petitioners are
still entitled to exemption from tax or deferment of payment of tax, as the
case may be.
by Finance Department notifications under the Orissa Sales Tax Act, 1947
granting the said exemptions. Encouraged by the said declaration, the
petitioner set up a small-scale industrial unit for manufacturing of card-
board boxes and corrugated card-board boxes by investing money from his own
personal resources as well as from out of the loans from the State Bank of
India in the year 1991. A permanent registration certificate thereafter was
granted by the General Manager, District Industries Center, Cuttack indicating
therein that the date of commercial production of the small-scale industrial
unit of the petitioner is September 11, 1993 and the petitioner was entitled
to enjoy the aforesaid benefits of exemption from sales tax for a period of
seven years up to September 11, 2000. The petitioner enjoyed the said benefits
of sales tax exemption from September 11, 1993 but on July 30, 1999
Notifications Nos. 622 of 1999, 623 of 1999, 624 of 1999 and 625 of 1999 were
issued by the Government of Orissa in the Finance Department withdrawing all
such benefits with effect from the 1st August, 1999. Aggrieved, the petitioner
has filed this writ petition praying for quashing the said notifications dated
30th of July, 1999.
3\. O.J.C. No. 13017 of 1999 (Petitioner--Larsen Toubro Co. Ltd.) :
Under IPR 1989 the State Government of Orissa declared, inter alia, that
pioneer industrial units set up in zone "C" will be allowed deferment of
payment of sales tax collected on finished products for a period of 9 years
from the date of commercial production and in lieu of such deferment such
pioneer industrial unit can opt for exemption of sales tax on finished
products for a period of seven years from the date of commercial production.
This was followed by notifications issued by the State Government of Orissa
granting deferment of payment of tax under the Orissa Sales Tax Act, 1947 and
under the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956 for a period of seven years from the
date of commercial production. Encouraged by the said declarations, the
petitioner set up a new industry at mouza-Arda in Jharsuguda located in Zone
"C" named M/s. L & T Cement works with a capacity of 0.7 million tones per
annum at a purchase cost of Rs. 80 crores and started commercial production
exemption from payment of custom duty to the imports meant for power projects
engaged in production of power as an end-product meant for public distribution
as such while denying a similar benefit to the imports referable to power
plants generating electricity for captive consumption only."
Hence, we do not find any merit in the challenge to the impugned notifications
dated July 30, 1999 and February 17, 2000 on the ground of discrimination.
69\. In the result, we are not inclined to quash the impugned notifications
dated July 30, 1999 and February 17, 2000 issued by the State Government and
we declare the said notifications to be valid in law. All interim orders
passed by this Court in these cases are vacated. It will be, however, open for
the petitioners to contend before the competent authority of the State
Government or the competent authority under the Orissa Sales Tax Act and the
Central Sales Tax Act that despite the impugned notifications dated July 30,
1999 and February 17, 2000 which we have held to be valid, the petitioners are
still entitled to exemption from tax or deferment of payment of tax, as the
case may be.
