Madras High Court
Preethi Kitchen Appliances Pvt. ... vs Baghyaa Home Appliances
    IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT MADRAS
    Reserved on  :     13.02.2018
    			     Delivered on :     01.03.2018
    CORAM
    THE HON'BLE MR.JUSTICE M.SUNDAR
    		Original Application Nos.31 and 32 of 2018
    in
    				C.S.No.26 of 2018
    Preethi Kitchen Appliances Pvt. Ltd.,
    Having its registered office at
    C/o.Boomerang Unit No.506
    5th Floor, Wing B-2, Chandivali Farm Road
    Powai, Mumbai- 400 072			   	..  Applicant/Plaintiff
    				Vs.
    1.Baghyaa Home Appliances
       Electronics & Furnitures
       Hameeda Shopping Mall
       #108 & 109 Triplicane High Road
defendant is not only a subsequent registrant, but also a subsequent entrant
in the market. The prayer regarding passing off is product passing off. The
plaintiff seeks an injunction restraining second defendant from passing off
its products being Vidiem V-Star series as plaintiff's Preethi Zodiac
Series. Therefore, when these aspects are seen in conjunction with and in the
light of the narrative supra pertaining to infringement of suit design, it
follows as an inevitable sequitur that the prayer for injunction qua product
passing off also deserves to be acceded to.
5(xli) Therefore, as far as this common order is concerned, in the light of
all that have been set out supra, prayers in both applications deserve to be
acceded to and I do so.
5(xlii) Before parting with case, I deem it necessary to place on record that
the scanned reproductions in this order supra, are in black and white, but I
had the benefit of comparing them in colour. This is notwithstanding the fact
that the design registration does not include colour.
In other words, owing to the narrative supra, O.A.No.31 of 2018 and O.A.No.32
       #108 & 109 Triplicane High Road
       Near Post Office, Chennai  600 005
    2.M/s.Maya Appliances Private Limited
       No.10/5, Royal Enclave
       Besant Avenue, Adyar
       Chenani  600 020				 .. Respondents/Defendants
Application filed under Order XIV Rule 8 Original Side Rules read with Order
XXXIX Rules 1 and 2 of Code of Civil Procedure to grant an order of ad interim
injunction restraining the respondents/defendants, their men, agents, or
person acting on their behalf, from in any manner infringing the
Applicant/plaintiff's copyright in design No.276216 granted on 01.10.2015 in
respect of its tripod shaped base unit for its 'Preethi Zodiac' series of
mixer grinders under the name Vidiem V-Star series or under any other name
with features identical or any manner similar to the applicant/plaintiff's
tripod shaped base unit design for mixer grinder pending disposal of the suit.
    		For Applicant          : Mr.M.S.Bharath
    		For 1st Respondent  : Mr.Sudhir Ravindran 
    		For 2nd Respondent : Mr.P.S.Raman, 
    					  Senior Advocate 
    					  Mr.K.Harishankar
    COMMON ORDER
    	This common order will dispose of both these applications.
    	2.Sole plaintiff in the main suit is the lone applicant in both these applications.  Defendant Nos.1 and 2 in the main suit are respondent Nos.1 and 2 respectively in both these applications.  Parties in these applications are referred to by their respective ranks in the main suit for the sake of convenience and clarity.
    	3.A thumb nail sketch of facts essential for appreciating the instant common order is set out infra under the caption Factual matrix in a nutshell.
    4. Factual matrix in a nutshell
4(i) Plaintiff and Defendant No.2 inter alia manufacture, market and
distribute kitchen appliances. To be noted, Defendant No.1 is a dealer of
defendant No.2. Considering the nature of the lis i.e., complaint of
infringement of a registered design, Defendant No.1 is, for all practical
purposes, a formal party. It follows that plaintiff and Defendant No.2 are
real adversaries in this lis.
4(ii) Plaintiff and the second defendant can be described as siblings in
industry or cousins in commerce as they have an umbilical chord relationship.
Preethi was part of Defendant No.2 from 1978. More than three decades later,
sometime in 2011, Koninklijke Philips, Netherlands acquired Preethi from
Defendant No.2. Plaintiff company, i.e., Preethi Kitchen Appliances Pvt. Ltd.,
was incorporated as a company in India under the Companies Act, 1956 in 2011
and aforesaid Koninklijke Philips, Netherlands, is the parent / holding
company. In other words, plaintiff company is a subsidiary of Koninklijke
Philips, Netherlands.
4(iii) I am also informed that the entire acquisition referred to supra in
2011 is a slump sale. It is in the aforesaid context that I ventured to
describe the adversaries as siblings in industry or cousins in commerce.
This much about the relationship between the adversaries.
4(iv) Moving on to the lis, plaintiff has come with the main suit complaining
of infringement of its registered design in respect of tripod shaped base unit
for mixer grinder and passing off. Nucleus of this lis is a registered design
of the plaintiff company bearing registered Design No.276216 dated 01.10.2015
in class 31-00 with the title Base unit of a Mixer Grinder . This registered
design of the plaintiff company is in force for 10 years ie., upto 01.10.2025.
This registered design of the plaintiff company is hereinafter referred to as
suit design for the sake of brevity, convenience and clarity.
4(v) It is the case of the plaintiff that in March 2016, plaintiff launched
the zodiac series of mixer grinders in the market in the name and style
'Preethi Zodiac', 'Preethi Taurus' and 'Preethi Aries' with the base unit
based on the suit design. It is also the specific case of the plaintiff that
conventional mixer grinder consists of rectangular, round, oval and square
shaped base units and the plaintiff's launch of a mixer grinder with a tripod
base unit based on the suit design was path breaking. It is the specific case
of plaintiff that sometime in December 2017, it gained knowledge about the
fact that the second defendant has been manufacturing and selling mixer
grinder under the name and style of Vidiem V-Star series with base units,
which according to the plaintiff, are an obvious imitation/infringement of
suit design. It is also averred by the plaintiff that second defendant has got
a design registered vide Design No.292910 dated 17.04.2017. It is to be noted
that the second defendant entered appearance and took the stand that design
registration of second defendant is dated 17.04.2017, is in force upto
17.04.2027 and that the Vidiem V-Star series launched by them is pursuant to
such design registration of the second defendant.
4(vi) Second defendant contended that their Vidiem V-Star products are not
obvious imitation/infringement of suit design, but are products based on their
aforesaid registered design.
4(vii) It was also contended that a comparison of suit design and second
defendants product would reveal that there is no imitation, much less obvious
imitation or piracy. Defendants also alleged that there is no novelty in the
suit design and that the registration of suit design ought not to have been
granted. In other words, second defendant is also assailing the registration
of the suit design.
The above is factual matrix in a nutshell and in the light of the same, I now
proceed to discuss the lis under the caption discussion infra.
5.Discussion 5(i) It is necessary for a meaningful discussion to understand
with clarity what exactly is the suit design. For this purpose, I examined the
plaintiff's design Registration Certificate. Plaintiff's design registration
is in respect of 'shape' and 'configuration'. The suit design (registration
certificate) consists of 6 views and one perspective view, which are as
follows:
Bottom view 5(ii) I wanted to see the products of the plaintiff based on suit
design. To be noted, the products are base units of a mixer grinder. The
products were placed before me in the course of hearing. Two such products
were marked as A-MO1 and A-MO2, by consent of both sides.
5(iii) I also noticed from the suit design that it is not restricted to any
colour or combination of colours and does not confer any exclusive use of a
colour or combination of colours. The electrical wire i.e, chord seen in the
pictorial representations are not part of the registration of the design and
there can be no claim over the same. A design is defined under Section 2(d) of
the Designs Act, 2000 (Act No.16 of 2000) and from the definition of design it
emerges clearly that there can be a design in six different aspects and they
are follows:
a) Shape
b) Configuration
c) Pattern
d)Ornament
e) Composition of lines and
f) Colours applied to any articles.
5(iv) Though there are six aspects in which there can be a design
registration, the suit design is with regard to shape and configuration as
mentioned supra. To be noted, the terms 'shape' and 'configuration' are not
defined in the Act and are not words of art. Therefore, with regard to shape
and configuration, one has to necessarily turn to the dictionary meaning. As
set out supra under the caption 'Factual Matrix in a nutshell', the second
defendant has taken a stand that it has got registration of a design vide
design Registration No.292910 dated 17.04.2017 and that their product Vidiem
series is not an imitation/infringement or piracy qua suit design.
5(v) From the submissions made on either side, which have been set out partly
under Factual Matrix and partly under Discussion supra, for the purpose of
having focus qua deciding these applications, I deem it appropriate to make a
enumeration of the questions that the rival stands bring up in these
applications. They are as follows:
I.Whether registration of suit design is valid or whether it deserves to be
cancelled inter alia for lack of novelty?
II.Whether registration of design obtained by second defendant will protect
the second defendant in this design infringement action?
III.Whether a comparison be made to come to a conclusion regarding whether or
not there is imitation / piracy on the part of the second defendant?
IV.Whether the second defendant is guilty of infringement/piracy of suit
design.
5(vi) From the narration of the questions that fall for consideration in these
applications, it requires no explanation to say that answers to these
questions I and II will decide whether the remaining questions need to be gone
into at all.
5(vii) With regard to the first question regarding validity of the suit
design, Mr.M.S.Bharath, counsel on record for plaintiff, Mr.Sudhir Ravindran,
counsel on record for first defendant and Mr.P.S.Raman, learned senior counsel
leading Mr.T.K.Bhskar, counsel on record for second defendant, submitted in
unison before me that question regarding validity of the suit design and the
plea that the suit design deserves to be cancelled can be left open for
decision in the main suit. This puts an end to Question No.I. In other words,
Question No.I is left open, by consent of all the learned counsel before me,
for being tested in the main suit post trial.
5(viii) Though the aforesaid stand taken by all counsel in unison puts an end
to the search for an answer to Question No.I, I deem it appropriate to record
how it unfurls.
5(ix) In a suit for action complaining of infringement of registered design, a
defendant has the statutory right to take the plea that the plaintiff's
registration itself is invalid. The grounds on which a person can assail the
registration of a design are enumerated under Section 19 of Designs Act, 2000
(hereinafter referred to as 'said Act' for brevity). By virtue of Section
22(3) of the said Act, right is conferred on defendant(s) in design
infringement action to assail the design registration of the plaintiff on the
grounds set out in Section 19 of the said Act. This is unlike the other
Statutes in the IPR regime with the exception of Patents Act. In other words,
such a course is not available to defendants in an action complaining of
infringement of Trademarks, Copyrights or Geographical indications. To be
noted, it is not available for defendants in an action for infringement of
Trademark, copyright or geographical indication. A controversy was raised by
saying that this statutory option given to a defendant in a design
infringement action is available only to a defendant, who has sought
cancellation of plaintiff's design. However, it is not necessary to go into
that aspect of the matter in this order disposing of these applications in the
light of the common stand taken by all the counsel before me. For the purpose
of abundant clarity, it is made clear that the issue of validity of suit
design and as to whether the suit design deserves to be cancelled including
the question as to whether it is open to the defendant to raise such a plea,
without actually filing for cancellation, are all left open to be decided in
the main suit. Further to be noted, this is by consent of all the counsel
before me. This takes us to the next question.
5(x) With regard to the second question, this very question came up before the
Delhi High Court. One learned Judge of the Delhi High Court had made a
reference and pursuant to a reference, a Full Bench (including the Judge who
made the reference) was constituted. Full Bench of the Delhi High Court by a
2:1 majority vide its judgment dated 15.05.2013 and what is now come to be
known as Micolube case (Micolube India Limited Vs. Rakesh Kumar Trading as
Saurabh Industries and Ors. Reported in MIPR 2013 (2) 156), answered the
reference saying that holder of a registered design can institute a suit
against a defendant who is also in possession of a registered design. The Full
Bench of the Delhi High Court held so in the Micolube case by placing reliance
on the expression 'any person' occurring in Section 22 of the said Act. Full
Bench took the view expression 'any person' occurring in the said Act would
not exclude a subsequent registrant.
5(xi) In my considered view, in this case, the plaintiff is in a much better
pedestal for the simple reason that the plaintiff is not a subsequent
registrant, but a prior registrant. As would be evident from the 'Factual
Matrix' supra and the 'Discussion' thus far, the plaintiff's registration is
dated 01.10.2015 and the second defendant's registration was 1 = years later
on 17.04.2017.
5(xii) To buttress and highlight that the issue of one registrant suing
another registrant with regard to design infringement, it was submitted that
it has not just been answered but has also been put in practice, as there have
been several cases where injunction has been granted against a registered
design holder in an action for infringement of design. In support of this
proposition, three reported judgments and one unreported judgment were placed
before me. Reported judgments are Alert India Vs. Naveen Plastics reported in
1997 PTC (17) 15 where a learned single Judge of the Delhi High Court granted
injunction against a defendant holding a registered design. Judgment in
A.R.Safiullah Vs. A.Sowkath Ali reported in 2013 (54) PTC 499 (Mad) was placed
before me and this is a case where a single Judge of this Court granted
injunction against holder of a registered design. Whirlpool of India Ltd., Vs.
Videocom Industries Ltd., is another case reported in 2014 (60) PTC 155 (Bom)
where a single Judge of the Bombay High Court granted injunction against a
registrant of a design. One more order of the Delhi High Court in Vikas Jain
Vs.Aftab Ahmed case where the Delhi High Court vide order dated 04.07.2007 had
granted injunction against an entity which had design registration was also
placed before me. In this order, which was authored by Hon'ble Justice Badar
Durrez Ahmed.J., as his Lordship then was, the issue of defendant being a
registrant and more so, the plaintiff being a prior registrant which is closer
to the facts of this case was examined and articulated in Paragraph 13, which
reads as follows:
13.Furthermore, not much turns on the factum of the defendant being the
registered proprietor of the design under the registration No.198624. Firstly,
the registration of the plaintiff's design is prior in time. The plaintiff's
design was registered on 23.03.2004, whereas the defendants' design was
registered on 01.03.2005. The fact that the plaintiff's registration is prior
in time to that of the defendants' would entitle the plaintiff to prevent its
infringement by the defendants. In Alert India (supra), a learned single Judge
of this Court held that a design registered later would not be entitled to
protection against the first or prior registered proprietor of a design.
5(xiii)The above said simple but lucid articulation is closer to the facts of
this case. No contra material was placed before me by the second defendant in
this regard. Only aspect that was highlighted was that the aforesaid Full
Bench judgement of the Delhi High Court in Micolube was a 2:1 majority. I also
noticed one interesting feature in the micolube judgment and I deem it
appropriate to record the same here Hon'ble Judge, who made the reference was
invited to be part of the Full Bench and that Hon'ble Judge did become part of
the Full Bench is mentioned supra, but interestingly that Hon'ble Judge who
made the reference wrote a separate dissenting judgment. I have perused that
separate dissenting judgment also. There are two reasons why I would go with
the majority view. One is notwithstanding it is a majority view, ultimately it
becomes a judgment of a Full Bench. Another aspect is on facts, it does not
appear to be a case where the plaintiff is a prior registrant unlike the
instant case. All these leave me answering Question No.II by saying that a
holder of a registered design can institute a suit against a defendant, who is
also in possession of a registered design.
5(xiv) Answer to Questions I and II has now made it necessary to make a
comparison and decide whether there is infringement as alleged. There is a
very interesting principle that unfurls with regard to comparison in design
infringement actions. Mr.M.S.Bharath, learned counsel for plaintiff, submitted
that in a design infringement action, the design registration certificate of
the plaintiff should be compared with the alleged offending product of the
defendant. While not disagreeing with Mr.M.S.Bharath, Mr.P.S.Raman, learned
senior counsel submitted that notwithstanding the position that if a
comparison of the plaintiff's product and the alleged offending product of the
second defendant are done, it will work to the disadvantage of the second
defendant, in the instant case he would invite the Court to make such a
comparison ie., comparison of the plaintiff with the alleged offending design
of the defendant notwithstanding the disadvantage that will be caused to the
defendant.
5(xv) This makes my task simpler. The earliest case pertaining to comparison
in a design infringement action is Dunlop company case (Dunlop Rubber Co.
Ltd., Vs. Golf Ball Developmens Ltd., reported in 1931 XLVIII RPC 268). This
is a judgment of the Chancery Division in England and Justice Farwell had
authored the same. The product in the instant case is a Golf Ball. Decisions
of foreign courts have only persuasive value. Notwithstanding this position, I
am emboldened to look at Dunlop Company case for two reasons. One reason is
the definition of design under the then UK Designs Act as contained in Section
93 of the UK Designs Act as well as the parameters for piracy as contained in
Section 60 of the UK Designs Act are the same as the definition of design
under Section 2(d) and piracy as contained in Section 22 of the Designs Act,
2000 in India are almost in pari materia. This is evident from two paragraphs
in Dunlop Company case and these two paragraphs are as follows:
Before I come to deal with the Designs themselves, I would just say one word
or two with regard to the law on this matter, and for that purpose I must look
at the Act. The first section of the Act to which I desire to refer is the
definition Section, Section 93. In that Section the word design is defined
in these terms:  'Design' means only the feature of shape, configuration,
pattern or ornament applied to any article by any industrial process or means,
whether manual, mechanical, or chemical, separate or combined, which in the
finished article appeal to and are judged solely by the eye, I need not read
the rest of that definition. I want to say one word with regard to Section
60. Section 60, so far as it is relevant for my purpose is in these terms:
During the existence of copyright in any design it shall not be lawful for
any person (a) for the purposes of sale to apply or cause to be applied to any
article in any class of goods in which the design is registered the design or
any fraudulent or obvious imitation thereof, except with the licence or
written consent of the registered proprietor, or to do anything with a view to
enable the design to be so applied. There are three things there which a
member of the public may not do with regard to a registered design. In the
first place, he may not apply, to any article in the class of goods in which
the design is registered the design itself. He may not, therefore, take the
registered design and use it bodily for the purpose of an article of his own
manufacture. That of course is not suggested in this case.  5(xvi) The second
reason for me to still look to Dunlop Company Case is, the principles culled
out in Dunlop Company case has been consistently and continuously followed by
the Indian Courts in a long line of authorities in J.N.Electricals (India) V.
President Electricals of Delhi High Court reported in ILR (1980) 1 Delhi 215,
Castrol India Ltd., V. Tide Water Oil Co.(I) Ltd., of Calcutta High Court
reported in 1996 PTC (16) 202, Alert India Vs. Naveen Plastics of Delhi High
Court reported in 1997 PTC (17) 15, Dabur V. Amit Jain of Delhi High Court
reported in 2009 (39) PTC 104 and finally Darts Industries case of the Madras
High Court was as late as in 2017 i.e., MIPR 2017(3) 0158.
5(xvii) To my mind, the manner in which the Hon'ble Judges who authored these
judgments starting from Dunlop Company case made comparison to decide a design
infringement action is clear. A design registration certificate should be
compared with the alleged offending product to decide a design infringement
action. Eye of the Judge being the key appears to be the general drift.
However, in the instant case, in the light of unanimity of view and consensual
approach expressed by adversarial counsel that plaintiff's product can be
compared with the defendant's product, I am not elaborating on this question
of how a comparison should actually be made in a design infringement action
further. This takes us to the last question i.e., question No.IV as to whether
the second defendant is guilty of infringement / piracy of suit design.
5(xix) In the light of all that have been said regarding comparison in the
instant design infringement action alluded to supra, I compared the
plaintiff's products with the second defendant's products.
5(xx) To be noted, two of plaintiff's products were marked as two material
objects on the plaintiff's side. Two of second defendant products were marked
as two material objects on the second defendant's side. I have referred to
material objects that have been marked in these applications. I have also set
out supra that plaintiff's two products were marked as two material objects
and second defendant's two products were marked as two material objects. I am
giving the colours for clarity. Two of the plaintiff's products are such that
one is black and and the other is combination of Teal and white. Two of the
defendants products are such that one is black and the other is combination of
sky blue and white.
5(xxi) Mr.M.S.Bharath, learned counsel for plaintiff submitted that the
plaintiff is not claiming any monopoly regarding tripod mixer grinder base,
but there is a definite feature for the plaintiff's product in protruding leg
and arched feet. Learned counsel made it clear that these are highlighting
features and the features of the design registration of the plaintiff i.e.,
suit design are not restricted to these two features. In support of his
submission that the plaintiff is not attempting to monopolise tripod mixer
grinder base, learned counsel for plaintiff drew my attention to several other
tripod mixer/grinder bases in the market and submitted that the plaintiff is
not aggrieved by those. The list placed before me is as follows:
5(xxii) As product to product comparison was agreed upon to decide the design
infringement action, various Tripod/Triangular shaped mixer grinder base units
including that of plaintiff's and defendants' were demonstrated in the
hearing. To my eye, while defendants' product came across as a replication of
plaintiff's product, the others appeared to be different from that of the
plaintiff's and defendants' products. It has to be added that no discernment
was necessary for this.
5(xxiii) Interestingly aforesaid scanned reproduction is part of the
defendants typed-set. However Mr.M.S.Bharath relied on this only to buttress
his submission that the plaintiff is not making any attempt to monopolise
tripod /mixer grinder base. It was to buttress his complaint that the slavish
imitation of the protruding legs and the arched feet which according to him
are a clear case of infringement qua shape and configuration for which the
plaintiff has registration i.e., suit design.
5(xxiv) Learned senior counsel Mr.P.S.Raman, pointed out that the product has
to be compared as a whole. I have no disagreement on this. I will refer to
this in greater detail infra in this order. It was also argued by learned
counsel for plaintiff that the Regulator has been placed between the two legs
in the second defendant's products. Therefore, to avoid confusion in addition
to the material objects and the prefix, I have also referred to the products
by colour. While making the comparison, as the names of the products are
clearly written on the same, I also identified products by the name written on
the products and compared. To be noted, plaintiff clearly has 'Preethi'
written thereon and second defendant's products have Vidiem written thereon.
In any action for infringement, the plaintiff will argue on similarities and
the defendant will argue on dissimilarities. This case is no exception.
5(xxv) Mr.P.S.Raman pointed out that so called protruding legs are flat in the
plaintiff's products whereas it is not so flat, but pointed in the second
defendant's product. It was also argued that the second defendant's products
are taller. Furthermore, the bottom view of the products were exhibited to
show that they are completely different.
5(xxvi) Per contra, Mr.M.S.Bharath, learned counsel for plaintiff highlighting
on the similarities said the Regulator alone has been placed in a different
position i.e., between two legs /above an arched feet in the second
defendant's product to make it appear that it is different, he also pointed
out that in the plaintiff's product, Regulator is placed above one of the
three legs. Responding to this, Mr.P.S.Raman, learned senior counsel attempted
to say that it is merely a question of placing the Regulator at a different
place. Mr.Raman pointed out that the Regulator in the second defendant's
product is star shaped unlike the Regulator in the plaintiff's product and
because it is star shaped it cannot be placed along side a leg, and it has to
be placed between two legs. Mr.Raman also showed photographs of some star
shaped products to show what their inspiration was.
5(xxvii) I also had a very close look at the photographs of other Tripod
triangular shaped mixer grinder bases that were placed before me. To be noted
those have been scanned and reproduced. Further to be noted, these were placed
before me not by the plaintiff, but by the second defendant. To my eyes, it
appears that while other tripod triangular shaped mixer grinder bases are
clearly distinguishable from Plaintiff's product, the tripod shaped
mixer/grinder base of the second defendant is not clearly distinguishable from
that of the plaintiff's products and comes across as an infringement. If at
all there is any difference, it is in the bottom view. This, according to me,
is immaterial because the central theme of a design is appeal to the eye.
Appeal to the eye can be only by seeing a product as one would normally look
at it. Bottom view will be visible only when we are examining the product very
closely. In the normal position when the product is placed, the bottom view is
invisible. Therefore, the central theme of design being appeal to the eye
i.e., judged 'solely by the eye' clearly clinches the issue in favour of the
plaintiff.
5(xxviii) There is one more aspect of the matter.
5(xxix) As alluded to supra, while design registration can be obtained in six
different aspects, in the instant case, design registration has been obtained
only in shape and configuration. Shape and configuration in the suit design in
three dimensional form in the finished product is the test. In this view of
the matter also, I have no hesitation in coming to the conclusion that the
suit design, at least four out of six views is absolutely similar. The four
views which are absolutely similar are front view, rear view, side view and
opposite view as contained in the design registration certificate i.e., the
suit design. Differences if any is visible to the eye only in top view and the
bottom view. There again, there is not much of difference in the top view.
Then, if one looks at the perspective view as contained in the Design
Registration Certificate of the suit design, there is no doubt in my mind that
the second defendant's product is a clear case of infringement/piracy. In
other words, overall perspective are same. In this regard, I put it to the
learned counsel on both sides as to whether there are any case laws pertaining
to design infringement action, wherein some of the views as shown in the
Design Registration Certificate are similar and some are not. Both learned
counsel for plaintiff and learned senior counsel for second defendant fairly
submitted that this principle is not blessed with authorities / precedents. It
was also fairly submitted in unison that it is the overall perspective or
product as a whole, which should be looked into and I have done exactly that.
5(xxx) I therefore lay down the principle that in design infringement actions,
if some views in design registration certificate and alleged offending product
are same/similar and when some other views are not same/similar, the overall
perspective will be the clincher.
5(xxxi) In this regard, it is also necessary to look at the judgment of Lord
Farwell in the celebrated Dunlop company case, which I have referred to supra.
I have also set out in detail the reasons why I am referring to an English law
in this judgment. Lord Farwell has very elucidatively laid down that in a
design infringement action, when we are taking about eye, it is the eye of the
Judge. I went a step further. I examined it from the eye of a common man too.
I examined it from the perspective of a man who may or may not be discerning.
I have no hesitation in coming to the conclusion that the second defendant's
products suffer from the vice of what is being referred to as 'sameness' even
to the eye of a person who may not be very discerning. I had undertaken this
exercise in tune with some of the judgments cited at the bar by the learned
senior counsel for the second defendant. One such judgment is Britannia
Industries Ltd. vs Sara Lee Bakery reported in AIR 2000 Mad 497. My attention
was drawn to Paragraphs 38 and 41, which read as follows:
38. The task of the Court is to Judge the similarity or difference through
the eye alone and where the article in respect of which the design is applied
is itself the object of purchase, through the eye of the purchaser. In judging
the articles solely by the eye the Court shall see whether the infringing
design is an obvious or a fraudulent Imitation.
41\. One of the tests to find out the identity or sameness of the design is to
find whether there are substantial differences between the design subsequently
registered and the design which was earlier registered. These differences
cannot be based on purely subjective or utilitarian or aesthetic
considerations. The differences must be objective in its essential features. A
general view of the features of both the designs should be looked into to find
out if the one design is as good as the other, and the conclusion is to be
arrived at by visual examination of the two things. Similarity of device in
external appearance may be a relevant factor in considering the substantial
differences between the two but is certainly not a determining factor.
5(xxxii) Another judgment of the Bombay High Court in Harish Chhabra Vs. Bajaj
Electricals Ltd., and another reported in 2005(3) Mh.L.J 962 was placed before
me to say that the product as a whole has to be compared. A portion of
paragraph No.5 of this judgment was relied on by learned senior counsel
Mr.P.S.Raman. That portion of Paragraph 5 reads as follows:
5...........On the other hand the learned counsel appearing for the
respondent contended that what is invented design is an ornamental ring fitted
on a fan and therefore a fan with such afeature is a design registered by the
respondent No. 1 and therefore the design is rightly registered. However the
learned advocate General appearing on behalf of the respondent No. 1 has
fairly drawn my attention to the judgment of the House of Lords in the case of
William J. Holdsworth and Ors. v. Henry C. M' crea reported in 1987 Vol. II
English and Irish Appeal page 380 wherein it has been held as under :
"The only thing which it is here necessary to point out, as well for warning
to inventors as for the protection of the public, is this, that if a design,
as exhibited in a pattern is filed and registered by an inventor, without any
farther limitation or description than that which is given by the design
itself, it protects the entire thing and the entire thing only, and the
protection cannot, at pleasure, be made applicable one day to the entirety and
another day to the separate integral parts or elements of the entire design.
It must be considered that the protection of the statute is invoked for the
entire thing that appears upon the register and is applicable to nothing but
the exact copy of the thing so registered."
5(xxxiii) It is again reiterated that I have compared the products as a whole
as set out supra. A judgment of House of Lords in Philips vs Harbro Rubber
Company (1920 XXXVII RPC 233) was also placed before me. However, that was a
case where the House of Lord returned a verdict that the design itself was not
worthy of registration as it was lacking in novelty and originality. To be
noted, the issue of validity of the design has been set apart for main suit in
the instant case. An attempt was made to place before me a judgment of a
learned single Judge of the Delhi High Court dated 18.01.2018 pertaining to
duplication of pens. When pointed out that the said judgment has entered into
arena of functionality of the product, learned senior counsel in his usual
fairness submitted that it does not help further the case of the second
defendant in the instant lis. Another judgement of a learned single Judge of
the Bombay High Court in Hawkins Cookers Ltd. vs Zaverchand Liladhar Shah And
Ors. reported in 2005 (31) PTC 129 Bom was also placed before me to emphasise
that whether there is novelty in the design itself is a matter which has to be
decided by the eye. It was pressed into service to say that the question the
Court has to address itself in a design infringement action is whether the two
appearances are substantially the same or not and that the design must be
looked at as a whole. Relevant paragraph is Paragraph No.8, which reads as
follows:
8\. Looking at the aforesaid judgment, it is obvious that it is ultimately the
court to ascertain whether design is different or similar by having a look at
the same. Looking at the two handles which are supposed to be innovated by
either parties, I am of the opinion that the said handles are not identical.
The look and shape of the handles is different. The visual look of the two
handles indicates that if the handle is the only matter where the petitioners
are claiming to be the innovators then the handle of Respondent No. 1 is
different and independent. The learned single Judge while hearing the motion
in Suit No. 4226 of 1994 has also considered the aforesaid aspect and has set
out a detailed distinction between the said two designs. The said suit was
preferred by the plaintiffs against Respondent No. 2 herein. Respondent No. 2
is a marketing and distributing product manufactured by Petitioner No. 1.
While considering the case of petitioners in the aforesaid suit prima facie
the learned single Judge of this Court has held in para 6 as under:
"6. Visual look of these two products will show that the case made out by the
defendants will have to be accepted. Defendants product cannot be said to be
in infringement of the registered design of plaintiffs. The design of
defendants of Tava is altogether separate having independent handle and there
is curve in the handle, while there is no curve in the handle of plaintiffs"
produce. There is difference in the size of the handle. There is also
difference in the thickness of Tavas. Length of handle also differs in both
these products. Defendants' Tavas are very light in weight, whereas
plaintiffs' Tavas are heavy. Defendants are manufacturing Tavas in three
different sizes and in three different diameters, while plaintiffs are
manufacturing Tavas of one size and one diameter. Defendants' own registered
trade mark is "Armour-Finish", which has been embossed on their product.
Defendants are marketing their product under the trade name "Meera", while
plaintiffs' are marketing their product under the trade name "Hawkins".
Respective design numbers are also embossed on the products. The visual look
of both these products shows that defendants' case will have to be accepted
and it cannot be held that defendants are infringing plaintiffs" product.
Defendants' are manufacturing said product and using the registered design
from 11.11.1992. Plaintiffs have given notice on 12.2.1993 to which reply was
given on 3.3.1993. Inspite of this, first time suit came to be filed on
11.10.1994. Thus, plaintiffs have slept over their rights. Delay in
approaching the Court after the notice is not explained. In my judgment, this
also disentitles plaintiffs from claiming any relief in this motion.?
5(xxxiv) I have no disagreement. I have done exactly that.
5(xxxv)For the purpose of completion of facts, I deem it appropriate to
extract the 7 views and one prospective view in the Design Registration
Certificate of second defendant also. The same is as follows:
As in Alert India (supra) a later design registration would not be entitled to
any protection qua a prior registrant, 2nd defendant's product being on the
basis of aforesaid design registration certificate does not help the second
defendant in this case as it is pitted against a prior registrant.
5(xxxvi) It is necessary to record the fact that the issue of whether a design
infringement action and passing off action can be combined in one suit was
brought up. In this regard, the aforesaid Full Bench judgment of the Delhi
High Court i.e., Micolube case returned as an answer to one of the references,
that it cannot be done. However, as I am deciding the interlocutory
applications, I am not expressing any opinion on the same. The reason is,
Delhi High Court in the Microlube case has said that if a design infringement
action suit and passing off suit are brought up simultaneously or in quick
succession, it can still be tried together.
5(xxxvii) I deem it appropriate to leave this question open to be decided in
main suit depending on the trajectory of the litigation.
5(xxxviii) I have come to an emphatic conclusion that the there is
infringement of suit design.
5(xxxix) To be noted, though I have followed Delhi High Court Full Bench
Judgment with regard to infringement action against a registrant, with regard
to combining design infringement action and passing off action, I leave the
question open to be decided in the main suit as there is no disagreement
before me that submissions in this regard will turn heavily on evidence and it
is desirable to have that question left open at this interlocutory stage.
5(xl) With regard to the prayer for injunction qua passing off, undisputed
facts as they unfurl before me from the pleadings and submissions is that the
plaintiff launched their products being mixer grinder with tripod shaped base
unit i.e., Preethi Zodiac Series in March 2016, whereas defendants (second
defendant to be specific) launched their products being mixer grinders with
tripod shaped base unit i.e, Vidiem V-Star series in September 2017.
Furthermore, the design registration certificate of the plaintiff (Design
Registration No.276216) is dated 01.10.2015 i.e., suit design. This Design
Registration Certificate of Second Defendant (Design Registration No.292910)
is dated 17.04.2017. Therefore, there is no dispute before me on facts that
the second defendant is a subsequent registrant. To be noted, the second
defendant is not only a subsequent registrant, but also a subsequent entrant
in the market. The prayer regarding passing off is product passing off. The
plaintiff seeks an injunction restraining second defendant from passing off
its products being Vidiem V-Star series as plaintiff's Preethi Zodiac
Series. Therefore, when these aspects are seen in conjunction with and in the
light of the narrative supra pertaining to infringement of suit design, it
follows as an inevitable sequitur that the prayer for injunction qua product
passing off also deserves to be acceded to.
5(xli) Therefore, as far as this common order is concerned, in the light of
all that have been set out supra, prayers in both applications deserve to be
acceded to and I do so.
5(xlii) Before parting with case, I deem it necessary to place on record that
the scanned reproductions in this order supra, are in black and white, but I
had the benefit of comparing them in colour. This is notwithstanding the fact
that the design registration does not include colour.
In other words, owing to the narrative supra, O.A.No.31 of 2018 and O.A.No.32
of 2018 are allowed. No costs in the light of the nature and trajectory of the
litigation.
01.03.2018 Index: Yes/No gpa M.SUNDAR.J gpa Order in Original Application
Nos.31 and 32 of 2018 in C.S.No.26 of 2018 01.03.2018
defendant is not only a subsequent registrant, but also a subsequent entrant
in the market. The prayer regarding passing off is product passing off. The
plaintiff seeks an injunction restraining second defendant from passing off
its products being Vidiem V-Star series as plaintiff's Preethi Zodiac
Series. Therefore, when these aspects are seen in conjunction with and in the
light of the narrative supra pertaining to infringement of suit design, it
follows as an inevitable sequitur that the prayer for injunction qua product
passing off also deserves to be acceded to.
5(xli) Therefore, as far as this common order is concerned, in the light of
all that have been set out supra, prayers in both applications deserve to be
acceded to and I do so.
5(xlii) Before parting with case, I deem it necessary to place on record that
the scanned reproductions in this order supra, are in black and white, but I
had the benefit of comparing them in colour. This is notwithstanding the fact
that the design registration does not include colour.
In other words, owing to the narrative supra, O.A.No.31 of 2018 and O.A.No.32
       #108 & 109 Triplicane High Road
       Near Post Office, Chennai  600 005
    2.M/s.Maya Appliances Private Limited
       No.10/5, Royal Enclave
       Besant Avenue, Adyar
       Chenani  600 020				 .. Respondents/Defendants
Application filed under Order XIV Rule 8 Original Side Rules read with Order
XXXIX Rules 1 and 2 of Code of Civil Procedure to grant an order of ad interim
injunction restraining the respondents/defendants, their men, agents, or
person acting on their behalf, from in any manner infringing the
Applicant/plaintiff's copyright in design No.276216 granted on 01.10.2015 in
respect of its tripod shaped base unit for its 'Preethi Zodiac' series of
mixer grinders under the name Vidiem V-Star series or under any other name
with features identical or any manner similar to the applicant/plaintiff's
tripod shaped base unit design for mixer grinder pending disposal of the suit.
    		For Applicant          : Mr.M.S.Bharath
    		For 1st Respondent  : Mr.Sudhir Ravindran 
    		For 2nd Respondent : Mr.P.S.Raman, 
    					  Senior Advocate 
    					  Mr.K.Harishankar
defendant is not only a subsequent registrant, but also a subsequent entrant
in the market. The prayer regarding passing off is product passing off. The
plaintiff seeks an injunction restraining second defendant from passing off
its products being Vidiem V-Star series as plaintiff's Preethi Zodiac
Series. Therefore, when these aspects are seen in conjunction with and in the
light of the narrative supra pertaining to infringement of suit design, it
follows as an inevitable sequitur that the prayer for injunction qua product
passing off also deserves to be acceded to.
5(xli) Therefore, as far as this common order is concerned, in the light of
all that have been set out supra, prayers in both applications deserve to be
acceded to and I do so.
5(xlii) Before parting with case, I deem it necessary to place on record that
the scanned reproductions in this order supra, are in black and white, but I
had the benefit of comparing them in colour. This is notwithstanding the fact
that the design registration does not include colour.
In other words, owing to the narrative supra, O.A.No.31 of 2018 and O.A.No.32
       #108 & 109 Triplicane High Road
       Near Post Office, Chennai  600 005
    2.M/s.Maya Appliances Private Limited
       No.10/5, Royal Enclave
       Besant Avenue, Adyar
       Chenani  600 020				 .. Respondents/Defendants
Application filed under Order XIV Rule 8 Original Side Rules read with Order
XXXIX Rules 1 and 2 of Code of Civil Procedure to grant an order of ad interim
injunction restraining the respondents/defendants, their men, agents, or
person acting on their behalf, from in any manner infringing the
Applicant/plaintiff's copyright in design No.276216 granted on 01.10.2015 in
respect of its tripod shaped base unit for its 'Preethi Zodiac' series of
mixer grinders under the name Vidiem V-Star series or under any other name
with features identical or any manner similar to the applicant/plaintiff's
tripod shaped base unit design for mixer grinder pending disposal of the suit.
    		For Applicant          : Mr.M.S.Bharath
    		For 1st Respondent  : Mr.Sudhir Ravindran 
    		For 2nd Respondent : Mr.P.S.Raman, 
    					  Senior Advocate 
    					  Mr.K.Harishankar
defendant is not only a subsequent registrant, but also a subsequent entrant
in the market. The prayer regarding passing off is product passing off. The
plaintiff seeks an injunction restraining second defendant from passing off
its products being Vidiem V-Star series as plaintiff's Preethi Zodiac
Series. Therefore, when these aspects are seen in conjunction with and in the
light of the narrative supra pertaining to infringement of suit design, it
follows as an inevitable sequitur that the prayer for injunction qua product
passing off also deserves to be acceded to.
5(xli) Therefore, as far as this common order is concerned, in the light of
all that have been set out supra, prayers in both applications deserve to be
acceded to and I do so.
5(xlii) Before parting with case, I deem it necessary to place on record that
the scanned reproductions in this order supra, are in black and white, but I
had the benefit of comparing them in colour. This is notwithstanding the fact
that the design registration does not include colour.
In other words, owing to the narrative supra, O.A.No.31 of 2018 and O.A.No.32
       #108 & 109 Triplicane High Road
       Near Post Office, Chennai  600 005
    2.M/s.Maya Appliances Private Limited
       No.10/5, Royal Enclave
       Besant Avenue, Adyar
       Chenani  600 020				 .. Respondents/Defendants
Application filed under Order XIV Rule 8 Original Side Rules read with Order
XXXIX Rules 1 and 2 of Code of Civil Procedure to grant an order of ad interim
injunction restraining the respondents/defendants, their men, agents, or
person acting on their behalf, from in any manner infringing the
Applicant/plaintiff's copyright in design No.276216 granted on 01.10.2015 in
respect of its tripod shaped base unit for its 'Preethi Zodiac' series of
mixer grinders under the name Vidiem V-Star series or under any other name
with features identical or any manner similar to the applicant/plaintiff's
tripod shaped base unit design for mixer grinder pending disposal of the suit.
    		For Applicant          : Mr.M.S.Bharath
    		For 1st Respondent  : Mr.Sudhir Ravindran 
    		For 2nd Respondent : Mr.P.S.Raman, 
    					  Senior Advocate 
    					  Mr.K.Harishankar
    COMMON ORDER
    	This common order will dispose of both these applications.
    	2.Sole plaintiff in the main suit is the lone applicant in both these applications.  Defendant Nos.1 and 2 in the main suit are respondent Nos.1 and 2 respectively in both these applications.  Parties in these applications are referred to by their respective ranks in the main suit for the sake of convenience and clarity.
    	3.A thumb nail sketch of facts essential for appreciating the instant common order is set out infra under the caption Factual matrix in a nutshell.
    4. Factual matrix in a nutshell
4(i) Plaintiff and Defendant No.2 inter alia manufacture, market and
distribute kitchen appliances. To be noted, Defendant No.1 is a dealer of
defendant No.2. Considering the nature of the lis i.e., complaint of
infringement of a registered design, Defendant No.1 is, for all practical
purposes, a formal party. It follows that plaintiff and Defendant No.2 are
real adversaries in this lis.
defendant is not only a subsequent registrant, but also a subsequent entrant
in the market. The prayer regarding passing off is product passing off. The
plaintiff seeks an injunction restraining second defendant from passing off
its products being Vidiem V-Star series as plaintiff's Preethi Zodiac
Series. Therefore, when these aspects are seen in conjunction with and in the
light of the narrative supra pertaining to infringement of suit design, it
follows as an inevitable sequitur that the prayer for injunction qua product
passing off also deserves to be acceded to.
5(xli) Therefore, as far as this common order is concerned, in the light of
all that have been set out supra, prayers in both applications deserve to be
acceded to and I do so.
5(xlii) Before parting with case, I deem it necessary to place on record that
the scanned reproductions in this order supra, are in black and white, but I
had the benefit of comparing them in colour. This is notwithstanding the fact
that the design registration does not include colour.
In other words, owing to the narrative supra, O.A.No.31 of 2018 and O.A.No.32
       #108 & 109 Triplicane High Road
       Near Post Office, Chennai  600 005
    2.M/s.Maya Appliances Private Limited
       No.10/5, Royal Enclave
       Besant Avenue, Adyar
       Chenani  600 020				 .. Respondents/Defendants
Application filed under Order XIV Rule 8 Original Side Rules read with Order
XXXIX Rules 1 and 2 of Code of Civil Procedure to grant an order of ad interim
injunction restraining the respondents/defendants, their men, agents, or
person acting on their behalf, from in any manner infringing the
Applicant/plaintiff's copyright in design No.276216 granted on 01.10.2015 in
respect of its tripod shaped base unit for its 'Preethi Zodiac' series of
mixer grinders under the name Vidiem V-Star series or under any other name
with features identical or any manner similar to the applicant/plaintiff's
tripod shaped base unit design for mixer grinder pending disposal of the suit.
    		For Applicant          : Mr.M.S.Bharath
    		For 1st Respondent  : Mr.Sudhir Ravindran 
    		For 2nd Respondent : Mr.P.S.Raman, 
    					  Senior Advocate 
    					  Mr.K.Harishankar
    COMMON ORDER
    	This common order will dispose of both these applications.
    	2.Sole plaintiff in the main suit is the lone applicant in both these applications.  Defendant Nos.1 and 2 in the main suit are respondent Nos.1 and 2 respectively in both these applications.  Parties in these applications are referred to by their respective ranks in the main suit for the sake of convenience and clarity.
    	3.A thumb nail sketch of facts essential for appreciating the instant common order is set out infra under the caption Factual matrix in a nutshell.
    4. Factual matrix in a nutshell
4(i) Plaintiff and Defendant No.2 inter alia manufacture, market and
distribute kitchen appliances. To be noted, Defendant No.1 is a dealer of
defendant No.2. Considering the nature of the lis i.e., complaint of
infringement of a registered design, Defendant No.1 is, for all practical
purposes, a formal party. It follows that plaintiff and Defendant No.2 are
real adversaries in this lis.
defendant is not only a subsequent registrant, but also a subsequent entrant
in the market. The prayer regarding passing off is product passing off. The
plaintiff seeks an injunction restraining second defendant from passing off
its products being Vidiem V-Star series as plaintiff's Preethi Zodiac
Series. Therefore, when these aspects are seen in conjunction with and in the
light of the narrative supra pertaining to infringement of suit design, it
follows as an inevitable sequitur that the prayer for injunction qua product
passing off also deserves to be acceded to.
5(xli) Therefore, as far as this common order is concerned, in the light of
all that have been set out supra, prayers in both applications deserve to be
acceded to and I do so.
5(xlii) Before parting with case, I deem it necessary to place on record that
the scanned reproductions in this order supra, are in black and white, but I
had the benefit of comparing them in colour. This is notwithstanding the fact
that the design registration does not include colour.
In other words, owing to the narrative supra, O.A.No.31 of 2018 and O.A.No.32
