Central Government Act
Section 52(1)(a) in the Copyright Act, 1957
(a) a fair dealing with a literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work 1[not
being a computer programme] for the purposes of— 1[(i) Private use including
research;]
(ii) criticism or review, whether of that work or of any other work; 2[(aa)
the making of copies or adaptation of a computer programme by the lawful
possessor of a copy of such computer programme from such copy— 1[(aa) the
making of copies or adaptation of a computer programme by the lawful possessor
of a copy of such computer programme from such copy—"
(i) in order to utilise the computer programme for the purpose for which it
was supplied; or
(ii) to make back-up copies purely as a temporary protection against loss,
destruction or damage in order only to utilise the computer programme for the
purpose for which it was supplied;] 3[(ab) the doing of any act necessary to
obtain information essential for operating inter-operability of an
independently created computer programme with other programmes by a lawful
possessor of a computer programme provided that such information is not
otherwise readily available; 3[(ab) the doing of any act necessary to obtain
information essential for operating inter-operability of an independently
being a computer programme] for the purposes of— 1[(i) Private use including
research;]
(ii) criticism or review, whether of that work or of any other work; 2[(aa)
the making of copies or adaptation of a computer programme by the lawful
possessor of a copy of such computer programme from such copy— 1[(aa) the
making of copies or adaptation of a computer programme by the lawful possessor
of a copy of such computer programme from such copy—"
(i) in order to utilise the computer programme for the purpose for which it
was supplied; or
(ii) to make back-up copies purely as a temporary protection against loss,
destruction or damage in order only to utilise the computer programme for the
purpose for which it was supplied;] 3[(ab) the doing of any act necessary to
obtain information essential for operating inter-operability of an
independently created computer programme with other programmes by a lawful
possessor of a computer programme provided that such information is not
otherwise readily available; 3[(ab) the doing of any act necessary to obtain
information essential for operating inter-operability of an independently
created computer programme with other programmes by a lawful possessor of a
computer programme provided that such information is not otherwise readily
available;"
being a computer programme] for the purposes of— 1[(i) Private use including
research;]
(ii) criticism or review, whether of that work or of any other work; 2[(aa)
the making of copies or adaptation of a computer programme by the lawful
possessor of a copy of such computer programme from such copy— 1[(aa) the
making of copies or adaptation of a computer programme by the lawful possessor
of a copy of such computer programme from such copy—"
(i) in order to utilise the computer programme for the purpose for which it
was supplied; or
(ii) to make back-up copies purely as a temporary protection against loss,
destruction or damage in order only to utilise the computer programme for the
purpose for which it was supplied;] 3[(ab) the doing of any act necessary to
obtain information essential for operating inter-operability of an
independently created computer programme with other programmes by a lawful
possessor of a computer programme provided that such information is not
otherwise readily available; 3[(ab) the doing of any act necessary to obtain
information essential for operating inter-operability of an independently
created computer programme with other programmes by a lawful possessor of a
computer programme provided that such information is not otherwise readily
available;"
being a computer programme] for the purposes of— 1[(i) Private use including
research;]
(ii) criticism or review, whether of that work or of any other work; 2[(aa)
the making of copies or adaptation of a computer programme by the lawful
possessor of a copy of such computer programme from such copy— 1[(aa) the
making of copies or adaptation of a computer programme by the lawful possessor
of a copy of such computer programme from such copy—"
(i) in order to utilise the computer programme for the purpose for which it
was supplied; or
(ii) to make back-up copies purely as a temporary protection against loss,
destruction or damage in order only to utilise the computer programme for the
purpose for which it was supplied;] 3[(ab) the doing of any act necessary to
obtain information essential for operating inter-operability of an
independently created computer programme with other programmes by a lawful
possessor of a computer programme provided that such information is not
otherwise readily available; 3[(ab) the doing of any act necessary to obtain
information essential for operating inter-operability of an independently
created computer programme with other programmes by a lawful possessor of a
computer programme provided that such information is not otherwise readily
available;"
being a computer programme] for the purposes of— 1[(i) Private use including
research;]
(ii) criticism or review, whether of that work or of any other work; 2[(aa)
the making of copies or adaptation of a computer programme by the lawful
possessor of a copy of such computer programme from such copy— 1[(aa) the
making of copies or adaptation of a computer programme by the lawful possessor
of a copy of such computer programme from such copy—"
(i) in order to utilise the computer programme for the purpose for which it
was supplied; or
(ii) to make back-up copies purely as a temporary protection against loss,
destruction or damage in order only to utilise the computer programme for the
purpose for which it was supplied;] 3[(ab) the doing of any act necessary to
obtain information essential for operating inter-operability of an
independently created computer programme with other programmes by a lawful
possessor of a computer programme provided that such information is not
otherwise readily available; 3[(ab) the doing of any act necessary to obtain
information essential for operating inter-operability of an independently
created computer programme with other programmes by a lawful possessor of a
computer programme provided that such information is not otherwise readily
available;"
being a computer programme] for the purposes of— 1[(i) Private use including
research;]
(ii) criticism or review, whether of that work or of any other work; 2[(aa)
the making of copies or adaptation of a computer programme by the lawful
possessor of a copy of such computer programme from such copy— 1[(aa) the
making of copies or adaptation of a computer programme by the lawful possessor
of a copy of such computer programme from such copy—"
(i) in order to utilise the computer programme for the purpose for which it
was supplied; or
(ii) to make back-up copies purely as a temporary protection against loss,
destruction or damage in order only to utilise the computer programme for the
purpose for which it was supplied;] 3[(ab) the doing of any act necessary to
obtain information essential for operating inter-operability of an
independently created computer programme with other programmes by a lawful
possessor of a computer programme provided that such information is not
otherwise readily available; 3[(ab) the doing of any act necessary to obtain
information essential for operating inter-operability of an independently
created computer programme with other programmes by a lawful possessor of a
computer programme provided that such information is not otherwise readily
available;"
being a computer programme] for the purposes of— 1[(i) Private use including
research;]
(ii) criticism or review, whether of that work or of any other work; 2[(aa)
the making of copies or adaptation of a computer programme by the lawful
possessor of a copy of such computer programme from such copy— 1[(aa) the
making of copies or adaptation of a computer programme by the lawful possessor
of a copy of such computer programme from such copy—"
(i) in order to utilise the computer programme for the purpose for which it
was supplied; or
(ii) to make back-up copies purely as a temporary protection against loss,
destruction or damage in order only to utilise the computer programme for the
purpose for which it was supplied;] 3[(ab) the doing of any act necessary to
obtain information essential for operating inter-operability of an
independently created computer programme with other programmes by a lawful
possessor of a computer programme provided that such information is not
otherwise readily available; 3[(ab) the doing of any act necessary to obtain
