Central Government Act
Section 10 in The Insurance Act, 1938
10 Separation of accounts and funds. â€”
(1) Where the insurer carries on business of more than one of the 167
[following classes, namely, life insurance, fire insurance, marine insurance
or miscellaneous insurance], he shall keep a separate account of all receipts
and payments in respect of each such class of insurance business 168 [and
where the insurer carries on business of 167 [miscellaneous insurance] whether
alone or in conjunction with business of another class, he shall, unless the
169 [Authority] waives this requirement in writing, keep a separate account of
all receipts and payments in respect of 167 [each of such sub-classes of
miscellaneous insurance business] as may be prescribed in this behalf:
Provided that no sub-class of 167 [miscellaneous insurance business] shall be
prescribed under this sub-section if the insurance business comprised in the
sub-class consist of insurance contracts which are terminable by the insurer
at intervals not exceeding twelve months and under which, if a claim arises,
the insurer's liability to pay benefit ceases within one year of the date on
which the claim arose.
(2) Where the insurer carries on the business of life insurance 170 [all
receipts due in respect of such business], shall be carried to and shall form
of sub-section (1) of that section: Provided further that an insurer may show
in such statement all the assets held in his life department, but at the same
time showing any deductions on account of general reserves and other
liabilities of that department: Provided also that the 174 [Authority] may
call for a statement similarly certified of such assets as at any other date
specified by him to be furnished within a period of three months from the date
with reference to which the statement is called for]].
175 [(2A) No insurer carrying on life insurance business shall be entitled to
be registered for any class of insurance business in addition to the class or
classes for which he has been already registered unless the 176 [Authority] is
satisfied that the assets of the life insurance fund of the insurer are
adequate to meet all his liabilities on policies of life insurance maturing
for payment.]
(3) The life insurance fund shall be as absolutely the security of the life
policy-holders as though it belonged to an insurer carrying on no other
business than life insurance business and shall not be liable for any
receipts due in respect of such business], shall be carried to and shall form
a separate fund to be called the life insurance fund 171 [the assets of which
shall, after the expiry of six months from the commencement of the Insurance
(Amendment) Act, 1946, be kept distinct and separate from all other assets of
the insurer] and the deposit made by the insurer in respect of life insurance
business shall be deemed to be 172 [part of the assets of such fund; 173 [and
every insurer shall, within the time limited in sub-section (1) of section 15
in regard to the furnishing of the statements and accounts referred to in
section 11, furnish to the Controller a statement showing in detail such
assets as at the close of every calendar year duly certified by an auditor or
by a person qualified to audit under the law of the insurer's country:
Provided that such statement shall, in the case of an insurer to whom section
11 applies, be set out as a part of the balance-sheet mentioned in clause (a)
of sub-section (1) of that section: Provided further that an insurer may show
in such statement all the assets held in his life department, but at the same
time showing any deductions on account of general reserves and other
liabilities of that department: Provided also that the 174 [Authority] may
call for a statement similarly certified of such assets as at any other date
specified by him to be furnished within a period of three months from the date
with reference to which the statement is called for]].
175 [(2A) No insurer carrying on life insurance business shall be entitled to
be registered for any class of insurance business in addition to the class or
classes for which he has been already registered unless the 176 [Authority] is
satisfied that the assets of the life insurance fund of the insurer are
adequate to meet all his liabilities on policies of life insurance maturing
for payment.]
(3) The life insurance fund shall be as absolutely the security of the life
policy-holders as though it belonged to an insurer carrying on no other
business than life insurance business and shall not be liable for any
contracts of the insurer for which it would not have been liable had the
business of the insurer been only that of life insurance and shall not be
applied directly or indirectly 177 [***] for any purposes 5 [other than those
of the life insurance business of the insurer].
of sub-section (1) of that section: Provided further that an insurer may show
in such statement all the assets held in his life department, but at the same
time showing any deductions on account of general reserves and other
liabilities of that department: Provided also that the 174 [Authority] may
call for a statement similarly certified of such assets as at any other date
specified by him to be furnished within a period of three months from the date
with reference to which the statement is called for]].
175 [(2A) No insurer carrying on life insurance business shall be entitled to
be registered for any class of insurance business in addition to the class or
classes for which he has been already registered unless the 176 [Authority] is
satisfied that the assets of the life insurance fund of the insurer are
adequate to meet all his liabilities on policies of life insurance maturing
for payment.]
(3) The life insurance fund shall be as absolutely the security of the life
policy-holders as though it belonged to an insurer carrying on no other
business than life insurance business and shall not be liable for any
receipts due in respect of such business], shall be carried to and shall form
a separate fund to be called the life insurance fund 171 [the assets of which
shall, after the expiry of six months from the commencement of the Insurance
(Amendment) Act, 1946, be kept distinct and separate from all other assets of
the insurer] and the deposit made by the insurer in respect of life insurance
business shall be deemed to be 172 [part of the assets of such fund; 173 [and
every insurer shall, within the time limited in sub-section (1) of section 15
in regard to the furnishing of the statements and accounts referred to in
section 11, furnish to the Controller a statement showing in detail such
assets as at the close of every calendar year duly certified by an auditor or
by a person qualified to audit under the law of the insurer's country:
Provided that such statement shall, in the case of an insurer to whom section
11 applies, be set out as a part of the balance-sheet mentioned in clause (a)
of sub-section (1) of that section: Provided further that an insurer may show
in such statement all the assets held in his life department, but at the same
time showing any deductions on account of general reserves and other
liabilities of that department: Provided also that the 174 [Authority] may
call for a statement similarly certified of such assets as at any other date
specified by him to be furnished within a period of three months from the date
with reference to which the statement is called for]].
of sub-section (1) of that section: Provided further that an insurer may show
in such statement all the assets held in his life department, but at the same
time showing any deductions on account of general reserves and other
liabilities of that department: Provided also that the 174 [Authority] may
call for a statement similarly certified of such assets as at any other date
specified by him to be furnished within a period of three months from the date
with reference to which the statement is called for]].
175 [(2A) No insurer carrying on life insurance business shall be entitled to
be registered for any class of insurance business in addition to the class or
classes for which he has been already registered unless the 176 [Authority] is
satisfied that the assets of the life insurance fund of the insurer are
adequate to meet all his liabilities on policies of life insurance maturing
for payment.]
(3) The life insurance fund shall be as absolutely the security of the life
policy-holders as though it belonged to an insurer carrying on no other
business than life insurance business and shall not be liable for any
receipts due in respect of such business], shall be carried to and shall form
a separate fund to be called the life insurance fund 171 [the assets of which
shall, after the expiry of six months from the commencement of the Insurance
(Amendment) Act, 1946, be kept distinct and separate from all other assets of
the insurer] and the deposit made by the insurer in respect of life insurance
business shall be deemed to be 172 [part of the assets of such fund; 173 [and
every insurer shall, within the time limited in sub-section (1) of section 15
in regard to the furnishing of the statements and accounts referred to in
section 11, furnish to the Controller a statement showing in detail such
assets as at the close of every calendar year duly certified by an auditor or
by a person qualified to audit under the law of the insurer's country:
Provided that such statement shall, in the case of an insurer to whom section
11 applies, be set out as a part of the balance-sheet mentioned in clause (a)
of sub-section (1) of that section: Provided further that an insurer may show
in such statement all the assets held in his life department, but at the same
time showing any deductions on account of general reserves and other
liabilities of that department: Provided also that the 174 [Authority] may
call for a statement similarly certified of such assets as at any other date
specified by him to be furnished within a period of three months from the date
with reference to which the statement is called for]].
of sub-section (1) of that section: Provided further that an insurer may show
in such statement all the assets held in his life department, but at the same
time showing any deductions on account of general reserves and other
liabilities of that department: Provided also that the 174 [Authority] may
call for a statement similarly certified of such assets as at any other date
specified by him to be furnished within a period of three months from the date
with reference to which the statement is called for]].
175 [(2A) No insurer carrying on life insurance business shall be entitled to
be registered for any class of insurance business in addition to the class or
classes for which he has been already registered unless the 176 [Authority] is
satisfied that the assets of the life insurance fund of the insurer are
adequate to meet all his liabilities on policies of life insurance maturing
for payment.]
(3) The life insurance fund shall be as absolutely the security of the life
policy-holders as though it belonged to an insurer carrying on no other
business than life insurance business and shall not be liable for any
receipts due in respect of such business], shall be carried to and shall form
a separate fund to be called the life insurance fund 171 [the assets of which
shall, after the expiry of six months from the commencement of the Insurance
(Amendment) Act, 1946, be kept distinct and separate from all other assets of
the insurer] and the deposit made by the insurer in respect of life insurance
business shall be deemed to be 172 [part of the assets of such fund; 173 [and
every insurer shall, within the time limited in sub-section (1) of section 15
in regard to the furnishing of the statements and accounts referred to in
section 11, furnish to the Controller a statement showing in detail such
assets as at the close of every calendar year duly certified by an auditor or
by a person qualified to audit under the law of the insurer's country:
Provided that such statement shall, in the case of an insurer to whom section
11 applies, be set out as a part of the balance-sheet mentioned in clause (a)
of sub-section (1) of that section: Provided further that an insurer may show
in such statement all the assets held in his life department, but at the same
time showing any deductions on account of general reserves and other
liabilities of that department: Provided also that the 174 [Authority] may
call for a statement similarly certified of such assets as at any other date
specified by him to be furnished within a period of three months from the date
with reference to which the statement is called for]].
175 [(2A) No insurer carrying on life insurance business shall be entitled to
be registered for any class of insurance business in addition to the class or
classes for which he has been already registered unless the 176 [Authority] is
satisfied that the assets of the life insurance fund of the insurer are
adequate to meet all his liabilities on policies of life insurance maturing
for payment.]
(3) The life insurance fund shall be as absolutely the security of the life
policy-holders as though it belonged to an insurer carrying on no other
business than life insurance business and shall not be liable for any
contracts of the insurer for which it would not have been liable had the
business of the insurer been only that of life insurance and shall not be
of sub-section (1) of that section: Provided further that an insurer may show
in such statement all the assets held in his life department, but at the same
time showing any deductions on account of general reserves and other
liabilities of that department: Provided also that the 174 [Authority] may
call for a statement similarly certified of such assets as at any other date
specified by him to be furnished within a period of three months from the date
with reference to which the statement is called for]].
175 [(2A) No insurer carrying on life insurance business shall be entitled to
be registered for any class of insurance business in addition to the class or
classes for which he has been already registered unless the 176 [Authority] is
satisfied that the assets of the life insurance fund of the insurer are
adequate to meet all his liabilities on policies of life insurance maturing
for payment.]
(3) The life insurance fund shall be as absolutely the security of the life
policy-holders as though it belonged to an insurer carrying on no other
business than life insurance business and shall not be liable for any
receipts due in respect of such business], shall be carried to and shall form
a separate fund to be called the life insurance fund 171 [the assets of which
shall, after the expiry of six months from the commencement of the Insurance
(Amendment) Act, 1946, be kept distinct and separate from all other assets of
the insurer] and the deposit made by the insurer in respect of life insurance
business shall be deemed to be 172 [part of the assets of such fund; 173 [and
every insurer shall, within the time limited in sub-section (1) of section 15
in regard to the furnishing of the statements and accounts referred to in
section 11, furnish to the Controller a statement showing in detail such
assets as at the close of every calendar year duly certified by an auditor or
by a person qualified to audit under the law of the insurer's country:
Provided that such statement shall, in the case of an insurer to whom section
11 applies, be set out as a part of the balance-sheet mentioned in clause (a)
of sub-section (1) of that section: Provided further that an insurer may show
in such statement all the assets held in his life department, but at the same
time showing any deductions on account of general reserves and other
liabilities of that department: Provided also that the 174 [Authority] may
call for a statement similarly certified of such assets as at any other date
specified by him to be furnished within a period of three months from the date
with reference to which the statement is called for]].
175 [(2A) No insurer carrying on life insurance business shall be entitled to
be registered for any class of insurance business in addition to the class or
classes for which he has been already registered unless the 176 [Authority] is
satisfied that the assets of the life insurance fund of the insurer are
adequate to meet all his liabilities on policies of life insurance maturing
for payment.]
(3) The life insurance fund shall be as absolutely the security of the life
policy-holders as though it belonged to an insurer carrying on no other
business than life insurance business and shall not be liable for any
contracts of the insurer for which it would not have been liable had the
business of the insurer been only that of life insurance and shall not be
of sub-section (1) of that section: Provided further that an insurer may show
in such statement all the assets held in his life department, but at the same
time showing any deductions on account of general reserves and other
liabilities of that department: Provided also that the 174 [Authority] may
call for a statement similarly certified of such assets as at any other date
specified by him to be furnished within a period of three months from the date
with reference to which the statement is called for]].
175 [(2A) No insurer carrying on life insurance business shall be entitled to
be registered for any class of insurance business in addition to the class or
classes for which he has been already registered unless the 176 [Authority] is
satisfied that the assets of the life insurance fund of the insurer are
adequate to meet all his liabilities on policies of life insurance maturing
for payment.]
(3) The life insurance fund shall be as absolutely the security of the life
policy-holders as though it belonged to an insurer carrying on no other
business than life insurance business and shall not be liable for any
