Andhra High Court
Acharya N.G. Ranga Agricultural ... vs M.Devender Reddy And Others on 11
February, 2013
     HON'BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE SRI PINAKI CHANDRA GHOSE AND THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE VILAS V. AFZULPURKAR, J             
    W.A Nos.1491 of 2012 and batch  
    dated.11-02-2013 
    Acharya N.G. Ranga Agricultural University,Represented by its
    Registrar,Hyderabad ... Appellant
    M.Devender Reddy and others ... Respondents  
Counsel for Appellant: The Advocate General for Sri.T.Durga Reddy sc for
ANGRAU Counsel for Respondent:1.Sri G.Mohan Rao Counsel for Respondent :2.GP
FOR Cooperation Counsel for Respondnet :3.GP for Higher EDUCATION Counsel for
Respondent :4.Sri Deepak Bhattacharjee Counsel for Respondent :5.Sri Ponnam
Ashok Gpud Assistant Solicitor General.
JUDGMENT: (Per the Hon'ble the Chief Justice) In these cases, the issue that
arises for consideration is with regard to the procedure to be adopted for
appointment of Vice-Chancellor to Acharya N.G. Ranga Agricultural University,
Hyderabad. As such, all the cases were heard together and are disposed of by
this common judgment. For the purpose of disposal of these cases, the facts in
Writ Petition No.34156 of 2012 may be noticed and the parties herein are
15\. In this case, the Government issued G.O.Ms.No.14, dated 20.2.2010
directing all the universities in the State to implement the service
conditions as recommended by the UGC and the Six Member Committee constituted
by the Government by amending necessary statutes, ordinances, rules and
regulations. We are, therefore, of the view that till Statute 4 of the First
Statutes is amended as per the recommendations of the UGC, the University has
to follow the manner of appointment of Vice-Chancellor as provided in Statute
4 of the First Statutes and the petitioner cannot seek a direction from this
Court to follow the procedure prescribed in G.O.Ms.No.14, Higher Education
(UE.II) Department, dated 20.2.2010. The Government may consider the changes
proposed by the Board of Management of the University to the APAU Act and take
necessary steps for making suitable amendments, at the earliest.
16\. In view of the above, the impugned order passed by the learned Single
Judge in WPMP.No.43447 of 2012 in Writ Petition No.34156 of 2012 is set aside,
Writ Appeal Nos.1491 and 1522 of 2012 and 13 of 2013 are allowed, Writ
Petition No.34156 of 2012 and PIL No.387 of 2012 stand dismissed. No order as
Writ Petition No.34156 of 2012 may be noticed and the parties herein are
referred to as they are arrayed in the said writ petition. With the consent of
the parties, we have taken up Writ Petition No.34156 of 2012 also for hearing
and disposal.
2\. Writ Petition No.34156 of 2012 has been filed for a writ of mandamus
declaring the action of the Government of Andhra Pradesh and Acharya N.G.
Ranga Agricultural University in not following the UGC Regulations 2010/ICAR
Model Act for Agricultural Universities as adopted by the University and
G.O.Ms.No.14, Higher Education (UE.II) Department, dated 20.2.2010 with regard
to appointment of Vice-Chancellor to the University as arbitrary, illegal and
violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India and for a
direction to the Government and the University to make appointment of Vice-
Chancellor in accordance with UGC Regulations 2010/ICAR Model Act.
3\. By the impugned order passed in WPMP.No.43447 of 2012 in Writ Petition
No.34156 of 2012 respondent Nos.1 to 3, Government of Andhra Pradesh and the
University, were directed to follow the procedure prescribed in G.O.Ms.No.14,
dated 20.2.2010 for selecting and appointing a candidate as the Vice-
Chancellor of Acharya N.G. Ranga Agricultural University, Hyderabad. As
against the said direction, while the Government filed Writ Appeal No.1522 of
2012, Acharya N.G. Ranga Agricultural University preferred Writ Appeal No.1491
of 2012. Writ Appeal No.13 of 2013 has also been filed against the same order
of the learned Single Judge by one Dr. A. Padma Raju seeking leave of this
Court, as he is not a party to the writ petition. PIL No.387 of 2012 has been
filed by M. Govind Reddy, a retired Professor of the University, seeking a
direction to the Government and the University to make appointment of Vice-
Chancellor in accordance with UGC Regulations, ICAR Model Act and
G.O.Ms.No.14, dated 20.2.2010.
4\. It is mainly contended in the writ appeals that unless Statue 4 of the
First Statutes and Section 11 of the Andhra Pradesh Agricultural University
Act, 1963 (for short, 'the APAU Act') are amended by the State Legislature,
the University has to follow the procedure prescribed under the Act and the
First Statutes framed thereunder for appointment of Vice-Chancellor and cannot
follow the procedure prescribed in G.O.Ms.No.14, dated 20.2.2010.
5\. Learned Advocate General representing the State and also the University
contended that the appointment of Vice-Chancellor is made as per Section 11 of
the APAU Act and the procedure prescribed under Statute 4 of the First
Statutes made under sub-section (1) of Section 39 and these are not amended by
the State Legislature and, therefore, the Government and the University are
bound to follow the procedure as prescribed under the said provisions. He
submitted that the procedure prescribed under Section 11 of the APAU Act and
Statute 4 of the First Statutes does not provide for appointment of a search
committee and a notification inviting applications for appointment of Vice-
Chancellor. The procedure prescribed under the APAU Act cannot be said as non-
transparent as contended by the petitioner as the Board of Management consists
of very eminent people. He further submitted that Section 11 of the APAU Act
and Statute 4 of the First Statutes govern the appointment of Vice-Chancellor
and the UGC Regulations are not mandatory for the State Government and the
University. G.O.Ms.No.14 was mainly issued for implementation of the revised
pay scales of the UGC and there is no reference to the Statutes of the
University. The amendment of the Statutes needs specific prior approval by the
Government and then only the University has to amend the same. Section 39 of
the APAU Act stipulates the procedure for amending the statutes and without
amending Statute 4 of the First Statutes as provided therein, the new
procedure prescribed in G.O.Ms.No.14 cannot be followed. Therefore, the
learned Single Judge could not have directed to follow the procedure
prescribed in G.O.Ms.No.14 for appointment of Vice-Chancellor. The learned
Advocate General placed reliance on the judgment of the Supreme Court in
Rajendra Agricultural University v. Ashok Kumar Prasad1 to contend that when
the APAU Act lays down the manner in which a statute should be made, it shall
have to be made in that manner and no other. He also relied on the judgment of
the Supreme Court in B. Bharath Kumar v. Osmania University2 and a judgment of
this Court in Prof. B. Surya Prakash Rao v. Union of India3 and another
judgment of the Bombay High Court in Suresh Patilkhede of Thane v. The
Chancellor Universities of Maharashtra4 and submitted that the UGC
Regulations, 2010 are not mandatory and are merely recommendatory in nature
and they are not binding on the State Government. The learned Advocate General
also placed reliance on the judgment of the Supreme Court in Khandesh College
Education Society, Jalgaon v. Arjun Hari Narkhede5 and submitted that unless
the First Statutes made under the APAU Act are modified or superseded, they
continue to be in force. He submitted that the University addressed a letter
to the Government on 24.12.2010 proposing some changes to the APAU Act on par
with the model Act of ICAR and requesting for Government's approval and the
same is pending consideration.
6\. Sri M. Ravindranath Reddy, learned counsel appearing for the appellant in
Writ Appeal No.13 of 2013 (not a party to the writ petition) submitted that
the writ petitioner having participated in the selection for appointment of
Vice- Chancellor without protesting the procedure followed is now estopped
from questioning the same after failing in the said selection. In support of
this, he placed reliance on the judgments of the Supreme Court in Madan Lal v.
State of J & K6 and Marripati Nagaraja v. Govt. of A.P.7 He submitted that the
procedure laid down in the APAU Act has to be strictly followed and not the
procedure which is yet to be incorporated in the said Act. The UGC Regulations
and the instructions contained in G.O.Ms.No.14 are in the nature of advice and
the University being a statutory body need to take a decision to accept the
same and it needs to be translated into an Act or a statute before giving
effect to it. When a procedure is laid down by law, the authority concerned is
required to exercise power conferred on it in the manner prescribed by it and
not otherwise and the selection procedure is to be completed in accordance
with law as it stood at its commencement. In this connection, he placed
reliance on the judgment of the Supreme Court in P. Mahendran v. Matteesh Y.
Annigeri8. Placing reliance on another judgment of the Supreme Court in K.A.
Nagamani v. Indian Airlines9, the learned counsel submitted that the
rules/instructions contained in G.O.Ms.No.14 are considered as administrative
rules and not rules of law and they have no statutory force. He further
submitted that the petitioner chose to file the writ petition without
impleading his client as party respondent and approached this Hon'ble Court
with unclean hands by suppressing the facts. Thus, the writ petition is liable
to be dismissed.
7\. Sri Gandra Mohan Rao, learned counsel for the petitioner reiterated the
contentions raised before the Hon'ble Single Judge and submitted that the
Government issued G.O.Ms.No.14 for implementation of the service conditions
recommended by the University Grants Commission (UGC) within a timeframe by
amending the statutes, ordinances, rules and regulations and this would amount
to prior approval of the Government for modification of the First Statutes of
the University, and the University also issued proceedings dated 2.3.2010 for
implementing G.O.Ms.No.14, dated 20.2.2010, therefore, there could not have
been any objection for following the new procedure for selecting a candidate
for appointment as Vice-Chancellor. The University also proposed necessary
changes to the APAU Act on the lines of the model Act suggested by Indian
Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR) in the meeting of the Board of
Management held on 1.12.2010 and, therefore, it was not open to the University
to fall back on the old procedure prescribed under Statute 4 of the First
Statutes. Section 11 of the APAU Act or the First Statutes do not prescribe
any procedure for selection of Vice-Chancellor. In the absence of any
procedure prescribed in the Act and the Statutes, there is nothing wrong in
the direction of the Hon'ble Single Judge to follow the procedure prescribed
in G.O.Ms.No.14, dated 20.2.2010, when the said G.O. was adopted by the
University. He submitted that executive instructions can supplement the rules
which may not deal with every aspect of the matter and the law merely
prohibits issuance of a direction which is not in consonance with the Act or
the statutory rules. In support of his contentions, the learned counsel placed
reliance on the judgments of the Supreme Court in K.H. Siraj v. High Court of
Kerala10, NDMC v. Tanvi Trading & Credit (P) Ltd.11 and Joint Action Committee
of Air Line Pilots' Assn. of India v. DG of Civil Aviation12.
8\. Learned counsel further submitted that the Government constituted a
committee to examine the issues relating to implementation of the revised pay
scales of 2006 to the teaching staff of the universities and colleges and
after examining the report of the said committee, suggestions of the
Government of India and the UGC Regulations, the Government issued
G.O.Ms.No.14, dated 20.2.2010. Appendix to the said G.O. deals with pay scales
and selection of Vice-Chancellor among other matters. According to the
procedure prescribed in the said G.O., the selection of Vice-Chancellor should
be by a search committee by issuing a public notification and the search
committee should prepare a panel of 3 to 5 names and the Chancellor is
required to appoint Vice-Chancellor out of the said panel. All the
universities in the State adopted G.O.Ms.No.14 and it was adopted by the Board
of Management of the University, and hence the First Statutes of the
University are deemed to be amended by incorporation of the procedure relating
to the selection of Vice-Chancellor. The requirements of Section 39(2) of the
APAU Act are complied with and no other procedure is prescribed in the said
Act for giving effect to the amendments. Since the First Statutes are deemed
to be amended, the University is bound to follow the procedure of constitution
of search committee etc. for selection of Vice- Chancellor. The Board of
Management of the University considered the revision of the APAU Act on par
with the model Act for agricultural universities framed by the Indian Council
of Agricultural Research and approved the changes in the APAU Act and,
therefore, the UGC Regulations and the model Act are binding on the University
and it cannot deviate from the same and the judgment of the Bombay High Court
in Suresh Patilkhede's case has no application to this case. Further, the
question of petitioner's participation in the selection process does not arise
as there was no interview or any test. The new procedure ensures equality of
opportunity to all eligible persons and eliminates favouritism and brings
transparency to the selection process and such procedure is the constitutional
mandate as held by the Supreme Court in State of Karnataka v. Umadevi (3)13.
9\. Sri J. Ramachandra Rao, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner in
PIL No.387 of 2012, raised almost similar contentions as raised by Sri Gandra
Mohan Rao. He submitted that the UGC Regulations and the model Act framed by
ICAR prescribe the procedure for appointment of Vice-Chancellor and they are
binding on the University. However, the Government and University are not
following the said procedure and appointing persons of their choice as Vice-
Chancellor. Any appointment to a post under the State must be within the
constitutional scheme and rule of equality in public employment is a basic
feature of the Constitution. He, therefore, prayed for direction to the
Government to give wide publicity through an advertisement inviting
applications from eligible and meritorious candidates and to make appointment
to the post of Vice-Chancellor.
10\. In view of the rival contentions, the question that arises for
consideration is whether the University can follow the procedure stipulated
under Statute 4 of the First Statutes made under the APAU Act or the procedure
prescribed in G.O.Ms.No.14, dated 20.2.2010 for appointment of Vice-Chancellor
of the University.
11\. Acharya N.G. Ranga Agricultural University, formerly known as Andhra
Pradesh Agricultural University, was established under the Andhra Pradesh
Agricultural University Act, 1963. The University shall consist of a
Chancellor, a Vice-Chancellor, a Board of Management and an Academic Council.
The appointment of Vice-Chancellor is governed by Section 11 of the APAU Act.
Section 20 of the said Act speaks about the powers and functions of the Board
of Management. Section 20(i) confers power on the Board of Management to
determine and regulate all policies relating to the affairs of the University
in accordance with the Act and the statutes. Section 39 states as to how
statutes are made. Sub-section (1) of Section 39 states that the First
Statutes with regard to matters set out in clauses (a) to (m) of Section 38
namely, constitution, powers and duties of the authorities; powers, functions,
duties and conditions of service of the officers etc., shall be made by the
Government. Sub-section (2) of Section 39, which is relevant for the purpose,
reads thus: "(2) subject to the prior approval of the Government, the Board
may, from time to time, make any statute in addition to the first statutes
referred to in sub- section (1), and may amend or repeal any statute in the
manner hereinafter provided in this section."
Sub-section (6) of Section 39 is as follows:
"(6) Every first statute made under sub-section (1) shall immediately after it
is made, be laid before each House of the State Legislature if it is in
session and if it is not in session in the session immediately following, for
a total period of fourteen days which may be comprised in one session in which
it is so laid or the session immediately following, both Houses agree in
making any modification in the statute or in the annulment of the statute, the
statute shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or shall stand
annulled, as the case may be; so however that any such modification or
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under the statute."
A combined reading of the above extracted provisions makes it clear that the
Board of Management of the University may amend or repeal any statute
including First Statutes subject to prior approval of the Government, and any
such modification in the statute shall have effect only when it is laid before
each House of the State Legislature and on agreeing for such modification.
Therefore, in our opinion, the Hon'ble Single Judge was not correct in holding
that the procedure set out in Section 39(6) of the APAU Act has no application
to the amendment or repeal of any existing statute of the University. Merely
because there was failure on the part of the Board of Management in taking
steps for amendment of Statute 4 of the First Statutes within the time
stipulated in G.O.Ms.No.14, dated 20.2.2010, it cannot be said that the
procedure prescribed therein cannot be followed and the University must
necessarily adopt the procedure stipulated in G.O.Ms.No.14. It is true that
the selection procedure for appointment of teachers stipulated in G.O.Ms.No.14
was adopted by the State Government and the University, however, we are of the
view of that the said procedure cannot be followed for appointment of Vice-
Chancellor as the same is governed by Section 11 of the APAU Act and Statute 4
of the First Statutes made thereunder and unless and until Statute 4 is
amended as provided under Section 39(6), the same will govern the field.
Clause 13 of G.O.Ms.No.14 says that the service conditions of teachers like
recruitment and qualifications, selection procedure etc. shall be implemented
by all universities by amending necessary statutes, ordinances, rules and
regulations. In our view, it is a general direction or advice to all the
universities in the State and it cannot be termed as prior approval of the
Government to amend the First Statutes of the University; the Board of
Management has to follow the procedure stipulated in Section 39 of the APAU
Act for making amendments to the statutes of the University. Thus, it is clear
that unless and until the manner of appointment of Vice-Chancellor as
prescribed in Statute 4 of the First Statutes is amended as provided in
Section 39(6) of the APAU Act, the University has to follow the same.
12\. It is now well settled that any guidelines which do not have any
statutory flavour are merely advisory in nature. They cannot have the force of
a statute. They are subservient to the legislative Act and the statutory
rules. (See State of Haryana v. Mahender Singh14, Maharao Sahib Shri Bhim
Singhji v. Union of India15, J.R. Raghupathy v. State of A.P.16 and Narendra
Kumar Maheshwari v. Union of India17. It is also well settled that
instructions cannot be so framed or utilized as to override the provisions of
law and such a method will destroy the very basis of the rule of law and
strike at the very root of orderly administration of law (See Mannalal Jain v.
State of Assam18).
13\. In this connection, it is apposite to quote the following observations
from K.A. Nagamani v. Indian Airlines (supra):
"............Mere administrative rules are not legislation of any kind. They
are in the nature of statements of policy and the practice of government
departments, statutory authorities, whether published or otherwise. Statutory
rules, which are made under the provisions of any enactment and regulations,
subject to parliamentary approval stand on entirely different footing. The
administrative rules are always considered and have repeatedly been held to be
rules of administrative practice merely, not rules of law and not delegated
legislation and they have no statutory force. Mere description of such rules
of administrative practice as "rules" does not make them to be statutory
rules. Such administrative rules can be modified, amended or consolidated by
the authorities without following any particular procedure. There are no legal
restrictions to do so as long as they do not offend the provisions of the
Constitution or statutes or statutory rules as the case may be."
14\. It is thus clear from the above that administrative rules are merely
rules of practice and not rules of law and not delegated legislation and they
have no statutory force and cannot override the provisions of law.
15\. In this case, the Government issued G.O.Ms.No.14, dated 20.2.2010
directing all the universities in the State to implement the service
conditions as recommended by the UGC and the Six Member Committee constituted
by the Government by amending necessary statutes, ordinances, rules and
regulations. We are, therefore, of the view that till Statute 4 of the First
Statutes is amended as per the recommendations of the UGC, the University has
to follow the manner of appointment of Vice-Chancellor as provided in Statute
4 of the First Statutes and the petitioner cannot seek a direction from this
Court to follow the procedure prescribed in G.O.Ms.No.14, Higher Education
(UE.II) Department, dated 20.2.2010. The Government may consider the changes
proposed by the Board of Management of the University to the APAU Act and take
necessary steps for making suitable amendments, at the earliest.
16\. In view of the above, the impugned order passed by the learned Single
Judge in WPMP.No.43447 of 2012 in Writ Petition No.34156 of 2012 is set aside,
Writ Appeal Nos.1491 and 1522 of 2012 and 13 of 2013 are allowed, Writ
Petition No.34156 of 2012 and PIL No.387 of 2012 stand dismissed. No order as
to costs. All the pending miscellaneous applications stand closed.
___________________________ PINAKI CHANDRA GHOSE, CJ ______________ VILAS V.
AFZULPURKAR, J.
11th February, 2013.
15\. In this case, the Government issued G.O.Ms.No.14, dated 20.2.2010
directing all the universities in the State to implement the service
conditions as recommended by the UGC and the Six Member Committee constituted
by the Government by amending necessary statutes, ordinances, rules and
regulations. We are, therefore, of the view that till Statute 4 of the First
Statutes is amended as per the recommendations of the UGC, the University has
to follow the manner of appointment of Vice-Chancellor as provided in Statute
4 of the First Statutes and the petitioner cannot seek a direction from this
Court to follow the procedure prescribed in G.O.Ms.No.14, Higher Education
(UE.II) Department, dated 20.2.2010. The Government may consider the changes
proposed by the Board of Management of the University to the APAU Act and take
necessary steps for making suitable amendments, at the earliest.
16\. In view of the above, the impugned order passed by the learned Single
Judge in WPMP.No.43447 of 2012 in Writ Petition No.34156 of 2012 is set aside,
Writ Appeal Nos.1491 and 1522 of 2012 and 13 of 2013 are allowed, Writ
Petition No.34156 of 2012 and PIL No.387 of 2012 stand dismissed. No order as
Writ Petition No.34156 of 2012 may be noticed and the parties herein are
referred to as they are arrayed in the said writ petition. With the consent of
the parties, we have taken up Writ Petition No.34156 of 2012 also for hearing
and disposal.
2\. Writ Petition No.34156 of 2012 has been filed for a writ of mandamus
declaring the action of the Government of Andhra Pradesh and Acharya N.G.
Ranga Agricultural University in not following the UGC Regulations 2010/ICAR
Model Act for Agricultural Universities as adopted by the University and
G.O.Ms.No.14, Higher Education (UE.II) Department, dated 20.2.2010 with regard
to appointment of Vice-Chancellor to the University as arbitrary, illegal and
violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India and for a
direction to the Government and the University to make appointment of Vice-
Chancellor in accordance with UGC Regulations 2010/ICAR Model Act.
3\. By the impugned order passed in WPMP.No.43447 of 2012 in Writ Petition
No.34156 of 2012 respondent Nos.1 to 3, Government of Andhra Pradesh and the
University, were directed to follow the procedure prescribed in G.O.Ms.No.14,
dated 20.2.2010 for selecting and appointing a candidate as the Vice-
Chancellor of Acharya N.G. Ranga Agricultural University, Hyderabad. As
against the said direction, while the Government filed Writ Appeal No.1522 of
2012, Acharya N.G. Ranga Agricultural University preferred Writ Appeal No.1491
15\. In this case, the Government issued G.O.Ms.No.14, dated 20.2.2010
directing all the universities in the State to implement the service
conditions as recommended by the UGC and the Six Member Committee constituted
by the Government by amending necessary statutes, ordinances, rules and
regulations. We are, therefore, of the view that till Statute 4 of the First
Statutes is amended as per the recommendations of the UGC, the University has
to follow the manner of appointment of Vice-Chancellor as provided in Statute
4 of the First Statutes and the petitioner cannot seek a direction from this
Court to follow the procedure prescribed in G.O.Ms.No.14, Higher Education
(UE.II) Department, dated 20.2.2010. The Government may consider the changes
proposed by the Board of Management of the University to the APAU Act and take
necessary steps for making suitable amendments, at the earliest.
16\. In view of the above, the impugned order passed by the learned Single
Judge in WPMP.No.43447 of 2012 in Writ Petition No.34156 of 2012 is set aside,
Writ Appeal Nos.1491 and 1522 of 2012 and 13 of 2013 are allowed, Writ
Petition No.34156 of 2012 and PIL No.387 of 2012 stand dismissed. No order as
Writ Petition No.34156 of 2012 may be noticed and the parties herein are
referred to as they are arrayed in the said writ petition. With the consent of
the parties, we have taken up Writ Petition No.34156 of 2012 also for hearing
and disposal.
2\. Writ Petition No.34156 of 2012 has been filed for a writ of mandamus
declaring the action of the Government of Andhra Pradesh and Acharya N.G.
Ranga Agricultural University in not following the UGC Regulations 2010/ICAR
Model Act for Agricultural Universities as adopted by the University and
G.O.Ms.No.14, Higher Education (UE.II) Department, dated 20.2.2010 with regard
to appointment of Vice-Chancellor to the University as arbitrary, illegal and
violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India and for a
direction to the Government and the University to make appointment of Vice-
Chancellor in accordance with UGC Regulations 2010/ICAR Model Act.
3\. By the impugned order passed in WPMP.No.43447 of 2012 in Writ Petition
No.34156 of 2012 respondent Nos.1 to 3, Government of Andhra Pradesh and the
University, were directed to follow the procedure prescribed in G.O.Ms.No.14,
dated 20.2.2010 for selecting and appointing a candidate as the Vice-
Chancellor of Acharya N.G. Ranga Agricultural University, Hyderabad. As
against the said direction, while the Government filed Writ Appeal No.1522 of
2012, Acharya N.G. Ranga Agricultural University preferred Writ Appeal No.1491
15\. In this case, the Government issued G.O.Ms.No.14, dated 20.2.2010
directing all the universities in the State to implement the service
conditions as recommended by the UGC and the Six Member Committee constituted
by the Government by amending necessary statutes, ordinances, rules and
regulations. We are, therefore, of the view that till Statute 4 of the First
Statutes is amended as per the recommendations of the UGC, the University has
to follow the manner of appointment of Vice-Chancellor as provided in Statute
4 of the First Statutes and the petitioner cannot seek a direction from this
Court to follow the procedure prescribed in G.O.Ms.No.14, Higher Education
(UE.II) Department, dated 20.2.2010. The Government may consider the changes
proposed by the Board of Management of the University to the APAU Act and take
necessary steps for making suitable amendments, at the earliest.
16\. In view of the above, the impugned order passed by the learned Single
Judge in WPMP.No.43447 of 2012 in Writ Petition No.34156 of 2012 is set aside,
Writ Appeal Nos.1491 and 1522 of 2012 and 13 of 2013 are allowed, Writ
Petition No.34156 of 2012 and PIL No.387 of 2012 stand dismissed. No order as
Writ Petition No.34156 of 2012 may be noticed and the parties herein are
referred to as they are arrayed in the said writ petition. With the consent of
the parties, we have taken up Writ Petition No.34156 of 2012 also for hearing
and disposal.
2\. Writ Petition No.34156 of 2012 has been filed for a writ of mandamus
declaring the action of the Government of Andhra Pradesh and Acharya N.G.
Ranga Agricultural University in not following the UGC Regulations 2010/ICAR
Model Act for Agricultural Universities as adopted by the University and
G.O.Ms.No.14, Higher Education (UE.II) Department, dated 20.2.2010 with regard
to appointment of Vice-Chancellor to the University as arbitrary, illegal and
violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India and for a
direction to the Government and the University to make appointment of Vice-
Chancellor in accordance with UGC Regulations 2010/ICAR Model Act.
3\. By the impugned order passed in WPMP.No.43447 of 2012 in Writ Petition
No.34156 of 2012 respondent Nos.1 to 3, Government of Andhra Pradesh and the
University, were directed to follow the procedure prescribed in G.O.Ms.No.14,
dated 20.2.2010 for selecting and appointing a candidate as the Vice-
Chancellor of Acharya N.G. Ranga Agricultural University, Hyderabad. As
against the said direction, while the Government filed Writ Appeal No.1522 of
2012, Acharya N.G. Ranga Agricultural University preferred Writ Appeal No.1491
of 2012. Writ Appeal No.13 of 2013 has also been filed against the same order
of the learned Single Judge by one Dr. A. Padma Raju seeking leave of this
Court, as he is not a party to the writ petition. PIL No.387 of 2012 has been
filed by M. Govind Reddy, a retired Professor of the University, seeking a
direction to the Government and the University to make appointment of Vice-
Chancellor in accordance with UGC Regulations, ICAR Model Act and
G.O.Ms.No.14, dated 20.2.2010.
4\. It is mainly contended in the writ appeals that unless Statue 4 of the
First Statutes and Section 11 of the Andhra Pradesh Agricultural University
Act, 1963 (for short, 'the APAU Act') are amended by the State Legislature,
the University has to follow the procedure prescribed under the Act and the
15\. In this case, the Government issued G.O.Ms.No.14, dated 20.2.2010
directing all the universities in the State to implement the service
conditions as recommended by the UGC and the Six Member Committee constituted
by the Government by amending necessary statutes, ordinances, rules and
regulations. We are, therefore, of the view that till Statute 4 of the First
Statutes is amended as per the recommendations of the UGC, the University has
to follow the manner of appointment of Vice-Chancellor as provided in Statute
4 of the First Statutes and the petitioner cannot seek a direction from this
Court to follow the procedure prescribed in G.O.Ms.No.14, Higher Education
(UE.II) Department, dated 20.2.2010. The Government may consider the changes
proposed by the Board of Management of the University to the APAU Act and take
necessary steps for making suitable amendments, at the earliest.
16\. In view of the above, the impugned order passed by the learned Single
Judge in WPMP.No.43447 of 2012 in Writ Petition No.34156 of 2012 is set aside,
Writ Appeal Nos.1491 and 1522 of 2012 and 13 of 2013 are allowed, Writ
Petition No.34156 of 2012 and PIL No.387 of 2012 stand dismissed. No order as
Writ Petition No.34156 of 2012 may be noticed and the parties herein are
referred to as they are arrayed in the said writ petition. With the consent of
the parties, we have taken up Writ Petition No.34156 of 2012 also for hearing
and disposal.
2\. Writ Petition No.34156 of 2012 has been filed for a writ of mandamus
declaring the action of the Government of Andhra Pradesh and Acharya N.G.
Ranga Agricultural University in not following the UGC Regulations 2010/ICAR
Model Act for Agricultural Universities as adopted by the University and
G.O.Ms.No.14, Higher Education (UE.II) Department, dated 20.2.2010 with regard
to appointment of Vice-Chancellor to the University as arbitrary, illegal and
violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India and for a
direction to the Government and the University to make appointment of Vice-
Chancellor in accordance with UGC Regulations 2010/ICAR Model Act.
3\. By the impugned order passed in WPMP.No.43447 of 2012 in Writ Petition
No.34156 of 2012 respondent Nos.1 to 3, Government of Andhra Pradesh and the
University, were directed to follow the procedure prescribed in G.O.Ms.No.14,
dated 20.2.2010 for selecting and appointing a candidate as the Vice-
Chancellor of Acharya N.G. Ranga Agricultural University, Hyderabad. As
against the said direction, while the Government filed Writ Appeal No.1522 of
2012, Acharya N.G. Ranga Agricultural University preferred Writ Appeal No.1491
of 2012. Writ Appeal No.13 of 2013 has also been filed against the same order
of the learned Single Judge by one Dr. A. Padma Raju seeking leave of this
Court, as he is not a party to the writ petition. PIL No.387 of 2012 has been
filed by M. Govind Reddy, a retired Professor of the University, seeking a
direction to the Government and the University to make appointment of Vice-
Chancellor in accordance with UGC Regulations, ICAR Model Act and
G.O.Ms.No.14, dated 20.2.2010.
4\. It is mainly contended in the writ appeals that unless Statue 4 of the
First Statutes and Section 11 of the Andhra Pradesh Agricultural University
Act, 1963 (for short, 'the APAU Act') are amended by the State Legislature,
the University has to follow the procedure prescribed under the Act and the
15\. In this case, the Government issued G.O.Ms.No.14, dated 20.2.2010
directing all the universities in the State to implement the service
conditions as recommended by the UGC and the Six Member Committee constituted
by the Government by amending necessary statutes, ordinances, rules and
regulations. We are, therefore, of the view that till Statute 4 of the First
Statutes is amended as per the recommendations of the UGC, the University has
to follow the manner of appointment of Vice-Chancellor as provided in Statute
4 of the First Statutes and the petitioner cannot seek a direction from this
Court to follow the procedure prescribed in G.O.Ms.No.14, Higher Education
(UE.II) Department, dated 20.2.2010. The Government may consider the changes
proposed by the Board of Management of the University to the APAU Act and take
necessary steps for making suitable amendments, at the earliest.
16\. In view of the above, the impugned order passed by the learned Single
Judge in WPMP.No.43447 of 2012 in Writ Petition No.34156 of 2012 is set aside,
Writ Appeal Nos.1491 and 1522 of 2012 and 13 of 2013 are allowed, Writ
Petition No.34156 of 2012 and PIL No.387 of 2012 stand dismissed. No order as
