Customs, Excise and Gold Tribunal - Delhi
Commr. Of C. Ex. vs Dhanvi Trading And Investment (P) ... on 14 February, 2005
Equivalent citations: 2005 (187) ELT 270 Tri Del
Bench: A T V.K., P Bajaj
ORDER P.S. Bajaj, Member (J)
1\. This appeal has been directed by the Revenue against the impugned order-
in-appeal vide which the Commissioner (Appeals) has allowed the benefit of the
SSI exemption under Notification No. 175/86, dated 1-3-86 to the respondents
in spite of their using brand name of another person on their products
Detergent powder and cake. The appeal was earlier decided by the Tribunal vide
final order dated 25-7-89 vide which the Tribunal upheld the order-in-appeal
along with another appeal of Vikashara Trading & Investment Pvt. Ltd. The
Revenue challenged that order before the Apex Court and the Apex Court
observed that no order has been passed in respect of the respondents and
remanded the matter to the Tribunal for fresh decision.
2\. We have heard both the sides. The learned SDR has contended that since the
respondents are using the brand name 'Skylark' on their goods (Detergent
powder and cake) which is owned by M/s. CMC India Pvt. Ltd. who is not
eligible for grant of SSI exemption under Notification No. 175/86 and as such,
the respondents cannot claim benefit of that notification in terms of Para 7
CMC India Pvt. Ltd. and that company is not eligible for the availment of SSI
exemption under Notification No. 175/86. The company had only allowed
permission to use that brand name, to M/s. Vikshara Trading Co. and by virtue
of that permission, the company, did not become the owner of the brand name.
The ownership of the brand name continued to vest in the company M/s. CMC Pvt.
Ltd. Similarly, the respondents had only obtained permission on the strength
of an agreement from the company M/s. Vikshara Trading Company for using the
brand name on their goods also. No ownership rights in respect of the brand
name, never stood transferred to the respondents, for the using the same on
their goods. The owner of the brand name M/s. CMC is not entitled to the
availment of the SSI exemption. Therefore, the respondents cannot claim the
benefit of that notification in terms of Para 7 of the notification.
5\. The manufacture of different type of goods by the owner of the brand name,
than what are being manufactured by the respondents, is of no consequence in
view of the latest judgment of the Apex Court in the case of CC, Trichy v.
Rukmani Pakkwell (supra) wherein it has been observed that in such a situation
the respondents cannot claim benefit of that notification in terms of Para 7
of that notification. He has also contended that the manufacture of different
goods by the owner of the brand name, than the goods manufactured by the
respondents, is of no consequence and the respondents still cannot claim
benefit of the above said notification. He has referred to the latest
pronouncement of the Apex Court on this point, in the case of CCE, Trichy v.
Rukmani Pakkwell Traders .
3\. On the other hand, the learned Counsel has reiterated the correctness of
the impugned order and contended that respondents, M/s. Dhanvi Trading &
Investment Co. Ltd. are assignee of the brand name from the owner M/s. CMC (I)
Pvt. Ltd. and as such, are entitled to the SSI exemption benefit under
Notification No. 175/86 in question specially when the said owner is eligible
for availment of the exemption.
4\. We have heard both the sides, gone through the record and in our view, the
contention raised by the learned SDR has to be accepted. From the record, we
find that the trade mark 'Skylark' belonged to M/s. CMC (I) Pvt. Ltd. That
company procured the brand name from Shantilal P. Jas and Subhash S. Shah of
Calcutta, but later on, through assignment deed, the company (M/s. CMC Ltd.)
assigned the brand name to M/s. Vikshara Trading Co. Ltd. who was engaged in
the manufacture of detergent powder and cake. The respondents are said to have
further obtained permission from M/s. Vikshara Trading & Investment Co. for
using this brand name on their goods (Detergent powder and cake) through
agreement dated 5-10-87. The ownership of the brand name still vests in M/s.
CMC India Pvt. Ltd. and that company is not eligible for the availment of SSI
exemption under Notification No. 175/86. The company had only allowed
permission to use that brand name, to M/s. Vikshara Trading Co. and by virtue
of that permission, the company, did not become the owner of the brand name.
The ownership of the brand name continued to vest in the company M/s. CMC Pvt.
Ltd. Similarly, the respondents had only obtained permission on the strength
of an agreement from the company M/s. Vikshara Trading Company for using the
brand name on their goods also. No ownership rights in respect of the brand
name, never stood transferred to the respondents, for the using the same on
their goods. The owner of the brand name M/s. CMC is not entitled to the
availment of the SSI exemption. Therefore, the respondents cannot claim the
benefit of that notification in terms of Para 7 of the notification.
5\. The manufacture of different type of goods by the owner of the brand name,
than what are being manufactured by the respondents, is of no consequence in
view of the latest judgment of the Apex Court in the case of CC, Trichy v.
Rukmani Pakkwell (supra) wherein it has been observed that in such a situation
also, the SSI exemption will not be available.
6\. In view of the discussion made above, the impugned order under appeal
cannot be sustained and is set aside. The appeal of the Revenue is allowed
with consequential relief, if any.
CMC India Pvt. Ltd. and that company is not eligible for the availment of SSI
exemption under Notification No. 175/86. The company had only allowed
permission to use that brand name, to M/s. Vikshara Trading Co. and by virtue
of that permission, the company, did not become the owner of the brand name.
The ownership of the brand name continued to vest in the company M/s. CMC Pvt.
Ltd. Similarly, the respondents had only obtained permission on the strength
of an agreement from the company M/s. Vikshara Trading Company for using the
brand name on their goods also. No ownership rights in respect of the brand
name, never stood transferred to the respondents, for the using the same on
their goods. The owner of the brand name M/s. CMC is not entitled to the
availment of the SSI exemption. Therefore, the respondents cannot claim the
benefit of that notification in terms of Para 7 of the notification.
5\. The manufacture of different type of goods by the owner of the brand name,
than what are being manufactured by the respondents, is of no consequence in
view of the latest judgment of the Apex Court in the case of CC, Trichy v.
Rukmani Pakkwell (supra) wherein it has been observed that in such a situation
the respondents cannot claim benefit of that notification in terms of Para 7
of that notification. He has also contended that the manufacture of different
goods by the owner of the brand name, than the goods manufactured by the
respondents, is of no consequence and the respondents still cannot claim
benefit of the above said notification. He has referred to the latest
pronouncement of the Apex Court on this point, in the case of CCE, Trichy v.
Rukmani Pakkwell Traders .
3\. On the other hand, the learned Counsel has reiterated the correctness of
the impugned order and contended that respondents, M/s. Dhanvi Trading &
Investment Co. Ltd. are assignee of the brand name from the owner M/s. CMC (I)
Pvt. Ltd. and as such, are entitled to the SSI exemption benefit under
Notification No. 175/86 in question specially when the said owner is eligible
for availment of the exemption.
4\. We have heard both the sides, gone through the record and in our view, the
contention raised by the learned SDR has to be accepted. From the record, we
find that the trade mark 'Skylark' belonged to M/s. CMC (I) Pvt. Ltd. That
company procured the brand name from Shantilal P. Jas and Subhash S. Shah of
Calcutta, but later on, through assignment deed, the company (M/s. CMC Ltd.)
assigned the brand name to M/s. Vikshara Trading Co. Ltd. who was engaged in
the manufacture of detergent powder and cake. The respondents are said to have
CMC India Pvt. Ltd. and that company is not eligible for the availment of SSI
exemption under Notification No. 175/86. The company had only allowed
permission to use that brand name, to M/s. Vikshara Trading Co. and by virtue
of that permission, the company, did not become the owner of the brand name.
The ownership of the brand name continued to vest in the company M/s. CMC Pvt.
Ltd. Similarly, the respondents had only obtained permission on the strength
of an agreement from the company M/s. Vikshara Trading Company for using the
brand name on their goods also. No ownership rights in respect of the brand
name, never stood transferred to the respondents, for the using the same on
their goods. The owner of the brand name M/s. CMC is not entitled to the
availment of the SSI exemption. Therefore, the respondents cannot claim the
benefit of that notification in terms of Para 7 of the notification.
5\. The manufacture of different type of goods by the owner of the brand name,
than what are being manufactured by the respondents, is of no consequence in
view of the latest judgment of the Apex Court in the case of CC, Trichy v.
Rukmani Pakkwell (supra) wherein it has been observed that in such a situation
the respondents cannot claim benefit of that notification in terms of Para 7
of that notification. He has also contended that the manufacture of different
goods by the owner of the brand name, than the goods manufactured by the
respondents, is of no consequence and the respondents still cannot claim
benefit of the above said notification. He has referred to the latest
pronouncement of the Apex Court on this point, in the case of CCE, Trichy v.
Rukmani Pakkwell Traders .
3\. On the other hand, the learned Counsel has reiterated the correctness of
the impugned order and contended that respondents, M/s. Dhanvi Trading &
Investment Co. Ltd. are assignee of the brand name from the owner M/s. CMC (I)
Pvt. Ltd. and as such, are entitled to the SSI exemption benefit under
Notification No. 175/86 in question specially when the said owner is eligible
for availment of the exemption.
4\. We have heard both the sides, gone through the record and in our view, the
contention raised by the learned SDR has to be accepted. From the record, we
find that the trade mark 'Skylark' belonged to M/s. CMC (I) Pvt. Ltd. That
company procured the brand name from Shantilal P. Jas and Subhash S. Shah of
Calcutta, but later on, through assignment deed, the company (M/s. CMC Ltd.)
assigned the brand name to M/s. Vikshara Trading Co. Ltd. who was engaged in
the manufacture of detergent powder and cake. The respondents are said to have
CMC India Pvt. Ltd. and that company is not eligible for the availment of SSI
exemption under Notification No. 175/86. The company had only allowed
permission to use that brand name, to M/s. Vikshara Trading Co. and by virtue
of that permission, the company, did not become the owner of the brand name.
The ownership of the brand name continued to vest in the company M/s. CMC Pvt.
Ltd. Similarly, the respondents had only obtained permission on the strength
of an agreement from the company M/s. Vikshara Trading Company for using the
brand name on their goods also. No ownership rights in respect of the brand
name, never stood transferred to the respondents, for the using the same on
their goods. The owner of the brand name M/s. CMC is not entitled to the
availment of the SSI exemption. Therefore, the respondents cannot claim the
benefit of that notification in terms of Para 7 of the notification.
5\. The manufacture of different type of goods by the owner of the brand name,
than what are being manufactured by the respondents, is of no consequence in
view of the latest judgment of the Apex Court in the case of CC, Trichy v.
Rukmani Pakkwell (supra) wherein it has been observed that in such a situation
the respondents cannot claim benefit of that notification in terms of Para 7
of that notification. He has also contended that the manufacture of different
goods by the owner of the brand name, than the goods manufactured by the
respondents, is of no consequence and the respondents still cannot claim
benefit of the above said notification. He has referred to the latest
pronouncement of the Apex Court on this point, in the case of CCE, Trichy v.
Rukmani Pakkwell Traders .
3\. On the other hand, the learned Counsel has reiterated the correctness of
the impugned order and contended that respondents, M/s. Dhanvi Trading &
Investment Co. Ltd. are assignee of the brand name from the owner M/s. CMC (I)
Pvt. Ltd. and as such, are entitled to the SSI exemption benefit under
Notification No. 175/86 in question specially when the said owner is eligible
for availment of the exemption.
4\. We have heard both the sides, gone through the record and in our view, the
contention raised by the learned SDR has to be accepted. From the record, we
find that the trade mark 'Skylark' belonged to M/s. CMC (I) Pvt. Ltd. That
company procured the brand name from Shantilal P. Jas and Subhash S. Shah of
Calcutta, but later on, through assignment deed, the company (M/s. CMC Ltd.)
assigned the brand name to M/s. Vikshara Trading Co. Ltd. who was engaged in
the manufacture of detergent powder and cake. The respondents are said to have
further obtained permission from M/s. Vikshara Trading & Investment Co. for
using this brand name on their goods (Detergent powder and cake) through
agreement dated 5-10-87. The ownership of the brand name still vests in M/s.
CMC India Pvt. Ltd. and that company is not eligible for the availment of SSI
exemption under Notification No. 175/86. The company had only allowed
permission to use that brand name, to M/s. Vikshara Trading Co. and by virtue
of that permission, the company, did not become the owner of the brand name.
The ownership of the brand name continued to vest in the company M/s. CMC Pvt.
Ltd. Similarly, the respondents had only obtained permission on the strength
of an agreement from the company M/s. Vikshara Trading Company for using the
brand name on their goods also. No ownership rights in respect of the brand
CMC India Pvt. Ltd. and that company is not eligible for the availment of SSI
exemption under Notification No. 175/86. The company had only allowed
permission to use that brand name, to M/s. Vikshara Trading Co. and by virtue
of that permission, the company, did not become the owner of the brand name.
The ownership of the brand name continued to vest in the company M/s. CMC Pvt.
Ltd. Similarly, the respondents had only obtained permission on the strength
of an agreement from the company M/s. Vikshara Trading Company for using the
brand name on their goods also. No ownership rights in respect of the brand
name, never stood transferred to the respondents, for the using the same on
their goods. The owner of the brand name M/s. CMC is not entitled to the
availment of the SSI exemption. Therefore, the respondents cannot claim the
benefit of that notification in terms of Para 7 of the notification.
5\. The manufacture of different type of goods by the owner of the brand name,
than what are being manufactured by the respondents, is of no consequence in
view of the latest judgment of the Apex Court in the case of CC, Trichy v.
Rukmani Pakkwell (supra) wherein it has been observed that in such a situation
the respondents cannot claim benefit of that notification in terms of Para 7
of that notification. He has also contended that the manufacture of different
goods by the owner of the brand name, than the goods manufactured by the
respondents, is of no consequence and the respondents still cannot claim
benefit of the above said notification. He has referred to the latest
pronouncement of the Apex Court on this point, in the case of CCE, Trichy v.
Rukmani Pakkwell Traders .
3\. On the other hand, the learned Counsel has reiterated the correctness of
the impugned order and contended that respondents, M/s. Dhanvi Trading &
Investment Co. Ltd. are assignee of the brand name from the owner M/s. CMC (I)
Pvt. Ltd. and as such, are entitled to the SSI exemption benefit under
Notification No. 175/86 in question specially when the said owner is eligible
for availment of the exemption.
4\. We have heard both the sides, gone through the record and in our view, the
contention raised by the learned SDR has to be accepted. From the record, we
find that the trade mark 'Skylark' belonged to M/s. CMC (I) Pvt. Ltd. That
company procured the brand name from Shantilal P. Jas and Subhash S. Shah of
Calcutta, but later on, through assignment deed, the company (M/s. CMC Ltd.)
assigned the brand name to M/s. Vikshara Trading Co. Ltd. who was engaged in
the manufacture of detergent powder and cake. The respondents are said to have
further obtained permission from M/s. Vikshara Trading & Investment Co. for
using this brand name on their goods (Detergent powder and cake) through
agreement dated 5-10-87. The ownership of the brand name still vests in M/s.
CMC India Pvt. Ltd. and that company is not eligible for the availment of SSI
exemption under Notification No. 175/86. The company had only allowed
permission to use that brand name, to M/s. Vikshara Trading Co. and by virtue
of that permission, the company, did not become the owner of the brand name.
The ownership of the brand name continued to vest in the company M/s. CMC Pvt.
Ltd. Similarly, the respondents had only obtained permission on the strength
of an agreement from the company M/s. Vikshara Trading Company for using the
brand name on their goods also. No ownership rights in respect of the brand
CMC India Pvt. Ltd. and that company is not eligible for the availment of SSI
exemption under Notification No. 175/86. The company had only allowed
permission to use that brand name, to M/s. Vikshara Trading Co. and by virtue
of that permission, the company, did not become the owner of the brand name.
The ownership of the brand name continued to vest in the company M/s. CMC Pvt.
Ltd. Similarly, the respondents had only obtained permission on the strength
of an agreement from the company M/s. Vikshara Trading Company for using the
brand name on their goods also. No ownership rights in respect of the brand
name, never stood transferred to the respondents, for the using the same on
their goods. The owner of the brand name M/s. CMC is not entitled to the
availment of the SSI exemption. Therefore, the respondents cannot claim the
benefit of that notification in terms of Para 7 of the notification.
5\. The manufacture of different type of goods by the owner of the brand name,
than what are being manufactured by the respondents, is of no consequence in
view of the latest judgment of the Apex Court in the case of CC, Trichy v.
Rukmani Pakkwell (supra) wherein it has been observed that in such a situation
