Delhi District Court
Complainant Naresh Dhall Has ... vs . on 18 April, 2009
Author: Sh. Dig Singh
           IN THE COURT OF SH. DIG VINAY SINGH, ADDITIONAL CHIEF METROPOLITAN 
                                                  MAGISTRATE­03 (IPR), ROHINI, DELHI
                In re:                                 
                NARESH DHALL                                              ...COMPLAINANT
                VS.
                LALAN SINGH                                               ...ACCUSED
                CC NO.67A/1/2008    
                U/s.138 N.I. ACT                                                                                              
                P.S. ASHOK VIHAR
    DATE OF RESERVATION OF JUDGMENT: 13.4.2009
    DATE OF PRONOUNCEMENT OF JUDGMENT: 18.4.2009
                                                                       JUDGEMENT
    (a) The serial no. of the case                                        : R0038612008.
    (b) The date of commission of offence                                 : 09.11.2008.
    (c) The name of complainant                                           : NARESH DHALL S/O. KRISHAN LAL DHALL
(d) The name,parentage,residence of accused : LALAN SINGH S/O. SH. BRAHAM DEV
SINGH R/O. K­1674, JAHANGIR PURI, DELHI­110033
that is, had the accused issued the cheque in question on 25.4.2007 without
date and amount, the accused could have proved this fact by bringing on record
any evidence from his bankers that the other cheque leafs from the same cheque
book , after the number of the cheque in question, were transacted or issued
in favour of other or self by the accused between April, 2007 till September,
2008, the date when allegedly cheque was given to the complainant by the
accused, but even that was not done.
31\. Accordingly, the accused has not only failed to rebut the presumption in
favour of complainant, but also the falsity of the claim of accused is writ
large from the above facts.
32\. In such circumstances, the case of complainant is proved beyond
reasonable doubt. Accused is found guilty and convicted for the offence u/s
138 of Negotiable Instruments Act.
    ANNOUNCED IN OPEN COURT ON 
    18th April 2009                                                                   DIGVINAY SINGH
                                           ADDITIONAL CHIEF METROPOLITAN MAGISTRATE­03 (IPR), 
SINGH R/O. K­1674, JAHANGIR PURI, DELHI­110033
(e) The offence complained of/ proved : U/s.138 N.I. ACT.
    (f) The plea of accused                                               : pleaded not guilty
    (g) The final order                                                   : CONVICTED.
    (h) The date of such order                                            : 18.4.2009.
    (i) Brief statement of the reasons for the decision                              :­
1\. Complainant Naresh Dhall has preferred this complaint against the accused
Lallan Singh for the offence u/s. 138 Negotiable Instruments Act. The case of
the complainant is that, the accused was a tenant of complainant with respect
to basement of shop no. C­534, New Subzi Mandi, Azad Pur, Delhi, from
21.11.2005, for a period of two years, at a monthly rent of Rs.4500/­. There
was a registered rent agreement dated 21.11.2005. It is further the case of
JUDGMENT/NARESH DHALLVS.LALAN
SINGH/CCNO.76A/1/08/U.S.138N.I.ACT/CONVITED/18.04.2009/Pg 1 of 16/K
complainant that the ground floor and the first floor of the said shop was
also rented out to the accused vide another lease deed dated 25.4.2007 for
additional monthly rent of Rs.8500/­ which was for a period of eleven months
ending on 31.3.2008. The term of the lease regarding basement and other two
floor expired due to efflux of time. Complainant claims that he allowed the
accused to overstay in the premises, but accused was a chronic defaulter of
rent and since March, 2008 no rent was paid. In both the rent agreements,
there were penalty clauses which entitled the complainant to receive a total
sum of Rs.33,000/­ per month. Complainant also claims that the accused
alongwith one Mohd. Yusuf filed a frivolous suit of permanent injunction
against the complainant and thereafter complainant issued a legal notice dated
25.9.2008 claiming penalty amount of Rs.33000/­ per month including
electricity and other charges with effect from 01.4.2008 and the accused was
also called upon to vacate the premises. It is claimed that in discharge of
this liability of damages from 01.4.2008 to 30.9.2008 @ Rs.33000/­ per month,
the accused issued cheque no.517714 dated 15.10.2008 for a sum of
Rs.1,98,000/­ drawn on Punjab & Sind Bank, New Subzi Mandi, Azad Pur, Delhi.
When this cheque was presented for encashment, it was dishonoured due to the
reason "Account Closed", vide memo dated 25.10.2008. A legal notice as
required was issued to the accused on 06.11.2008 i.e. within 30 days from the
date of knowledge of dishonour, asking the accused to pay the cheque amount
within 15 days of receipt of notice. When the accused failed to pay the
amount, the present case was filed. Since, the complaint was within limitation
as stipulated and there was sufficient material to proceed against the accused
for offence u/s.138 N.I. Act, he was summoned as such.
2\. A notice u/s.251 Cr.PC for the offence u/s.138 N.I. Act was framed against
the accused to which he claimed trial.
3\. In support of its case, the complainant examined himself as PW1 in which
he proved the two lease deeds as mentioned above as Ex. CW1/1 & CW1/2
respectively. The cheque in question was also proved as Ex. CW1/4. The
photocopy of legal notice dated 25.9.2008 asking the accused to pay damages
and vacate the property is Mark­A. It is deposed by the complainant that the
said cheque got dishonoured due to remarks "Account Closed" vide memo Ex.
CW1/5. Legal notice dated 06.11.2008 , sent to the accused demanding payment
of cheque amount within 30 days of knowledge of dishonour of cheque was proved
as Ex. CW1/6 and the registered postal receipts and UPC through which the
notice was dispatched to the JUDGMENT/NARESH DHALLVS.LALAN
SINGH/CCNO.76A/1/08/U.S.138N.I.ACT/CONVITED/18.04.2009/Pg 2 of 16/K accused
were proved as Ex. CW1/7 & CW1/8 respectively. Complainant deposed that the
accused failed to make payment of cheque amount despite receipt of notice.
4\. In the cross examination of complainant by the accused, nothing material
could be brought out on record. It was suggested by the accused to the
complainant in cross examination that the complainant filled up the date, name
of complainant and amount on the cheque in question in his own handwriting,
which was denied by the complainant and the complainant took a stand that when
the cheque was brought to him by the accused, it was already filled up and
signed. The accused also put a suggestion to the complainant that the cheque
was given as a blank cheque as security in 2007 by the accused to the
complainant and that the cheque was misused. Complainant denied this
suggestion also.
5\. All the incriminating evidence was put to the accused in his examination
u/s.313 r/w 281 Cr.PC. In his statement, accused admitted that he took on rent
the basement of the shop on 21.11.2005 for two years, but he stated that rent
was Rs.1900/­ and not Rs.4500/­, as claimed in the agreement. He also stated
that he had been paying Rs.1900/­ per month to the complainant and for the
sake of agreement only, the rate of rent was mentioned as Rs.4500/­. He
admitted his signatures on the agreement dated 21.11.2005 Ex. CW1/1. In answer
to another question during statement of accused, he claimed that from the very
beginning of the tenancy, he was in possession of basement,ground floor and
first floor from 21.11.2005 and the rent of three floors was Rs.1900/­ per
month. When the agreement dated 25.4.2007 Ex. CW1/2 was put to the accused, he
admitted his signatures on this document also and claimed that although it
bears his signatures, but his signatures on this agreement dated 25.4.2007 was
obtained by the complainant when the accused entered into earlier rent
agreement dated 21.11.2005. Accused denied that he ever agreed to pay
additional sum of Rs.8500/­ as rent for ground floor and first floor or that
he took these two floors separately on rent from 25.4.2007. Very interestingly
in the answer to another question, the accused claimed that when he entered
into agreement dated 25.4.2007, the complainant took the cheque in question a
blank cheque as security and this cheque was fraudulently filled up and
presented by the complainant. He specifically admitted the cheque in question
Ex. CW1/4 was given by him to the complainant when he entered into lease deed
dated 25.4.2007. Accused also admitted that he received legal notice dated
06.11.2008 sent by the JUDGMENT/NARESH DHALLVS.LALAN
SINGH/CCNO.76A/1/08/U.S.138N.I.ACT/CONVITED/18.04.2009/Pg 3 of 16/K
complainant demanding the payment of cheque amount but he claimed that since
he had no legally enforceable liability towards the complainant, therefore, he
did not pay the cheque amount to the complainant after receiving the notice.
6\. The accused examined himself as DW1 and also examined one more witness
Vipin Chaudhary as DW2.
7\. In the witness box during defence evidence as DW­1 the accused changed his
stand and deposed that he is a tenant on the entire shop no. C­34, New Subzi
Mandi, Azad Pur, Delhi since 1996. He admitted that he took this shop on rent
from the complainant, but stated that no written agreement regarding rent or
lease was recorded and right from the very beginning he is in possession of
the entire shop on rent @ Rs.1900/­ per month.
8\. Now this stand taken by the accused is absolutely in contradiction from
his statement u/s.313 Cr.PC where he admitted that he signed rent agreement
dated 21.11.2005 and he took on rent the basement of the shop on 21.11.2005
for two years. In his statement accused also stated that the agreement dated
25.4.2007 bears his signatures, but the signatures on this agreement were
already taken by the complainant when he signed earlier agreement dated
21.11.2005.
9\. In his defence, the accused further deposed that on 25.4.2007, the
complainant asked the accused to come to his house alongwith certain cheques
as the complainant wanted to execute some rent agreement etc. The accused was
asked to bring four photographs and certain cheques and, accordingly, he
reached the house of complainant with four photographs, one blank cheque
alongwith DW2 where the complainant asked him to give blank cheque as security
and also obtained his signatures on certain documents. Accused deposed that
his signatures were obtained on various papers some of which were blank stamp
papers and others were blank white papers.
10\. DW2 Vipin Chaudhary also deposed that he accompanied the accused to the
house of complainant on 25.4.2007 where photographs of the accused were taken
by the complainant alongwith one blank cheque as security and the accused was
also asked to sign 3/4 blank documents, which he signed.
11\. Both these witnesses DW1 & DW2 were subjected to cross examination by the
complainant and various material contradictions were also brought out in their
cross examination. Which JUDGMENT/NARESH DHALLVS.LALAN
SINGH/CCNO.76A/1/08/U.S.138N.I.ACT/CONVITED/18.04.2009/Pg 4 of 16/K create
doubt about their trustworthiness.
12\. Ld. Counsel for the complainant argued that there is a presumption in
favour of complainant u/s.139 r/w section 118 of Negotiable Instruments Act,
which the accused has failed to rebut and, that the stand taken by the
accused, that on 25.4.2007, he gave the blank cheque or that signatures of
accused were obtained on some blank documents gets belied by various material
contradictions in the cross examination of DW1 & DW2 and also by the change of
stand of accused in his statement u/s.313 Cr.PC and in his testimony as DW1.
It is claimed by the complainant that case of complainant is proved.
13\. On the other hand Ld. Counsel for the accused Sh. Ayub Ahmed Qureshi,
argued that neither the complainant is owner of shop, nor his father is owner
of shop and no proof of ownership is put forth and , therefore, the whole case
of complainant gets demolished. The next argument raised by the counsel for
accused is that the complainant admitted in the cross examination that the
cheque was already filled up and signed when it was brought to the complainant
and that, unless a cheque is filled up in the presence of accused as well as
complainant, no case u/s. 138 Negotiable Instruments Act can be prosecuted
and, therefore, the complaint ought to be dismissed.
14\. The last mentioned contention of the counsel for accused, that, to bring
a charge for the offence u/s.138 of Negotiable Instruments Act, the cheque in
question has to be executed and signed in the presence of the drawer and
drawee is absolutely baseless and frivolous. There is no such requirement of
law that the cheque becomes a negotiable instrument only when it is executed
and signed in the presence of drawer and drawee.
15\. In the case of Ravi Chopra Vs. State & Another 2008 (102) DRJ 147 (Delhi
High Court), the facts were that complaint u/s 138 N. I. Act was filed by the
complainant on the ground that between 2000 to 2003 accused took a loan of Rs.
8 lakhs from the complainant and issued certain cheques which were
dishonoured. The defence of the accused in the case was that complainant did
not extend any loan but in fact the amount of Rs. 8 lakhs was invested by the
complainant in real estate business by brother of accused and the cheques in
question were issued by the accused on the insistence of complainant as
security. The accused claimed that when he signed the cheques, they were blank
i.e. without filling the name, date and crossings. The accused further claimed
that he had repaid the loan amount in October 2000 but the complainant did not
return the cheques stating that he would return the cheques in due
JUDGMENT/NARESH DHALLVS.LALAN
SINGH/CCNO.76A/1/08/U.S.138N.I.ACT/CONVITED/18.04.2009/Pg 5 of 16/K course.
The accused claimed that complaint was filed by the complainant after filling
the name of the payee, date and crossing of the cheques. During trial, accused
filed an application for sending the cheques with specimen handwriting of
complainant and accused to handwriting expert claiming that it would falsify
the entire case of complainant. The said application was dismissed by Ld.
Trial court and matter went to Hon'ble Delhi High Court. Before Hon'ble Delhi
High Court, it was argued on behalf of accused that handwriting expert opinion
would mainly probablise the accused's defence in the trial as expert opinion
would show the date of ink to ascertain the time when signatures were appended
and the material particulars were filled up subsequently. It was also argued
that it would show that what was handed over by the accused to the complainant
was not a cheque within the meaning of Section 138 N. I. Act. The accused also
claimed that report of expert regarding difference in ink would show that
there was no liability of accused when cheques were presented for encashment.
Hon'ble Delhi High Court examined Section 87, 20, 49, 86 and 125 of N. I. Act
and it was held as follows in paragraph no. 20.
"20. A collective reading of the above provisions shows that even under the
scheme of the N. I. Act it is possible for the drawer of a cheque to give a
blank cheque signed by him to the payee and consent either impliedly or
expressly to the said cheque being filled up at a subsequent point in time and
presented for payment by the drawee. There is no provision in the N. I. Act
which either defines the difference in the handwriting or the ink pertaining
to the material particulars filled up in comparison with the signature thereon
as constituting a "material alteration" for the purposes of Section 87 N. I.
Act. What however is essential is that the cheque must have been signed by the
drawer. If the signature is altered or does not tally with the normal
signature of the maker, that would be a material alteration. Therefore as long
as the cheque has been signed by the drawer, the fact that the ink in which
the name and figures are written or the date is filled up is different from
the ink of the signature is not a material alteration for the purposes of
Section 87 N. I. Act." Hon'ble Delhi High Court came to conclusion that
contention of the accused that if signatures on the cheques are shown to be
much prior to the date of filling up of the material particulars on the cheque
would probablise the defence of the accused cannot be accepted. It was held
that it matters little if the name of the payee, date and amount are filled up
at a subsequent JUDGMENT/NARESH DHALLVS.LALAN
SINGH/CCNO.76A/1/08/U.S.138N.I.ACT/CONVITED/18.04.2009/Pg 6 of 16/K point of
time subject to proviso to Section 118 N. I. Act.
16\. The second contention raised by the counsel for accused that the
complainant failed to prove ownership of the shop or that, therefore, the
complaint is not maintainable, is also without force. In section 116 of the
Indian Evidence Act, 1872, it is mentioned that a no tenant of immovable
property shall during the continuance of tenancy be permitted to deny that the
landlord of the such tenant had, at the beginning of the tenancy had title to
such immovable property. Accordingly, the accused is estopped u/s. 116 of the
Evidence Act to deny the factum of title of the complainant to the immovable
property. In view of that estoppel, there was no need for the complainant to
have proved the ownership of the shop. Even otherwise, in the present
complaint u/s. 138 Negotiable Instruments Act, the question is whether the
cheque was in discharge of legally enforceable liability or not and once it is
admitted by the accused that he was a tenant, inducted by the complainant, the
ownership of the shop would not in any manner affect the merits of the present
case. It is needless to say here that the accused has specifically admitted
that he is a tenant of the shop in question and that he was paying rent to the
complainant. Although, the date of commencement of tenancy and the amount of
rent is disputed by the accused, but the very admission by the accused that he
was a tenant under the complainant makes the question ownership of the shop of
the complainant, immaterial.
17\. As mentioned above, signatures on the cheque in question is not denied by
the accused, rather it is claimed by the accused is that he gave the cheque in
question to the complainant as security only and it was blank at that time.
The accused claimed that he has no legally enforceable liability of
Rs.1,98,000/­, therefore, he was not obliged to honour the cheque. Accused
also claimed that he did not sign the rent agreement and that his signatures
were obtained on blank papers by the complainant. Let us see whether the
accused's claim is supported by material or not.
18\. U/s. 139 r/w section 118 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, there is a
presumption in favour of the complainant that the cheque in question was
issued in discharge of legally enforceable liability of the accused and it was
for consideration. Under section 139 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, there
is a legal presumption in favour of complainant and against the accused, that
the cheque in question was received by the complainant in discharge of any
debt or other liability from the accused either in whole or in part. As per
this section, the burden to rebut the presumption was on the JUDGMENT/NARESH
DHALLVS.LALAN SINGH/CCNO.76A/1/08/U.S.138N.I.ACT/CONVITED/18.04.2009/Pg 7 of
16/K accused which the accused failed to rebut in the present case. Mere oral
allegations by the accused that the cheque was not given in discharge of his
liability or that he gave the cheque to the complainant towards security would
not suffice. To rebut the presumption u/s.138 N.I. Act, there has to be some
more evidence from the accused besides making of bare oral denial. The accused
has not proved any documentary proof to show that he gave the cheque to the
complainant towards security. If such a defence without any document are to be
taken as sufficient rebuttal, in every case u/s.138 N.I. Act, the accused can
escape his liability by mere oral claim that the cheque was not in discharge
of his liability.
19\. Under section 118 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, there is a legal
presumption in favour of the complainant that every negotiable instrument
(which includes a cheque) was made or drawn for consideration. The legal
presumption is also regarding date of cheque, time of its acceptance, time of
transfer, order of endorsement and also as to stamps. Reading section 118 and
139 of Negotiable Instruments Act, a presumption arises in favour of the
complainant and not in favour of accused that, when this cheque was received
by the complainant, it was against consideration and also towards discharge of
liability by the accused.
20\. In the case of M/s. Kumar Exports v. M/s. Sharma Carpets , 2009(1)
R.C.R.(Criminal) 478 : 2009(1) R.C.R.(Civil) 453 : 2009(1) R.A.J. 154 hon'ble
Supreme court of India, held as follows;
"9. In order to determine the question whether offence punishable under
Section 138 of the Act is made out against the appellant, it will be necessary
to examine the scope and ambit of presumptions to be raised as envisaged by
the provisions of Sections 118 and 139 of the Act. In a suit to enforce a
simple contract, the plaintiff has to aver in his pleading that it was made
for good consideration and must substantiate it by evidence. But to this rule,
the negotiable instruments are an exception. In a significant departure from
the general rule applicable to contracts, Section 118 of the Act provides
certain presumptions to be raised. This Section lays down some special rules
of evidence relating to presumptions. The reason for these presumptions is
that, negotiable instrument passes from hand to hand on endorsement and it
would make trading very difficult and negotiability of the instrument
impossible, unless certain presumptions are made. The presumption, therefore,
is a matter of principle to facilitate negotiability as well as trade. Section
118 of the Act provides presumptions to be raised until the contrary is proved
(i) as to consideration, (ii) as to date of instrument, (iii) as to time of
acceptance, (iv) as to time of transfer, (v) as to order of endorsements, (vi)
as to appropriate stamp and (vii) as to holder being a holder in due course.
Section 139 of the Act provides that it shall be presumed, unless
JUDGMENT/NARESH DHALLVS.LALAN
SINGH/CCNO.76A/1/08/U.S.138N.I.ACT/CONVITED/18.04.2009/Pg 8 of 16/K the
contrary is proved, that the holder of a cheque received the cheque of the
nature referred to in Section 138 for the discharge, in whole or in part, of
any debt or other liability. Presumptions are devices by use of which the
courts are enabled and entitled to pronounce on an issue notwithstanding that
there is no evidence or insufficient evidence. Under the Indian Evidence Act
all presumptions must come under one or the other class of the three classes
mentioned in the Act, namely, (1) "may presume" (rebuttable), (2) "shall
presume" (rebuttable) and (3) "conclusive presumptions" (irrebuttable). The
term `presumption' is used to designate an inference, affirmative or dis
affirmative of the existence a fact, conveniently called the "presumed fact"
drawn by a judicial tribunal, by a process of probable reasoning from some
matter of fact, either judicially noticed or admitted or established by legal
evidence to the satisfaction of the tribunal. Presumption literally means
"taking as true without examination or proof". Section 4 of the Evidence Act
inter-alia defines the words `may presume' and `shall presume as follows: -
"(a) `may presume' - Whenever it is provided by this Act that the Court may
presume a fact, it may either regard such fact as proved, unless and until it
is disproved or may call for proof of it.
(b) `shall presume' - Whenever it is directed by this Act that the Court shall
presume a fact, it shall regard such fact as proved, unless and until it is
disproved."
In the former case the Court has an option to raise the presumption or not,
but in the latter case, the Court must necessarily raise the presumption. If
in a case the Court has an option to raise the presumption and raises the
presumption, the distinction between the two categories of presumptions ceases
and the fact is presumed, unless and until it is disproved."
"10. Section 118 of the Act inter alia directs that it shall be presumed,
until the contrary is proved, that every negotiable instrument was made or
drawn for consideration. Section 139 of the Act stipulates that unless the
contrary is proved, it shall be presumed, that the holder of the cheque
received the cheque, for the discharge of, whole or part of any debt or
liability. "
Applying the definition of the word `proved' in Section 3 of the Evidence Act
to the provisions of Sections 118 and 139 of the Act, it becomes evident that
in a trial under Section 138 of the Act a presumption will have to be made
that every negotiable instrument was made or drawn for consideration and that
it was executed for discharge of debt or liability once the execution of
negotiable instrument is either proved or admitted. As soon as the complainant
discharges the burden to prove that the instrument, say a note, was executed
by the JUDGMENT/NARESH DHALLVS.LALAN
SINGH/CCNO.76A/1/08/U.S.138N.I.ACT/CONVITED/18.04.2009/Pg 9 of 16/K accused,
the rules of presumptions under Sections 118 and 139 of the Act help him shift
the burden on the accused. The presumptions will live, exist and survive and
shall end only when the contrary is proved by the accused, that is, the cheque
was not issued for consideration and in discharge of any debt or liability. A
presumption is not in itself evidence, but only makes a prima facie case for a
party for whose benefit it exists."
" 11. The use of the phrase "until the contrary is proved" in Section 118 of
the Act and use of the words "unless the contrary is proved" in Section 139 of
the Act read with definitions of "may presume" and "shall presume" as given in
Section 4 of the Evidence Act, makes it at once clear that presumptions to be
raised under both the provisions are rebuttable. When a presumption is
rebuttable, it only points out that the party on whom lies the duty of going
forward with evidence, on the fact presumed and when that party has produced
evidence fairly and reasonably tending to show that the real fact is not as
presumed, the purpose of the presumption is over. The accused in a trial under
Section 138 of the Act has two options. He can either show that consideration
and debt did not exist or that under the particular circumstances of the case
the non-existence of consideration and debt is so probable that a prudent man
ought to suppose that no consideration and debt existed. To rebut the
statutory presumptions an accused is not expected to prove his defence beyond
reasonable doubt as is expected of the complainant in a criminal trial. The
accused may adduce direct evidence to prove that the note in question was not
supported by consideration and that there was no debt or liability to be
discharged by him. However, the court need not insist in every case that the
accused should disprove the non-existence of consideration and debt by leading
direct evidence because the existence of negative evidence is neither possible
nor contemplated. At the same time, it is clear that bare denial of the
passing of the consideration and existence of debt, apparently would not serve
the purpose of the accused. Something which is probable has to be brought on
record for getting the burden of proof shifted to the complainant. To disprove
the presumptions, the accused should bring on record such facts and
circumstances, upon consideration of which, the court may either believe that
the consideration and debt did not exist or their non-existence was so
probable that a prudent man would under the circumstances of the case, act
upon the plea that they did not exist. Apart from adducing direct evidence to
prove that the note in question was not supported by consideration or that he
had not incurred any debt or liability, the accused may also rely upon
circumstantial evidence and if the circumstances so relied upon are
compelling, the burden may likewise shift again on to the complainant. The
accused may also rely upon JUDGMENT/NARESH DHALLVS.LALAN
SINGH/CCNO.76A/1/08/U.S.138N.I.ACT/CONVITED/18.04.2009/Pg 10 of 16/K
presumptions of fact, for instance, those mentioned in Section 114 of the
Evidence Act to rebut the presumptions arising under Sections 118 and 139 of
the Act. The accused has also an option to prove the non-existence of
consideration and debt or liability either by letting in evidence or in some
clear and exceptional cases, from the case set out by the complainant, that
is, the averments in the complaint, the case set out in the statutory notice
and evidence adduced by the complainant during the trial. Once such rebuttal
evidence is adduced and accepted by the court, having regard to all the
circumstances of the case and the preponderance of probabilities, the
evidential burden shifts back to the complainant and, thereafter, the
presumptions under Sections 118 and 139 of the Act will not again come to the
complainant's rescue. "
21\. In the present case let us see whether the accused has been able to rebut
the presumption in favour of the complainant or not.
22\. In order to rebut the presumption, the accused claimed that he never
signed the two rent agreements dated 21.11.2005 & 25.4.2007 Ex. CW1/1 & CW1/2.
He claims that his signatures were obtained on blank documents. During cross
examination of the complainant regarding these two agreements, all that was
suggested by the accused to the complainant was that the cheque was given to
the complainant as blank and as security and in 2007. Besides this, no
suggestion was given, specifically, to the complainant that the two agreements
were not executed by the accused or that signatures of accused were obtained
on blank documents by the complainant or that these two agreements were
prepared later on by the complainant fraudulently. No such suggestion was even
put to the complainant. In the statement uu/s 313 Cr.P.C. the accused
specifically admitted in answer to question no.1 that accused took on rent the
basement of the shop on 21.11.2005 for two years. Accused admitted his
signatures on this agreement dated 21.11.2005 and disputed only the rate of
rent which as per accused was Rs.1900/­ and not Rs.4500/­. In his statement,
the accused also admitted his signatures on second agreement dated 25.4.2007
Ex. CW1/2, but he stated that the signatures on the agreement dated 25.4.2007
were obtained when he entered into earlier rent agreement dated 21.11.2005. In
the next breath in answer to another question, accused stated that he entered
into agreement dated 25.4.2007 and he gave the cheque as security. These facts
reveals that the accused till the stage of cross examination of complainant,
and in his statement, was taking stand that he executed lease deed dated
JUDGMENT/NARESH DHALLVS.LALAN
SINGH/CCNO.76A/1/08/U.S.138N.I.ACT/CONVITED/18.04.2009/Pg 11 of 16/K
21.11.2005 and also dated 25.4.2007 and on the subsequent execution of lease,
the cheque was given. The accused changed his stand in his evidence as DW1 and
started claiming that he was a tenant of the shop since 1996 and all three
floors were taken by him and no agreement whatsoever was executed. He also
changed his stand that on 25.4.2007, he was called by the complainant to his
house where his signatures were obtained on blank papers and the cheque was
also obtained by the complainant. The very fact of taking mutually destructive
stands by the accused reveals that the accused has been lying at different
stages of the case.
23\. The stand taken by the accused that on 25.4.2007, his signatures were
obtained on blank papers by the complainant or that the cheque was given as
security also get belied from various material contradictions in the testimony
of DW1 & DW2. First of all DW2 is a very close relative of accused as admitted
by him and in all probability, this witness is a planted witness by the
accused. Accused never suggested his defence to the complainant regarding the
incident dated 25.4.2007 or accompaniment by Vipin Chaudhary to the house of
complainant. The accused claims that when they reached the house of
complainant on 25.4.2007, there was one more person in the house of
complainant, whereas DW2 claimed that there was no such person. Accused as DW1
claimed that DW2 left for his house from Azad Pur, whereas DW2 claimed that he
remained with the complainant overnight after the incident of 25.4.2007. These
material contradictions alongwith other contradictions in the cross
examination of DW1 & DW2 creates serious doubts over the version of accused
that any incident dated 25/4/2007 took place.
24\. In the case of Devender Kumar Singla vs. Baldev Krishan Singla 2004 II AD
(Cr.) SC 217 it was held by hon'ble SC that the statement under section 313 is
not evidence. It is only the accused's stand or version by way of explanation,
when incriminating materials appearing against him are brought to his notice.
Absence of any suggestion during cross­ examination cannot be made up by a
statement under section 313 Cr.P.C. At that stage the prosecution does not get
an opportunity to question the accused about his stand in the statement under
section 313.
25\. Not only this, perusal of Ex. CW1/1 reveals that it is a registered rent
agreement. The accused claims that he never went to the office of Sub
Registrar, whereas, no registration JUDGMENT/NARESH DHALLVS.LALAN
SINGH/CCNO.76A/1/08/U.S.138N.I.ACT/CONVITED/18.04.2009/Pg 12 of 16/K of a
document can take place in the office of Sub Registrar unless the executing
party or witness are present before Sub Registrar. Admittedly, this document
bears his signatures and contains his photographs. It is not the case of
accused that this document bears photograph of someone else or that somebody
impersonated. The document also bears thumb impression of the accused at point
"X" which was put to the accused in his cross examination and which was
admitted by him. These thumb impressions are obtained at the time of
registration before Sub Registrar. The said agreement Ex. CW1/1 also bears
photographs of complainant and the accused and both these photographs bears
signatures of accused and complainant which are across i.e. the signatures are
partially on photograph and partially on the agreement which shows that it was
signed by the accused after his photograph was affixed on the agreement.
Accused or DW2 nowhere in the testimony claimed that on 25.4.2007, the
signatures of accused were also obtained across the photographs and the
agreement and, in such a manner that they were partially on the photograph and
partially on the stamp paper. This also belies the stand of accused. DW2 also
claimed that on 25.4.2007, the thumb impression of accused were not obtained
by the complainant whereas thumb impression exist on the document dated
21.11.2005, which is duly registered. This also belies the stand of accused
since had this document been same on which, allegedly, on 25.4.2007,
signatures of accused were obtained on blank papers, there was no occasion of
thumb impression of accused coming on the document. Besides this, some
sanctity has to be attached to a registered document which is registered
before Sub Registrar. Under the photograph of accused on this document, his
ration card number and the date of issuance of ration card is also mentioned.
Accused does not claim that he supplied information to the complainant. Then
how come this information appear on the document i.e. agreement dated
21.1.2005. The stamp paper on which this agreement was executed was purchased
on 17.11.2005, which is clear from the stamp of the vendor stamp. Had
signatures of accused obtained on 25.4.2007, this documents could not have
been registered for a back date on 21.11.2005. This also belies the stand of
accused. Besides this, on the lease deed dated 25.4.2007 also there is
signatures of accused. This stamp paper was purchased on 25.4.2007 wherein,
the name of purchaser of stamp paper is mentioned as that of accused himself.
This JUDGMENT/NARESH DHALLVS.LALAN
SINGH/CCNO.76A/1/08/U.S.138N.I.ACT/CONVITED/18.04.2009/Pg 13 of 16/K document
is witnessed by one Vijay Kumar. Accused has not examined Vijay Kumar to prove
that this document was not executed as such by the accused and the
complainant. This document is also notarised by a Notary Public which again
makes the stand of accused absolutely false. Falsehood of the defence of
accused is also writ large from the fact that, in his cross examination, he
was suggested by the complainant that for the basement, rate of rent was
Rs.4500/­ and that on some occasions this rent was paid by the accused through
cheques to the complainant. The accused conveniently denied this suggestion,
but the accused was shown statement of bank account by the complainant for the
period 09.5.2007 to 14.11.2007 showing that on various dates, cheques worth
Rs.4500/­ each were encashed in the account of the complainant from the
account of accused. On three occasions, the cheque was also dishonoured. The
accused admitted this statement as Ex. DW1/1. Now this statement clearly
reflects that such cheques of Rs.4500/­ were encashed. In reply to this,
accused claimed that on certain occasions, he used to issue cheques to the
complainant on the asking of complainant that the complainant needs cheque of
Rs.4500/­, but the complainant used to return the amount of Rs.4500/­ to the
accused. Now, what is fun in asking by the complainant for such cheques and
issuance of such cheques by the accused. It is nothing but an absolute lie
told by the accused. These statements indeed reveals that the rate of rent for
the basement was RS.4500/­ per month. This again belies the stand of accused.
26\. Besides this, the accused has not shown any document in the nature of
bill/invoice/any other document to show that he was a tenant of the shop from
the year 1996. Although accused claimed that he was a tenant in shop from
1996, but there was no electricity and he was working without electricity. He
also claims that earlier one already disconnected electricity meter was there,
but he was not in possession of any K.No. or Meter No. to give credence to his
defence.
27\. The accused also admitted in his cross examination that he received
notice dated 25.9.2008 vide which he was asked to vacate the shop and pay
damagers, but he did not even reply to this notice. Now, had the accused not
signed the two agreements,, the accused would have at least replied to this
notice denying the execution of the two rent agreement and also denying the
rate of damages which are mentioned as Rs.33,000/­ per month. Not replying to
this JUDGMENT/NARESH DHALLVS.LALAN
SINGH/CCNO.76A/1/08/U.S.138N.I.ACT/CONVITED/18.04.2009/Pg 14 of 16/K notice
goes to prove that the accused executed the two rent agreement and he was
aware of the penalty clauses in the two rent agreements. The defence of the
accused that he did not reply to this notice since it was in English and he
was not aware of its contents does not inspire any confidence whatsoever. Even
if the accused was not aware of English, the natural reaction of anybody would
be to get the notice read over and explained by somebody who know English.
Even this was not done. There is one more fact in the cross examination that
accused admitted that he alongwith Yusuf filed a suit for permanent injunction
against the complainant. He admitted that Yusuf is not a co­tenant in the shop
and he was only an associate of accused. Despite this, the accused made Yusuf
a co­plaintiff in suit for permanent injunction. This also reveals the conduct
of accused. In the suit for injunction filed by the accused, he also claimed
that at the time of inception of tenancy, Rs.4,00,000/­ was paid to the
complainant as security. If that was the case, then there was no need for the
accused to have signed the cheque as security on 25.4.2007. This fact also
proves falsehood of the defence of accused, since, nobody who has already paid
Rs.4,00,000/­ as security would issue another blank cheque as security.
28\. What is important is that the cheque in question is claimed to be issued
by the accused in blank to the complainant in April, 2007 and as per accused,
it was undated cheque. If that was the case and when the accused received
notice dated 25.9.2008, the accused would have at the first instance replied
to the notice dated 25.9.2008. Admittedly that notice was received by the
accused. Not only the accused did not reply but the accused, despite receipt
of that notice, did not even think it proper to stop the payment of the cheque
in question. We may remind here that the cheque in question was dishonoured
due to "Account Closed" and not due to "Stop Payment". Had the accused issued
that cheque in blank in April, 2007, the accused would have immediately, on
receipt of notice dated 25.9.2008, stopped the payment of the cheque or at
least would have replied to the notice, but it was not done.
29\. Even the legal notice demanding payment of the cheque amount is not
replied. Had the accused not issued the cheque in question towards the
discharge of liability, the accused would have at least replied to the legal
notice dated 06.11.2008 vide which the cheque amount was demanded by the
complainant from the accused. This also proves the JUDGMENT/NARESH
DHALLVS.LALAN SINGH/CCNO.76A/1/08/U.S.138N.I.ACT/CONVITED/18.04.2009/Pg 15 of
16/K falsehood of the accused.
30\. Lastly, the accused could have proved his defence by one more fact and,
that is, had the accused issued the cheque in question on 25.4.2007 without
date and amount, the accused could have proved this fact by bringing on record
any evidence from his bankers that the other cheque leafs from the same cheque
book , after the number of the cheque in question, were transacted or issued
in favour of other or self by the accused between April, 2007 till September,
2008, the date when allegedly cheque was given to the complainant by the
accused, but even that was not done.
31\. Accordingly, the accused has not only failed to rebut the presumption in
favour of complainant, but also the falsity of the claim of accused is writ
large from the above facts.
32\. In such circumstances, the case of complainant is proved beyond
reasonable doubt. Accused is found guilty and convicted for the offence u/s
138 of Negotiable Instruments Act.
    ANNOUNCED IN OPEN COURT ON 
    18th April 2009                                                                   DIGVINAY SINGH
                                           ADDITIONAL CHIEF METROPOLITAN MAGISTRATE­03 (IPR), 
                                                                                                  ROHINI, 
                                                                                                          DELHI
JUDGMENT/NARESH DHALLVS.LALAN
SINGH/CCNO.76A/1/08/U.S.138N.I.ACT/CONVITED/18.04.2009/Pg 16 of 16/K
that is, had the accused issued the cheque in question on 25.4.2007 without
date and amount, the accused could have proved this fact by bringing on record
any evidence from his bankers that the other cheque leafs from the same cheque
book , after the number of the cheque in question, were transacted or issued
in favour of other or self by the accused between April, 2007 till September,
2008, the date when allegedly cheque was given to the complainant by the
accused, but even that was not done.
31\. Accordingly, the accused has not only failed to rebut the presumption in
favour of complainant, but also the falsity of the claim of accused is writ
large from the above facts.
32\. In such circumstances, the case of complainant is proved beyond
reasonable doubt. Accused is found guilty and convicted for the offence u/s
138 of Negotiable Instruments Act.
    ANNOUNCED IN OPEN COURT ON 
    18th April 2009                                                                   DIGVINAY SINGH
                                           ADDITIONAL CHIEF METROPOLITAN MAGISTRATE­03 (IPR), 
SINGH R/O. K­1674, JAHANGIR PURI, DELHI­110033
(e) The offence complained of/ proved : U/s.138 N.I. ACT.
    (f) The plea of accused                                               : pleaded not guilty
    (g) The final order                                                   : CONVICTED.
    (h) The date of such order                                            : 18.4.2009.
    (i) Brief statement of the reasons for the decision                              :­
1\. Complainant Naresh Dhall has preferred this complaint against the accused
Lallan Singh for the offence u/s. 138 Negotiable Instruments Act. The case of
the complainant is that, the accused was a tenant of complainant with respect
to basement of shop no. C­534, New Subzi Mandi, Azad Pur, Delhi, from
21.11.2005, for a period of two years, at a monthly rent of Rs.4500/­. There
was a registered rent agreement dated 21.11.2005. It is further the case of
JUDGMENT/NARESH DHALLVS.LALAN
SINGH/CCNO.76A/1/08/U.S.138N.I.ACT/CONVITED/18.04.2009/Pg 1 of 16/K
complainant that the ground floor and the first floor of the said shop was
also rented out to the accused vide another lease deed dated 25.4.2007 for
additional monthly rent of Rs.8500/­ which was for a period of eleven months
ending on 31.3.2008. The term of the lease regarding basement and other two
floor expired due to efflux of time. Complainant claims that he allowed the
accused to overstay in the premises, but accused was a chronic defaulter of
that is, had the accused issued the cheque in question on 25.4.2007 without
date and amount, the accused could have proved this fact by bringing on record
any evidence from his bankers that the other cheque leafs from the same cheque
book , after the number of the cheque in question, were transacted or issued
in favour of other or self by the accused between April, 2007 till September,
2008, the date when allegedly cheque was given to the complainant by the
accused, but even that was not done.
31\. Accordingly, the accused has not only failed to rebut the presumption in
favour of complainant, but also the falsity of the claim of accused is writ
large from the above facts.
32\. In such circumstances, the case of complainant is proved beyond
reasonable doubt. Accused is found guilty and convicted for the offence u/s
138 of Negotiable Instruments Act.
    ANNOUNCED IN OPEN COURT ON 
    18th April 2009                                                                   DIGVINAY SINGH
                                           ADDITIONAL CHIEF METROPOLITAN MAGISTRATE­03 (IPR), 
SINGH R/O. K­1674, JAHANGIR PURI, DELHI­110033
(e) The offence complained of/ proved : U/s.138 N.I. ACT.
    (f) The plea of accused                                               : pleaded not guilty
    (g) The final order                                                   : CONVICTED.
    (h) The date of such order                                            : 18.4.2009.
    (i) Brief statement of the reasons for the decision                              :­
1\. Complainant Naresh Dhall has preferred this complaint against the accused
Lallan Singh for the offence u/s. 138 Negotiable Instruments Act. The case of
the complainant is that, the accused was a tenant of complainant with respect
to basement of shop no. C­534, New Subzi Mandi, Azad Pur, Delhi, from
21.11.2005, for a period of two years, at a monthly rent of Rs.4500/­. There
was a registered rent agreement dated 21.11.2005. It is further the case of
JUDGMENT/NARESH DHALLVS.LALAN
SINGH/CCNO.76A/1/08/U.S.138N.I.ACT/CONVITED/18.04.2009/Pg 1 of 16/K
complainant that the ground floor and the first floor of the said shop was
also rented out to the accused vide another lease deed dated 25.4.2007 for
additional monthly rent of Rs.8500/­ which was for a period of eleven months
ending on 31.3.2008. The term of the lease regarding basement and other two
floor expired due to efflux of time. Complainant claims that he allowed the
accused to overstay in the premises, but accused was a chronic defaulter of
that is, had the accused issued the cheque in question on 25.4.2007 without
date and amount, the accused could have proved this fact by bringing on record
any evidence from his bankers that the other cheque leafs from the same cheque
book , after the number of the cheque in question, were transacted or issued
in favour of other or self by the accused between April, 2007 till September,
2008, the date when allegedly cheque was given to the complainant by the
accused, but even that was not done.
31\. Accordingly, the accused has not only failed to rebut the presumption in
favour of complainant, but also the falsity of the claim of accused is writ
large from the above facts.
32\. In such circumstances, the case of complainant is proved beyond
reasonable doubt. Accused is found guilty and convicted for the offence u/s
138 of Negotiable Instruments Act.
    ANNOUNCED IN OPEN COURT ON 
    18th April 2009                                                                   DIGVINAY SINGH
                                           ADDITIONAL CHIEF METROPOLITAN MAGISTRATE­03 (IPR), 
SINGH R/O. K­1674, JAHANGIR PURI, DELHI­110033
(e) The offence complained of/ proved : U/s.138 N.I. ACT.
    (f) The plea of accused                                               : pleaded not guilty
    (g) The final order                                                   : CONVICTED.
    (h) The date of such order                                            : 18.4.2009.
    (i) Brief statement of the reasons for the decision                              :­
1\. Complainant Naresh Dhall has preferred this complaint against the accused
Lallan Singh for the offence u/s. 138 Negotiable Instruments Act. The case of
the complainant is that, the accused was a tenant of complainant with respect
to basement of shop no. C­534, New Subzi Mandi, Azad Pur, Delhi, from
21.11.2005, for a period of two years, at a monthly rent of Rs.4500/­. There
was a registered rent agreement dated 21.11.2005. It is further the case of
JUDGMENT/NARESH DHALLVS.LALAN
SINGH/CCNO.76A/1/08/U.S.138N.I.ACT/CONVITED/18.04.2009/Pg 1 of 16/K
complainant that the ground floor and the first floor of the said shop was
also rented out to the accused vide another lease deed dated 25.4.2007 for
additional monthly rent of Rs.8500/­ which was for a period of eleven months
ending on 31.3.2008. The term of the lease regarding basement and other two
floor expired due to efflux of time. Complainant claims that he allowed the
accused to overstay in the premises, but accused was a chronic defaulter of
rent and since March, 2008 no rent was paid. In both the rent agreements,
there were penalty clauses which entitled the complainant to receive a total
sum of Rs.33,000/­ per month. Complainant also claims that the accused
alongwith one Mohd. Yusuf filed a frivolous suit of permanent injunction
against the complainant and thereafter complainant issued a legal notice dated
25.9.2008 claiming penalty amount of Rs.33000/­ per month including
electricity and other charges with effect from 01.4.2008 and the accused was
also called upon to vacate the premises. It is claimed that in discharge of
this liability of damages from 01.4.2008 to 30.9.2008 @ Rs.33000/­ per month,
the accused issued cheque no.517714 dated 15.10.2008 for a sum of
Rs.1,98,000/­ drawn on Punjab & Sind Bank, New Subzi Mandi, Azad Pur, Delhi.
that is, had the accused issued the cheque in question on 25.4.2007 without
date and amount, the accused could have proved this fact by bringing on record
any evidence from his bankers that the other cheque leafs from the same cheque
book , after the number of the cheque in question, were transacted or issued
in favour of other or self by the accused between April, 2007 till September,
2008, the date when allegedly cheque was given to the complainant by the
accused, but even that was not done.
31\. Accordingly, the accused has not only failed to rebut the presumption in
favour of complainant, but also the falsity of the claim of accused is writ
large from the above facts.
32\. In such circumstances, the case of complainant is proved beyond
reasonable doubt. Accused is found guilty and convicted for the offence u/s
138 of Negotiable Instruments Act.
    ANNOUNCED IN OPEN COURT ON 
    18th April 2009                                                                   DIGVINAY SINGH
                                           ADDITIONAL CHIEF METROPOLITAN MAGISTRATE­03 (IPR), 
SINGH R/O. K­1674, JAHANGIR PURI, DELHI­110033
(e) The offence complained of/ proved : U/s.138 N.I. ACT.
    (f) The plea of accused                                               : pleaded not guilty
    (g) The final order                                                   : CONVICTED.
    (h) The date of such order                                            : 18.4.2009.
    (i) Brief statement of the reasons for the decision                              :­
1\. Complainant Naresh Dhall has preferred this complaint against the accused
Lallan Singh for the offence u/s. 138 Negotiable Instruments Act. The case of
the complainant is that, the accused was a tenant of complainant with respect
to basement of shop no. C­534, New Subzi Mandi, Azad Pur, Delhi, from
21.11.2005, for a period of two years, at a monthly rent of Rs.4500/­. There
was a registered rent agreement dated 21.11.2005. It is further the case of
JUDGMENT/NARESH DHALLVS.LALAN
SINGH/CCNO.76A/1/08/U.S.138N.I.ACT/CONVITED/18.04.2009/Pg 1 of 16/K
complainant that the ground floor and the first floor of the said shop was
also rented out to the accused vide another lease deed dated 25.4.2007 for
additional monthly rent of Rs.8500/­ which was for a period of eleven months
ending on 31.3.2008. The term of the lease regarding basement and other two
floor expired due to efflux of time. Complainant claims that he allowed the
accused to overstay in the premises, but accused was a chronic defaulter of
rent and since March, 2008 no rent was paid. In both the rent agreements,
there were penalty clauses which entitled the complainant to receive a total
sum of Rs.33,000/­ per month. Complainant also claims that the accused
alongwith one Mohd. Yusuf filed a frivolous suit of permanent injunction
against the complainant and thereafter complainant issued a legal notice dated
25.9.2008 claiming penalty amount of Rs.33000/­ per month including
electricity and other charges with effect from 01.4.2008 and the accused was
also called upon to vacate the premises. It is claimed that in discharge of
this liability of damages from 01.4.2008 to 30.9.2008 @ Rs.33000/­ per month,
the accused issued cheque no.517714 dated 15.10.2008 for a sum of
Rs.1,98,000/­ drawn on Punjab & Sind Bank, New Subzi Mandi, Azad Pur, Delhi.
that is, had the accused issued the cheque in question on 25.4.2007 without
date and amount, the accused could have proved this fact by bringing on record
any evidence from his bankers that the other cheque leafs from the same cheque
book , after the number of the cheque in question, were transacted or issued
in favour of other or self by the accused between April, 2007 till September,
2008, the date when allegedly cheque was given to the complainant by the
accused, but even that was not done.
31\. Accordingly, the accused has not only failed to rebut the presumption in
favour of complainant, but also the falsity of the claim of accused is writ
large from the above facts.
32\. In such circumstances, the case of complainant is proved beyond
reasonable doubt. Accused is found guilty and convicted for the offence u/s
138 of Negotiable Instruments Act.
    ANNOUNCED IN OPEN COURT ON 
    18th April 2009                                                                   DIGVINAY SINGH
                                           ADDITIONAL CHIEF METROPOLITAN MAGISTRATE­03 (IPR), 
