Calcutta High Court
Secretary Of State vs Golabrai Paliram on 3 May, 1937
Equivalent citations: AIR 1937 Cal 298
Author: Costello
JUDGMENT Costello, J.
1\. This is an appeal against a judgment and decree of Lord-Williams J. Two
points, broadly speaking, ware put forward on behalf of the defendant-
appellant and both of them were in the nature of a demurrer. The first has
relation to the question of jurisdiction of this Court to entertain the suit
at all, for that the defendant does not carry on business within the
jurisdiction of this Court, and that the requirements with regard to the
notice provided for by Section 77, Railways Act, (Act 9 of 1890) which has to
be served by the plaintiff before making his claim, did not accurately
describe the cause of action so as to bring the matter within the territorial
jurisdiction of this Court. The other point was one of limitation. It is con.
tended on behalf of the defendant-appellant that Article 30 of Schedule 1,
Lim. Act, 1908 applied to the circumstances of this case. There is no doubt
that if that contention is correct, and if Article 30 does apply to this case,
then the plaintiff is unable to succeed, because it is quite clear that the
suit would be barred by lapse of time.
Limitation Act. There the word used is 'carrier' and not a 'common carrier'.
Then there is no warrant for the contention that the word 'carrier' in Article
31 has the same meaning as the words 'common carrier' as defined in the
Carriers Act.
17\. This judgment is obviously very germane to the point now before us. It is
with considerable regret that 1 find myself unable to agree with the view
taken by Lort-Williams J. in the year 1930 but I think that upon the plain,
unambiguous and unequivocal words of the Article we have to construe, one is
bound to hold that the word 'carrier' is of a wider meaning than the
expression common carrier' and that it is wide enough to cover the case of a
railway owned or controlled by Government which took upon itself to carry
goods belonging to the plaintiff from one place (Poradah Junction) to another,
namely (Cossipore Road). It follows, therefore, that the defendant was in a
position to avail himself of the protection afforded by Article 30 or Article
31 or both. The appeal is therefore allowed and the suit dismissed, with costs
throughout. The applicant will be entitled to retain his costs of the appeal
suit would be barred by lapse of time.
2\. The learned Judge came to the conclusion that the contention of the
defendant as regards the point of limitation could not be sustained, and that
the Article governing the facts of this matter is Article 115 of Schedule 1,
Lim. Act of 1908. This matter has had a somewhat curious history with the
result that today we are in effect sitting in appeal as regards a judgment
delivered by Lort-Williams J. as long ago as 23rd May 1930. The judgment
delivered by Lort-Williams J. on 23rd May 1930 was taken in appeal and came
before She late Chief Justice of this Court Sir George Rankin and Pearson J.
on 16th April 1931, and the Court of Appeal then held that the questions
discussed before Lort-Williams J. were of such importance that they should not
have been dealt with on a mere application to revoke leave granted under
Clause 12 of the Letters Patent. The matter had originally come before Lort-
Williams J. upon an application of that kind. The Court of Appeal remanded the
matter to be dealt when the suit came on for trial in the ordinary course.
Thus It came about that the points dealt with by the learned Judge in his
judgment of 23rd May 1930 came again before the same Judge (as it happened),
on 9th November 1936. On that date however, neither party availed himself of
the opportunity of giving evidence as contemplated by the Court of Appeal,
when they declined to adjudicate upon the matter in 1931. On 9th November 1936
therefore the position, to all intents and purposes, was precisely the same as
when the matter originally came before Lort-Williams J. on 23rd May 1930; and
so it is not surprising, in the circumstances that the learned Judge on 9th
November 1936, said : "I see no reason to alter the opinion which I have
already given in my judgment, dated 23rd May 1930." It follows, therefore, as
I have already indicated that although in form this is an appeal against the
judgment of the learned Judge dated 9th November 1936, in substance it is an
appeal from the judgment of the learned Judge given on 23rd May 1930.
3\. We have now only to consider the question of limitation, for, that was the
only point determined by the learned Judge, and it is the only point which has
been argued before us. All that we have to decide is whether or not the
Secretary of State for India in Council can take advantage of the provisions
of Article 30 of Schedule 1 to the Limitation Act, 1908 and avail himself of
that provision as a plea in bar of the plaintiff's claim. The learned Judge
came to the conclusion that Article 115 was the Article most appropriate to
the facts of this case. He based his decision upon this, that it hardly could
be intended that a railway administration or Government should be absolved
from the onerous responsibilities of common carriers, and yet at the same time
have the benefit) of the short period of limitation expressly provided by
Article 30 for traders who are burthened by the law with such obligations. The
learned Judge took the view that as the responsibility of the railway
administration for loss of and damage to goods, is regulated by Section 72,
Railways Act, 1890 which puts a railway company into the position of a bailee
under Sections 151, 152 and 161, Contract Act of 1872, and the railway
administration has not the liability of common carriers, it must have been
intended by the Legislature that Articles 30 and 31 should not apply but
should only be available to persons who are in the position of common
carriers.
4\. The learned Advocate-General has re-minded us of the well-known
observations of Lord Esher with regard to the position of a Court which is
being invited to express an opinion on the provisions of statutes or other
enactments and it is argued that it is clearly not the function of the Court
to make endeavours to get behind the precise language of an enactment for the
purpose of ascertaining what might be presumed to be the intention of the
Legislature at the time when the enactment was made. In the course of the
argument, I quoted the words of Lord Bacon when he said that the Court has to
jus dicere and not jus dare. We have to interpret the statute as we find it
and not put a gloss upon it or read into it something which is in fact not
there. The precise words of Article 30 are these:
Against a carrier for compensation for losing or injuring goods, the period
described is one year from the date when the loss or injury occurs.
5\. The language of Article 31 is this:
Against a carrier for compensation for non-delivery of, or delay in delivering
goods, one year, when the goods ought to be delivered.
6\. Lort-Williams J. was of opinion that word 'carrier' should be read as if
it was exactly the same thing as the two words 'common carrier.' Mr. Mazumdar
has invited us to say that that is the correct interpretation of the Article.
In other words, it is contended on behalf the plaintiff respondent that we
ought to place before the word 'carrier' the qualifying adjective 'common', so
that the operation of both the Article (30 and 31) should be restricted to
those cases in which the defendant is in law a common carrier. Mr. Mazumdar
sought to fortify his argument by an historical survey of various statutes or
Acts of the Legislature relating to railways, relating to limitation and
relating to carriers. Put quite shortly, that part of Mr. Mazumdar's argument
which is based on chronological and historical review of the enactments of the
kind I have enumerated comes to this, that until the Carriers Act of 1865 came
into existence there was no specific provision in the Limitation Act relating
to suits against carriers, and it was only after 1865, actually in the year
1871, by the Limitation Act of that year that for the first time there came
into existence a definite provision with regard to limitation in relation to
suits of that character. That provision was contained in Articles 36 and 37 of
the Schedule to the Act 9 of 1871. Subsequently those two Articles became
Articles 30 and 31 of the Lim. Act of 1877. The other fact which Mr. Mazumdar
thought of considerable importance for the purpose of his argument was that an
amendment was made touching the question of limitation in an Act of the year
1899, Act 10 of that year which was described as an Act to amend the law
relating to carriers and which in fact added a Section 10 to the original
Carriers Act, 1865, and which, at the same time, by Section 3 of Act 10 of
1893 transferred Articles 30 and 31 of Schedule 1, Lim. Act, 1877 from part 5
to part 4, thereby reducing the period of limitation from two years as 'it was
then to one year as it became from the year 1899 onwards. At the same time,
Section 3 of Act, 10 of 1893 made a slight alteration, or rather made an
addition to Article 31 by putting in the words 'non-delivery'.
7\. From the circumstances I have just mentioned, Mr. Mazumdar asked us to
draw the inference that the word 'carrier' as used in Articles 30 and 31 must
be looked at in the light of the Carriers Act, 1865, Therefore it can only
have application in the case of common carriers. It is quite clear that a
railway company as regards its responsibility towards persons consigning goods
is liable only to the extent provided for by Section 72, Railways Act 1890,
which repealed the previous Act of 1879 which Act had contained a provision,
that the Carriers Act of 1865 had no application to railways. Mr. Mazumdar
however rests his argument ultimately and indeed fundamentally upon the fact
that in Section 2, Carriers Act of 1865 there is a definition which seems to
put the Government as a carrier outside the category of common carriers. That
however, in my opinion, is of little importance and indeed of do importance at
all because as Mr. Mazunadar agrees, railways whether they are owned and
controlled by the Government, or whether they are not, that is to say, whether
they are State railways or non-State railways, they are all in the same
position, as regards their responsibility as carriers of goods. Taking
therefore a broad definition of 'carriers', we find it for example in
Wharton's Law Lexicon, one can scarcely doubt, that railways whether State-
controlled or not, can quite accurately be described as carriers, even though
for the purposes of the Carriers Act, they are not common carriers. It seems
to me that it would be a misuse of language to say that railways which carry
goods for reward are not carriers, even though it is quite accurate to say
that for the purposes of the Carriers Act of 1865 and any amendment of that
Act they are not common carriers. In my opinion, it would not be right that we
should interpolate into Article 30 the qualifying restriction implied by the
word 'common' as applied to carriers. There is a case, Mylappa Chettiar v. The
British India Steam Navigation Co. Ltd. (1918) 5 AIR Mad 341, which is vary
material to the pre-sent discussion. In that case the plaintiff had been the
consignee of certain timber through defendant 1 which was a firm of carriers
by sea. The timber was consigned under a bill of lading. Defendant 2 was a
firm which had a monopoly of landing all the goods from ships belonging to
defendant 1 but on receipt of separate charges from the consignee. It was held
(1) that there was a privity of contract between the consignee and the landing
agent, defendant a; (2) that the case being one of continuous carriage of
goods defendant 2 was a carrier though not a common carrier within the meaning
of the Carriers Act of 1865; and (3) that the suit against both the defendants
was governed by Article 31, Lim. Act.
8\. This case is of importance for our purpose by reason of the second and the
third points of the decision. Sir John Wallis, who was then the Chief Justice
of the Madras High Court at p. 555 says:
The suit as against defendant 1 is barred under Article 31 according to the
Full Bench ruling in Venkatasubba Row v. Asiatic Steam Navigation Co.,
Calcutta (1916) 3 AIR Mad 314....
9\. Mr. Justice Kumaraswami Sastri says at p. 557:
There can be little doubt that defendant 2 company are carriers though not
common carriers within the moaning of the Carriers Act of 1865. The word "
carrier " in Its general sense means a person or company who undertakes to
transport the goods of another person from one place to another for hire and
defendant 2 falls within the definition.
10\. Lower down on the same page the learned Judge observed:
If however defendant 2 company are carriers and I think they are, it is clear
that Article 31, Limitation Act, would apply equally to them. It is not
necessary for the purposes of Article 31 that they should be common carriers.
11\. With that proposition I respectfully and entirely agree. I am supported
in that view of the matter by two cases which ware decided in the High Court
of Allahabad. Unfortunately they do not seem to have found their way into the
authorized Law Reports, but they are to be found in the All India Reporter for
the year 1933. The first of these two oases is F.D. Footwear v. N.W. Railway .
The head-note of that case is as follows:
It is true that Government is excluded from the definition of " common carrier
" for the purposes of Carriers Act, 1865, but Article 31, Lim. Act, does not
contain the expression "common carrier "; it only applies to a " carrier " and
is therefore presumably of a wider meaning, and therefore Article 31 does
apply to a State Railway.
12\. King J. in the course of his judgment at p. 349 said:
The first point taken is that Article 31 does not apply because Government is
not a " carrier " within the meaning of Article 31. It is pointed out that in
Section 2, Carriers Act 1865, the expression " common carrier " is defined as
denoting " a person other than the Government, engaged in the business of
transporting for hire property from place to place, by land or inland
navigation for all persons indiscriminately.
13\. I am disposed to adopt this language as being of direct application to
the circumstances of this present appeal. The learned Judge continued:
The argument is that Government is expressly excluded from the definition of
"common carrier"; so Article 31 cannot apply to a suit against a State
Railway. In this case it appears that both the railways concerned, namely N.
W. Railway and the G. I. P. Railway, are State Railways. I think there is no
force in this contention. It is true that Government is excluded from the
definition of " common carrier " for the purpose of the Carriers Act, 1865 but
Article 31, Lim. Act, does not contain the expression " common carrier "; it
only applies to a " carrier " and is therefore presumably of a wider meaning.
I see no reason on the face of it why it should not apply to a State Railway
and Article 31 has been applied to the case of a State Railway in Radha Shyam
Basak v. Secretary of State (1917) 4 AIR Cal 640. I may also note that in
Mutsaddiial v. B.B. & C.I. Ry. Co., and Rohilkhand Kumaun Ry. (1920) 7 AIR All
157, Art 31 was applied to a suit of this nature although it does not appear
that the railway in question was a State Railway.
14\. That decision was given on 3rd February 1933. About a month later, a
similar point came before Mukerji J. in the same High Court in the case in
Alamgir Footwear Co. v. Secretary of State . We need not pause to consider the
precise facts of the case. It is sufficient to refer to a passage in the
judgment at page 467 where the learned Judge says this:
The next point urged was that even if the suit was time-barred, against the
Railway Administration it was not barred against the Secretary of State. This
is a fallacious argument. The Secretary of State has been impleaded only as
the owner of the railway concern and not in any other capacity.
15\. Mr. Mazumdar, in answer to a question from me, said that ha was not
seeking to draw a distinction between the Secretary of State and the railway
administration. He admitted that for the purposes of the present case the
railway administration and the Secretary of State must be taken to be one and
the same.
16\. The learned Judge further said:
The argument that the Government is not a 'common carrier' within the meaning
of the Carriers Act (Act 3 of 1865) does not make the Secretary of State for
India in Council incapable of taking advantage of Article 31, Schedule 1,
Limitation Act. There the word used is 'carrier' and not a 'common carrier'.
Then there is no warrant for the contention that the word 'carrier' in Article
31 has the same meaning as the words 'common carrier' as defined in the
Carriers Act.
17\. This judgment is obviously very germane to the point now before us. It is
with considerable regret that 1 find myself unable to agree with the view
taken by Lort-Williams J. in the year 1930 but I think that upon the plain,
unambiguous and unequivocal words of the Article we have to construe, one is
bound to hold that the word 'carrier' is of a wider meaning than the
expression common carrier' and that it is wide enough to cover the case of a
railway owned or controlled by Government which took upon itself to carry
goods belonging to the plaintiff from one place (Poradah Junction) to another,
namely (Cossipore Road). It follows, therefore, that the defendant was in a
position to avail himself of the protection afforded by Article 30 or Article
31 or both. The appeal is therefore allowed and the suit dismissed, with costs
throughout. The applicant will be entitled to retain his costs of the appeal
and of the suit out of the moneys lying in Court.
McNair, J.
18\. I agree with the judgment which has just been delivered by my learned
brother and I have nothing to add.
Limitation Act. There the word used is 'carrier' and not a 'common carrier'.
Then there is no warrant for the contention that the word 'carrier' in Article
31 has the same meaning as the words 'common carrier' as defined in the
Carriers Act.
17\. This judgment is obviously very germane to the point now before us. It is
with considerable regret that 1 find myself unable to agree with the view
taken by Lort-Williams J. in the year 1930 but I think that upon the plain,
unambiguous and unequivocal words of the Article we have to construe, one is
bound to hold that the word 'carrier' is of a wider meaning than the
expression common carrier' and that it is wide enough to cover the case of a
railway owned or controlled by Government which took upon itself to carry
goods belonging to the plaintiff from one place (Poradah Junction) to another,
namely (Cossipore Road). It follows, therefore, that the defendant was in a
position to avail himself of the protection afforded by Article 30 or Article
31 or both. The appeal is therefore allowed and the suit dismissed, with costs
throughout. The applicant will be entitled to retain his costs of the appeal
suit would be barred by lapse of time.
2\. The learned Judge came to the conclusion that the contention of the
defendant as regards the point of limitation could not be sustained, and that
the Article governing the facts of this matter is Article 115 of Schedule 1,
Lim. Act of 1908. This matter has had a somewhat curious history with the
result that today we are in effect sitting in appeal as regards a judgment
delivered by Lort-Williams J. as long ago as 23rd May 1930. The judgment
delivered by Lort-Williams J. on 23rd May 1930 was taken in appeal and came
before She late Chief Justice of this Court Sir George Rankin and Pearson J.
on 16th April 1931, and the Court of Appeal then held that the questions
discussed before Lort-Williams J. were of such importance that they should not
have been dealt with on a mere application to revoke leave granted under
Clause 12 of the Letters Patent. The matter had originally come before Lort-
Williams J. upon an application of that kind. The Court of Appeal remanded the
matter to be dealt when the suit came on for trial in the ordinary course.
Thus It came about that the points dealt with by the learned Judge in his
judgment of 23rd May 1930 came again before the same Judge (as it happened),
on 9th November 1936. On that date however, neither party availed himself of
the opportunity of giving evidence as contemplated by the Court of Appeal,
when they declined to adjudicate upon the matter in 1931. On 9th November 1936
Limitation Act. There the word used is 'carrier' and not a 'common carrier'.
Then there is no warrant for the contention that the word 'carrier' in Article
31 has the same meaning as the words 'common carrier' as defined in the
Carriers Act.
17\. This judgment is obviously very germane to the point now before us. It is
with considerable regret that 1 find myself unable to agree with the view
taken by Lort-Williams J. in the year 1930 but I think that upon the plain,
unambiguous and unequivocal words of the Article we have to construe, one is
bound to hold that the word 'carrier' is of a wider meaning than the
expression common carrier' and that it is wide enough to cover the case of a
railway owned or controlled by Government which took upon itself to carry
goods belonging to the plaintiff from one place (Poradah Junction) to another,
namely (Cossipore Road). It follows, therefore, that the defendant was in a
position to avail himself of the protection afforded by Article 30 or Article
31 or both. The appeal is therefore allowed and the suit dismissed, with costs
throughout. The applicant will be entitled to retain his costs of the appeal
suit would be barred by lapse of time.
2\. The learned Judge came to the conclusion that the contention of the
defendant as regards the point of limitation could not be sustained, and that
the Article governing the facts of this matter is Article 115 of Schedule 1,
Lim. Act of 1908. This matter has had a somewhat curious history with the
result that today we are in effect sitting in appeal as regards a judgment
delivered by Lort-Williams J. as long ago as 23rd May 1930. The judgment
delivered by Lort-Williams J. on 23rd May 1930 was taken in appeal and came
before She late Chief Justice of this Court Sir George Rankin and Pearson J.
on 16th April 1931, and the Court of Appeal then held that the questions
discussed before Lort-Williams J. were of such importance that they should not
have been dealt with on a mere application to revoke leave granted under
Clause 12 of the Letters Patent. The matter had originally come before Lort-
Williams J. upon an application of that kind. The Court of Appeal remanded the
matter to be dealt when the suit came on for trial in the ordinary course.
Thus It came about that the points dealt with by the learned Judge in his
judgment of 23rd May 1930 came again before the same Judge (as it happened),
on 9th November 1936. On that date however, neither party availed himself of
the opportunity of giving evidence as contemplated by the Court of Appeal,
when they declined to adjudicate upon the matter in 1931. On 9th November 1936
Limitation Act. There the word used is 'carrier' and not a 'common carrier'.
Then there is no warrant for the contention that the word 'carrier' in Article
31 has the same meaning as the words 'common carrier' as defined in the
Carriers Act.
17\. This judgment is obviously very germane to the point now before us. It is
with considerable regret that 1 find myself unable to agree with the view
taken by Lort-Williams J. in the year 1930 but I think that upon the plain,
unambiguous and unequivocal words of the Article we have to construe, one is
bound to hold that the word 'carrier' is of a wider meaning than the
expression common carrier' and that it is wide enough to cover the case of a
railway owned or controlled by Government which took upon itself to carry
goods belonging to the plaintiff from one place (Poradah Junction) to another,
namely (Cossipore Road). It follows, therefore, that the defendant was in a
position to avail himself of the protection afforded by Article 30 or Article
31 or both. The appeal is therefore allowed and the suit dismissed, with costs
throughout. The applicant will be entitled to retain his costs of the appeal
suit would be barred by lapse of time.
2\. The learned Judge came to the conclusion that the contention of the
defendant as regards the point of limitation could not be sustained, and that
the Article governing the facts of this matter is Article 115 of Schedule 1,
Lim. Act of 1908. This matter has had a somewhat curious history with the
result that today we are in effect sitting in appeal as regards a judgment
delivered by Lort-Williams J. as long ago as 23rd May 1930. The judgment
delivered by Lort-Williams J. on 23rd May 1930 was taken in appeal and came
before She late Chief Justice of this Court Sir George Rankin and Pearson J.
on 16th April 1931, and the Court of Appeal then held that the questions
discussed before Lort-Williams J. were of such importance that they should not
have been dealt with on a mere application to revoke leave granted under
Clause 12 of the Letters Patent. The matter had originally come before Lort-
Williams J. upon an application of that kind. The Court of Appeal remanded the
matter to be dealt when the suit came on for trial in the ordinary course.
Thus It came about that the points dealt with by the learned Judge in his
judgment of 23rd May 1930 came again before the same Judge (as it happened),
on 9th November 1936. On that date however, neither party availed himself of
the opportunity of giving evidence as contemplated by the Court of Appeal,
when they declined to adjudicate upon the matter in 1931. On 9th November 1936
therefore the position, to all intents and purposes, was precisely the same as
when the matter originally came before Lort-Williams J. on 23rd May 1930; and
so it is not surprising, in the circumstances that the learned Judge on 9th
November 1936, said : "I see no reason to alter the opinion which I have
already given in my judgment, dated 23rd May 1930." It follows, therefore, as
I have already indicated that although in form this is an appeal against the
judgment of the learned Judge dated 9th November 1936, in substance it is an
appeal from the judgment of the learned Judge given on 23rd May 1930.
3\. We have now only to consider the question of limitation, for, that was the
only point determined by the learned Judge, and it is the only point which has
been argued before us. All that we have to decide is whether or not the
Limitation Act. There the word used is 'carrier' and not a 'common carrier'.
Then there is no warrant for the contention that the word 'carrier' in Article
31 has the same meaning as the words 'common carrier' as defined in the
Carriers Act.
17\. This judgment is obviously very germane to the point now before us. It is
with considerable regret that 1 find myself unable to agree with the view
taken by Lort-Williams J. in the year 1930 but I think that upon the plain,
unambiguous and unequivocal words of the Article we have to construe, one is
bound to hold that the word 'carrier' is of a wider meaning than the
expression common carrier' and that it is wide enough to cover the case of a
railway owned or controlled by Government which took upon itself to carry
goods belonging to the plaintiff from one place (Poradah Junction) to another,
namely (Cossipore Road). It follows, therefore, that the defendant was in a
position to avail himself of the protection afforded by Article 30 or Article
31 or both. The appeal is therefore allowed and the suit dismissed, with costs
throughout. The applicant will be entitled to retain his costs of the appeal
suit would be barred by lapse of time.
2\. The learned Judge came to the conclusion that the contention of the
defendant as regards the point of limitation could not be sustained, and that
the Article governing the facts of this matter is Article 115 of Schedule 1,
Lim. Act of 1908. This matter has had a somewhat curious history with the
result that today we are in effect sitting in appeal as regards a judgment
delivered by Lort-Williams J. as long ago as 23rd May 1930. The judgment
delivered by Lort-Williams J. on 23rd May 1930 was taken in appeal and came
before She late Chief Justice of this Court Sir George Rankin and Pearson J.
on 16th April 1931, and the Court of Appeal then held that the questions
discussed before Lort-Williams J. were of such importance that they should not
have been dealt with on a mere application to revoke leave granted under
Clause 12 of the Letters Patent. The matter had originally come before Lort-
Williams J. upon an application of that kind. The Court of Appeal remanded the
matter to be dealt when the suit came on for trial in the ordinary course.
Thus It came about that the points dealt with by the learned Judge in his
judgment of 23rd May 1930 came again before the same Judge (as it happened),
on 9th November 1936. On that date however, neither party availed himself of
the opportunity of giving evidence as contemplated by the Court of Appeal,
when they declined to adjudicate upon the matter in 1931. On 9th November 1936
therefore the position, to all intents and purposes, was precisely the same as
when the matter originally came before Lort-Williams J. on 23rd May 1930; and
so it is not surprising, in the circumstances that the learned Judge on 9th
November 1936, said : "I see no reason to alter the opinion which I have
already given in my judgment, dated 23rd May 1930." It follows, therefore, as
I have already indicated that although in form this is an appeal against the
judgment of the learned Judge dated 9th November 1936, in substance it is an
appeal from the judgment of the learned Judge given on 23rd May 1930.
3\. We have now only to consider the question of limitation, for, that was the
only point determined by the learned Judge, and it is the only point which has
been argued before us. All that we have to decide is whether or not the
Limitation Act. There the word used is 'carrier' and not a 'common carrier'.
Then there is no warrant for the contention that the word 'carrier' in Article
31 has the same meaning as the words 'common carrier' as defined in the
Carriers Act.
17\. This judgment is obviously very germane to the point now before us. It is
with considerable regret that 1 find myself unable to agree with the view
taken by Lort-Williams J. in the year 1930 but I think that upon the plain,
unambiguous and unequivocal words of the Article we have to construe, one is
bound to hold that the word 'carrier' is of a wider meaning than the
expression common carrier' and that it is wide enough to cover the case of a
railway owned or controlled by Government which took upon itself to carry
goods belonging to the plaintiff from one place (Poradah Junction) to another,
namely (Cossipore Road). It follows, therefore, that the defendant was in a
position to avail himself of the protection afforded by Article 30 or Article
31 or both. The appeal is therefore allowed and the suit dismissed, with costs
throughout. The applicant will be entitled to retain his costs of the appeal
