Madras High Court
The Copra Producers And Crushers ... vs The State Of Madras on 26 September,
1972
Equivalent citations: 1973 32 STC 458 Mad
Author: Ramanujam
Bench: Ramanujam, V Ramaswami
JUDGMENT Ramanujam, J.
1\. The petitioner in this case is a co-operative society. It entered into an
agreement dated 21st September, 1962, with the State Trading Corporation
(hereinafter referred to as the corporation) which had a bulk import licence
to import on the latter's behalf copra from Ceylon and distribute the same to
crushers in Kerala State, who were called allottees and who were registered
with the Ministry of Commerce and Industry, Government of India. The list of
allottees with the quantity allotted to each of them was given in annexure 1
to the said agreement. The petitioner, in accordance with the terms of the
agreement, had to notify each allottee his allocation from time to time and
require him to indicate the quality of copra, the pattern of delivery and his
preference, if any, as to the foreign supplier. The petitioner has to import
copra from time to time in accordance with the agreement entered into with the
State Trading Corporation and distribute it to the allottees as per their
Ltd. v. Deputy Commissioner of Commercial Taxes [1966] 17 S.T.C. 473 (S.C.),
the Supreme Court expressed the view that before a sale could be said to have
occasioned the import it was not necessary that the sale should have preceded
the import and that it is sufficient if the movement of the goods from the
foreign territory was incidental to, or in pursuance of, the contract between
the acutal importer and the local purchaser and if there was no possibility of
the goods being diverted by the importer for any other purpose. It is common
ground that the petitioner-society placed orders with the foreign seller only
after it entered into an agreement with the various allottees and that the
agreement between the petitioner-society and the allottees specifically
provided that the goods are to be imported from Ceylon and supplied to them as
per their requirements on the basis of the bulk licence given in the name of
the corporation. We, therefore, accept the contention of the petitioner that
even if the petitioner-society can be said to have sold the goods to the
allottees, such sales will be sales in the course of import.
6\. As we have already held the transactions in question are not taxable under
State Trading Corporation and distribute it to the allottees as per their
requirements. The petitioner was allowed to take half a per cent of the c. i.
f. value of the goods for meeting its overhead expenses. The petitioner has
undertaken the liability to pay as premium a sum of Rs. 290 per ton on the
landed weight of copra to the corporation. The petitioner had also entered
into an agreement with each one of the allottees undertaking to import the
quantity of copra allotted to each of them on account of the allottee's share
of copra from the bulk licence of the corporation on each of the allottees
making a particular amount as a deposit having regard to the tonnage to cover
the initial expenses towards insurance, etc. Under the said agreements, the
allottees have undertaken to honour the drafts from the bankers of the
petitioner for the c. i. f. value of the shipment, the import duty, the
clearing and handling charges and the premium payable by the society to the
corporation as also the society's commission of half a per cent and other
incidental charges. The modus operandi adopted by the society in importing
copra from Ceylon was as follows: The various allottees write to the
petitioner selecting the dealers from Colombo from whom they require copra as
also the quantity, quality and rate, etc. and on that basis the petitioner
contacts the foreign suppliers and settle the price as well as the quantities
to be supplied according to the delivery pattern suggested by the allottees.
Thereafter, the petitioner sends to the allottees purchase orders in
quadruplicate to be duly filled up for confirmation by the allottees as also
the Colombo sellers or their agents, as the case may be. The purchase order
contains the price and the other terms such as the time and place of delivery,
etc. and it is signed by the petitioner, allottee and the Colombo seller. In
pursuance of the said purchase order the goods are shipped by the Colombo
seller and the necessary insurance is effected by the allottees to cover 110
percent value of the goods shipped. The Ceylon seller however prepares the
documentary bills in the name of the petitioner which had instructed its
bankers, the Canara Bank Ltd., to honour the bills drawn on it by the Colombo
seller and take delivery of the documents. The petitioner in its turn draws a
bill of exchange as well as invoice on the allottee and asks its bankers to
collect the amount from the allottee and deliver the documents to the allottee
on payment. On receipt of payment from the allottees, the bank directs
clearing agents to deliver the goods to the allottees. Thereafter, in the
accounts of the petitioner credit is given to the allottees for the payments
made by them and debits are made for the monies paid to the foreign seller,
the freight and clearing charges incurred and the commission paid to the
petitioner.
2\. For the assessment year 1963-64, the petitioner was assessed to sales tax
under the Madras General Sales Tax Act, 1959, on best judgment basis on a
turnover of Rs. 7,92,402.64 and a tax of Rs. 15,848.05 and a penalty of Rs.
23,772.08 Under Section 12(3) of the Act were levied. The assessing authority
had rejected the petitioner's contention that it was not a dealer, that it
imported goods only on behalf of the allottees already named by the
corporation, that it did not purchase or import any goods on its own account,
that it was a clear case of direct purchase by the allottees from the Ceylon
sellers and that there was neither a purchase nor a sale by the petitioner.
The assessing authority also rejected the petitioner's further contention
that, in any event, the alleged sales were in the course of import within the
meaning of Section 5(2) of the Central Sales Tax Act and as such not liable to
tax under the Madras General Sales Tax Act, 1959. The order of assessment was
also confirmed on appeal.
3\. There was a further appeal to the Sales Tax Appellate Tribunal. Though it
upheld the assessment, it reduced the penalty from Rs. 23,772.08 to Rs. 1,000.
Before us, the learned counsel for the petitioner challenges the view taken by
the Tribunal as regards the taxability of the transactions in question.
4\. On behalf of the petitioner it is contended that in importing copra from
Ceylon and in supplying the same to the various allottees it has neither acted
as a dealer nor effected any sale and that, in any event, even if the import
and the distribution are taken to be sales, such sales will be in the course
of import not liable to be taxed under the Madras General Sales Tax Act. The
learned counsel has taken us through the various terms of the two agreements,
one entered into between the corporation and the petitioner on the one hand
and the other entered into between the society and the allottees. According to
the learned counsel, the Tribunal went wrong in holding that there was no
direct purchases by the allottees from the foreign sellers and that it was the
petitioner who had purchased from the Ceylon seller. We are inclined to agree
with the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner that the
Tribunal has not appreciated properly the nature of the transactions. As
already stated, the purchase order has been signed by the foreign seller, the
allottee and the petitioner-society. There is thus privity between the foreign
seller and the allottee on whose requirement and specification the goods have
been consigned. Though the goods have been shipped in the name of the
petitioner, it cannot be said that the petitioner had any right of disposal
over the goods for under the agreement entered into by the petitioner with the
corporation, the goods have to be imported and delivered only to the allottees
and the goods had been insured at the cost of the allottees. In similar
circumstances, this court in National Chamber of Commerce v. State of Madras
[1970] 25 S.T.C. 185, held that a person like the petitioner can be treated
only as an agent of the allottees and that he cannot be treated as a "dealer"
purchasing and selling goods on his own behalf. The fact that the purchase
order has been signed by the allottee and the foreign seller indicates that
the purchase was directly by the allottee from the foreign seller through the
petitioner as an intermediary for the purpose of import. As a matter of fact,
the petitioner had no import licence in its name and it had been merely
authorised by the corporation to import copra on the basis of the bulk licence
issued in its name by the Government of India on behalf of the named
allottees. Therefore, we are of the view that the Tribunal is not right in
holding that there has been a sale by the foreign seller to the petitioner and
a further sale by the petitioner to the allottees. On the facts, there is only
one sale by the foreign seller to the allottees though the goods are routed
through the petitioner which has merely been authorised to import and
distribute copra by the corporation in pursuance of an agreement entered into
between them.
5\. On the further question as to whether even if the petitioner-society is
taken to have sold the goods to the various allottees, such sales could be
brought in for charge as a local sale. The contention of the petitioner is
that such a sale will be in the course of import. The Tribunal has taken the
view that the transaction is not a sale in the course of import on the ground
that the movement of the goods from Ceylon was not as a result of a covenant
in the contract of sale between the petitioner and the allottees that there
was no direct purchase by the allottees from the foreign sellers and that the
goods from Ceylon were shipped to the petitioner. But, we are of the view that
on the facts of this case, the conclusion is inescapable that the transaction
will be a sale in the course of import. As already stated, the purchase order
has been signed by the seller in Ceylon and the petitioner-society as well as
the allottee. Therefore, when the goods were shipped by the foreign seller he
was aware as to whom the same are intended. The quality and the quantity of
the goods shipped were as per the requirements of the allottees, though it is
the petitioner-society that actually placed the purchase order. It can,
therefore, be said that the sale by the petitioner-society to the allottee has
occasioned the import of the goods, especially when the agreement between the
petitioner-society and the allottee preceded the import. In Khosla & Co. (P.)
Ltd. v. Deputy Commissioner of Commercial Taxes [1966] 17 S.T.C. 473 (S.C.),
the Supreme Court expressed the view that before a sale could be said to have
occasioned the import it was not necessary that the sale should have preceded
the import and that it is sufficient if the movement of the goods from the
foreign territory was incidental to, or in pursuance of, the contract between
the acutal importer and the local purchaser and if there was no possibility of
the goods being diverted by the importer for any other purpose. It is common
ground that the petitioner-society placed orders with the foreign seller only
after it entered into an agreement with the various allottees and that the
agreement between the petitioner-society and the allottees specifically
provided that the goods are to be imported from Ceylon and supplied to them as
per their requirements on the basis of the bulk licence given in the name of
the corporation. We, therefore, accept the contention of the petitioner that
even if the petitioner-society can be said to have sold the goods to the
allottees, such sales will be sales in the course of import.
6\. As we have already held the transactions in question are not taxable under
the Madras General Sales Tax Act, there is no question of any penalty being
imposed.
7\. The tax case is, therefore, allowed and the order of the Tribunal is set
aside. There will be no order as to costs.
Ltd. v. Deputy Commissioner of Commercial Taxes [1966] 17 S.T.C. 473 (S.C.),
the Supreme Court expressed the view that before a sale could be said to have
occasioned the import it was not necessary that the sale should have preceded
the import and that it is sufficient if the movement of the goods from the
foreign territory was incidental to, or in pursuance of, the contract between
the acutal importer and the local purchaser and if there was no possibility of
the goods being diverted by the importer for any other purpose. It is common
ground that the petitioner-society placed orders with the foreign seller only
after it entered into an agreement with the various allottees and that the
agreement between the petitioner-society and the allottees specifically
provided that the goods are to be imported from Ceylon and supplied to them as
per their requirements on the basis of the bulk licence given in the name of
the corporation. We, therefore, accept the contention of the petitioner that
even if the petitioner-society can be said to have sold the goods to the
allottees, such sales will be sales in the course of import.
6\. As we have already held the transactions in question are not taxable under
State Trading Corporation and distribute it to the allottees as per their
requirements. The petitioner was allowed to take half a per cent of the c. i.
f. value of the goods for meeting its overhead expenses. The petitioner has
undertaken the liability to pay as premium a sum of Rs. 290 per ton on the
landed weight of copra to the corporation. The petitioner had also entered
into an agreement with each one of the allottees undertaking to import the
quantity of copra allotted to each of them on account of the allottee's share
of copra from the bulk licence of the corporation on each of the allottees
making a particular amount as a deposit having regard to the tonnage to cover
the initial expenses towards insurance, etc. Under the said agreements, the
allottees have undertaken to honour the drafts from the bankers of the
petitioner for the c. i. f. value of the shipment, the import duty, the
clearing and handling charges and the premium payable by the society to the
corporation as also the society's commission of half a per cent and other
incidental charges. The modus operandi adopted by the society in importing
copra from Ceylon was as follows: The various allottees write to the
petitioner selecting the dealers from Colombo from whom they require copra as
also the quantity, quality and rate, etc. and on that basis the petitioner
contacts the foreign suppliers and settle the price as well as the quantities
to be supplied according to the delivery pattern suggested by the allottees.
Ltd. v. Deputy Commissioner of Commercial Taxes [1966] 17 S.T.C. 473 (S.C.),
the Supreme Court expressed the view that before a sale could be said to have
occasioned the import it was not necessary that the sale should have preceded
the import and that it is sufficient if the movement of the goods from the
foreign territory was incidental to, or in pursuance of, the contract between
the acutal importer and the local purchaser and if there was no possibility of
the goods being diverted by the importer for any other purpose. It is common
ground that the petitioner-society placed orders with the foreign seller only
after it entered into an agreement with the various allottees and that the
agreement between the petitioner-society and the allottees specifically
provided that the goods are to be imported from Ceylon and supplied to them as
per their requirements on the basis of the bulk licence given in the name of
the corporation. We, therefore, accept the contention of the petitioner that
even if the petitioner-society can be said to have sold the goods to the
allottees, such sales will be sales in the course of import.
6\. As we have already held the transactions in question are not taxable under
State Trading Corporation and distribute it to the allottees as per their
requirements. The petitioner was allowed to take half a per cent of the c. i.
f. value of the goods for meeting its overhead expenses. The petitioner has
undertaken the liability to pay as premium a sum of Rs. 290 per ton on the
landed weight of copra to the corporation. The petitioner had also entered
into an agreement with each one of the allottees undertaking to import the
quantity of copra allotted to each of them on account of the allottee's share
of copra from the bulk licence of the corporation on each of the allottees
making a particular amount as a deposit having regard to the tonnage to cover
the initial expenses towards insurance, etc. Under the said agreements, the
allottees have undertaken to honour the drafts from the bankers of the
petitioner for the c. i. f. value of the shipment, the import duty, the
clearing and handling charges and the premium payable by the society to the
corporation as also the society's commission of half a per cent and other
incidental charges. The modus operandi adopted by the society in importing
copra from Ceylon was as follows: The various allottees write to the
petitioner selecting the dealers from Colombo from whom they require copra as
also the quantity, quality and rate, etc. and on that basis the petitioner
contacts the foreign suppliers and settle the price as well as the quantities
to be supplied according to the delivery pattern suggested by the allottees.
Ltd. v. Deputy Commissioner of Commercial Taxes [1966] 17 S.T.C. 473 (S.C.),
the Supreme Court expressed the view that before a sale could be said to have
occasioned the import it was not necessary that the sale should have preceded
the import and that it is sufficient if the movement of the goods from the
foreign territory was incidental to, or in pursuance of, the contract between
the acutal importer and the local purchaser and if there was no possibility of
the goods being diverted by the importer for any other purpose. It is common
ground that the petitioner-society placed orders with the foreign seller only
after it entered into an agreement with the various allottees and that the
agreement between the petitioner-society and the allottees specifically
provided that the goods are to be imported from Ceylon and supplied to them as
per their requirements on the basis of the bulk licence given in the name of
the corporation. We, therefore, accept the contention of the petitioner that
even if the petitioner-society can be said to have sold the goods to the
allottees, such sales will be sales in the course of import.
6\. As we have already held the transactions in question are not taxable under
State Trading Corporation and distribute it to the allottees as per their
requirements. The petitioner was allowed to take half a per cent of the c. i.
f. value of the goods for meeting its overhead expenses. The petitioner has
undertaken the liability to pay as premium a sum of Rs. 290 per ton on the
landed weight of copra to the corporation. The petitioner had also entered
into an agreement with each one of the allottees undertaking to import the
quantity of copra allotted to each of them on account of the allottee's share
of copra from the bulk licence of the corporation on each of the allottees
making a particular amount as a deposit having regard to the tonnage to cover
the initial expenses towards insurance, etc. Under the said agreements, the
allottees have undertaken to honour the drafts from the bankers of the
petitioner for the c. i. f. value of the shipment, the import duty, the
clearing and handling charges and the premium payable by the society to the
corporation as also the society's commission of half a per cent and other
incidental charges. The modus operandi adopted by the society in importing
copra from Ceylon was as follows: The various allottees write to the
petitioner selecting the dealers from Colombo from whom they require copra as
also the quantity, quality and rate, etc. and on that basis the petitioner
contacts the foreign suppliers and settle the price as well as the quantities
to be supplied according to the delivery pattern suggested by the allottees.
Thereafter, the petitioner sends to the allottees purchase orders in
quadruplicate to be duly filled up for confirmation by the allottees as also
the Colombo sellers or their agents, as the case may be. The purchase order
contains the price and the other terms such as the time and place of delivery,
etc. and it is signed by the petitioner, allottee and the Colombo seller. In
pursuance of the said purchase order the goods are shipped by the Colombo
seller and the necessary insurance is effected by the allottees to cover 110
percent value of the goods shipped. The Ceylon seller however prepares the
documentary bills in the name of the petitioner which had instructed its
bankers, the Canara Bank Ltd., to honour the bills drawn on it by the Colombo
seller and take delivery of the documents. The petitioner in its turn draws a
Ltd. v. Deputy Commissioner of Commercial Taxes [1966] 17 S.T.C. 473 (S.C.),
the Supreme Court expressed the view that before a sale could be said to have
occasioned the import it was not necessary that the sale should have preceded
the import and that it is sufficient if the movement of the goods from the
foreign territory was incidental to, or in pursuance of, the contract between
the acutal importer and the local purchaser and if there was no possibility of
the goods being diverted by the importer for any other purpose. It is common
ground that the petitioner-society placed orders with the foreign seller only
after it entered into an agreement with the various allottees and that the
agreement between the petitioner-society and the allottees specifically
provided that the goods are to be imported from Ceylon and supplied to them as
per their requirements on the basis of the bulk licence given in the name of
the corporation. We, therefore, accept the contention of the petitioner that
even if the petitioner-society can be said to have sold the goods to the
allottees, such sales will be sales in the course of import.
6\. As we have already held the transactions in question are not taxable under
State Trading Corporation and distribute it to the allottees as per their
requirements. The petitioner was allowed to take half a per cent of the c. i.
f. value of the goods for meeting its overhead expenses. The petitioner has
undertaken the liability to pay as premium a sum of Rs. 290 per ton on the
landed weight of copra to the corporation. The petitioner had also entered
into an agreement with each one of the allottees undertaking to import the
quantity of copra allotted to each of them on account of the allottee's share
of copra from the bulk licence of the corporation on each of the allottees
making a particular amount as a deposit having regard to the tonnage to cover
the initial expenses towards insurance, etc. Under the said agreements, the
allottees have undertaken to honour the drafts from the bankers of the
petitioner for the c. i. f. value of the shipment, the import duty, the
clearing and handling charges and the premium payable by the society to the
corporation as also the society's commission of half a per cent and other
incidental charges. The modus operandi adopted by the society in importing
copra from Ceylon was as follows: The various allottees write to the
petitioner selecting the dealers from Colombo from whom they require copra as
also the quantity, quality and rate, etc. and on that basis the petitioner
contacts the foreign suppliers and settle the price as well as the quantities
to be supplied according to the delivery pattern suggested by the allottees.
Thereafter, the petitioner sends to the allottees purchase orders in
quadruplicate to be duly filled up for confirmation by the allottees as also
the Colombo sellers or their agents, as the case may be. The purchase order
contains the price and the other terms such as the time and place of delivery,
etc. and it is signed by the petitioner, allottee and the Colombo seller. In
pursuance of the said purchase order the goods are shipped by the Colombo
seller and the necessary insurance is effected by the allottees to cover 110
percent value of the goods shipped. The Ceylon seller however prepares the
documentary bills in the name of the petitioner which had instructed its
bankers, the Canara Bank Ltd., to honour the bills drawn on it by the Colombo
seller and take delivery of the documents. The petitioner in its turn draws a
Ltd. v. Deputy Commissioner of Commercial Taxes [1966] 17 S.T.C. 473 (S.C.),
the Supreme Court expressed the view that before a sale could be said to have
occasioned the import it was not necessary that the sale should have preceded
the import and that it is sufficient if the movement of the goods from the
foreign territory was incidental to, or in pursuance of, the contract between
the acutal importer and the local purchaser and if there was no possibility of
the goods being diverted by the importer for any other purpose. It is common
ground that the petitioner-society placed orders with the foreign seller only
after it entered into an agreement with the various allottees and that the
agreement between the petitioner-society and the allottees specifically
provided that the goods are to be imported from Ceylon and supplied to them as
per their requirements on the basis of the bulk licence given in the name of
the corporation. We, therefore, accept the contention of the petitioner that
even if the petitioner-society can be said to have sold the goods to the
allottees, such sales will be sales in the course of import.
6\. As we have already held the transactions in question are not taxable under
