Central Government Act
Section 230 in The Income- Tax Act, 1995
230\. Tax, clearance certificate 3
(1) Subject to such exceptions as the Central Government may, by notification
4 in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf, 5 no person-
(a) who is not domiciled in India; or
(b) who is domiciled in India at the time of his departure, but-
(ii) intends to proceed to another country on a work permit with the object of
taking up any employment or other occupation in that country; or
(iii) in respect of whom circumstances exist which in the opinion of an
income- tax authority, render it necessary for him to obtain a certificate
under this section, shall leave the territory of India] by land, sea or air
unless he first
1\. Substituted by the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 1987, w. e. f. 1- 4-
1989. Prior to the substitution, it read as under:" (2) Notwithstanding the
issue of a certificate under section 222 to the Tax Recovery Officer where an
assessee is in default or is deemed to be in default in making a payment of
tax, the Assessing Officer may, if the assessee has property in a country
outside India (being a country with which the Central Government has entered
into an agreement for the recovery of income- tax under this Act and the
either in respect of a single journey or in respect of all journeys to be
undertaken by that person within such period as may be specified in the
certificate.
(2) If the owner or charterer of any ship or aircraft carrying persons from
any place in the territory of India to any place outside India allows any
person to whom sub- section (1) applies to travel by such ship or aircraft
without first satisfying himself that such person is in possession of a
certificate as required by that sub- section, he shall be personally liable to
pay the whole or any part of the amount of tax, if any, payable by such person
as the 2 Assessing] Officer may, having regard to the circumstances of the
case, determine.
(3) In respect of any sum payable by the owner or charterer of any ship or
aircraft under sub- section (2), the owner or charterer, as the case may be,
shall be deemed to be an assessee in default for such sum, and such sum shall
be recoverable from him in the manner provided in this Chapter as if it were
an arrear of tax. 3 (4) The Board may make rules for regulating any matter
into an agreement for the recovery of income- tax under this Act and the
corresponding law in force in that country), forward to the Board a
certificate specifying the amount of arrears due from the assessee and the
Board may take such action thereon as it may deem appropriate having regard to
the terms of the agreement with such country." The italicised word was
substituted for" Income- tax" by the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 1989, w.
r. e. f. 1- 4- 1988.
5\. Substituted for" no person who is not domiciled in India, or who, even if
domiciled in India at the time of his departure, has, in the opinion of an
income- tax authority, no intention of returning to India, shall leave the
territory of India" by the Direct Tax Laws (, Amendment) Act, 1987, w. e. f.
1- 4- 1989.
obtains from such authority as may be appointed' by the Central Government in
this behalf (hereinafter in this section referred to as the" competent
authority") a certificate stating that he has no liabilities under this Act,
the Excess Profits Tax Act, 1940 (15 of 1940 ), the Business Profits Tax Act,
1947 (21 of 1947 ), the Indian Income- tax Act, 1922 (11 of 1922 ), the
Wealth- tax Act, 1957 (27 of 1957 ), the Expenditure- tax Act, 1957 (29 of
1957 ) or the Gift- tax Act 1958 (18 of 1958 ), or that satisfactory
arrangements have been made for the payment of all or any of such taxes which
are or may become payable by that person: Provided that in the case of a
person not domiciled in India the competent authority may, if it is satisfied
that such person intends to return to India, issue an exemption certificate
either in respect of a single journey or in respect of all journeys to be
undertaken by that person within such period as may be specified in the
certificate.
(2) If the owner or charterer of any ship or aircraft carrying persons from
any place in the territory of India to any place outside India allows any
person to whom sub- section (1) applies to travel by such ship or aircraft
without first satisfying himself that such person is in possession of a
certificate as required by that sub- section, he shall be personally liable to
pay the whole or any part of the amount of tax, if any, payable by such person
as the 2 Assessing] Officer may, having regard to the circumstances of the
case, determine.
(3) In respect of any sum payable by the owner or charterer of any ship or
aircraft under sub- section (2), the owner or charterer, as the case may be,
shall be deemed to be an assessee in default for such sum, and such sum shall
be recoverable from him in the manner provided in this Chapter as if it were
an arrear of tax. 3 (4) The Board may make rules for regulating any matter
necessary for, or incidental to, the purpose of carrying out the provisions of
this section. Explanation.- For the purposes of this section, the expressions"
owner" and" charterer" include any representative, agent or employee empowered
by the owner or charterer to allow persons to travel by the ship or aircraft.
either in respect of a single journey or in respect of all journeys to be
undertaken by that person within such period as may be specified in the
certificate.
(2) If the owner or charterer of any ship or aircraft carrying persons from
any place in the territory of India to any place outside India allows any
person to whom sub- section (1) applies to travel by such ship or aircraft
without first satisfying himself that such person is in possession of a
certificate as required by that sub- section, he shall be personally liable to
pay the whole or any part of the amount of tax, if any, payable by such person
as the 2 Assessing] Officer may, having regard to the circumstances of the
case, determine.
(3) In respect of any sum payable by the owner or charterer of any ship or
aircraft under sub- section (2), the owner or charterer, as the case may be,
shall be deemed to be an assessee in default for such sum, and such sum shall
be recoverable from him in the manner provided in this Chapter as if it were
an arrear of tax. 3 (4) The Board may make rules for regulating any matter
into an agreement for the recovery of income- tax under this Act and the
corresponding law in force in that country), forward to the Board a
certificate specifying the amount of arrears due from the assessee and the
Board may take such action thereon as it may deem appropriate having regard to
the terms of the agreement with such country." The italicised word was
substituted for" Income- tax" by the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 1989, w.
r. e. f. 1- 4- 1988.
5\. Substituted for" no person who is not domiciled in India, or who, even if
domiciled in India at the time of his departure, has, in the opinion of an
income- tax authority, no intention of returning to India, shall leave the
territory of India" by the Direct Tax Laws (, Amendment) Act, 1987, w. e. f.
1- 4- 1989.
obtains from such authority as may be appointed' by the Central Government in
this behalf (hereinafter in this section referred to as the" competent
authority") a certificate stating that he has no liabilities under this Act,
the Excess Profits Tax Act, 1940 (15 of 1940 ), the Business Profits Tax Act,
1947 (21 of 1947 ), the Indian Income- tax Act, 1922 (11 of 1922 ), the
Wealth- tax Act, 1957 (27 of 1957 ), the Expenditure- tax Act, 1957 (29 of
1957 ) or the Gift- tax Act 1958 (18 of 1958 ), or that satisfactory
arrangements have been made for the payment of all or any of such taxes which
either in respect of a single journey or in respect of all journeys to be
undertaken by that person within such period as may be specified in the
certificate.
(2) If the owner or charterer of any ship or aircraft carrying persons from
any place in the territory of India to any place outside India allows any
person to whom sub- section (1) applies to travel by such ship or aircraft
without first satisfying himself that such person is in possession of a
certificate as required by that sub- section, he shall be personally liable to
pay the whole or any part of the amount of tax, if any, payable by such person
as the 2 Assessing] Officer may, having regard to the circumstances of the
case, determine.
(3) In respect of any sum payable by the owner or charterer of any ship or
aircraft under sub- section (2), the owner or charterer, as the case may be,
shall be deemed to be an assessee in default for such sum, and such sum shall
be recoverable from him in the manner provided in this Chapter as if it were
an arrear of tax. 3 (4) The Board may make rules for regulating any matter
into an agreement for the recovery of income- tax under this Act and the
corresponding law in force in that country), forward to the Board a
certificate specifying the amount of arrears due from the assessee and the
Board may take such action thereon as it may deem appropriate having regard to
the terms of the agreement with such country." The italicised word was
substituted for" Income- tax" by the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 1989, w.
r. e. f. 1- 4- 1988.
5\. Substituted for" no person who is not domiciled in India, or who, even if
domiciled in India at the time of his departure, has, in the opinion of an
income- tax authority, no intention of returning to India, shall leave the
territory of India" by the Direct Tax Laws (, Amendment) Act, 1987, w. e. f.
1- 4- 1989.
obtains from such authority as may be appointed' by the Central Government in
this behalf (hereinafter in this section referred to as the" competent
authority") a certificate stating that he has no liabilities under this Act,
the Excess Profits Tax Act, 1940 (15 of 1940 ), the Business Profits Tax Act,
1947 (21 of 1947 ), the Indian Income- tax Act, 1922 (11 of 1922 ), the
Wealth- tax Act, 1957 (27 of 1957 ), the Expenditure- tax Act, 1957 (29 of
1957 ) or the Gift- tax Act 1958 (18 of 1958 ), or that satisfactory
arrangements have been made for the payment of all or any of such taxes which
either in respect of a single journey or in respect of all journeys to be
undertaken by that person within such period as may be specified in the
certificate.
(2) If the owner or charterer of any ship or aircraft carrying persons from
any place in the territory of India to any place outside India allows any
person to whom sub- section (1) applies to travel by such ship or aircraft
without first satisfying himself that such person is in possession of a
certificate as required by that sub- section, he shall be personally liable to
pay the whole or any part of the amount of tax, if any, payable by such person
as the 2 Assessing] Officer may, having regard to the circumstances of the
case, determine.
(3) In respect of any sum payable by the owner or charterer of any ship or
aircraft under sub- section (2), the owner or charterer, as the case may be,
shall be deemed to be an assessee in default for such sum, and such sum shall
be recoverable from him in the manner provided in this Chapter as if it were
an arrear of tax. 3 (4) The Board may make rules for regulating any matter
into an agreement for the recovery of income- tax under this Act and the
corresponding law in force in that country), forward to the Board a
certificate specifying the amount of arrears due from the assessee and the
Board may take such action thereon as it may deem appropriate having regard to
the terms of the agreement with such country." The italicised word was
substituted for" Income- tax" by the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 1989, w.
r. e. f. 1- 4- 1988.
5\. Substituted for" no person who is not domiciled in India, or who, even if
domiciled in India at the time of his departure, has, in the opinion of an
income- tax authority, no intention of returning to India, shall leave the
territory of India" by the Direct Tax Laws (, Amendment) Act, 1987, w. e. f.
1- 4- 1989.
obtains from such authority as may be appointed' by the Central Government in
this behalf (hereinafter in this section referred to as the" competent
authority") a certificate stating that he has no liabilities under this Act,
the Excess Profits Tax Act, 1940 (15 of 1940 ), the Business Profits Tax Act,
1947 (21 of 1947 ), the Indian Income- tax Act, 1922 (11 of 1922 ), the
Wealth- tax Act, 1957 (27 of 1957 ), the Expenditure- tax Act, 1957 (29 of
1957 ) or the Gift- tax Act 1958 (18 of 1958 ), or that satisfactory
arrangements have been made for the payment of all or any of such taxes which
are or may become payable by that person: Provided that in the case of a
person not domiciled in India the competent authority may, if it is satisfied
that such person intends to return to India, issue an exemption certificate
either in respect of a single journey or in respect of all journeys to be
undertaken by that person within such period as may be specified in the
certificate.
(2) If the owner or charterer of any ship or aircraft carrying persons from
any place in the territory of India to any place outside India allows any
person to whom sub- section (1) applies to travel by such ship or aircraft
without first satisfying himself that such person is in possession of a
certificate as required by that sub- section, he shall be personally liable to
either in respect of a single journey or in respect of all journeys to be
undertaken by that person within such period as may be specified in the
certificate.
(2) If the owner or charterer of any ship or aircraft carrying persons from
any place in the territory of India to any place outside India allows any
person to whom sub- section (1) applies to travel by such ship or aircraft
without first satisfying himself that such person is in possession of a
certificate as required by that sub- section, he shall be personally liable to
pay the whole or any part of the amount of tax, if any, payable by such person
as the 2 Assessing] Officer may, having regard to the circumstances of the
case, determine.
(3) In respect of any sum payable by the owner or charterer of any ship or
aircraft under sub- section (2), the owner or charterer, as the case may be,
shall be deemed to be an assessee in default for such sum, and such sum shall
be recoverable from him in the manner provided in this Chapter as if it were
an arrear of tax. 3 (4) The Board may make rules for regulating any matter
into an agreement for the recovery of income- tax under this Act and the
corresponding law in force in that country), forward to the Board a
certificate specifying the amount of arrears due from the assessee and the
Board may take such action thereon as it may deem appropriate having regard to
the terms of the agreement with such country." The italicised word was
substituted for" Income- tax" by the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 1989, w.
r. e. f. 1- 4- 1988.
5\. Substituted for" no person who is not domiciled in India, or who, even if
domiciled in India at the time of his departure, has, in the opinion of an
income- tax authority, no intention of returning to India, shall leave the
territory of India" by the Direct Tax Laws (, Amendment) Act, 1987, w. e. f.
1- 4- 1989.
obtains from such authority as may be appointed' by the Central Government in
this behalf (hereinafter in this section referred to as the" competent
authority") a certificate stating that he has no liabilities under this Act,
the Excess Profits Tax Act, 1940 (15 of 1940 ), the Business Profits Tax Act,
1947 (21 of 1947 ), the Indian Income- tax Act, 1922 (11 of 1922 ), the
Wealth- tax Act, 1957 (27 of 1957 ), the Expenditure- tax Act, 1957 (29 of
1957 ) or the Gift- tax Act 1958 (18 of 1958 ), or that satisfactory
arrangements have been made for the payment of all or any of such taxes which
are or may become payable by that person: Provided that in the case of a
person not domiciled in India the competent authority may, if it is satisfied
that such person intends to return to India, issue an exemption certificate
either in respect of a single journey or in respect of all journeys to be
undertaken by that person within such period as may be specified in the
certificate.
(2) If the owner or charterer of any ship or aircraft carrying persons from
any place in the territory of India to any place outside India allows any
person to whom sub- section (1) applies to travel by such ship or aircraft
without first satisfying himself that such person is in possession of a
certificate as required by that sub- section, he shall be personally liable to
either in respect of a single journey or in respect of all journeys to be
undertaken by that person within such period as may be specified in the
certificate.
(2) If the owner or charterer of any ship or aircraft carrying persons from
any place in the territory of India to any place outside India allows any
person to whom sub- section (1) applies to travel by such ship or aircraft
without first satisfying himself that such person is in possession of a
certificate as required by that sub- section, he shall be personally liable to
pay the whole or any part of the amount of tax, if any, payable by such person
as the 2 Assessing] Officer may, having regard to the circumstances of the
case, determine.
(3) In respect of any sum payable by the owner or charterer of any ship or
aircraft under sub- section (2), the owner or charterer, as the case may be,
shall be deemed to be an assessee in default for such sum, and such sum shall
be recoverable from him in the manner provided in this Chapter as if it were
an arrear of tax. 3 (4) The Board may make rules for regulating any matter
