Central Government Act
Section 195 in The Income- Tax Act, 1995
195\. Other sums 1
(1) 2 Any person responsible for paying to a non- resident, not being a
company, or to a foreign company, any interest (not being interest on
securities) or any other sum chargeable under the provisions of this Act (not
being income chargeable under the head" Salaries" 3 ]) shall, at the time of
credit of such income to the account of the payee or at the time of payment
thereof in cash or by the issue of a cheque or draft or by any other mode,
whichever is earlier, deduct income- tax thereon at the rates in force: 4 5
Provided that in the case of interest payable by the Government or a public
sector bank within the meaning of clause (23D) of section 10 or a public
financial institution within the meaning of that clause, deduction of tax
shall be made only at the time of payment thereof in cash or by the issue of a
cheque or draft or by any other mode.] Explanation.- For the purposes of this
section, where any interest or other sum as aforesaid is credited to any
account, whether called" Interest Payable Account" or" Suspense Account" or by
any other name, in the books of account of the person liable to pay such
income, such crediting shall be deemed to be credit of such income to the
account of the payee and the provisions of this section shall apply
tax shall be deducted under sub- section (1) only on that proportion of the
sum which is so chargeable: 4 Omitted by the Finance (No. 2) Act, 1991 , w. e.
f. 1- 10- 1991 ]
(3) 5 Subject to rules made under sub- section (5), any person entitled to
receive any interest or other sum on which income- tax has to be deducted
under sub- section (1) may make an application in the prescribed form to the 6
Assessing] Officer for the grant of a certificate authorising him to receive
such interest or other sum without deduction of tax under that subsection, and
where any such certificate is granted, every person responsible for paying
such interest or other sum to the person to whom such certificate is granted
shall, so long as the certificate is in force, make payment of such interest
or other sum without deducting tax thereon under sub- section (1).
(4) A certificate granted under sub- section (3) shall remain in force till
the expiry of the period specified therein or, if it is cancelled by the 7
Assessing] Officer before the expiry of such period, till such cancellation.
(5) The Board may, having regard to the convenience of assessees and the
account of the payee and the provisions of this section shall apply
accordingly.]
(2) Where the person responsible for paying any such sum chargeable under this
Act (other than 6 ] interest on securities, 7 ] and
2\. Substituted by the Finance Act, 1987, w. e. f. 1- 6- 1987. Prior to the
substitution, subsection (1), as amended by the Finance Act, 1965, w. e. f. 1-
4- 1965 and the Finance Act, 1975, w. e. f. 1- 4- 1975, read as under:" 195.
Other sums.- (1) Any person responsible for paying to a non- resident, not
being a company, or to a company which is neither an Indian company nor a
company which has made the prescribed arrangements for the declaration and
payment of dividends within India any interest, not being" Interest on
securities", or any other sum, not being dividends, chargeable under the
provisions of this Act, shall, at the time of payment unless he is himself
liable to pay any income- tax thereon as an agent, deduct income- tax thereon
at the rates in force: Provided that nothing in this sub- section shall apply
to any payment made in the course of transactions in respect of which a person
responsible for the payments is deemed under the proviso to sub- section (1)
of section 163 not to be an agent of the payee."
3\. The words" or dividends" omitted by the Finance (No. 2) Act, 1991, w. e.
f. 1- 10- 1991
5\. Inserted by the Direct Tax Laws (Second Amendment) Act, 1989, w. r. e. f.
1- 6- 1987.
6\. The words" or dividends" omitted by the Finance Act, 1976, w.. e. f. 1- 6-
1976.
7\. The words", dividend" omitted by the Finance (No. 2) Act, 1991, w. e. f.
1- 10- 1991
salary) to a non- resident considers that the whole of such sum would not be
income chargeable in the case of the recipient, he may make an application 1
to the 2 Assessing] Officer to determine, 3 by general or special order], the
appropriate proportion of such sum so chargeable, and upon such determination,
tax shall be deducted under sub- section (1) only on that proportion of the
sum which is so chargeable: 4 Omitted by the Finance (No. 2) Act, 1991 , w. e.
f. 1- 10- 1991 ]
(3) 5 Subject to rules made under sub- section (5), any person entitled to
receive any interest or other sum on which income- tax has to be deducted
under sub- section (1) may make an application in the prescribed form to the 6
Assessing] Officer for the grant of a certificate authorising him to receive
such interest or other sum without deduction of tax under that subsection, and
where any such certificate is granted, every person responsible for paying
such interest or other sum to the person to whom such certificate is granted
shall, so long as the certificate is in force, make payment of such interest
or other sum without deducting tax thereon under sub- section (1).
(4) A certificate granted under sub- section (3) shall remain in force till
the expiry of the period specified therein or, if it is cancelled by the 7
Assessing] Officer before the expiry of such period, till such cancellation.
(5) The Board may, having regard to the convenience of assessees and the
interests of revenue, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
specifying the cases in which, and the circumstances under which, an (3) and
the conditions subject to which such certificate may be granted and providing
for all other matters connected therewith.
tax shall be deducted under sub- section (1) only on that proportion of the
sum which is so chargeable: 4 Omitted by the Finance (No. 2) Act, 1991 , w. e.
f. 1- 10- 1991 ]
(3) 5 Subject to rules made under sub- section (5), any person entitled to
receive any interest or other sum on which income- tax has to be deducted
under sub- section (1) may make an application in the prescribed form to the 6
Assessing] Officer for the grant of a certificate authorising him to receive
such interest or other sum without deduction of tax under that subsection, and
where any such certificate is granted, every person responsible for paying
such interest or other sum to the person to whom such certificate is granted
shall, so long as the certificate is in force, make payment of such interest
or other sum without deducting tax thereon under sub- section (1).
(4) A certificate granted under sub- section (3) shall remain in force till
the expiry of the period specified therein or, if it is cancelled by the 7
Assessing] Officer before the expiry of such period, till such cancellation.
(5) The Board may, having regard to the convenience of assessees and the
account of the payee and the provisions of this section shall apply
accordingly.]
(2) Where the person responsible for paying any such sum chargeable under this
Act (other than 6 ] interest on securities, 7 ] and
2\. Substituted by the Finance Act, 1987, w. e. f. 1- 6- 1987. Prior to the
substitution, subsection (1), as amended by the Finance Act, 1965, w. e. f. 1-
4- 1965 and the Finance Act, 1975, w. e. f. 1- 4- 1975, read as under:" 195.
Other sums.- (1) Any person responsible for paying to a non- resident, not
being a company, or to a company which is neither an Indian company nor a
company which has made the prescribed arrangements for the declaration and
payment of dividends within India any interest, not being" Interest on
securities", or any other sum, not being dividends, chargeable under the
provisions of this Act, shall, at the time of payment unless he is himself
liable to pay any income- tax thereon as an agent, deduct income- tax thereon
at the rates in force: Provided that nothing in this sub- section shall apply
to any payment made in the course of transactions in respect of which a person
responsible for the payments is deemed under the proviso to sub- section (1)
of section 163 not to be an agent of the payee."
3\. The words" or dividends" omitted by the Finance (No. 2) Act, 1991, w. e.
f. 1- 10- 1991
tax shall be deducted under sub- section (1) only on that proportion of the
sum which is so chargeable: 4 Omitted by the Finance (No. 2) Act, 1991 , w. e.
f. 1- 10- 1991 ]
(3) 5 Subject to rules made under sub- section (5), any person entitled to
receive any interest or other sum on which income- tax has to be deducted
under sub- section (1) may make an application in the prescribed form to the 6
Assessing] Officer for the grant of a certificate authorising him to receive
such interest or other sum without deduction of tax under that subsection, and
where any such certificate is granted, every person responsible for paying
such interest or other sum to the person to whom such certificate is granted
shall, so long as the certificate is in force, make payment of such interest
or other sum without deducting tax thereon under sub- section (1).
(4) A certificate granted under sub- section (3) shall remain in force till
the expiry of the period specified therein or, if it is cancelled by the 7
Assessing] Officer before the expiry of such period, till such cancellation.
(5) The Board may, having regard to the convenience of assessees and the
account of the payee and the provisions of this section shall apply
accordingly.]
(2) Where the person responsible for paying any such sum chargeable under this
Act (other than 6 ] interest on securities, 7 ] and
2\. Substituted by the Finance Act, 1987, w. e. f. 1- 6- 1987. Prior to the
substitution, subsection (1), as amended by the Finance Act, 1965, w. e. f. 1-
4- 1965 and the Finance Act, 1975, w. e. f. 1- 4- 1975, read as under:" 195.
Other sums.- (1) Any person responsible for paying to a non- resident, not
being a company, or to a company which is neither an Indian company nor a
company which has made the prescribed arrangements for the declaration and
payment of dividends within India any interest, not being" Interest on
securities", or any other sum, not being dividends, chargeable under the
provisions of this Act, shall, at the time of payment unless he is himself
liable to pay any income- tax thereon as an agent, deduct income- tax thereon
at the rates in force: Provided that nothing in this sub- section shall apply
to any payment made in the course of transactions in respect of which a person
responsible for the payments is deemed under the proviso to sub- section (1)
of section 163 not to be an agent of the payee."
3\. The words" or dividends" omitted by the Finance (No. 2) Act, 1991, w. e.
f. 1- 10- 1991
tax shall be deducted under sub- section (1) only on that proportion of the
sum which is so chargeable: 4 Omitted by the Finance (No. 2) Act, 1991 , w. e.
f. 1- 10- 1991 ]
(3) 5 Subject to rules made under sub- section (5), any person entitled to
receive any interest or other sum on which income- tax has to be deducted
under sub- section (1) may make an application in the prescribed form to the 6
Assessing] Officer for the grant of a certificate authorising him to receive
such interest or other sum without deduction of tax under that subsection, and
where any such certificate is granted, every person responsible for paying
such interest or other sum to the person to whom such certificate is granted
shall, so long as the certificate is in force, make payment of such interest
or other sum without deducting tax thereon under sub- section (1).
(4) A certificate granted under sub- section (3) shall remain in force till
the expiry of the period specified therein or, if it is cancelled by the 7
Assessing] Officer before the expiry of such period, till such cancellation.
(5) The Board may, having regard to the convenience of assessees and the
account of the payee and the provisions of this section shall apply
accordingly.]
(2) Where the person responsible for paying any such sum chargeable under this
Act (other than 6 ] interest on securities, 7 ] and
2\. Substituted by the Finance Act, 1987, w. e. f. 1- 6- 1987. Prior to the
substitution, subsection (1), as amended by the Finance Act, 1965, w. e. f. 1-
4- 1965 and the Finance Act, 1975, w. e. f. 1- 4- 1975, read as under:" 195.
Other sums.- (1) Any person responsible for paying to a non- resident, not
being a company, or to a company which is neither an Indian company nor a
company which has made the prescribed arrangements for the declaration and
payment of dividends within India any interest, not being" Interest on
securities", or any other sum, not being dividends, chargeable under the
provisions of this Act, shall, at the time of payment unless he is himself
liable to pay any income- tax thereon as an agent, deduct income- tax thereon
at the rates in force: Provided that nothing in this sub- section shall apply
to any payment made in the course of transactions in respect of which a person
responsible for the payments is deemed under the proviso to sub- section (1)
of section 163 not to be an agent of the payee."
3\. The words" or dividends" omitted by the Finance (No. 2) Act, 1991, w. e.
f. 1- 10- 1991
5\. Inserted by the Direct Tax Laws (Second Amendment) Act, 1989, w. r. e. f.
1- 6- 1987.
6\. The words" or dividends" omitted by the Finance Act, 1976, w.. e. f. 1- 6-
1976.
7\. The words", dividend" omitted by the Finance (No. 2) Act, 1991, w. e. f.
1- 10- 1991
salary) to a non- resident considers that the whole of such sum would not be
income chargeable in the case of the recipient, he may make an application 1
to the 2 Assessing] Officer to determine, 3 by general or special order], the
appropriate proportion of such sum so chargeable, and upon such determination,
tax shall be deducted under sub- section (1) only on that proportion of the
tax shall be deducted under sub- section (1) only on that proportion of the
sum which is so chargeable: 4 Omitted by the Finance (No. 2) Act, 1991 , w. e.
f. 1- 10- 1991 ]
(3) 5 Subject to rules made under sub- section (5), any person entitled to
receive any interest or other sum on which income- tax has to be deducted
under sub- section (1) may make an application in the prescribed form to the 6
Assessing] Officer for the grant of a certificate authorising him to receive
such interest or other sum without deduction of tax under that subsection, and
where any such certificate is granted, every person responsible for paying
such interest or other sum to the person to whom such certificate is granted
shall, so long as the certificate is in force, make payment of such interest
or other sum without deducting tax thereon under sub- section (1).
(4) A certificate granted under sub- section (3) shall remain in force till
the expiry of the period specified therein or, if it is cancelled by the 7
Assessing] Officer before the expiry of such period, till such cancellation.
(5) The Board may, having regard to the convenience of assessees and the
account of the payee and the provisions of this section shall apply
accordingly.]
(2) Where the person responsible for paying any such sum chargeable under this
Act (other than 6 ] interest on securities, 7 ] and
2\. Substituted by the Finance Act, 1987, w. e. f. 1- 6- 1987. Prior to the
substitution, subsection (1), as amended by the Finance Act, 1965, w. e. f. 1-
4- 1965 and the Finance Act, 1975, w. e. f. 1- 4- 1975, read as under:" 195.
Other sums.- (1) Any person responsible for paying to a non- resident, not
being a company, or to a company which is neither an Indian company nor a
company which has made the prescribed arrangements for the declaration and
payment of dividends within India any interest, not being" Interest on
securities", or any other sum, not being dividends, chargeable under the
provisions of this Act, shall, at the time of payment unless he is himself
liable to pay any income- tax thereon as an agent, deduct income- tax thereon
at the rates in force: Provided that nothing in this sub- section shall apply
to any payment made in the course of transactions in respect of which a person
responsible for the payments is deemed under the proviso to sub- section (1)
of section 163 not to be an agent of the payee."
3\. The words" or dividends" omitted by the Finance (No. 2) Act, 1991, w. e.
f. 1- 10- 1991
5\. Inserted by the Direct Tax Laws (Second Amendment) Act, 1989, w. r. e. f.
1- 6- 1987.
6\. The words" or dividends" omitted by the Finance Act, 1976, w.. e. f. 1- 6-
1976.
7\. The words", dividend" omitted by the Finance (No. 2) Act, 1991, w. e. f.
1- 10- 1991
salary) to a non- resident considers that the whole of such sum would not be
income chargeable in the case of the recipient, he may make an application 1
to the 2 Assessing] Officer to determine, 3 by general or special order], the
appropriate proportion of such sum so chargeable, and upon such determination,
tax shall be deducted under sub- section (1) only on that proportion of the
tax shall be deducted under sub- section (1) only on that proportion of the
sum which is so chargeable: 4 Omitted by the Finance (No. 2) Act, 1991 , w. e.
f. 1- 10- 1991 ]
(3) 5 Subject to rules made under sub- section (5), any person entitled to
receive any interest or other sum on which income- tax has to be deducted
under sub- section (1) may make an application in the prescribed form to the 6
Assessing] Officer for the grant of a certificate authorising him to receive
such interest or other sum without deduction of tax under that subsection, and
where any such certificate is granted, every person responsible for paying
such interest or other sum to the person to whom such certificate is granted
shall, so long as the certificate is in force, make payment of such interest
or other sum without deducting tax thereon under sub- section (1).
(4) A certificate granted under sub- section (3) shall remain in force till
the expiry of the period specified therein or, if it is cancelled by the 7
Assessing] Officer before the expiry of such period, till such cancellation.
(5) The Board may, having regard to the convenience of assessees and the
