Central Government Act
Section 72 in The Transfer of Property Act, 1882
72\. Right of mortgagee in possession.—1[A mortgagee] may spend such money as
is necessary— 2[***]
(b) for 3[the preservation of the mortgaged property] from destruction,
forfeiture or sale;
(c) for supporting the mortgagor’s title to the property;
(d) for making his own title thereto good against the mortgagor; and
(e) when the mortgaged property is a renewable lease-hold, for the renewal of
the lease, and may, in the absence of a contract to the contrary, add such
money to the principal money, at the rate of interest payable on the
principal, and, where no such rate is fixed, at the rate of nine per cent. per
annum: 4[Provided that the expenditure of money by the mortgagee under clause
(b) or clause (c) shall not be deemed to be necessary unless the mortgagor has
been called upon and has failed to take proper and timely steps to preserve
the property or to support the title.] Where the property is by its nature
insurable, the mortgagee may also, in the absence of a contract to the
contrary, insure and keep insured against loss or damage by fire the whole or
any part of such property, and the premiums paid for any such insurance shall
be 5[added to the principal money with interest at the same rate as is payable
(e) when the mortgaged property is a renewable lease-hold, for the renewal of
the lease, and may, in the absence of a contract to the contrary, add such
money to the principal money, at the rate of interest payable on the
principal, and, where no such rate is fixed, at the rate of nine per cent. per
annum: 4[Provided that the expenditure of money by the mortgagee under clause
(b) or clause (c) shall not be deemed to be necessary unless the mortgagor has
been called upon and has failed to take proper and timely steps to preserve
the property or to support the title.] Where the property is by its nature
insurable, the mortgagee may also, in the absence of a contract to the
contrary, insure and keep insured against loss or damage by fire the whole or
any part of such property, and the premiums paid for any such insurance shall
be 5[added to the principal money with interest at the same rate as is payable
on the principal money or, where no such rate is fixed, at the rate of nine
per cent. per annum]. But the amount of such insurance shall not exceed the
amount specified in this behalf in the mortgage-deed or (if no such amount is
therein specified) two-thirds of the amount that would be required in case of
be 5[added to the principal money with interest at the same rate as is payable
on the principal money or, where no such rate is fixed, at the rate of nine
per cent. per annum]. But the amount of such insurance shall not exceed the
amount specified in this behalf in the mortgage-deed or (if no such amount is
therein specified) two-thirds of the amount that would be required in case of
total destruction to reinstate the property insured. Nothing in this section
shall be deemed to authorise the mortgagee to insure when an insurance of the
property is kept up by or on behalf of the mortgagor to the amount in which
the mortgagee is hereby authorised to insure.
(e) when the mortgaged property is a renewable lease-hold, for the renewal of
the lease, and may, in the absence of a contract to the contrary, add such
money to the principal money, at the rate of interest payable on the
principal, and, where no such rate is fixed, at the rate of nine per cent. per
annum: 4[Provided that the expenditure of money by the mortgagee under clause
(b) or clause (c) shall not be deemed to be necessary unless the mortgagor has
been called upon and has failed to take proper and timely steps to preserve
the property or to support the title.] Where the property is by its nature
insurable, the mortgagee may also, in the absence of a contract to the
contrary, insure and keep insured against loss or damage by fire the whole or
any part of such property, and the premiums paid for any such insurance shall
be 5[added to the principal money with interest at the same rate as is payable
on the principal money or, where no such rate is fixed, at the rate of nine
per cent. per annum]. But the amount of such insurance shall not exceed the
amount specified in this behalf in the mortgage-deed or (if no such amount is
therein specified) two-thirds of the amount that would be required in case of
be 5[added to the principal money with interest at the same rate as is payable
on the principal money or, where no such rate is fixed, at the rate of nine
per cent. per annum]. But the amount of such insurance shall not exceed the
amount specified in this behalf in the mortgage-deed or (if no such amount is
therein specified) two-thirds of the amount that would be required in case of
total destruction to reinstate the property insured. Nothing in this section
shall be deemed to authorise the mortgagee to insure when an insurance of the
property is kept up by or on behalf of the mortgagor to the amount in which
the mortgagee is hereby authorised to insure.
(e) when the mortgaged property is a renewable lease-hold, for the renewal of
the lease, and may, in the absence of a contract to the contrary, add such
money to the principal money, at the rate of interest payable on the
principal, and, where no such rate is fixed, at the rate of nine per cent. per
annum: 4[Provided that the expenditure of money by the mortgagee under clause
(b) or clause (c) shall not be deemed to be necessary unless the mortgagor has
been called upon and has failed to take proper and timely steps to preserve
the property or to support the title.] Where the property is by its nature
insurable, the mortgagee may also, in the absence of a contract to the
contrary, insure and keep insured against loss or damage by fire the whole or
any part of such property, and the premiums paid for any such insurance shall
be 5[added to the principal money with interest at the same rate as is payable
on the principal money or, where no such rate is fixed, at the rate of nine
per cent. per annum]. But the amount of such insurance shall not exceed the
amount specified in this behalf in the mortgage-deed or (if no such amount is
therein specified) two-thirds of the amount that would be required in case of
be 5[added to the principal money with interest at the same rate as is payable
on the principal money or, where no such rate is fixed, at the rate of nine
per cent. per annum]. But the amount of such insurance shall not exceed the
amount specified in this behalf in the mortgage-deed or (if no such amount is
therein specified) two-thirds of the amount that would be required in case of
total destruction to reinstate the property insured. Nothing in this section
shall be deemed to authorise the mortgagee to insure when an insurance of the
property is kept up by or on behalf of the mortgagor to the amount in which
the mortgagee is hereby authorised to insure.
(e) when the mortgaged property is a renewable lease-hold, for the renewal of
the lease, and may, in the absence of a contract to the contrary, add such
money to the principal money, at the rate of interest payable on the
principal, and, where no such rate is fixed, at the rate of nine per cent. per
annum: 4[Provided that the expenditure of money by the mortgagee under clause
(b) or clause (c) shall not be deemed to be necessary unless the mortgagor has
been called upon and has failed to take proper and timely steps to preserve
the property or to support the title.] Where the property is by its nature
insurable, the mortgagee may also, in the absence of a contract to the
contrary, insure and keep insured against loss or damage by fire the whole or
any part of such property, and the premiums paid for any such insurance shall
be 5[added to the principal money with interest at the same rate as is payable
on the principal money or, where no such rate is fixed, at the rate of nine
per cent. per annum]. But the amount of such insurance shall not exceed the
amount specified in this behalf in the mortgage-deed or (if no such amount is
therein specified) two-thirds of the amount that would be required in case of
be 5[added to the principal money with interest at the same rate as is payable
on the principal money or, where no such rate is fixed, at the rate of nine
per cent. per annum]. But the amount of such insurance shall not exceed the
amount specified in this behalf in the mortgage-deed or (if no such amount is
therein specified) two-thirds of the amount that would be required in case of
total destruction to reinstate the property insured. Nothing in this section
shall be deemed to authorise the mortgagee to insure when an insurance of the
property is kept up by or on behalf of the mortgagor to the amount in which
the mortgagee is hereby authorised to insure.
(e) when the mortgaged property is a renewable lease-hold, for the renewal of
the lease, and may, in the absence of a contract to the contrary, add such
money to the principal money, at the rate of interest payable on the
principal, and, where no such rate is fixed, at the rate of nine per cent. per
annum: 4[Provided that the expenditure of money by the mortgagee under clause
(b) or clause (c) shall not be deemed to be necessary unless the mortgagor has
been called upon and has failed to take proper and timely steps to preserve
the property or to support the title.] Where the property is by its nature
insurable, the mortgagee may also, in the absence of a contract to the
contrary, insure and keep insured against loss or damage by fire the whole or
any part of such property, and the premiums paid for any such insurance shall
be 5[added to the principal money with interest at the same rate as is payable
on the principal money or, where no such rate is fixed, at the rate of nine
per cent. per annum]. But the amount of such insurance shall not exceed the
amount specified in this behalf in the mortgage-deed or (if no such amount is
therein specified) two-thirds of the amount that would be required in case of
be 5[added to the principal money with interest at the same rate as is payable
on the principal money or, where no such rate is fixed, at the rate of nine
per cent. per annum]. But the amount of such insurance shall not exceed the
amount specified in this behalf in the mortgage-deed or (if no such amount is
therein specified) two-thirds of the amount that would be required in case of
total destruction to reinstate the property insured. Nothing in this section
shall be deemed to authorise the mortgagee to insure when an insurance of the
property is kept up by or on behalf of the mortgagor to the amount in which
the mortgagee is hereby authorised to insure.
(e) when the mortgaged property is a renewable lease-hold, for the renewal of
the lease, and may, in the absence of a contract to the contrary, add such
money to the principal money, at the rate of interest payable on the
principal, and, where no such rate is fixed, at the rate of nine per cent. per
annum: 4[Provided that the expenditure of money by the mortgagee under clause
(b) or clause (c) shall not be deemed to be necessary unless the mortgagor has
been called upon and has failed to take proper and timely steps to preserve
the property or to support the title.] Where the property is by its nature
insurable, the mortgagee may also, in the absence of a contract to the
contrary, insure and keep insured against loss or damage by fire the whole or
any part of such property, and the premiums paid for any such insurance shall
be 5[added to the principal money with interest at the same rate as is payable
on the principal money or, where no such rate is fixed, at the rate of nine
per cent. per annum]. But the amount of such insurance shall not exceed the
amount specified in this behalf in the mortgage-deed or (if no such amount is
therein specified) two-thirds of the amount that would be required in case of
