Supreme Court of India
Madhab Roy Alias Madha Roy vs State Of West Bengal on 26 February, 1974
Equivalent citations: AIR 1975 SC 255, 1974 CriLJ 1335, (1974) 4 SCC 548, 1974
(6) UJ 276 SC
Bench: D Palekar, P Bhagwati, V K Iyer
JUDGMENT Bhagwati J.,
1\. The petitioner, who has filed this petition for a writ of habeas corpus
from jail, was detained pursuant to an order dated 23rd May, 1972 passed by
District Magistrate, 24 Parganas under Sub-section (1) read with Sub-section
(2) of Section 3 of the Maintenance of Internal Security Act, 1971 on the
ground that it was necessary to detain the petitioner with a view to
preventing him from acting in any manner prejudicial to the maintenance of
supplies and services essential to the community. The communication dated 23rd
May, 1972, which was served on the petitioner at the time of his arrest,
intimated to him the following ground on which the order of detention was made
by the District Magistrate:
That on 18-12-71 at about 20.00 hours you along with your associates with a
view to commit theft of Copper return feeder wire of Railway Traction cut the
end of the wire of traction at post No. 28/23 in between Shyamnager and
Ichhapur. During the operation your associates Shri Lakshman Ch. Das died of
incident referred to in the communication served on the petitioner is a single
solitary incident, it cannot be looked upon as an isolated act. It necessarily
connotes a course of previous conduct of such or similar activities where
specialised experience has been acquired and specialised kind of mischief has
been planned to be perpetrated. The allegation that the petitioner was one of
the notorious anti-social elements indulging in committing theft of copper
feeder wires from railway stations is, therefore, really nothing but an
elaboration of what is already implied in the apparently single solitary
incident communicated to the petitioner. To quote the word of one of us in
Anil Day v. State of West Bengal WR No. 20 of 1973, dec. on February 22, 1974.
"the very proficiency and daring displayed by the petitioner, with his
associates, in doing what he did, amounts to the attribution of a series of
activities" more fully put down in paragraph 7 of the affidavit of the
District Magistrate. It is therefore, not possible to say that in arriving at
the requisite satisfaction the District Magistrate relied on any ground not
communicated to the petitioner, or that in making the order of detention he
Ichhapur. During the operation your associates Shri Lakshman Ch. Das died of
of Electrocution at the post. You and other associates then left the place
without picking up the wires which rolled up in a running goods train passing
on the line and caused serious damages to post No. 28/23 resulting disruption
of train services. You have thus acting in a manner prejudicial to the
maintenance of supply and services essential to the community.
Though only one single incident was referred to in the communication dated
23rd May, 1972 as forming the basis of the making of the order of detention,
the District Magistrate in paragraph 7 of the affidavit filed by him in reply
to the petition stated what according to the petitioner was something much
more than this single incident:
I further state that the detenu-petitioner is one of the notorious anti-
elements of Shyamnagar P.S. He was indulging in committing theft of copper
feeder wires from Railway stations, it appears that on 18-12-1971, the
petitioner along with his associates cut end of feeder traction wires from the
post No. 28/23 between Shyamnagar and Ichhapur railway stations with a view to
commit theft of the said copper feeder wire and during the said operation one
of the associates Lakshman Chandra Das died as a result of electrocution. It
further appears that on 12-2-72 the petitioner and his associates also
committed theft of 48.5 meters of overhead copper traction wires between the
said railway stations. Due to the aforesaid acts running of trains in the
Sealdah Division was dislocated and disrupted for a considerable period
causing hardship to travelling public and delay in movement of supply and
services. The activities of the petitioner were prejudicial to the maintenance
of supply and services essential to the community and so he was detained under
the said Act.
The argument of the petitioner was that in arriving at his subjective
satisfaction that it was necessary to detain the petitioner with a view to
preventing him from carrying on prejudicial activities, the District
Magistrate took into account not only the solitary incident intimated to the
petitioner in the communication dated 23rd May, 1972, but also the fact that
the petitioner was "one of the notorious anti-social elements of Shyamnagar
P.S.", and that "he was indulging in committing theft of copper feeder wires
from railway stations". This additional circumstance, which went into the
formation of the satisfaction of" the District Magistrate, was not
communicated to the petitioner and the petitioner had, therefore, no
opportunity of making his representation against it. This, contended the
petitioner, constituted violation of the Constitutional safeguard in Article
22, Clause (5) which has been translated into statutory enactment in Section 8
of the Act. Now, there can be no doubt and that has been repeatedly laid down
by this Court in a series of recent decisions commencing from Sheik Hanif v.
state of West Bengal W.Ps. Nos. 1679 of 1973, etc., dec. on February 1, 1974.
and Bhut Nath Made v. state of West Bengal WP No. 20 of 1973, dec. on February
22, 1974 that if any factual components constituting the real grounds for
detention have not been fairly and fully put across to the detenu so as to
enable him to make an effective answer, the order of detention would be
invalid as being in contravention not only of the statutory safeguard under
Section 8 of the Act, but also of the Constitutional guarantee under Article
22, Clause (5). It, therefore, becomes necessary to consider whether in the
present case any facts or circumstances, in addition to the single solitary
incident communicated to the petitioner, were taken into account by the
District Magistrate in arriving at the requisite satisfaction for making the
order of detention. The District Magistrate admittedly took into account the
fact or circumstance that the petitioner was one of the notorious anti-social
elements of Shyamnagar police station and was indulging-in committing theft of
copper feeder wires from railway stations. The question, is, does this
prejudicial activity attributed to the petitioner go beyond the ground based
on the single fugitive incident communicated to the petitioner, or is
comprised within it.?
2\. To answer this question it is necessary to understand the real nature of
the activity of the petitioner as disclosed by the incident communicated to
him. This incident must be judged in its correct setting, grave proportions
and clear implications. It must be noticed that this was not an ordinary
incident of theft of wheat, rice or jute bags. It was a daring act of robbery
of copper return feeder wire of railway stations which resulted in the death
of one of the associates of the petitioner by electrocution and brought
serious disruption of the railway services. Now, cutting and removal of copper
return feeder wire of railway traction is a sophisticated and complex
operation which requires technical skill and expertise and is not the work of
a lay man or a novice. It postulates experience acquired as a result of a
course of such or similar activities and also suggests that it is a part of an
organised activity of "a complex of agencies collaborating to remove, secret
and sell" such stolen goods. This activity has very serious and disturbing
consequences and it can well be part of a plan of sabotage which brings to a
grinding halt the movement of trains. Therefore, it is obvious that though the
incident referred to in the communication served on the petitioner is a single
solitary incident, it cannot be looked upon as an isolated act. It necessarily
connotes a course of previous conduct of such or similar activities where
specialised experience has been acquired and specialised kind of mischief has
been planned to be perpetrated. The allegation that the petitioner was one of
the notorious anti-social elements indulging in committing theft of copper
feeder wires from railway stations is, therefore, really nothing but an
elaboration of what is already implied in the apparently single solitary
incident communicated to the petitioner. To quote the word of one of us in
Anil Day v. State of West Bengal WR No. 20 of 1973, dec. on February 22, 1974.
"the very proficiency and daring displayed by the petitioner, with his
associates, in doing what he did, amounts to the attribution of a series of
activities" more fully put down in paragraph 7 of the affidavit of the
District Magistrate. It is therefore, not possible to say that in arriving at
the requisite satisfaction the District Magistrate relied on any ground not
communicated to the petitioner, or that in making the order of detention he
was guilty of any violation of the statutory provision in Section 8 or of the
Constitutional safeguard in Article 22, Clause (5).
3\. This was the only contention urged on behalf of the petitioner and since
there is no substance in it, the petition fails and the rule is discharged.
incident referred to in the communication served on the petitioner is a single
solitary incident, it cannot be looked upon as an isolated act. It necessarily
connotes a course of previous conduct of such or similar activities where
specialised experience has been acquired and specialised kind of mischief has
been planned to be perpetrated. The allegation that the petitioner was one of
the notorious anti-social elements indulging in committing theft of copper
feeder wires from railway stations is, therefore, really nothing but an
elaboration of what is already implied in the apparently single solitary
incident communicated to the petitioner. To quote the word of one of us in
Anil Day v. State of West Bengal WR No. 20 of 1973, dec. on February 22, 1974.
"the very proficiency and daring displayed by the petitioner, with his
associates, in doing what he did, amounts to the attribution of a series of
activities" more fully put down in paragraph 7 of the affidavit of the
District Magistrate. It is therefore, not possible to say that in arriving at
the requisite satisfaction the District Magistrate relied on any ground not
communicated to the petitioner, or that in making the order of detention he
Ichhapur. During the operation your associates Shri Lakshman Ch. Das died of
of Electrocution at the post. You and other associates then left the place
without picking up the wires which rolled up in a running goods train passing
on the line and caused serious damages to post No. 28/23 resulting disruption
of train services. You have thus acting in a manner prejudicial to the
maintenance of supply and services essential to the community.
Though only one single incident was referred to in the communication dated
23rd May, 1972 as forming the basis of the making of the order of detention,
the District Magistrate in paragraph 7 of the affidavit filed by him in reply
to the petition stated what according to the petitioner was something much
more than this single incident:
I further state that the detenu-petitioner is one of the notorious anti-
elements of Shyamnagar P.S. He was indulging in committing theft of copper
feeder wires from Railway stations, it appears that on 18-12-1971, the
petitioner along with his associates cut end of feeder traction wires from the
post No. 28/23 between Shyamnagar and Ichhapur railway stations with a view to
commit theft of the said copper feeder wire and during the said operation one
of the associates Lakshman Chandra Das died as a result of electrocution. It
further appears that on 12-2-72 the petitioner and his associates also
committed theft of 48.5 meters of overhead copper traction wires between the
incident referred to in the communication served on the petitioner is a single
solitary incident, it cannot be looked upon as an isolated act. It necessarily
connotes a course of previous conduct of such or similar activities where
specialised experience has been acquired and specialised kind of mischief has
been planned to be perpetrated. The allegation that the petitioner was one of
the notorious anti-social elements indulging in committing theft of copper
feeder wires from railway stations is, therefore, really nothing but an
elaboration of what is already implied in the apparently single solitary
incident communicated to the petitioner. To quote the word of one of us in
Anil Day v. State of West Bengal WR No. 20 of 1973, dec. on February 22, 1974.
"the very proficiency and daring displayed by the petitioner, with his
associates, in doing what he did, amounts to the attribution of a series of
activities" more fully put down in paragraph 7 of the affidavit of the
District Magistrate. It is therefore, not possible to say that in arriving at
the requisite satisfaction the District Magistrate relied on any ground not
communicated to the petitioner, or that in making the order of detention he
Ichhapur. During the operation your associates Shri Lakshman Ch. Das died of
of Electrocution at the post. You and other associates then left the place
without picking up the wires which rolled up in a running goods train passing
on the line and caused serious damages to post No. 28/23 resulting disruption
of train services. You have thus acting in a manner prejudicial to the
maintenance of supply and services essential to the community.
Though only one single incident was referred to in the communication dated
23rd May, 1972 as forming the basis of the making of the order of detention,
the District Magistrate in paragraph 7 of the affidavit filed by him in reply
to the petition stated what according to the petitioner was something much
more than this single incident:
I further state that the detenu-petitioner is one of the notorious anti-
elements of Shyamnagar P.S. He was indulging in committing theft of copper
feeder wires from Railway stations, it appears that on 18-12-1971, the
petitioner along with his associates cut end of feeder traction wires from the
post No. 28/23 between Shyamnagar and Ichhapur railway stations with a view to
commit theft of the said copper feeder wire and during the said operation one
of the associates Lakshman Chandra Das died as a result of electrocution. It
further appears that on 12-2-72 the petitioner and his associates also
committed theft of 48.5 meters of overhead copper traction wires between the
incident referred to in the communication served on the petitioner is a single
solitary incident, it cannot be looked upon as an isolated act. It necessarily
connotes a course of previous conduct of such or similar activities where
specialised experience has been acquired and specialised kind of mischief has
been planned to be perpetrated. The allegation that the petitioner was one of
the notorious anti-social elements indulging in committing theft of copper
feeder wires from railway stations is, therefore, really nothing but an
elaboration of what is already implied in the apparently single solitary
incident communicated to the petitioner. To quote the word of one of us in
Anil Day v. State of West Bengal WR No. 20 of 1973, dec. on February 22, 1974.
"the very proficiency and daring displayed by the petitioner, with his
associates, in doing what he did, amounts to the attribution of a series of
activities" more fully put down in paragraph 7 of the affidavit of the
District Magistrate. It is therefore, not possible to say that in arriving at
the requisite satisfaction the District Magistrate relied on any ground not
communicated to the petitioner, or that in making the order of detention he
Ichhapur. During the operation your associates Shri Lakshman Ch. Das died of
of Electrocution at the post. You and other associates then left the place
without picking up the wires which rolled up in a running goods train passing
on the line and caused serious damages to post No. 28/23 resulting disruption
of train services. You have thus acting in a manner prejudicial to the
maintenance of supply and services essential to the community.
Though only one single incident was referred to in the communication dated
23rd May, 1972 as forming the basis of the making of the order of detention,
the District Magistrate in paragraph 7 of the affidavit filed by him in reply
to the petition stated what according to the petitioner was something much
more than this single incident:
I further state that the detenu-petitioner is one of the notorious anti-
elements of Shyamnagar P.S. He was indulging in committing theft of copper
feeder wires from Railway stations, it appears that on 18-12-1971, the
petitioner along with his associates cut end of feeder traction wires from the
post No. 28/23 between Shyamnagar and Ichhapur railway stations with a view to
commit theft of the said copper feeder wire and during the said operation one
of the associates Lakshman Chandra Das died as a result of electrocution. It
further appears that on 12-2-72 the petitioner and his associates also
committed theft of 48.5 meters of overhead copper traction wires between the
said railway stations. Due to the aforesaid acts running of trains in the
Sealdah Division was dislocated and disrupted for a considerable period
causing hardship to travelling public and delay in movement of supply and
services. The activities of the petitioner were prejudicial to the maintenance
of supply and services essential to the community and so he was detained under
the said Act.
The argument of the petitioner was that in arriving at his subjective
satisfaction that it was necessary to detain the petitioner with a view to
preventing him from carrying on prejudicial activities, the District
Magistrate took into account not only the solitary incident intimated to the
petitioner in the communication dated 23rd May, 1972, but also the fact that
incident referred to in the communication served on the petitioner is a single
solitary incident, it cannot be looked upon as an isolated act. It necessarily
connotes a course of previous conduct of such or similar activities where
specialised experience has been acquired and specialised kind of mischief has
been planned to be perpetrated. The allegation that the petitioner was one of
the notorious anti-social elements indulging in committing theft of copper
feeder wires from railway stations is, therefore, really nothing but an
elaboration of what is already implied in the apparently single solitary
incident communicated to the petitioner. To quote the word of one of us in
Anil Day v. State of West Bengal WR No. 20 of 1973, dec. on February 22, 1974.
"the very proficiency and daring displayed by the petitioner, with his
associates, in doing what he did, amounts to the attribution of a series of
activities" more fully put down in paragraph 7 of the affidavit of the
District Magistrate. It is therefore, not possible to say that in arriving at
the requisite satisfaction the District Magistrate relied on any ground not
communicated to the petitioner, or that in making the order of detention he
Ichhapur. During the operation your associates Shri Lakshman Ch. Das died of
of Electrocution at the post. You and other associates then left the place
without picking up the wires which rolled up in a running goods train passing
on the line and caused serious damages to post No. 28/23 resulting disruption
of train services. You have thus acting in a manner prejudicial to the
maintenance of supply and services essential to the community.
Though only one single incident was referred to in the communication dated
23rd May, 1972 as forming the basis of the making of the order of detention,
the District Magistrate in paragraph 7 of the affidavit filed by him in reply
to the petition stated what according to the petitioner was something much
more than this single incident:
I further state that the detenu-petitioner is one of the notorious anti-
elements of Shyamnagar P.S. He was indulging in committing theft of copper
feeder wires from Railway stations, it appears that on 18-12-1971, the
petitioner along with his associates cut end of feeder traction wires from the
post No. 28/23 between Shyamnagar and Ichhapur railway stations with a view to
commit theft of the said copper feeder wire and during the said operation one
of the associates Lakshman Chandra Das died as a result of electrocution. It
further appears that on 12-2-72 the petitioner and his associates also
committed theft of 48.5 meters of overhead copper traction wires between the
said railway stations. Due to the aforesaid acts running of trains in the
Sealdah Division was dislocated and disrupted for a considerable period
causing hardship to travelling public and delay in movement of supply and
services. The activities of the petitioner were prejudicial to the maintenance
of supply and services essential to the community and so he was detained under
the said Act.
The argument of the petitioner was that in arriving at his subjective
satisfaction that it was necessary to detain the petitioner with a view to
preventing him from carrying on prejudicial activities, the District
Magistrate took into account not only the solitary incident intimated to the
petitioner in the communication dated 23rd May, 1972, but also the fact that
incident referred to in the communication served on the petitioner is a single
solitary incident, it cannot be looked upon as an isolated act. It necessarily
connotes a course of previous conduct of such or similar activities where
specialised experience has been acquired and specialised kind of mischief has
been planned to be perpetrated. The allegation that the petitioner was one of
the notorious anti-social elements indulging in committing theft of copper
feeder wires from railway stations is, therefore, really nothing but an
elaboration of what is already implied in the apparently single solitary
incident communicated to the petitioner. To quote the word of one of us in
Anil Day v. State of West Bengal WR No. 20 of 1973, dec. on February 22, 1974.
"the very proficiency and daring displayed by the petitioner, with his
associates, in doing what he did, amounts to the attribution of a series of
activities" more fully put down in paragraph 7 of the affidavit of the
District Magistrate. It is therefore, not possible to say that in arriving at
the requisite satisfaction the District Magistrate relied on any ground not
communicated to the petitioner, or that in making the order of detention he
