Delhi District Court
Judgment/Devender Singh vs . Manoj Kr Aneja/Cc No. ... on 3 September, 2009
Author: Sh. Dig Singh
          IN THE COURT OF SH. DIG VINAY SINGH, ADDITIONAL CHIEF
             METROPOLITAN MAGISTRATE-03 (IPR), ROHINI, DELHI
    In re:
    Sh. DEVENDER SINGH
    VS.
    Sh. MANOJ KUMAR ANEJA
    CC NO. 121/1
    U/s. 138 Negotiable Instruments Act
    P.S. SARASWATI VIHAR
    DATE OF RESERVATION OF JUDGMENT:                                                29.08.2009
    DATE OF PRONOUNCEMENT OF JUDGMENT: 03.09. 2009
    JUDGEMENT
(a) The name of complainant : Sh. Devender Singh
(b) The name, parentage, residence of accused: Sh. Manoj Kumar Aneja s/o Sh.
Pishori Lal Aneja r/o 119, Vasundra Apartments, Sector-9 Rohini, Delhi.
    (c) The offence complained of/ proved :                                         U/s. 138 N. I. Act. Act
    (d) The plea of accused :                                                       Pleaded not guilty
letting in evidence or in some clear and exceptional cases, from the case set
out by the complainant, that is, the averments in the complaint, the case set
out in the statutory notice and evidence adduced by the complainant during the
trial. Once such re- buttal evidence is adduced and accepted by the court,
having regard to all the circumstances of the case and the preponderance of
probabilities, the evidential burden shifts back to the complainant and,
thereafter, the presumptions under Sections 118 and 139 of the Act will not
again come to the complainant's rescue. "
30\. Therefore, in my considered view, the accused is guilty for the dishonour
of cheque despite having legally enforceable liability and for failure to pay
the cheque amount to the complainant despite receiving the legal notice and
within the stipulated period of fifteen days from the date of receipt of the
notice.
31\. In such circumstances, the case of the complainant stands proved and
accused is held guilty u/s 138 Negotiable Instruments Act for dishonor of
cheque in question due to "Insufficient funds" and "Account closed"
    (d) The plea of accused :                                                       Pleaded not guilty
JUDGMENT/Devender Singh Vs. Manoj Kr Aneja/CC NO. 121/01/US:138 N.I. Act
/Convicted/03.09.09/Page 1 of 21/D
(e) The final order : Convicted
(f) The date of such order : 03.09.2009
(g) Brief statement of the reasons for the decision:-
1\. This is a complaint case, filed by the complainant against the accused,
under section 138 of The Negotiable Instruments Act, claiming that the accused
was known to complainant because of some business relationship and friendship.
On the asking of accused, complainant extended a friendly loan of Rs. Ten
lakhs, for 25 days, to the accused on 14-07-2007 and, pursuant to the said
loan, accused issued one cheque bearing no. 007197 for a sum of Rs. Ten lakhs
drawn on Allahabad Bank, Branch New Rajender Nagar, New Delhi. But the cheque,
when presented for encashment, was dishonored on 26- 09-2008 due to
"insufficient funds" as well as "account closed" and, within the stipulated
period a legal notice was sent to the accused on 24-10-2008 demanding the
payment of cheque amount, but the accused failed to pay the amount.
2\. The accused was summoned by this court for the said offence on 11-
> 12-2008 and thereafter on appearance of accused, a notice u/s 251 Cr. P. C.
> for the offence u/s 138 Negotiable Instruments Act was served upon the
> accused in writing on 22-01-2009 to which accused claimed trial.
> Admission/denial of the documents was also conducted on 22-01- 2004 u/s 294
> Cr. P. C.
3\. Thereafter, complainant examined himself as PW1 in support of his case.
JUDGMENT/Devender Singh Vs. Manoj Kr Aneja/CC NO. 121/01/US:138 N.I. Act
/Convicted/03.09.09/Page 2 of 21/D
4\. After the complainants evidence, all the incriminating evidence against
the accused was put to him in his examination u/s 313 Cr. P. C. r/w 281 Cr. P.
C.
5\. The accused, in his statement u/s 313 Cr. P. C., claimed that he did not
take any loan whatsoever from the complainant. Rather, the amount of Rs. Ten
lakhs was invested by the complainant in the business of property with
accused. Accused admitted that he issued the cheque in question to the
complainant bearing his signatures and also that amount in numerical as well
as words was in his own handwriting. However, he stated that name of the
complainant on the cheque and the date was blank at the time when cheque was
given to the complainant. The accused further in his statement claimed that
out of said amount Rs. Ten lakhs which was invested by complainant in the
property business, Rs. 9,70,000/- has already been repaid to him but the
complainant failed to return his cheque and therefore he was constrained to
close the account before cheque was presented. The accused claimed that he has
no legally enforceable liable. In support of his defence, accused examined
himself as DW1 and he also examined Kamal Sehgal as DW2 and one bank official
namely Kuldeep Singh as DW3.
6\. I have heard Ld. Counsel for complainant as well as counsel for accused.
Ld. Counsel for complainant argued that complainant has succeeded in proving
its case against the accused as there is legal presumption in favour of
complainant u/s 139 and 118 of N. I. Act and accused has not been able to
rebut the said presumption. It is also argued that the accused was unable to
prove that he paid Rs.
JUDGMENT/Devender Singh Vs. Manoj Kr Aneja/CC NO. 121/01/US:138 N.I. Act
/Convicted/03.09.09/Page 3 of 21/D 9,70,000/- towards discharge of the amount
given by the complainant as loan.
7\. On the other hand, Ld. Counsel for accused argued that sufficient evidence
has come on record to show that Rs. 9,70,000/- was returned to the complainant
by the accused on three different occasions and it is argued that legal notice
was not received by the accused. It is also argued that complainant admitted
in his cross-examination that he received the amount of Rs. 9,70,000/-
therefore the case ought to be dismissed.
8\. Before proceeding further, let it be mentioned here that certain facts are
not in dispute in this case.
• It is not in dispute that complainant paid Rs. Ten lakhs to the accused. The
complainant claims that it was a loan whereas the accused claims that this
amount was given by the complainant as an investment in property business with
the accused.
• This is also not in dispute that cheque in question was given by the accused
to the complainant and it bears signatures of accused as also the amount of
the cheque in words and numerical on the cheque are in the handwriting of
accused himself. The complainant during cross-examination admitted that date
on the cheque was not written when it was handed over to the complainant by
the accused. The accused claims that even the name of the complainant was not
written on the cheque when he gave the cheque in question to the complainant.
• The accused also admits one document Ex. CW1/A which is dated 14-07-2007.
The said document is a receipt executed in JUDGMENT/Devender Singh Vs. Manoj
Kr Aneja/CC NO. 121/01/US:138 N.I. Act /Convicted/03.09.09/Page 4 of 21/D
handwriting of accused regarding receiving of Rs. Ten lakhs by the accused
from the complainant. This receipt is admitted by the accused in
admission/denial of accused conducted on 22- 01-2009. Throughout the cross-
examination of complainant or anywhere else this receipt was never disputed by
the accused in the present trial.
    •    It   is    also       not      in     dispute          that       cheque          in     question        was
         dishonored.                The memo of the bank is                                   proved by the
complainant as Ex. CW1/C dated 26-09-2008 which shows that cheque in question
was dishonored due to "funds insufficient" and "account closed". On the top of
this memo a reason for dishonor is mentioned as reason no. 1 which is "Funds
Insufficient" in the list of reason of dishonor. Besides this, the bank
officials also ticked reason no. 1 and reason no. 50 which are "Funds
insufficient" and "Account closed" respectively.
9\. From the facts as has come on record, the defence of the accused is to two
fold. The first limb of the arguments of accused is that amount in question
was received by the accused not as a loan but as an investment amount in
property business and that out of that amount he repaid Rs. 9,70,000/- to the
complainant but the complainant did not return the cheque in question and
presented the cheque dishonestly. The second limb of arguments is that accused
did not receive any legal notice and therefore offence u/s 138 N. I. Act is
not made out.
10\. Taking the first argument of accused, that amount in question was
received not as loan but as an investment amount, takes us back to the
admission/denial of the documents. On 22-01-2009 when Ex. JUDGMENT/Devender
Singh Vs. Manoj Kr Aneja/CC NO. 121/01/US:138 N.I. Act
/Convicted/03.09.09/Page 5 of 21/D CW1/A dated 14-07-2007 was put to the
accused, the accused specifically admitted that he executed this document.
Throughout trial, the accused did not challenge this document at any stage.
Not even a suggestion was put to the complainant that Ex. CW1/A does not
contain factually correct statement. Perusal of Ex. CW1/A would reveal that it
is specifically mentioned by the accused that he has received Rs. Ten lakhs
from the complainant "as a loan for 25 days w.e.f. 14-07-2009" (emphasis
supplied on this line). Ex. CW1/A further goes to state that "I will pay the
above said amount on 08-08- 2007\. I have issued a cheque no. 007197 drawn on
Allahabad Bank, Rajender Nagar, New Delhi". In the cross-examination of
accused, the complainant specifically asked the accused that Ex. CW1/A does
not mention that amount of Rs. Ten lakhs was to be invested in property. The
accused admitted that it was not so mentioned. No explanation was put forth by
the accused that if what accused was stating was truth, why it was not
mentioned in Ex. CW1/A.
11\. Now, does this document alone not belie the stand of the accused? The
answer ought to be in affirmative. The accused examined himself to state that
this amount of Rs. Ten lakhs was rather an investment made by the complainant
in the property business of accused and the accused specified in his evidence
that complainant made this investment for some flat in TDI, Ansal Etc, in
Haryana. Accused also deposed that he gave the cheque in question as a
security and that in the property market, the properties were and are being
sold/purchased by way of slip and not by transfer documents JUDGMENT/Devender
Singh Vs. Manoj Kr Aneja/CC NO. 121/01/US:138 N.I. Act
/Convicted/03.09.09/Page 6 of 21/D unless it is required and executed by an
end user. It is deposed that the accused guaranteed the complainant for 'no
loss' therefore he issued the cheque in question as security to the
complainant.
12\. First of all, this oral deposition of the accused is belied by document
Ex. CW1/A which says that amount given was a loan. Secondly, when
admission/denial of the document was conducted and Ex. CW1/A was put to the
accused on 22-01-2009, the accused volunteered that he had some dispute of
property with the complainant, therefore, there was no legally enforceable
liability and nowhere the accused claimed that CW1/A is a forged document or
that he executed it under pressure or that document was signed by him as
blank. It was also not claimed by the accused that amount of Rs. Ten lakhs was
an investment by the complainant with the accused and towards loan.
13\. During cross-examination of accused, the falsehood of his defence also
came writ large, since, the accused deposed that he never had any transaction
with the complainant prior to the present transaction in question but in his
cross-examination itself the complainant put two documents Ex. DW1/P1 and P2,
both of which were admitted by the accused and, both of which show that there
were indeed earlier transaction between the accused and the complainant.
DW1/P1 pertains to 30-04-2007 and DW1/P2 pertains to 07-05-2007. Both these
documents are admitted by the accused. In both these documents, it is recorded
that accused had paid Rs. Four lakhs regarding some property file of TDI,
Mohali. This shows that not only the accused was not truthful while deposing
in the court that he had no earlier transaction with the accused, but these
JUDGMENT/Devender Singh Vs. Manoj Kr Aneja/CC NO. 121/01/US:138 N.I. Act
/Convicted/03.09.09/Page 7 of 21/D two documents Ex DW1/P1 and P2 also would
reflect one thing that in earlier transaction with the complainant, regarding
property, whenever any money was exchanged between them, such receipts used to
be executed and in those receipts it used to be specifically mentioned that
deal was regarding some property (TDI). Naturally a simple question arises in
mind as to, had it been true that in the present case also the transaction of
Rs. Ten lakhs was regarding investment in property, it would have been so
mentioned clearly in Ex CW1/A, and it would not have found mentioned that
amount was a loan. I do not see any reason as to why accused would mention the
transaction of property in earlier receipts and why he failed to mention it in
Ex. CW1/A. If in the earlier transaction receipt Ex. DW1/P1 and P2 accused
could mention the property transaction specifically, there is no reason why it
would not have been so mentioned in Ex. CW1/A. This also belies the stand of
accused.
14\. Besides this the accused could not tell the court as to for which
particular property this transaction of Rs. Ten lakhs took place. The accused
could not tell as to where, when and on which date or month this request of
investment was made by the complainant, whether it was at the house of
complainant or office of accused or some other place. Admittedly, no third
person was present at that time. Accused deposed that investment was for the
purpose of flats of TDI. The accused even claimed that no written document was
executed between complainant and accused, but this is in absolute
contradiction to the document Ex. CW1/A. This again proves that accused was
not truthful in his examination.
15\. Besides that, accused admits in his cross-examination that in the
JUDGMENT/Devender Singh Vs. Manoj Kr Aneja/CC NO. 121/01/US:138 N.I. Act
/Convicted/03.09.09/Page 8 of 21/D property business he never gave any such
assurances to his clients regarding 'no loss' policy. One wonders as to why
the accused would grant this concession to the complainant only. The accused
had no reasons for giving this special concession of guarantee of 'no losses
in property investment business to the complainant only.
16\. In the entire evidence, the accused did not give any details of the
property which was so purchased with the amount of complainant. All that is
mentioned is that it was regarding three flats in TDI City Kundli. The details
of the flat, the details of persons who transferred those flats or any other
documentary proof to support this claim is not given in evidence of the
accused. Even the accused admitted in his cross- examination that amount of
Rs. Ten lakhs was only for 25 days. It again raises suspicion on the defence
of the accused since nobody would invest amount of Rs. Ten lakhs for
unspecified property and that too for a too short and fixed period of 25 day
only. All these things clearly show that defence of the accused that amount of
Rs. Ten lakhs was towards property business is not true.
17\. Turning to the next contention of the accused that he repaid Rs.
9.70,000/- out of Rs. Ten lakhs. Accused claims that he paid Rs. 7 lakhs cash
to the complainant, and Rs. 70,000 also to the complainant by way of cheque
,and Rs. 2 lakhs through cheque to the mother of the complainant. No receipt
was executed by the accused while returning the amount. The complainant
specifically claimed that no amount of Rs. 7 lakhs was paid in cash to the
complainant on 29-01-2008. One wonders that if the accused was in the habit of
obtaining receipts, as is the case in Ex. DW1/P1 and P2, why he failed to take
receipt of Rs. 7 lakhs, allegedly paid by him to the complainant towards
repayment. JUDGMENT/Devender Singh Vs. Manoj Kr Aneja/CC NO. 121/01/US:138
N.I. Act /Convicted/03.09.09/Page 9 of 21/D The accused in his evidence
claimed that this amount of Rs. 7 lakhs was paid in the presence of bank
official Sh. Kuldeep. But Kuldeep when examined as DW3 did not depose any such
fact. All that he stated is that on 29-01-2008 total amount of Rs. 7 lakhs was
withdrawn by accused through self cheques from his account and that he was not
aware as to what was done to those Rs. 7 lakhs by the accused. Although the
accused specifically deposed that Kuldeep, bank official, was also present
when this amount was handed over to the complainant but in the absence of
supporting evidence from Kuldeep, this cannot be relied. There is one more
fact which creates doubt about the repayment of those 7 lakhs. On 29-01-2008 a
total amount of Rs. 7 lakhs is withdrawn by the accused. If accused intended
to pay that Rs. 7 lakhs to the complainant, he could have done it by paying
cheque as it is claimed that earlier he gave Rs. 2 lakhs and Rs. 70,000/- , to
the mother of complainant and complainant respectively through cheques.
Secondly, if he was to pay Rs. 7 lakhs on 29-01-2008, he could have withdrawn
that amount by one single cheque and it is not explained as to why three
different cheques were used by the accused for his withdrawal on that very day
when allegedly the complainant was present inside the bank itself when the
amount is claimed to be given to complainant.
18\. The complainant specifically claimed that Rs. 2 lakhs through cheque
given by accused to his mother was towards a different property transaction.
It is proved on record that there were other transactions also between the
complainant and accused as is clear from Ex. DW1/P1 and P2, therefore, in such
circumstances when the complainant denied that this cheque of Rs. 2 lakhs
encashed in the JUDGMENT/Devender Singh Vs. Manoj Kr Aneja/CC NO.
121/01/US:138 N.I. Act /Convicted/03.09.09/Page 10 of 21/D account of mother
of complainant was not towards repayment of present loan, it was all more
necessary for accused to have proved that this amount was indeed towards
repayment of this very loan only and no other transaction. Same is the case
with the repayment of Rs. 70,000/- through cheque to the complainant. In all
probability, had the accused had paid any loan amount, he would have obtained
receipt of the same as he so took earlier but surprisingly it is not done in
the present transaction. All these things goes to show that no amount was paid
by the accused towards present loan transaction.
19\. Accused also nowhere claimed on 22-01-2009 in the court at the time of
admission/denial that he repaid any of the loan amount. Rather on that day, he
stated that he had property disputes with the complainant and therefore he had
no liability.
20\. Ld. Counsel for accused laid much emphasis on the question that the name
of complainant on the cheque is not in the handwriting of accused and that it
was of complainant. There is no suggestion given by the accused in the cross
examination of the complainant, to the complainant, that it was not
handwriting of the accused or that it was handwriting of complainant. Rather
complainant PW1 specifically deposed that it was in the handwriting of
accused, and in absence of any counter suggestion this fact is to be deemed to
have been admitted by the accused that it was in his own handwriting. There is
no denial of the fact that remaining portion of the cheque is in the
handwriting of accused himself including the amount except the date part of
it.
21\. Ld. Counsel for accused also laid much emphasis on certain the
JUDGMENT/Devender Singh Vs. Manoj Kr Aneja/CC NO. 121/01/US:138 N.I. Act
/Convicted/03.09.09/Page 11 of 21/D reply given by the complainant in his
cross-examination which reads:-
"I do not remember today that on that day, Kamal Sehgal or Gaurav Gupta were
also present there. Vol. As I told there were other transactions between
myself and accused and therefore I do not remember today whether these two
persons were present on the occasion of such transaction."
Ld. Counsel for accused argued that these two replies by the complainant must
be taken as admission by the complainant that he was present on 29-01-2008 at
the bank when part payment was received by him. I am afraid Ld. Counsel for
accused is reading between the lines and what he wants this court to infer is
nowhere even remotely suggested by two answers given by complainant.
Complainant has categorically denied that he was present in the bank or that
Kamal Sehgal or Gaurav Gupta were present or that he received any such amount.
Gaurav Gupta has not been examined by the accused in his favour. Rather it is
in the evidence of Kamal Sehgal that Gaurav Gupta was an employee of accused
although accused in his evidence denied the suggestion of the complainant that
Gaurav was his employee. This again creates serious doubt about the defence of
accused. When DW3 Kuldeep appeared as a defence witness it was nowhere even
remotely suggested by the accused to him that on 29-01-2008 Rs. 7 lakhs were
paid by the accused to complainant. Kuldeep is the most neutral witness of the
transaction, if any, dated 29-01-2008 and when this witness did not support
the contention of the accused, in absence of any document proof, it does not
lie in the mouth of accused to say that he paid Rs. 7 lakhs particularly in
presence of Kuldeep, without obtaining any receipt or documentary proof.
22\. The defence of the accused that amount was given towards
JUDGMENT/Devender Singh Vs. Manoj Kr Aneja/CC NO. 121/01/US:138 N.I. Act
/Convicted/03.09.09/Page 12 of 21/D investment in property is also belied from
the fact that Kamal Sehgal the defence witness of the accused himself, claimed
that he was present when complainant asked the accused to invest his money in
property whereas the accused specifically stated that no one else was present
when the complainant so requested for investment of amount in property
business of the accused. The defence of the accused regarding this aspect of
the matter is also belied from the fact that Kamal Sehgal deposed that
investment was regarding a plot of 250 Sq. yards whereas it is the case of the
accused that it was for a flat and not for plot. DW2 Kamal Sehgal also
materially contradicted the accused DW1 on material aspect of the matter which
creates serious doubt about the defence of accused.
23\. There is one more fact that had the accused paid most of the part of the
loan to the complainant, in all probability, he should have asked for return
of the cheque in question. Admittedly, no written communication or notice is
ever sent to the complainant by the accused demanding the cheque back. Rather
the accused claimed that he demanded, orally, the cheque but the complainant
did not return it and claimed that he closed this account because the cheque
was not returned. In ordinary course, anybody would have demanded the cheque
back vide a written communication. Accused also did not prove any written
communication on record to show that he informed his bankers in writing that
cheque in question was misplaced by the complainant. In the absence of any
notice to the complainant or any other communication to the complainant
demanding the cheque back and in the absence of any such communication to the
bank, the accused's defence that he was informed by the complainant that
JUDGMENT/Devender Singh Vs. Manoj Kr Aneja/CC NO. 121/01/US:138 N.I. Act
/Convicted/03.09.09/Page 13 of 21/D cheque is misplaced is a blatant falsehood
and a cooked up story.
24\. Besides this, it would be pertinent to mention that present cheque is not
dishonored due to stop payment but it is dishonored due to "Account closed"
and also because of "Insufficient Funds". It is not first case where a cheque
is claimed to be lost by a party in such cases. In most of those cases where
cheques are lost, the course of action adopted by the account holder is to
stop the payment of the cheque and not to close the account itself. The
present cheque was dishonored not only due to "Account closed" but also with
second reason given by bankers of accused the there was "insufficient funds"
in the account of accused when it was so closed. It not observed by the
bankers of accused that the cheque in question was reportedly lost by the
account holder. Nor the accused proved any such communication sent by hi to
his bankers. It shows that no communication was sent by the accused to his
bankers that cheque in question was lost.
25\. Lastly, coming to the defence of accused that he was not served with the
notice demanding payment in this case. Again this defence is farce. Throughout
the cross-examination of PW1 who specifically proved the AD card Ex. CW1/G,
neither the objection was raised at the time of proving of this document and
at the time of exhibiting of the same, nor accused even suggested anywhere to
the complainant that this AD card is forged or that it does not bear correct
address of accused. This AD card bears stamp of postal authorities and some
sort of authenticity and weight is to be given to this document. The accused
does not deny that he was not leaving at the address mentioned in the
Registered envelope and also at the address so JUDGMENT/Devender Singh Vs.
Manoj Kr Aneja/CC NO. 121/01/US:138 N.I. Act /Convicted/03.09.09/Page 14 of
21/D mentioned on the AD card and in the absence of even single suggestion to
the complainant that notice was not dispatched or served upon the accused, the
accused admitted the said document but also the complainant closed his
prosecution evidence without further proof of this document since it was not
even challenged by the accused at that stage. Subsequently, in defence
evidence, by making of a bare allegation that notice was not received, does
not prove the defence of accused that he did not receive the notice.
26\. In view of the above discussion, it is proved that complainant extended
the loan amount of Rs. 10 lakhs to the accused and it was not an investment in
property business of accused. The cheque in question was given in discharge of
such legally enforceable liability and there is legal presumption on this
aspect of the matter that it was towards discharge of legally enforceable
liability. The accused has not been able to rebut the presumption also by
leading any cogent defence which could have shifted the onus on the
complainant.
27\. Under section 139 r/w section 118 of the Negotiable Instruments Act,
there is a presumption in favour of the complainant that the cheque in
question was issued in discharge of legally enforceable liability of the
accused and it was for consideration. There is a legal presumption in favour
of complainant and against the accused that the cheque in question was
received by the complainant in discharge of any debt or other liability from
the accused either in whole or in part. As per this section, the burden to
rebut the presumption was on the accused which the accused failed to rebut in
the present case. A mere oral allegation by the accused that he repaid the
loan is insufficient to discharge this burden. To rebut the presumption
u/s.138 N.I. Act, there JUDGMENT/Devender Singh Vs. Manoj Kr Aneja/CC NO.
121/01/US:138 N.I. Act /Convicted/03.09.09/Page 15 of 21/D has to be some more
evidence from the accused besides making of bare oral denial. The accused has
not proved any documentary proof to prove his case. If such a defence without
any document is to be taken as sufficient rebuttal, in every case u/s.138 N.I.
Act, the accused can escape his liability by mere oral claim that the cheque
was not in discharge of his liability.
28\. Under section 118 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, there is a legal
presumption in favour of the complainant that every negotiable instrument
(which includes a cheque) was made or drawn for consider- ation. The legal
presumption is also regarding date of cheque, time of its acceptance, time of
transfer, order of endorsement and also as to stamps. Reading section 118 and
139 of Negotiable Instruments Act, a presumption arises in favour of the
complainant and not in favour of accused that, when this cheque was received
by the complainant, it was against consideration and also towards discharge of
liability by the accused.
29\. In the case of M/s. Kumar Exports v. M/s. Sharma Carpets , 2009(1)
R.C.R.(Criminal) 478 : 2009(1) R.C.R.(Civil) 453 : 2009(1) R.A.J. 154 Hon'ble
Supreme court of India, held as fol- lows;
"9. In order to determine the question whether offence punishable under
Section 138 of the Act is made out against the appellant, it will be neces-
sary to examine the scope and ambit of presumptions to be raised as en-
visaged by the provisions of Sections 118 and 139 of the Act. In a suit to
enforce a simple contract, the plaintiff has to aver in his pleading that it
was made for good consideration and must substantiate it by evidence.
JUDGMENT/Devender Singh Vs. Manoj Kr Aneja/CC NO. 121/01/US:138 N.I. Act
/Convicted/03.09.09/Page 16 of 21/D But to this rule, the negotiable
instruments are an exception. In a signifi- cant departure from the general
rule applicable to contracts, Section 118 of the Act provides certain
presumptions to be raised. This Section lays down some special rules of
evidence relating to presumptions. The reason for these presumptions is that,
negotiable instrument passes from hand to hand on endorsement and it would
make trading very difficult and ne- gotiability of the instrument impossible,
unless certain presumptions are made. The presumption, therefore, is a matter
of principle to facilitate ne- gotiability as well as trade. Section 118 of
the Act provides presumptions to be raised until the contrary is proved (i) as
to consideration, (ii) as to date of instrument, (iii) as to time of
acceptance, (iv) as to time of trans- fer, (v) as to order of endorsements,
(vi) as to appropriate stamp and (vii) as to holder being a holder in due
course. Section 139 of the Act provides that it shall be presumed, unless the
contrary is proved, that the holder of a cheque received the cheque of the
nature referred to in Section 138 for the discharge, in whole or in part, of
any debt or other liability. Presump- tions are devices by use of which the
courts are enabled and entitled to pronounce on an issue notwithstanding that
there is no evidence or insuf- ficient evidence. Under the Indian Evidence Act
all presumptions must come under one or the other class of the three classes
mentioned in the Act, namely, (1) "may presume" (rebuttable), (2) "shall
presume" (rebut- table) and (3) "conclusive presumptions" (irrebuttable). The
term `pre- sumption' is used to designate an inference, affirmative or dis
affirmative of the existence a fact, conveniently called the "presumed fact"
drawn by a judicial tribunal, by a process of probable reasoning from some
matter of fact, either judicially noticed or admitted or established by legal
evi- dence to the satisfaction of the tribunal. Presumption literally means
"tak- ing as true without examination or proof". Section 4 of the Evidence Act
JUDGMENT/Devender Singh Vs. Manoj Kr Aneja/CC NO. 121/01/US:138 N.I. Act
/Convicted/03.09.09/Page 17 of 21/D inter-alia defines the words `may presume'
and `shall presume as follows:
\-
"(a) `may presume' - Whenever it is provided by this Act that the Court may
presume a fact, it may either regard such fact as proved, unless and until it
is disproved or may call for proof of it.
(b) `shall presume' - Whenever it is directed by this Act that the Court shall
presume a fact, it shall regard such fact as proved, unless and until it is
disproved."
In the former case the Court has an option to raise the presumption or not,
but in the latter case, the Court must necessarily raise the presump- tion. If
in a case the Court has an option to raise the presumption and raises the
presumption, the distinction between the two categories of pre- sumptions
ceases and the fact is presumed, unless and until it is dis- proved."
"10. Section 118 of the Act inter alia directs that it shall be presumed, un-
til the contrary is proved, that every negotiable instrument was made or drawn
for consideration. Section 139 of the Act stipulates that unless the contrary
is proved, it shall be presumed, that the holder of the cheque re- ceived the
cheque, for the discharge of, whole or part of any debt or lia- bility. "
JUDGMENT/Devender Singh Vs. Manoj Kr Aneja/CC NO. 121/01/US:138 N.I. Act
/Convicted/03.09.09/Page 18 of 21/D "Applying the definition of the word
`proved' in Section 3 of the Evidence Act to the provisions of Sections 118
and 139 of the Act, it becomes evi- dent that in a trial under Section 138 of
the Act a presumption will have to be made that every negotiable instrument
was made or drawn for con- sideration and that it was executed for discharge
of debt or liability once the execution of negotiable instrument is either
proved or admitted. As soon as the complainant discharges the burden to prove
that the instru- ment, say a note, was executed by the accused, the rules of
presump- tions under Sections 118 and 139 of the Act help him shift the burden
on the accused. The presumptions will live, exist and survive and shall end
only when the contrary is proved by the accused, that is, the cheque was not
issued for consideration and in discharge of any debt or liability. A
presumption is not in itself evidence, but only makes a prima facie case for a
party for whose benefit it exists."
" 11. The use of the phrase "until the contrary is proved" in Section 118 of
the Act and use of the words "unless the contrary is proved" in Section 139 of
the Act read with definitions of "may presume" and "shall pre- sume" as given
in Section 4 of the Evidence Act, makes it at once clear that presumptions to
be raised under both the provisions are rebuttable. When a presumption is
rebuttable, it only points out that the party on whom lies the duty of going
forward with evidence, on the fact presumed and when that party has produced
evidence fairly and reasonably tending to show that the real fact is not as
presumed, the purpose of the pre- sumption is over. The accused in a trial
under Section 138 of the Act has two options. He can either show that
consideration and debt did not exist JUDGMENT/Devender Singh Vs. Manoj Kr
Aneja/CC NO. 121/01/US:138 N.I. Act /Convicted/03.09.09/Page 19 of 21/D or
that under the particular circumstances of the case the non-existence of
consideration and debt is so probable that a prudent man ought to sup- pose
that no consideration and debt existed. To rebut the statutory pre- sumptions
an accused is not expected to prove his defence beyond rea- sonable doubt as
is expected of the complainant in a criminal trial. The accused may adduce
direct evidence to prove that the note in question was not supported by
consideration and that there was no debt or liability to be discharged by him.
However, the court need not insist in every case that the accused should
disprove the non-existence of consideration and debt by leading direct
evidence because the existence of negative evi- dence is neither possible nor
contemplated. At the same time, it is clear that bare denial of the passing of
the consideration and ex- istence of debt, apparently would not serve the
purpose of the accused. Something which is probable has to be brought on
record for getting the burden of proof shifted to the complainant. To disprove
the presumptions, the accused should bring on record such facts and
circumstances, upon consideration of which, the court may ei- ther believe
that the consideration and debt did not exist or their non-ex- istence was so
probable that a prudent man would under the circum- stances of the case, act
upon the plea that they did not exist. Apart from adducing direct evidence to
prove that the note in question was not sup- ported by consideration or that
he had not incurred any debt or liability, the accused may also rely upon
circumstantial evidence and if the cir- cumstances so relied upon are
compelling, the burden may likewise shift again on to the complainant. The
accused may also rely upon presump- tions of fact, for instance, those
mentioned in Section 114 of the Evidence Act to rebut the presumptions arising
under Sections 118 and 139 of the Act. The accused has also an option to prove
the non-existence of consid-
JUDGMENT/Devender Singh Vs. Manoj Kr Aneja/CC NO. 121/01/US:138 N.I. Act
/Convicted/03.09.09/Page 20 of 21/D eration and debt or liability either by
letting in evidence or in some clear and exceptional cases, from the case set
out by the complainant, that is, the averments in the complaint, the case set
out in the statutory notice and evidence adduced by the complainant during the
trial. Once such re- buttal evidence is adduced and accepted by the court,
having regard to all the circumstances of the case and the preponderance of
probabilities, the evidential burden shifts back to the complainant and,
thereafter, the presumptions under Sections 118 and 139 of the Act will not
again come to the complainant's rescue. "
30\. Therefore, in my considered view, the accused is guilty for the dishonour
of cheque despite having legally enforceable liability and for failure to pay
the cheque amount to the complainant despite receiving the legal notice and
within the stipulated period of fifteen days from the date of receipt of the
notice.
31\. In such circumstances, the case of the complainant stands proved and
accused is held guilty u/s 138 Negotiable Instruments Act for dishonor of
cheque in question due to "Insufficient funds" and "Account closed"
ANNOUNCED IN OPEN COURT ON 03rd September 2009 (DIGVINAY SINGH) ADDITIONAL
CHIEF METROPOLITAN MAGISTRATE-03 IPR, ROHINI, DELHI JUDGMENT/Devender Singh
Vs. Manoj Kr Aneja/CC NO. 121/01/US:138 N.I. Act /Convicted/03.09.09/Page 21
of 21/D
letting in evidence or in some clear and exceptional cases, from the case set
out by the complainant, that is, the averments in the complaint, the case set
out in the statutory notice and evidence adduced by the complainant during the
trial. Once such re- buttal evidence is adduced and accepted by the court,
having regard to all the circumstances of the case and the preponderance of
probabilities, the evidential burden shifts back to the complainant and,
thereafter, the presumptions under Sections 118 and 139 of the Act will not
again come to the complainant's rescue. "
30\. Therefore, in my considered view, the accused is guilty for the dishonour
of cheque despite having legally enforceable liability and for failure to pay
the cheque amount to the complainant despite receiving the legal notice and
within the stipulated period of fifteen days from the date of receipt of the
notice.
31\. In such circumstances, the case of the complainant stands proved and
accused is held guilty u/s 138 Negotiable Instruments Act for dishonor of
cheque in question due to "Insufficient funds" and "Account closed"
    (d) The plea of accused :                                                       Pleaded not guilty
JUDGMENT/Devender Singh Vs. Manoj Kr Aneja/CC NO. 121/01/US:138 N.I. Act
/Convicted/03.09.09/Page 1 of 21/D
(e) The final order : Convicted
(f) The date of such order : 03.09.2009
(g) Brief statement of the reasons for the decision:-
1\. This is a complaint case, filed by the complainant against the accused,
under section 138 of The Negotiable Instruments Act, claiming that the accused
was known to complainant because of some business relationship and friendship.
On the asking of accused, complainant extended a friendly loan of Rs. Ten
lakhs, for 25 days, to the accused on 14-07-2007 and, pursuant to the said
loan, accused issued one cheque bearing no. 007197 for a sum of Rs. Ten lakhs
drawn on Allahabad Bank, Branch New Rajender Nagar, New Delhi. But the cheque,
when presented for encashment, was dishonored on 26- 09-2008 due to
"insufficient funds" as well as "account closed" and, within the stipulated
period a legal notice was sent to the accused on 24-10-2008 demanding the
payment of cheque amount, but the accused failed to pay the amount.
2\. The accused was summoned by this court for the said offence on 11-
> 12-2008 and thereafter on appearance of accused, a notice u/s 251 Cr. P. C.
> for the offence u/s 138 Negotiable Instruments Act was served upon the
letting in evidence or in some clear and exceptional cases, from the case set
out by the complainant, that is, the averments in the complaint, the case set
out in the statutory notice and evidence adduced by the complainant during the
trial. Once such re- buttal evidence is adduced and accepted by the court,
having regard to all the circumstances of the case and the preponderance of
probabilities, the evidential burden shifts back to the complainant and,
thereafter, the presumptions under Sections 118 and 139 of the Act will not
again come to the complainant's rescue. "
30\. Therefore, in my considered view, the accused is guilty for the dishonour
of cheque despite having legally enforceable liability and for failure to pay
the cheque amount to the complainant despite receiving the legal notice and
within the stipulated period of fifteen days from the date of receipt of the
notice.
31\. In such circumstances, the case of the complainant stands proved and
accused is held guilty u/s 138 Negotiable Instruments Act for dishonor of
cheque in question due to "Insufficient funds" and "Account closed"
    (d) The plea of accused :                                                       Pleaded not guilty
JUDGMENT/Devender Singh Vs. Manoj Kr Aneja/CC NO. 121/01/US:138 N.I. Act
/Convicted/03.09.09/Page 1 of 21/D
(e) The final order : Convicted
(f) The date of such order : 03.09.2009
(g) Brief statement of the reasons for the decision:-
1\. This is a complaint case, filed by the complainant against the accused,
under section 138 of The Negotiable Instruments Act, claiming that the accused
was known to complainant because of some business relationship and friendship.
On the asking of accused, complainant extended a friendly loan of Rs. Ten
lakhs, for 25 days, to the accused on 14-07-2007 and, pursuant to the said
loan, accused issued one cheque bearing no. 007197 for a sum of Rs. Ten lakhs
drawn on Allahabad Bank, Branch New Rajender Nagar, New Delhi. But the cheque,
when presented for encashment, was dishonored on 26- 09-2008 due to
"insufficient funds" as well as "account closed" and, within the stipulated
period a legal notice was sent to the accused on 24-10-2008 demanding the
payment of cheque amount, but the accused failed to pay the amount.
2\. The accused was summoned by this court for the said offence on 11-
> 12-2008 and thereafter on appearance of accused, a notice u/s 251 Cr. P. C.
> for the offence u/s 138 Negotiable Instruments Act was served upon the
letting in evidence or in some clear and exceptional cases, from the case set
out by the complainant, that is, the averments in the complaint, the case set
out in the statutory notice and evidence adduced by the complainant during the
trial. Once such re- buttal evidence is adduced and accepted by the court,
having regard to all the circumstances of the case and the preponderance of
probabilities, the evidential burden shifts back to the complainant and,
thereafter, the presumptions under Sections 118 and 139 of the Act will not
again come to the complainant's rescue. "
30\. Therefore, in my considered view, the accused is guilty for the dishonour
of cheque despite having legally enforceable liability and for failure to pay
the cheque amount to the complainant despite receiving the legal notice and
within the stipulated period of fifteen days from the date of receipt of the
notice.
31\. In such circumstances, the case of the complainant stands proved and
accused is held guilty u/s 138 Negotiable Instruments Act for dishonor of
cheque in question due to "Insufficient funds" and "Account closed"
    (d) The plea of accused :                                                       Pleaded not guilty
JUDGMENT/Devender Singh Vs. Manoj Kr Aneja/CC NO. 121/01/US:138 N.I. Act
/Convicted/03.09.09/Page 1 of 21/D
(e) The final order : Convicted
(f) The date of such order : 03.09.2009
(g) Brief statement of the reasons for the decision:-
1\. This is a complaint case, filed by the complainant against the accused,
under section 138 of The Negotiable Instruments Act, claiming that the accused
was known to complainant because of some business relationship and friendship.
On the asking of accused, complainant extended a friendly loan of Rs. Ten
lakhs, for 25 days, to the accused on 14-07-2007 and, pursuant to the said
loan, accused issued one cheque bearing no. 007197 for a sum of Rs. Ten lakhs
drawn on Allahabad Bank, Branch New Rajender Nagar, New Delhi. But the cheque,
when presented for encashment, was dishonored on 26- 09-2008 due to
"insufficient funds" as well as "account closed" and, within the stipulated
period a legal notice was sent to the accused on 24-10-2008 demanding the
payment of cheque amount, but the accused failed to pay the amount.
2\. The accused was summoned by this court for the said offence on 11-
> 12-2008 and thereafter on appearance of accused, a notice u/s 251 Cr. P. C.
> for the offence u/s 138 Negotiable Instruments Act was served upon the
> accused in writing on 22-01-2009 to which accused claimed trial.
> Admission/denial of the documents was also conducted on 22-01- 2004 u/s 294
> Cr. P. C.
3\. Thereafter, complainant examined himself as PW1 in support of his case.
JUDGMENT/Devender Singh Vs. Manoj Kr Aneja/CC NO. 121/01/US:138 N.I. Act
/Convicted/03.09.09/Page 2 of 21/D
4\. After the complainants evidence, all the incriminating evidence against
the accused was put to him in his examination u/s 313 Cr. P. C. r/w 281 Cr. P.
C.
5\. The accused, in his statement u/s 313 Cr. P. C., claimed that he did not
take any loan whatsoever from the complainant. Rather, the amount of Rs. Ten
letting in evidence or in some clear and exceptional cases, from the case set
out by the complainant, that is, the averments in the complaint, the case set
out in the statutory notice and evidence adduced by the complainant during the
trial. Once such re- buttal evidence is adduced and accepted by the court,
having regard to all the circumstances of the case and the preponderance of
probabilities, the evidential burden shifts back to the complainant and,
thereafter, the presumptions under Sections 118 and 139 of the Act will not
again come to the complainant's rescue. "
30\. Therefore, in my considered view, the accused is guilty for the dishonour
of cheque despite having legally enforceable liability and for failure to pay
the cheque amount to the complainant despite receiving the legal notice and
within the stipulated period of fifteen days from the date of receipt of the
notice.
31\. In such circumstances, the case of the complainant stands proved and
accused is held guilty u/s 138 Negotiable Instruments Act for dishonor of
cheque in question due to "Insufficient funds" and "Account closed"
    (d) The plea of accused :                                                       Pleaded not guilty
JUDGMENT/Devender Singh Vs. Manoj Kr Aneja/CC NO. 121/01/US:138 N.I. Act
/Convicted/03.09.09/Page 1 of 21/D
(e) The final order : Convicted
(f) The date of such order : 03.09.2009
(g) Brief statement of the reasons for the decision:-
1\. This is a complaint case, filed by the complainant against the accused,
under section 138 of The Negotiable Instruments Act, claiming that the accused
was known to complainant because of some business relationship and friendship.
On the asking of accused, complainant extended a friendly loan of Rs. Ten
lakhs, for 25 days, to the accused on 14-07-2007 and, pursuant to the said
loan, accused issued one cheque bearing no. 007197 for a sum of Rs. Ten lakhs
drawn on Allahabad Bank, Branch New Rajender Nagar, New Delhi. But the cheque,
when presented for encashment, was dishonored on 26- 09-2008 due to
"insufficient funds" as well as "account closed" and, within the stipulated
period a legal notice was sent to the accused on 24-10-2008 demanding the
payment of cheque amount, but the accused failed to pay the amount.
2\. The accused was summoned by this court for the said offence on 11-
> 12-2008 and thereafter on appearance of accused, a notice u/s 251 Cr. P. C.
> for the offence u/s 138 Negotiable Instruments Act was served upon the
> accused in writing on 22-01-2009 to which accused claimed trial.
> Admission/denial of the documents was also conducted on 22-01- 2004 u/s 294
> Cr. P. C.
3\. Thereafter, complainant examined himself as PW1 in support of his case.
JUDGMENT/Devender Singh Vs. Manoj Kr Aneja/CC NO. 121/01/US:138 N.I. Act
/Convicted/03.09.09/Page 2 of 21/D
4\. After the complainants evidence, all the incriminating evidence against
the accused was put to him in his examination u/s 313 Cr. P. C. r/w 281 Cr. P.
C.
5\. The accused, in his statement u/s 313 Cr. P. C., claimed that he did not
take any loan whatsoever from the complainant. Rather, the amount of Rs. Ten
letting in evidence or in some clear and exceptional cases, from the case set
out by the complainant, that is, the averments in the complaint, the case set
out in the statutory notice and evidence adduced by the complainant during the
trial. Once such re- buttal evidence is adduced and accepted by the court,
having regard to all the circumstances of the case and the preponderance of
probabilities, the evidential burden shifts back to the complainant and,
thereafter, the presumptions under Sections 118 and 139 of the Act will not
again come to the complainant's rescue. "
30\. Therefore, in my considered view, the accused is guilty for the dishonour
of cheque despite having legally enforceable liability and for failure to pay
the cheque amount to the complainant despite receiving the legal notice and
within the stipulated period of fifteen days from the date of receipt of the
notice.
31\. In such circumstances, the case of the complainant stands proved and
accused is held guilty u/s 138 Negotiable Instruments Act for dishonor of
cheque in question due to "Insufficient funds" and "Account closed"
