Central Government Act
Article 12(3) in The Constitution Of India 1949
(3) The rights in respect of leave of absence and pension and the other
conditions of service of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India shall be
governed or shall continue to be governed, as the case may be, by the
provisions which were applicable to the Auditor General of India immediately
before the commencement of this Constitution and all references in those
provisions to the Governor General shall be construed as references to the
President THIRD SCHEDULE Articles 75 ( 4 ), 99, 124 ( 6 ), 148 ( 2 ), 164 ( 3
), 188 and 2191 Forms of Oaths or Affirmations I Form of oath of office for a
Minister for the Union: I, A B, do that I will bear true faith and allegiance
to the Constitution of India as by law established, that I will uphold the
sovereignty and integrity of India that I will faithfully and conscientiously
discharge my duties as a Minister for the Union and that I will do right to
all manner of people in accordance with the Constitution and the law, without
fear or favour, affection or ill will II Form of oath of secrecy for a
Minister for the Union: I, A B, do that I will not directly or indirectly
communicate or reveal to any person or persons any matter which shall be
brought under my consideration or shall become known to me as a Minister for
the Union except as may be required for the due discharge of my duties as such
candidate to fill a seat in Legislative Assembly (or Legislative Council), do
that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by
law established and that I will uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India
B Form of oath or affirmation to be made by a member of the Legislature of a
State: I, A B, having been elected (or nominated) a member of the Legislative
Assembly (or Legislative Council), do that I will bear true faith and allegi
ance to the Constitution of India as by law established, that I will uphold
the sovereignty and integrity of India and that I will faithfully discharge
the duty upon which I am about to enter VIII Form of oath or affirmation to be
made by the Judges of a High Court: I, A B, having been appointed Chief
Justice (or a Judge) of the High Court at (or of) do that I will bear true
faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established, that
I will uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India, that I will duly and
faithfully and to the best of my ability, knowledge, and judgment perform the
duties of my office without fear or favour, affection or ill will and that I
will uphold the Constitution and the laws FOURTH SCHEDULE Articles 4 ( 1 ) and
the Union except as may be required for the due discharge of my duties as such
Minister III A Form of oath or affirmation to be made by a candidate for
election to Parliament: I, A B, having been nominated as a candidate to fill a
seat in the Council of States (or the House of the People) do that I will bear
true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established
and that I will uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India B Form of oath
or affirmation to be made by a member of Parliament: I, A B, having been
elected (or nominated) a member of the Council of States (or the House of the
People) do that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of
India as by law established, that I will uphold the sovereignty and integrity
of India and that I will faithfully discharge the duty upon which I am about
to enter IV Form of oath or affirmation to be made by the Judges of the
Supreme Court and the Comptroller and Auditor General of India: I, A B, having
been appointed Chief Justice (or a Judge) of the Supreme Court of India (or
Comptroller and Auditor General of India) do that I will bear true faith and
allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established, that I will
uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India, that I will duly and faithfully
and to the best of my ability, knowledge and judgment perform the duties of my
office without fear or favour, affection or ill will and that I will uphold
the Constitution and the laws V Form of oath of office for a Minister for a
State: I, A B, do that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the
Constitution of India as by law established, that I will uphold the
sovereignty and integrity of India, that I will faithfully and conscientiously
discharge my duties as a Minister for the State of and that I will do right to
all manner of people in accordance with the Constitution and the law without
fear or favour, affection or ill will VI Form of oath of secrecy for a
Minister for a State: I, A B, do that I will not directly or indirectly
communicate or reveal to any person or persons any matter which shall be
brought under my consideration or shall become known to me as a Minister for
the State of except as may be required for the due discharge of my duties as
such Minister VII A Form of oath or affirmation to be made by a candidate for
election to the Legislature of a State: I, A B, having been nominated as a
candidate to fill a seat in Legislative Assembly (or Legislative Council), do
that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by
law established and that I will uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India
B Form of oath or affirmation to be made by a member of the Legislature of a
State: I, A B, having been elected (or nominated) a member of the Legislative
Assembly (or Legislative Council), do that I will bear true faith and allegi
ance to the Constitution of India as by law established, that I will uphold
the sovereignty and integrity of India and that I will faithfully discharge
the duty upon which I am about to enter VIII Form of oath or affirmation to be
made by the Judges of a High Court: I, A B, having been appointed Chief
Justice (or a Judge) of the High Court at (or of) do that I will bear true
faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established, that
I will uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India, that I will duly and
faithfully and to the best of my ability, knowledge, and judgment perform the
duties of my office without fear or favour, affection or ill will and that I
will uphold the Constitution and the laws FOURTH SCHEDULE Articles 4 ( 1 ) and
80 ( 2 ) Allocation of seats in the Council of States For each State or Union
territory specified in the first column of the following table, there shall be
allotted the number of seats specified in the second column thereof opposite
to that State or that Union territory, as the case may be Table
candidate to fill a seat in Legislative Assembly (or Legislative Council), do
that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by
law established and that I will uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India
B Form of oath or affirmation to be made by a member of the Legislature of a
State: I, A B, having been elected (or nominated) a member of the Legislative
Assembly (or Legislative Council), do that I will bear true faith and allegi
ance to the Constitution of India as by law established, that I will uphold
the sovereignty and integrity of India and that I will faithfully discharge
the duty upon which I am about to enter VIII Form of oath or affirmation to be
made by the Judges of a High Court: I, A B, having been appointed Chief
Justice (or a Judge) of the High Court at (or of) do that I will bear true
faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established, that
I will uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India, that I will duly and
faithfully and to the best of my ability, knowledge, and judgment perform the
duties of my office without fear or favour, affection or ill will and that I
will uphold the Constitution and the laws FOURTH SCHEDULE Articles 4 ( 1 ) and
the Union except as may be required for the due discharge of my duties as such
Minister III A Form of oath or affirmation to be made by a candidate for
election to Parliament: I, A B, having been nominated as a candidate to fill a
seat in the Council of States (or the House of the People) do that I will bear
true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established
and that I will uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India B Form of oath
or affirmation to be made by a member of Parliament: I, A B, having been
elected (or nominated) a member of the Council of States (or the House of the
People) do that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of
India as by law established, that I will uphold the sovereignty and integrity
of India and that I will faithfully discharge the duty upon which I am about
to enter IV Form of oath or affirmation to be made by the Judges of the
Supreme Court and the Comptroller and Auditor General of India: I, A B, having
been appointed Chief Justice (or a Judge) of the Supreme Court of India (or
Comptroller and Auditor General of India) do that I will bear true faith and
allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established, that I will
uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India, that I will duly and faithfully
and to the best of my ability, knowledge and judgment perform the duties of my
office without fear or favour, affection or ill will and that I will uphold
the Constitution and the laws V Form of oath of office for a Minister for a
candidate to fill a seat in Legislative Assembly (or Legislative Council), do
that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by
law established and that I will uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India
B Form of oath or affirmation to be made by a member of the Legislature of a
State: I, A B, having been elected (or nominated) a member of the Legislative
Assembly (or Legislative Council), do that I will bear true faith and allegi
ance to the Constitution of India as by law established, that I will uphold
the sovereignty and integrity of India and that I will faithfully discharge
the duty upon which I am about to enter VIII Form of oath or affirmation to be
made by the Judges of a High Court: I, A B, having been appointed Chief
Justice (or a Judge) of the High Court at (or of) do that I will bear true
faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established, that
I will uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India, that I will duly and
faithfully and to the best of my ability, knowledge, and judgment perform the
duties of my office without fear or favour, affection or ill will and that I
will uphold the Constitution and the laws FOURTH SCHEDULE Articles 4 ( 1 ) and
the Union except as may be required for the due discharge of my duties as such
Minister III A Form of oath or affirmation to be made by a candidate for
election to Parliament: I, A B, having been nominated as a candidate to fill a
seat in the Council of States (or the House of the People) do that I will bear
true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established
and that I will uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India B Form of oath
or affirmation to be made by a member of Parliament: I, A B, having been
elected (or nominated) a member of the Council of States (or the House of the
People) do that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of
India as by law established, that I will uphold the sovereignty and integrity
of India and that I will faithfully discharge the duty upon which I am about
to enter IV Form of oath or affirmation to be made by the Judges of the
Supreme Court and the Comptroller and Auditor General of India: I, A B, having
been appointed Chief Justice (or a Judge) of the Supreme Court of India (or
Comptroller and Auditor General of India) do that I will bear true faith and
allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established, that I will
uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India, that I will duly and faithfully
and to the best of my ability, knowledge and judgment perform the duties of my
office without fear or favour, affection or ill will and that I will uphold
the Constitution and the laws V Form of oath of office for a Minister for a
candidate to fill a seat in Legislative Assembly (or Legislative Council), do
that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by
law established and that I will uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India
B Form of oath or affirmation to be made by a member of the Legislature of a
State: I, A B, having been elected (or nominated) a member of the Legislative
Assembly (or Legislative Council), do that I will bear true faith and allegi
ance to the Constitution of India as by law established, that I will uphold
the sovereignty and integrity of India and that I will faithfully discharge
the duty upon which I am about to enter VIII Form of oath or affirmation to be
made by the Judges of a High Court: I, A B, having been appointed Chief
Justice (or a Judge) of the High Court at (or of) do that I will bear true
faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established, that
I will uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India, that I will duly and
faithfully and to the best of my ability, knowledge, and judgment perform the
duties of my office without fear or favour, affection or ill will and that I
will uphold the Constitution and the laws FOURTH SCHEDULE Articles 4 ( 1 ) and
the Union except as may be required for the due discharge of my duties as such
Minister III A Form of oath or affirmation to be made by a candidate for
election to Parliament: I, A B, having been nominated as a candidate to fill a
seat in the Council of States (or the House of the People) do that I will bear
true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established
and that I will uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India B Form of oath
or affirmation to be made by a member of Parliament: I, A B, having been
elected (or nominated) a member of the Council of States (or the House of the
People) do that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of
India as by law established, that I will uphold the sovereignty and integrity
of India and that I will faithfully discharge the duty upon which I am about
to enter IV Form of oath or affirmation to be made by the Judges of the
Supreme Court and the Comptroller and Auditor General of India: I, A B, having
been appointed Chief Justice (or a Judge) of the Supreme Court of India (or
Comptroller and Auditor General of India) do that I will bear true faith and
allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established, that I will
uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India, that I will duly and faithfully
and to the best of my ability, knowledge and judgment perform the duties of my
office without fear or favour, affection or ill will and that I will uphold
the Constitution and the laws V Form of oath of office for a Minister for a
State: I, A B, do that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the
Constitution of India as by law established, that I will uphold the
sovereignty and integrity of India, that I will faithfully and conscientiously
discharge my duties as a Minister for the State of and that I will do right to
all manner of people in accordance with the Constitution and the law without
fear or favour, affection or ill will VI Form of oath of secrecy for a
Minister for a State: I, A B, do that I will not directly or indirectly
communicate or reveal to any person or persons any matter which shall be
brought under my consideration or shall become known to me as a Minister for
the State of except as may be required for the due discharge of my duties as
such Minister VII A Form of oath or affirmation to be made by a candidate for
candidate to fill a seat in Legislative Assembly (or Legislative Council), do
that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by
law established and that I will uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India
B Form of oath or affirmation to be made by a member of the Legislature of a
State: I, A B, having been elected (or nominated) a member of the Legislative
Assembly (or Legislative Council), do that I will bear true faith and allegi
ance to the Constitution of India as by law established, that I will uphold
the sovereignty and integrity of India and that I will faithfully discharge
the duty upon which I am about to enter VIII Form of oath or affirmation to be
made by the Judges of a High Court: I, A B, having been appointed Chief
Justice (or a Judge) of the High Court at (or of) do that I will bear true
faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established, that
I will uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India, that I will duly and
faithfully and to the best of my ability, knowledge, and judgment perform the
duties of my office without fear or favour, affection or ill will and that I
will uphold the Constitution and the laws FOURTH SCHEDULE Articles 4 ( 1 ) and
the Union except as may be required for the due discharge of my duties as such
Minister III A Form of oath or affirmation to be made by a candidate for
election to Parliament: I, A B, having been nominated as a candidate to fill a
seat in the Council of States (or the House of the People) do that I will bear
true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established
and that I will uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India B Form of oath
or affirmation to be made by a member of Parliament: I, A B, having been
elected (or nominated) a member of the Council of States (or the House of the
People) do that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of
India as by law established, that I will uphold the sovereignty and integrity
of India and that I will faithfully discharge the duty upon which I am about
to enter IV Form of oath or affirmation to be made by the Judges of the
Supreme Court and the Comptroller and Auditor General of India: I, A B, having
been appointed Chief Justice (or a Judge) of the Supreme Court of India (or
Comptroller and Auditor General of India) do that I will bear true faith and
allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established, that I will
uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India, that I will duly and faithfully
and to the best of my ability, knowledge and judgment perform the duties of my
office without fear or favour, affection or ill will and that I will uphold
the Constitution and the laws V Form of oath of office for a Minister for a
State: I, A B, do that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the
Constitution of India as by law established, that I will uphold the
sovereignty and integrity of India, that I will faithfully and conscientiously
discharge my duties as a Minister for the State of and that I will do right to
all manner of people in accordance with the Constitution and the law without
fear or favour, affection or ill will VI Form of oath of secrecy for a
Minister for a State: I, A B, do that I will not directly or indirectly
communicate or reveal to any person or persons any matter which shall be
brought under my consideration or shall become known to me as a Minister for
the State of except as may be required for the due discharge of my duties as
such Minister VII A Form of oath or affirmation to be made by a candidate for
candidate to fill a seat in Legislative Assembly (or Legislative Council), do
that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by
law established and that I will uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India
B Form of oath or affirmation to be made by a member of the Legislature of a
State: I, A B, having been elected (or nominated) a member of the Legislative
Assembly (or Legislative Council), do that I will bear true faith and allegi
ance to the Constitution of India as by law established, that I will uphold
the sovereignty and integrity of India and that I will faithfully discharge
the duty upon which I am about to enter VIII Form of oath or affirmation to be
made by the Judges of a High Court: I, A B, having been appointed Chief
Justice (or a Judge) of the High Court at (or of) do that I will bear true
faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established, that
I will uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India, that I will duly and
faithfully and to the best of my ability, knowledge, and judgment perform the
duties of my office without fear or favour, affection or ill will and that I
will uphold the Constitution and the laws FOURTH SCHEDULE Articles 4 ( 1 ) and
