Madras High Court
V.G. Row vs The State Of Madras on 14 September, 1950
Equivalent citations: AIR 1951 Mad 147, (1951) IMLJ 628
Author: S Rao
Bench: Rajamannar, S Rao, V Sastri
JUDGMENT Satyanarayana Rao J.
1\. This is a petn. under Article 226, Const. Ind. for the issue of a writ of
certiorari for calling the records & quashing the order of the State of Madras
in G. O. No. Ms. 1517 Public General dated 10-3-1950 declaring under Section
16, Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1908, the People's Education Society as an
unlawful assocn. The petnr. is the General Secretary of the People's Education
Society registered in November 1947 under the Societies Registration Act, 1860
(XXI [21] of 1860), & is also a barrister-at-law & an advocate of this Court &
the Supreme Ct.
2\. The objects of the Society as stated in the affidavit of the petnr. are
among others "(a) to encourage, promote, diffuse, & popularise useful
knowledge in all science & more specially Social Science; (b) to encourage,
promote, diffuse & popularise political education among people; (c) to
encourage, promote or popularise the study & understanding of all social &
political problems & bring about social & political reforms; & (d) to promote,
provide for any remedy which apart from the existing law would be available to
a person for enforcement of any of the rights dealt with in Part III of the
Constitution & therefore the H. C. could not entertain an appln. under Article
226 for the issue of a direction in the nature of a habeas corpus apart from
the provision of Section 491, Cr. P. C. Assuming that the decision in that
case is correct & we have grave doubts as to its correctness--this Ct. which
undoubtedly possesses the jurisdiction & power to issue prerogative writs like
certiorari, prohibition, etc., must be held to have the jurisdiction & power
to grant those writs for the enforcement of the rights mentioned in Part III
of the Constitution as well. It is not denied by the learned Advocate-General
that this Ct. had at the commencement of the Constitution the jurisdiction &
power to issue a writ of certiorari within the limits of its original
jurisdiction at least. It follows, therefore, that this jurisdiction which is
continued to us under Article 225 would enable this Ct. to issue a writ of
certiorari in the present case. It is, therefore, unnecessary to canvass the
correctness of the decision cited to us in this case.
political problems & bring about social & political reforms; & (d) to promote,
encourage & popularise are, literature & drama."
The notfn. by the resp. the State of Madras, dated 10-3-1950 under Section 16,
Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1908, declaring the Society an unlawful assocn. is
in the following terms :
"Whereas in the opinion of the State Govt. the Assocn. known as the People's
Education Society, Madras, has for its object interference with the
administration of the law & the maintenance of law & order, & constitutes a
danger to the public peace;
Now, therefore, His Excellency the Governor of Madras, in exercise of the
powers conferred by Section 16, Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1908 (Central Act
XIV [14] of 1908) hereby declares the said Assocn. to be an unlawful assocn.
within the meaning of the said Act."
(Sd.) K. RAMUNNI meNON, Chief Secretary."
3\. After the aforesaid declaration, it is alleged in the affidavit of the
petnr. that the City Police searched the office of the said society purporting
to act under a search warrant issued by the Comr. of Police, Madras, under
Section 12, Madras Maintenance of Public Order Act (XXIII [23] of 1949) &
seized certain articles. The petnr. denies that the objects of the society
were those stated in the notfn. & he also asserts that the order, that is, the
notfn. was not served upon the petnr. & that he was never given any
opportunity or warning before the order was made. On 31-3-1950 the Govt.
passed a further order under Section 17 (E) (3), Criminal Law Amendment Act,
1908, declaring their intention to forfeit to the Govt. an amount of Rs.
2405-14-0 belonging to the Society in the hands of Messrs. Best & Co. Ltd., as
the money was intended to be used for the purpose of the unlawful assocn.
namely, the People's Education Society, Madras. Notice of this intention was
also given to Messrs Best & Co. Ltd., who are in possession of the funds. The
amount, in question, it is alleged in the affidavit, represents compensation
money for non-delivery of certain rotary press materials & the petnr. alleges
that this fund was not intended to be used for any unlawful purpose. The order
of the Govt. dated 10-3-1950 is impugned in the affidavit as being illegal &
void as the Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1908 became void on 26-1-1950 as being
inconsistent with the fundamental rights guaranteed under Part III, Const.
Ind. more particularly the rights specified under Articles 19, 21 & 31 of the
Constitution. The petnr. also questions the legality of the search & the order
of the Govt. of 81-8-1950 proposing to forfeit the funds in the hands of
Messrs. Best & Co.
4\. On behalf of the resp. the Deputy Secretary to the Govt. of Madras filed a
counter affidavit in which it is asserted that the real objects of the society
were not those contained in its Memo. of Assocn. but it was intended really to
be a propaganda organisation of the Madras branch of the Communist Party & was
formed by the leading Communists of Madras, the first Secretary of the Assocn.
being Mr. M. R. Venkataraman, who was also Secretary of the Madras Committee
of the Communist Party of India. It is admitted by the Deputy Secretary in the
counter affidavit that the assocn. had ceased to function from March 1949 as
all the prominent communists had either been detained or gone underground. The
assocn. owns a house, No. 4, Rundall's Road, Vepery, which was purchased for a
sum of Rs. 55,000 in or about 29-11-1947. The Society placed an order for the
purchase of rotary printing press which arrived in Madras on 5-2-1948 but with
some parts missing & was taken delivery of by the petnr. & M.R. Venkataraman
on 5-2-1948. The press was thereafter sold by the petnr. to one Sadanand on
25-4-1949. Though the Society was not in a position to function according to
the allegations in the counter affidavit, the petnr. as its joint Secretary
continues to collect the rent from the premises. It is claimed in the counter
affidavit that the order of Govt. of 10-3-1960 declaring the said assocn. to
be an unlawful assoen. within the meaning of Section 16, Criminal Law
Amendment Act, 1908, was perfectly justified in the circumstances stated in
it.
5\. Sub-clause (2) of Section 15, Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1908 (unamended)
defines an "unlawful assocn" as meaning an assocn.
"(a) which encourages or aids persons to commit acts of violence or
intimidation or of which the members habitually commit such acts, or (b) which
has been declared to be unlawful by the Provincial Govt. under the powers
hereby conferred."
The power to declare an assocn. unlawful is conferred on the Provincial Govt.
by Section 16 which is as follows :
"If the Provincial Govt. is of opinion that any aasocn. interferes or has for
its object interference with the administration of the law or with the
maintenance of law & order, or that it constitutes a danger to the public
peace, the Provincial Govt. may, by notfn. in the official Gazette, declare
such assocn. to be unlawful."
If, after an assocn. is declared an unlawful assocn. a member continues to be
a member or takes part in any of its activities or collects funds he is liable
to be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months or
with fine or with both under Section 17 of the Act. There are also other penal
consequences enumerated in the Act which might follow as a result of the
declaration under Section 16.
6\. The present appln. was filed by the petnr. on 10-4-1950, & a rule nisi was
issued by this Ct. on 11-4-1950, After the decision of the S. C. in A.K.
Gopalan v. State of Madras, (the judgment in which was delivered on 19-5-1950)
the State of Madras passed the Indian Criminal Law (Amendment) (Madras) Act,
1950 (Madras Act XI [11] of 1950) which was published in a Gazette
Extraordinary of Fort St. George on 16-8-1950. By this Act the definition of
an "unlawful assocn." in Section 15 (2) (b), Indian Criminal Law Amendment
Act, 1908, has been substituted by the following clause :
"(b) which has been declared by the State Govt. by notfn. in the Official
Gazette to be unlawful on the ground to be specified in the notfn.) that such
assocn.
(i) constitutes a danger to the public peace, or
(ii) has interfered or interferes with the maintenance of public order or has
such interference for its object, or
(iii) has interfered or interferes with the administration of the law, or has
such interference for its object."
7\. For Section 16 of the unamended Act, two new sections, Sections 16 & 16-A
have been substituted. These two sections provide a procedure for the issue of
a notfn. declaring an assocn. unlawful & for reference to an Advisory Board
constituted under Section 16A to decide about the existence of a sufficient
cause for the issue of the notfn. If there be no sufficient cause in the
opinion of the Advisory Board, justifying the notfn. the State Govt. has to
cancel the notfn. The procedure in these two sections is somewhat on the lines
of the Madras Maintenance of Public Order Act. Section 16 requires that the
notfn. issued under Clause (b) of Sub-section (2) of Section 15 in respect of
any assocn. should specify the grounds on which it was issued, the reasons for
its issue & such other particulars, if any, as may have a bearing on the
necessity for the issue of the notfn. It also fixes a reasonable period within
which any office-bearer or member of the assocn. or any other person
interested may make a representation to the State Govt. in respect of the
issue of the notfn. The State Govt. is prohibited by Sub-section (2) of
Section 16 from disclosing any facts which it considers to be against the
public interest to disclose. After the expiry of the time fixed in the notfn.
for making representation, Section 16A requires that the State Govt. should
place the matter before an Advisory Board constituted in accordance with the
provisions of Sub-section (2) of the same section. What the Advisory Board
should do after a reference is made is provided in Sub-section (3) of Section
16A. Sub-clause (4) requires that the Advisory Board should express its
opinion whether or not there was sufficient cause for the issue of the notfn.
in respect of the assocn. concerned & should also indicate whether the opinion
is unanimous or is only that of the majority of the members. Sub-section (5)
negatives the right of the persons affected to appear in person or by an
advocate before the Advisory Board & the proceedings of the Advisory Board &
its report, except the portion relating to its opinion or that of the majority
of its member, are made confidential. Under Sub-section (6) if there is no
sufficient cause in the opinion of the Advisory Board or the majority of its
members, the State Govt. has to cancel the notfn. in respect of such assocn.
8\. Section 17 of the unamended Act is not touched in any manner by this
Amending Act. Section 17A & Section 17-F have also been amended by Sections 4
& 5 of the Amending Act. Section 6, Amending Act, contains certain saving
provisions. It states :
"6 (1) All notfns. issued in respect of assocns. by the State Govt. before the
commencement of this Act under Section 16 of the said Act & not cancelled
before such commencement shall, an from such commencement, have effect as if
they had been issued under Section 15 (2) (b) of the said Act as amended by
this Act ;
Provided as follows :
(i) In the case of every assocn. to which any such notfn. applies, the State
Govt. shall issue & supplementary notfn. as soon as may be after the
commencement of this Act, specifying the ground, the reasons & the
particulars, if any, referred to in Section 16 (1) (a) of the said Act as
amended by this Act, & fixing a reasonable period for the making of the
representations referred to in Section 16 (1) (b) of the said Act amended as
aforesaid.
(ii) the procedure prescribed by Section 16A of the said Act as amended by
this Act shall be followed thereafter." (The other parts of the section are
omitted as not relevant.)
9\. By the time this appln. came on for hearing before us on 21-8-1950, the
Amending Act came into force. As Section 16 of the unamended Act which
conferred upon the Provincial Govt. a power to declare an assocn. unlawful was
repealed by the Amending Act, Mr. M. K. Nambiar, the learned Advocate for the
petnr. raised a preliminary point that as there is no power to issue a notfn.
under any of the provisions of the new Act & as the new Section 15(2) (b)
merely assumes the existence of such a power but does not expressly confer it
upon the State Govt., the whole proceedings are void. Though the validity of
the provisions of the Act were impugned in the affidavit as offending Articles
19, 21 & 31, Const. Ind. in the arguments before us the learned advocate for
the petnr. restricted his contentions to Articles 14 & 19 of the Const.
According to him, the provisions of the un-amended Act & the Amending Act are
inconsistent with Articles 14 & 19, Sub-clauses (1) (a), (c) & (f) of the
Constitution & are void. The third contention was that if the unamended Act
particularly Section 1C became void after 26-1-1950, a notfn. issued under a
void section could not be validated by Section 6, Amending Act.
10\. On a consideration of Section 16 of the unamended Act & Section 15 (2)
(b) introduced by the Amending Act, it would seem at first sight that as the
unamended Section 16 is no longer in force the contention that there is no
power conferred on the State to declare an assocn, unlawful is well founded.
Section 15 (b) of the unamended Act expressly states that the definition
includes "an assocn. declared to be unlawful by the Provincial Govt. under the
powers hereby conferred". The power "hereby conferred" contemplated by that
clause is undoubtedly Section 16 of the unamended Act. In the Amending Act
while Section 16 is omitted all that we have is Clause (b) of Sub-section (2)
of Section 15 which does not espressly confer a power on the State Govt. to
declare an aasocn. unlawful. It assumes, by its language, that the State Govt.
has such a power. No doubt the power to declare an assocn. unlawful is not a
natural or common law or prerogative right of the State. It can acquire such a
power only under an enactment conferring such power. The learned Advocate
General who appeared for the resp. contended that though the power was not
espressly conferred by the new Sub-clause (b) of Sub-section (2) of Section 15
it is implied in it by necessary intendment, & it must be hold that the
Legislature must be deemed to have conferred such a power. He drew our
attention to various Acts of the Central & Provincial Legislatures,
particularly of Madras, from 1886, wherein as a matter of fact, the
legislative practice followed was to include in the definition section an
implied power to issue a notfn. As examples I may refer to Sub-clause (19) of
Section 2, Cantonments Act, 1924 (II [2] of 1924); Sub-clause (4) of Sub-
section (8) of Section 8, Madras Prohibition Act, 1937 (X [10] of 1937) & Sub-
clause (4) of Sub-section (13) of Section 3, Madras Abkari Act, 1886 (I [1] of
1886) None of the clauses in the various Acts, however, came up for judicial
consideration. We cannot altogether ignore the legislative practice adopted
from such a long time & which remained unchallenged. There is also some
authority in support of the view that such a power may be implied. Maxwell on
Interpretation of Statutes, Edn. 9 at p. 361 sets out an instance in point &
states :
"The enactment that at the election of poor law guardians the votes should be
taken & returned as the Comrs. should direct, impliedly authorised the
appointment of a returning officer. An Act, which, after empowering the
parishioners to elect an assistant overseer, provided that this power should
cease where an asst. overseer had been appointed by the Poor Law Comrs. (who
bad previously no power to make such an appointment) & while their order of
appointment remained in force, would seem to have given the Comrs. that power
by implication."
An implied power for the Justices to summarily convict under Section 57,
Contagious Diseases (Animals) Act, 1870 was recognised in Cullen v. Trimble,
(1872) 7 Q. B. 416 : (41 L. J. M. C. 132) by the Ct. of Appeal in England. In
Baxter v. Ah Wav, 8 commonwealth Rep. 626, the question no doubt that directly
came up for consideration was whether the power conferred upon the Governor
General in Council under Section 52 (g), Customs Act, 1901, to prohibit
importation of goods was a delegation of a legislative power or conditional
legislation. From an examination of the sections referred to in that case it
appears, however, that Section 52 of the Act enumerated prohibited goods in a
series of sub-sections & included in it, Sub-section (g) which is in these
terms : "All goods the importation of which may be prohibited by
proclamation". It was not disputed in that case that that clause conferred
ample power to issue a proclamation prohibiting the importation of goods & was
treated by Griffith C. J. as authorising the issue of such a proclamation. Of
course this is not a decision on the question but the legislative practice in
other countries also seems to be in consonance with that which has obtained in
this country from a very long time. In a recent decision of the Bombay H. C.
which had to construe Section 4, Bombay Prize Competition Tax Act (XI [11] of
1939) it was held that when the section required that prize competition shall
not be conducted unless a licence in respect of such a competition has been
obtained by the promoter thereof from the Collector carried with it also the
implied power assumed in the section on the part of the Collector to issue a
licence : Y. R. Parpia v. Chambarbagawalla, A. I. R. (36) 1949 Bom. 109 : (50
Bom. L. R. 728).
11\. Mr. Nambiar, the learned advocate for the petnr., emphasised the well-
known principle of interpretation of statutes that it is the duty of the Ct.
to ascertain the meaning of the Act as it stands & the Ct. has nothing to do
with the unexpressed intention of the Legislature. Reference was made in
support of this view to Attorney-General v. West Riding of Yorkshire County
Council, (1907) A. C. 29 : (76 L. J. K. B. 97) & to the observations of Lord
Cambell C. J. in the well-known case of Woodward v. Watts, (1853) 2 El. & Bl.
452 : 118 E. R. 836, where at p. 457 (838) the learned Chief Justice stated :
"I must take the words as I find them, & following the golden rule, construe
the words so as to put a just construction on them. If this leads to hardship
or inconvenience, the remedy must be sought from the Legislature."
This rule of construction, it mast be observed, does not at all come into
conflict with the principle that from the language employed in a Statute a
power may be implied, if it is possible to do so. The language of the new Sub-
clause (b) of Sub-section (2) of Section 15 proceeds undoubtedly on the
assumption that the State Govt. has power to issue the notfn. It was also
argued that the statute being a penal one, must receive a strict construction
& nothing should be implied which is not expressly provided for. No doubt it
was the practice in England in the earlier decisions to observe a distinction
of that kind between criminal statutes & civil Acts. The tendency, however, of
modern decisions is to do away with this difference as pointed out by Maxwell
on Interpretation of Statutes (Edn. 9) at p. 288 :
"The tendency of modern decisions, upon the whole, is to narrow materially the
difference between what is called a strict & beneficial construction. All
Statutes are now construed with a more attentive regard to the language, &
criminal statutes with a more rational ragard to the aim & intention of the
Legislature than formerly."
If the language & the contest of the Statute which has to be construed compal
the Ct. to imply a power, there is no reason to make a distinction between a
penal statute & a civil one & adopt different rates of interpretation, having
regard to their nature. The State Govt. has, therefore, in my opinion,
undoubted power to issue a notfn. declaring an assocn. unlawful under the new
Sub-clause (b) of Sub-section (2) of Section 15. It would have been better for
the draftsman of the new Act to have made it explicit instead of leaving it to
be implied so as to avoid any room for controversy.
12\. I shall now examine, how & to what extent the provisions of the Criminal
Law Amendment Act, unamended & amended, are inconsistent with the fundamental
rights in part III of the Constitution. It is not seriously disputed by the
learned Advocate General though he did not concede, that Section 16 of the
unamended Act, is void as being inconsistent with the fundamental rights
recognised in the Constitution. That section confers upon the Provincial Govt.
the power to declare an assocn. unlawful if it is of opinion that the assocn.
interferes or has for its object inferference with the administration of law
or with the maintenance of law & order or that it constitutes a danger to the
public peace. That declaration is final & conclusive & cannot be questioned in
a prosecution under Section 17 of the Act. The accused has no right or
opportunity to show that the declaration was erroneous & was not justified. It
is a naked arbitrary power conferred upon the Provincial Govt. to impose a
restriction on the right of a free assocn. conferred by Article 19(c) of the
Constitution & is of such an absolute nature which cannot & indeed, was not
attempted to he supported as a reasonable restriction on the exercise of the
right. In my opinion, it offends also Article 14 as it denies equal protection
of the laws to persons. As no serious attempt was made on behalf of the resp.
to support the legality of that provision it is unnecessary to give more
reasons to hold that it is inconsistent with the provisions of Part III of the
Constitution. In view of Article 13 of the Constitution, it must be held that
Section 16 which is inconsistent with the provisions of the Constitution is
void.
13\. The more important question on which there was serious controversy before
us was whether the Amended Act is consistent with Articles 14 & 19 of the
Constitution.
14\. Our task in interpreting Article 19 of the Constitution has to a largo
extent been lightened by the recent pronouncement by the S. C. in Gopalan's
case, & one or two other later decisions. It has been decided authoritatively
by a majority of the learned Judges of the S. C. in Gopalan's case, that
Article 19 has no application to a legislation dealing with preventive or
punitive detention. The observations of Kama C. J. in that case afford useful
guidance in the manner of approach & the method of interpreting Article 19.
The learned Chief Justice observed at p. 180 :
"The Article has to be read without any preconceived notions. So read, it
clearly means that the legislation to be examined must be directly in respect
of one of the rights mentioned in the sub-clauses. If there is a legislation
directly attempting to control a citizen's freedom of speech or expression, or
his right to assemble peaceably & without arms, etc., the question whether
that legislation is saved by the relevant saving clause of Article 19 will
arise. If, however, the legislation is not directly in respect of any of these
subjects, but as a result of the operation of other legislation, for instance,
for punitive or preventive detention, his right under any of these sub-clauses
is abridged, the question of the application of Article 19 does not arise. The
true approach is only to consider the directness of the legislation & not what
will be the result of the detention otherwise valid, on the mode of the
detenu's life."
The Article has no application says the learned Chief Justice to a legislation
directly aimed at preventive or punitive detention.
15\. The fundamental rights, that is, rights of freedom conferred by Sub-
clauses (a) to (g) of Clause (1) of Article 19 & the effect of the
restrictions contained in Clauses (2) to (6) of the same Article have also
been considered & the scope of the Articles viewed in the light of the
restrictions imposed has been clearly laid down by the learned Chief Justice
at p. 181 :
"In order to appreciate the true scope of Article 19 it is useful to read it
by itself & then to consider how far the other articles in Part III affect or
control its meaning. It is the first article under the caption "Right to
freedom.' It gives the rights mentioned in Article 19(1)(a) and 19(1)(g) to
all citizens of India. These rights read by themselves & apart from the
controls found in Clauses (2) to (6) of the same Article, specify the
different general rights which a free citizen in a democratic country
ordinarily has. Having specified those rights, each of them is considered
separately from the point of view of a similar right in the other citizens,
and also after taking into consideration the principle that individual liberty
must give way, to the extent it is necessary, when the good or safety of the
people generally is concerned. Thus the right to freedom of speech &
expression is given by Article 19(1)(a). But Clause (2) provides that such
right shall not prevent the operation of a law which relates to libel,
slander, defamation, contempt of Ct. or any matter which offends against
decency or morality or which Undermines the security of, or tends to
overthrow, the State. Clause (2) thus only emphasises that while the
individual citizen has a free right of speech or expression, he cannot be
permitted to use the same to the detriment of a similar tight in another
citizen or to the detriment of the State. Thus, all laws of libel, slander,
contempt of Ct. or laws in respect of matters which offend against decency or
morality are reaffirmed to be operative in spite of this individual right of
the citizen to freedom of speech & expression. Similarly, that right is also
subject to laws which prevent undermining the security of the State or are
against activities which tend to overthrow the State. A similar analysis of
Clauses (3) & (4) shows similar restrictions imposed on similar grounds. In
the same way Clause (5) also permits reasonable restrictions in the exercise
of the right to freedom of movement through the territory of India, the right
to reside & settle in any part of the territory of India or the right to
acquire, hold & dispose of property, being imposed by law provided such
reasonable restrictions on the exercise of such right are in the interest of
the general public. Reading Article 19 in that way as a whole the only concept
appears to be that the specified rights of a free citizen are thus controlled
by what the framers of the Constitution thought were necessary restrictions in
the interest of the rest of the citizens."
To a similar effect are the observations of Das J. at p. 288 where the learned
Judge observed :
"It will be noticed that of the seven rights protected by Clause (1) of
Article 19, six of them, namely, (a), (b), (c), (d), (E) &, (g) are what are
said to be rights attached to the person (jus personarum). The remaining item,
namely, (f) is the right to property (jus rerum). If there were nothing else
in Article 19 these rights would have been absolute rights and the protection
given to them would have completely debarred parliament or any of the State
Legislatures from making any law taking away or abridging any of those rights.
But a perusal of Article 19 makes it abundantly clear that none of the seven
rights enumerated in Clause (1) is an absolute right for each of these rights
is liable to be curtailed by laws made or to be made by the State to the
extent mentioned in the several Clauses (2) to (6) of that Article. Those
clauses save the power of the State to make laws imposing certain specified
restrictions on the several rights. The net result is that the unlimited
legislative power given by Article 246 read with the different legislative
lists in Schedule VII is cut down by the provisions of Article 19 & all laws
made by the State with respect to these rights must in order to be valid
observe these limitations. Whether any law has in fact transgressed these
limitations is to be ascertained by the Ct. & if in its view the restrictions
imposed by the law are greater than what is permitted by Clauses (2) to (6),
whichever is applicable the Ct. will declare the same to be unconstitutional
&, therefore, void under Article 13. Here again there is scope for the
application of the 'intellectual yardstick of the Ct. If, however, the Ct.
finds, on scrutiny, that the law has not overstepped the constitutional
limitations, the Ct. will have to uphold the law, whether it likes the law or
not."
This pronouncement of the highest Ct. in the land as the final authority on
the interpretation of the Const. Ind. makes it unnecessary for me to define in
my own words the ambit of Article 19 of the Constitution.
16\. Before I proceed to examine the provisions of the Act now impugned, it is
necessary to deal with the extreme contention urged on behalf of the petnr. by
his learned advocate. It is said that the restrictions imposed by Clauses (2)
to (6) of Article 19 are in effect & substance identical with the power of the
S. C. under the American Constitution to determine the validity of a
legislation by the Congress & the States under the 5th & 14th Amendments
respectively under the "Due Process of Law clause." Under the guarantee given
by the American Constitution by the "Due Process of Law" the S. C. arrogated
to itself an unlimited power to declare a law invalid if according to the
majority of the Judges of the S. C. that law was unreasonable. The Judges of
the S. C. applied their own intellectual yardstick to test the validity &
reasonableness of a piece of legislation. The S. C. is supreme under the
American Constitution while the Parliament or the Legislature is supreme under
the English Constitution. The makers of our Constitution did not recognise
either the supremacy of the Ct. or that of the Legislature. The function of
the Ct. under our Constitution, it seems to me, is only to see whether the
Legislature kept itself within bounds laid down by the Constitution in
enacting a law or has overstepped those limitations. If the Ct. considers that
a particular law is unreasonable notwithstanding that it was within the
competence of the Legislature & that it did not transgress any of the
limitations imposed by the Constitution, the Ct. has no power to declare its
invalidity on that ground. The meaning of the expression "due process of law"
is elastic & varied from time to time as will be evident from a perusal of
Willia on Constitutional Law, Weaver's Constitutional Law and Willoughby on
the Constitution of the United States. As a corrective to the unlimited power
claimed & exercised by the S. C. of the U. S. A. the doctrine of "Police
Powers" was brought into being. The scope of "due process of law" clause was
considered by the learned Judges in Gopalan's case, in interpreting Article 21
of the Constitution & it was held that the framers of our Constitution
deliberately refrained from adopting the American model & employed in Article
21 language which excluded such a conception. The learned Chief Justice at p.
185 considered the meaning of "due process of law" & its scope in the light of
the authorities & summarised his view in the following words :
"The discussion of the meaning of 'due process of law' found in Willis on
Constitutional Law & in Colley's Constitutional Limitations shows the diverse
meanings given to that expression at different times & under different
circumstances by the S. C. of U. S. A., so much so that the conclusion reached
by these authors is that the expression means reasonable law according to the
view of the majority of the Judges of the S. C. at a particular time holding
office. It also shows how the moaning of the expression was widened or
abridged in certain decades. Moreover, to control the meaning so given to that
expression from time to time the doctrine of police powers was brought into
play. That doctrine shortly put, is that legislation meant for the good of the
people generally, & in which the individual has to surrender his freedom to a
certain extent because it is for the benefit of the people at large, has not
to be tested by the touchstone of the 'due process of law' formula."
17\. The other learned Judges also discussed this subject elaborately in the
light of the authorities & rejected the contention that Article 21 of the
Constitution should be interpreted in the light of that formula (see for
example Mookerjee J. at pp. 272 & 275 & Das J. at pp. 298 & 299). Das J.
summarised his conclusion at p. 299 in these words :
"The net result is that the all inclusive & indefinable doctrine of due
process of law has in America now been brought back to its original status of
a procedural due process of law by the enunciation & application of the new
doctrine of police power as an antidote or palliative to the former. Who knows
when the pendulum will swing again?"
Clauses (3) to (6) of Article 19 alone use the expression "reasonable
restrictions" & not Clause (2). As pointed by my Lord, the Chief Justice, in
the course of the arguments, if the extreme contention of the petnr. that the
doctrine of due process of law had been embodied in Clauses (3) to (6) of
Article 19, Sub-clause (2) gives no room for applying a standard of
reasonableness in determining the validity of the restrictions contained in
Sub-clause (2). Sub-clause (2) imposes a restriction upon the right to freedom
of speech & expression conferred by Sub-clause (a) of Clause (1) of Article 19
& it enacts :
"Nothing in Sub-clause (a) of Clause (1) shall affect the operation of any
existing law in so far as it relates to, or prevent the State from making any
law relating to libel, slander, defamation, contempt of Ct. or any matter
which offends against decency or morality or which undermines the security of,
or tends to overthrow, the State."
If the argument of the petnr. was correct it will be open to a Ct. in respect
of a legislation affecting the right guaranteed under Article 19(1)(a) to
examine the reasonableness of the law relating to libel, slander, defamation,
etc. & to declare the restrictions imposed under such law as unreasonable. But
the language of Clause (2) excludes a judicial review of such law on that
ground. Further even in the other clauses the restrictions are directed to a
particular object, for example in Clause (3) the object of the restriction
permitted is in the interest of public order & the function of the Ct. in
testing the validity of an Act is to see whether the reasonable restrictions
imposed by the law are in the interests of the public order. To the same
effect are also the other clauses. It is, therefore, impossible to accept the
contention that the power of the Ct. to declare a law invalid as contravening
Clauses (2) to (6) of Article 19 is co-extensive with the power of the S. C.
under the American Constitution. The framera of our Constitution have
deliberately abstained from adopting the doctrine of "due process of law"
whether it is under Article 21 or under Article 19. If they intended to adopt
it instead of providing elaborate limitations, varying with the nature of the
right or freedom conferred under Clause (1) of Article 19 they would have
easily adopted a simpler & more compendious formula as in the 5th Amendment or
the 14th Amendment of the American Constitution. I am unable, therefore, to
accept the extreme contention of the learned advocate for the petnr.
18\. In the light of the foregoing I now proceed to examine whether all or any
of the provisions of the Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1908, as amended by
Madras Act XI [11] of 1950 contravene the provisions of Article 19. The
clauses relied on are (a), (c) & (f). It has been accepted before us that the
Act is a direct legislation dealing with the right to form assocns. or unions
& attempt to control the freedom recognised by that clause. The object of the
legislation is no doubt preventive but it is agreed that in its ultimate
results it is punitive in character. It is also common ground that the special
provisions relating to preventive detention in Article 22 of the Constitution
have no application. It was strongly urged on behalf of the petnr. that the
Act practically deprived the right of a citizen to form an assocn. or union &
the restrictions imposed are unreasonable. Clause (c) has been very strongly
relied on in the course of the arguments. The right to form an assocn., it is
conceded, includes the right to continue an assocn. The Act, therefore, does
not only prevent formation of assocns. but also prevent continuance of
assocns. &, therefore, affects the fundamental rights of the citizen in Sub-
clause (c) of Article 19. The restriction on this right is contained in Clause
(4) of the said article. It says :
"Nothing in Sub-clause (c) of the said clause shall affect the operation of
any existing law in so far as it imposes, or prevents the State from making
any law imposing, in the interests of public order or morality, reasonable
restrictions on the exercise of the right conferred by the said sub-clause."
As laid down by the S. C. the only question that arises for consideration,
therefore, is whether the restrictions are reasonable & whether they were
imposed in the interests of public order or morality.
19\. Under Section 16 of the unamended Act a declaration could be made if the
object of the assocn. was such as to interfere with the administration of the
law or with the maintenance of law & order, or that it constitutes a danger to
the public peace. The notfn. actually issued under that section by the Govt.
on 10-8-1950 practically follows the language of the section though instead of
using the disjunctive "or" uses the conjunctive "and". The new Section 15 (b)
empowers the Govt. to declare as unlawful on all or any of the three grounds
specified in Sub-clause (b) but none of them include the maintenance of law.
The object of both the Acts is undoubtedly to impose restriction in the
interest of public order. The use of "and" instead of "or" in the notfn. has
given room for the contention that the notfn. in any event cannot be deemed to
be valid under the amended Act as the maintenance of law & maintenance of
order are two distinct matters & the maintenance of law is not one of the
grounds recognised by the new section & it is, therefore, uncertain on which
of the grounds the decision to declare the assocn. unlawful was based. If
permissible grounds are mixed up with grounds not so permissible, it is
difficult to infer that the order was issued on permissible grounds alone; &
if there is such an indefiniteness it should be held that the notfn. is
invalid under the new Act. I do not, however, think that the expression
'maintenance of law' is something different & wholly dissociated from the
expression 'maintenance of public order'. The two words "law" & "order" are
two component parts of the same idea & cannot be dissociated. It cannot,
therefore, be held that the notfn. is invalid on that ground. The object of
the two acts is undoubtedly, therefore, the maintenance of public order &
therefore, one of the conditions in Sub-clause (4) of Article 19 is satisfied.
20\. The next question is whether the restrictions imposed are reasonable. I
feel no difficulty in answering the question under the unamended Act. An
unrestricted power is conferred by Section 16 on the Provincial Govt. to
declare an asaocn. unlawful & the satisfaction of the existence of the grounds
enumerated in the section is the subjective satisfaction of the Provincial
Govt. & not of an external authority. The declaration carried with it a
finality & it is not a justiciable right. No machinery is provided to test the
correctness of the order by the persons affected & no opportunity is provided
for them to show that the assocn. is not such as falls within the purview of
the grounds enumerated in the section. The declaration carries with it the
penalties specified in Sections 17A to 17E. The declaration cannot be
questioned in a proceeding under Section 17 nor under Section 17A or 17B or
17E. The penalties contemplated under these sections proceed on the basis that
the declaration is valid & is not subject to any judicial review. A total
prohibition of a right of a person to defend himself is not only a restriction
on the right to defend himself but a negation of it. It cannot be argued &
indeed no attempt was made to support the position that the provision in
Section 16 is a reasonable restriction.
21\. The position, however, under the amending Act is somewhat different; &
the arguments of the learned Advocate General were directed mainly to
establish that the rigour of the law under Section 16 of the unamended Act has
been considerably modified by the new Act & that ample provision was made in
the new Act to enable the person aggrieved to defend himself & show that the
declaration was not justified. Both under the unamended Act & the new Act, so
far as "associations" falling under Sub-clause (a) of Sub-section (2) of
Section 15 are concerned, there is an undoubted right of the members of the
assocn. to show that they are not within the mischief of that clause, whether
it is a prosecution under Section 17 of the other penalties imposed under
Sections 17-A to 17-E. That such is the position was not seriously challenged.
But then both the unamended Act & the-new Act place assocns. declared unlawful
by the Provincial Govt. & the other assocns. within Section 15 (2) (a) on a
different footing altogether. While the new Act to some extent seems to modify
the rigor of the law it does not provide an adequate & just remedy for the
person aggrieved to challenge the correctness of the declaration. In the first
place there is no provision in the Act for service of the grounds on any of
the members or office-bearers of the assocn. The learned Advocate General
attempted to argue that the issue of a notfn. which contains the grounds on
which the declaration is made is itself a good substitute for services of the
grounds on the members or office-bearers of the assocn. In support of this
contention, however, no autho-rity has been cited before us. An assocn. is
defined in Section 15 (1) of the Act as "any combination or body of persons
whether the same be known by any distinctive name or not." If the assocn. has
a distinctive name & has a place of business, the ordinary mode of serving the
notice may be to leave a notice at the place where the asaocn. carries on its
business. If it has no distinctive name the assocn. can be described only by
the names of persons who form the combination or the names of the body of
persons. The Govt., therefore, must know in such an event, the names of the
persons who constitute the combination or assocn. A combination cannot be of
known & unknown persons so as to make both the known & unknown persons
punishable under Section 17 by virtue of the notfn. If the persons are unknown
it is difficult to see how the Govt. could be in a position to state in their
grounds that the assocn. has for its object all or any of the objects
specified in Section 15 (2) (b). In my view it is impossible to accept the
argument that the issue of a notfn. tantamounts to service of the grounds on
the aggrieved persons.
22\. In vol. 6 p. 392 of Halsbury's Laws of England, Edn. 2 of the seven
important liberties such as the right of personal freedom, the right of
security of property, freedom of speech etc., the following right is also
recognised as a fundamental right :
"It seems that there should be added to this list the following rights which
appear to have become well established :
(b) the right of the subject to have any case affecting him tried in
accordance with the principles of natural justice particularly the principles
that a man may not be a judge in his own cause, & that no party ought to be
condemned unheard, or to have a decision given against him unless he has been
given a reasonable opportunity of putting forward his case . . . ."
That due observance of procedural requirements is obligatory even when a
judicial power is exercised by the executive was laid down by Bowen L. J. in
Leeson v. General Council of Medical Education, (1889) 43 Ch. D. 366 at p. 383
: (59 L. J. ch. 233). The principle is no doubt part of the British system of
law but has been followed & applied in this country. This implies, that there
must be a due enquiry & the accused person must have notice of what he was
accused & should have a reasonable opportunity of putting forward his case
before he is deprived of all or any of his liberties or rights of freedom. To
defend himself he must have notice of the grounds on which he is sought to be
deprived of his freedom.
23\. The Act as amended does not provide for testing the correctness or the
validity of the notfn. in the ordinary manner in a Ct. of law when the man is
accused of an offence under Section 17 or is sought to be deprived of his
liberty. If he is charged with an offence under Section 17 it should
ordinarily be open to him to show that the notfn. was not justified; but
instead of that, the Act provides a machinery for ascertaining the opinion of
the Advisory Board as a substitute for trial under ordinary law. No doubt the
notfn. itself besides specifying the grounds fixes a reasonable period for any
office-bearer or member of the assocn. or any other person interested, to make
a representation to the State Govt. regarding the notfn. This assumes that the
person had knowledge of the notfn. If he makes a representation there is no
time limit within which the State Govt. should place the matter before the
Advisory Board constituted under Sub-section (2). Nor is there any time-limit
within which the Advisory Board should give its opinion. It has been pointed
out in this Ct. on more than one occasion in dealing with cases under the
Madras Maintenance of Public Order Act that as the Legislature did not fix any
period of time for the steps to be taken by the Govt. it has resulted in grave
injustice to the person detained as he was kept in prison without even an
enquiry by the Advisory Board for a period longer than would be permissible if
the detention order was confirmed. Notwithstanding these decisions it passes
one's comprehension why the Legislature did not take the elementary precaution
of fixing a time limit for the State Govt. to send the papers to the Advisory
Board & for the Advisory Board to submit its opinion. The person has no right
to lead any evidence & the matter has to be disposed of merely on the
representation made by him & the information, if any, which the Advisory Board
would be able to obtain under Sub-clause (3). The declaration does not require
any confirmation by the Govt. as a result of the opinion of the Advisory Board
& therefore, it may be assumed that its operation commences from the date of
the notfn. unless ultimately the State Govt. decides to cancel it consequent
on the adverse opinion of the Advisory Board or the majority of its members.
The proceedings of the Advisory Board are of course confidential & there is no
appeal provided to any authority against the order of the State Govt. The
Legislature seems to have followed to some extent the procedure permitted by
the Constitution under Article 22 in respect of the preventive detention.
24\. The satisfaction regarding the existence of the grounds is of course the
subjective satisfaction of the Govt. & this is expressly stated in the
unamended Section 16 & I think the omission of the expression "opinion of the
Govt." in Section 15 (2) (b) makes no difference. It, therefore, comes to
this: that by an executive notfn. a person is effectively prevented from
showing that the assocn. is not unlawful which entails the consequence that he
is liable to the penalties provided in Sections 17, 17A to E. Is there any
justification or reason for abridging the right of the person to defend
himself & to have the matter tried in the ordinary manner ? No doubt in cases
of emergency the initial order passed upon a subjective satisfaction may be
permissible but at a subsequent stage a right should be given to the citizen
to establish if he can, that that satisfaction was based upon no or on
insufficient data. If this right is denied I think it is an unreasonable
restriction on the freedom conferred by Article 19(1)(c). Suppose for example,
in the case of an offence falling under Section 302, I. P. C. a procedure of
this description is substituted for an ordinary trial in a criminal Ct, Can it
for a moment be contended that as there is the intervention of a tribunal of
some sort the right is made justiciable & the legislation is valid ? There is
practically no difference between a situation of that description & a
situation envisaged under the new Act, except that before punishing a man an
executive declaration is interposed which is not open to challenge. The
learned Advocate-General drew our attention to passages from the judgment of
the S. C. in Gopalan's case, where the majority of the Judges upheld
subjective satisfaction as permissible. But the remarks of the learned Judges
were confined to preventive detention & not to punitive detention. If an
offence under the ordinary law is committed or a new offence is created by the
Statute there is no reason for not adopting the ordinary modes of procedure
for trying such offences.
25\. From this it does not necessarily follow that in certain cases & for good
reason it may not be open to the Legislature to introduce a trial by other
impartial tribunals than by ordinary Cts. in the land. The trial in such a
case must be a real trial in the sense that the person accused has a
reasonable opportunity of placing his case before the tribunal & a guarantee
of a fair trial. If this is not provided it is difficult to hold that the
abridgment of the right to defend oneself in the ordinary mode is not an
unreasonable restriction on the right.
26\. The learned Advocate General pressed upon us the recent decision of the
S. C. in N. B. Khare v. State of Delhi, which related to an externment order
made by the Dist. Mag. of Delhi under the East Punjab Public Safety Act, 1949.
Dr. Khare was served with the order of externment directing him to remove
himself from Delhi district & not to return to it for a period of three
months. The Madhya Pradesh Govt. passed an order directing him to reside in
Nagpur. The validity of the first order was challenged by a writ of habeas
corpus under Article 32, Const. Ind. as the Act offends the freedom of
movement under Sub-clause (d) of Clause (1) of Article 19. Section 4 (6) of
the Punjab Act provided that where an externment order has been made the
grounds may be communicated to the externee by the authority making the order
& in any case when the order is to be enforced for more than three months he
shall have a right of making a representation which shall be referred to the
Advisory Tribunal constituted under Section 3 (4) of the Act. The Act did not
provide as to what the Advisory Tribunal should do after the matter was
referred to it. The main argument in the case was whether the restrictions
imposed by the Act were reasonable restrictions within the meaning of Clause
(6) of Article 19. In interpreting Clause (5) of Article 19 the learned Chief
Justice observed at p. 441 :
"In my opinion Clause (5) must be given its full meaning. The question which
the Ct. has to consider is whether the restrictions put by the impugned
legislation on the exercise of the right are reasonable or not. The question
whether the provisions of the Act provide reasonable safeguards against the
abuse of the power given to the executive authority to administer the law is
not relevant for tie true interpretation of the clause. The Ct. on either
interpretation will be entitled to consider whether the restrictions on the
right to move throughout India, i. e., both as regards the territory & the
duration, are reasonable or not. The law providing reasonable restriction on
the exercise of the right conferred by Article 19 may contain substantive
provisions as well as procedural provisions. While the reasonableness of the
restrictions has to be considered with regard to the exercise of the right, it
does not necessarily exclude from the consideration of the Ct. the question of
reasonableness of the procedural part of the law. It is obvious that if the
law prescribes five years externment or ten years externment, the question
whether such period of externment is reasonable, being the substantive part,
is necessarily for the consideration of the Ct. under Clause (5). Similarly if
the law provides the procedure under which the exercise of the right may be
restricted, the same is also for the consideration, of the Ct., as it has to
determine if the exercise of the right has been reasonably restricted."
27\. One of the grounds taken was that there was no obligation on the part of
the externing authority to serve the grounds upon the externee as Section 4
(6) of the Act only provided that the grounds "may" be communicated to the
externee & not "shall". The learned Chief Justice construed the word "may" in
the context as equivalent to "shall" & that, therefore, it was obligatory to
serve the grounds even if the externment order was only for a period of three
months. The absence of an express provision in the Act regarding the duties of
the Advisory Board, it was held did not invalidate the Act as the reference
necessarily carried with it the implication that it is to be considered by the
Advisory Board. The majority of the learned Judges, therefore, were of the
opinion having regard to the duration of the order which was only three months
& in view of the construction placed on Section 4 (6) that it was obligatory
upon the externing authority to serve the grounds, that the restrictions were
not unreasonable. Mukherjee J., however, took a different view. No doubt in
that case the question was not whether the substitution of an Advisory Board
for an ordinary tribunal was not an unreasonable abridgement of the right of
the subject as no such contention apparently was raised. It must also be
noticed that it was not a case of preventive detention within the meaning of
Article 22 of the Constitution. Notwithstanding this, the effect of
substitution of an Advisory Board and a procedure analogous to that of
preventive detention was not considered unreasonable by the majority of the
learned Judges. It is, therefore, argued with some force by the learned
Advocate General that in the light of this decision the procedure laid down by
the new Act should be held reasonable. I think, however, that the scope of the
two Acts are entirely different. The orders contemplated under the Punjab Act
are only for a limited duration; whereas the declaration under the present Act
continues in force until it is cancelled by the State Govt. Thereafter if the
person continues to be a member of such an unlawful assocn he is liable to be
punished under Section 17. His property is liable to be forfeited; the
premises in which the assocn. carried on its activities are liable to be taken
possession of by the State Govt. Further, under the present Act, there is no
provision at all for serving the grounds on which the notfn. is based. The Act
makes an invidious distinction between assocns., with objects falling within
the purview of Sub-clause (a) of Clause (2) of Section 15 & Clause (b) for
which there is no sort of justification. Had the Chief Justice of the S. C.
come to the conclusion that the service of the grounds was not obligatory,
perhaps his opinion would have been different regarding the reasonableness of
the Act as did the dissenting judges. Of course, the difference between the
learned Judges was regarding the interpretation of the word "may" in Section 4
(6), Punjab Public Safety Act. Where a Municipal Board granted a monopoly in
trade to A under a by-law which conferred the power to issue a licence which
resulted in preventing B who carried on similar trade previously from carrying
on his business, the S. C. held that the restriction imposed by the by-law was
unreasonable under Article 19(b) of the Constitution notwithstanding a remedy
by way of an appeal to the local Govt. was provided : Rashid Ahmad v.
Municipal Board, Kairana, .
28\. I have, therefore, no hesitation in holding that the restrictions imposed
by the new Act are unreasonable.
29\. The argument based on Clauses (a) & (f) of Sub-section (1) of Article 19
may be easily disposed of. The Act is not a direct legislation relating to the
freedom recognised under Clause (a) or Clause (f). These two rights are not
deprived as a result of direct legislation relating to the rights of freedom
to form assoens. or unions under Clause (c). It is, therefore, unnecessary to
consider whether the restrictions under the new Act offend the provisions in
Clauses (2) & (5) of Article 19. If the impugned provisions of the Act are
otherwise valid, they cannot be treated as offending these provisions.
30\. It may be pointed out that in view of the decision of the S. C. in what
is known as the Cross Roads Case, Romesh Thapper v. State of Madras, which had
to consider whether provision in Section 9 (1) (a), Madras Maintenance of
Public Order Act, was outside the scope of the authorised restriction of
Clause (a) of Article 19, the expression "security of the State" in Sub-clause
(2) of Article 19 is not identical with public order, Although a restriction
in an Act may have been imposed in the interests of public order such
restrictions would not be restrictions on freedom of speech & expression
directed solely against the undermining of the security of the State or the
overthrow of it & would not be covered by Clause (2) of Article 19. Therefore
such restrictions will be unconstitutional & void.
31\. It was next contended that the provisions of the impugned Act denied to
persons equality before the law & also contravene the provisions in Article 14
regarding "equal protection of the law." Article 14 under the caption "Bight
to Equality" states :
"The State shall not deny to any person equality before the law or the equal
protection of the laws within the territory of India."
This Article, in my opinion, relates to two different concepts. One is
"equality before the law" & the second "equal protection of the laws" Two
obligations are cast upon the State, that is, to secure to a person equality
before the law & also to give equal protection of the laws to the person. The
expression "equality before the law" is not used in the American Constitution,
though "equal protection of the laws" occurs in the 14th Amendment. The
expression "due process of law" is used in a more elastic sense as to include
equality before the law & also equal protection of the laws. Though in the 5th
Amendment of the American Constitution, equal protection of the laws is not
specifically mentioned it is specifically stated, however, in the 14th
amendment as it was thought that there should be an impliation in that
direction so far as the State legislation was concerned. Prof. Dicey in his
Law of the Constitution treats "equality before the law" as one of the three
meanings of the expression "rule of law" which formed the fundamental
principle of the English Constitution. He defines it at p. 202. Edn. 9 as
meaning :
"The equal subjection of all classes to the ordinary law of the land
administered by the ordinary law Cts; the 'rule of law' in this sense excludes
the idea of any exemption of officials or others from the duty of obedience to
the law which governs other citizens or from the jurisdiction of the ordinary
tribunals; there can be with us nothing really corresponding to the
'administrative law' (droit administratif) or the 'administrative tribunals'
(tribuna uxadministratifs) of France. The notion which lies at the bottom of
the 'administrative law' known to foreign countries is, that affairs or
disputes in which the Govt. or its servants are concerned are beyond the
sphere of the civil Cts. & must be dealt with by special & more or less
official bodies. This idea is utterly unknown to the law of England & indeed
is fundamentally inconsistent with our traditions & customs."
In other words, this expression implies in my opinion that the Legislature
should not make a distinction between the rich & the poor, official & non-
officials, & make discrimination on any other basis between one subject & the
other. All must be treated as equal before the law. The argument on this part
of the case by Mr. Nambiar was that accused in criminal cases must be treated
alike & no distinction should be made between persons accused of one kind of
offence & another. The acceptance of this argument would lead in my opinion to
very disastrous results. The Criminal P. C itself draws a distinction between
the modes of trial of various offences & the Penal Code imposes different
penalties varying with the nature of the offences. If the view contended for
were to be accepted all these will be inequalities & must be declared void.
His contention is that accused under Section 17, Criminal Law Amendment Act,
are treated differently as they are not allowed to challenge & show that the
declaration by notfn. is not well founded; as this right is denied, it is
said, that there is a violation of the right. What is contemplated by the
clause in my opinion is not a discrimination between persons accused of
offences but a discrimination between one set of persons & others, having
regard to their status & other considerations.
32\. The next point for consideration is whether under the impugned provision
equal protection is denied. The last clause of the 14th Amendment of the
American Constitution in which a similar limitation occurs states :
"Nor shall any State deprive any person of life, liberty, or property, without
due process of law; nor deny to any person within its jurisdiction equal
protection of the laws."
There is no similar express prohibition in the 5th Amendment which relates to
the Federal Legislation. The Fourteenth Amendment was originally introduced to
protect the rights of the Negroes but was subsequently extended even to
Chinamen in the well-known Laundry Case: Yick Wo. v. Hopkins, 118 U.S. 356.
That the requirement of "due process of law" to a considerable extent includes
the guarantee of equal protection of laws is established in Smyth v. Ames, 169
U.S. 466. The distinction, however, between the two limitations was noticed by
Taft C. J. in Truax v. Coorrigan, 257 U. S, 312. He there pointed out :
"It may be that they (the two prohibitions) overlap, that a violation of one
may involve at times the violation of the other, but the spheres of the
protection they offer are not conterminous .... The due process clause .....
of course tends to secure equality of law in the sense that it makes a
required minimum of protection for everyone's right of life, liberty &
property, which the Congress or the Legislature may not withhold. Our whole
system of law is predicated on the general fundamental principle of equality
of application of the law ..... But the framers & adopters of this
(fourteenth) amendment were not content to depend on a mere minimum secured by
the due process clause, or upon the spirit of equality which might not he
insisted on by local public opinion. They therefore embodied that spirit in a
specific guaranty. The guaranty was aimed at undue favour & individual or
class privilege, on the one hand & at hostile discrimination or the oppression
of inequality, on the other. It sought an equality of treatment of all
persons, even though all enjoyed the protection of due process."
As observed in Hayes v. Missouri, 120 U. S. 68 "the clause does not prohibit
legislation which is limited either in the objects to which it is directed or
by the territory within which it is to operate. It merely requires that all
persons subjected to such legislation shall be treated alike under like
circumstances & conditions both in the privileges conferred & in the
liabilities imposed."
32a. The scope & intent of this provision of equal protection of the laws was
defined by Field J. in Barbier v. Connelly, 113 U. S. 27, in a passage which
has since become classic. He observed :
"The fourteenth Amendment in declaring that no State 'shall deprive any person
of life, liberty or property without due process of law, nor deny to any
person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws', undoubtedly
intended, not only that there should be no arbitrary deprivation of life or
liberty or arbitrary spoliation of property but that equal protection &
security should be given to all under like circumstances in the enjoyment of
their personal & civil rights; that all persons should be equally entitled to
pursue their happiness & acquire & enjoy property; that they should have like
access to the Cts. of the country for the protection of their persons &
property, the prevention & redress of wrongs, & the enforcement of contracts;
that no impediment should be interposed to the pursuits of any one except as
applied to the same pursuits by others under like circumstances; that no
greater burdens should be laid upon one than are laid upon others in the same
calling & condition, & that in the administration of criminal justice no
different or higher punishment should be imposed upon one than such as is
prescribed to all for like offences. But neither the Amendment, broad &
comprehensive as it is, nor any other amendment was designed to interfere with
the power of the State, sometimes termed its "police power", to prescribe
regulations to promote the health, peace, morals, education & good order of
the people, & to legislate so as to increase the industries of the State,
develop its resources & add to its wealth & prosperity. From the very
necessities of society, legislation of a special character, having these
objects in view, must often be had in certain districts, such as for draining
marshes & irrigating arid plains. Special burdens are often necessary for
general benefits, for supplying water, preventing fires, lighting districts,
cleaning streets, opening parks, & many other objects. Regulations for these
purposes may press with more or less weight upon, one than upon another, but
they are designed, not to impose unequal or unnecessary restrictions upon
anyone, but to promote with as little individual inconvenience as possible,
the general good. Though in many respects necessarily special in their
character, they do not furnish just ground of complaint if they operate alike
upon all persons & property under the same circumstances & conditions. Class
legislation, discriminating against some & favouring others, is prohibited;
but legislation which, in carrying out a public purpose, is limited in its
application, if within the sphere of its operation it affects alike all
persons similarly situated, is not within the amendment. In the execution of
admitted powers unnecessary proceedings are often required, which are
cumbersome, dilatory & expensive, yet, if no discrimination against any one be
made & no substantial right be impaired by them, they are not obnoxious to any
constitutional objection. The inconveniences arising in the administration of
the laws from this cause are matters entirely for the consideration of the
State; they can be remedied only by the State."
This passage brings out to what extent discrimination is permissible. While
class legislation is prohibited a reasonable classification bylaw has always
been considered as not amounting to a denial of equal protection. An
illustration of class legislation is the Laundry case, 113 U. S. 356. In that
case the validity of an ordinance of the City of San Francisco which required
persons intending to establish laundries in frame houses to obtain the
previous consent of certain municipal officials was considered. It conferred a
discretion to the officials in the nature of a naked & arbitrary power to give
or withhold the consent not only as to the places but also as to persons. On
the face of it the legislation impugned was not discriminatory. The evidence
in the case established that it was in fact directed exclusively against a
particular class of persons, namely the Chinese. The Ct. held :
"Though the law be fair on its face, & impartial in appearance, yet, if it is
applied & administered by public authority with an evil eye & unequal hand so
as practically to make unjust & illegal discriminations between persons in
similar circumstances material to their rights, the denial of equal justice is
still within the prohibition of the Constitution."
The quotation from the judgment of Field J. brings out also the distinction
between classification & class legislation. As pointed out by Weaver on the
Constitutional Law at p. 397:
"Class legislation is that which makes an improper discrimination by
conferring particular privileges upon a class of persons, arbitrarily selected
from a large number of persons, all of whom stand in the same relation to the
privilege granted & between whom & the persons not so favoured no reasonable
distinction or substantial difference can be found justifying the inclusion of
one & the exclusion of the other from such privilege."
The State has the undoubted authority notwithstanding the formula of the
"equal protection of the laws" the power to classify the subjects of
legislation based on particular objects or to classify persons to accomplish a
particular result. The classification, however, as pointed out by Weaver,
"must not be arbitrary, artificial or evasive & there must be a reasonable,
natural & substantial distinction in the nature of the class or classes upon
which the law operates. Unless the classification is clearly unreasonable &
arbitrary Ct. would not interfere with the legislation."
This subject is dealt with by Willis on the Constitutional Law at p. 579.
Under this clause, the right of all persons to have a like access to the
Courts of the country for the protection of their persons & property is
undoubtedly recognised. No impediment should be imposed in respect of such
right except as applied to the exercise of the same rights by others
constituted similarly. The effect of the impugned provisions of the amended
Act is undoubtedly to create a distinction between assocns. within the purview
of Clause (a) of Sub-clause (2) of Section 15 & Clause (b). For no conceivable
reason the right of access to the persons aggrieved to the Cts. of the country
for the protection of their rights in the ordinary manner & under ordinary
procedure is denied. The Advisory Board can well be described as merely a
means of salving the conscience of the State, to adopt the language of Alien
on Law & Orders at p. 79.
33\. An examination of the provisions of the Amended Act undoubtedly leads to
the conclusion that the remedy provided for is ineffective to give a right of
equal opportunity to the person affected. It is not based upon any reasonable
classification & there is no reason or justification for making invidious
distinction between one kind of unlawful assocn. & another. All members of an
unlawful assocn. are not placed in the same footing; & there is no
justification for the Legislature to have selected persons forming an assocn.
within the meaning of Sub-clause (b) of Section 15 (2) for a special kind of
treatment, unlike other persons who are accused of offences either under the
Penal Code or under special laws. Nor is there any reason for not following
the ordinary procedure for trial of offences laid down in the Criminal P. C.
The legislation is not directly aimed at preventive detention in which case
the Constitution recognised an abridgment of the right. I have, therefore, no
hesitation in holding that the impugned provision of the Amended Act is wholly
inconsistent with Article 14.
34\. It must, therefore, be held that Section 16 of the unamended Act, & the
following Sections 17 & 17A to F & the provisions of the Amended Act must be
held void. Under Article 13 of the Constitution, it is void only to the extent
to which it is inconsistent with the provisions of Part III.
35\. There remains one other contention raised on behalf of the petnr. Under
Section 6 of the Amended Act the notfns. already issued under the repealed
Section 16 & not cancelled before the commencement of the Amended Act are
treated as having been issued under the now Section 15 (2) (b) of the Amended
Act, & their operation commences from the date of the commencement of the
Amended Act. The argument is that as the notfn. in question was issued under
the unamended Section 16 which is no longer in existence & which is void, the
Legislature had no power to validate notfns. issued under a void Act. I am,
however, convinced on a reading of the clear provisions of the section that
the object of the section is not to validate the notfns. but merely to treat
the paper on which the notfn. is contained as a notfn. issued under Section 15
(2) (b) & its operation commences not from its date but from the date of the
commencement of the Act. Instead of issuing a large number of notfns. once
more & presumably in order to save time, the Legislature intended to treat the
notfns. already issued as notfns. issued under the amended Act. The power is
given to the State Govt. under the first proviso to Section 6 to issue
supplementary notfn. specifying the ground & the reasons & the particulars
referred to in Section 16 (1) (a) of the Amended Act & also to give a
reasonable period for making representations. Thereafter the procedure
prescribed in the subsequent provisions in Section 16 has to be followed. I do
not, therefore, think that there is any force in the argument of the learned
counsel for the petnr.
36\. It was also urged that Section 12, Madras Maintenance of Public Order
Act, under which a search warrant was issued also offends the provisions of
Article 14 & Article 19 of the Constitution. I do not see any force in this
contention & we have no power under this writ to direct a return of the
articles seized by the police in pursuance of the search warrant.
37\. Mr. N. S. Mani, who followed Mr. Nambiar, raised a further contention
that the Act offends the guarantee of equal protection of laws under Article
14 as Section 17 (3), Criminal Law Amendment Act, makes the offence under
Section 17 (1) non-bailable notwithstanding anything contained in the Criminal
Procedure Code. Section 496, Cr. P. C., provides for the grant of bail when a
person is accused of a bailable offence; & Section 497, when a person is
accused of any non-bailable offence. Section 497 empowers the Ct. if certain
conditions exist to release a person on bail even when he is accused of a non-
bailable offence. The effect of Clause (3) of Section 17, Criminal Law
Amendment Act, it was argued is to take away the right of obtaining bail even
in suitable cases. It has been held by Panchapakesa Aiyar J. in In re
Ramalingayya, that notwithstanding the provisions in Clause (3) of Section 17,
Criminal Law Amendment Act, the Ct. has power to grant bail in suitable cases
& in fact, in that case the learned Judge granted bail. In my opinion, the
view taken by the learned Judge is correct &, therefore, there is no violation
of the guarantee of equal protection of laws on this ground.
38\. It follows, therefore, that the rule nisi must be made absolute & the
order of the State of Madras in G. O. No. 1517 dated 10-3-1950 must be quashed
& that the order of 31-3-1950 in G. O. No. 1733 must also be quashed.
Viswanatha Sastri J.
39\. The facts & the relevant statutory provisions have been stated in the
judgment of my learned brother Satyanarayana Rao J. which I have had the
advantage of reading. Were it not for the importance of the issues involved, I
should have been content to express my formal concurrence in the opinion just
now read. The case confronts us with the duty, at once difficult & delicate,
laid upon us by the Const. Ind. of adjudicating upon the validity of State
legislation when it is challenged as transgressing the limits of legislative
power granted to the State by the Constitution. A written constitution, like
ours, is fundamental law which limits by express rules the powers of the
executive & the legislature. Judicial review, itself a limitation on the
supremacy of the legislature, is a fundamental part of our constitutional
scheme & it is the duty of the Ct. to declare void an enactment which is
contrary to the Constitution. The main question before us is whether the
Criminal Law Amendment Act (XIV [14] of 1908) in its original form or as
amended by Madras Act XI [11] of 1950, squares with the constitutional
mandate.
40\. I shall deal briefly with one or two preliminary points argued before us.
In this judgment I shall refer to the Criminal Law Amendment Act (XIV [14] of
1908) as "the Act" & to the articles of the Constitution of India as
"articles"
41\. The Act was amended by Madras Act XI [11] of 1950 which came into force
on 16-8-1950. Section 16 of the Act as it originally stood expressly empowered
the Provincial Govt. by notfn. in the Official Gazette to declare any assocn.
which, in its opinion, interfered or had for its object interference with the
administration of the law or the maintenance of public order or which
constituted a danger to the public peace, an "unlawful assocn." Section 15 (2)
(b) of the Act defined an "unlawful assocn." as an assocn. declared to be
unlawful by the Provincial Govt. Section 3 of the Amending Act XI [11] of 1950
deleted Section 16 & Section 2 substituted for Section 15 (2) (b) of the Act a
clause that any assocn. declared by the State Govt. by notfn. in the official
Gazette to be unlawful on the ground that it constituted a danger to the
public peace or interfered with or had for its object interference with the
maintenance of public order or the administration of the law, was an
''unlawful assocn." The argument of Mr. Nambiar for the appct. is that the
power of the Govt. to declare an assocn. unlawful on the grounds above
specified came to an end with the repeal of Section 16 which in terms
conferred that power. The argument of the learned Advocate-General for the
respondent is that the power has been conferred impliedly by the new
definition of an "unlawful aasocn." in Section 15 (2) (b) as an assocn.
declared by the State Govt. to be such by a notfn, and that the unskilfulness
of the draftsman should not be pressed into service for nullifying the Act. In
numerous legislative enactments, both Central & Local, this familiar drafting
device of investing, under the guise of a definition clause, the executive
Govt. or some other body, with implied authority to declare or notify so as to
bring the person or thing notified within the purview of the enactments, has
been adopted. Many such instances were cited to us by the learned Advocate-
General. The power to notify is conferred, not expressly but by necessary
intendment in such cases : see Maxwell on the Interpretation of Statutes (Edn.
9), p. 361 ; Cullen v. Trimble, (1872) 7 Q. B. 416 : (41 L. J. M. C. 132). It
is a somewhat unusual procedure for an amending Act to do away with an express
power already existing & conceal it in the interstices of a definition. If the
draftsman of Madras Act XI [11] of 1950 had been asked why he had deleted the
express power conferred by Section 16 of the Act & resorted to this indirect
method, he would perhaps have answered, that he was improving the graces of
style & following time honoured legislative practice. The construction
contended for by the appct. would nullify the Act. The cardinal principle of
statutory construction is, if possible, to save & not to destroy an enactment.
Even penal enactments have to be construed in a rational way with due regard
to the aim & intention of the Legislature. A power may be conferred expressly
as well as by necessary implication. The only commonsense conclusion is to
hold that the Legislature has not nullified the Act which it avowedly sought
to improve by means of the amendment.
42\. It was boldly argued by the Advocate-General that the State had the
prerogative right to declare assocns. unlawful & imprison its members in the
interests of public order. Such an argument was never heard in England after
the Magna Carta & assertions of such prerogatives cost an English King his
head & another his throne. Such a contention is unthinkable under our
Constitution.
43\. It was next argued that in a matter so vitally affecting the freedom &
civil rights of citizens, the Legislature could not delegate to the State
Govt. the power of declaring an assocn. unlawful, which declaration involves
serious penal consequences & deprivation of property. If the Act, before or
after its amendment, was within the competence of the State Legislature--I
assume for the purpose of this part of the case that it was--the delegation is
not bad. In one sense it may be considered to be a delegation because another
body specified by the Legislature is authorised to do something which it might
have done itself. It is now too late in the day to contend that such a
delegation is objectionable. It is impracticable for the Legislature to pass a
separate enactment with reference to each assocn. declaring it to be unlawful.
The power has necessarily to be given to the executive Govt. to determine from
time to time & with reference to the activities of each particular assocn.
whether or not it should be dealt with as an unlawful assocn. Modern Govt.
would be almost impossible without some amount of delegation of authority to
executive bodies. The point is now well established by authority. Empress v.
Burah, 4 Cal. 172 : (5 I. A. 178 P. C.), Emperor v. Benorilal Sarma, (1945) 1
M.L.J. 76 : (A.I.R. (32) 1945 P.C. 48 : 46 Cr. L J. 589) per the Chief Justice
of India in A. K. Gopalan v. State of Madras, and in Dr. Khare v. The State of
Delhi, . The orders now under consideration are not invalidated solely by
reason of the fact that they were made by Govt. in the exercise of a delegated
power. But this point will have a bearing on the interpretation of Article
19(4) of the Constitution.
44\. The next contention of the appct. was that the Act, even after its
amendment, & a fortiori before its amendment, was repugnant to Article 14 &
19(1)(a)(c) & (f) of the Constitution and was, therefore, void under Article
13. The learned Advocate-General did not contend that the Act, before its
amendment, was not inconsistent with the Constitution, though he said that he
should not be understood to have made any admission on the point. It is common
ground, however, that if the Act as amended were held to be repugnant to the
Constitution, the unamended Act was clearly void. It is also admitted that
before the enactment of the Constitution, the Act was quite valid. The Act has
been on the statute book since 1908 & has undergone amendments from time to
time, Madras Act XI [11] of 1950 being the latest.
45\. The question for decision is whether, in the frame in which the Act is
cast, it can receive effect as a lawful exercise of legislative authority. In
such enquiry, it has been held by the Judicial Committee that Cts. must
ascertain "the true nature & character" of the enactment or its "pith &
substance" & consider the provisions of the Constitution by which
affirmatively legislative powers have been created & negatively such powers
have been restricted. Entry No. 1 in the State List II of Schedule VII to the
Constitution refers to "public order." Entry No. 1 in the Concurrent List
refers to "criminal law" & Entry No. 2 to "criminal procedure.' Under Article
246 of the Constitution, the State Legislature, in respect of "public order,"
& the Parliament & the State Legislature in respect of "criminal law" &
"criminal procedure," have power to legislate. Under Article 245, however,
this legislative power must be exercised subject to the provisions of the
Constitution. Article 13(1) & (2) provide that all laws inconsistent with or
in derogation of the fundamental rights of citizens declared & guaranteed in
Part III of the Constitution shall, to the extent of such inconsistency or
contravention be void. The legislature has power to create or define crimes &
prescribe the procedure for trial & the imposition of penalties in respect of
such offences, without transgressing the limits of Part III of the
Constitution. When a power is conferred to legislate on a particular topic it
is important in determining the scope of the power to regard what is
ordinarily treated in legislative practice & particularly the legislative
practice in India as comprised in that subject. The impugned Act deals with
"public order" which has always been regarded in Indian legislation as
comprising public safety & the orderly administration of law. It also deals
with criminal law & procedure. The only question is whether it offends Part
III of the Constitution.
46\. In this connection many American decisions & text books have been cited
to us by learned counsel on both sides. These decisions afford valuable
guidance though they have only a persuasive value here. The generality &
brevity of the American Constitution provided more starting points for
judicial exposition & the Constitution now consists mostly of case-law. The
outlook of the S. C. has varied with changes in time & the personnel of the
Ct. The dissents of one generation, notably the classic dissents of Justice
Holmes, became the law of the next generation of Judges. But always the
Constitution was regarded as a superior & paramount law controlling &
annulling legislative acts repugnant to it. Very early in the history of the
American Republic, the power & duty of the Cfc. to interpret the law enacted
by the legislature was assumed to carry with it the power to veto legislation
as being unconstitutional. Notwithstanding the separation of powers & the
establishment of three separate & independent agencies of Govt. functionally
differentiated from one another, the supremacy of the judiciary became the
established rule of the American Constitution. By reason of the assumption of
this wide power, the S. C. not only adjudicated upon actual disputes but also
controlled national policies. It had to move with the current of public
opinion of the time. It asserted the federal or national power under Marshall
C. J. restored to the States some of their lost power under Taney C. J. vetoed
regulatory, social & economic legislation of the States as a violation of the
"due process" clause, later upheld it as a proper exercise of the "police
power", sterilised the Federal Govt.'s anti-trust & anti-cartel legislation &
later gave life to it.
47\. With reference to civil rights or liberties the American decisions have
been more consistent, though even here, their outlook or mode of approach has
not been uniform. The American Constitution was framed by men whose ancestors
had left their homes to escape religious & political tyranny & whose tradition
had been to regard the State as the enemy of civil liberty. Their primary
concern was for safeguarding the life, liberty & property of individual
citizens. The extent to which Govt. was viewed as the enemy of liberty would
be apparent from the very first section of the Bill of Rights :
"Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion or
prohibiting the free exercise thereof; of abridging the freedom of speech or
of the press; or the right of the people peaceably to assemble, & to petn. the
Govt. for a redress of their grievances."
This tendency was revealed in the early decisions of the S. C. also. But times
have changed & judicial opinion in America has not remained static. New
concepts of civil liberty ensuring the safety of the State & the protection of
citizens not against the Govt. but by the Govt. have found expression in
recent times. What might have been thought as an essential & inviolable right
of the citizen two or three generations ago, is not asserted or maintained as
such in America today.
48\. I shall have to say something later in the course of this judgment with
reference to the growth of the power of judicial review of legislative
decisions in America. In approaching the question before us, we have to
remember that the Const. Ind. was framed with full knowledge of the working of
many Federal & Republican Constitutions in other countries; that it was
intended to fashion a Constitution suited to the particular needs & conditions
of this country; & that it descends into particulars & details unlike the
Constitution of America. Its object, to quote the preamble, was to secure to
all citizens "justice, social, economic & political; liberty of thought,
expression, belief, faith & worship; equality of status & opportunity" & to
promote "fraternity, assuring the dignity of the individual & the unity of the
Nation." These high purposes were intended to be fulfilled under the
protection & authority of a stable & well ordered democratic State. I humbly
venture to think that where the law of the Constitution as expounded by
learned American Judges of the S. C. is left in a state of conflict, doubt or
uncertainty with varying statements of the law by different Judges, it is open
to us to choose & accept that judicial opinion which, subject to the guidance
of the S. C., we consider, is in consonance with the principles of our
Constitution, & suited also to the needs & conditions of our country. This
seeming digression has been necessitated by the course taken by the arguments
before us.
49\. Article 14 of the Constitution provides that the State shall not deny to
any person equality before the law or the equal protection of the laws." The
impugned Act is said to be a violation of this provision. The first part of
Article 14 is of English & Irish origin & the latter part is a verbatim
adoption of a phrase found in the 14th amendment of the American Constitution.
The argument was presented in diverse forms. Reliance was placed on Dicey's
Laws of the Constitution Edn. 9 at pp. 202-203 where one aspect of the
doctrine of "the rule of law" which, according to the author, forms a
fundamental principle of the English Constitution, was thus stated :
"It means, again, equality before the law or the equal subjection of all
classes to the ordinary law of the land administered by the ordinary Cts."
Founding himself on this passage, Mr. Nambiar argues that the impugned Act
enacts a highly discriminatory law, empowering the executive Govt. of the day
to select groups or assocns. of persons whose policies & activities the Govt.
may not approve, & to subject them to severe penalties in the shape of
imprisonment & loss of property, without a trial in the ordinary Cts.
according to the ordinary law of criminal procedure. Whatever may be the
validity of this contention otherwise, it is in my opinion, a misapplication
of Dicey's doctrine. What the author meant in the passage cited was that if a
public officer committed a tort or a crime in England, he would be liable for
it in the ordinary civil & criminal Cts. of the land, unlike in France where
administrative tribunals determined the dispute. This thesis was elaborated in
a whole chapter & conclusions favourable to the English legal system were
drawn by Dicey. The passage referring to "equality before the law" had no
reference & could not have had any reference, in view of the absolute
legislative supremacy of parliament, to any legislative enactment or to that
part of the law which gives powers to & imposes duties upon public
authorities. This is made clear by a passage in Dicey following the one
already cited :
"The 'rule of law' in this sense excludes the idea of any exemption of
officials or others from the duty of obedience to the law which governs other
citizens or from the jurisdiction of the ordinary tribunals; there can be with
us nothing corresponding to the administrative law (droit administratif) or
the administrative tribunals (tribunaux administratifs) of France."
The argument went further. It was said that Sections 120-A & 120-B & Sections
141 to 151, Penal Code, dealt with assocns. of people whose object & purpose
were as heinous, if not more, & that in such cases, the accused had a right to
be tried in accordance with the ordinary laws of criminal procedure with a
right to engage counsel, cross-examine witnesses, lead rebutting evidence &
address arguments in open Ct. These rights were denied to persons brought
under the impugned Act which enabled the Govt. to make an assocn. unlawful by
its mere declaration. There was here a denial of equality before the law & of
equal protection of the laws. So ran the argument. Reliance was placed on the
following decisions : Barbier v. Connelly, (1885) 113 U. S. 27, Yick Wo v.
Hopkins, (1886) 118 U.S. 356 & Smyth v. Ames, (1898) 169 U. S. 466 for the
proposition that "equal protection of the laws" necessarily involved & implied
(1) exclusion of arbitrariness; (2) access to Cts. & (3) freedom from
deprivation of personal liberty or property except as the result of a
conviction by the ordinary Cts. of the land.
50\. The impugned Act is aimed at associations whose activities constitute, in
the opinion of the Govt., a danger to the public peace or an interference with
the maintenance of public order or to the administration of the law. In this
respect it does not differentiate between associations according to their
political, economic or social doctrines & objectives. It lays down only one
test for all groups or associations before they are declared illegal. The
grounds on which alone the Govt. is empowered to declare associations unlawful
are laid down by the Act. They are grounds which might apply to all
associations, political, religious, economic or academic, if their real
activities bring them within the mischief of the Act. That united & joint
action involves greater danger to public peace & public order than the
utterances & acts of individuals must be conceded. The exercise of the
statutory power of the Govt. is hedged in with conditions & limitations which
apply in the cases of all associations. The State has not, in dealing with its
citizens by legislation, arbitrarily singled out a class of citizens &
subjected that class to oppression, discrimination or disability. The impugned
Act strikes down all groups or associations having the object or activity
prohibited by the Act & menacing the public peace. The possibility of an abuse
of governmental power may be relevant to another portion of the argument which
I shall consider later, but ex facie the impugned Act does not discriminate
between one association & another but applies a common test to all
associations. "Equality before the law'' is not, in my opinion, violated by
the impugned Act.
51\. The arguments based on the expression "equal protection of the laws" like
the American decisions interpreting it mix up the two concepts of "equal
protection of the laws" & "due process of law" both of which find a place in
one sentence in Section 1 of the 14th amendment :
"No State shall make or enforce any law which shall abridge the privileges or
immunities of citizens of the United States; nor shall any State deprive any
person of life, liberty or property without due process of law; nor deny to
any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of laws."
Our Constitution has carefully avoided the use of the expression "due process
of law" which has been a terror to legislative bodies & a paradise for Cts. &
lawyers in America. The guarantees of "due process of law" & "equal protection
of the laws" are secured to all persons, whether American citizens or not. The
two guarantees differ in theory, "Equal protection of the laws" is a guarantee
against discriminatory legislation while "due process of law" is a guarantee
that all legislation shall conform to certain well-established standards or
principles. But these rights are in most cases treated together in considering
the constitutional validity of legislative enactments & only occasionally
differentiated. "In not a few cases the Cts. have referred to both
prohibitions leaving it uncertain which prohibition was deemed the most
pertinent & potent in the premises"--Willoughby's Constitution Law, Vol. III,
p. 1929. The possible distinction is indicated in Truax v. Corrigan, 257 U. S.
312 where Taft C. J. said :
"It may be that they (the two prohibitions) overlap that a violation of one
may involve at times the violation of the other, but the spheres of protection
they offer are not conterminous. . . . The due process clause ... of course
tends to secure equality of law in the sense that it makes a required minimum
of protection for everyone's right of life, liberty & property, which the
Congress or the Legislature may not withhold. Our whole system of law is
predicated on the general fundamental principle of equality of application of
the law .... The guarantee was aimed at undue favour & individual or class
privilege, on the one hand & at hostile discrimination or the oppression of
inequality on the other. It sought an equality of treatment of all persons,
even though all enjoyed the protection of due process."
In Barbier v. Connolly, 113 U. S. 27, relied upon by Mr. Nambiar the S. C
expanded the meaning of "equal protection of laws" by saying that "not only
that there should be no arbitrary deprivation of life or liberty or arbitrary
spoliation of property but that equal protection and security should be given
to all under like circumstances in the enjoyment of their personal and civil
rights; that all persona should be equally entitled to pursue their happiness
& acquire & enjoy property; that they should have like access to the Cts. of
the country for the protection of their persons & property, the prevention &
redress of wrongs & the enforcement of contracts; that no impediment should be
interposed to the pursuits by any one except as applied to the same pursuits
by others under like circumstances; that no greater burdens should be laid
upon one than are laid upon others in the same calling & condition, & that in
the administration of criminal justice no different or higher punishment
should be imposed upon one than such as is prescribed to all for like
offences."
It is not right, in my opinion, to treat these words as if they were part of
the Constitution itself or as a precise definition. Crimes against society are
treated differently from crimes against individuals, & crimes against property
from crimes against person. The law of criminal procedure provides different
modes of trial for different offences. Sentences varying in their severity are
imposed for the same offence according to the circumstances of the crime & the
condition of the accused. Relations between debtor & creditor, employer &
workman, & landholder & tenant, are not regulated by the laissez faire theory
or by the principle of freedom of contracts & are even taken out of the
jurisdiction of Cts. The bulk of modern social & economic legislation applies
not to all citizens generally but only to special classes considered by the
public opinion of the day as deserving of special protection. The prohibition
against the denial of equal protection of the laws does not, therefore,
require that the law should have an equality of operation on persons as such,
but no persons according to their relation. Distinguishing, selecting &
classifying objects of legislation within a wide range of discretion &
according to the needs & circumstances of society from time to time, are both
necessary & permissible, provided the discretion is based on some reasonable
or intelligible grounds. The power of the State to prescribe regulations for
promoting the health, morals. & education, of the people, the economic &
industrial development of the country, & for preserving peace & order, called
the "police power" in America, involves some kind of selection, classification
& special treatment. Reasonable classifications made & restrictions imposed by
law do not amount to a denial of equal protection. Though the classification
must have relation to the purpose of the Legislature, logical appropriateness
of the inclusion or exclusion of objects or persons is not required & the
Legislature must have great freedom of discretion in this respect. A
classification having some reasonable basis does not offend the rule of "equal
protection of the laws" merely because it is not made with mathematical,
logical or scientific accuracy or because practice & actual working it results
in some inequality. Gulf C. & S. F. Ry. Co. v. Ellis, 165 U. S. 150 at p. 155,
Health Mileigan Manufacturing Co. v. Worst, 207 U. S. 338. All that can be
said is that the classification must not be an arbitrary, capricious or
colourable selection which no reasonable man would make but must rest upon
some difference which bears a reasonable & just relation to the act in respect
of which the classification is made. The classification, as stated in one of
the books quoted to us (Weaver on Constitutional law p. 397) "must not be
arbitrary, artificial or evasive." There must be a reasonable distinction in
the nature of the class or classes on which the law operates. He who assails
the legitimacy of the classification must establish beyond doubt that it does
not rest on any reasonable basis, the presumption being that it does. Gulf C.
& S. F. Ry. Co. v. Ellis, 165 U. S. 150 at p. 155, Coonolly v. Union Sewer
Pipe Co., (1902) 184 U. S. 540, Lindlsye v. National Carbonic Gas Co., (1911)
220 U. S. 61 at p. 78. The 14th Amendment is not a "pedagogic requirement of
the impracticable" said Holmes J. Legislation may be & in practice is often
limited as to objects or territory, the only requisite being that all persons
subject to it are treated alike under like circumstances "both in the
privileges conferred & the liabilities imposed". Hayes v. Missouri, 120 U S.
68 ; Giles v. Teasley, (1904) 193 U. S. 146. The degrees of evil, detriment of
injury to the State or to the citizens arising from unsocial conduct might
justify a classification. The classification of crimes proceeds on this basis
& the only requisite is that the like should be treated alike. It has been
pointed out in America that in considering whether a State has violated the
rule as to equal protection of laws, paraphrased as 'the protection of equal
laws", the Ct. "is free to go behind the face of the law & inquire into the
fairness of its actual working & enforcement" Yick Wo v. Hopkins, 118 U. S.
356; Reagan v. Farmers Loan & Trust Co., (1894) 154 U. S. 362.
52\. To apply these principles to the impugned Act, it deals with a type of
association having objects & activities which threaten public peace & the
maintenance of public safety or Order & it was the object of the Legislature
to penalise all such associations in public interests. There is no
discrimination between persons or groups of persons according to their
political, social or religious affiliations. The classification cannot be said
to be arbitrary, irrational or unreasonable. Within reasonable limits it is
open to the Legislature to determine by what process & in what forum penalties
may be imposed for infraction of the penal law. Neither a change of the
ordinary venue nor the constitution of a special tribunal for the trial of a
particular type of offences, irrespective of the persons or the associations
concerned, can, by itself, be said to be a violation of the rule of "equal
protection of the laws". The procedure enacted by law must, however, give
reasonable notice & a fair opportunity to be heard before a decision is given
or a penalty is imposed. Cincinanati Street Ry. Co. v. Charles B. Snell,
(1904) 193 U. S. 30. This last qualification lies in the penumbra of the "due
process" rule & will be dealt with latter when I discuss the reasonableness"
of the impugned Act, Except for this, reservation, the impugned Act does not
offend the principle of "equal protection of laws".
53\. The further question is whether the impugned Act violates Article 19 of
the Constitution. The fundamental rights of citizens declared in Article 19 of
our Constitution are referred to in the 14th Amendment as "the right to life,
liberty & property". Our Constitution expands the concept & also limits its
scope. The doctrine of "natural rights" extolled in Thomas Jefferson's
Declaration of American Independence & expounded by John Locke, permeated the
minds of the framers of the American Constitution & influenced its judicial
exposition in the early days. The conception of natural rights, an universal
sense of equality, & the possession by individual citizens of certain inherent
& inalienable rights & the need for their protection against governmental
encroachment found expression in the "due process" clause of the 5th & 14th
Amendments & the "equal protection of the laws" in the 14th Amendment. The
total number of these rights, their substance & content & the limitations on
their exercise were not precisely formulated, but they were all compendiously
described as "civil rights". They were safeguarded & guaranteed to the citizen
by the American Bill of Bights & the 14th Amendment & by the Judicial
interpretation of the clauses relating to the "due process" & "equal
protection of the laws." In our Constitution these rights & the limitations on
their exercise are defined in chap. III. We are here cencerned with Article 19
whose object & scope were thus explained by the learned Chief Justice of the
S. C in A. K. Gopalan v. State of Madras, :
"It is the first Article under the caption "rights to Freedom". It gives the
rights mentioned in 19 (1) (a) to (g) to all citizens of India. These rights
read by themselves & apart from The controls found in Clauses (2) to (6) of
the same Article, specify the different general rights which a free citizen in
a democratic country ordinarily has. Having specified those rights, each of
them is considered separately from the point of view of a similar right in the
o her citizens, & also after taking into consideration the principle that
individual liberty must give way, to the extent it is necessary when the good
or safety or the people generally is concerned ...... The only concept appears
to be that the specified rights of free citizen are thus controlled by what
the framers of the Constitution thought were necessary restrictions in the
interest of the rest of the citizens."
The Constitution, however, insists that the Legislature has no powers to
abrogate the rights defined & declared in Article 19(1) but gives them the
power in Article 19(3) to (6) to impose "reasonable restrictions" on the
exercise of those rights.
54\. The following questions immediately present themselves & call for an
answer. Whose "reasonableness" is to prevail in the matter of imposing:
restrictions on the exercise of fundamental rights, whether of the Legislature
or of the Cts. ? What are the standards by which reasonableness has to be
measured? If the Ct. is to be the Judge of reasonableness, are there any, & if
so, what limits to the power of judicial review ? To some extent they were
answered by Das J. of the S. C. in A. K. Gopalan v. State of Madras, :
"Whether any law has in fact transgressed these limitations is to be
ascertained by the Ct. & if, in its view, the restrictions imposed by the law
are greater than what is permitted by Clauses (2) to (6) of Article 19,
whichever is applicable, the Ct. will declare the same to be unconstitutional
&, therefore, void under Article 18. Here again there is scope for the
application of the "intellectual yardstick" of the Ct. If, however, the Ct.
finds, on scrutiny, that the law has not overstepped the constitutional
limitations, the Ct. will have to uphold the law, whether in likes or not."
55\. Mr. Nambiar boldly argues that the power of this Ct. to invalidate
legislation contravening Article 19 was of greater amplitude than that
possessed by the S. C. of America & that we were at liberty to examine any
legislative act on its own merits & upset it if, in our opinion, it imposed
unreasonable restrictions on the exercise of fundamental rights. One would
wish one had to write on a clean state & the books held no authority on the
subject. Not only are there decisions, but a mass of commentary on what the
cases really come to. Reconciliation of the decisions or dicta is beyond my
capacity & I must confess I have only a partial knowledge of American case-
law. Before I embark on a consideration of American precedents on this topic,
I have to make a preliminary observation.
56\. The American Constitution was based on the theory of division of powers &
expressly vested the judicial power of the State in the S. C. as a separate &
distinct organ of Govt. A provision vesting the judicial power of the State in
Cts. is not found in our Constitution; but that does not, in my opinion,
affect the power of the Cts. from the highest to the lowest to declare
legislation unconstitutional if it is hit at by Article 13 of the
Constitution. The prerogative writs, however, can be issued only by the H.
Cts. & the S. C. of India This feature of the American Constitution enabled
the Judges of the S. C. to test the propriety of impugned legislation by their
own notions of what was fair & reasonable in the circumstances. Legislative
decisions were thus brought under the control of the S. C. & subjected to
judicial correction. I shall show presently that judicial opinion has not been
uniform as to the limits of judicial review in America. Under the "due
process" clause of the 14th Amendment, the S. C. assumed power to invalidate
all legislation which appeared unreasonable to the majority of the Judges for
the time being. Under our Constitution, in respect of matters not falling
within chap. III, the appropriate Legislatures have plenary power to
legislate; and in respect of rights declared & guaranteed by chap. III their
power is restricted, as for instance, by Clauses (2) to (6) of Article 19. Our
Constitution too has recognised that it is made for people whose opinions
might differ fundamentally that there are occasions in which the temptations
may be severe to abridge the fund-mental rights of citizens & that such an
abridgment might be attempted by a party having a temporary majority in the
Legislatures. Such an abridgment is often made in a concealed form, less open
to scrutiny, & much more convenient, by giving power to the Govt. for
declaring by notfn. that a particular thing is authorised or prohibited. The
Constitution has therefore provided for judicial review of the reasonableness
of the restrictions imposed by legislation on the exercise of the citizens'
fundamental rights. This Ct. is expressly empowered by Article 226 of the
Constitution to protect those fundamental rights by appropriate legal
processes against illegal or unauthorised encroachment by the Legislature.
This power is not permissive but its exercise is obligatory on this Ct.
Compare Julius v. Lord Bishop of Oxford, (1880) 5 A. C. 214 : (49 L.J. Q. B.
577). This Ct. has therefore a duty to exercise a jealous scrutiny in
considering any invasion of the liberty or freedom of citizens by the exercise
of governmental power, executive or legislative. I use the words "liberty" &
"freedom" in the comprehensive sense in which they are dealt with in chap.
III.
57\. Freedom of assembly & freedom of association & discussion of matters of
public interest are indispensable to the effective use of the processes of
popular Govt. These rights are guaranteed to citizens by Article 19(1) read
with Article 13 of the Constitution. The liberty that is thus protected is
liberty in a community or society organised under the Constitution The
guarantees are not absolute & they do not protect unsocial actions subversive
of the community itself. These privileges are not "absolutes" bat are subject
under Article 19(3) to (6) of the Constitution to reasonable restrictions
imposed by the State to ensure the existence of an orderly society. Under
Article 19, Clauses (3) to (6) of the Constitution the Ct. has to take the
role of a reasonable man & decide what are just & proper restrictions on the
exercise of the fundamental rights dealt with in Article 19(1)(b) to (g). The
hypothetical reasonable man is personified in the Ct. to which is entrusted
the task of deciding whether the restrictions imposed by law are reasonable,
after giving due weight to all relevant considerations. An undefined standard
of reasonableness may sometimes be difficult to apply but the task is one
which Judges have had to perform from time immemorial. Oar Constitution
designedly leaves it to the Ct. to pronounce upon the justice & fairness, in
the broader sense, of legislation imposing restrictions on the exercise of
fundamental rights of citizens enumerated in Article 19(1)(b) to (f). Mr.
Nambiar invited us to consider & decide whether there is any factual
justification for the impugned Act remaining on the Statute book. He referred
to the decisions in Whitney v. California, 274 U. S. 357 & Terminiello v.
Chicago, 337 U. S. 1. This opens up the controversy encircling the "due
process" clause of the 14th Amendment.
58\. Till about the year 1890, judicial review was restricted to controlling
the "competency of the Legislature to deal with certain subjects & not the way
in which the Legislature dealt with them," Munn v. Illinois (1876) 94 U. S.
113, Chicago Milwaukee & St. Paul Ry. Co. v. State Minnscata, (1890) 134 U. S.
418. The evolutionary growth of the judicial power resulted in the S. C.
establishing its right to take cognizance of the reasonableness of impugned
legislation & to adjudicate upon its constitutionality. The limit to the power
of for that of the Legislature came to be regarded as their own the Judges to
substitute their own judgment sense of "self-restraint". The Ct. went on to
hold that, "a legislative declaration or finding is necessarily subject to
independent judicial review upon the facts & the law by Cts. of competent
jurisdiction to the end that the constitution as the supreme law of the laud
may be maintained. . . . . The principle applies whether rights of persons or
of property are protected by constitutional limitations," Per Hughes C. J. in
St. Joseph Stockyard Co. v. U.S. (1936) 298 U. S. 38.
Thus the "due process" clause became an irresistable weapon of judicial attack
on legislative decisions. The expression "due process," a term of elusive
import, was not defined by the Constitution. Originally it was understood to
mean the modes of procedure known to the English common law especially in
connection with the trial of cases, civil & criminal, before Cts. Later on it
was construed to mean "reasonable law & procedure", that is to say, reasonable
in the view of the Judges of the S. C. As a consequence of this extended
meaning given to "due process" as the equivalent of reasonable law, judicial
review ceased to have any defined limits. The Ct. assumed power to come to its
own independent judgment, whether the end or objective of the Legislature was
legitimate & proper & whether the enacted law was a fair & reasonable method
of accomplishing that objective. "Unreasonableness" or "unfairness" shed its
old technical legal meaning & became an ethical test. The Ct. claimed the
right to decide whether the evils assumed or asserted by the Legislature did
in fact exist, whether they warranted the remedy prescribed whether the
enacted law was calculated to bring about the desired result whether the end
itself was constitutional & whether the procedure was fair & just. Even with
reference to legislation trenching upon the property rights of citizens &
their freedom of contract, the Ct. sat in judgment over the Legislature in the
manner of an appellate Ct.
59\. But powerful protests against these views were often heard. In his famous
dissent in Baldwin v. Missouri, 281 U. S. 586, Holmes J., disapproved of the
crusade waged by the S. C. against State legislation. He said ;
"I have not yet adequately expressed the more than anxiety that I feel at the
ever increasing scope given to the 14th Amendment in cutting down what I
believe to be the constitutional rights of States. As the decisions now stand.
I see hardly any limit but the sky to the invalidating of those rights if they
happen to strike a majority of this Ct. as for any reason, unreasonable. I
cannot believe that the Amendment was intended to give up carte blanche to
embody our economi or moral beliefs in its prohibitions."
These observations were made with reference to the legislative decisions in
the sphere of economic activities. Legislation regulating the hours of labour,
controlling the use of property securing fair wages for workmen, & controlling
commerce & industry in the interests of public welfare belong to this type. In
Missouri Kansas & Texas Ry. Co. v. Clay May, (1904) 194 U. S. 267 Holmes J.
had said :
"It must be remembered that Legislatures are the ultimate guardians of the
liberty & welfare of the peoples in quite as great a degree as the Ct."
Frankfurter J. referred to this statement as going "to the very essence of our
constitutional system & the democratic conception of our society". He added
the weight of his own observations :
"The Constitution does not give us greater veto power when dealing with one
phase of "liberty" than with another.... In neither situation is our function
comparable to that of a Legislature or are we free to act as though we were a
super-Legislature. Judicial self-restraint is equally necessary whenever an
exercise of political or legislative power is challenged . . . . In no
instance is the Ct. the primary protector of the particular liberty that is
invoked." West Virginia Board of Education v. Barnette, (1943) 319 U.S. 624.
60\. Where personal rights & liberties are concerned a wider coverage of
judicial review had been accorded than in the case of the property rights
including freedom of contracts. There is a heirarchy of Constitutional values
in which rights of personal liberty, freedom of speech, assembly & association
are accorded the first place rights of property being accorded a lower
position. Different standards have been laid down in American cases for
testing the exercise of legislative power in regard to rights of property &
civil liberties such as freedom of speech & free assembly. H. P. Hood & Sons
v. U. S., 307 U. S. 588, Yakub v. U. S., 321 U. S. 414. The Holmes doctrine of
"legislative supremacy & judicial self-limitation" has not been accepted
without qualification. Where fundamental rights of free speech & assembly are
alleged to have been invaded, it has been recognised that a person charged
with infringement of law can join issue on the question whether there did
exist "a clear & present danger" to justify the law as enacted & whether the
evil apprehended was so substantial as to justify the stringent restrictions
imposed by the Legislature. In a dissenting judgment Holmes J. himself said :
"If there is any principle of the Constitution that more imperatively calls
for attachment than any other, it is the principle of free thought--not free
thought for those who agree with us but freedom for the thought that we hate.
U. S. v. Schwimmer, 279 U.S. 644 at pp. 654-655."
Again in his famous judgment in Jacob Abrams v. United States, (1919) 250 U.
S. 616 at pp. 627-8 he said :
"But when men have realised that time has upset many fighting faiths, they may
have come to believe the very foundations of their own conduct that the
ultimate good desired is better reached by free trade in ideas--that the best
teat of truth is the power of the thought to get itself accepted in the
competition of the market and that truth is the only ground upon which their
wishes safely can be carried out."
When civil liberties came up for consideration, the majority of Judges were of
the view that the primacy of these rights required that there should be no
presumption of the validity of legislation, which, ex facie appeared to
infringe these guarantees, Stone J. speaking for the majority said :
"When confronted with legislation which stifles the freedom of helpless
minorities, the S. C. should not hesitate to assume the role of protector,
even if in doing so, it supplants the legislative judgment with its own
conception of what is appropriate."
Frankfurter J., however, did not accept this dual approach to the "due
process" clause & held that in all oases where the police power of the States
is questioned, the only issue was "whether Legislatures could, in reason, have
enacted such a law". In his view, the principles of judicial review must be
consistently applied, & whether it was a question of civil liberties or a
question of economic regulation, the rule of the Ct. was limited to enquiring
whether there was reasonable justification for the legislative judgment.
61\. Mr. Nambiar argued that there was no need or justification for a
permanent & peace time legislation of a drastic character like the impugned
Act, & on this ground it should be held to be unreasonable. He referred to the
"clear & present danger" or the "grave & imminent danger" test adopted in
American decisions like Whitney v. California, 274 U. S. 357, Thomas v.
Collins, 323 U. S. 516, & West Virginia State Board of Education v. Barnette,
319 U. S. 624 in order to invalidate the impugned Act. The phrase in question
was freely used by Holmes J., in assessing the propriety of legislation
abridging fundamental rights during a period when the existence or state
itself was imperilled. The expression is felicitous & attractive, but it
cannot be applied as a touchstone of legislative propriety. It was a working
principle that the 'substantive evil must be extremely serious & the degree of
imminence extremely high" before freedom of speech, assembly & association
could be interfered with by legislation. It is not a legal doctrine or formula
which can be applied to all cases. The necessity for legislation is a question
of fact depending on the circumstances attending the legislation. I prefer to
act on the following principles :
"If any state of facts reasonably can be conceived that would sustain the
legislation, the existence of that state of facts at the time the law was
enacted must be assumed". Lindlsye v. National Carbonic Gas Co., (1911) 220 U.
S. 61 at p. 78; Plessy v. Fer-guson, 163 U. S. 537."
Even in America a distinction has been drawn between issues of fact & issues
of law, the former being pre-eminently a matter for legislative decision.
Judicial review must, in my opinion, proceed on the footing that the facts
assumed or found by the Legislature do exist. The Ct. cannot determine when a
public danger is near or clear & when it is remote or naucent. (sic). Nor can
the Ct. weigh in nice scales the amount of public danger. I, there, fore
approach the impugned Act on the assumption that there was need & perhaps
grave need, for such legislation. This Ct. which is supposed to be blind &
deaf for many purpose, cannot possibly assess the public need for a particular
type of legislation. Nor is it in a position to assume responsibility for the
maintenance of public peace & order throughout the State. If a State is
bludgeoned by serious threats, it is not for the Ct. be say "Wait. No hurry".
Representatives elected by the people to make laws must determine policies
which ought to govern people, the Ct.'s function to consider the
reasonableness of the restrictions imposed & to interpret the laws I am unable
be hold that there is no factual justification for the impugned Act.
62\. Even so, we have to consider whether the restrictions on the exercise of
fundamental rights imposed by the impugned Act are reasonable. In so doing we
have to take into account substantive as well as procedural rights that are
alleged to have been infringed for both these matters are open to judicial
review under Article 19(3) to (6) of our Constitution; N. B. Khare v. State of
New Delhi, . The "reasonableness" has to be judged both from the point of view
of the individual & the public standard of reasonableness will vary according
as it occurs in a legislative enactment conceived in the interests of the
general public or in a bye-law framed by a local or municipal body. It need
hardly be said that the Ct. has a wider latitude of construction in the former
case than in the latter.
63\. First of all, we have to consider whether the end sought to be achieved
by the legislation is legitimate & authorised by the constitution. There must
be a proper legislative purpose If the Legislature passed a law ostensibly in
the interests of public safety but intended & applied for suppression of
freedom of assembly & association for citizens belonging to a hostile
political group, then the legislation is colourable & will have be be
invalidated as being a cloak for illegitimate ends & as a violation of
fundamental rights. That is not the case here. The essence of the offence
denounced by the impugned Act is the combining with others in an association
for the accomplishment of ends injurious to public order & the due
administration of law, without which even the guarantees of civil rights will
become farcical. It partakes of the nature of criminal conspiracy. The
maintenance of public peace & public order has from time immemorial, been one
of the primary duties which State has to perform in the interests of the
public. Hence, it is that "public order" is placed as the first item in the
State List. 2 in Schedule VII of the Constitution. The end, object or purpose
of the impugned Act is the preservation of public peace & public order &
therefore legitimate.
64\. Secondly, we have to consider whether the impugned Act has a reasonable
relation to a proper legislative purpose. The fundamental right with which we
are primarily concerned in this case is the right to freedom of association
dealt with in Article 19(1)(c) & Article 19(4). It is said that the rights
recognised in Article 19(1)(a) & (f) are also violated & I shall deal with
this contention later on. Govt. by public opinion involves the right to create
& organise opinion with a view to influence the conduct of Govt. or to bring
about a change in Govt. Freedom to assemble & associate is necessary for the
propagation of ideas & for combating social, economic & political evils &
injustices. Hence Article 19(1)(c) withdraws the right to freedom of
association from the vicissitudes of political controversy places it beyond
the reach of "fleeting" legislative majorities & guarantees the right through
Cts. But freedom to combine in order to cause injury or danger to other
citizens or to disturb the public peace & order is not guaranteed by the
Constitution. There is always the danger of free association being used not
for creating public opinion or for turning out the Govt. by lawful means, but
to coerce & intimidate & by violence those who entertain different views.
Hence Article 19(4) subjects this right of free association to restrictions in
the interests of public order or morality. But the restrictions must have a
reasonable relation to the interests of public order of morality. Fairness of
moans must be united with fairness of the end in such a way that from both
points of view the Ct. must be able to say that the restriction is reasonable.
Nebbia v. New York, 291 U. S. 502 at p. 537.
65\. The critical question is whether the particular limitations &
restrictions on personal liberty imposed by the impugned Act have a reasonable
relation to the maintenance of public order which is the purpose of the Act.
James v. Commonwealth of Australia (No. 2), (1936) A. C. 578 at p. 613 : (105
L. J. P. C. 115); Minersville School District v. Gobitis, 310 U. S. 586, Jones
v. Opelika, 316 U. S. 584; West Virginia Board of Education v. Burvette, 319
U. S. 624. The true character, object & effect of the legislation can only, as
has been said, be ascertained from an examination of the Act in its entirety.
The safety or security of the State is not the end or purpose of the
legislation. Its purpose is much more restricted, namely, the maintenance of
public order inside the State of Madras. See Romesh Thappar v. State of
Madras, . It is not made in the exercise of the "war power" or the "defence
power" of the State under Entry No. 1 of the Union List 1, Schedule VII At the
same time the grant of a legislative power with respect to public order must
carry with it whatever is necessary to give effect to the power itself. It may
be that in the interests of public order certain associations whose activities
are prejudicial thereto, have to be put out of action for a time or from time
to time. The wisdom of the legislative act or the policy which called it forth
cannot be canvassed by the Ct. In my opinion, however, the impugned Act has
transgressed these permissible limits. The provisions relating to the
forfeiture of moveable properties, monies securities & bank credits of a
prescribed association have little connection with the maintenance of public
order. It is not merely a precautionary detention but a forfeiture to the
state not merely of the properties of the association declared unlawful but of
other person's properties as well, which, in the opinion of the Govt. are
intended to be used for the purposes of the association. Even creditors have
no right to proceed against the properties forfeited to the State. It is not
so much the declaration by Govt. that an association is unlawful as the direct
& immediate consequences that might attend the declaration, that are serious &
far reaching, reaching beyond the confines of "public order." Such extreme
penalties imposed in order that they may have not only a deterrent but a
terrorising effect would make the legislation unreasonable.
66\. A declaration by the Govt. upheld by an Advisory Board, might remain
operative & effective, for as long a time as the Govt. might think fit. Bodies
corporate & incorporate might be put out of existence altogether & divested of
their rights & their properties on a declaration by the executive. The
declaration may be based only on the opinions or suspicions of the Govt., on
the tendencies & presumed opinions of the members of the prescribed
association. It is not required to be based on overt acts or plain omissions
demonstrable in a Ct. of law. Not only in England bub in Australia too where
there is a written constitution, it has recently been held that a state of war
justified many inroads on personal freedom & restriction on the use of
property of an abnormal & temporary nature, which would not be considered
legitimate in time of peace Liversidge v. Sir John Andersen, (1942) A. C. 206
: (110 L. J. K. B. 724), Adelaid Co. of Johovah's Witnesses Incorporated v.
Commonwealth, 67 Comm. L. R. 116. The rights of freedom of speech, assembly &
association are the rights of individual citizens under Article 19(1) of the
Constitution & not of artificial persons such as corporations or associations,
though the right to hold property might be a right of artificial persons as
well. The law as regards preventive detention effectively, though indirectly
restrains the exercise of these rights by the citizen who is detained. The
wide legislative powers conferred on Parliament under Article 22 of the
Constitution & the power conferred by Entry No. 3 in the Concurrent List (NO.
III Schedule VII) with reference to preventive detention in the interests of
public order & the security of the State operate on natural persons. The
Preventive Detention Act (IV [4] of 1950) passed by Parliament has been
declared to be validly enacted by the S. C. in A. K. Gopalan v. The State of
Madras, . It is in this context that the provisions of the impugned Act must
be considered. The State Legislature has purported to extend the provisions of
the Preventive Detention legislation which applies to individual citizens to
associations, & to enlarge the scope of that legislation so as to include
forfeiture of property. Having regard to the limited legislative purpose & the
limited extent of the legislative power conferred on the State, I find it
difficult to uphold the provisions of the impugned Act relating to forfeiture
of property as having a reasonable relation to the end in view, viz., the
maintenance of public order.
67\. Thirdly & lastly, the means adopted by the Legislature to secure its
object must not be arbitrary, oppressive or unjust. It is a question of what
has been called procedural "due process," a term which requires compliance
with certain forms accepted & universally established by the jurisprudence of
all civilised States. In America it has been held that a police measure may be
unconstitutional because the remedy although effective as a means of
protection is unduly harsh, oppressive or tyrannical. Unconstitutional means
cannot be adopted to secure a Constitutional end. The substance of justice &
fair dealing must be provided before a person is deprived of his freedom by
action taken under a restrictive enactment & this requisite is an integral
part of the "due process" doctrine of the American Constitution. It is also
the core of the principle of "natural justice", a term widely employed in the
discussion of this subject. The idea is that the substantial requirements of
justice should not be violated; notice of the charge & of the enquiry into it
should be given; adequate opportunity to rebut the charge & to be heard in
defence should be given; the tribunal must be impartial & disinterested; and
any condemnation, conviction or deprivation of personal liberty or property
must be imposed only as a result or by the force of the decision of the
tribunal. It is not necessary that the tribunal should be one in the heirarchy
of the ordinary criminal Cts. A right of appeal from the decision of the
tribunal is nob essential. No set form or stereotyped procedure is necessary.
It is not desirable to force "natural justice" a term lacking in precision,
though not in content, into a procrustean bed.
68\. It is in the light of these principles that the validity of the impugned
Act (as amended) has to be determined. A question was mooted whether Article
19(1) of the Constitution was at all applicable to the case, inasmuch as the
right of free speech & freedom of association is lost only as the result of a
conviction under the impungned Act & not directly under it. Reference was made
to A. K. Gopalan v. State of Madras, , where the learned Chief Justice of
India pointed out that Article 19 of the Constitution declared the fundamental
rights of free citizens only while they were free, & Article 19(2) to (5) come
into play only when the deprivation is of the rights of such persons & not of
persons convicted of offences & who thereby become incapable of exercising
such rights. In my opinion, the right to freedom of association was dealt with
directly by the impugned Act & the imposition of restrictions on that right
was its direct object & effect. Article 19(1)(c) & Article 19(4) govern the
validity of the impugned Act. Indeed the Advocate-General did not contest this
point. Equally untenable is the argument that Article 19(1)(c) merely
guarantees the right to "form" associations & not the right to continue to
remain as members of an association. The guarantee in Article 19(1)(c) will
become illusory & farcical if this contention were to be upheld.
69\. Mr. Nambiar for the applt. contends that the impugned Act does not
"restrict" but destroys associations & the freedom to join such associations &
therefore, Article 19(4) of the Constitution cannot save it. It is said that
the effect of a declaration by the Govt. under Section 15 (2) (b) of the Act
is forthwith to make the notified association unlawful & thereby supress it
altogether. This, it is argued, is not restriction or regulation which implies
the continued existence of the association with its activities limited or
restricted. It has been observed in some American decisions that the power to
regulate does not mean the power to destroy but this is not a rule of general
application 'Restrictions in the interests of public morality" in Article
19(4) must connote "suppression" & not mere regulation. "Res-triction" in
Article 19(5) & (6) must include prohibition of dog-racing, gambling &
prevention of unqualified persons from practising as physicians or surgeons.
It is not right to put a different interpretation on the word "restriction" in
Article 19(4) when applied to public order. It all depends on the subject-
matter whether the regulation is prohibition or merely involves a partial
restraint. The State may go on from regulation to prohibition according to the
nature of the public evil that is sought to be eradicated or suppressed. Even
in America the power to regulate intestate commerce or lotteries hag been held
to include a power to prohibit. Megler v. Kansas, 123 U. S. 623, Tyson & Bros.
v. Banten, 273 U. S 418, Kentucky Whip & Collar Co. v. Illionosis Central
Rilroad Co., 299 U. S. 334,
70\. The draftsman of the Amending Act has followed the model of Article 22(4)
to (7) of the Constitution & the Preventive Detention Act (IV [4] of 1950)
after the validity of the latter had been upheld by the S. C. in A. K. Gopalan
v. State of Madras, . It does not follow that what is expressly enacted by the
Constitution itself & what is authorised to be done by Parliament under
Article 22(7) is also within the competence of the Legislature of the State of
Madras. It is said that provision of a reference to the Advisory Board in the
Amending Act saves it from the taint of un-constitutionality. The learned
Advocate-General placed strong reliance on the two recent decisions of the S.
C. in A. K. Gopalan v. State of Madras, & N. B. Khare v. State of New Delhi, .
The former decision was based on an interpretation of Article 22(3) to (7) of
the Constitution relating to preventive detention. The learned Chief Justice
of India with whom the majority of the Ct. agreed, pointed out that Article
19, with which alone we are here concerned, had no application to the case of
a preventive detention. The Act whose validity was there questioned was
enacted by Parliament under the enabling provisions of Article 22(7) of the
Constitution itself. That decision has no application to State legislation
affecting the fundamental rights of free citizens guaranteed under Article 19.
71\. The second case arose out of an order of externment from Delhi District
served on Dr. Khare under Section 4, East Punjab Public Safety Act. The
learned Chief Justice of India delivering the judgment of the majority held
that the Acfc in question did not violate Article 19(1)(d) of the Constitution
& was saved by Article 19(5). The learned Advocate-General particularly relied
upon the following sentence in that judgment: "Abuse of the power given by a
law sometimes occurs; but the validity of the law cannot be contested because
of such apprehension." This argument assumes that there is a grant of plenary
power unhampered by any restrictions or limibations. In cases relating, to
fixing of rates for services rendered by public utility concerns to citizens
under the police power of the State, the S. C. of America acted on the
principle that the fixing of rates was a matter of legislative discretion &
nofc of judicial review. "We know," the Ct added "this is a power which may be
abused; but that is no argument against its existence. For protection against
abuses by legislation the people must resort to the polls, not to the Cts."
Munn v. Illionis, 94 U. S. 113. But in a later case decided ten years
thereafter, Waite C J. said with reference to this passage, "From what has
thus been said it is not to be inferred that this power of limitation or
regulation is itself without limit." Stone v. Farmers, L & T Co. 116 U. S.
307. The Ct. receded from the position taken in Munn v. Illinois, 94 U. S. 113
& held that the question whether a rate fixed by a body empowered by the
Legislature was reasonable was a judicial question. The result of the American
decisions is that the "due process" clause protects personal & private rights
of citizens from invasion except by a legitimate exercise of the "police
power." If, however, the right is not personal to a citizen, but in relation
to an industry or enterprise affected wifch a public interest, it becomes
subject to a public control as a public utility service & the discretionary
authority of the Legislature to regulate rates & fees for services rendered to
the public is wide. Indeed the S. C. divided on the question, the majority
went to the other extreme & said:
"The question of the reasonableness of a rate or charge for transportation by
a railroad company, involving as it does, the element of reasonableness both
as regards the company & as regards the public, is eminently a question for
judicial investigation, requiring due process of law for its determination."
Chicago Mil Waukee & St. Paul Ry. Co. v. Minnesota, (1890) 134 U.S. 418.
I humbly venture to think that the learned Chief Justice of India could not
have meant that in no case can the possibility of abuse of statutory power be
taken into consideration in adjudging the reasonableness of legislative
restrictions of fundamental rights. The case before His Lordship was an order
of externment for three months in the conditions then prevailing in Delhi
district. The impugned Act in the case had a life of one year only. It must,
however, be admitted that Dr. Khare's case, is in point because it related to
the interpretation of Article 19(1)(d) & Article 19(5) & to some extent
supports the contention of the learned Advocate-General. Having given the two
decisions of the S. C. my anxious & respectful consideration, I have come to
the conclusion that they do not rule the present case. Preventive detention &
externmenfc orders, it must be admitted, involve interference with the freedom
of a citizen to some extent, but they are not punitive bat merely
precautionary. The action is taken on suspicion. No crime is charged. A Ct. of
law is not an appropriate tribunal for inquiring whether circumstances of
suspicion exist warranting a precautionary step by way of restraint. In any
case the Constitution has incorporated ' Preventive Detention" as part of the
Chapter on "Fundamental Rights" & made the exercise of fundamental rights
expressly subject to Article 22. The same Constitution has given Parliament
plenary power of legislation on preventive detention under Article 22(7). It
is, therefore, not proper in my opinion, to extend the principle of the two
rulings of the S C. to punitive legislation affecting the personal liberty &
properties of citizens.
72\. In my opinion, the Act exceeds the authority given to the Legislature by
our Constitution. The Act is a permanent part of the statute book & not a
piece of emergency legislation. It is not a legislation passed in the exercise
of the defence power of the State. The legislative power that is invoked is
"public" order in Entry I of List II of Schedule VII. Constitutional rights &
liberties guaranteed by the Constitution & which are of prime importance to
the citizens of a free democracy have been considerably eclipsed. The Act
creates & establishes a crime & provides drastic penalties by way of
imprisonment, fine & forfeiture of property without a fair trial. It does not
provide for proper & reasonable notice to persons penalised. It does not give
them fair & reasonable opportunity to be heard before they are condemned. At
the trial before a Mag. for the offence of being a member of an unlawful
association, the declaration by the Govt. is conclusive. In effect, it places
sentence before trial & judgment. I do nob think that the Constitution has
made this colossal delegation of power to State Legislatures when they were
authorised to legislate with respect of public order. Let mo make good these
observations.
73\. A declaration by the Govt. published in the official gazette that an
association or body of persons is unlawful makes it an unlawful association.
This initial declaration is made ex parte by the Govt. on its own information.
The selection of the association is left to the discretion of the Govt. The
grounds for declaration together with reasons & such particulars as the Govt.
may think it fit to give, are published in the Gazette. So soon as the
declaration is published, the association becomes an unlawful association &
its members are liable to be prosecuted & sentenced to imprisonment & fine
under Section 17. The moveable properties, monies, securities & credits of the
association as well as effects, not belonging to it are liable to be forfeited
by Govt. under Sections 17B & 17E. On a prosecution under Section 17, it will
not be open to the members of the association to go behind the declaration &
show that it is unjustified, that the grounds do not exist & the reasons are
incorrect. Even strangers who take part in the meetings of such association
after the declaration are liable to imprisonment & fine. All this might happen
even before the persons affected had any opportunity to have their objections
to the declaration by the Govt. considered by the Advisory Board. Punishment
might automatically follow the declaration though the Govt. might be trusted
to await the report of the Advisory Board before launching a prosecution.
There is no provision in the Act for service of the notice of the declaration
on the Association through its office-bearers or members at its place of
business. Such a provision is common in other enactments. The suggestion that
the members of the association might be unknown to the Govt. does not carry
weight, for it is unreasonable to penalise persons whom you do not even know,
for an alleged transgression of the law. A time for making representations
against the declaration of the Govt. is fixed in the notfn. but in the absence
of a service of the notice on the association or its office-bearers or
members, the time might pass by without their being aware of the notfn. at
all. I am aware that in some cases, as for example, in the Income-tax Act,
statutory provision is made for the publication of a general notfn. so as to
fix all citizens with notice. I am also aware that citizens who were in enemy
country during war time & who actively assisted the enemy have been condemned
as war criminals without personal service of the proceedings but after
publication in official gazettes. But this rule of constructive service by
publication is the exception rather than the rule. Penneyer v. Nett, (1877) 95
U. S. 714. The persons affected are not entitled to know on what evidence they
are being declared to be members of an unlawful association. The Govt. is
entitled to withhold communication of the evidence according to its
discretion, even though it cannot claim privilege under the Evidence Act. It
might be that during a state of war when the very existence of the State is
threatened, or under the provisions of the Preventive Detention Act, the Govt.
might not be required to disclose confidential information which it considers,
it would be against public interest to disclose. But this is an exceptional
procedure which does not admit of being made part of the ordinary criminal law
& procedure. The representation by the persons affected is presumably required
to be in writing for it has to be placed by the Govt. before the Advisory
Board. If there is no right to be heard in person on so grave an accusation it
has been held to be a denial of due process. Londoner v. Deener, (1908) 210 U.
S. 373. The imposing facade of an Advisory Board is not an effective
protection. There is no limit of time within which reference should be made to
the Advisory Board or within which the Board should give its report. The
persons affected are not entitled to be heard in person or by counsel before
the Board though Article 22(1) accords that right to persons charged with a
crime. They have no right to test the evidence relied upon by the Govt. or to
lead evidence contra. The Govt. is the sole Judge of what evidence it will
produce & what it will withhold from the scrutiny of the Advisory Board. The
Board cannot compel the Govt. to produce all the evidence in its possession.
The Board functions in secrecy & its report, except its final opinion or the
opinion of the majority, is confidential. There is not even a provision that
if the reference to the Board is not made or the decision of the Board is not
given, say within 3 or 6 months, the declaration by the Govt. should stand
cancelled. There is no provision that no prosecution or forfeiture shall be
made till the Board has given its decision. There is no limit of time for the
continuance of the declaration. A report by the Board that there is no
justification for the notfn. is like a judgment of acquittal on an appeal from
a conviction. But the trial itself is fundamentally opposed to principles of
justice & fairplay. The safeguards are nothing compared with those given to a
man charged with murder who must at once be produced before a judicial
tribunal which investigates the case in public.
74\. There is one other feature of the case that must be adverted to. A person
who is accused of the offence of being a member of an unlawful association
under Section 15 (2) (a) has a right to be tried before a Mag. He can be
defended by counsel cross-examine prosecution witnesses, lead evidence in
defence, address arguments & establish that the association is not unlawful.
By contrast, a person charged as being a member of an unlawful association
under Section 15 (2) (b) cannot be heard to dispute the declaration by the
Govt. that the association was unlawful. This brings out the unreasonableness
of the restriction imposed by the impugned Act on the right of freedom of
association declared by Article 19(1)(o) of the Constitution. I do not however
consider that this feature of the impugned Act in itself renders it obnoxious
to the principle of "equal protection of the laws" in Article 14 of the
Constitution. The mere juxtaposition of the two parts of the definition of
"unlawful association" in Section 15 (2) (a) & (b) of the Act is by no means
decisive. Suppose Section 15 (2) (a) had not been enacted & only Clause (b)
had been found in the impugned Act or again suppose that Section 15 (2) (a) &
15 (2) (b) had been the subject of separate enactments. In such a case, it
could not be said that there was any discrimination or unequal treatment & it
need not make any difference that the two categories are dealt with in one
section. Further, it will be observed that the activities of associations
dealt with by Section 15 (2) (b) constitute a direct threat to the maintenance
of public order or a danger to the public peace whereas the activities of
associations falling under Section 15 (2) (a) are injurious to individual
citizens or citizens of a particular locality & indirectly to the public peace
or public order. It cannot therefore be said that there is no reasonable basis
for differentiating between tbe two types of associations whose activities
differ in their technique & their consequences. But there is no justification
for a radical difference in the procedure for trial of these categories of
offences.
75\. It was also contended by Mr. Nambiar that the impugned Act violated
Article 19(1)(a) & (f) of the Constitution. The Act does not purport to deal
directly with freedom of speech or expression by way of prohibition or
restriction. It may be that if an association is declared unlawful its members
cannot meet & speak & exchange ideas as such members, without incurring the
penalty of imprisonment or fine or both. This however is an indirect
consequence of the association being declared unlawful, A law may produce an
indirect effect in relation to a subject-matter without being a law with
reference to that subject-matter. As an individual citizen, each member of the
association is free to speak though he is penalised for addressing meetings of
an association declared to be unlawful. Article 19(1)(a) has no direct
application to the present case. If it has, I must hold that the maintenance
of public order does not come within the scope of the restrictions permitted
by Article 19(2) in view of the recent decision of the S. C. in Romesh Thappar
v. The State of Madras, . The further contention of Mr. Nambiar that the
impugned Act offends Article 19(1)(f) & is not saved by Article 19(5) of the
Constitution must be accepted, for the Act directly affects the right to
"hold" property by permitting a forfeiture of the "monies, securities &
credits" & "move-able properties" of the association declared to be unlawful
by the Govt.
76\. For the foregoing reasons I hold that the impugned Act (as amended) is in
excess of the legislative power of the State conferred by the Constitution. It
follows that the Act as it stood before its amendment was also opposed to the
Constitution.
77\. It is unnecessary to consider the effect of Section 6 of the Amending Act
(XI [11] of 1950). If the Act before its amendment became void under Article
13 of the Constitution, as I hold it did, a notfn. issued pursuant to it is
also avoided automatically & cannot be resurrected by any subsequent
legislative effort. Further, it cannot be treated as a valid notfn. under the
Act (as amended) for it did not comply with the requirements of Sections 15
(2) (b) & 16 of the Act (as amended). If it is to be treated as a mere piece
of paper, as my learned brother Satyanarayana Rao J. holds it is it does no
harm to anybody for it has no legal effect unless followed up by a proper
notfn. complying with the terms of Section 15 (2) (b) of the Act as amended.
Only the legislative effort has been barren of results. I need hardly add that
this judgment affects the validity of the impugned Act only with reference to
associations declared unlawful under Section 15 (2) (b) of the Act. I agree
with the orders passed by my Lord, the Chief Justice.
Rajamannar, C.J.
78\. I have had the advantage of going through the full & elaborate opinions
prepared by my learned brothers. I agree with them in their conclusion, but
having regard to the importance of the questions raised before us I shall deal
with some of them though briefly.
79\. At the outset, learned counsel for the petnr. raised a preliminary point
which did not touch the merits of the case. His contention was that after the
passing of the Amending Act, there was no valid order in existence which
declared the society unlawful. His contention was based on the fact that the
Amending Act repealed Section 16 of the old Act & there was no other provision
which gave power to the State Govt. to declare an association unlawful. No
doubt Section 6 (1) of the Amending Act enacted that all notfns. issued in
respect of associations by the State Govt. before the amendment of the Act
under Section 16 of the old Act shall have effect as if they had been issued
under Section 15 (2) (b) of the said Act as amended by the new Act. But it was
contended that Clause (b) of Sub-section (2) of Section 15 only defines an
unlawful association & does not expressly confer any power on the Govt. to
issue a notfn. The learned Advocate-General met the contention by the argument
that such a power should be implied necessarily from the language of Section
15 (2) (b) as amended as well as from the subsequent provisions of the
amending Act. Section 16 (1) as amended opens with the words "A notfn. issued
under Clause (b) of Sub-section (2) of Section 15 in respect of any
association." The Legislature must therefore be taken to have conferred the
power to issue such a notfn. Though the power was not expressly conferred, it
must be deemed to have been conferred by necessary intendment. The Advocate-
General cited to us numerous instances of legislative practice to show that it
was always assumed that a reference in a definition clause to a declaration or
notfn. by the Govt. impliedly gave the power to the Govt. to make such a
declaration or issue such a notfn. I need only refer to the following
instances, Madras Salt Act IV [4] of 1899, Section 3, Clause (k); Rubber
Production and Marketing Act (XXIV [24] of 1947), Section 3 (1), Clause (v);
the Indian Ports Act, 1908 (xv [15] of 1908), Section 3, Clause (8) ; Madras
Act XIV [14] of 1947 Section 2, Clause (b). No case was cited to us in which
the validity of the conferment of such an implied power was raised & decided,
but the long practice does indicate a well recognised method of a conferring
power by implication.
80\. There are some cases in the English reports in which learned Judges have
inferred by implication the conferment of a power to do an act though there
were no express words conferring such power. An enactment that at the
elections of Poor Law guardians, the votes should be taken & returned as the
Comr., should direct was held to impliedly authorise the appointment of a
returning officer: See Rex v. Oldham, (1847) 16 L. J. M. C. 110. In Red v.
Green (1852) 21 L. J. M. C. 137 a power to appoint an Asst. overseer was taken
to have been impliedly conferred on the Poor Law Commissioners though there
was no express provision giving them such power. This rule of construction has
been applied even to cases relating to jurisdiction of tribunals. In Maxwell
on Interpretation of Statutes, Edn. 9 at p. 139, we find this :
"However effect must of course be given to the intention where the Act without
conferring jurisdiction in express terms does so by plain & necessary
implication."
In Cullen v. Trimble, (1872) 7 Q. B. 416 : (41 L. J. M. C. 132) it was held
that jurisdiction was impliedly given to Justices to summarily convict in a
penalty a person guilty of an offence under Section 57, Contagious Diseases
(Animals) Act, 1870 though there was no provision conferring on Justices such
summary jurisdiction.
81\. As I have already stated the intention of the Legislature is made
abundantly clear by the several provisions of the Amended Act that the State
Govt. has the power to declare by notfn. that an association is unlawful on
the grounds stated in Section 15 (2) (b) of the Act as amended. The
preliminary objection of the petnr. must fail.
82\. Learned counsel for the petnr. attacked the validity of the original Act
of 1908 as it stood on the date of the coming into force of the Constitution
as well as the Act as its now stands after the recent amendment in 1950
(hereinafter referred to as the Amending Act) on the ground that both the Acts
were inconsistent with & contravened the provisions of part III of the
Constitution, in particular, Articles 14 & 19 thereof.
83\. I think it is convenient to first dispose of the contention based upon
Article 14. That article runs thus :
"The State shall not deny to any person equality before the law or the equal
protection of the laws within the territory of India."
The two phrases "equality before the law" & "the equal protection of the laws"
must be taken to denote two different conceptions because of the disjunctive.
Otherwise we would be attributing the sin of tautology to the Constitution
makers. These two phrases appear to have been taken from the Constitutional
doctrine of the two countries, Britain & the United States. It was Dicey who
enunciated the doctrine of equality before the law as a part of the rule of
law which according to the learned Professor forms the fundamental principle
of the British Constitution. It has three meanings or may be regarded from
three different points of view. It means in the first place the supremacy of
the regular law of the land as opposed to arbitrary power. A man may be
punished for a breach of law but he can be punished for nothing else.
"It means again equality before the law, or the equal subjection of all
classes to the ordinary law of land administered by the ordinary law Cts. ;
the 'rule of law' in this sense excludes the idea of any exemption of
officials or others from the duty of obedience to the law which governs other
citizens or from the jurisdiction of the ordinary tribunals ;"
This aspect of the rule has been understood to imply that no man however well
placed or powerful he be otherwise is above the law; that officials like
private citizens are bound to obey the same law & for the same offence are
tried by the same judicial tribunals, & that for the vindication of their
civil rights or to obtain redress for wrongs done to them, they have to pursue
the same remedies (see Dicey p. 193). "Equality before the law" does not mean
that the powers & privileges of a private citizen are the same as the powers
of a public official or an alien. To perform public duties, public officers
may be given special powers. "What the rule of law requires is that any abuse
of such power or any other wrongful act by a public officer should be subject
to control by the Cts. in the same way as any wrongful act committed by an
ordinary citizen. The principle of equality before the law is not violated by
the existence of special laws providing for particular groups in the State, e.
g. soldiers, doctors, or lawyers. Such laws may not affect the rest of the
people but apply only to the members of a particular calling. But in the
enforcement of these laws as well as in the enforcement of the general law, no
distinction is made between man & man. To give a concrete illustration of the
principle, if the criminal law provides for the punishment of an offence any
person who is guilty of the offence irrespective of his position in life or
his wealth or influence will be liable to be punished in the same way as any
other person guilty of the same offence. No doubt the punishment may vary
according to the facts of each particular case, but the same set of facts, if
they existed in another case, would also result in the same punishment. In my
opinion, the principle of equality before the law does not come into play in
any controversy as to the legality of a law enacted by the State. It conies
into play really in the sphere of its enforcement. This is obvious from the
fact that Professor Dicey who treats it as one of the fundamentals of the
British Constitution was well aware of the supremacy of the British Parliament
in the making of laws. No question can arise in Britain of an Act of
Parliament being invalid, because it contravenes the principles of equality
before the law. So, when Professor Dicey speaks of the principle being an
essential part of the Constitution, it only means that the laws of the land
shall be enforced against all persons equally without any distinction being
made on any ground whatsoever. In my opinion, it is in this sense that the
phrase "equality before the law" is used in Article 14. The impugned Act does
not offend this principle.
84\. The other concept of "the equal protection of the laws" undoubtedly comes
from the 14th Amendment to the United States Constitution. Ordinarily, one
should expect, therefore, a great deal of light to be thrown on meaning of the
phrase by the decisions of the S. C. of the United States. Unfortunately,
however, this phrase occurs along with another phrase "due process of law" &
in pronouncing on the validity of State laws, Cts. in America have referred to
both provisions leaving it uncertain which provision was deemed "the most
pertinent & potent in the premises "(See Willoughby, Students' Edn., p 823).
In the famous passage from the judgment of Field J. in Barbier v. Connolly,
113 U. S. 27, which is given in extenso in the judgment of one of my brothers,
that learned Judge was expatiating on the 14th Amendment which contains both
the provisions of due process & equal protection. Taft C. J., in his opinion
in the leading case of Truax v. Corrigan, 257 U. S. 312, conceded that the two
provisions overlapped & that a violation of one may involve at times the
violation of the other, but pointed out that the spheres of the protection
they offer are not conterminous. The due process clause might end to secure
equality of law in the sense that it makes a required minimum of protection
for every one's right of life, liberty & property which the Congress or the
Legislature may not withhold (sic). The learned Chief Justice then observes :
"But the framers & adopters of this Amendment were not content to depend on a
mere minimum secured by the due process clause, or upon the spirit of equality
which might not be insisted on by local public opinion. They therefore
embodied that spirit in a specific guarantee. The guarantee was aimed at undue
favour & individual or class privilege, on the one hand, & at hostile
discrimination or the oppression of inequality, on the other. It sought an
equality of treatment of all persons, even though all enjoyed the protection
of due process .... Thus the guarantee was intended to secure equality of
protection not only for all but against all similarly situated."
In short the equal protection clause embodies a prohibition against
discrimination, discrimination in favour of any person or class as much as
discrimination against any person or class. "Equal protection of the laws is a
pledge of the protection of equal laws". Yick Wo. v. Hopkins, 118 U. S. 356.
It requires that persons subjected to a piece of legislation "shall be treated
alike under like circumstances & conditions both in the privileges conferred &
in the liabilities imposed" (Hayes v. Missouri, 120 U. S. 68). It prevents
"any person or class of persons from being singled out aa a special subject
for discriminating & hostile legislation." (Pembina Consolidated Silver Mining
Go. v. Commonwealth Pennsylvania, (1883) 125 U. S. 181). It is well
established that this clause does not forbid classification for purposes of
the exorcise by the State of police power or taxation rights, It is in this
sense I understand the phrase as incorporated in Article 14.
85\. Is there any thing in the Act as it stood before or after the amendment
which offends against this provision ? Mr. Nambiar attempted to bring his case
within this clause by referring to the provisions of the Act under which a
declaration by the Govt. that an association is unlawful cannot be challenged
in a criminal Ct. in a prosecution under Section 17 of the Act. It is common
ground that when a person is charged with an offence under Section 17 of the
Act, he cannot be heard to say that the association in question is not
unlawful, because none of the grounds on which the Govt. can make such
declaration exists in the case of that association. The declaration of the
Govt. is conclusive that the association is unlawful. Now Mr. Nambiar says
that this law discriminates against certain persons & denies them the
elementary right which an ordinary accused has of establishing his innocence &
disproving the case of the prosecution. While a person charged with an offence
under any of the provisions of the I. P. C. is given the right to show that
the offence has not been established, a person charged with an offence under
Section 17 of the impugned Act is denied that right. Though I was at first
impressed to some extent with this argument, on further consideration I think
I must reject it. The Act by itself does not discriminate between persons. It
does not specify any class or group by a political or religious or linguistic
or territorial denomination & declare that they alone are unlawful
associations. Provided the conditions are satisfied, namely, that an
association is dangerous to public peace or has interfered with the
maintenance of law & order or the administration of law, the Govt. declares it
unlawfal whichever such association may be. No doubt the procedure laid down
in the amended Act is different from the procedure which obtains in the case
of other offences. This would amount to a classification & it cannot be said
that thia classification is discriminatory. We are familiar with the
classification in the Criminal P. C. of offences for the purposes of being
tried by officers of different grades according to the nature of the offence.
It may be that for very good reasons certain crimes & offences should be tried
by special judicial tribunals & not by the ordinary Cts. of the land. On this
ground alone it cannot be said that there has been a denial of the equal
protection of the laws. The contention of the petnr.'s counsel based on
Article 14 of the Constitution must fail.
86\. The main part of Mr. Nambiar's argument on behalf of the petnr. rested on
Article 19(1) in particular on 19 (1) (c) read with Article 19(4). Article
19(1) embodies the several rights which a free citizen of India is entitled to
enjoy. Liberty for its citizen is one of the proclaimed objectives of the
Republic of India. The basic freedoms categorically enumerated in Article
19(1) are commonly recognised in all the democratic Constitutions of the
world, though in some cases they are not contained in a written constitution.
The liberty of the individual is inherent in the conception of the democracy.
At the same time, it has always been recognised that freedom or liberty can
never be absolute & uncontrolled in an organised society. The very idea of a
society consisting of several individuals necessarily leads to a curtailment
to some extent of the rights of each individual in so far as it conflicts with
the rights of others. Otherwise there would be a state of anarchy :
"The conflict between man & the state is as old as human history. For this
reason some compromise must be struck between private liberty & public
authority. There is some need of protecting personal liberty against
Governmental power & also some need of limiting personal liberty by
Governmental power. The ideal situation is a matter of balancing one against
the other, or adjusting conflicting interests"
(Willis' Constitutional Law of the United States, p. 477).
This problem of balancing the two conflicting interests has been attempted to
be solved in different ways by different countries at different times. In
England it is solved by making the Parliament supreme & relying on the good
sense of the people, their political tradition & the system of representative
& responsible Govt. which has been evolved. In the well-known Liversidge's
case, (1942) A. C. 206 : (110 L. J. K. B. 724), Lord Wright said :
"All the Cts. today & not least this House, are as jealous as they have ever
been in upholding the liberty of the subject. But that liberty is a liberty
confined & controlled by law, whether common law or statute. It is, in Burke's
words, a regulated freedom. It is not an abstract or absolute freedom.
Parliament is supreme-It can enact extraordinary powers of interfering with
personal liberty .... I have ventured on these elementary & obvious
observations because it seems to have been suggested on behalf of the applt.
that this house was being asked to countenance arbitrary, despotic or
tyrannous conduct. But in the constitution of this country there are no
guaranteed or absolute rights. The safeguard of British liberty is in the good
sense of the people & in the system of representative & responsible Govt.
which has been evolved."
In U. S. A. on the other hand, to a very great extent, the solution of the
problem is left ultimately to the S. C. The task of protecting social
interests & individual interests is entrusted really to the S. C. When the
Constitution of the United States was framed, there was an impression that
Legislatures tend to become tyrannical & "an elective despotism" was as bad as
any other kind of despotism. It was not safe always to rely upon public
opinion to keep Legislatures from overstepping their bounds. If there was no
supreme authority which could act as a check on the highhandedness of the
Legislature, the conflict between the State & the individual would almost
always end adversely to the individual. The principle of judicial supremacy is
now a well accepted feature of the American Constitution. In the words of
Woodrow Wilson, "The Constitutional powers of the Cts. constitute the ultimate
safeguard alike of individual privilege & of Governmental prerogative. It is
in this sense that our judiciary is the balance-wheel of our whole system."
Most of the work of the S. C. in drawing the line between personal liberty &
Governmental control has been done in connection with the due process clause.
In the early years of its history, the Ct. definitely favoured personal
liberty & extended the scope of the due process clause to such an extent that
Holmes J. exclaimed in his dissenting opinion in Baldwin v. Missouri, 281 U.
S. 586-
"I have not yet adequately expressed the more than anxiety that I feel at the
ever-increasing scope given to the 14th Amendment in cutting down what I
believe to be the Constitutional rights of the States. As the decisions now
stand, I see hardly any limit but the sky to the invalidating of those rights
if they happen to strike a majority of this Ct. as for reason undesirable."
But the S. C. has not remained static. It has changed with the social &
economic conditions & it has recognised the existence of what is called
"police power" in the State in exercise of which personal liberty could be
curtailed in the general interests of the State.
87\. The Indian Constitution has not adopted in its entirety either the
British example or the American. The Legislature of the Union & of the States
are not supreme as the British Parliament is. Equally the judicial supremacy
which is a part of the American Constitutional practice does not exist under
our Constitution. Neither the S. C. nor this Ct. can declare void any State
law on the ground that the Ct. or majority of the Judges composing the Ct.
thinks it unreasonable or undesirable. The Legislatures are expressly given
the power to restrict or curtail the fundamental rights conferred by Article
19(1), but the conditions for & the limits of such a power are more or less
definitely formulated. The Cts. can set aside a State law only if it is in
excess of such power. The freedoma vouchsafed to every citizen under Article
19(1) are not absolute freedoms, but are regulated by the provisions in
Clauses (2) to (6) of that Article.
88\. Bearing this special feature of our Constitution in mind, let me approach
the main issue in this case. Article 19(1) Clause (c) declares that all
citizens shall have the right to form associations or unions. There can be no
doubt--& it was fairly conceded by the learned Advocate General--that the
impugned Act, before & after the amendment, directly interferes with the right
so declared. "The right of association presupposes organisation & a relation
of some permanence between these persons" (Willis). The word "form" therefore
must refer not only to the initial commencement of the association, but also
to the continuance of the association as such. This was not seriously disputed
by the learned Advocate General.
89\. I do not agree with the learned counsel for the petnr. that the Act
totally destroys the right. The Act does not say that no one shall form
associations or unions of any sort. Such a law would of course be a total
negation of the right. What the Act prohibits is certain types of
associations. Such an Act can only be described as an Act restricting the
right & not totally negativing it. Restriction is a limitation imposed upon a
person or thing. It may be that even a total suspension of the right for a
temporary period would also come within the meaning of restriction. Clause (4)
defines the restrictions which are permissible. It runs thus :
"Nothing in Sub-clause (c) of the said clause shall affect the operation of
any existing law in so far as it imposes, or prevent the State from making any
law imposing, in the interests of public order or morality reasonable
restrictions on the exercise of the right conferred by the said sub-clause."
The restrictions must be (1) in the interests of public order or morality &
(2) reasonable. There can be no doubt whatever that the restrictions imposed
by the Act are in the interests of public order. The grounds on which the
State Govt. can declare an association to be unlawful under the Amending Act
are (1) that it constitutes a danger to public peace, (2) that it has
interfered or interferes with the maintenance of public order or has such
interference for its object & (3) that it has interfered or interferes with
the administration of the law or has such interference for its object. Even
under the original Act the grounds are similar. A point was raised by Mr.
Nambiar for the petnr. that administration of the law is not covered by public
order. He would make a difference between law & order, maintenance of order &
the administration of the law. But, law & order cannot be really separated.
"The conjunction of law & order in common parlance is nob fortuitous. It
embodies a fundamental truth. The purpose of the law is the creation &
maintenance of order," (per Lord Macmillan). Without proper administration of
the law, there can be no maintenance of public order. As Hughes C. J. said in
the case of Cox v. New Hampshire, 312 U. S. 569 :
"Civil liberties, as guaranteed by the Constitution, imply the existence of an
organised society maintaining public order without which liberty itself could
be lost in the excesses of unrestrained abuses."
90\. It remains to consider whether the restrictions imposed by the Act are
reasonable. What restrictions are reasonable is certainly for the Ct. to
decide. There can of course be no absolute standard of reasonableness.
"It would be unreasonable to expect an exact definition of the word
'reasonable.' Reason varies in its conclusions according to the idiosyncracy
of the individual & the times & circumstances in which he thinks .... mankind
must be satisfied with the reableness within reach"
(Strouds Judicial Dictionary).
Even ideas of what is just differ from age to age. What may seem to be just to
one man in one age may appear to another man in another age as the very
quintessence of injustice. In deciding on the reasonableness of the
restrictions, it is not possible to think only in the abstract. Several
circumstances must be taken into consideration, in particular, the purpose of
the Act, the conditions prevailing in the country at the time, the duration of
the restriction, its extent & nature. What may undoubtedly be a reasonable
restriction in a state of war or revolution may be utterly unreasonable in
normal times. What may be a reasonable restriction if it is for a short period
may be unreasonable for a much longer period. The decision of the S. C. in N.
B. Khare v. State of Delhi, 1950 M. W. N. 440; (A. I. R. (37) 1960 S. C. 211)
is authority for the proposition that in deciding on the reasonableness or
otherwise of the restrictions imposed by law, the substantive as well as the
procedural provisions of the law should be examined. The learned Chief Justice
of India observes thus :
"The law providing reasonable restrictions on the exercise of the right
conferred by Article 19 may contain substantive provisions as well as
procedural provisions. While the reasonableness of the restrictions has to be
considered with regard to the exercise of the right, it does not necessarily
exclude from the consideration of the Ct. the question of reasonableness of
the procedural part of the law .... It seems that the narrow construction,
sought to be put on the expression to restrict the Ct's. power to consider
only the substantive law on the point is not correct."
Mukherjee J. who wrote a dissenting judgment also agrees with the learned
Chief Justice on this point.
91\. In considering whether the procedural provisions of the impugned law are
reasonable, I think it is necessary to bear in mind that the Act is not a
temporary measure. The original Act has been on the statute book since 1908 &
there is nothing in the amending Act to show that it is for a limited period.
The learned Chief Justice of India in N. B. Khare's case, dealing with the
Punjab Public Safety Act said:
"The further extension of the externment order beyond three months may be for
an indefinite period, but in that connection the fact that the whole Act is to
remain in force only upto 14-8-1951 cannot be overlooked."
It is also necessary to bear in mind that the Act is punitive in several
respects, though it may also have a preventive aspect. Section 17 provides for
punishment with imprisonment for terms ranging between six months & three
years with or without fine. Section 17-B enables the Govt. to forfeit moveable
property & Section 17E moneys securities & credits belonging to the
association which has been declared unlawful by the Govt.
92\. The first &, in my opinion, the most important defect in the procedural
part of the Act which renders the restriction unreasonable is the absence of
any provision for the communication of the order of the Govt. declaring an
association to be unlawful to the association & its members. The Act provides
only for a notfn. in the official gazette. Though it is true such a notfn. may
in certain cases be treated as amounting to constructive notice of the order
of the Govt. yet in a case where drastic consequences ensue by reason of the
order; the interest of the citizens requires a more direct notice. Section 16
(1) (b) provides that the notfn. shall fix a reasonable period for any office-
bearer or member of the association or any other person interested to make a
representation to the State Govt. in respect of the issue of the notfn.
Presumably after the lapse of the period so fixed, there will be no right of
representation. It is easily conceivable that the members of an association
may not have knowledge of the notfn. declaring it to be unlawful till after
the lapse of the period fixed. Though all persons in a State are presumed to
know the law of the land & ignorance of law is no excuse, I do not think there
is anything which makes it incumbent on every citizen to pursue regularly the
official gazette. In the case of preventive detention or internment or
externment, the order is served on the person concerned. I do not mean to say
that personal service is the only mode of service. In cases of evasion or
absconding or in other cases where it is impracticable to have personal
notice, other modes of service may be resorted to. We are familiar with the
alternative modes of notice provided under the Civil P. C. In the case of an
association which is registered or has a distinctive name & a definite place
set apart for its use, the notfn. can be served on any office-bearer of the
association, or if no such office-bearer is available for service by affixture
at the reputed place of the association. Without some such notice, it appears
to me to be unreasonable to say that the association & its members would be
precluded from making a representation to the Govt. against the issue of the
notfn. after a fixed time. Section 16 (1) of the Act defines an association,
as "any combination or body of persons, whether the same be known by any
distinctive name or not." The learned Advocate General contended that it would
be open to the Govt. to issue a notfn. declaring "A, B & others" an unlawful
association when the association is nob known by a d stinctive name, & it
would be open to the Govt. to Hunch a prosecution against C, a person other
than A & B, provided they can prove at the hearing of the case that C was
associated with A & B. the necessity of a personal notice in such a case on
the members alleged to form an association becomes all the more apparent, when
in addition to the lack of a distinctive name, the association has no definite
place. The opportunity evidently intended to be given to the association & its
members to show cause against the issue of the notfn. will be illusory in the
absence of a direct communication.
93\. The next procedural provision which I think makes the restriction not
reasonable is the prohibition against any person making a representation in
respect of the notfn. from taking any part in the proceedings of the Advisor,
Board. I see no objection in making the proceedings of the Board & its report
confidential in the public interest. But so long as the proceedings are not
made public, I can see no valid objection to the person aggrieved being given
an opportunity of establishing his case by relevant evidence. Article 22(1) of
the Constitution provides that a person who is arrested shall not be denied
the right to consult & to be defended by a legal practitioner of his choice.
Clause (3) of the Article expressly declares that the provision will not apply
to any person who for the time being is an enemy alien or to any person who is
arrested or detained under any law providing for preventive detention. It is
true that before a prosecution is launched under Section 17 of the Act, a
member of an unlawful association is not arrested, but once a prosecution is
launched, the criminal Ct. is powerless to decide as to the validity of the
declaration by the Govt. The fact that he may be entitled to be defended by a
practitioner in the criminal Ct. will not be really of much use to him. When
penal consequences result from a declaration under Section 15 (2) (b), I think
it is reasonable that there should be provision for the aggrieved person to
defend himself. I must also mention the fact to which reference has been made
by my learned brothers, namely, that when a person is charged under Section 17
as being a member of an unlawful association within the meaning of Section
15(2) (a), the established procedure of the criminal Cts. of the land will
apply. The onus will be on the prosecution to affirmatively establish that the
association encourages or aids persons to commit acts of violence or
intimidation or that the members of the association habitually commit such
acts. The accused will be entitled to lead rebutting evidence & the Ct. is
entitled to adjudicate on the issue whether the association is unlawful within
the meaning of the enactment. I can understand in the case of a declaration by
Govt. the onus shifting on to the accused who may be called upon to establish
that the declaration of the Govt. is unwarranted & illegal. But to say that an
association shall be deemed to be unlawful once & for ever by a declaration by
the Govt. subject only to the opinion of an Advisory Board which merely
considers the material placed before it by the Govt. & may or may not call for
further information from the association or its members & which does not
conduct its proceedings in the presence of the aggrieved party or some one
representing him appears to me to unreasonably restrict the right conferred by
Article 19(1)(c) of the Constitution. I may also add that there is nothing
making it incumbent on the Govt. to refer the notfn. to the Advisory Board
within a definite time & there is nothing to compel the Advisory Board to make
its report within a particular time, circumstances to which my learned
brothers have alluded. Personally, these later defects alone would not, in my
opinion, render the Act repugnant to the Constitution though I entirely agree
that it is desirable in the interests of the rights of the citizens that there
should be provision for expeditious disposal of the matter by the Govt. & the
Advisory Board.
94\. I have, therefore, come to the same conclusion as my learned brothers
that the Amending Act is void as it is inconsistent with the provisions of
Part III of the Constitution, in particular with the provisions of Article 19.
95\. It follows that the original Act before its amendment, became void on the
coming into force of the Constitution. In fact the learned Advocate-General
found it very difficult to sustain the validity of the original Act which did
not provide any opportunity for the declaration by the Govt. to be challenged
in any manner. One could not find a better illustration of the exercise of
naked arbitrary power than the original Criminal Law Amendment Act. The Govt.
had only to issue a notfn. on a subjective satisfaction that an association
was unlawful & it was infallible & conclusive. It is impossible to say that
the restriction imposed by the original Act is in any sense reasonable within
the meaning of Article 19(4) of the Constitution.
96\. In the view I have taken of the validity of the Amending Act, it is not
necessary to deal at length with the argument which arises only if the
original Act is held to have become void but the Amending Act is valid,
namely, the effect of Section 6 of the Amending Act. Under Sub-section (1) of
that section, all notfns. issued by the Govt. before the commencement of the
Amending Act under Section 16 of the original Act & not cancelled shall as
from the commencement of the Amending Act have effect as if they had been
issued under Section 15 (2) (b) of the said Act as amended by the Amending
Act. If, on the coming into force of the Constitution Section 16 of the
original Act became void, any notfn. issued under that section would obviously
also become void. It is, therefore, arguable that such a notfn. cannot be
validated by retroactive legislation. But that is not what has been done by
Section 6 (1) of the Amending Act. It does not purport to render the notfn.
already issued valid from the date of its issue. It is only deemed to have
been issued on the date of the Amending Act & deemed to have been issued under
Section 15 (2) (b) of the Amending Act. This provision was obviously intended
to avoid re-issue of all the notfns. originally issued under Section 16 of the
unamended Act. I fail to see why this should not be done as a matter of
convenience. If it should be held that the Amending Act is valid, then I would
hold that the appln. is premature, because the supplementary notfn.
contemplated by the proviso to Section 6 (1) of the Amending Act had not been
issued by the date of the hearing of the appln.
97\. In the result, the order of the State of Madras in G. O. ms. No. 1517
Public (General) Department dated 10-3-1950 is hereby quashed & the rule nisi
already issued will be made absolute. As a consequence the Govt. Order No.
1733 (Public) dated 31-3-1950 will also be quashed.
98\. As we were about to deliver our judgments, the learned Advocate-General
brought to our notice the decision of a F.B. of the Madhya Bharat H.C. Anand
Bhasker v. State, A.I.R. (37) 1950 M.B. 60 : (51 Cr. L. J. 1352 F.B.) in which
Kaul C. J. & Shinde J. held (Mehta J, dissenting) that Article 226 does not
provide for any remedy which apart from the existing law would be available to
a person for enforcement of any of the rights dealt with in Part III of the
Constitution & therefore the H. C. could not entertain an appln. under Article
226 for the issue of a direction in the nature of a habeas corpus apart from
the provision of Section 491, Cr. P. C. Assuming that the decision in that
case is correct & we have grave doubts as to its correctness--this Ct. which
undoubtedly possesses the jurisdiction & power to issue prerogative writs like
certiorari, prohibition, etc., must be held to have the jurisdiction & power
to grant those writs for the enforcement of the rights mentioned in Part III
of the Constitution as well. It is not denied by the learned Advocate-General
that this Ct. had at the commencement of the Constitution the jurisdiction &
power to issue a writ of certiorari within the limits of its original
jurisdiction at least. It follows, therefore, that this jurisdiction which is
continued to us under Article 225 would enable this Ct. to issue a writ of
certiorari in the present case. It is, therefore, unnecessary to canvass the
correctness of the decision cited to us in this case.
99\. The petnr. will have his costs fixed at Rs. 250. A certificate will issue
under Article 132 that this case involves a substantial question of law as to
the interpretation of the Constitution, in particular Articles 14 & 19
thereof.
provide for any remedy which apart from the existing law would be available to
a person for enforcement of any of the rights dealt with in Part III of the
Constitution & therefore the H. C. could not entertain an appln. under Article
226 for the issue of a direction in the nature of a habeas corpus apart from
the provision of Section 491, Cr. P. C. Assuming that the decision in that
case is correct & we have grave doubts as to its correctness--this Ct. which
undoubtedly possesses the jurisdiction & power to issue prerogative writs like
certiorari, prohibition, etc., must be held to have the jurisdiction & power
to grant those writs for the enforcement of the rights mentioned in Part III
of the Constitution as well. It is not denied by the learned Advocate-General
that this Ct. had at the commencement of the Constitution the jurisdiction &
power to issue a writ of certiorari within the limits of its original
jurisdiction at least. It follows, therefore, that this jurisdiction which is
continued to us under Article 225 would enable this Ct. to issue a writ of
certiorari in the present case. It is, therefore, unnecessary to canvass the
correctness of the decision cited to us in this case.
political problems & bring about social & political reforms; & (d) to promote,
encourage & popularise are, literature & drama."
The notfn. by the resp. the State of Madras, dated 10-3-1950 under Section 16,
Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1908, declaring the Society an unlawful assocn. is
in the following terms :
"Whereas in the opinion of the State Govt. the Assocn. known as the People's
Education Society, Madras, has for its object interference with the
administration of the law & the maintenance of law & order, & constitutes a
danger to the public peace;
Now, therefore, His Excellency the Governor of Madras, in exercise of the
powers conferred by Section 16, Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1908 (Central Act
XIV [14] of 1908) hereby declares the said Assocn. to be an unlawful assocn.
within the meaning of the said Act."
(Sd.) K. RAMUNNI meNON, Chief Secretary."
3\. After the aforesaid declaration, it is alleged in the affidavit of the
petnr. that the City Police searched the office of the said society purporting
to act under a search warrant issued by the Comr. of Police, Madras, under
Section 12, Madras Maintenance of Public Order Act (XXIII [23] of 1949) &
seized certain articles. The petnr. denies that the objects of the society
were those stated in the notfn. & he also asserts that the order, that is, the
provide for any remedy which apart from the existing law would be available to
a person for enforcement of any of the rights dealt with in Part III of the
Constitution & therefore the H. C. could not entertain an appln. under Article
226 for the issue of a direction in the nature of a habeas corpus apart from
the provision of Section 491, Cr. P. C. Assuming that the decision in that
case is correct & we have grave doubts as to its correctness--this Ct. which
undoubtedly possesses the jurisdiction & power to issue prerogative writs like
certiorari, prohibition, etc., must be held to have the jurisdiction & power
to grant those writs for the enforcement of the rights mentioned in Part III
of the Constitution as well. It is not denied by the learned Advocate-General
that this Ct. had at the commencement of the Constitution the jurisdiction &
power to issue a writ of certiorari within the limits of its original
jurisdiction at least. It follows, therefore, that this jurisdiction which is
continued to us under Article 225 would enable this Ct. to issue a writ of
certiorari in the present case. It is, therefore, unnecessary to canvass the
correctness of the decision cited to us in this case.
political problems & bring about social & political reforms; & (d) to promote,
encourage & popularise are, literature & drama."
The notfn. by the resp. the State of Madras, dated 10-3-1950 under Section 16,
Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1908, declaring the Society an unlawful assocn. is
in the following terms :
"Whereas in the opinion of the State Govt. the Assocn. known as the People's
Education Society, Madras, has for its object interference with the
administration of the law & the maintenance of law & order, & constitutes a
danger to the public peace;
Now, therefore, His Excellency the Governor of Madras, in exercise of the
powers conferred by Section 16, Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1908 (Central Act
XIV [14] of 1908) hereby declares the said Assocn. to be an unlawful assocn.
within the meaning of the said Act."
(Sd.) K. RAMUNNI meNON, Chief Secretary."
3\. After the aforesaid declaration, it is alleged in the affidavit of the
petnr. that the City Police searched the office of the said society purporting
to act under a search warrant issued by the Comr. of Police, Madras, under
Section 12, Madras Maintenance of Public Order Act (XXIII [23] of 1949) &
seized certain articles. The petnr. denies that the objects of the society
were those stated in the notfn. & he also asserts that the order, that is, the
provide for any remedy which apart from the existing law would be available to
a person for enforcement of any of the rights dealt with in Part III of the
Constitution & therefore the H. C. could not entertain an appln. under Article
226 for the issue of a direction in the nature of a habeas corpus apart from
the provision of Section 491, Cr. P. C. Assuming that the decision in that
case is correct & we have grave doubts as to its correctness--this Ct. which
undoubtedly possesses the jurisdiction & power to issue prerogative writs like
certiorari, prohibition, etc., must be held to have the jurisdiction & power
to grant those writs for the enforcement of the rights mentioned in Part III
of the Constitution as well. It is not denied by the learned Advocate-General
that this Ct. had at the commencement of the Constitution the jurisdiction &
power to issue a writ of certiorari within the limits of its original
jurisdiction at least. It follows, therefore, that this jurisdiction which is
continued to us under Article 225 would enable this Ct. to issue a writ of
certiorari in the present case. It is, therefore, unnecessary to canvass the
correctness of the decision cited to us in this case.
political problems & bring about social & political reforms; & (d) to promote,
encourage & popularise are, literature & drama."
The notfn. by the resp. the State of Madras, dated 10-3-1950 under Section 16,
Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1908, declaring the Society an unlawful assocn. is
in the following terms :
"Whereas in the opinion of the State Govt. the Assocn. known as the People's
Education Society, Madras, has for its object interference with the
administration of the law & the maintenance of law & order, & constitutes a
danger to the public peace;
Now, therefore, His Excellency the Governor of Madras, in exercise of the
powers conferred by Section 16, Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1908 (Central Act
XIV [14] of 1908) hereby declares the said Assocn. to be an unlawful assocn.
within the meaning of the said Act."
(Sd.) K. RAMUNNI meNON, Chief Secretary."
3\. After the aforesaid declaration, it is alleged in the affidavit of the
petnr. that the City Police searched the office of the said society purporting
to act under a search warrant issued by the Comr. of Police, Madras, under
Section 12, Madras Maintenance of Public Order Act (XXIII [23] of 1949) &
seized certain articles. The petnr. denies that the objects of the society
were those stated in the notfn. & he also asserts that the order, that is, the
notfn. was not served upon the petnr. & that he was never given any
opportunity or warning before the order was made. On 31-3-1950 the Govt.
passed a further order under Section 17 (E) (3), Criminal Law Amendment Act,
1908, declaring their intention to forfeit to the Govt. an amount of Rs.
2405-14-0 belonging to the Society in the hands of Messrs. Best & Co. Ltd., as
the money was intended to be used for the purpose of the unlawful assocn.
namely, the People's Education Society, Madras. Notice of this intention was
also given to Messrs Best & Co. Ltd., who are in possession of the funds. The
amount, in question, it is alleged in the affidavit, represents compensation
money for non-delivery of certain rotary press materials & the petnr. alleges
that this fund was not intended to be used for any unlawful purpose. The order
provide for any remedy which apart from the existing law would be available to
a person for enforcement of any of the rights dealt with in Part III of the
Constitution & therefore the H. C. could not entertain an appln. under Article
226 for the issue of a direction in the nature of a habeas corpus apart from
the provision of Section 491, Cr. P. C. Assuming that the decision in that
case is correct & we have grave doubts as to its correctness--this Ct. which
undoubtedly possesses the jurisdiction & power to issue prerogative writs like
certiorari, prohibition, etc., must be held to have the jurisdiction & power
to grant those writs for the enforcement of the rights mentioned in Part III
of the Constitution as well. It is not denied by the learned Advocate-General
that this Ct. had at the commencement of the Constitution the jurisdiction &
power to issue a writ of certiorari within the limits of its original
jurisdiction at least. It follows, therefore, that this jurisdiction which is
continued to us under Article 225 would enable this Ct. to issue a writ of
certiorari in the present case. It is, therefore, unnecessary to canvass the
correctness of the decision cited to us in this case.
political problems & bring about social & political reforms; & (d) to promote,
encourage & popularise are, literature & drama."
The notfn. by the resp. the State of Madras, dated 10-3-1950 under Section 16,
Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1908, declaring the Society an unlawful assocn. is
in the following terms :
"Whereas in the opinion of the State Govt. the Assocn. known as the People's
Education Society, Madras, has for its object interference with the
administration of the law & the maintenance of law & order, & constitutes a
danger to the public peace;
Now, therefore, His Excellency the Governor of Madras, in exercise of the
powers conferred by Section 16, Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1908 (Central Act
XIV [14] of 1908) hereby declares the said Assocn. to be an unlawful assocn.
within the meaning of the said Act."
(Sd.) K. RAMUNNI meNON, Chief Secretary."
3\. After the aforesaid declaration, it is alleged in the affidavit of the
petnr. that the City Police searched the office of the said society purporting
to act under a search warrant issued by the Comr. of Police, Madras, under
Section 12, Madras Maintenance of Public Order Act (XXIII [23] of 1949) &
seized certain articles. The petnr. denies that the objects of the society
were those stated in the notfn. & he also asserts that the order, that is, the
notfn. was not served upon the petnr. & that he was never given any
opportunity or warning before the order was made. On 31-3-1950 the Govt.
passed a further order under Section 17 (E) (3), Criminal Law Amendment Act,
1908, declaring their intention to forfeit to the Govt. an amount of Rs.
2405-14-0 belonging to the Society in the hands of Messrs. Best & Co. Ltd., as
the money was intended to be used for the purpose of the unlawful assocn.
namely, the People's Education Society, Madras. Notice of this intention was
also given to Messrs Best & Co. Ltd., who are in possession of the funds. The
amount, in question, it is alleged in the affidavit, represents compensation
money for non-delivery of certain rotary press materials & the petnr. alleges
that this fund was not intended to be used for any unlawful purpose. The order
provide for any remedy which apart from the existing law would be available to
a person for enforcement of any of the rights dealt with in Part III of the
Constitution & therefore the H. C. could not entertain an appln. under Article
226 for the issue of a direction in the nature of a habeas corpus apart from
the provision of Section 491, Cr. P. C. Assuming that the decision in that
case is correct & we have grave doubts as to its correctness--this Ct. which
undoubtedly possesses the jurisdiction & power to issue prerogative writs like
certiorari, prohibition, etc., must be held to have the jurisdiction & power
to grant those writs for the enforcement of the rights mentioned in Part III
of the Constitution as well. It is not denied by the learned Advocate-General
that this Ct. had at the commencement of the Constitution the jurisdiction &
power to issue a writ of certiorari within the limits of its original
jurisdiction at least. It follows, therefore, that this jurisdiction which is
continued to us under Article 225 would enable this Ct. to issue a writ of
certiorari in the present case. It is, therefore, unnecessary to canvass the
correctness of the decision cited to us in this case.
