Kerala High Court
State Of Kerala vs Western India Cosmetic And Health on 16 December, 2009
      IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM
    ST.Rev..No. 90 of 2009()
    1. STATE OF KERALA, REPRESENTED BY
                          ...  Petitioner
                            Vs
    1. WESTERN INDIA COSMETIC AND HEALTH
                           ...       Respondent
                    For Petitioner  :GOVERNMENT PLEADER
                    For Respondent  :DR.K.B.MUHAMED KUTTY (SR.)
    The Hon'ble MR. Justice C.N.RAMACHANDRAN NAIR
    The Hon'ble MR. Justice HARUN-UL-RASHID
    The Hon'ble MR. Justice V.K.MOHANAN
     Dated :16/12/2009
     O R D E R
                                                                 C.R.
                       C .N. RAMACHANDRAN NAIR
                            HARUN-UL-RASHID &
                             V.K. MOHANAN, JJ.
Tribunal, though now found to be wrong by this Court, respondents should have
settled the liability towards interest under the Amnesty Scheme, that was
prevalent upto 31.3.2009. We find force in this contention because had the
Tribunal dismissed the appeals probably respondents would have settled the
liability under the Amnesty Scheme. We therefore direct the assessing officer
to grant amnesty benefit to the respondents reducing the interest in terms of
the scheme and allow settlement of liability by demanding further interest at
one per cent per month for the amnesty amount payable from the last date for
payment under the amnesty scheme till date of payment. Respondents are
directed to make application in this regard before the assessing officer
within three weeks from the date of receipt of a copy of this judgment and the
officer is directed to allow them to settle liability by making payment within
one month thereafter. Demand notice should be raised within one week from the
date of making  9 application. We make it clear that amnesty benefit extended
by us to the respondents will apply only to the respondents because of the
peculiar facts stated above.
                             V.K. MOHANAN, JJ.
                     --------------------------------------------
                      S. T. Rev. No. 90 & 107 OF 2009
                     --------------------------------------------
                  Dated this the 16th day of December, 2009
                                  JUDGMENT
Ramachandran Nair, J.
A Division Bench, after doubting the correctness of the judgment of this Court
in P.K. DAMODRAN's case, 138 STC 442, has referred this case for decision by
Full Bench on the scope of interest payable under Section 23(3A) of the
K.G.S.T. Act, hereinafter called the "Act". We have heard Special Government
Pleader for the revision petitioner and various counsel appearing for the
respondent-assessees.
2\. The question raised is whether short payment of tax by the dealers along
with monthly returns either on account of non-inclusion of turnover or failure
to return turnover at the full rate of tax attracts interest under Section
23(3A) of the Act. In ST Rev. 107 of 2009 the respondent is a dealer in paper
who paid tax on the turnover of paper at 4% as against 8% payable under the
Act. The respondent-dealer in the other case has failed to include turnover in
the return which led to levy  2 of interest under Section 23(3A) of the Act.
The Tribunal in all the cases cancelled levy of interest following the
Division Bench decision of this Court above referred wherein this Court held
that interest could be levied under Section 23(3A) only if there is failure on
the part of the dealer to include any turnover of his business in the return
filed and consequent escapement of turnover in the assessment. When the matter
was heard, the Division Bench felt that subsequent amendment introduced to
Section 23(3A) with effect from 1.4.2004 is clarificatory in nature and the
interest under Section 23(3A) being compensatory in nature is payable on the
short fall in payment of tax which is the difference between the paid tax and
assessed tax, whatever be the circumstances which led to non-payment of full
amount of tax in time. In order to consider the issue , we have to refer to
the provisions of Section 23(3A) as it originally stood and after it's
amendment by Finance Act, 2004 with effect from 1.4.2004, which are extracted
below:
> 23\. Payment and recovery of tax:- (1)......
> (3A) Where any dealer has failed to include any turnover of his business in
> any return filed or where any  3 turnover has escaped assessment, interest
> under sub-section (3) shall accrue on the tax due on such turnover with
> effect from such date on which the tax would have fallen due for payment had
> the dealer include the same in the return relating to the period to which
> such turnover relates (Originally stood) 3A. Where any dealer has failed to
> include any turnover or taxable turnover of his business or to pay the tax
> due thereon on the taxable turnover in any return filed or where any
> turnover or tax due has escaped assessment, interest under sub-section (3)
> shall accrue on the tax due on the turnover with effect from such date on
> which the tax due would have fallen due for payment, had the dealer included
> the same in the return relating to the period to which the turnover or tax,
> as the case may be, relates (After amendment).
3\. The contention raised by Special Government appearing for the State is
that interest under Section 23(3A) is payable from the period the tax would
have been paid, had the dealer included the turnover in the return filed. On
the other hand, counsel appearing for respondents contended that if the
turnover is included in the return the assessee will have no liability to pay
interest on non-payment or short payment of tax, and if the same happens on
account of misclassification of goods under different rates, Rule 21(9) of the
Rules authorises the assessing officer to scrutinize the returns filed and to
4 make provisional or regular assessment demanding actual tax. Therefore
according to counsel if there is failure on the part of the assessing officer
assessee cannot be called upon to pay interest for the lapses of the officer.
Special Government Pleader has referred to the decision of this Court in
CHANDRAMANI TRADERS V. STATE OF KERALA, (2008) 16 VST 294 and two unreported
decisions of this Court in ST Rev. No. 484 of 2004 and M.F.A. No. 331 of 2000
and contended that interest is payable under Section 23(3A) from the due date
it was payable till payment, irrespective of the reason for non- payment,
short payment or delayed payment of tax.
4\. On going through the provisions both before and after the amendment, it is
clear that interest is compensatory in nature inasmuch as it is payable from
such date on which tax would have been fallen due, had the dealer included
actual turnover in the return relating to such period. Liability arises on
account of failure of the dealer to include any turnover of his business in
any return filed. In this context, counsel for the respondents submitted that
turnover by itself does not determine any tax liability and that is why
provision is amended later  5 to include taxable turnover in the Section and
consequently there cannot be any liability for interest for period prior to
the amendment if turnover was fully returned. We are unable to accept this
contention because the question whether there is failure on the part of the
assessee to include turnover in the return filed has to be considered with
reference to the return itself, which is form No. 9 prescribed under the
Rules. It is to be noted that dealer is required to give description and
turnover of each goods, classification made with reference to entries in the
Schedule to the Act, the point of sale and the rate of tax of taxable goods.
There is a specific column provided in the return to declare the turnover on
exempted goods. Therefore the dealer is expected to file return disclosing the
entire turnover of all the goods and by bifurcating turnover between taxable
and non-taxable and again classifying taxable goods at applicable rate on
turnover of each such goods. Non-payment or short payment will arise on
account of the dealer mis-classifying taxable goods as non-taxable and can
also happen on account of mis- classification of taxable goods at rates lower
than the rates provided in the schedules to the Act. Therefore failure of
inclusion of turnover in  6 the return leading to non-payment or short-payment
of tax uder the pre-amended provision means non-inclusion of taxable turnover
or any part there of at the appropriate rate of tax. We hold that the
amendment is only clarificatory because the turnover omitted in the return
that attracts liability for interest is taxable turnover or otherwise the
section before it's amendment becomes meaningless. Interest payable under
Section 23(3A) is from the date on which tax would have been payable, had the
dealer included the turnover at the correct rate of tax in the return filed.
Interest under the Section is attracted if there is omission on the part of
the dealer to include any taxable turnover in the return filed or wrong claim
of exemption made on taxable turnover and further on account of
misclassification of goods at lower rate of tax than the actual rate of tax
that is payable on the turnover of goods. Further, even if the assessment is
made based on the return filed, and such assessment happens to be incorrect
later and the demand of tax is increased through revision of assessment under
Section 19(1) pursuant to orders under Section 35(1), still the assessee will
be liable to pay interest under Section 23(3A) on the differential tax that is
between  7 assessed tax and tax paid based on the return.
5\. On going through the judgment of this Court above referred, we do not find
that this Court has considered the nature of interest payable under Section
23(3A) which we have found to be compensatory in nature. Further this Court
has not examined the manner in which a dealer has to file return, the manner
in which the dealer has to include turnover of various goods in the return to
be filed and the manner of payment of tax along with return contemplated under
the Rules. In view of our above finding, the judgment of this Court above
referred cannot be said to be laying the correct interpretation of Section
23(3A) of the Act. The finding of this Court is that even if a dealer has
declared the turnover at lower rate of tax as against higher rate payable
under the Act, still the dealer is not liable to pay interest under Section
23(3A) because there was no omission to include turnover. This interpretation
in our view defeats the very purpose of the section which is to recover
interest in the form of compensation for belated payment of tax. We therefore
overrule the judgment in P.K. DAMODRAN's case above referred and allow  8
revision cases by reversing the orders of the Tribunal and by restoring the
interest levied under Section 23(3A). However, counsel appearing for the
respondents submitted that but for the favourable orders issued by the
Tribunal, though now found to be wrong by this Court, respondents should have
settled the liability towards interest under the Amnesty Scheme, that was
prevalent upto 31.3.2009. We find force in this contention because had the
Tribunal dismissed the appeals probably respondents would have settled the
liability under the Amnesty Scheme. We therefore direct the assessing officer
to grant amnesty benefit to the respondents reducing the interest in terms of
the scheme and allow settlement of liability by demanding further interest at
one per cent per month for the amnesty amount payable from the last date for
payment under the amnesty scheme till date of payment. Respondents are
directed to make application in this regard before the assessing officer
within three weeks from the date of receipt of a copy of this judgment and the
officer is directed to allow them to settle liability by making payment within
one month thereafter. Demand notice should be raised within one week from the
date of making  9 application. We make it clear that amnesty benefit extended
by us to the respondents will apply only to the respondents because of the
peculiar facts stated above.
(C.N.RAMACHANDRAN NAIR) Judge.
(HARUN-UL-RASHID) Judge.
(V.K. MOHANAN) Judge.
kk 10
Tribunal, though now found to be wrong by this Court, respondents should have
settled the liability towards interest under the Amnesty Scheme, that was
prevalent upto 31.3.2009. We find force in this contention because had the
Tribunal dismissed the appeals probably respondents would have settled the
liability under the Amnesty Scheme. We therefore direct the assessing officer
to grant amnesty benefit to the respondents reducing the interest in terms of
the scheme and allow settlement of liability by demanding further interest at
one per cent per month for the amnesty amount payable from the last date for
payment under the amnesty scheme till date of payment. Respondents are
directed to make application in this regard before the assessing officer
within three weeks from the date of receipt of a copy of this judgment and the
officer is directed to allow them to settle liability by making payment within
one month thereafter. Demand notice should be raised within one week from the
date of making  9 application. We make it clear that amnesty benefit extended
by us to the respondents will apply only to the respondents because of the
peculiar facts stated above.
                             V.K. MOHANAN, JJ.
                     --------------------------------------------
                      S. T. Rev. No. 90 & 107 OF 2009
                     --------------------------------------------
                  Dated this the 16th day of December, 2009
                                  JUDGMENT
Ramachandran Nair, J.
A Division Bench, after doubting the correctness of the judgment of this Court
in P.K. DAMODRAN's case, 138 STC 442, has referred this case for decision by
Full Bench on the scope of interest payable under Section 23(3A) of the
K.G.S.T. Act, hereinafter called the "Act". We have heard Special Government
Pleader for the revision petitioner and various counsel appearing for the
respondent-assessees.
2\. The question raised is whether short payment of tax by the dealers along
with monthly returns either on account of non-inclusion of turnover or failure
to return turnover at the full rate of tax attracts interest under Section
23(3A) of the Act. In ST Rev. 107 of 2009 the respondent is a dealer in paper
who paid tax on the turnover of paper at 4% as against 8% payable under the
Act. The respondent-dealer in the other case has failed to include turnover in
the return which led to levy  2 of interest under Section 23(3A) of the Act.
Tribunal, though now found to be wrong by this Court, respondents should have
settled the liability towards interest under the Amnesty Scheme, that was
prevalent upto 31.3.2009. We find force in this contention because had the
Tribunal dismissed the appeals probably respondents would have settled the
liability under the Amnesty Scheme. We therefore direct the assessing officer
to grant amnesty benefit to the respondents reducing the interest in terms of
the scheme and allow settlement of liability by demanding further interest at
one per cent per month for the amnesty amount payable from the last date for
payment under the amnesty scheme till date of payment. Respondents are
directed to make application in this regard before the assessing officer
within three weeks from the date of receipt of a copy of this judgment and the
officer is directed to allow them to settle liability by making payment within
one month thereafter. Demand notice should be raised within one week from the
date of making  9 application. We make it clear that amnesty benefit extended
by us to the respondents will apply only to the respondents because of the
peculiar facts stated above.
                             V.K. MOHANAN, JJ.
                     --------------------------------------------
                      S. T. Rev. No. 90 & 107 OF 2009
                     --------------------------------------------
                  Dated this the 16th day of December, 2009
                                  JUDGMENT
Ramachandran Nair, J.
A Division Bench, after doubting the correctness of the judgment of this Court
in P.K. DAMODRAN's case, 138 STC 442, has referred this case for decision by
Full Bench on the scope of interest payable under Section 23(3A) of the
K.G.S.T. Act, hereinafter called the "Act". We have heard Special Government
Pleader for the revision petitioner and various counsel appearing for the
respondent-assessees.
2\. The question raised is whether short payment of tax by the dealers along
with monthly returns either on account of non-inclusion of turnover or failure
to return turnover at the full rate of tax attracts interest under Section
23(3A) of the Act. In ST Rev. 107 of 2009 the respondent is a dealer in paper
who paid tax on the turnover of paper at 4% as against 8% payable under the
Act. The respondent-dealer in the other case has failed to include turnover in
the return which led to levy  2 of interest under Section 23(3A) of the Act.
Tribunal, though now found to be wrong by this Court, respondents should have
settled the liability towards interest under the Amnesty Scheme, that was
prevalent upto 31.3.2009. We find force in this contention because had the
Tribunal dismissed the appeals probably respondents would have settled the
liability under the Amnesty Scheme. We therefore direct the assessing officer
to grant amnesty benefit to the respondents reducing the interest in terms of
the scheme and allow settlement of liability by demanding further interest at
one per cent per month for the amnesty amount payable from the last date for
payment under the amnesty scheme till date of payment. Respondents are
directed to make application in this regard before the assessing officer
within three weeks from the date of receipt of a copy of this judgment and the
officer is directed to allow them to settle liability by making payment within
one month thereafter. Demand notice should be raised within one week from the
date of making  9 application. We make it clear that amnesty benefit extended
by us to the respondents will apply only to the respondents because of the
peculiar facts stated above.
                             V.K. MOHANAN, JJ.
                     --------------------------------------------
                      S. T. Rev. No. 90 & 107 OF 2009
                     --------------------------------------------
                  Dated this the 16th day of December, 2009
                                  JUDGMENT
Ramachandran Nair, J.
A Division Bench, after doubting the correctness of the judgment of this Court
in P.K. DAMODRAN's case, 138 STC 442, has referred this case for decision by
Full Bench on the scope of interest payable under Section 23(3A) of the
K.G.S.T. Act, hereinafter called the "Act". We have heard Special Government
Pleader for the revision petitioner and various counsel appearing for the
respondent-assessees.
2\. The question raised is whether short payment of tax by the dealers along
with monthly returns either on account of non-inclusion of turnover or failure
to return turnover at the full rate of tax attracts interest under Section
23(3A) of the Act. In ST Rev. 107 of 2009 the respondent is a dealer in paper
who paid tax on the turnover of paper at 4% as against 8% payable under the
Act. The respondent-dealer in the other case has failed to include turnover in
the return which led to levy  2 of interest under Section 23(3A) of the Act.
The Tribunal in all the cases cancelled levy of interest following the
Division Bench decision of this Court above referred wherein this Court held
that interest could be levied under Section 23(3A) only if there is failure on
the part of the dealer to include any turnover of his business in the return
filed and consequent escapement of turnover in the assessment. When the matter
was heard, the Division Bench felt that subsequent amendment introduced to
Section 23(3A) with effect from 1.4.2004 is clarificatory in nature and the
interest under Section 23(3A) being compensatory in nature is payable on the
short fall in payment of tax which is the difference between the paid tax and
assessed tax, whatever be the circumstances which led to non-payment of full
amount of tax in time. In order to consider the issue , we have to refer to
Tribunal, though now found to be wrong by this Court, respondents should have
settled the liability towards interest under the Amnesty Scheme, that was
prevalent upto 31.3.2009. We find force in this contention because had the
Tribunal dismissed the appeals probably respondents would have settled the
liability under the Amnesty Scheme. We therefore direct the assessing officer
to grant amnesty benefit to the respondents reducing the interest in terms of
the scheme and allow settlement of liability by demanding further interest at
one per cent per month for the amnesty amount payable from the last date for
payment under the amnesty scheme till date of payment. Respondents are
directed to make application in this regard before the assessing officer
within three weeks from the date of receipt of a copy of this judgment and the
officer is directed to allow them to settle liability by making payment within
one month thereafter. Demand notice should be raised within one week from the
date of making  9 application. We make it clear that amnesty benefit extended
by us to the respondents will apply only to the respondents because of the
peculiar facts stated above.
                             V.K. MOHANAN, JJ.
                     --------------------------------------------
                      S. T. Rev. No. 90 & 107 OF 2009
                     --------------------------------------------
                  Dated this the 16th day of December, 2009
                                  JUDGMENT
Ramachandran Nair, J.
A Division Bench, after doubting the correctness of the judgment of this Court
in P.K. DAMODRAN's case, 138 STC 442, has referred this case for decision by
Full Bench on the scope of interest payable under Section 23(3A) of the
K.G.S.T. Act, hereinafter called the "Act". We have heard Special Government
Pleader for the revision petitioner and various counsel appearing for the
respondent-assessees.
2\. The question raised is whether short payment of tax by the dealers along
with monthly returns either on account of non-inclusion of turnover or failure
to return turnover at the full rate of tax attracts interest under Section
23(3A) of the Act. In ST Rev. 107 of 2009 the respondent is a dealer in paper
who paid tax on the turnover of paper at 4% as against 8% payable under the
Act. The respondent-dealer in the other case has failed to include turnover in
the return which led to levy  2 of interest under Section 23(3A) of the Act.
The Tribunal in all the cases cancelled levy of interest following the
Division Bench decision of this Court above referred wherein this Court held
that interest could be levied under Section 23(3A) only if there is failure on
the part of the dealer to include any turnover of his business in the return
filed and consequent escapement of turnover in the assessment. When the matter
was heard, the Division Bench felt that subsequent amendment introduced to
Section 23(3A) with effect from 1.4.2004 is clarificatory in nature and the
interest under Section 23(3A) being compensatory in nature is payable on the
short fall in payment of tax which is the difference between the paid tax and
assessed tax, whatever be the circumstances which led to non-payment of full
amount of tax in time. In order to consider the issue , we have to refer to
Tribunal, though now found to be wrong by this Court, respondents should have
settled the liability towards interest under the Amnesty Scheme, that was
prevalent upto 31.3.2009. We find force in this contention because had the
Tribunal dismissed the appeals probably respondents would have settled the
liability under the Amnesty Scheme. We therefore direct the assessing officer
to grant amnesty benefit to the respondents reducing the interest in terms of
the scheme and allow settlement of liability by demanding further interest at
one per cent per month for the amnesty amount payable from the last date for
payment under the amnesty scheme till date of payment. Respondents are
directed to make application in this regard before the assessing officer
within three weeks from the date of receipt of a copy of this judgment and the
officer is directed to allow them to settle liability by making payment within
one month thereafter. Demand notice should be raised within one week from the
date of making  9 application. We make it clear that amnesty benefit extended
by us to the respondents will apply only to the respondents because of the
peculiar facts stated above.
