Income Tax Appellate Tribunal - Delhi
M/S Yakult Danone India Pvt. ... vs Dcit, New Delhi on 29 March, 2019
                  IN THE INCOME TAX APPELLATE TRIBUNAL
                   DELHI BENCHES: Bench I-2 NEW DELHI
                BEFORE SHRI R.K.PANDA, ACCOUNTANT MEMBER
                  AND SMT. BEENA A PILLAI, JUDICIAL MEMBER
                              ITA No. 996/Del/2016
                                   A.Y. 2011-12
          Yakult Danone India P Ltd.           D.C.I.T. Circle 27(1)
               st
          16, 1 Floor                     vs. New Delhi
          Community Centre
          Okhla Industrial Area, Phase I
          New Delhi
          PAN: AAACY2585R
                   (Appellant)                     (Respondent)
                Assessee by          Sh. Himanshu Sinha, Adv. &
                                     Ms.Vrinda, Adv.
                Revenue by          Sh. HK Choudhary, CIT, D.R.
                Date of Hearing     20/02/2019
                                                                   ITA 996/Del/2016 AY: 2011-12
                                                            Yakult Danone India Private Limited
                                                 Date
    Draft dictated on
                                                 18.03.19
    Draft placed before author                   22.03.19
                                                 26/03/19
    Draft proposed & placed before the second
    member
    Draft discussed/approved by Second
    Member.
    Approved Draft comes to the Sr.PS/PS
    Kept for pronouncement on
                &
    Order uploaded on :
    File sent to the Bench Clerk
                Date of Hearing     20/02/2019
                Date of             29/03/2019
                Pronouncement
                                     ORDER
PER BEENA A PILLAI, JUDICIAL MEMBER Present appeal has been filed by assessee
against final assessment order dated 29/12/15, passed by Ld.AO under section
143 (3) read with section 144C (4) of the act on following grounds of appeal:
" Grounds The following grounds of appeal are mutually exclusive of and
without prejudice to each other.
ITA 996/Del/2016 AY: 2011-12 Yakult Danone India Private Limited General
Ground of Appeal
1\. That Ld. Assessing Officer ("AO") /Hon'ble Dispute Resolution Panel
("DRP")/ Ld. Transfer Pricing Officer ("TPO") erred in assessing the loss of
the Appellant at INR. 267,771,897/- as against returned loss of INR
337,317,454 under normal provisions of the Act. Transfer Pricing Ground of
appeals
2\. The Ld.TPO/AO/DRP have erred in making an adjustment under section 92CA
(3) of the Act without returning a finding about existence of any of the
circumstances specified in clauses (a) to (d) of sub-section (3) of section
92C of the Act.
3\. The Ld. TPO/AO/ Hon'ble DRP have erred in computing an adjustment of INR
6,95,45,557/- to the total income of the Appellant on account of adjustment in
arm's length price ("ALP") of the alleged international transaction pertaining
to Advertisement, Marketing and Promotional ("AMP") expenditure entered into
by the Appellant with its Associated Enterprise ("AE").
4\. The Ld. TPO/ AO/ DRP have erred in holding AMP expenditure as a separate
international transaction under section 92B of the Act and assuming
jurisdiction to determine the ALP thereof, when such expenditure represents
only domestic transactions with unrelated parties and does not satisfy the
requisites of being an international transaction under section 92B read with
section 92F(v) of the Act.
5\. The Ld. TPO/ AO has erred in treating expenses incurred by the Appellant
on account of AMP as an 'international transaction', without considering the
fact that the Appellant is a full risk bearing licensed manufacturer.
6\. The Hon'ble DRP/Ld. TPO/ Ld. AO erred in not considering that the Gross
Profit ("GP") rate of the Appellant is very high vis-a-vis comparable
companies and "remuneration/compensation" for AMP expenses (if warranted) may
be considered to subsumed in the GP earned from its manufacturing activities.
7\. The Hon'ble DRP/ Ld.TPO/Ld. AO have grossly erred in applying the ratio of
AMP/GP to determine the Arm's Length Price ('ALP") of the alleged transaction
of AMP for computing adjustment  2 ITA 996/Del/2016 AY: 2011-12 Yakult Danone
India Private Limited when the same is not a prescribed method under the
purview of section 92C of the Act, thereby rendering analysis based thereon as
illegal, null and void.
8\. The learned TPO/AO/DRP have erred in applying AMP/GP ratio, given the
fallacies and deficiencies associated therewith, and inferring that AMP
expenses incurred by the Appellant are "excessive" on that basis by
considering a set of inappropriate companies as comparable to the Appellant.
9\. Without prejudice to the contention that AMP expenses were incurred for
the purpose of enhancing sales in India, the learned TPO/AO/Hon'ble DRP have
grossly erred in considering direct sales expenses like sales promotion and
selling expenditure as a part of AMP expenses while computing the adjustment
in relation to the alleged international transaction, as they do not lead to
brand building.
10\. That the learned TPO/AO/DRP have erred in :
a. Not appreciating the functional profile of the Appellant (according to
which, incurrence of AMP expenses is an integral part of its roles and
responsibilities);
b. Re-characterizing the Appellant as a limited risk distributor and requiring
the Appellant to earn its remuneration in accordance with such re-
characterized business model;
c. Ignoring the fact that AMP expenses incurred by the Appellant were in
respect of its own business considerations, were incurred to penetrate the
market (since the Appellant launched a new unique product i.e.probiotic
fermented milk)) and any benefits resulting from such expenditure accrue to
the Appellant and benefit, if any to the AE is purely incidental in nature;
d. Erroneously assuming that the Appellant had rendered services to its AE by
incurring AMP expenses and holding that it should earn a mark-up on the
allegedly incurred excessive AMP expenditure.; and  3 ITA 996/Del/2016 AY:
2011-12 Yakult Danone India Private Limited e. Applying GP/AMP ratio as the
mark-up percentage for the alleged services provided by the Appellant to the
AE towards AMP activities.
11\. The learned TPO/ AO/DRP have erred, on facts and circumstances of the
case.
in:
a. Holding that advertising is done for brand promotion and not for product
promotion; and b. Computing adjustment thereon, without appreciating that no
expenditure attributable to brand promotion can be separately identified.
Corporate tax Ground of Appeals
12\. That on facts and in laws, the Ld. AO erred in holding that the appellant
has furnished inaccurate particulars of income in respect of each item of
disallowance/ additions and in initiating penalty proceedings under section
274 read with section 271 (1) (c) of the Act. The appellant craves leave to
submit such further grounds at or before the hearing of the appeal, so as to
enable your Honour to decide the appeal according to law."
2\. Brief facts of the case are as under:
Assessee filed its return of income on 29/11/11 declaring loss of
Rs.33,73,17,454/-, which was processed under section 143 (1) of the Income Tax
Act, 1961 (the Act). The case was selected for scrutiny and statutory notices
under section 143(2) of the Act was issued. In response to statutory notices,
representative of assessee appeared before Ld. AO and filed requisite details
as called for. 2.1. Ld.AO observed that during year under consideration
assessee was engaged in business of manufacturing dairy products. From records
it was further observed that assessee has entered into international
transactions with associated enterprises  4 ITA 996/Del/2016 AY: 2011-12
Yakult Danone India Private Limited during year. Ld. AO called for details of
international transaction and a reference was made under section 92 CE to
Transfer Pricing Officer (TPO) for determining arm's length price of
international transaction entered into by assessee with its associated
concerns. 2.2. Ld.TPO observed that assessee is a joint venture between Yakult
Honsha of Japan and Group Pay Denon of France with 50:50 shareholding. He
observed that assessee has been set up to manufacture and sell probiotics milk
in India. It has also been observed by Ld. TPO that assessee has set up its
manufacturing facility at Rai, Sonepat (Haryana). It has also been observed
that assessee commenced its commercial production from 18/12/07. 2.3. Ld.TPO
records that assessee is a sole manufacturer of Yakult's group products in
India and performs all business functions relating to sale of such products
such as identifying customers, negotiating purchase terms, arranging the
necessary resources, undertaking sales promotion activities etc. 2.4. It has
also been observed by Ld.TPO that during year assessee entered into following
international transactions disclosed in form 3 CEB:
    No.    Nature of transaction   Most            Profit          Value of
                                   Appropriate     Level           transaction:
                                   Method as per   Indicator       Rs.
                                   TP study        (PLI) as
                                                   per TP
                                                   Study
    1.     Purchase of raw and TNMM                OP/OC           1,21,02,574
           packing material
    2.     Purchase of stores and TNMM                                12,30,252
           spares
                                                                                     5
                                                                ITA 996/Del/2016 AY: 2011-12
                                                         Yakult Danone India Private Limited
    3.    Payment of Royalty           TNMM                                13,55,782
    4.    Reimbursement of             No bench                             5,75,745
          expenses to AE (in the       marking
          nature of travelling &       required
          other expenses)paid
    5.    Reimbursement of             No bench                            90,66,471
          expenses by AE (in the       marking
          nature of travelling &       required
          other expenses)paid
2.5. Ld.TPO,after calling for various details/explanations/evidences and on
consideration of same proposed adjustment with respect to AMP expenses
incurred by assessee as he was of view that assessee has carried out brand
building activities, for benefit of its AE's, for which assessee has been
adequately compensated. Ld. AO was of the opinion that assessee do not have
any right on trademarks and brands/trade name or any other marketing
intangibles in India and such brands are owned by its AEs outside India and
therefore expenditure incurred on AMP activities was for advantage of AEs.
Ld.TPO accordingly applied bright line approach and computed adjustment as
under:
    Particulars                                              Amount (Rs.)
    Total expenditure on AMP                                 6,45,14,654
    Sale of assessee                                         10,19,46,703
    AMP as a % of sales of assessee                          63.28%
Arm's length level of AMP % (as per the 'bright line') 0.75% Arm's length
level of AMP expenses 7,64,600 Amount spent in excess of 'bright line' and on
6,37,50,054 creation of marketing intangible Mark-up (PLR of SBI) 12.25%
Amount by which the assessee should have been 7,15,65,810 reimbursed by AE  6
ITA 996/Del/2016 AY: 2011-12 Yakult Danone India Private Limited 2.6.
Aggrieved by proposed AMP adjustment, assessee raised objections before DRP,
who upheld stand of Ld.TPO regarding AMP being an international transaction.
However following decision of Hon'ble Delhi High Court in case of Sony Ericson
Mobile Communication India (P) Ltd vs. CIT reported in (2015) 55 Taxmann.com
240, DRP directed for exclusion of routine selling and distribution expenses
while computing AMP of comparables. DRP also directed that only comparables
where similar expenses have been incurred should be considered while matching
with assessee, as per direction of Hon'ble Delhi High Court in case of Sony
Ericson Mobile Communication India (P) Ltd vs. CIT (supra). DRP also directed
to use Cost Plus method, to calculate markup on excessive AMP expenses as per
Rule 10(1)(c)(ii) of IT Rules 1963 which is GP/sales of comparable companies
selected.
Subsequently Hon'ble Delhi High Court in case of Maruti Suzuki India Ltd.,
Reported in (2015) 64 Taxmann.com 150 in which Hon'ble Court held that AMP
expenses incurred by Maruti Suzuki India cannot be treated and categorised as
an international transaction based upon which assessee in present facts of
case filed application for rectification before DRP. DRP however relied upon
decision of Sony Ericson (supra) passed by Hon'ble Delhi High Court.
2.7. Finally pursuant to DRP directions, Ld. AO passed impugned assessment
order incorporating the transfer pricing adjustment proposed by Ld. TPO vide
order dated 29/12/15 and reduced adjustment to Rs. 6,95,45,557/-.
7
ITA 996/Del/2016 AY: 2011-12 Yakult Danone India Private Limited 2.8.
Aggrieved by adjustment made by Ld. AO, assessee is in appeal before us now.
3\. It has been submitted that Ground No. 1 is general in nature and therefore
do not require adjudication.
4\. Ld.Counsel submitted that Ground No. 2-11 are regarding adjustment of Rs.
6.95 crores made on account of AMP expenses. He submitted that Ld.TPO applied
bright line test, which was originally sanctioned by Special Bench of this
Tribunal in case of LG Electronics vs ACIT reported in (2013) 29 Taxmann.com
300. He submitted that said approach has been overruled by Hon'ble Delhi High
Court in case of Sony Ericson Mobile Communications India Pvt. Ltd., (supra)
and Maruti Suzuki India Ltd (supra). Ld.Counsel argued that, bright line test
method is not the prescribed method under Indian Income Tax laws.
4.1. Ld.Counsel submitted that, assessee incurred AMP expenditure where
payments have been made to unrelated parties, in respect of its business
operation in India, to boost its sales in India. It has been submitted that,
these expenses are incurred to penetrate into market, and to educate consumers
in India about its novel and niche product. Ld.Counsel placing reliance upon
chart, submitted that, OP/sales of assessee reduced from -302.45% in financial
year 2010-11 to -22.67% in financial year 2017-18. It has been submitted that
assessee is on its way to achieve break-even in the next couple of years.
8
ITA 996/Del/2016 AY: 2011-12 Yakult Danone India Private Limited 4.2. It is
submitted that, adjustment made by Ld.TPO is not sustainable for various
reasons. Ld.Counsel submitted following prepositions:
(i) No "international transaction" involved: Placing reliance upon Section
92B(1) of the Act, Ld.Counsel submitted that 'international transaction' has
been defined to mean 'transaction' between two or more 'associated
enterprises', either or both of whom are non-residents, for purchase, sale or
lease of tangible or intangible property, or provisions of services, etc. He
submitted that, said section provides that, term 'international transaction'
would include 'mutual agreement' or 'arrangement' between two or more
associated enterprises for allocation or apportionment of, or contribution to
any cost incurred in connection with any benefit or service provided to any
such enterprise.
(ii) He submitted that section 92B, for a transaction to be termed as
International transaction, it has to fit into either of two limbs, viz; 
There must be a transaction and such transaction must be between associated
enterprises.
or  There should be mutual agreement or arrangement between two or more
associated enterprises for allocation or apportionment of or contribution to
any cost or expense incurred in connection with benefit, service or facility
provided to one or more of the associated enterprises.
9
ITA 996/Del/2016 AY: 2011-12 Yakult Danone India Private Limited 4.3.
Ld.Counsel submitted that, it is neither the case of Revenue that, there
existed a mutual agreement or arrangement for allocation or apportionment of,
nor, any contribution by AEs to any cost or expense incurred by assessee
towards advertisement, marketing and promotion in India. Ld.Counsel submitted
that, Ld.TPO can assume jurisdiction to undertake benchmarking of AMP
expenses, incurred by assessee, under section 92(2) of the Act, only if it
gives give rise to an international transaction in terms of section 92B. He
submitted that, facts of case in hand are specific and jurisdiction assumed by
Ld.TPO to undertake benchmarking of AMP expenses incurred by assessee in
course of carrying on of its business, cannot be sustained.
4.4. He vehemently submitted that expenditure unilaterally incurred by
assessee for purposes of its business, cannot give rise to a transaction or
international transaction, between associated enterprises, so as to be covered
under section 92B of the Act. He placed reference to Clause (v) of section 92F
of Act defines term transaction is as under:
"(v) "transaction " includes an arrangement, understanding or action in
concert. -
(a) Whether or not such arrangement, understanding or action is formal or in
writing; or
(b)Whether or not such arrangement, understanding or action is intended to be
enforceable by legal proceeding". (c )It is the case of the applicant that
unilateral incurring of AMP expenses by the applicant in India does not result
in any  10 ITA 996/Del/2016 AY: 2011-12 Yakult Danone India Private Limited
"transaction", much less an "international transaction", between the
applicant, on the one hand, and the foreign AE, on the other, so as to invoke
the transfer pricing regulations 4.5. From a conjoint reading of section 92B
read with section 92F(v) of the Act, it would kindly be appreciated that
transfer pricing regulations would be applicable to any transaction", being an
arrangement, understanding or action in concert, whether formal or writing or
whether enforceable or not by legal proceedings. He submitted that
transaction, per se, involves bilateral arrangement or agreement between
parties. A unilateral action by one of the parties, without any binding
obligation, in the absence an arrangement, understanding, or action in concert
(e.g. pre-arranged plan, or design agreed by parties), between parties, cannot
be termed as a transaction.
4.6. He thus submitted that, in order to construe a transaction, there has to
be an express arrangement, understanding or action in concert between parties
which cannot be inferred or implied. 4.7. Ld.Counsel submitted that, in
present case, AMP expenses had been incurred by assessee unilaterally, at its
own discretion through unrelated Indian parties, for purpose of its own
business, in order to cater to local market needs. Such AMP expenditure was
not incurred at instance of overseas AEs.
4.8. He further submitted that, no material brought on record by Ld.TPO, to
establish existence an arrangement, understanding or action in concert with
AEs. He submitted that Ld.TPO held such AMP expenditure unilaterally incurred
by assessee locally, for and  11 ITA 996/Del/2016 AY: 2011-12 Yakult Danone
India Private Limited on behalf of it, to be amounting to "international
transaction" in terms of section 92B, warranting invocation of transfer
pricing provisions.
4.9. Ld.Counsel placing reliance on decision of Hon'ble Delhi High Court in
the case of Moser Baer vs. ACIT reported in (2009) 176 Taxmann 473 submitted
that Ld.TPO therein, placed certain evidence/material on record to show that,
there existed a mutual arrangement or understanding between parties therein or
acted in concert, so as to constitute an international transaction. Ld.Counsel
thus submitted that Ld.TPO in facts of present case, cannot, on basis of
presumption/surmises, reach to a conclusion that parties herein has been
acting in concert, or there is an understanding or arrangement between them,
so as to construe a transaction. He therefore, submitted that in order to
constitute an international transaction in terms of section 92B of the Act, an
arrangement, understanding or action in concert must be shown to exist between
assessee and it's associated enterprises who are non-residents. 4.10.
Ld.Counsel placed reliance upon decision of Hon'ble Delhi High Court in case
of Maruti Suzuki India Ltd.,(supra) on the issue of existence of international
transaction for purpose of making transfer pricing adjustment in relation to
AMP expense incurred by assessee, wherein Hon'ble High Court observed and held
as under: "Step wise analysis of statutory provisions
62\. If a step by step analysis is undertaken of Sections 92B to 92F, the sine
qua non for commencing the transfer pricing exercise is to show the existence
of an international transaction. The next step is to  12 ITA 996/Del/2016 AY:
2011-12 Yakult Danone India Private Limited determine the price of such
transaction. The third step would be to determine the ALP by applying one of
the five price discovery methods specified in Section 92C. The fourth step
would be to compare the price of the transaction that is shown to exist with
the ALP and make the transfer pricing adjustment by substituting the ALP for
the contract price.
63\. A reading of the heading of Chapter X ["Computation of income from
international transactions having regard to arm's length price"] and Section
92 (1) which states that any income arising from an international transaction
shall be computed having regard to the ALP. Section 92C (1) which sets out the
different methods of determining the ALP, makes it clear that the transfer
pricing adjustment is made by substituting the ALP for the price of the
transaction. To begin with there has to be an international transaction with a
certain disclosed price. The transfer pricing adjustment envisages the
substitution of the price of such international transaction with the ALP.
64\. The transfer pricing adjustment is not expected to be made by deducing
from the difference between the 'excessive' AMP expenditure incurred by the
Applicant and the AMP expenditure of a comparable entity that an international
transaction exists and then proceed to make the adjustment of the difference
in order to determine the value of such AMP expenditure incurred for the AE.
And, yet, that is what appears to have been done by the Revenue in the present
case. It first arrived at the 'bright line' by comparing the AMP expenses
incurred by MSIL with the average percentage of the AMP expenses incurred by
the comparable entities. Since on applying  13 ITA 996/Del/2016 AY: 2011-12
Yakult Danone India Private Limited the BLT, the AMP spend of MSIL was found
'excessive' the Revenue deduced the existence of an international transaction.
It then added back the excess expenditure as the transfer pricing
'adjustment'. This runs counter to legal position explained in] CIT v. EKL
Appliances Ltd. (2012) 345 ITR 241 (Del) which required a TPO "to examine the
'international transaction' as he actually finds the same." In other words the
very existence of an international transaction cannot be a matter for
inference or surmise.
65\. As already noticed, the decision in Sony Ericsson has done away with the
BLT as means for determining the ALP of an international transaction involving
AMP expenses.
Revenue's contentions
66\. It is contended by the Revenue that the mere fact that the Indian entity
is engaged in the activity of creation, promotion or maintenance of certain
brands of its foreign AE or for the creation/promotion of new/existing markets
for the AE, is by itself enough to demonstrate that there is an arrangement
with the parent company for this activity. It is urged that merely because
MSIL and SMC do not have an explicit arrangement/agreement on this aspect
cannot lead to the inference that there is no such arrangement or the entire
AMP activity of the Indian entity is unilateral and only for its own benefit.
According to the Revenue, "the only credible test in the context of TP
provisions to determine whether the Indian subsidiary is incurring AMP
expenses unilaterally on its own or at the instance of the AE is to find out
whether an independent party would have also done the same." It is asserted:
"An independent party with a short term  14 ITA 996/Del/2016 AY: 2011-12
Yakult Danone India Private Limited agreement with the MNC will not incur
costs which give long term benefits of brand & market development to the other
entity. An independent party will, in such circumstances, carry out the
function of development of markets only when it is adequately remunerated for
the same.
67\. Reference is made by Mr. Srivastava to some sample agreements between
Reebok (UK) and Reebok (South Africa) and 1C Issacs & Co and BHPC Marketing to
urge that the level of AMP spend is a matter of negotiation between the
parties together with the rate of royalty. It is further suggested that it
might be necessary to examine whether in other jurisdictions the foreign AE
i.e., SMC is engaged in AMP/brand promotion through independent entities or
their subsidiaries without any compensation to them either directly or through
an adjustment of royalty payments.
Absence of a machinery provision
68\. The above submissions proceed purely on surmises and conjectures and if
accepted as such will lead to sending the tax authorities themselves on a
wild- goose chase of what can at best be described as a 'mirage'. First of
all, there has to be a clear statutory mandate for such an exercise. The Court
is unable to find one. To the question whether there is any 'machinery'
provision for determining the existence of an international transaction
involving AMP expenses, Mr. Srivastava only referred to Section 92F (ii) which
defines ALP to mean a price "which is applied or proposed to be applied in a
transaction between persons other than AEs in uncontrolled conditions". Since
the reference is to 'price' and to 'uncontrolled  15 ITA 996/Del/2016 AY:
2011-12 Yakult Danone India Private Limited conditions' it implicitly brings
into play the BLT. In other words, it emphasises that where the price is
something other than what would be paid or charged by one entity from another
in uncontrolled situations then that would be the ALP. The Court does not see
this as a machinery provision particularly in light of the fact that the BLT
has been expressly negatived by the Court in Sony Ericsson. Therefore, the
existence of an international transaction will have to be established de hors
the BLT.
69\. There is nothing in the Act which indicates how, in the absence of the
BLT, one can discern the existence of an international transaction as far as
AMP expenditure is concerned. The Court finds considerable merit in the
contention of the Applicant that the only TP adjustment authorised and
permitted by Chapter X is the substitution of the ALP for the transaction
price or the contract price. It bears repetition that each of the methods
specified in S.92C(I) is a price discovery method. S.92C (I) thus is explicit
that the only manner of effecting a TP adjustment is to substitute the
transaction price with the ALP so determined. The second proviso to Section
92C(2) provides a 'gateway' by stipulating that if the variation between the
ALP and the transaction price does not exceed the specified percentage, no TP
adjustment can at all be made. Both Section 92CA, which provides for making a
reference to the TPO for computation of the ALP and the manner of the
determination of the ALP by the TPO, and Section 92CB which provides for the
"safe harbor" rules for determination of the ALP, can be applied only if the
TP adjustment involves substitution of the transaction price with the ALP.
Rules IOB. IOC and  16 ITA 996/Del/2016 AY: 2011-12 Yakult Danone India
Private Limited the new Rule 10AB only deal with the determination of the ALP.
Thus for the purposes of Chapter X of the Act, what is envisaged is not a
quantitative adjustment but only a substitution of the transaction price with
the ALP.
70\. What is clear is that it is the 'price' of an international transaction
which is required to be adjusted. The very existence of an international
transaction cannot be presumed by assigning some price to it and then deducing
that since it is not an ALP, an 'adjustment' has to be made. The burden is on
the Revenue to first show the existence of an international transaction. Next,
to ascertain the disclosed 'price' of such transaction and thereafter ask
whether it is an ALP. If the answer to that is in the negative the TP
adjustment should follow. The objective of Chapter X is to make adjustments to
the price of an international transaction which the AEs involved may seek to
shift from one jurisdiction to another. An 'assumed' price cannot form the
reason for making an ALP adjustment." 4.11. Ld.Counsel placing reliance on
specific observations by Hon'ble High Court, reproduced herein above,
submitted that, provisions under Chapter X envisage separate entity concept,
and there cannot be a presumption that since assessee is a subsidiary of
associated enterprise, all activities of assessee are dictated by such
associated enterprises. Merely because associated enterprise has financial
interest, it cannot be presumed that AMP expense incurred by assessee are at
the instance, or on behalf of associated  17 ITA 996/Del/2016 AY: 2011-12
Yakult Danone India Private Limited enterprises. Placing reliance upon view by
Hon'ble Delhi High Court, Ld.Counsel submitted that initial onus is on Revenue
to demonstrate through some tangible material that assessee and associated
enterprise acted in concert and further that there was an agreement to enter
into an international transaction concerning AMP expenses.
4.12. It was vehemently submitted that Ld.TPO erroneously held that
performance of Development, Enhancement, Maintenance, Protection and
Enhancement ('DEMPE') functions by assessee lead to international transaction
between assessee and associated enterprise, without appreciating that such
functions are performed by assessee independently, unilaterally and without
any influence of associated enterprises. It was submitted by Ld.Counsel that
since DEMPE functions relating to AMP expenses are performed by assessee and
returns attributed to such functions are also enjoyed by assessee in the form
of higher sales and profitability, no compensation for AMP expenses incurred
by assessee is warranted. He placed reliance upon a chart forecasting profits
in future years. Ld.Counsel at this juncture admitted that, expenses incurred
by assessee toward advertisement are 60% of the turnover and since its
inception assessee has been showing losses, which is expected to continue till
2020. He submitted that assessee is slowly making place in market of pro-
biotic products, for which expenses has to be incurred towards advertisements
for long lasting existence.
18
ITA 996/Del/2016 AY: 2011-12 Yakult Danone India Private Limited 4.13.
Accordingly, he submitted that AMP expenses cannot be regarded as having been
incurred at the behest of or in concert with the Associated Enterprises.
4.14. It is submitted that Ld.TPO applied Bright Line Test, which has been
rejected by Hon'ble Delhi High Court in case of Sony Ericsson Mobile
Communications (supra).
4.15. He thus submitted that, Bright Line Test has no mandate under the Act
and accordingly same cannot be resorted to for purposes of ascertaining, if
there exists an international transaction of brand promotion services between
assessee and associated enterprises.
4.16. He submitted that Hon'ble Delhi High Court in case of Maruti Suzuki
India Ltd. (supra) held that existence of an international transaction needs
to be established de hors Bright Line Test. He placed reliance upon following
decisions of Hon'ble Delhi High Court, which has followed aforestated view:
Honda Seil Power Products Ltd. Vs. DCIT reported in (2016) 237 Taxmann 304
Bausch and Lomb Eyecare India Pvt.Ltd. vs. Addl.CIT reported in (2016) 237
Taxmann 24;
Valvoline Cummins P Ltd. Vs. DCIT (ITA No.527/Del/2016) CIT vs Whirlpool of
India Ltd reported in (2015) 64 Taxmann.com 324;
Pepsico India Holdings P Ltd. Vs. ACIT (2018) 100 Taxmann.com 159 (Delhi-Trib)
LOreal India P Ltd. Vs. DCIT (TA No.7714/Mum/2012)  19 ITA 996/Del/2016 AY:
2011-12 Yakult Danone India Private Limited Goodyear India Ltd. Vs. DCIT (ITA
No.5650/Del/2011) 4.17. Ld.Counsel submitted that it has been reiterated by
Hon'ble Court that, Revenue needs to establish on basis of some tangible
material or evidence that there exists an international transaction of
provision of brand building service between assessee and associated enterprise
and in absence of any transaction, there is no question of undertaking any
bench marking analysis with respect to AMP expenses.
4.18. He thus submitted that, unilateral incurring of AMP expenses by assessee
in present facts of case, neither gave rise to an international transaction in
terms of section 92B, nor are covered in section 92(2) of the Act, so as to be
subjected to arm's length test under Transfer Pricing provisions.
4.19. Economic vs. legal ownership of intellectual property. Ld.Counsel
submitted that, assessee is a joint-venture between Yakult Japan and Danone
Singapore. He submitted that there is no economic sense in joint-venture
incurring huge expenditure in India for benefit of only one party of joint-
venture. It has been submitted that, both Yakult Japan and Danone Singapore
are 50:50 shareholders of joint-venture, and any expenditure incurred in India
would be for the benefit of both parties involved and Danone Singapore, would
not have allowed assessee to incur excessive AMP spent only for benefit for
Yakult Japan, as it would lower the share profits which Danone Singapore is
entitled for. 4.20. It has thus been submitted by Ld.Counsel that all
decisions made in context of AMP functions within India are undertaken by  20
ITA 996/Del/2016 AY: 2011-12 Yakult Danone India Private Limited assessee and
any benefit arising out of same, directly accrues to assessee. It has also
been submitted that if any benefit are accrued to AEs is indirect, and purely
incidental. Ld.Counsel submitted that assessee is operating in India since
2007 and has been exclusively manufacturing and selling pro-biotic products
within the territory.
4.21. Ld.Counsel argued that AMP expenditure were unilaterally incurred by
assessee for exploiting brand name 'Yakult' in course of carrying on of its
business, such expenses cannot be said to be attributed to legal ownership of
brand, which admittedly vests with overseas AE. He submitted that, the term
economic ownership of benefits, is characterization of parties upon FAR
analysis, which is a cardinal principle, for undertaking transfer pricing
analysis. He submitted that in Transfer Pricing parlance, term 'economic
ownership' refers to ownership as to economic benefit, pursuant to functions
performed, assets utilized and risks assumed by respective parties and is to
be taken into consideration for purpose of transfer pricing analysis.
4.22. He placed reliance upon decision of Hon'ble Delhi High Court in case of
Sony Ericsson Mobile Communications India P Ltd(supra), in relation to
aforesaid aspect of economic ownership held, wherein Hon'ble Court observed
and held as under.
"133. Transfer Pricing Officers have referred to paragraphs 6.36 to 6.39. For
the sake of completeness, we would quote the said paragraphs from the OECD
Transfer Pricing Guidelines, which read:
21
ITA 996/Del/2016 AY: 2011-12 Yakult Danone India Private Limited 6.36.
Difficult transfer pricing problems can arise when marketing activities are
undertaken by enterprises that do not own the trademarks or trade names that
they are promoting (such as a distributor of branded goods). In such a case,
it is necessary to determine how the marketer should be compensated for those
activities. The issue is whether the marketer should be compensated as a
service provider, i.e. for providing promotional services, or whether there
are any cases in which the marketer should share in any additional return
attributable to the marketing intangibles. A related question is how the
return attributable to the marketing intangibles can be identified.
6.37. As regards the first issue- whether the marketer is entitled to a return
on the marketing intangibles above a normal return on marketing activities-
the analysis requires an assessment of the obligations and rights implied by
the agreement between the parties. It will often be the case that the return
on marketing activities will be sufficient and appropriate. One relatively
clear case is where a distributor acts merely as an agent, being reimbursed
for its promotional expenditures by the owner of the marketing intangible. In
that case, the distributor would be entitled to compensation appropriate to
its agency activities alone and would not be entitled to share in any return
attributable to the marketing intangible. 6.38. Where the distributor actually
bears the cost of its marketing activities (i.e. there is no arrangement for
the owner  22 ITA 996/Del/2016 AY: 2011-12 Yakult Danone India Private Limited
to reimburse the expenditures), the issue is the extent to which the
distributor is able to share in the potential benefits from those activities.
In general, in arm's length transactions the ability of a party that is not
the legal owner of a marketing intangible to obtain the future benefits of
marketing activities that increase the value of that intangible will depend
principally on the substance of the rights of that party. For example, a
distributor may have the ability to obtain benefits from its investments in
developing the value of a trademark from its turnover and market share where
it has a long-term contract of sole distribution rights for the trademarked
product. In such cases, the distributor share of benefits should be determined
based on what an independent distributor would obtain in comparable
circumstances. In some cases, a distributor may bear extraordinary marketing
expenditures beyond what an independent distributor with similar rights might
incur for the benefit of its own distribution activities. An independent
distributor in such a case might obtain an additional return from the owner of
the trademark, perhaps through a decrease in the purchase price of the product
or a reduction in royalty rate.
6.39 The other question is how the return attributable to marketing activities
can be identified. A marketing intangible may obtain value as a consequence of
advertising and other promotional expenditures, which can be important to
maintain the value of the trademark. However, it can be difficult to  23 ITA
996/Del/2016 AY: 2011-12 Yakult Danone India Private Limited determine what
these expenditures have contributed to the success of a product. For instance,
it can be difficult to determine what advertising and marketing expenditures
have contributed to the production or revenue, and to what degree. It is also
possible that a new trademark or one newly introduced into a particular market
may have no value or little value in that market and its value may change over
the years as it makes an impression on the market (or perhaps loses its
impact). A dominant market share may to some extent be attributable to
marketing efforts of a distributor. The value and any changes will depend to
an extent on how effectively the trademark is promoted in the particular
market. More fundamentally, in many cases higher returns derived from the sale
of trademarked products may be due as much to the unique characteristics of
the product or its high quality as to the success of advertising and other
promotional expenditures. The actual conduct of the parties over a period of
years should be given significant weight in evaluating the return attributable
to marketing activities.
See paragraphs 3.75-3.79 (multiple year data).
134\. The aforesaid paragraphs do not support the Revenue's submission, but
stipulate the requirement that the owner of the marketing intangible should
adequately compensate the domestic AE incurring costs towards marketing
activities by reimbursement of expenses or by sufficient and appropriate
return. Where the domestic AE is entitled to compensation as a pure
distributor, it would not be  24 ITA 996/Del/2016 AY: 2011-12 Yakult Danone
India Private Limited entitled to share in any return attributable to the
marketing intangible, not being the legal owner. The position may be different
where there is a long term contract of sole distribution rights of the
trademarked products, thereby acquiring economic ownership benefit. In some
cases, where the distributor bears extraordinary> marketing expenses, he would
be entitled to additional or higher return, through decreased price or
reduction of royalty rate. The difficulty in attributing advertisement and
other promotional expenditures towards trademark valuation or towards
marketing activities, i.e. contributing to manufacture and current income and
the impracticability of division in the case of such attribution is
highlighted in paragraph 6.39."
4.23. Ld.Counsel thus submitted that economic ownership of brand 'Yakult'
rests with assessee and accordingly, assessee cannot be expected to seek
compensation for expenditure incurred on asset economically owned by it.
4.24. In view of aforesaid, it is respectfully submitted that adjustment on
account of AMP expenses made by Ld.TPO is not permissible.
5\. On the contrary, Ld.CIT DR submitted that huge spending of AMP expenses
amounts to brand building and trademark of AEs, and therefore gives benefit to
AE by enhancing its brand value, which helps AE in achieving sales in other
territories or otherwise. He submitted that, concept of brand building and
whether such brand building can be attributed to advertisement and sale
promotion, thereby benefiting AE, has been discussed in detail by  25 ITA
996/Del/2016 AY: 2011-12 Yakult Danone India Private Limited Hon'ble Delhi
High Court in case of Sony Ericson Mobile Communication (P) Ltd (supra). He
submitted that assessee is paying trademark at 1% of Transfer License
Agreement, which is placed at page 62 of paper book, apart from Royalty @1% to
Yakult Japan. He submitted following chart being the rates of royalty payable
by assessee:
                    Year                        Rate
     1st  year                                  1.0%
       nd
     2 year                                     1.0%
     3rd year                                   1.0%
       th
     4 year                                     2.0%
     5th year                                   2.0%
     th
6 year and subsequent years (but subject to 3.0% the proviso to paragraph (a)
of Article 5) 5.1. Referring to Transfer Pricing order, Ld.CIT DR submitted
that, apart from trademark fee and royalty fee, assessee is purchasing major
raw materials for its manufacturing activity, from its AEs, which is reported
as international transaction. He submitted that AE apart from trademark fee
and royalty is also deriving benefits by way of selling its products in India.
Referring to chart of estimated profits filed by assessee, Ld.CIT DR submitted
that assessee has a gross profit of 70.54% during year and operating loss at
309% at net level. He submitted that, main reason for such a huge loss is
sales and distribution expenses and administrative and sales promotion
expenses incurred by assessee amounting to Rs.3,73,11,582/- and
Rs.6,45,14,654/- respectively. Ld. CIT DR thus submitted that assessee is
substantially engaged in business  26 ITA 996/Del/2016 AY: 2011-12 Yakult
Danone India Private Limited of brand building/trademark for AEs during year.
It has been submitted that total consumption of raw materials during year
amounts to Rs.2.59 crores vis-a-vis advertisement expenses amounting to
Rs.6.45 crore which is 250% of consumption of raw materials. It was thus
submitted by Ld.CIT DR that there are sufficient materials to hold that there
is international transaction of AMP functions of assessee under section 92F(v)
of the Act, as assessee is acting in concert with its AEs for developing its
brand and popularising its products in India.
6\. We have perused submissions advanced by both sides in light of records
placed before us.
6.1. Before adverting to main issue, it is sine qua non to understand
functions performed by assessee, risks assumed and assets used by assessee to
the transaction.
4.2.2 Functions performed by Yakult Danone India The functions performed by
Yakult Danone India are:
a) Procurement of raw materials and packing materials: Yakult Danone India is
primarily engaged in the manufacture and sale of dairy products i.e. probiotic
milk. The manufacturing plant of the company is located in Sonepat. Hence, it
is involved in the procurement of raw materials and packaging materials in
respect of its operations. These materials are procured by Yakult Danone India
based on sales forecasts and consumption estimates.
b) Production of milk: Yakult Danone India is engaged in preparation of
probiotic milk from skimmed milk. The main ingredients of the product are
skimmed milk powder, sugar, glucose, friendly bacteria and water. The bacteria
is cultured and mixed with other ingredients to prepare the probiotic milk.
The company is engaged in routine functions of inventory scheduling,
production scheduling and monitoring as a part of its production operations.
Yakult Danone India purchases capital equipment from its Group Companies for
production of milk. These equipments purchased are in the nature of dairy
machines, machines connected with preparation of milk bottles, lab equipments
for quality checks, etc.  27 ITA 996/Del/2016 AY: 2011-12 Yakult Danone India
Private Limited AEs provide technical assistance to the company in connection
with the construction and operation of Yakult Danone India's plants and for
the production and sale of probiotic products. Yakult Danone India also
receives technical assistance from its AEs in form of personnel visiting, on a
need basis. In consideration of the receipt of such assistance, Yakult Danone
India in FY 2007-08 paid a royalty to its AEs amounting to 1% of its net
sales. Apart from the above, for use of the Yakult trademark, Yakult Danone
India also paid an additional royalty amounting to 1% of its net sales to its
Group Companies.
c) Sales Promotion: Yakult Danone India deals in the FMCG sector which is
typically characterized by heavy expenditure on planning and execution of
sales promotion. Toward this end Yakult Danone India engages in domestic sales
promotion activities. In line with the global sales strategy, Yakult Danone
India primarily sells its products through 'Yakult Ladies'. This strategy was
adopted by Yakult Danone India to help customers fully understand the benefits
of lactobacilli and bring Yakult products to them every day. Yakult Ladies are
particularly well-suited for serving housewives in this way as the great
majority of them are housewives themselves. Delivery of Yakult products is
performed by Yakult Ladies working through regional marketing companies. These
Yakult Ladies are provided the required training for sale of the products at
these centres itself. At the same time, however, these centres also serve as
places where Yakult Ladies can form strong bonds with co-workers and foster
new enthusiasm for the important work they do. Apart from this, Yakult
products are also sold via convenience stores, on the Street or in an office,
schools, hospitals, and elderly care facilities.
For the sale of the Yakult milk produced, Yakult Danone India's marketing
activities are concentrated towards periodic advertisement in newspapers,
conferences, key opinion leaders for recommending the production.
d) Quality Control: Yakult Danone India is responsible for ensuring that the
products adhere to the quality standards laid down by the Group. These quality
standards are applicable for both input materials as well as for finished
goods. Every bottle is tested in Yakult Danone India after production.
e) General Management Functions: Apart from the above, Yakult Danone India
also undertakes certain general management functions that are carried out by
any business irrespective of its size and type. These functions (mentioned
below) are drivers of every business and are indispensable in the economic
environment:
• Corporate Strategy Determination: All policies relating to various processes
and issues within Yakult Danone India are determined by its own management
which continuously monitors the economic environment surrounding the Indian
entity, assesses their strategic position within the industry and targets to
comply with the overall longterm corporate goals.
• Finance, Accounting, Treasury, HR and Legal Function: Yakult Danone India is
responsible for managing its finance, treasury and accounting  28 ITA
996/Del/2016 AY: 2011-12 Yakult Danone India Private Limited functions. Yakult
Danone India is also responsible for compliance with all legal/ statutory
requirements applicable to the Indian entity. It also undertakes its routine
administration and HR functions.
    4.3     Assets
    Tangible Assets
Yakult Danone India utilized routine tangible assets for its manufacturing
operation like plant and machinery, factory building, office equipments,
furniture and fixtures, computers etc. These assets form a significant part of
Yakult Danone India's fixed cost base.
Intangible Assets Yakult Danone India does not own any non-routine intangibles
and accordingly does not own trade secrets or undertake research and
development activities on its account that would lead to the development of
non-routine intangibles. 4.4 Risk Analysis Risks are those business factors
that may expose a company to the possibility of loss or damage. In other
words, Risk is the probability that a particular adverse event may occur
during a stated period of time, or may result from a particular challenge. The
following section discusses the risk borne by Company vis-à-vis Group
Companies.
Market Risk Market risk arises when a company is subject to adverse sales
conditions due to either increased competition in the marketplace, adverse
demand conditions within the market, or the inability to develop markets or
position products to service targeted customers.
Yakult Danone India is exposed to this risk as it is dependent on market
patterns and trends, while the Group Companies have relatively lower risk
relating to Indian operations.
Customer Credit Risk When a company supplies products or services to a
customer in advance of customer payment, the company runs the risk that the
customer will fail to make payment. This risk is known as customer credit
risk. Yakult Danone India is exposed to the risk of non-payment from the
customers to whom they have sold the products. Group Companies are not exposed
to this risk with respect to the Indian operations.
Foreign Exchange Risk Exchange rate risk relates to the potential variability
of profits that can arise because of changes in foreign exchange rates. Such
risks arise when doing business in any market that is affected by
international trade and can arise even if a company does not conduct actual
transactions in a foreign currency. Yakult Danone India deals with its
Associate Enterprises in foreign currency. It therefore bears the risk of
adverse movements of the Indian Rupee vis-a-vis the foreign currencies. Since
the Associated Enterprises receive their payments in their local currency,
they are not exposed to the risk on this account. Capacity utilisation risk
29 ITA 996/Del/2016 AY: 2011-12 Yakult Danone India Private Limited Capacity
Utilisation Risk refers to the risk that relates to the under-utilisation of
the existing capacity of the organisation in terms of manufacturing facility/
service capacity etc. Yakult Danone India is exposed to the risk of under
utilisation of its capacity. As Yakult Danone India was engaged in commercial
operations only from December 2007, during the year, it operated at a capacity
of only 8% of its installed capacity.
The AEs do not bear the capacity utilisation risk with respect to the Indian
operations.
Manpower risk Manpower is one of the most valuable resources employed by an
organisation for carrying out its day-to-day operations. The increasing
competition in the market place combined with other uncontrolled variables
result in exposure to manpower risk.
Yakult Danone India bears this risk in respect of the India personnel. Yakult
Danone Group does not bear any risk associated with manpower of Indian
operations.
Price Risk This risk arises on account of fluctuations of prices in the
market. As Yakult Danone India competes in the open market it is exposed to
this risk. Yakult Danone India initiated commercial production of milk in
December 2007 only. Accordingly to penetrate the market it underpriced its
bottles by approximately 90%. Thus, in Financial Year 2007-08, the company had
a high exposure to this risk.
Yakult Danone Group is not directly affected by the competition faced by
Yakult Danone India, but since it is a major supplier to Yakult Danone India,
it indirectly bears this risk.
Research and Development Risk It represents the risk that the research
performed by an enterprise may not be successful.
As Yakult Danone India does not undertake any R&D on its own account, it is
not exposed to this risk.
R&D is primarily the responsibility of Yakult Danone Group and hence it bears
all the risks associated with this activity.
Technology Risk This risk arises if the market in which an enterprise operates
is sensitive to the introduction of new products and variants. In such a case,
the enterprise may lose potential revenues arising from obsolete
infrastructure, tools and manufacturing process.
Yakult Danone India does not own the manufacturing technology and relies on
AEs for constant up-gradation of technology. Accordingly, the Indian entity is
relatively less exposed to this risk.
As AEs have (over the years) spent considerable amount in developing the
technology and are also responsible for constant up-gradation of technology,
they bear significant risk on this account.
30
ITA 996/Del/2016 AY: 2011-12 Yakult Danone India Private Limited Inventory
Risk Inventory risk relates to the potential for losses associated with
carrying finished product inventory. Losses include obsolescence, shrinkage,
or market collapse such that products are only saleable at prices that are
inadequate to cover the company's product costs.
All risks associated with inventory management vest with Yakult Danone India.
AEs are relatively less exposed to this risk.
4.5. Summary of Contribution This section presents a summary of the
economically relevant contributions of Yakult Danone India and its Group
Companies participating in inter-company transactions.
The marks in the table denote the contributions made by each enterprise as
follows.:
             Mark            Explanation
              -          No or insignificant contribution
              √         Positive or significant contribution
    Contribution              Yakult Danone India       Group Companies
    FUNCTIONS
    PERFORMED:
    1. New Product
    Conceptualisation                 -                            √
    and Development
    2. Global                                                          √
    manufacturing                    -
    3. Core Global                                                     √
    Marketing                        -
    4. Global Quality                                                  √
    Assurance                        -
    5. Research &                                                      √
    Development                      -
    6. Procurement of
    Raw Material and                      √                        -
    Packing Material
    7. Local production of
    Milk                                      √                    -
    8. Local Sales                        √                    -
    Promotion
                                                                                               31
                                                           ITA 996/Del/2016 AY: 2011-12
                                                    Yakult Danone India Private Limited
    9. Local Quality              √                     -
    Control
    10. General                   √                 -
    Management
    Functions
    RISKS BORNE
    11. Market Risk               √                 -
    12.Customer Credit            √                 -
    Risk
    13. Foreign Exchange          √             -
    Risk
    14. Capacity                  √            -
    Utilisation Risk
    15. Man Power Risk            √             -
    16. Price Risk                √            -
    17. Research and              -                 √
    Development Risk
    18. Technology Risk       -                          √
    19. Inventory Risk                √                 -
    ASSETS USED
    20. Tangible Assets                √                -
    21. Intangible Assets             -                     √
6.2. Admittedly, assessee is a joint venture between Yakult Honsha of Japan
and Groupe Danone of France with 50:50 shareholdings. There is no dispute that
this company has been set up to manufacture and sell Probiotic milk in India.
In TP study, assessee categorised itself to be a manufacturer of Probiotic
milk. Admittedly, assessee started its commercial sale in financial year
2007-08 and made significant losses at operating level during year. It is also
observed that assessee has entered into Trademark License Agreement and
Technical Service Assistance Agreement with Yakult Honsha of Japan. Assessee
is to pay 1% royalty under Trademark License Agreement and 1% under Technical
Service Assistance  32 ITA 996/Del/2016 AY: 2011-12 Yakult Danone India
Private Limited Agreement. Assessee has placed agreements at page 61-87 of
paper book.
6.3. From FAR analysis reproduced herein above, assessee has categorised
itself to be a full-fledged manufacturer, exposed to all kinds of risks
associated with carrying out manufacturing activities in India. It is
submitted that, it does not own any significant intangibles and neither does
it undertake research and development on this account. It is observed that
assessee has been importing raw materials, packing materials and capital
equipments from AEs in respect of production, based upon forecast and
consumption estimates. The chart relied upon by Ld.Counsel is reproduced
hereunder:
    Parti-     FY              FY             FY             FY 2013-14     FY               FY               FY                  FY
    culars     2010-11         2011-12        2012-13                       2014-15          2015-16          2016-17             2017-18
    Turn-
    over
               101,946,703     168,655,834    249,886,433    340,447,002    447,583,394      539,755,838      567,576,484         712,533,646
    (INR)
    Advt.
    &
               58,677,227      92,979,979     109,965,657    106,072,714    126,091,403      120,140,826      136,003,003         152,093,103
    Sales
    Promo-
    tion
    (INR)
    Advt.
     &
               57.56%          55.13%         44.01%         31.16%         28.17%           22.26%           23.96%              21.35%
    Sales
    Promo-
    tion (%)
    Opera-
    ting '
               -308,336,160    -287,644,781   -312,736,237   -258,409,919   -244,742,375     -207,468,986     -217,047,723        -161,505,861
    profit
    OP/        -302.45%        -170.55%       -125.15%       -75.90%        -54.68%          -38.44%          -38.24%             -22.67%
    Sales
6.4. Assessee benchmarked purchase of raw materials as international
transaction, which is duly reported in Form 3CEB and  33 ITA 996/Del/2016 AY:
2011-12 Yakult Danone India Private Limited also filed transfer pricing
documentation on which no adverse inference has been drawn by revenue.
6.5. It is observed that assessee engages itself into domestic sales promotion
activities in line with global sales strategy. Assessee sells its products
through 'Yakult Ladies' that help customers fully understand benefits of
lactobacilli, and bring Yakult products to them everyday. It has been
submitted in transfer pricing study that, these Yakult Ladies are provided
with required training for sale of product, at these centres itself, where
these ladies form strong bond with co-workers and foster new enthusiasm for
important work they do. It has also been submitted that the products are sold
via convenience stores, on the street or in office, schools, hospitals and
elderly care facilities. It is also observed that assessee is exposed to
market risk, customer credit risk, foreign exchange risk, capacity utilisation
risk, manpower risk and inventory risk.
6.6. From the above, it is clear that all necessary functions of strategizing,
advertising and marketing activities, its implementation and controlling
across country is conducted by assessee for market penetration in India. Thus,
in a way assessee is economic owner of brand, though not the legal owner. As a
full- fledged manufacturer, assessee has been assuming all risks for promoting
its sales, and thereby entire profitability is subject to tax in India, and no
residual profits are enjoyed by AE. It is observed that AE is only paid
royalty and technical service fee at 1% each of net turnover.
34
ITA 996/Del/2016 AY: 2011-12 Yakult Danone India Private Limited 6.7. Ld.TPO
concluded that assessee created marketing intangibles only for promotion of
brand and products of AE. Ld.TPO was of opinion that, as AE recovering AMP
expenditure incurred by it from assessee, and that AE is controlling AMP
activity of assessee, indicates that, there was some arrangement between
assessee and its AE, regarding incurring of AMP expenditure. Ld.TPO, adopted
bright line test for.
6.8. From Trademark License Agreement and Royalty Agreement, it is observed
that there is nothing in agreement to suggest any sort of arrangement or
agreement between assessee and AE towards spending of AMP. In our view this is
a case where Ld.TPO failed to establish international transaction vis-a-vis
AMP expenses amounting to brand building and trademarking of AE which helps AE
in achieving sales in other territories or otherwise.
6.9. The contentions raised by Ld.Counsel as well as Ld.CIT DR has been dealt
with by Coordinate Bench of this Tribunal in case of PepsiCo India Holdings
(P) Ltd., VS ACIT reported in (2018) 100 Taxmann.com 159(Del-Trib) as under:
"57. The TPO has also referred to the decision of Hon'ble Delhi High Court in
the case of Sony Ericsson Mobile Communication India (P.) ltd. to contend that
mere incurrence of AMP expenditure in respect of brand not owned by the
assessee has to be treated as international transaction. Such an inference by
the learned TPO is not tenable in view of the Hon'ble Delhi High Court in the
judgment in the case of Maruti Suzuki India (P.) Ltd. case (Supra) wherein the
ratio of  35 ITA 996/Del/2016 AY: 2011-12 Yakult Danone India Private Limited
Sony Ericsson judgement has been explained in the following manner: --
"41. Having considered the above submissions, the Court proceeds to analyse
the decision in Sony Ericsson Mobile Communications India (P.) Ltd. (supra) to
determine if it conclusively answers the issue concerning the existence of an
international transaction as a result of incurring of AMP expenditures by an
Assessee.
42\. As already noticed, the judgment in Sony Ericsson Mobile Communications
India (P.) Ltd. (supra) does not seek to cover all the cases which may have
been argued before the Division Bench. In particular, as far as the present
appeal ITA No. 110 of 2014 is concerned, although it was heard along with the
batch of appeals, including those disposed of by the Sony Ericsson Mobile
Communications India (P.) Ltd. (supra) judgment, at one stage of the
proceedings on 30th October 2014 the appeal was delinked to be heard
separately.
43\. Secondly, the cases which were disposed of by the Sony Ericsson Mobile
Communications India (P.) Ltd. (supra) judgment, i.e. of the three Assessees
Canon, Reebok and Sony Ericsson were all of distributors of products
manufactured by foreign AEs. The said Assessees were themselves not
manufacturers. In any event, none of them appeared to have questioned the
existence of an international transaction involving the concerned foreign AE.
It was also not disputed that the said international transaction of incurring
of AMP expenses could be made subject matter of transfer pricing adjustment in
terms of Section 92 of the Act.
44\. However, in the present appeals, the very existence of an international
transaction is in issue. The specific case of MSIL is that the Revenue has
failed to show the existence of any agreement, understanding or arrangement
between MSIL and SMC regarding the AMP spend of MSIL. It is pointed out that
the BLT has been applied to the AMP spend by MSIL to (a) deduce the existence
of an international transaction involving SMC and (b) to  36 ITA 996/Del/2016
AY: 2011-12 Yakult Danone India Private Limited make a quantitative
'adjustment' to the ALP to the extent that the expenditure exceeds the
expenditure by comparable entities. It is submitted that with the decision in
Sony Ericsson Mobile Communications India (P.) Ltd. (supra) having disapproved
of BLT as a legitimate means of determining the ALP of an international
transaction involving AMP expenses, the very basis of the Revenue's case is
negated."
"68. The above submissions proceed purely on surmises and conjectures and if
accepted as such will lead to sending the tax authorities themselves on a
wildgoose chase of what can at best be described as a 'mirage'. First of all,
there has to be a clear statutory mandate for such an exercise. The Court is
unable to find one. To the question whether there is any 'machinery' provision
for determining the existence of an international transaction involving AMP
expenses, Mr. Srivastava only referred to Section 92F (ii) which defines ALP
to mean a price "which is applied or proposed to be applied in a transaction
between persons other than AEs in uncontrolled conditions". Since the
reference is to 'price' and to 'uncontrolled conditions' it implicitly brings
into play the BLT. In other words, it emphasizes that where the price is
something other than what would be paid or charged by one entity from another
in uncontrolled situations then that would be the ALP. The Court does not see
this as a machinery provision particularly in light of the fact that the BLT
has been expressly negatived by the Court in Sony Ericsson Mobile
Communications India (P.) Ltd. (supra). Therefore, the existence of an
international transaction will have to be established de hors the BLT.
69\. There is nothing in the Act which indicates how, in the absence of the
BLT, one can discern the existence of an international transaction as far as
AMP expenditure is concerned. The Court finds considerable merit in the
contention of the Assessee that the only TP adjustment authorised and
permitted by Chapter X is the substitution of the ALP for the transaction
price or the contract price. It bears repetition that each of the methods
specified in S.92C (1) is a price discovery method. S.92C (1) thus is explicit
that the only manner of effecting a TP adjustment is to substitute the
transaction price with the ALP so  37 ITA 996/Del/2016 AY: 2011-12 Yakult
Danone India Private Limited determined. The second proviso to Section 92C (2)
provides a 'gateway' by stipulating that if the variation between the ALP and
the transaction price does not exceed the specified percentage, no TP
adjustment can at all be made. Both Section 92CA, which provides for making a
reference to the TPO for computation of the ALP and the manner of the
determination of the ALP by the TPO, and Section 92CB which provides for the
"safe harbour" rules for determination of the ALP, can be applied only if the
TP adjustment involves substitution of the transaction price with the ALP.
Rules 10B, 10C and the new Rule 10AB only deal with the determination of the
ALP. Thus, for the purposes of Chapter X of the Act, what is envisaged is not
a quantitative adjustment but only a substitution of the transaction price
with the ALP.
70\. What is clear is that it is the 'price' of an international transaction
which is required to be adjusted. The very existence of an international
transaction cannot be presumed by assigning some price to it and then deducing
that since it is not an ALP, an 'adjustment' has to be made. The burden is on
the Revenue to first show the existence of an international transaction. Next,
to ascertain the disclosed 'price' of such transaction and thereafter ask
whether it is an ALP. If the answer to that is in the negative the TP
adjustment should follow. The objective of Chapter X is to make adjustments to
the price of an international transaction which the AEs involved may seek to
shift from one jurisdiction to another. An 'assumed' price cannot form the
reason for making an ALP adjustment.
71\. Since a quantitative adjustment is not permissible for the purposes of a
TP adjustment under Chapter X, equally it cannot be permitted in respect of
AMP expenses either. As already noticed hereinbefore, what the Revenue has
sought to do in the present case is to resort to a quantitative adjustment by
first determining whether the AMP spend of the Assessee on application of the
BLT, is excessive, thereby evidencing the existence of an international
transaction involving the AE. The quantitative determination forms the very
basis for the entire TP exercise in the present case.
38
ITA 996/Del/2016 AY: 2011-12 Yakult Danone India Private Limited
72\. As rightly pointed out by the Assessee, while such quantitative
adjustment involved in respect of AMP expenses may be contemplated in the
taxing statutes of certain foreign countries like U.S.A., Australia and New
Zealand, no provision in Chapter X of the Act contemplates such an adjustment.
An AMP TP adjustment to which none of the substantive or procedural provisions
of Chapter X of the Act apply, cannot be held to be permitted by Chapter X. In
other words, with neither the substantive nor the machinery provisions of
Chapter X of the Act being applicable to an AMP TP adjustment, the inevitable
conclusion is that Chapter X as a whole, does not permit such an adjustment.
73\. It bears repetition that the subject matter of the attempted price
adjustment is not the transaction involving the Indian entity and the agencies
to whom it is making payments for the AMP expenses. The Revenue is not joining
issue, the Court was told, that the Indian entity would be entitled to claim
such expenses as revenue expense in terms of Section 37 of the Act. It is not
for the Revenue to dictate to an entity how much it should spend on AMP. That
would be a business decision of such entity keeping in view its exigencies and
its perception of what is best needed to promote its products. The argument of
the Revenue, however, is that while such AMP expense may be wholly and
exclusively for the benefit of the Indian entity, it also ensures to building
the brand of the foreign AE for which the foreign AE is obliged to compensate
the Indian entity. The burden of the Revenue's song is this: an Indian entity,
whose AMP expense is extraordinary (or 'nonroutine') ought to be compensated
by the foreign AE to whose benefit also such expense enures. The 'nonroutine'
AMP spend is taken to have 'subsumed' the portion constituting the
'compensation' owed to the Indian entity by the foreign AE. In such a scenario
what will be required to be benchmarked is not the AMP expense itself but to
what extent the Indian entity must be compensated. That is not within the
realm of the provisions of Chapter X.
74\. The problem with the Revenue's approach is that it wants every instance
of an AMP spend by an Indian entity which happens to use the brand of a
foreign AE to be presumed to involve an international transaction. And this,
notwithstanding  39 ITA 996/Del/2016 AY: 2011-12 Yakult Danone India Private
Limited that this is not one of the deemed international transactions listed
under the Explanation to Section 92B of the Act. The problem does not stop
here. Even if a transaction involving an AMP spend for a foreign AE is able to
be located in some agreement, written (for e.g., the ample agreements produced
before the Court by the Revenue) or otherwise, how should a TPO proceed to
benchmark the portion of such AMP spend that the Indian entity should be
compensated for?
75\. As an analogy, and for no other purpose, in the context of a domestic
transaction involving two or more related parties, reference may be made to
Section 40A(2)(a) under which certain types of expenditure incurred by way of
payment to related parties is not deductible where the AO "is of the opinion
that such expenditure is excessive or unreasonable having regard to the fair
market value of the goods." In such event, "so much of the expenditure as is
so considered by him to be excessive or unreasonable shall not be allowed as a
deduction." The AO in such an instance deploys the 'best judgment' assessment
as a device to disallow what he considers to be an excessive expenditure.
There is no corresponding 'machinery' provision in Chapter X which enables an
AO to determine what should be the fair 'compensation' an Indian entity would
be entitled to if it is found that there is an international transaction in
that regard. In practical terms, absent a clear statutory guidance, this may
encounter further difficulties. The strength of a brand, which could be
product specific, may be impacted by numerous other imponderables not limited
to the nature of the industry, the geographical peculiarities, economic trends
both international and domestic, the consumption patterns, market behaviour
and so on. A simplistic approach using one of the modes similar to the ones
contemplated by Section 92C may not only be legally impermissible but will
lend itself to arbitrariness. What is then needed is a clear statutory scheme
encapsulating the legislative policy and mandate which provides the necessary
checks against arbitrariness while at the same time addressing the
apprehension of tax avoidance.
76\. As explained by the Supreme Court in CIT v. B.C. Srinivasa Setty [1981]
128 ITR 294 and PNB Finance Ltd. v. CIT [2008] 307  40 ITA 996/Del/2016 AY:
2011-12 Yakult Danone India Private Limited ITR 75 in the absence of any
machinery provision, bringing an imagined international transaction to tax is
fraught with the danger of invalidation. In the present case, in the absence
of there being an international transaction involving AMP spend with an
ascertainable price, neither the substantive nor the machinery provision of
Chapter X are applicable to the transfer pricing adjustment exercise."
Further in the judgment of Sony Ericsson Mobile Communication (P.) Ltd.
(supra), the High Court itself has distinguished the cases before it wherein
there were cases which already themselves had accepted that there exists
international transaction and there were other set of cases where the assessee
has disputed the international transaction. This is clear from the following
passage of the judgment: --
"120. Notwithstanding the above position, the argument of the Revenue goes
beyond adequate and fair compensation and the ratio of the majority decision
mandates that in each case where an Indian subsidiary of a foreign AE incurs
AMP expenditure should be subjected to the 'bright line test' on the basis of
comparables mentioned in paragraph 17.4. Any excess expenditure beyond the
bright line should be regarded as a separate international transaction of
brand building. Such a broadbrush universal approach is unwarranted and would
amount to judicial legislation. During the course of arguments, it was
accepted by the Revenue that the TPOs/Assessing Officers have universally
applied 'bright line test' to decipher and compute value of international
transaction and thereafter applied 'Cost Plus Method' or 'Cost Method' to
compute the arm's length price. The said approach is not mandated and
stipulated in the Act or the Rules. The list of parameters for ascertaining
the comparables for applying bright line test in paragraph 17.4 and,
thereafter, the assertion in paragraph 17.6 that comparison can be only made
by choosing comparable of domestic cases not using any foreign brand, is
contrary to the Rules. It amounts to writing and prescribing a  41 ITA
996/Del/2016 AY: 2011-12 Yakult Danone India Private Limited mandatory
procedure or test which is not stipulated in the Act or the Rules. This is
beyond what the statute in Chapter X postulates. Rules also do not so
stipulate. The argument and reasoning in paragraph 17.6 in a way loses focus
on the main issue and controversy; whether the arm's length price fixed
between the two AEs is adequate and justified and would have been paid if the
transaction was between two independent enterprises. The two independent
enterprises must be two unrelated parties having no connection. It does not
matter whether the comparables are domestic enterprises or not. However, and
it is manifest that the comparable should have similar rights, if any, as the
tested party in the brand name, trademark, etc.
121\. During the course of hearing before us, counsel for the Revenue had
submitted that paragraph 17.4 should be treated as illustrations and not as
binding comparables. We would prefer to observe, that an Assessing Officer/TPO
can go and must examine the question whether the assessee is performing
functions of a pure distributor or performing distribution and marketing
functions, in the latter case, he must examine and ascertain whether the
transfer price takes into consideration the marketing function, which would
include AMP functions. This would ensure adequate transaction price and hence
assure no loss of revenue. When the distribution and marketing functions are
interconnected and reliable comparables are available, arm's length price
could be computed as a package, if required and necessary by making adequate
adjustments. When the Assessing Officer/TPO comes to the conclusion that it is
not possible to compute arm's length price without segregating and dividing
distribution and marketing or AMP functions, he can so proceed after giving
justification and adequate reasons. At that stage, he would have apportioned
the price received or the compensation paid by the foreign AE towards
distribution and marketing or AMP functions. The TPO can then apply an
appropriate method and compute the arm's length price of the two independently
and even by applying separate methods. This will be in terms of the provisions
of the Act and the Rules and also as per the general principles of
international taxation accepted and applied universally. On the other hand, as
42 ITA 996/Del/2016 AY: 2011-12 Yakult Danone India Private Limited recorded
by us above, applying 'bright line test' on the basis of parameters prescribed
in paragraphs 17.4 and 17.6 would be adding and writing words in the statute
and the Rules and introducing a new concept which has not been recognised and
accepted in any of the international commentaries or as per the general
principles of international taxation accepted and applied universally. There
is nothing in the Act or the Rules to hold that it is obligatory that the AMP
expenses must and necessarily should be subjected to 'bright line test' and
the nonroutine AMP expenses as a separate transaction to be computed in the
manner as stipulated."
58\. Thus, form the plain reading of the aforesaid principles laid down by the
Hon'ble Jurisdictional High Court, the key sequitur is that:
> (i) International transaction cannot be identified or held to be existing
> simply because excess AMP expenditure has been incurred by the Indian
> entity.
(ii) International transactions cannot be found to exist after applying the
BLT to decipher and compute value of international transaction.
(iii) There is no provision either in the Act or in the Rules to justify the
application of BLT for computing the Arm's Length Price and there is nothing
in the Act which indicate how in the absence of BLT one can discern the
existence of an international transaction as far as AMP expenditure is
concerned.
(iv) Revenue cannot resort to a quantify the adjustment by determining the AMP
expenses spent by the assessee after applying BLT to hold it to be excessive
and thereby evidencing the existence of the international transaction
involving the AE.
59\. Here in this case also, the TPO has tried to prove the international
transaction, vis-à-vis, AMP after applying the BLT which now in view of
settled law by the Hon'ble Jurisdictional High Court, such an approach has to
be rejected. Hence at the very threshold the  43 ITA 996/Del/2016 AY: 2011-12
Yakult Danone India Private Limited spending of AMP expenditure by the
assessee cannot be held to be an international transaction between the
assessee and its AE.
60\. Another point which has been raised by the Revenue is that, huge spending
of AMP expenses amounts to brand building and trade mark of the AE, and
therefore, such a spending gives a benefit to the AE by enhancing its brand
value which helps the AE in achieving sales in other territories or otherwise.
This concept of brand building and whether such a brand building can be
attributed to advertisement and sale promotions and thereby benefitting the
AE, has been discussed in detail by the Hon'ble High Court in the case of Sony
Ericsson Mobile Communication (supra) which for the sake of ready reference is
reproduced hereunder: -- "Brand and brand building
102\. We begin our discussion with reference to elucidation on the concept of
brand and brand building in the minority decision in the case of L. G.
Electronics India Pvt Ltd. (supra). The term "brand", it holds, refers to
name, term, design, symbol or any other feature that identifies one seller's
goods or services as distinct from those of others. The word "brand" is
derived from the word "brand" of Old Norse language and represented an
identification mark on the products by burning a part. Brand has been
described as a duster of functional and emotional 103 It is a matter of
perception and reputation as it reflects customers' experience and faith.
Brand value is not generated overnight but is created ever a period of time,
when there is recognition that the logo or the name guarantees a consistent
level of quality and expertise. Leslie de Chematony and McDonald have
described "a successful brand is an identifiable product, service, person or
place, augmented in such a way that the buyer or user perceives relevant,
unique, sustainable added values which match their needs most closely". The
words of the Supreme Court in Civil Appeal No. 1201 of 1966 decided on
February 12, 1970, in Khushal Khenger Shah v. Khorshedbann Dabida Boatwala, to
describe "goodwill", can be adopted to describe a brand as an intangible asset
being the whole advantage of the reputation and connections formed with the
customer together with circumstances which make the connection durable. The
definition  44 ITA 996/Del/2016 AY: 2011-12 Yakult Danone India Private
Limited given by Lord MacNaghten in Commissioner of Inland Revenue v. Midler
and Co. Margarine Ltd. [1901] AC 217 (223) can also be applied with marginal
changes to understand the concept of brand. In the context of "goodwill" it
was observed: "It is very difficult, as it seems to me, to say that goodwill
is not property. Goodwill is bought and sold every day. It may be acquired.
I think, in any of the different ways in which property is usually acquired.
When a man has got it he may keep it as his own. He may vindicate his
exclusive right to it if necessary by process of law. He may dispose of it if
he will--of course, under the conditions attaching to property of that nature
... What is goodwill? It is a thing very easy to describe very difficult to
define. It is the benefit and advantage of the good name, reputation, and:
connection of a business. It is the attractive force which brings in custom.
It is the one thing which distinguishes an old established business from a new
business at its first start. The goodwill of a business must emanate from a
particular centre or source. However, widely extended or diffused its
influence may be, goodwill is worth nothing unless it has power of attraction
sufficient to bring customers home to the source from which it emanates.
Goodwill is composed of a variety of elements. It differs in its composition
in different trades and in different businesses in the same trade. One element
may preponderate here and another element there. To analyse goodwill and split
it up into its component parts, to pare it down as the Commissioners desire to
do until nothing is left but a dry residuum ingrained in the actual place
where the business is carried on while everything else is in the all, seems to
me to be as useful for practical purposes as it would be to resolve the human
body into the various substances of which it is said to be composed. The
goodwill of a business is one whole, and in a case like this it must be dealt
with as such. For my part, I think that if there is one attribute common to
all cases of goodwill it is the attribute of locality. For goodwill has no
independent existence. It cannot subsist by itself. It must be attached to a
business. Destroy the business, and the goodwill perishes with it, though
elements remain which may perhaps be gathered up and be revived again ..."
45
ITA 996/Del/2016 AY: 2011-12 Yakult Danone India Private Limited 104 "Brand"
has reference to a name, trade mark or trade name. A brand like "goodwill",
therefore, is a value of attraction to customers arising from name and a
reputation for skill, integrity, efficient business management or efficient
service. Brand creation and value, therefore, depends upon a great number of
facts relevant for a particular business. It reflects the reputation which the
proprietor of the brand has gathered over a passage or period of time in the
form of widespread popularity and universal approval and acceptance in the
eyes of the customer. To use words from CTT v. Chunilal Prabhudas and Co.
[1970] 76 ITR 566 (Cal) ; AIR 1971 Cal 70, it would mean :
"It has been horticulturally and botanically viewed as 'a seed sprouting' or
an 'acorn growing into the mighty oak of goodwill'. It has been geographically
described by locality. It has been historically explained as growing and
crystallising traditions in the business. It has been described in terms of a
magnet as the 'attracting force'. In terms of comparative dynamics, goodwill
has been described as the 'differential return of profit'. Philosophically it
has been held to be intangible. Though immaterial, it is materially valued.
Physically and psychologically, it is a 'habit and sociologically it is a
'custom'. Biologically, it has been described by Lord Macnaghten in Trego v.
Hunt [1896] AC 7 as the 'sap and life' of the business."
There is a line of demarcation between development and exploitation.
Development of a trade mark or goodwill takes place over a passage of time and
is a slow ongoing process. In cases of well recognised or known trade marks,
the said trade mark is already recognised. Expenditures incurred for promoting
product(s) with a trade mark is for exploitation of the trade mark rather than
development of its value. A trade mark is a market place device by which the
consumers identify the goods arid services and their source. In the context of
trade mark, the said mark symbolises the goodwill or the likelihood that the
consumers will make future purchases of the same goods or services. Value of
the brand also would depend upon and is attributable to intangibles other than
trade mark. It refers to infra-structure, know-how, ability to compete with
the established market leaders. Brand value, therefore, does not represent
trade mark as  46 ITA 996/Del/2016 AY: 2011-12 Yakult Danone India Private
Limited a standalone asset and is difficult and complex to determine and
segregate its value. Brand value depends upon the nature and quality of goods
and services sold or dealt with'. Quality control being the most important
element, which can mar or enhance the value.
Therefore, to assert and profess that brand building as equivalent or
substantial attribute of advertisement and' sale promotion would be largely
incorrect. It represents a coordinated synergetic impact created by assort-
merit largely representing reputation and quality. There are a good number of
examples where brands have been built without incurring substantial
advertisement or promotion expenses and also cases where in spite of extensive
and large scale advertisements, brand values have not been created. Therefore,
it would be erroneous and fallacious to treat brand building as counterpart or
to commensurate brand with advertisement expenses. Brand building or creation
is a vexed and complexed issue, surely not just related to advertisement.
Advertisements may be the quickest and effective way to tell a brand story to
a large audience but just that is not enough to create or build a brand.
Market value of a brand would depend upon how many customers you have, which
has reference to brand goodwill, compared to a baseline of an unknown brand.
It is in this manner that the value of the brand or brand equity is
calculated. Such calculations would be relevant when there is an attempt to
sell or transfer the brand name. Reputed brands do not go in for advertisement
with the intention to increase the brand value but to increase the sales and
thereby earn larger and greater profits. It is not the case of the Revenue
that the foreign associated enterprises are in the business of sale/transfer
of brands.
Accounting Standard 26 exemplifies distinction between expenditure HJ7
incurred to develop or acquire an intangible asset and internally generated
goodwill. An intangible asset should be recognised as an asset, if and only
if, it is probable that future economic benefits attributable to the said
asset will flow to the enterprise and the cost of the asset can be measured
reliably. The estimate would represent the set off of economic conditions that
will exist over the useful life of the intangible asset. At the  47 ITA
996/Del/2016 AY: 2011-12 Yakult Danone India Private Limited initial stage,
intangible asset should be measured at cost. The above proposition would not
apply to internally generated goodwill or brand. Paragraph 35 specifically
elucidates that internally generated goodwill should not be recognised as an
asset. In some cases expenditure is incurred to generate future economic
benefits but it may not insult in creation of an intangible asset in the form
of goodwill or brand, which meets the recognition criteria under AS-26.
Internally generated goodwill or brand is not treated as an asset in AS-26
because it is not an identifiable resource controlled by an enterprise, which
can be reliably measured at cost. Its value can change due to a range of
factors. Such uncertain and unpredictable differences, which would occur in
future, are indeterminate. In subsequent paragraphs, AS-26 records that
expenditure on materials and services used or consumed, salary, wages and
employment related costs, overheads, etc., contribute in generating internal
intangible asset. Thus, it is possible to compute good- will or brand
equity/value at a point of time but its future valuation would be perilous and
an iffy exercise.
In paragraph 44 of AS-26, it is stated that intangible asset arising from
development will be recognised only and only if amongst several factors, can
demonstrate a technical feasibility of completing the intangible asset: that
it will be available for use or sale and the intention is to complete the
intangible asset for use or sale is shown or how the intangible asset generate
probable future benefits, etc. The aforesaid position finds recognition and
was accepted in CIT v. B. C. Srinivasa Setty [1981] 128 ITR 294 (SC), a
relating transfer to goodwill. Goodwill, it was held, was a capital asset and
denotes benefits arising from connection and reputation. A variety of elements
go into its making and the composition varies in different trades, different
businesses in the same trade, as one element may pre-dominate one business,
another element may dominate in another business. It remains substantial in
form and nebulous in character. In progressing business, brand value or
goodwill will show progressive increase but in falling business, it may vain.
Thus, its value fluctuates from one moment to another, depending upon
reputation and everything else relating to business, personality, business  48
ITA 996/Del/2016 AY: 2011-12 Yakult Danone India Private Limited rectitude of
the owners, impact of contemporary market reputation, etc. Importantly, there
can be no account in value of the factors producing it and it is impossible to
predicate the moment of its birth for it comes silently into the world
unheralded and unproclaimed. Its benefit and impact need not be visibly felt
for some time. Imperceptible at birth, it exits unwrapped in a concept,
growing or fluctuating with numerous imponderables pouring into and affecting
the business. Thus, the date of acquisition or the date on which it comes into
existence is not possible to determine and it is impossible to say what was
the cost of acquisition. The aforesaid observations are relevant and are
equally applicable to the present controversy. It has been repeatedly held by
the Delhi High Court that advertisement 110 expenditure generally is not and
should not be treated as capital expenditure incurred or made for creating an
intangible capital asset. Appropriate in this regard would be to reproduce the
observations in CTT v. Monto Motors Ltd. [2012] 206 Taxman 43 (Delhi), which
read:
"4. . . . Advertisement expenses when incurred to increase sales of products
are usually treated as a revenue expenditure, since the memory of purchasers
or customers is short. Advertisement are issued from time to time and the
expenditure is incurred periodically, so that the customers remain attracted
and do not forget the product and its qualities. The advertisements
published/displayed may not be of relevance or significance after lapse of
time in a highly competitive market, wherein the products of different
companies compete and are available in abundance. Advertisements and sales
promotion are conducted to increase sale and their impact is limited and felt
for a short duration. No permanent character or advantage is achieved and is
palpable, unless special or specific factors are brought on record. Expenses
for advertising consumer products generally are a part of the process of
profit earning and not in the nature of capital outlay. The expenses in the
present case were not incurred once and for all, but were a periodical
expenses which had to be incurred continuously in view of the nature of the
business. It was an on- going expense. Given the factual matrix, it is
difficult to hold that  49 ITA 996/Del/2016 AY: 2011-12 Yakult Danone India
Private Limited the expenses were incurred for setting the profit earning
machinery in motion or not for earning profits.". (Also see, CIT v. Spice
Distribution Ltd., I. T. A. No. 597 of 2014, decided by the Delhi High Court
on September 19, 2014 [2015] 374 ITR 30 (Delhi) and CTT v. Salora
International Ltd. [2009] 308 ITR 199 (Delhi).
Accepting the parameters of the "bright line test" and if the said para meters
and tests are applied to Indian companies with reputed brands and substantial
AMP expenses would lead to difficulty and unforeseen tax implications and
complications. Tata, Hero, Mahindra, TVS, Baja], Godrej, Videocon group and
several others are both manufacturers and owners of intangible property in the
form of brand names. They incur substantial AMP expenditure. If we apply the
"bright line test" with reference to indicators mentioned in paragraph 17.4 as
well as the ratio expounded by the majority judgment in L. G. Electronics
India Pvt Ltd.'s case (supra) in paragraph 17.6 to bifurcate and segregate the
AMP expenses towards brand building and creation, the results would be
startling and unacceptable. The same is the situation in case we apply the
parameters and the "bright line test" in terms of paragraph 17.4 or as per the
contention of the Revenue, i.e., AMP expenses incurred by a distributor who
does not have any right in the intangible brand value and the product being
marketed by him. This would be unrealistic and impracticable, if not delusive
and misleading (aforesaid reputed Indian companies, it is patent, are not to
be treated as comparables with the assessee, i.e., the tested parties in these
appeals, for the latter are not the legal owners of the brand name/trade
mark).
112\. Branded products and brand image is a result of consumerism and a
commercial reality, as branded products "own" and have a reputation of
intrinsic believability and acceptance which results in higher price and
margins. Trans- border brand reputation is recognised judicially and in the
commercial world. Well known and renowned brands had extensive goodwill and
image, even before they became freely and readily available in India through
the subsidiary associated  50 ITA 996/Del/2016 AY: 2011-12 Yakult Danone India
Private Limited enterprises, who are assessees before us. It cannot be denied
that the reputed and established brands had value and goodwill. But a new
brand/trade mark/trade-name would be relatively unknown. We have referred to
the said position not to make a comparison between different brands but to
highlight that these are relevant factors and could affect the function
undertaken which must be duly taken into consideration in selection of the
comparables or when making subjective adjustment and, thus, for computing the
arm's length price. The aforesaid discussion substantially negates and rejects
the Revenue's case. But there are aspects and contentions in favour of the
Revenue which requires elucidation."
60.1 Thus, the Hon'ble High Court after describing the concept of the "brand"
had made a clear cut demarcation between development and exploitation of brand
which is either in the form of trademark or goodwill which takes place over a
passage of time by which its value depends upon and is attributable to
intangibles other than trademark like, infrastructure, knowhow, ability to
compete in the established market, lease, etc. Brand value does not represent
trademark as asset and it is quite difficult to determine and segregate its
value. Brand value largely depends upon the nature of goods and services sold,
after sales services, robust distributorship, quality control, customer
satisfaction and catena of other factors. The advertisement is more telling
about the brand story, penetrating the mind of the customers and constantly
reminding about the brand, but it is not enough to create brand, because
market value of a brand would depend upon how many customers you have, which
has reference to a brand goodwill. There are instances where reputed brand
does not go for advertisement with the intention to increase the brand value
but to only increase the sale and thereby earning greater profits. It is  51
ITA 996/Del/2016 AY: 2011-12 Yakult Danone India Private Limited also not the
case here that foreign AE is in the business of sale/transfer of brands. Their
Lordships have also referred to Accounting Standard 26 which provides for
computation of goodwill and brand equal value at a point of time but not its
future valuation or how such an intangible asset will generate probable future
benefit. Because, the value fluctuates from one moment to other depending upon
reputation and other factors. Reputation of a brand only enhances the sale and
profitability and here in this case is only benefitting the assessee company
when marketing its products using the trade mark and the brand of AE. Even
otherwise also, the value of the brand which has been created in India by the
assessee company will only be relevant when at some point of time the foreign
AE decides to sell the brand, then perhaps that would be the time when brand
value will have some significance and relevance. But to make any transfer
pricing adjustment simply on the ground that assessee has spent advertisement,
marketing expenditure which is benefitting the brand/trademark of the AE would
not be correct approach. Thus, this line of reasoning given by the TPO is
rejected.
6.10. Respectfully following the same, we also reject Bright line Test applied
by Ld.TPO and further hold that, AMP expenditure cannot be considered as
International transaction in the facts and circumstances of present case.
6.11. Accordingly we allow ground nos. 1- 11 raised by assessee.
52
ITA 996/Del/2016 AY: 2011-12 Yakult Danone India Private Limited
7\. Ground no.12 is in respect of penalty levied by Ld.AO. This ground being
consequential in nature, do not call for any adjudication.
8\. In the result appeal filed by assessee stands allowed.
Order pronounced in open court on 29th March,2019.
                 Sd/-                                           Sd/-
       (R.K.PANDA)                                           (BEENA A PILLAI)
    Accountant Member                                        Judicial Member
    Dated: 29th March, 2019.
    Copy   of the Order forwarded to:
    1.     Appellant
    2.     Respondent
    3.     CIT
    4.     CIT(A)
    5.     DR
    6.     Guard File
                                                  By Order
                                                 Asst. Registrar
                                        ITAT, Delhi Benches, New Delhi
                                                                                          53
                                                                   ITA 996/Del/2016 AY: 2011-12
                                                            Yakult Danone India Private Limited
                                                 Date
    Draft dictated on
                                                 18.03.19
    Draft placed before author                   22.03.19
                                                 26/03/19
    Draft proposed & placed before the second
    member
    Draft discussed/approved by Second
    Member.
    Approved Draft comes to the Sr.PS/PS
    Kept for pronouncement on
                &
    Order uploaded on :
    File sent to the Bench Clerk
    Date on which file goes to the AR
    Date on which file goes to the Head Clerk.
    Date of dispatch of Order.
                                                                                            54
                                                                   ITA 996/Del/2016 AY: 2011-12
                                                            Yakult Danone India Private Limited
                                                 Date
    Draft dictated on
                                                 18.03.19
    Draft placed before author                   22.03.19
                                                 26/03/19
    Draft proposed & placed before the second
    member
    Draft discussed/approved by Second
    Member.
    Approved Draft comes to the Sr.PS/PS
    Kept for pronouncement on
                &
    Order uploaded on :
    File sent to the Bench Clerk
                Date of Hearing     20/02/2019
                Date of             29/03/2019
                Pronouncement
                                     ORDER
PER BEENA A PILLAI, JUDICIAL MEMBER Present appeal has been filed by assessee
against final assessment order dated 29/12/15, passed by Ld.AO under section
143 (3) read with section 144C (4) of the act on following grounds of appeal:
" Grounds The following grounds of appeal are mutually exclusive of and
without prejudice to each other.
ITA 996/Del/2016 AY: 2011-12 Yakult Danone India Private Limited General
Ground of Appeal
1\. That Ld. Assessing Officer ("AO") /Hon'ble Dispute Resolution Panel
("DRP")/ Ld. Transfer Pricing Officer ("TPO") erred in assessing the loss of
the Appellant at INR. 267,771,897/- as against returned loss of INR
337,317,454 under normal provisions of the Act. Transfer Pricing Ground of
appeals
2\. The Ld.TPO/AO/DRP have erred in making an adjustment under section 92CA
(3) of the Act without returning a finding about existence of any of the
circumstances specified in clauses (a) to (d) of sub-section (3) of section
92C of the Act.
                                                                   ITA 996/Del/2016 AY: 2011-12
                                                            Yakult Danone India Private Limited
                                                 Date
    Draft dictated on
                                                 18.03.19
    Draft placed before author                   22.03.19
                                                 26/03/19
    Draft proposed & placed before the second
    member
    Draft discussed/approved by Second
    Member.
    Approved Draft comes to the Sr.PS/PS
    Kept for pronouncement on
                &
    Order uploaded on :
    File sent to the Bench Clerk
                Date of Hearing     20/02/2019
                Date of             29/03/2019
                Pronouncement
                                     ORDER
PER BEENA A PILLAI, JUDICIAL MEMBER Present appeal has been filed by assessee
against final assessment order dated 29/12/15, passed by Ld.AO under section
143 (3) read with section 144C (4) of the act on following grounds of appeal:
" Grounds The following grounds of appeal are mutually exclusive of and
without prejudice to each other.
ITA 996/Del/2016 AY: 2011-12 Yakult Danone India Private Limited General
Ground of Appeal
1\. That Ld. Assessing Officer ("AO") /Hon'ble Dispute Resolution Panel
("DRP")/ Ld. Transfer Pricing Officer ("TPO") erred in assessing the loss of
the Appellant at INR. 267,771,897/- as against returned loss of INR
337,317,454 under normal provisions of the Act. Transfer Pricing Ground of
appeals
2\. The Ld.TPO/AO/DRP have erred in making an adjustment under section 92CA
(3) of the Act without returning a finding about existence of any of the
circumstances specified in clauses (a) to (d) of sub-section (3) of section
92C of the Act.
                                                                   ITA 996/Del/2016 AY: 2011-12
                                                            Yakult Danone India Private Limited
                                                 Date
    Draft dictated on
                                                 18.03.19
    Draft placed before author                   22.03.19
                                                 26/03/19
    Draft proposed & placed before the second
    member
    Draft discussed/approved by Second
    Member.
    Approved Draft comes to the Sr.PS/PS
    Kept for pronouncement on
                &
    Order uploaded on :
    File sent to the Bench Clerk
                Date of Hearing     20/02/2019
                Date of             29/03/2019
                Pronouncement
                                     ORDER
PER BEENA A PILLAI, JUDICIAL MEMBER Present appeal has been filed by assessee
against final assessment order dated 29/12/15, passed by Ld.AO under section
143 (3) read with section 144C (4) of the act on following grounds of appeal:
" Grounds The following grounds of appeal are mutually exclusive of and
without prejudice to each other.
ITA 996/Del/2016 AY: 2011-12 Yakult Danone India Private Limited General
Ground of Appeal
1\. That Ld. Assessing Officer ("AO") /Hon'ble Dispute Resolution Panel
("DRP")/ Ld. Transfer Pricing Officer ("TPO") erred in assessing the loss of
the Appellant at INR. 267,771,897/- as against returned loss of INR
337,317,454 under normal provisions of the Act. Transfer Pricing Ground of
appeals
2\. The Ld.TPO/AO/DRP have erred in making an adjustment under section 92CA
(3) of the Act without returning a finding about existence of any of the
circumstances specified in clauses (a) to (d) of sub-section (3) of section
92C of the Act.
3\. The Ld. TPO/AO/ Hon'ble DRP have erred in computing an adjustment of INR
6,95,45,557/- to the total income of the Appellant on account of adjustment in
arm's length price ("ALP") of the alleged international transaction pertaining
to Advertisement, Marketing and Promotional ("AMP") expenditure entered into
by the Appellant with its Associated Enterprise ("AE").
4\. The Ld. TPO/ AO/ DRP have erred in holding AMP expenditure as a separate
international transaction under section 92B of the Act and assuming
jurisdiction to determine the ALP thereof, when such expenditure represents
only domestic transactions with unrelated parties and does not satisfy the
requisites of being an international transaction under section 92B read with
section 92F(v) of the Act.
                                                                   ITA 996/Del/2016 AY: 2011-12
                                                            Yakult Danone India Private Limited
                                                 Date
    Draft dictated on
                                                 18.03.19
    Draft placed before author                   22.03.19
                                                 26/03/19
    Draft proposed & placed before the second
    member
    Draft discussed/approved by Second
    Member.
    Approved Draft comes to the Sr.PS/PS
    Kept for pronouncement on
                &
    Order uploaded on :
    File sent to the Bench Clerk
                Date of Hearing     20/02/2019
                Date of             29/03/2019
                Pronouncement
                                     ORDER
PER BEENA A PILLAI, JUDICIAL MEMBER Present appeal has been filed by assessee
against final assessment order dated 29/12/15, passed by Ld.AO under section
143 (3) read with section 144C (4) of the act on following grounds of appeal:
" Grounds The following grounds of appeal are mutually exclusive of and
without prejudice to each other.
ITA 996/Del/2016 AY: 2011-12 Yakult Danone India Private Limited General
Ground of Appeal
1\. That Ld. Assessing Officer ("AO") /Hon'ble Dispute Resolution Panel
("DRP")/ Ld. Transfer Pricing Officer ("TPO") erred in assessing the loss of
the Appellant at INR. 267,771,897/- as against returned loss of INR
337,317,454 under normal provisions of the Act. Transfer Pricing Ground of
appeals
2\. The Ld.TPO/AO/DRP have erred in making an adjustment under section 92CA
(3) of the Act without returning a finding about existence of any of the
circumstances specified in clauses (a) to (d) of sub-section (3) of section
92C of the Act.
3\. The Ld. TPO/AO/ Hon'ble DRP have erred in computing an adjustment of INR
6,95,45,557/- to the total income of the Appellant on account of adjustment in
arm's length price ("ALP") of the alleged international transaction pertaining
to Advertisement, Marketing and Promotional ("AMP") expenditure entered into
by the Appellant with its Associated Enterprise ("AE").
4\. The Ld. TPO/ AO/ DRP have erred in holding AMP expenditure as a separate
international transaction under section 92B of the Act and assuming
jurisdiction to determine the ALP thereof, when such expenditure represents
only domestic transactions with unrelated parties and does not satisfy the
requisites of being an international transaction under section 92B read with
section 92F(v) of the Act.
                                                                   ITA 996/Del/2016 AY: 2011-12
                                                            Yakult Danone India Private Limited
                                                 Date
    Draft dictated on
                                                 18.03.19
    Draft placed before author                   22.03.19
                                                 26/03/19
    Draft proposed & placed before the second
    member
    Draft discussed/approved by Second
    Member.
    Approved Draft comes to the Sr.PS/PS
    Kept for pronouncement on
                &
    Order uploaded on :
    File sent to the Bench Clerk
