Madras High Court
N.A. Chidambaram Chettiar Firm By ... vs The Government Of Tamil Nadu ... on
20 August, 1976
Equivalent citations: (1977) 1 MLJ 443
Author: Kailasam
ORDER Kailasam, C.J.
1\. This petition is filed under Articles 132 and 133 of the Constitution of
India for the grant of a certificate by this Court that the case involves a
substantial question of law as to the interpretation of the Constitution as
provided under Article 132 (i) of the Constitution of India and that it
fulfils the requirements of Article 133 of the Constitution.
2\. The petitioner filed a writ petition for the issue of a Writ of
Declaration that the Tamil Nadu Debt Relief Act, 1976 (President's Act for
Tamil Nadu, 31 of 1976) was unconstitutional, illegal and void, and for the
issue of a writ of mandamus directing the respondents therein to forbear from
enforcing or attempting to enforce the provisions of that Act and the Tamil
Nadu Debt Relief Rules 1976. By a Judgment delivered by us on 19th August,
1976. in W.P. No. 2997 of 1976, etc. (batch) we held that there was no
substance in any of the contentions raised by the learned Counsel for the
petitioner and that the impugned legislation fell within the powers of the
of this Court in Ramachandra Rao v. Narayanarao (1948) 2 M.L.J. 109 : 61 L.W.
508 : A.I.R. 1949 Mad. 156. wherein it was held that the Court did not
understand the decision in Mahadeva Royal v. Chikka Royal (1942) 1 M.L.J. 309
: A.I.R. 1942 Mad. 368. to lay down that, whenever a question as to the
adminissibility of any document was raised in an appeal and that question was
decided in one way, it followed ipso facto that there was a substantial
question of law which would justify the grant of a certificate under Section
110, C.P.C. The Full Bench held that when a question of law was fairly
arguable and when there was room for difference of opinion on it, then such a
question would be a substantial question of law.
7\. Applying this test, the question involved in this case cannot be said to
be fairly arguable. In this view, we are unable to accept the contention of
the learned Counsel that a substantial question of law is involved. The
petitioner in not entitled to certificate also on the ground that the question
involved has been decided by the Federal Court in Subramaniam v. Muthuswami 53
L.W. 109 : (1941) 1 M.L.J. (Supp.) 1 : A.I.R. 1941 F.C. 47. and by the Supreme
petitioner and that the impugned legislation fell within the powers of the
State Legislature and could not be attacked on any one of the grounds. Holding
that the petitions were totally devoid of any substance, we dismissed the
petitions.
3\. In this petition for grant of leave to appeal to the Supreme Court,
learned Counsel for the petitioner submits that the requirements of Articles
132 and 133 of the Constitution are satisfied and that this is a fit case for
granting leave to appeal to the Supreme Court.
4\. Mr. Venugopal, learned Counsel for the petitioner, submits that neither
the Supreme Court nor any other High Court has decided the question whether
the suspension of Article 19 of the Constitution in regard to the right of
trade will the effect trader's right to complain of violation of Part XIII
(Articles 301 to 304) of the Constitution, nor is there any decision deciding
the question as to the legislative competence. Learned Counsel also submitted
that the question whether the suspension of the right to trade would suspend
commerce and intercourse under Articles 301 to 304 (b) of the Constitution has
not been decided. He further submitted that the question whether the law
relating to non-money-lending and non-agricultural debts is within the
legislative competence of the State and whether they are severable had also
not been finally settled. We have considered the three points raised by the
learned Counsel. In disposing of the writ petition we have observed that as
emergency had been proclaimed and under the Prisident's proclamation the right
to enforce fundamental rights has been denied the petitioners were deprived of
their right to question the validity of the enactment on the ground that it
infringed the fundamental rights conferred on the citizen. The two points
urged by the learned Counsel were about the competency of the State
Legislature to enact the impugned legislation and the petitioners'
unrestricted right to trade, commerce and intercourse throughout the territory
of India under the rights conferred by Arts. 301 to 304 of the Constitution of
India. We have considered the questions in full. We have held that the
legislative competency of the State cannot be questioned in view of the
decision of the Federal Court in Subramaniam v. Mutkuswami 53 L.W. 109 :
(1941) 1 M.L.J. (Supp.) : A.I.R. 1941 F.C. 47. and that the contention that
the petitioners' right to trade, commerce and inter-course was conferred under
Articles 301 to 304 of the Constitution will not be available to them, as they
have no right to enforce the fundamental right to trade guaranteed under
Article 19 of the Constitution. We have observed that they cannot make any
claim as money-lender or pawnbroker as being entitled to commerce or
intercourse and that, in any event, their right to commerce and intercourse
will also be subject to the fundamental right to trade. In arriving at this
conclusion, we followed the decisions of the Supreme Court in Additional
District Magistrate, Jabalpur v. S. Shukla . As a result, we dismissed the
writ petitions in lirnine, holding that the impugned legislation fell within
the powers of the State Legislature, that it could not be attacked on the
ground of interference with trade and that the petitions were totally devoid
of any substance.
5\. Learned Counsel submits that the question of legislative competence as
well as right to trade is of great importance to the citizens in general, and
moneylenders and pawn-brokers in particular, and as such is a substantial
question of law. He also submits that a substantial question of the
interpretation of the provisions of the Constitution is involved and that
therefore this is a fit case for granting leave to appeal to the Supreme
Court. There can be no doubt the questions are very important and involve the
interpretation of the provisions of the Constitution. But, in our view, the
questions do not admit of two opinions, for, there can be no doubt about the
competency of the State Legislature to enact the impugned legislation. As we
feel that the question is not fairly open to argument, it will not be a
substantial question of law.
6\. In Subba Rao v. Veerraju . a Full Bench of this Court approved the test
laid down in M.C. Patil v. Ariff (1935) I.L.R. 13 Rang. 744. that, "unless it
was fairly open to argument that the decision of the High Court on a question
of law could have been otherwise, there would be no substantial question of
law''. After a consideration of the cases cited before it, the Full Bench did
not agree with the view expressed in Mahadeva Royal y. Chikka Royal (1942) 1
M.L.J. 309 : A.I.R. 1942 Mad. 368. that, if the words "substantial question"
were to be understood in their being of substance to the parties, it must be
held that the decision in regard to the non-admissibility of the documents was
a substantial question which would entitle the petitioner to have a
certificate. The Full Bench expressed the view that it was not possible to say
from what the learned Judges actually said in that case whether they thought
that the contention as to admissibility was arguable, though they themselves
found no merits in it. The Full Bench reiterated the view expressed by a Bench
of this Court in Ramachandra Rao v. Narayanarao (1948) 2 M.L.J. 109 : 61 L.W.
508 : A.I.R. 1949 Mad. 156. wherein it was held that the Court did not
understand the decision in Mahadeva Royal v. Chikka Royal (1942) 1 M.L.J. 309
: A.I.R. 1942 Mad. 368. to lay down that, whenever a question as to the
adminissibility of any document was raised in an appeal and that question was
decided in one way, it followed ipso facto that there was a substantial
question of law which would justify the grant of a certificate under Section
110, C.P.C. The Full Bench held that when a question of law was fairly
arguable and when there was room for difference of opinion on it, then such a
question would be a substantial question of law.
7\. Applying this test, the question involved in this case cannot be said to
be fairly arguable. In this view, we are unable to accept the contention of
the learned Counsel that a substantial question of law is involved. The
petitioner in not entitled to certificate also on the ground that the question
involved has been decided by the Federal Court in Subramaniam v. Muthuswami 53
L.W. 109 : (1941) 1 M.L.J. (Supp.) 1 : A.I.R. 1941 F.C. 47. and by the Supreme
Court in Additional District Magistrate, Jabalpur v. S. Sbukla .
8\. The result is that the petitioner is not entitled to a certificate either
under Article 132 or under Article 133 of the Constitution. The petition is
dismissed.
of this Court in Ramachandra Rao v. Narayanarao (1948) 2 M.L.J. 109 : 61 L.W.
508 : A.I.R. 1949 Mad. 156. wherein it was held that the Court did not
understand the decision in Mahadeva Royal v. Chikka Royal (1942) 1 M.L.J. 309
: A.I.R. 1942 Mad. 368. to lay down that, whenever a question as to the
adminissibility of any document was raised in an appeal and that question was
decided in one way, it followed ipso facto that there was a substantial
question of law which would justify the grant of a certificate under Section
110, C.P.C. The Full Bench held that when a question of law was fairly
arguable and when there was room for difference of opinion on it, then such a
question would be a substantial question of law.
7\. Applying this test, the question involved in this case cannot be said to
be fairly arguable. In this view, we are unable to accept the contention of
the learned Counsel that a substantial question of law is involved. The
petitioner in not entitled to certificate also on the ground that the question
involved has been decided by the Federal Court in Subramaniam v. Muthuswami 53
L.W. 109 : (1941) 1 M.L.J. (Supp.) 1 : A.I.R. 1941 F.C. 47. and by the Supreme
petitioner and that the impugned legislation fell within the powers of the
State Legislature and could not be attacked on any one of the grounds. Holding
that the petitions were totally devoid of any substance, we dismissed the
petitions.
3\. In this petition for grant of leave to appeal to the Supreme Court,
learned Counsel for the petitioner submits that the requirements of Articles
132 and 133 of the Constitution are satisfied and that this is a fit case for
granting leave to appeal to the Supreme Court.
4\. Mr. Venugopal, learned Counsel for the petitioner, submits that neither
the Supreme Court nor any other High Court has decided the question whether
the suspension of Article 19 of the Constitution in regard to the right of
trade will the effect trader's right to complain of violation of Part XIII
(Articles 301 to 304) of the Constitution, nor is there any decision deciding
the question as to the legislative competence. Learned Counsel also submitted
that the question whether the suspension of the right to trade would suspend
commerce and intercourse under Articles 301 to 304 (b) of the Constitution has
not been decided. He further submitted that the question whether the law
relating to non-money-lending and non-agricultural debts is within the
legislative competence of the State and whether they are severable had also
not been finally settled. We have considered the three points raised by the
of this Court in Ramachandra Rao v. Narayanarao (1948) 2 M.L.J. 109 : 61 L.W.
508 : A.I.R. 1949 Mad. 156. wherein it was held that the Court did not
understand the decision in Mahadeva Royal v. Chikka Royal (1942) 1 M.L.J. 309
: A.I.R. 1942 Mad. 368. to lay down that, whenever a question as to the
adminissibility of any document was raised in an appeal and that question was
decided in one way, it followed ipso facto that there was a substantial
question of law which would justify the grant of a certificate under Section
110, C.P.C. The Full Bench held that when a question of law was fairly
arguable and when there was room for difference of opinion on it, then such a
question would be a substantial question of law.
7\. Applying this test, the question involved in this case cannot be said to
be fairly arguable. In this view, we are unable to accept the contention of
the learned Counsel that a substantial question of law is involved. The
petitioner in not entitled to certificate also on the ground that the question
involved has been decided by the Federal Court in Subramaniam v. Muthuswami 53
L.W. 109 : (1941) 1 M.L.J. (Supp.) 1 : A.I.R. 1941 F.C. 47. and by the Supreme
petitioner and that the impugned legislation fell within the powers of the
State Legislature and could not be attacked on any one of the grounds. Holding
that the petitions were totally devoid of any substance, we dismissed the
petitions.
3\. In this petition for grant of leave to appeal to the Supreme Court,
learned Counsel for the petitioner submits that the requirements of Articles
132 and 133 of the Constitution are satisfied and that this is a fit case for
granting leave to appeal to the Supreme Court.
4\. Mr. Venugopal, learned Counsel for the petitioner, submits that neither
the Supreme Court nor any other High Court has decided the question whether
the suspension of Article 19 of the Constitution in regard to the right of
trade will the effect trader's right to complain of violation of Part XIII
(Articles 301 to 304) of the Constitution, nor is there any decision deciding
the question as to the legislative competence. Learned Counsel also submitted
that the question whether the suspension of the right to trade would suspend
commerce and intercourse under Articles 301 to 304 (b) of the Constitution has
not been decided. He further submitted that the question whether the law
relating to non-money-lending and non-agricultural debts is within the
legislative competence of the State and whether they are severable had also
not been finally settled. We have considered the three points raised by the
of this Court in Ramachandra Rao v. Narayanarao (1948) 2 M.L.J. 109 : 61 L.W.
508 : A.I.R. 1949 Mad. 156. wherein it was held that the Court did not
understand the decision in Mahadeva Royal v. Chikka Royal (1942) 1 M.L.J. 309
: A.I.R. 1942 Mad. 368. to lay down that, whenever a question as to the
adminissibility of any document was raised in an appeal and that question was
decided in one way, it followed ipso facto that there was a substantial
question of law which would justify the grant of a certificate under Section
110, C.P.C. The Full Bench held that when a question of law was fairly
arguable and when there was room for difference of opinion on it, then such a
question would be a substantial question of law.
7\. Applying this test, the question involved in this case cannot be said to
be fairly arguable. In this view, we are unable to accept the contention of
the learned Counsel that a substantial question of law is involved. The
petitioner in not entitled to certificate also on the ground that the question
involved has been decided by the Federal Court in Subramaniam v. Muthuswami 53
L.W. 109 : (1941) 1 M.L.J. (Supp.) 1 : A.I.R. 1941 F.C. 47. and by the Supreme
petitioner and that the impugned legislation fell within the powers of the
State Legislature and could not be attacked on any one of the grounds. Holding
that the petitions were totally devoid of any substance, we dismissed the
petitions.
3\. In this petition for grant of leave to appeal to the Supreme Court,
learned Counsel for the petitioner submits that the requirements of Articles
132 and 133 of the Constitution are satisfied and that this is a fit case for
granting leave to appeal to the Supreme Court.
4\. Mr. Venugopal, learned Counsel for the petitioner, submits that neither
the Supreme Court nor any other High Court has decided the question whether
the suspension of Article 19 of the Constitution in regard to the right of
trade will the effect trader's right to complain of violation of Part XIII
(Articles 301 to 304) of the Constitution, nor is there any decision deciding
the question as to the legislative competence. Learned Counsel also submitted
that the question whether the suspension of the right to trade would suspend
commerce and intercourse under Articles 301 to 304 (b) of the Constitution has
not been decided. He further submitted that the question whether the law
relating to non-money-lending and non-agricultural debts is within the
legislative competence of the State and whether they are severable had also
not been finally settled. We have considered the three points raised by the
learned Counsel. In disposing of the writ petition we have observed that as
emergency had been proclaimed and under the Prisident's proclamation the right
to enforce fundamental rights has been denied the petitioners were deprived of
their right to question the validity of the enactment on the ground that it
infringed the fundamental rights conferred on the citizen. The two points
urged by the learned Counsel were about the competency of the State
Legislature to enact the impugned legislation and the petitioners'
unrestricted right to trade, commerce and intercourse throughout the territory
of India under the rights conferred by Arts. 301 to 304 of the Constitution of
India. We have considered the questions in full. We have held that the
legislative competency of the State cannot be questioned in view of the
of this Court in Ramachandra Rao v. Narayanarao (1948) 2 M.L.J. 109 : 61 L.W.
508 : A.I.R. 1949 Mad. 156. wherein it was held that the Court did not
understand the decision in Mahadeva Royal v. Chikka Royal (1942) 1 M.L.J. 309
: A.I.R. 1942 Mad. 368. to lay down that, whenever a question as to the
adminissibility of any document was raised in an appeal and that question was
decided in one way, it followed ipso facto that there was a substantial
question of law which would justify the grant of a certificate under Section
110, C.P.C. The Full Bench held that when a question of law was fairly
arguable and when there was room for difference of opinion on it, then such a
question would be a substantial question of law.
7\. Applying this test, the question involved in this case cannot be said to
be fairly arguable. In this view, we are unable to accept the contention of
the learned Counsel that a substantial question of law is involved. The
petitioner in not entitled to certificate also on the ground that the question
involved has been decided by the Federal Court in Subramaniam v. Muthuswami 53
L.W. 109 : (1941) 1 M.L.J. (Supp.) 1 : A.I.R. 1941 F.C. 47. and by the Supreme
petitioner and that the impugned legislation fell within the powers of the
State Legislature and could not be attacked on any one of the grounds. Holding
that the petitions were totally devoid of any substance, we dismissed the
petitions.
3\. In this petition for grant of leave to appeal to the Supreme Court,
learned Counsel for the petitioner submits that the requirements of Articles
132 and 133 of the Constitution are satisfied and that this is a fit case for
granting leave to appeal to the Supreme Court.
4\. Mr. Venugopal, learned Counsel for the petitioner, submits that neither
the Supreme Court nor any other High Court has decided the question whether
the suspension of Article 19 of the Constitution in regard to the right of
trade will the effect trader's right to complain of violation of Part XIII
(Articles 301 to 304) of the Constitution, nor is there any decision deciding
the question as to the legislative competence. Learned Counsel also submitted
that the question whether the suspension of the right to trade would suspend
commerce and intercourse under Articles 301 to 304 (b) of the Constitution has
not been decided. He further submitted that the question whether the law
relating to non-money-lending and non-agricultural debts is within the
legislative competence of the State and whether they are severable had also
not been finally settled. We have considered the three points raised by the
learned Counsel. In disposing of the writ petition we have observed that as
emergency had been proclaimed and under the Prisident's proclamation the right
to enforce fundamental rights has been denied the petitioners were deprived of
their right to question the validity of the enactment on the ground that it
infringed the fundamental rights conferred on the citizen. The two points
urged by the learned Counsel were about the competency of the State
Legislature to enact the impugned legislation and the petitioners'
unrestricted right to trade, commerce and intercourse throughout the territory
of India under the rights conferred by Arts. 301 to 304 of the Constitution of
India. We have considered the questions in full. We have held that the
legislative competency of the State cannot be questioned in view of the
of this Court in Ramachandra Rao v. Narayanarao (1948) 2 M.L.J. 109 : 61 L.W.
508 : A.I.R. 1949 Mad. 156. wherein it was held that the Court did not
understand the decision in Mahadeva Royal v. Chikka Royal (1942) 1 M.L.J. 309
: A.I.R. 1942 Mad. 368. to lay down that, whenever a question as to the
adminissibility of any document was raised in an appeal and that question was
decided in one way, it followed ipso facto that there was a substantial
question of law which would justify the grant of a certificate under Section
110, C.P.C. The Full Bench held that when a question of law was fairly
arguable and when there was room for difference of opinion on it, then such a
question would be a substantial question of law.
7\. Applying this test, the question involved in this case cannot be said to
be fairly arguable. In this view, we are unable to accept the contention of
the learned Counsel that a substantial question of law is involved. The
petitioner in not entitled to certificate also on the ground that the question
involved has been decided by the Federal Court in Subramaniam v. Muthuswami 53
L.W. 109 : (1941) 1 M.L.J. (Supp.) 1 : A.I.R. 1941 F.C. 47. and by the Supreme
