Income Tax Appellate Tribunal - Bangalore
M/S Dell International Services ... vs Assessee on 20 July, 2016
                    IN THE INCOME TAX APPELLATE TRIBUNAL
                             BANGALORE BENCH ' B '
              BEFORE SHRI VIJAY PAL RAO, JUDICIAL MEMBER AND
                SHRI INTURI RAMA RAO, ACCOUNTANT MEMBER
                           I.T. (T.P) A. No.3/Bang/2013
                           (Assessment Year : 2008-09)
    M/s. Dell International Services India Pvt. Ltd.,
    12/A, 12/12A, 13/1A, Divyasree Greens,
    Challaghatta Village, Varthur, Hobli,
    Bangalore-570 071.                                      .... Appellant.
    PAN AAACH 1925Q
            Vs.
    Joint Commissioner of Income Tax,
    LTU, Bangalore.                                       ..... Respondent.
    Appellant By : Shri Sharath Rao, C.A.
    Respondent By : Shri P. Chandrashekar, CIT (D.R)
    Date of Hearing : 07.06.2016.
    Date of Pronouncement : 20.7.2016.
therefore the A.O./TPO to recomputed the ALP after considering the working
capital adjustment if any. Needless to say the benefit of the proviso to
Section 92C of the Act be also considered in  40 IT(TP)A No.3/Bang/2013 case
comparable price falls within the tolerance range of + or - 5% of the
assessee.
32\. In the result, the appeal of the assessee is partly allowed.
Order pronounced in the open court on the 20th day of July, 2016.
                            Sd/-                                 Sd/-
                    (INTURI RAMA RAO)                     (VIJAY PAL RAO)
                    Accountant Member                     Judicial Member
    *Reddy gp
    Copy to :
          1.   Appellant
          2.   Respondent
          3.   C.I.T.
          4.   CIT(A)
    Date of Pronouncement : 20.7.2016.
                                     O R D E R
Per Shri Vijay Pal Rao, J.M. :
This appeal by the assessee is directed against the assessment order dated
29/10/2012 passed under section 143(3) read  2 IT(TP)A No.3/Bang/2013 with
section 144C of the Act in pursuant to the directions of DRP dated 03/09/2012
for the assessment year 2008-09.
2\. The assessee has filed concise grounds of the appeal as under: " General
ground:
1\. That on the facts and circumstances of the case and in law, the Assessing
Officer ("AO"), has erred in completing the assessment of the appellant at an
income of INR 392,174,075 under the normal provisions of Income tax Act, 1961
("the Act") and book profit of INR 678,734,585 under the provisions of section
115JB of the Act as against the total income of INR 185,145,994 accepted by
the appellant under the normal provisions and book profits of INR 571,589,387
under the provisions of 115JB of the Act (considering suo-moto disallowances).
Disallowance under section 14A:
2\. That on the facts and circumstances of the case and in law, the AO /
Dispute Resolution Panel ("DRP") has erred in making an addition of INR
5,002,740 under the provisions of section 14A of the Act by attributing
expenses equivalent to 0.5 percent of the average value of the investments
held by the appellant during the year, failing to appreciate the contention of
the appellant that no expenditure has been incurred for earning dividend
income and therefore, the provisions of section 14A of the Act were not
applicable.
3\. Without prejudice, that the AO / DRP has erred in not considering the
expenses disallowed under section 14A for allocation over various units,
including those entitled to deduction under section 10A of the Act for the
purpose of computing deduction under section 10A of the Act.
4\. That on the facts and circumstances of the case and in law, the AO / DRP
has erred in making an addition of INR 5,002,740 in respect of expenses
disallowed under section 14A for computing book profit under the provisions of
section 115JB of the Act. Exchange gain on forward foreign exchange contracts:
5\. That on the facts and circumstances of the case and in law, the AO / DRP
has erred in adding unrealized Mark to Market ("MTM") gains amounting to INR
17,388,000,on forward foreign exchange contracts to the income of the
appellant, although the same reflects a decrease in the business income due to
a change in the accounting policy.
6\. Without prejudice, that on the facts and circumstances of the case and in
law, the AO / DRP has erred in not allocating the unrealized MTM gains arising
on account of forward  3 IT(TP)A No.3/Bang/2013 foreign exchange contracts to
the units eligible for deduction under section 10A of the Act, alleging that -
\- the appellant has failed to furnish any details thereof; and
\- the gains had not been 'derived from' such eligible units and hence could
not be allocated to eligible units for deduction under section 10A of the Act.
7\. That on the facts and circumstances of the case and in law, the AO / DRP
has erred in making addition of unrealized MTM gains of INR 17,388,000 on
account of forward foreign exchange contracts for computing book profit under
the provisions of section 115JB of the Act.
Disallowance on provision for leave encashment:
8\. That on the facts and circumstances of the case and in law, the AO has
erred in adding back provision for leave encashment amounting to INR
82,356,024 for computing book profit under section 115JB of the Act.
9\. That on the facts and circumstances of the case and in law, the DRP has
erred in not considering and giving specific direction on the ground of
objection raised by the appellant regarding proposed addition of provision for
leave encashment amounting to INR 82,356,024 for computing book profit under
section 115JB of the Act even though the DRP has specifically observed that
the matter regarding both provision for gratuity and leave encashment are
covered in favour of the appellant by the decision of the Supreme Court in
Bharat Earth Movers Ltd [(2000) 112 TAXMAN 61 (SC)]. Addition of excess
depreciation for computation of book profits:
10\. That on the facts and circumstances of the case and in law, the AO/DRP
has erred in adding back an amount of INR 2,398,434 on account of alleged
excess depreciation claimed in the books, for computing book profit under
section 115JB of the Act.
11\. Without prejudice,the AO / DRP has erred in computing the additional
depreciation without appreciating the actual date of acquisition / put to use
of relevant assets disclosed in the Tax audit report.
4
IT(TP)A No.3/Bang/2013 Transfer Pricing:
12\. The order passed by the DRP and the AO / Transfer Pricing Officer ("TPO")
is not in accordance with the law and is contrary to the facts and
circumstances of the present case and in any case in violation of the
principle of equity and natural justice.
13\. The DRP and the AO/TPO have erred in law and on facts in rejecting the
detailed benchmarking analysis conducted by the appellant and embarking on a
fresh search for comparables and upholding the Arm's Length Price ("ALP") of
24.49 percent as proposed by the TPO, for the software development services
rendered by the appellant and further erred in making an adjustment of INR
184,637,341.
14\. Among the other comparables considered, the DRP and the TPO has erred in
selecting the following companies as comparable companies:
\- Infosys Technologies Limited;
\- KALS Infosystems Limited; and
\- LGS Global Limited.
15\. The DRP and the AO/TPO has erred in determining the ALP based on
companies, which are not comparable to the appellant due to various factors
such as applying incorrect/ additional filters, not applying filters
consistently, ad-hoc selection of comparables, selecting comparables with
abnormally high margins or substantially huge turnover, selecting comparables
which are functionally different, selecting comparables engaged in sale of
software products and that hold high brand value,etc.
16\. That on the facts and circumstances of the case and in law, the AO / DRP
/ TPO has erred in not granting the working capital/risk adjustment, as
claimed by the appellant. That on the facts and circumstances of the case and
in law, the AO/TPO has erred by not following the directions issued by the DRP
and making a Transfer Pricing addition to the entire value of transactions
entered into by the appellant and in not restricting adjustments only to the
value of international transactions entered into by the appellant (i.e.
proportionate adjustments) and ignoring established jurisprudence in this
regard."
3\. Ground No.1 is general in nature and does not require any specific
adjudication.
4\. Ground Nos. 2 to 4 are regarding disallowance made under section 14A of
the income tax Act. The AO noted that the assessee has shown  5 IT(TP)A
No.3/Bang/2013 opening and closing balance of investment of
Rs.90,50,15,000/-and Rs.109,60,81,000/-respectively. During the year under
consideration, the assessee has received the dividend income of Rs. 2, 46, 99,
745/-which has been claimed exempt. The AO proposed to disallow the
expenditure under section 14A read with rule 8D of the income tax rules. In
response the assessee submitted that it has not incurred any expenses for
earning the dividend income. The AO did not accept the contention of the
assessee and made the disallowance of Rs.50,02,740/-being .5% of average value
of investment as per Rule 8D(2)(iii). The disallowance computed as per rule 8D
was also added to the income of the assessee while computing the book profit
under MAT provisions. Aggrieved by the Action of the AO the assessee has
raised the objections before the DRP but could not succeed.
5\. Before us the Ld. AR of the assessee has submitted that the assessee has
not incurred any expenditure for earning the dividend income and consequently
the assessee has not debited any expenditure related to the exempt income in
the profit and loss account, then the same cannot be brought within the
purview of clause (f) of explanation 1  6 IT(TP)A No.3/Bang/2013 to section
115 JB (2) of the Act. He has further contended that the disallowance made
under section 14A cannot be automatically imported for the purpose of
adjustment to the book profit as per the explanation to section 115 JB of the
Act. On the other hand, the Ld. DR has submitted that the authorities below
have followed the decision of the Mumbai benches of the Tribunal in case of
Dabar India Ltd versus ACIT 145 ITD 175 wherein the Tribunal has held that the
expression "in the relation to" used for making the disallowance under section
14A has been employed in the explanation 1 to section 115JB(2) as expenditure
"relatable to" in a more or less same form. Thus, the Ld. the DR contended
that the Tribunal has taken a view that the disallowance made under section
14A can be considered as an expenditure relatable to the exempt income for the
purpose of computing the book profit under section 115JB.
6\. We have considered the rival submissions as well as relevant material on
record. It is manifest from the details of the investment that there are
moments in the investment portfolio of the assessee and therefore, the
assessee has taken decisions of sale and purchase of the investments during
the year under consideration. Once the management  7 IT(TP)A No.3/Bang/2013 of
the assessee is involved in taking the decision of selling as well as
purchasing of the investments, then the provisions of section 14A are
attracted so far as the indirect expenditure is concerned. Section 14A of the
income tax Act envisages the concept of apportionment of the indirect
expenditure which has been incurred for the composite activity resulting
taxable as well as exempt income. Accordingly, we are of the view that when
there is no denial of the fact that during the year under consideration, the
assessee has taken the decisions for purchase and sale of the investments and
there is significant amount of moment in the investment portfolio then
irrespective of the assesse not debiting any specific expenditure in the
profit and loss account in respect of earning the tax-free dividend income,
the provisions of section 14A are attracted to the extent of the indirect
expenditure. Hence, we do concurrent/confirm the disallowance made by the AO
being 0.5% of the average investment on account of indirect expenditure under
section 14A read with rule 8D of the rules.
7\. As regards the adjustment of the amount disallowed under section 14A while
computing the book profit under section 115JB our intention  8 IT(TP)A
No.3/Bang/2013 was invited to the judgment of Hon'ble Bombay High Court in
case of CIT versus JSW Energy Limited 379 ITR 36, wherein the Honourable High
Court while dealing with an identical issue has observed in paras 9 and 10 as
under :
" 9. However, the tribunal also noted that by way of additional ground the
assessee challenged disallowance under section 14A in calculation of book
profit under section 115JB. The tribunal therefore heard both sides on
additional ground and in paragraph 18 held that once the accounts are prepared
in accordance with Indian Companies Act, 1956, they have been approved by the
Registrar of Companies, then, the assessing officer must take those accounts
into consideration. If the assessee has not debited any actual expenditure
relating to the earning of the exempt income, therefore, the provisions of
section 14A cannot be imported into the computation of book profit under
section 115JB of the Income Tax Act, 1961. Therefore, even clause (f) of
Explanation to section 115JB which refers to those amounts which are debited
to the Profit and Loss account, alone can be added to the book profit, cannot
apply. Then, the tribunal referred to the order passed in the case of Essar
Teleholdings Ltd. (supra). Mr.Kaka, learned Senior Counsel is right that in
case of Essar Teleholdings when similar issue was raised this Court did not
entertain the appeal and in that regard, he relied upon the Division Bench
order passed on 7th August, 2014. One of us (Shri S.C. Dharmadhikari, J.) was
a party to this order. The said order reads as under : "IN THE HIGH COURT OF
JUDICATURE AT BOMBAY ORDINARY ORIGINAL CIVIL JURISDICTION INCOME TAX APPEAL
NO.438 OF 2012 The Commissioner of Income Tax5, ...Appellant v/s M/s Essar
Teleholdings Ltd. ...Respondent Mr Abhay Ahuja with Ms Padma Divakar for
Appellant.
None for Respondent.
CORAM : S.C. DHARMADHIKARI AND B.P. COLABAWALLA JJ.
DATE : 7TH AUGUST 2014. P.C. :
1\. We have heard Mr Ahuja, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the
Appellant on the questions which have been termed as substantial  9 IT(TP)A
No.3/Bang/2013 questions of law. They are formulated in this Memo of Appeal by
the Revenue at page 3. They read as under :
"(A) Whether on the facts and circumstances of the case and in law, the
Hon'ble ITAT is right in setting aside and restoring back the issue to the
file of AO for de novo adjudication in light of the provisions of Rule 8D ?
(B) Whether on the facts and circumstances of the case and in law, the Hon'ble
ITAT is right in deleting the addition of Rs.4.06 crores made by the AO u/s
14A of the Act for the purpose of computing book profit u/s 115JB(f) of the
Income Tax Act 1961 ?"
3\. In relation to the second question, Mr Ahuja stated that it is a
substantial question of law simply because the Tribunal while remanding and
restoring the case to the file of the Assessing Officer has given a finding
with regard to the course to be adopted after restoration by the Assessing
Officer. The Tribunal should not have done this. In such circumstances, the
Appeal raises substantial questions of law. We are of the view that the
Tribunal had only reiterated in paragraph 8 of the order under challenge
delivered on 29th July 2011 the finding on the expenditure as per rule 8D r/w
section 14A of the Income Tax Act 1961. In relation to that, the Tribunal held
that Rule 8D is not applicable to the A.Y. Under consideration. Hence,
applying the provisions of Rule 8D is not justified. The further finding of
the Tribunal is only to bring to the notice of the Assessing Officer that he
has to abide by clause (f) of Explanation 115JB of the Income Tax Act. In such
circumstances, what the Tribunal has done is to invite attention of the
Assessing Officer to the orders passed by the Tribunal, Delhi Bench. Beyond
this, we do not think that the Tribunal has adjudicated the claim or has
accepted the contentions raised before it by either side. In these
circumstances and when the Assessing Officer is expected to determine the
claim afresh and in accordance with law, we do not see any basis for the
apprehension and which is voiced by Mr Ahuja. With this additional
clarification, the Appeal does not raise any substantial question of law.
Appeal is dismissed. No costs.
( B.P. COLABAWALLA J.) (S.C. DHARMADHIKARI J.)"
10\. Having held that the matter is sent back to the assessing officer for
reconsideration and while working out the deduction in terms of section 14A
read with Rule-8D, the asssessing officer must take note of clause (f) of
Explanation to section 115JB of the I.T. Act, then we do not think that
questions 1 and 3 could be entertained. The same clarification as is given in
the case of M/s. Essar Teleholdings Ltd. would govern the present case. The
facts and circumstances being identical, we do not think that the appeal
should be entertained on question nos.1 and 3."
In the absence of any contrary view or precedent of Honourable High Court, we
set aside this issue to the record of the assessing officer for  10 IT(TP)A
No.3/Bang/2013 reconsidering the issue of working out the adjustment as per
clause (f) of the explanation to Sec. 115JB of the amount calculated under
section 14A of the Act in the light of the observation of the Honourable High
Court.
8\. Ground Nos. 5 to 7 are regarding addition on account of exchange gain on
forward contracts. During the course of assessment proceedings the AO noted
that accounting policy in respect of accounting of profit/loss on forward
contract was changed during the year, resulting in reduction of income in
respect of foreign exchange gain on forward contract by a sum of
Rs.1,73,88,000/-. The assessee submitted before the AO that losses due to
forex fluctuation on forward contract were debited to the profit and loss
account, whereas the gain was not be recognised in the profit and loss account
as per the accounting policy. It was not disputed that up to the last
assessment year, the assessee was recognising gain or loss arising due to
change in the value of the forward contract. In the year under consideration,
the assessee has changed its accounting policy and has disclosed the impact of
such change in the notes to the accounts as per the accounting standards. The
assessee  11 IT(TP)A No.3/Bang/2013 pointed out that the relevant discloser
have been made in the note 10 of schedule 13 of the note to accounts.
Alternatively the assessee contended that even if Mark to market(MTM) gain is
to be added to the income of the assesse the same should be allowed for
deduction under section 10A of the Act. The AO did not accept the contention
of the assessee and held that the gain in respect of foreign exchange
fluctuation which was not accounted for by the assessee due to change of
accounting policy during the year is clearly a revenue receipt to be included
in the income of the assessee. As regards the claim of deduction under section
10A the AO denied the same for want of necessary details for calculation of
the claim. The assessee raised the objections before the DRP against the
denial of the change in accounting policy and as well as the deduction under
section 10A. The DRP has rejected the objections and confirmed the action of
the AO.
9\. Before us Ld. AR of the assessee has submitted that the assessee has
changed the accounting policy of recognising the gain/loss arising from
foreign exchange fluctuation on forward contract which is in accordance with
the accounting standards. The assessee has duly disclosed the said  12 IT(TP)A
No.3/Bang/2013 change of the accounting policy in the note 10 of schedule 13
to the accounts. Therefore, once the assessee has disclosed the impact of such
change in the notes to accounts as required under the accounting standards
then in the absence of any finding that the change has been made only with a
view to distort the financial results the assessing officer is not justified
in rejecting the accounting treatment given by the assessee. Alternatively,
the Ld. AR of the assessee has submitted that such a gain would be regarded as
business income of the assessee and therefore the same is eligible for
deduction under section 10A. The Ld. AR has pointed out that all the
undertakings of the assessee are eligible for deduction under section 10A and
accordingly the income arising from fluctuation gain on forward contract which
are marked to market, then such income would be regarded as the income of the
undertaking and consequently eligible for deduction under section 10A. In
support of his contention he has relied upon the decision of Honourable
jurisdictional High Court in case of CIT versus Motorola India Electronics
private Limited 225 taxmen 11 (Karnataka).
13
IT(TP)A No.3/Bang/2013 9.1 On the other hand, the Ld. DR has submitted that
the assessee has not brought on record the impending circumstances under which
the assessee has changed its accounting policy during the year under
consideration. It is undisputed fact that due to the change in the accounting
policy the assessee has not offered the due income on account of foreign
exchange gain on forward contract. He has relied upon the orders of the
authorities below. As regards the eligibility for deduction under section 10A
the Ld. DR has submitted that when this income is not derived from the
industrial undertaking and particularly from export of goods then it has no
first degree nexus with the undertaking to claim the deduction under section
10A. He has relied upon the decision of Honourable Supreme Court in case of
Liberty India v. CIT 317 ITR 218 as well as the orders of the authorities
below and submitted that the foreign exchange gain on forward contract does
not satisfy the condition for including in the export turnover.
10\. We have considered the rival submissions as well as relevant material on
the record. There is no impediment for the change of accounting policy if the
purpose of change is to comply with the  14 IT(TP)A No.3/Bang/2013 accounting
standard and not to achieve any under hand objective. In other words the
change in the accounting policy should not lead to the distortion of the
financial results and once it has been changed it should be for a long-lasting
period to maintain the consistency of recognising the revenue and treatment of
the particular income or loss. Though there is an impact on the taxable income
of the assessee due to the change in the accounting policy for not recognising
the foreign exchange gain as income in respect of forward contracts however,
if the change as well as the impact in the financial results due to such
change has been duly disclosed by the assessee as required under the
accounting standards and such change has been made to follow the accounting
standards and not intended to suppress the income or to misrepresents the
results then such change cannot be rejected. The assessing officer has
rejected the revenue recognition on account of foreign exchange gain on
forward contracts without examining the relevant facts whether the assessee is
continuing following the same accounting policy and whether the change of
accounting policy is in compliance of the accounting standard. Therefore, we
are of the view that if this change in  15 IT(TP)A No.3/Bang/2013 the
accounting policy is consistently followed by the assessee in the following
years and the assessee has already disclosed the change in the accounting
policy as well as impact of change in the books of accounts and particularly
in the notes to accounts under schedule 13 then it cannot be rejected without
pointing out the defect in policy or any ulterior motive of such change. The
assessing officer has not disputed the discloser of the change in the
accounting policy and impact of the same in the notes to accounts.
Accordingly, we set aside this issue to the record of the AO to the examine
the same in the light of the above observations and by considering the fact
whether the assessee has been consistently following the same accounting
policy for a substantial period in future.
10.1 As regards eligibility of deduction under section 10A it is pertinent to
note that if the forward contracts entered into by the assessee are fully
backed by the export then the gain or loss on such forward contracts would be
regarded as business income. Therefore, when the forward contracts are valued
at mark to market, and fully backed by the export transactions then the gain
or loss arising from such  16 IT(TP)A No.3/Bang/2013 contracts would be in the
nature of business income of the assessee. Consequently when all the
undertaking are eligible for deduction under section 10A then the income from
foreign exchange gain on forward contract is eligible for deduction under
section 10A. Accordingly, so far as the income on account of gain on foreign
exchange fluctuation on forward contracts which are fully backed by the export
transactions the same is to be treated as income derived from industrial
undertaking for the purpose of section 10A. The Honourable jurisdictional High
Court in case of CIT Vs. Motorola India Electronics Private Limited (supra)
after considering the judgment of Honourable Supreme Court in case of Liberty
India v. CIT (supra) has held in para 7 and 8 as under: " 7. The submission of
the appellant(s) [assessee(s)] in nutshell was that the amount of duty
drawback/DEPB was intended to neutralize the incidence of duty on inputs
consumed/utilized in the manufacture of exported goods resulting into
increased profits derived from the business of the industrial undertaking
which profits qualified for deduction under s. 80-IB. According to the
appellant(s) since no excise duty/customs duty was payable on raw materials
consumed/utilized in manufacturing goods exported out of India, the duty paid
stood refunded under s. 37(2)(xvia) of the Central Excise Act, 1944 and under
s. 75 of the Customs Act, 1962 read with Customs, Central Excise Duties and
Service-tax Drawback Rules, 1995\.
8\. On the nature of DEPB it was submitted that the amount of DEPB was granted
under Exim Policy issued in terms of powers conferred under s. 5 of the
Foreign Trade (Development and Regulation) Act, 1992. According to the
appellant(s), the DEPB Scheme is a Duty Remission Scheme which allows drawback
of import charges paid on inputs used in the export product. The object being
to neutralize the incidence of customs duty on the import content of the
export product by way of grant of duty credit. The DEPB benefit is freely
transferable. Thus, according to  17 IT(TP)A No.3/Bang/2013 the appellant(s),
duty drawback/DEPB benefit received had to be credited against the cost of
manufacture of goods/purchases debited to the P&L a/c. That, such credit was
not an independent source of profit. In this connection reliance has been
placed on AS-2 issued by ICAI on "Valuation of Inventories" which indicates
that while determining cost of purchase, cost of conversion and other costs
incurred in bringing the inventories to their present location and condition
should be considered and that trade discounts, rebates, duty drawback and such
other similar items have to be deducted in determining the cost of purchase.
Placing reliance on AS-2, it was submitted that where excise duty paid was
subsequently recoverable by way of drawback, the same would not form part of
the manufacturing cost. It was submitted on behalf of the appellant(s) that
payment of excise duty/customs duty on inputs consumed in manufacture of goods
by an industrial undertaking eligible for deduction under s. 80-IB, was
inextricably linked to the manufacturing operations of the eligible
undertaking without which manufacturing operations cannot be undertaken, hence
the duty, which was paid in the first instance and which had direct nexus to
the manufacturing activity when received back, had first degree nexus with the
industrial activity of the eligible undertaking and consequently the
reimbursement of the said amount cannot be treated as income of the
assessee(s) de hors the expense originally incurred by way of payment of duty.
Consequently, according to the appellant(s), receipt of duty drawback/DEPB
stood linked directly to the manufacture/production of goods and therefore had
to be regarded as profits derived from eligible undertaking qualifying for
deduction under s. 80-IB of the 1961 Act. On behalf of the appellant(s) it was
further submitted that this Court's decision in Sterling Food (supra) dealt
with availability of deduction under s. 80HH with respect to profit on sale of
import entitlements. The said decision, according to the appellant, had no
applicability to the issue under consideration for the reason that import
entitlement/REP licence was granted by the Government on the basis of exports
made; the same were granted gratuitously without antecedent cost having being
incurred by the industrial undertaking, unlike duty drawback and DEPB, which
had direct link to the costs incurred by such industrial undertaking by way of
payment of customs/excise duty in respect of duty paid inputs used in the
manufacture of goods meant for export and in such circumstances, profit from
sale of import entitlements/REP licence was in the nature of windfall and it
was in those circumstances, that the apex Court held that source of profit on
sale of import entitlements was not the industrial undertaking but the source
was the Export Promotion Scheme. According to the appellant(s), in the case of
sale of import entitlements/REP licence, the source was the scheme framed by
Government of India whereas in the case of DEPB/duty drawback, the source was
the fact of payment of duty in respect of inputs consumed/utilized in the
manufacture of goods meant for export. That, but for such payments of duty on
inputs used in the manufacture of goods meant for exports, industrial
undertaking(s) would not be entitled to the benefit of duty drawback/DEPB,
notwithstanding, the Export Promotion Scheme of the Government and, therefore,
there was a direct and immediate nexus between payment of duty on such inputs
and receipt of duty drawback/DEPB. In this connection reliance was placed on
the judgment of the Gujarat High Court in the case of CIT vs. India Gelatine &
Chemicals Ltd. (2005) 194 CTR (Guj) 492 : (2005) 275 ITR 284 (Guj). Lastly, it
was submitted on behalf of the appellant(s) that there was no difference
between Advance Licence Scheme and duty drawback/DEPB. In this connection it
was urged that duty drawback regime required the industrial undertaking to pay
in the  18 IT(TP)A No.3/Bang/2013 first instance the duty on inputs and
thereafter seek reimbursement on profit of goods manufactured using such duty
paid inputs, having been exported. The industrial undertaking alternatively
could avail of Advance Licence Scheme where under the industrial undertaking
could import inputs to be used for manufacture of goods meant for export
without payment of duty. In the case where the industrial undertaking enjoyed
the benefit of Advance Licence Scheme, the profit as shown in P&L a/c was
regarded as income derived from industrial undertaking entitled to deduction
under s. 80-IB of the 1961 Act without any adjustment whereas when the same
industrial undertaking when it opts for duty drawback is denied the benefit of
deduction under s. 80-IB on the duty remitted." In view of the facts and
circumstances of the case when the AO has denied the deduction under section
10A in respect of the foreign exchange fluctuation gain on forward contracts
for want of necessary details we set aside this issue to the record of the
assessing officer for fresh adjudication in the light of the judgment of
Honourable jurisdictional High Court in case of CIT versus Motorola India
election private Limited and after verifying the amount of income arising on
mark to market gain.
11\. Ground Nos. 8 & 9 are regarding addition of provision for leave
encashment while computing book profit. The assessing officer added back
provision for gratuity of Rs.45,00,26,696/-as well as provision for leave
encashment of Rs.8,23,56, 024/-while computing book profit under section 115JB
of the Act. While deciding the objections of the assesse the DRP has allowed
the claim and deleted the addition on account of  19 IT(TP)A No.3/Bang/2013
provision for gratuity however, the issue of adjustment make to the book
profit on account of provision for leave encashment has not been adjudicated
by the DRP.
12\. Before us the Ld. AR of the assessee has submitted that though
principally the DRP has decided the issue in favour of the assesse however,
the leave encashment issue has not been adjudicated while directing the AO not
to make the adjustment. He has referred the finding of the DRP in para 4.3 of
the directions and pleaded that the AO may be directed not to make adjustment
on account of leave encashment. The Ld. AR has pointed out that it is an
ascertain liability and based on actuarial valuations at the balance sheet
date. The Ld. AR has further pointed out that since it was a provision and the
actual payment was not made during the year therefore, the assessee itself has
disallowed this amount under section 43B of the Act in the normal computation
but it is an ascertain liability and based on the actuarial valuation carried
out by an independent actuary then no adjustment can be made while computing
the book profit. On the other hand, the Ld. DR has relied upon the order of
the assessment officer.
20
IT(TP)A No.3/Bang/2013
13\. We have considered the rival submissions as well as relevant material on
record. The DRP while dealing with the issue has given the directions to the
AO in para 4.3 of the order as under:
" 4.3 The assessee has objected that the Assessing Officer has erred in
proposing to add back provision for gratuity to INR 45,026,696, while
computing book profit under Section 115JB of the Act. It is seen that the
assessee has made adjustment to the book profit by treating provision for
gratuity as an unascertained liability. This issue is however, now settled in
favour of the tax payers by the judgement of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the
case of Bharat Earth Movers Ltd. 245 ITR 428 (SC), wherein the SC has held
that liability on account of gratuity and leave encashment is allowable as a
deduction while computing book profits. The objection of the assessee on this
account is therefore sustained and the Assessing Officer is directed not to
make adjustment of Rs.4,50,26,696 to the book profit on account of provision
for gratuity." As it is clear from the finding of the DRP that on principle
the DRP has accepted that the issue is now covered by the judgment of
Honourable Supreme Court in case of Bharat Earth Movers Ltd 245 ITR 428,
wherein it was held that liability on account of gratuity as well as leave
encashment is allowable as deduction while computing book profits. Only one
part of the claim regarding provision for gratuity was adjudicated by the DRP
and the other aspect of the issue regarding provision for leave encashment was
not adjudicated. Therefore, we are  21 IT(TP)A No.3/Bang/2013 of the view that
the matter is required to be examined by the AO in the light of the decisions
of the Honourable Supreme Court in case of BEML (supra) and by considering the
fact whether the liability is an ascertain liability based on actuarial
valuation at the date of balance sheet carried out by an independent Actuary.
Accordingly, this issue is set aside to the record of the AO to decide the
same afresh in terms of the above observations.
14\. Ground Nos.10 & 11 are regarding addition of excess depreciation for
computation of book profit. The Assessing Officer noted that the assessee is
following policy of capitalizing amount and then depreciating the same @ 100%
in respect of the asset costing up to Rs.45,000. Though the assessee claimed
depreciation as per the provisions of the Act for normal computation of income
however while computing the book profit the A.O noted that the depreciation of
100% in respect of the assets upto Rs.45,000 is not as per the Schedule XIV of
the Companies Act which permits 100% depreciation in respect of the assets
costing Rs.5,000 or less. Accordingly, the Assessing Officer after allowing
the depreciation specified as per the Schedule VI of the Companies Act made
22 IT(TP)A No.3/Bang/2013 the addition of the excess depreciation claimed by
the assessee to the tune of Rs.4,79,078. The DRP confirmed the action of the
Assessing Officer.
15\. Before us, the learned Authorised Representative of the assessee has
submitted that the assessee is following a particular policy on depreciation
and depreciating the asset costing upto Rs.45,000 @ 100% in the books of
accounts. He has submitted that there is no bar for adopting a higher rate
than provided under the Schedule XIV of the Companies Act. The assessee has
duly disclosed in the accounts the higher rate of depreciation applied in
respect of the assets costing upto Rs.45,000. In support of his contention, he
has referred to the guidance note issued by the Institute of Chartered
Accountants India on Schedule XIV of the Companies Act and submitted that the
company can write off fully low value item on the consideration of materiality
whether such accounting policy is followed by a company, the same should be
disclosed in the accounts. Thus the learned Authorised Representative has
submitted that the rate of depreciation provided under Schedule XIV is minimum
for the cost of the assets and if a company followed an  23 IT(TP)A
No.3/Bang/2013 accounting policy of charging depreciation @ 100% on low value
items of more than Rs.5,000 the same is permissible. In support of his
contention, he has relied upon the decision of Hon'ble Supreme Court in the
case of Malayala Manorama Co. Ltd. Vs. CIT (2008) 300 ITR 251 (SC) as well as
decision in the case of Apollo Tyres Ltd. Vs. CIT (2002) 255 ITR 273 (SC).
16\. On the other hand, the learned Departmental Representative has contended
that applying the depreciation @ 100% on the asset costing upto Rs.45,000 is
not provided under the Schedule XIV of the Companies Act. There is no basis of
charging 100% depreciation on the assets costing Rs.45,000 and fixing the
threshold limit of low cost item. The learned Departmental Representative has
further contended that the decisions of Hon'ble Supreme Court are not
applicable in the case of the assessee when the books of accounts are not
prepared as per Part II & III of Schedule VI of the Companies Act. He has
relied upon the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Dynamic
Orthopedics (P) Ltd. Vs. CIT (2010) 321 ITR 300 and submitted that the Hon'ble
Supreme Court has taken a different view in the subsequent decision.  24
IT(TP)A No.3/Bang/2013
17\. We have considered the rival submissions as well as the relevant material
on record. There is no dispute that as per Schedule XIV of the Companies Act
100% depreciation is provided in respect of the assts costing upto Rs.5,000.
The assessee has placed reliance on the guiding note of the ICAI on Schedule
XIV of the Companies Act which reads as under :
" 10. According to the above note, all individual items of fixed assets whose
actual cost does not exceed Rs.5,000 shall be charged depreciation at the rate
of 100%. However, in respect of the fixed assets acquired prior to December
16, 1993, alternative bases of computing the depreciation charge are
permitted. The amount of write off in respect of low value assets would also
therefore depend upon the alternative chosen.
11\. It is noted that Note 4 to Schedule XIV requires, inter alia, that where
during any financial year any addition has been made to any asset, the
depreciation on such assets should be calculated on a pro- rata basis from the
date of such addition. Since Note 8 to Schedule XIV (reproduced above)
prescribes the rate of depreciation of 100 per cent, pro-rata depreciation
should be charged on addition of the said low value items of fixed assets
also. However, a company can write off fully, low value items on the
consideration of materiality. Where such an accounting policy is followed by a
company, the same should be disclosed appropriately in the accounts." Thus
there is no dispute that even in the guiding note low cost items not exceeding
Rs.5,000 shall be charged depreciation @ 100%. The only exception provided is
that a low value item on consideration of  25 IT(TP)A No.3/Bang/2013
materiality can be written off fully if such an accounting policy is followed
by a company. Therefore it gives the scope of exceeding the threshold limit of
Rs.5,000 in the cases where the useable life of low value item is not lasting
more than one financial year. However this cannot be applied as a general rule
for deciding the threshold limit of low value item arbitrarily. It can be
understandable in a particular case if a low value item costing slightly more
than Rs.5,000 has a useable life ofonly one year then the company may write
off fully such low value item by following an accounting policy which should
be disclosed properly in the accounts. In the case of the assessee fixing of
the low cost item of Rs.45,000 has no basis and even the assessee has not
brought on record to show that this limit of low cost of Rs.45,000 is fixed
because of the useable life of the assets not exceeding one year. The Hon'ble
Supreme Court in the case of Dynamic Orthopedics (P) Ltd. Vs. CIT (2010) 321
ITR 300 (SC) which is the subsequent and latest decision on the point has held
in paras 7 and 8 as under :
" 7. In our view, with respect, the judgment of this Court in Malayala
Manorama Co. Ltd. vs. CIT (supra) needs reconsideration for the following
reasons : Chapter XII-B of the Act containing "Special provisions relating to
certain companies" was introduced in the IT Act, 1961, by the Finance Act,
1987, w.e.f. 1st April, 1988. In fact, s. 115J replaced s. 80VVA of the Act.
Sec. 115J (as it stood at the relevant time), inter alia, provided that where
the total income of a company, as computed  26 IT(TP)A No.3/Bang/2013 under
the Act in respect of any accounting year, was less than thirty per cent of
its book profit, as defined in the Explanation, the total income of the
company, chargeable to tax, shall be deemed to be an amount equal to thirty
per cent of such book profit. The whole purpose of s. 115J of the Act,
therefore, was to take care of the phenomenon of prosperous 'zero tax'
companies not paying taxes though they continued to earn profits and declare
dividends. Therefore, a MAT was sought to be imposed on 'zero tax' companies.
Sec. 115J of the Act imposes tax on a deemed income. Sec. 115J of the Act is a
special provision relating only to certain companies. The said section does
not make any distinction between public and private limited companies. In our
view, s. 115J of the Act legislatively only incorporates provisions of Parts
II and III of Sch. VI to 1956 Act. Such incorporation is by a deeming fiction.
Hence, we need to read s. 115J(1A) of the Act in the strict sense. If we so
read, it is clear that, by legislative incorporation, only Parts II and III of
Sch. VI to 1956 Act have been incorporated legislatively into s. 115J of the
Act. Therefore, the question of applicability of Parts II and III of Sch. VI
to 1956 Act does not arise. If a company is a MAT company, then be it a
private limited company or a public limited company, for the purposes of s.
115J of the Act, the assessee-company has to prepare its P&L a/c in accordance
with Parts II and III of Sch. VI to 1956 Act alone. If, with respect, the
judgment of this Court in Malayala Manorama Co. Ltd. (supra) is to be
accepted, then the very purpose of enacting s. 115J of the Act would stand
defeated, particularly when the said section does not make any distinction
between public and private limited companies. It needs to be reiterated that,
once a company falls within the ambit of it being a MAT company, s. 115J of
the Act applies and, under that section, such an assessee-company was required
to prepare its P&L a/c only in terms of Parts II and III of Sch. VI to 1956
Act. The reason being that rates of depreciation in r. 5 of the IT Rules,
1962, are different from the rates specified in Sch. XIV of 1956 Act. In fact,
by the Companies (Amendment) Act, 1988, the linkage between the two has been
expressly delinked. Hence, what is incorporated in s. 115J is only Sch. VI and
not s. 205 or s. 350 or s. 355. This was the view of the Kerala High Court in
the case of CIT vs. Malayala Manorama Co. Ltd. (supra), which has been wrongly
reversed by this Court in the case of Malayala Manorama Co. Ltd. vs. CIT
(supra).
8\. For the aforestated reasons, the Registry is directed to place this civil
appeal before the learned Chief Justice for appropriate directions as we are
of the view that the matter needs reconsideration by a Larger Bench of this
Court." Thus it is clear that the earlier decision of the Hon'ble Supreme
Court in the case of Malayala Manorama Ltd. (supra) has been distinguished by
the Division Bench and referred the matter for consideration by the larger
bench. Even otherwise when the assessee has not brought on record the basis
for fixing the low cost of the asset at Rs.45,000 for the  27 IT(TP)A
No.3/Bang/2013 purpose of applying 100% depreciation then the said accounting
treatment of the assessee is contrary to the provisions of Schedule XIV of the
Companies Act and therefore the Assessing Officer is empowered to make the
necessary adjustments. There is no dispute that the Assessing Officer has
allowed the depreciation @ provided under the Schedule XIV of the Companies
Act in respect of the assets in question. Accordingly, we do not find any
error or illegality in the impugned order qua this issue.
Ground Nos. 12 to 14 are regarding Transfer Pricing Adjustment.
18\. The assessee is involved in the provisions of software development
services to its Associated Enterprises (AEs) besides other international
transactions. The dispute is only with regard to the international
transactions of providing software development services to the AEs. The
international transactions reported by the assessee are as under :
    Nature       of     International Method            Value of International
    transactions                      Selected          transactions (INR)
    Provision of Software Services        TNMM                   2,291,287,095
    / IT Infrastructure Services.
    Provision       of     Corporate      TNMM                     146,729,086
    expenses charged back
    Provision of receiving of             TNMM                      61,566,042
    services
                                        28
                                                        IT(TP)A No.3/Bang/2013
    Reimbursement of expenses                 --                183,124,076
    Buy back of shares                        --                 12,528,492
    Bad debts written off / ESOP            TNMM                 30,268,030
    Recharges
19\. The assessee bench marked its international transactions by selection of
21 comparable companies and adopting TNMM as MAM with average margin of 5.21%
as against the assessee's margin of 17.22%. The TPO rejected the TP Analysis
of the assessee and carried out a fresh search. The TPO finally considered 10
comparable companies with average PLI of 24.49% as under :
          Sl.No.     Name of comparable                    OP/TC %
          1.         Infosys Technologies Ltd.             39.62
          2.         Mindtree Consulting Ltd.              15.34
          3.         R Systems InternationalLtd            15.30
          4.         Sasken Communication Technologies     12.83
                     Ltd. (Seg.)
          5.         Kals Information Systems Ltd.(Seg.)   41.94
          6.         Lanco Global Systems Ltd.             26.46
          7.         Quintegra Solutions Ltd.              9.75
          8.         Accel Transmatic Ltd. (Seg.)          15.72
          9.         Helios & Matheson Information         33.4
                     Technology Ltd. (Seg.)
          10.        i-Flex Solutions Ltd.                 34.62
                     Average                               24.49
                                          29
                                                           IT(TP)A No.3/Bang/2013
Accordingly, the TPO proposed an adjustment under Section 92CA of
Rs.20,26,85,019. In the present appeal, the assessee is seeking exclusion of
three comparable companies as under :
                i)     Infosys Technologies Ltd.
                ii)    KALS Info Systems Ltd.
                iii)   LGS Global Ltd.
20\. The learned Authorised Representative of the assessee has submitted that
the comparability of these three companies has been examined by this Tribunal
in a series of decisions and in a latest decision in the case of GXS India Vs.
ITO in IT(TP)A No.1444/Bang/2012 Dt.31.7.2015 for the Assessment Year 2008-09
again decided the comparability of these three companies.
21\. Thus the learned Authorised Representative has submitted that the issue
of comparability of these three companies is covered by the said decision of
the Tribunal. He has further pointed out that the Infosys Technologies Ltd.
was part of the TP Study however, the assessee raised the objection against
the inclusion of this company in the set of comparables before the DRP. He has
referred to the objections raised  30 IT(TP)A No.3/Bang/2013 before the DRP as
well as before the TPO at page 250 of the Paper Book I. However, the DRP has
not adjudicated on this issue.
22\. On the other hand, the learned Departmental Representative has submitted
that the TPO has considered the segmental data of the KALS Infosystems Ltd.
and therefore the objections of the assessee cannot be accepted. As regards
the Infosys Technologies Ltd., the predominant business activity of the said
company is software development services and other activities are
insignificant therefore more than 90% revenue is earned from the software
development services then the comparability of the said company cannot be
questioned on the ground of insignificant activity or function. Similar
contention has been advanced by the learned Departmental Representative in
respect of LGS Global Ltd. that the predominant activity of the said company
is software development services and more than 75% of revenue has been earned
from the software development services.
23\. We have considered the rival submissions as well as the relevant material
on record. At the outside we note that the functional  31 IT(TP)A
No.3/Bang/2013 comparability of the Infosys Technologies Ltd. and KALS
Infosystems Ltd. have been considered by the co-ordinate bench of this
Tribunal vide order dt.31.7.2015 in the case of GXS India Technology Centre
Pvt. Ltd. Vs. ITO (IT(TP)A No.1444/Bang/2012) in paras 11 & 12 held as under :
" 11. Infosys Technologies Ltd. The learned AR of the assessee has submitted
that this company cannot be considered as good comparables of the assessee
because this company own intangibles apart from the industry leader in the
field. In support of his contention, he has relied upon the decision of the
co-ordinate bench of this Tribunal in the case of M/s Cisco Systems (Ind.)
Pvt.Ltd. 11.1 On the other hand, learned DR has relied upon the orders of the
authorities below and submitted that this company is engaged in the same
business that of the assessee and therefore, it is a good comparable of a
software development company.
11.2 We have considered the rival submissions and the material on record. We
note that the co-ordinate bench of this Tribunal in case of Cisco Systems
(Ind.)Pvt. Ltd (Supra) has considered and examined the functional
comparability of this company in para-26.2 as under;
"26.2 Infosys Ltd.:- As far as this company is concerned, it is not in dispute
before us that this company has been considered to be functionally different
from a company providing simple software development services, as this company
owns significant intangibles and has huge revenues from software products. In
this regard, we find that the Bangalore Bench of the Tribunal in the case of
M/s. TDPLM Software Solutions Ltd. v. DCIT, ITA No.1303/Bang/2012, by order
dated 28.11.2013 with regard to this comparable has held as follows:- "11.0
Infosys Technologies Ltd.
11.1 This was a comparable selected by the TPO. Before the TPO, the assessee
objected to the inclusion of the company in the set of comparables, on the
grounds of turnover and brand attributable profit margin. The TPO, however,
rejected these objections raised by the assessee on the grounds that turnover
and brand aspects were not materially relevant in the software development
segment. 11.2 Before us, the learned Authorised Representative contended that
this company is not functionally comparable to the assessee in the case on
hand. The learned Authorised Representative drew our attention to various
parts of the Annual Report of this company to submit that this company
commands substantial  32 IT(TP)A No.3/Bang/2013 brand value, owns intellectual
property rights and is a market leader in software development activities,
whereas the assessee is merely a software service provider operating its
business in India and does not possess either any brand value or own any
intangible or intellectual property rights (IPRs). It was also submitted by
the learned Authorised Representative that :-
(i) the co-ordinate bench of this Tribunal in the case of 24/7 Customer.Com
Pvt. Ltd. in ITA No.227/Bang/2010 has held that a company owning intangibles
cannot be compared to a low risk captive service provider who does not own any
intangible and hence does not have an additional advantage in the market. It
is submitted that this decision is applicable to the assessee's case, as the
assessee does not own any intangibles and hence Infosys Technologies Ltd.
cannot be comparable to the assessee ;
(ii) the observation of the ITAT, Delhi Bench in the case of Agnity India
Technologies Pvt. Ltd. in ITA No.3856 (Del)/2010 at para 5.2 thereof, that
Infosys Technologies Ltd. being a giant company and market leader assuming all
risks leading to higher profits cannot be considered as comparable to captive
service providers assuming limited risk ;
(iii) the company has generated several inventions and filed for many patents
in India and USA ;
(iv) the company has substantial revenues from software products and the break
up of such revenues is not available ;
(v) the company has incurred huge expenditure for research and development;
(vi) the company has made arrangements towards acquisition of IPRs in
'AUTOLAY', a commercial application product used in designing high performance
structural systems. In view of the above reasons, the learned Authorised
Representative pleaded that, this company i.e. Infosys Technologies Ltd., be
excluded form the list of comparable companies.
11.3 Per contra, opposing the contentions of the assessee, the learned
Departmental Representative submitted that comparability cannot be decided
merely on the basis of scale of operations and the brand attributable profit
margins of this company have not been extraordinary. In view of this, the
learned Departmental Representative supported the decision of the TPO to
include this company in the list of comparable companies.
11.4 We have heard the rival submissions and perused and carefully considered
the material on record. We find that the assessee has brought on record
sufficient evidence to establish that this company is functionally dis-similar
and different from the assessee and hence is not comparable and the finding
rendered in the case of Trilogy E-Business Software India Pvt. Ltd. (supra)
for Assessment Year 2007-08 is applicable to this year also. We are inclined
to concur with the argument put forth by the assessee that Infosys
Technologies Ltd is not functionally comparable since it owns significant
intangible and has huge revenues from software products. It is also seen that
the break up of revenue from software services and software products is not
available. In this view of the matter, we hold  33 IT(TP)A No.3/Bang/2013 that
this company ought to be omitted from the set of comparable companies. It is
ordered accordingly.
The decision rendered as aforesaid pertains to A.Y. 2008- 09. It was affirmed
by the learned counsel for the Assessee that the facts and circumstances in
the present year also remains identical to the facts and circumstances as it
prevailed in AY 08- 09 as far as this comparable company is concerned.
Respectfully following the decision of the Tribunal referred to above, we hold
that Infosys Ltd. be excluded from the list of comparable companies".
Following the findings of the co-ordinate bench of this Tribunal we direct the
AO/TPO to exclude this company from the list of comparables.
12\. Kals Information Systems Ltd: The learned AR of the assessee submitted
that this company is engaged in the business of development of software and
software products. This company is also engaged in the provision of training
services and software services.
12.1 The learned AR thus, submitted that this company is functionally not
comparable with the business of the assessee. In support of his contention, he
has relied upon the decision of the co-ordinate bench of this Tribunal in case
of 3DPLM Software Solutions Ltd (Supra) as well as in the case of Cisco
Systems India Pvt. Ltd., (Supra).
12.2 On the other hand, learned DR has relied upon the orders of the
authorities below and submitted that the TPO has considered the segmental data
of this company. Therefore, this company is a good comparable of the assessee.
12.3. We have considered the rival submissions as well as the relevant
material on record. We find that the functional comparability of this company
has been examined by this co-ordinate bench of this Tribunal in case of 3DPLM
Software Solutions Ltd.(Supra) and also in case of M/s Cisco Systems India
Pvt. Ltd.,(Supra) the relevant finding of the Tribunal in case of Cisco
Systems (Supra) in para-26.3 as under;
"26.3 KALS Information Systems Ltd.:- As far as this company is concerned, it
is not in dispute before us that this company has been considered as not
comparable to a pure software development services company by the Bangalore
Bench of the Tribunal in the case of M/s. Trilogy e-business Software India
Pvt. Ltd. (supra). The following were the relevant observations of the
Tribunal:- "(d) KALS Information Systems Ltd.
46\. As far as this company is concerned, the contention of the assessee is
that the aforesaid company has revenues from both software development and
software products. Besides the above, it was also pointed out that this
company is engaged in providing training. It was also submitted that as per
the annual repot, the salary  34 IT(TP)A No.3/Bang/2013 cost debited under the
software development expenditure was Rs. 45,93,351. The same was less than 25%
of the software services revenue and therefore the salary cost filter test
fails in this case. Reference was made to the Pune Bench Tribunal's decision
of the ITAT in the case of Bindview India Private Limited Vs. DCI, ITA No. ITA
No 1386/PN/1O wherein KALS as comparable was rejected for AY 2006-07 on
account of it being functionally different from software companies. The
relevant extract are as follows:
"16. Another issue relating to selection of comparables by the TPO is
regarding inclusion of Kals Information System Ltd. The assessee has objected
to its inclusion on the basis that functionally the company is not comparable.
With reference to pages 185-186 of the Paper Book, it is explained that the
said company is engaged in development of software products and services and
is not comparable to software development services provided by the assessee.
The appellant has submitted an extract on pages 185-186 of the Paper Book from
the website of the company to establish that it is engaged in providing of I T
enabled services and that the said company is into development of software
products, etc. All these aspects have not been factually rebutted and, in our
view, the said concern is liable to be excluded from the final set of
comparables, and thus on this aspect, assessee succeeds."
Based on all the above, it was submitted on behalf of the assessee that KALS
Information Systems Limited should be rejected as a comparable.
47\. We have given a careful consideration to the submission made on behalf of
the Assessee. We find that the TPO has drawn conclusions on the basis of
information obtained by issue of notice u/s.133(6) of the Act. This
information which was not available in public domain could not have been used
by the TPO, when the same is contrary to the annual report of this company as
highlighted by the Assessee in its letter dated 21.6.2010 to the TPO. We also
find that in the decision referred to by the learned counsel for the Assessee,
the Mumbai Bench of ITAT has held that this company was developing software
products and not purely or mainly software development service provider. We
therefore accept the plea of the Assessee that this company is not comparable.
Following the aforesaid decision of the Tribunal, we hold that KALS
Information Systems Ltd. should not be regarded as a comparable".
Following the decision of the co-ordinate bench we direct the AO/TPO to
exclude this company from the list of comparables."
Following the earlier orders of this Tribunal wherein all the relevant facts
were examined by the Tribunal and it was found that these two  35 IT(TP)A
No.3/Bang/2013 companies cannot be considered as good comparable with company
providing software development services as captive service provider.
Accordingly, we direct the A.O./TPO to exclude these two companies from the
list of comparables. It is pertinent to note that in the case of KALS
Infosystems Ltd., no segmental data has been reported however the TPO himself
has computed the margin of software development services which cannot be
accepted without giving supporting details of expenditure to be allocated to
various activities.
LGS Global Limited.
24\. The learned Authorised Representative has pointed out that this company
is having the activity of BPO services and therefore in the absence of
segmental data, composite data from software development services and BPO
cannot be compared with the assessee.
25\. On the other hand, the learned Departmental Representative has submitted
that more than 75% of the revenue is earned by this company from software
development services and therefore it is a good comparable.
36
IT(TP)A No.3/Bang/2013
26\. We have considered the rival submissions as well as the relevant material
on record. At page 26 of the Annual Report of this company, the details of the
services and sales provided by this company includes:
> (i) Consultancy Services
> (ii) Enterprise System Solutions
> (iii) BPO (iv) Custom Development, etc. Thus it is apparent from the various
> services undertaken by this company that it engaged in diversified activity
> including Business Process Outsourcing (BPO) in the field of human
> resources, life sciences, legal services, supply chain management, sales and
> customer care etc. We further note that the company has not reported
> segmental data and therefore the composite data from the diversified
> activity of this company cannot be compared with the assessee's software
> development activity. Accordingly, we direct the A.O. / TPO to exclude this
> company from the set of comparables.
27\. The next grievance of the assessee is regarding working capital
adjustment. The TPO denied the working capital adjustment while passing the
impugned order.
37
IT(TP)A No.3/Bang/2013
28\. The learned Authorised Representative of the assessee has submitted that
the assessee has submitted the details of the outstanding receivables with the
related parties as well as the difference level of accounts receivable and
payable in respect of the comparable companies. Thus it is contended that the
risk assumed by the companies is greater than the no risk assumed by the
assessee with the related parties and therefore working capital adjustment is
required on this account as comparable companies are expected to return higher
due to the difference in risk involved. Accordingly the learned Authorised
Representative has pleaded that the A.O./TPO may be directed to grant the
appropriate risk adjustment. In support of his contention, he has relied upon
the decision of this Tribunal in the case of Mercer Consulting (India) P. Ltd.
Vs. DCIT reported in 150 ITD 1.
29\. On the other hand, the learned Departmental Representative has submitted
that the TPO as well as DRP have considered the claim of the assessee and
found that it is not a fit case to grant any risk adjustment. He has relied
upon the orders of the authorities below.  38
IT(TP)A No.3/Bang/2013
30\. We have considered the rival submissions as well as the relevant material
on record. The TPO as well as DRP has denied the risk adjustment on the ground
that the assessee has not furnished the relevant details to demonstrate that
there is a difference in the level of working capital employed by it vis-à-vis
the comparable. Since the assessee is a captive service provider therefore the
level of inventory, trade receivable and trade payable is certainly be
different from the comparable companies who are dealing with third parties.
The co- ordinate bench of Delhi Tribunal in the case of Mercer Consulting
(India) P. Ltd. (supra) has considered an identical issue in paras 16.1 and
16.2 as under :
" 16.1. The next issue raised by the ld. AR is against non-granting of working
capital adjustment claimed by the assessee for the first time before the TPO.
The assessee requested the TPO to grant working capital adjustment. The
assessee's claim was jettisoned on the ground that the assessee failed to
demonstrate that there was a difference in the levels of working capital
employed by it vis-a-vis the comparables. The TPO further observed that: "The
claim of working capital adjustment is not a matter of right." He further went
on to add that the issue of working capital can be relevant when there is a
situation of inventory remaining tied up or receivables being held up and such
situation will not be relevant to the service industry. That is how the
assessee's contention on this issue was repelled. The DRP also followed the
suit by noticing that the working capital adjustment is difficult to apply due
to the lack of accurate and reliable data. It also held that the issue of
working capital would be relevant only when there is a situation of inventory
remaining tied up or receivables being held up. The assessee contests the non-
granting of the working capital adjustment. 16.2. Having heard the rival
submissions and perused the relevant material on record, we find that the
viewpoint canvassed by the authorities below is sans  39 IT(TP)A
No.3/Bang/2013 merit. Working capital adjustment is ordinarily confined to
inventory, trade receivables and trade payables. If a company carries on high
trade receivables, it would mean that it is allowing its customers a
relatively longer period to pay their amount which will result into higher
interest cost and the resultant less profit. Similarly, by carrying high trade
payables, a company benefits from a relatively longer period available to it
to pay back its suppliers which lowers the interest cost and accelerates
profits. To have a level playing field, it is sine qua non that the working
capital adjustment should be carried out to bring two otherwise comparable
cases at par with each other. We are unable to comprehend any reason or rhyme
to restrict the grant of working capital adjustment only in the case of
manufacturers or traders. What is true for these categories of businesses is
fully true for a service provider as well. It is a different matter that in
the case of service provider, no working capital adjustment would be required
towards higher or lower inventory, but the same may be warranted in respect of
higher or lower trade receivables/payables. Since the authorities below have
rejected the assessee's contention for grant of working capital adjustment at
the threshold, which in our considered opinion is not correct, we set aside
the impugned order and remit the matter to the file of the TPO/AO for
examining the assessee's claim for grant of working capital adjustment on
merits and thereafter, allow the same, if it is available. Needless to say,
the assessee will be allowed an adequate opportunity of hearing."
In view of the above facts and circumstances of the case and following the
order of the co-ordinate bench (supra), we set aside this issue to the record
of the A.O/TPO to examine the claim of working capital adjustment properly and
then decide the same as per law.
31\. Since we have excluded three companies from the set of comparables,
therefore the A.O./TPO to recomputed the ALP after considering the working
capital adjustment if any. Needless to say the benefit of the proviso to
Section 92C of the Act be also considered in  40 IT(TP)A No.3/Bang/2013 case
comparable price falls within the tolerance range of + or - 5% of the
assessee.
32\. In the result, the appeal of the assessee is partly allowed.
Order pronounced in the open court on the 20th day of July, 2016.
                            Sd/-                                 Sd/-
                    (INTURI RAMA RAO)                     (VIJAY PAL RAO)
                    Accountant Member                     Judicial Member
    *Reddy gp
    Copy to :
          1.   Appellant
          2.   Respondent
          3.   C.I.T.
          4.   CIT(A)
          5.   DR, ITAT, Bangalore.
          6.   Guard File.
                                                           By Order
                                              Asst. Registrar, ITAT, Bangalore
therefore the A.O./TPO to recomputed the ALP after considering the working
capital adjustment if any. Needless to say the benefit of the proviso to
Section 92C of the Act be also considered in  40 IT(TP)A No.3/Bang/2013 case
comparable price falls within the tolerance range of + or - 5% of the
assessee.
32\. In the result, the appeal of the assessee is partly allowed.
Order pronounced in the open court on the 20th day of July, 2016.
                            Sd/-                                 Sd/-
                    (INTURI RAMA RAO)                     (VIJAY PAL RAO)
                    Accountant Member                     Judicial Member
    *Reddy gp
    Copy to :
          1.   Appellant
          2.   Respondent
          3.   C.I.T.
          4.   CIT(A)
    Date of Pronouncement : 20.7.2016.
                                     O R D E R
Per Shri Vijay Pal Rao, J.M. :
This appeal by the assessee is directed against the assessment order dated
29/10/2012 passed under section 143(3) read  2 IT(TP)A No.3/Bang/2013 with
section 144C of the Act in pursuant to the directions of DRP dated 03/09/2012
for the assessment year 2008-09.
2\. The assessee has filed concise grounds of the appeal as under: " General
ground:
1\. That on the facts and circumstances of the case and in law, the Assessing
Officer ("AO"), has erred in completing the assessment of the appellant at an
income of INR 392,174,075 under the normal provisions of Income tax Act, 1961
("the Act") and book profit of INR 678,734,585 under the provisions of section
115JB of the Act as against the total income of INR 185,145,994 accepted by
the appellant under the normal provisions and book profits of INR 571,589,387
under the provisions of 115JB of the Act (considering suo-moto disallowances).
Disallowance under section 14A:
2\. That on the facts and circumstances of the case and in law, the AO /
Dispute Resolution Panel ("DRP") has erred in making an addition of INR
5,002,740 under the provisions of section 14A of the Act by attributing
therefore the A.O./TPO to recomputed the ALP after considering the working
capital adjustment if any. Needless to say the benefit of the proviso to
Section 92C of the Act be also considered in  40 IT(TP)A No.3/Bang/2013 case
comparable price falls within the tolerance range of + or - 5% of the
assessee.
32\. In the result, the appeal of the assessee is partly allowed.
Order pronounced in the open court on the 20th day of July, 2016.
                            Sd/-                                 Sd/-
                    (INTURI RAMA RAO)                     (VIJAY PAL RAO)
                    Accountant Member                     Judicial Member
    *Reddy gp
    Copy to :
          1.   Appellant
          2.   Respondent
          3.   C.I.T.
          4.   CIT(A)
    Date of Pronouncement : 20.7.2016.
                                     O R D E R
Per Shri Vijay Pal Rao, J.M. :
This appeal by the assessee is directed against the assessment order dated
29/10/2012 passed under section 143(3) read  2 IT(TP)A No.3/Bang/2013 with
section 144C of the Act in pursuant to the directions of DRP dated 03/09/2012
for the assessment year 2008-09.
2\. The assessee has filed concise grounds of the appeal as under: " General
ground:
1\. That on the facts and circumstances of the case and in law, the Assessing
Officer ("AO"), has erred in completing the assessment of the appellant at an
income of INR 392,174,075 under the normal provisions of Income tax Act, 1961
("the Act") and book profit of INR 678,734,585 under the provisions of section
115JB of the Act as against the total income of INR 185,145,994 accepted by
the appellant under the normal provisions and book profits of INR 571,589,387
under the provisions of 115JB of the Act (considering suo-moto disallowances).
Disallowance under section 14A:
2\. That on the facts and circumstances of the case and in law, the AO /
Dispute Resolution Panel ("DRP") has erred in making an addition of INR
5,002,740 under the provisions of section 14A of the Act by attributing
therefore the A.O./TPO to recomputed the ALP after considering the working
capital adjustment if any. Needless to say the benefit of the proviso to
Section 92C of the Act be also considered in  40 IT(TP)A No.3/Bang/2013 case
comparable price falls within the tolerance range of + or - 5% of the
assessee.
32\. In the result, the appeal of the assessee is partly allowed.
Order pronounced in the open court on the 20th day of July, 2016.
                            Sd/-                                 Sd/-
                    (INTURI RAMA RAO)                     (VIJAY PAL RAO)
                    Accountant Member                     Judicial Member
    *Reddy gp
    Copy to :
          1.   Appellant
          2.   Respondent
          3.   C.I.T.
          4.   CIT(A)
    Date of Pronouncement : 20.7.2016.
                                     O R D E R
Per Shri Vijay Pal Rao, J.M. :
This appeal by the assessee is directed against the assessment order dated
29/10/2012 passed under section 143(3) read  2 IT(TP)A No.3/Bang/2013 with
section 144C of the Act in pursuant to the directions of DRP dated 03/09/2012
for the assessment year 2008-09.
2\. The assessee has filed concise grounds of the appeal as under: " General
ground:
1\. That on the facts and circumstances of the case and in law, the Assessing
Officer ("AO"), has erred in completing the assessment of the appellant at an
income of INR 392,174,075 under the normal provisions of Income tax Act, 1961
("the Act") and book profit of INR 678,734,585 under the provisions of section
115JB of the Act as against the total income of INR 185,145,994 accepted by
the appellant under the normal provisions and book profits of INR 571,589,387
under the provisions of 115JB of the Act (considering suo-moto disallowances).
Disallowance under section 14A:
2\. That on the facts and circumstances of the case and in law, the AO /
Dispute Resolution Panel ("DRP") has erred in making an addition of INR
5,002,740 under the provisions of section 14A of the Act by attributing
expenses equivalent to 0.5 percent of the average value of the investments
held by the appellant during the year, failing to appreciate the contention of
the appellant that no expenditure has been incurred for earning dividend
income and therefore, the provisions of section 14A of the Act were not
applicable.
3\. Without prejudice, that the AO / DRP has erred in not considering the
expenses disallowed under section 14A for allocation over various units,
including those entitled to deduction under section 10A of the Act for the
purpose of computing deduction under section 10A of the Act.
4\. That on the facts and circumstances of the case and in law, the AO / DRP
has erred in making an addition of INR 5,002,740 in respect of expenses
therefore the A.O./TPO to recomputed the ALP after considering the working
capital adjustment if any. Needless to say the benefit of the proviso to
Section 92C of the Act be also considered in  40 IT(TP)A No.3/Bang/2013 case
comparable price falls within the tolerance range of + or - 5% of the
assessee.
32\. In the result, the appeal of the assessee is partly allowed.
Order pronounced in the open court on the 20th day of July, 2016.
                            Sd/-                                 Sd/-
                    (INTURI RAMA RAO)                     (VIJAY PAL RAO)
                    Accountant Member                     Judicial Member
    *Reddy gp
    Copy to :
          1.   Appellant
          2.   Respondent
          3.   C.I.T.
          4.   CIT(A)
    Date of Pronouncement : 20.7.2016.
                                     O R D E R
Per Shri Vijay Pal Rao, J.M. :
This appeal by the assessee is directed against the assessment order dated
29/10/2012 passed under section 143(3) read  2 IT(TP)A No.3/Bang/2013 with
section 144C of the Act in pursuant to the directions of DRP dated 03/09/2012
for the assessment year 2008-09.
2\. The assessee has filed concise grounds of the appeal as under: " General
ground:
1\. That on the facts and circumstances of the case and in law, the Assessing
Officer ("AO"), has erred in completing the assessment of the appellant at an
income of INR 392,174,075 under the normal provisions of Income tax Act, 1961
("the Act") and book profit of INR 678,734,585 under the provisions of section
115JB of the Act as against the total income of INR 185,145,994 accepted by
the appellant under the normal provisions and book profits of INR 571,589,387
under the provisions of 115JB of the Act (considering suo-moto disallowances).
Disallowance under section 14A:
2\. That on the facts and circumstances of the case and in law, the AO /
Dispute Resolution Panel ("DRP") has erred in making an addition of INR
5,002,740 under the provisions of section 14A of the Act by attributing
expenses equivalent to 0.5 percent of the average value of the investments
held by the appellant during the year, failing to appreciate the contention of
the appellant that no expenditure has been incurred for earning dividend
income and therefore, the provisions of section 14A of the Act were not
applicable.
3\. Without prejudice, that the AO / DRP has erred in not considering the
expenses disallowed under section 14A for allocation over various units,
including those entitled to deduction under section 10A of the Act for the
purpose of computing deduction under section 10A of the Act.
4\. That on the facts and circumstances of the case and in law, the AO / DRP
has erred in making an addition of INR 5,002,740 in respect of expenses
therefore the A.O./TPO to recomputed the ALP after considering the working
capital adjustment if any. Needless to say the benefit of the proviso to
Section 92C of the Act be also considered in  40 IT(TP)A No.3/Bang/2013 case
comparable price falls within the tolerance range of + or - 5% of the
assessee.
32\. In the result, the appeal of the assessee is partly allowed.
Order pronounced in the open court on the 20th day of July, 2016.
                            Sd/-                                 Sd/-
                    (INTURI RAMA RAO)                     (VIJAY PAL RAO)
                    Accountant Member                     Judicial Member
    *Reddy gp
    Copy to :
          1.   Appellant
          2.   Respondent
          3.   C.I.T.
          4.   CIT(A)
