Income Tax Appellate Tribunal - Pune
Income-Tax Officer vs Poonawala Estate Stud And ... on 11 December, 1992
Equivalent citations: 1993 44 ITD 497 Pune
Bench: T Natarajachandran, T Bukte
ORDER T.V.K. Natarajachandran, Accountant Member
1\. These appeals pertaining to the same assessee were heard together and
disposed of together, as they involve common issue. Revenue is in appeal
against the orders of the CIT (A)-II, Pune, for the assessment years 1985-86
and 1986-87 while the assessee is in cross appeal for the assessment year
1986-87.
2\. The common point involved in these appeals is whether the stallions and
mares used for breeding of race horses are to be regarded as plant for the
purpose of claim of depreciation and investment allowance or not.
3\. The assessee is carrying on the business of running a stud farm as in the
past. It follows mercantile method of accounting and Samvat Year as the
accounting year. Upto the assessment year 1984-85 the assessee considered all
the horses as the stock-in-trade. For the assessment year 1985-86, the
assessee considered the mares and the stallions used for breeding purposes as
plant. Accordingly, the assessee transferred value of two stallions and 41
mares amounting to Rs. 24,69,812 out of the opening stock, to "plants
claim of deduction was not legally admissible.
20\. The learned counsel for the assessee reiterated the ground taken and
submitted that the claim of the assessee should be allowed. The learned
departmental representative, on the other ground, vehemently supported the
decisions of the Assessing Officer and the CIT(A).
21\. After due consideration, we are of the opinion that the authorities were
not justified in rejecting the claim because the expenses incurred were wholly
and necessarily for the purpose of business, even if there is no contract or
agreement for paying such allowance or for making such reimbursement of such
expenses. The expenses have been incurred actually and bona fide and there is
no dispute about it. It is immaterial whether the cars of the employees were
used partly for personal purposes or not. Insofar as the assessee has
reimbursed the expenses of the cars for user relating to business purposes,
they are admissible as a deduction as a commercial expediency. It is neither
capital expenditure nor personal expenses. Consequently, we reverse the
decision of the CIT(A) on this point for the assessment year 1986-87 and
mares amounting to Rs. 24,69,812 out of the opening stock, to "plants
account". The cost of one stallion purchased during the previous year Rs.
2,64,994 was also claimed as plant. The assessee claimed depreciation and
investment allowance on the stock transferred to the plant account and
investment allowance, depreciation allowance and additional depreciation
allowance on new purchases made. For this purpose, the decision of the Income
Tax Appellate Tribunal, A Ben ch, Bombay in the case of Ruia Stud & Agrl.
Farms (P.) Ltd. v. Sixth ITO [1985] 14 ITD 429 was relied upon by the
assessee.
4\. This claim was rejected by the Assessing Officer for five-fold reasons
given in para 11 of his assessment order. Consequently, he computed the total
income at Rs. 6,29,721 for the assessment year 1985-86 declining the claim of
depreciation and investment allowance.
5\. On appeal, the CIT(A) held that the horses and the stallion were used only
as a medium for procreation of horses and livestock breeding and therefore,
they could be vely well be understood as plant. Consequently, the assessee was
clearly entitled to treat the value of horses as plant entitled to
depreciation and investment allowance thereon. For this conclusion, reliance
was placed on the English decision in the case of Yarmouthv. France [1987] 19
QBD 647 in which the horses were held to be "plant" and the decision of the
Tribunal, Bombay Bench in the case of Ruia Stud & Agrl. Farms (P.) Ltd.
(supra) and Pune Bench decision in the case of ARC. Farms (P.) Ltd. v. ITO (IT
Appeal Nos. 693, 694 & 1645 (Pune) of 1985 dated 24-9-1986] and the Gujarat
High Court decision in the case of CITv. Elecon Engg. Co. Ltd. [1974] 96 1TR
672. In view of the aforesaid decisions, the CIT(A) directed the Assessing
Officer to allow depreciation and investment allowance on the stallions and
mares used for the purpose of breeding after verifying the correctness of the
cost shown by the assessee and also to verify whether the assessee satisfied
all other conditions for allowing depreciation and investment allowance.
6\. For the assessment year 1986-87, similar claims were made by the assessee.
The CIT(A) maintained his decision sofar as grant of depreciation allowance
was concerned. He pointed out that the aforesaid judgment in the case of
Yarmouth (supra) was approved by the Supreme Court in the case of Scientific
Engg. House (P.) Ltd. v. CIT [1986] 157 ITR 86', vide para 2 of his appellate
order.
7\. As regards the claim for investment allowance is concerned, the CIT(A)
held that the assessee is not entitled to investment allowance on the
stallions and mares used for the purpose of breeding as they did not satisfy
the conditions laid down under Section 32A of the Income-tax Act, 1961.
According to him, investment allowance has to be allowed on machinery or plant
installed after 31st day of March, 1976 in an industrial undertaking for the
purposes of business of construction, manufacture or production of any article
or thing, not being an article or thing specified in the list in the 11th
Schedule. On the basis of the text as well as the context in which the words
"article or thing" are used, it is clear that investment allowance has to be
allowed only where there is manufacture or production of an inanimate object
which is a new and distinct commercial commodity. Applying the aforesaid
tests, the CIT(A) observed that in the assessee's case, there is neither any
manufacture nor any production of any 'article or thing'. The stallions and
mares used for the purpose of breeding cannot be said to be engaged for the
purposes of business of manufacture or production of any article or thing. In
this connection, he made a pointed reference to the articles or things
specified in the 1lth Schedule to draw home the fact that the article or thing
has to be of an inanimate commercial article only. He further observed that
the process or breeding could not be considered as an industrial undertaking
in the sense in which it is understood for the purposes of allowance of
investment allowance under Section 32A. The foals which are born as a result
of breeding by the stallions cannot be considered as an article or thing nor
can breeding be considered as an industrial undertaking in the sense those
words are used in the context of Section 32A. For this view, he relied on the
decision of the Supreme Court in the case of Reserve Bank of India v. Peerless
General Finance & Investment Co. Ltd. 1987 Judgments Today (1) SC 246. In view
of the aforesaid reasons, he concluded that the assessee is not entitled to
investment allowance under Section 32A as the conditions laid down therein
were not satisfied.
8\. At the time of hearing, the learned departmental representative has been
duly heard. Taking the appeal of the department for the assessment year
1985-86, the learned departmental representative relied on the decision of the
Tribunal, Special Bench in the case of Ruia Stud & Agrl. Farms (P.) Ltd. v.
ITO (IT Appeal Nos. 7979 & 7980 (Bom.) of 1984 dated 3-10-1989]. In respect of
grounds 1 & 2 taken by the revenue pertaining to grant of depreciation and
investment allowance on stallions and mares used for breeding purposes. His
contention is the same in respect of the grant of depreciation directed by the
CIT(A) in the assessment year 1986-87. As regards grant of investment
allowance directed by the CIT(A) for the assessment year 1985-86, but declined
to grant investment allowance in the assessment year 1986-87, the contention
of the learned departmental representative was that the decision of the
Special Bench would also be applicable to the claim of investment allowance,
inasmuch as if horse is not a plant for the purpose of depreciation, it cannot
be a plant for the grant of investment allowance also. In other words, the
inference of the decision of the Special Bench in respect of depreciation
would be applicable for the claim of investment allowance also.
9\. Shri B.K. Khare, the learned counsel for the assessee, has been heard at
great length. According to him, the assessee runs a stud farm for the purpose
of rearing horses for races and therefore, it is a specialised stud farm in
ensuring the progeny. For this purpose, human effort is also involved,
although there is the natural phenomenon of production. Ordinarily, a horse is
low priced, whereas the stud firm horse, i.e., race horse, is highly priced.
Such breeding stallions and mares constituted fixed assets or capital asset,
but not stock-in-trade, because they were used for the purpose of breeding and
rearing only. According to him, nothing is produced, but the breeding is
manipulated. Breeding mares and stallions are segregated and transferred to
plant account out of the opening stock and the assessee claimed depreciation
treating them as plant. In this connection, he stated that the word "plant" is
very wide to include even Books. Any tool or device with which the business is
carried on is plant not being stock-in-trade provided it is durable.
Therefore, he wondered why a Special Bench has been constituted for this
purpose. Even the decision rendered by the Special Bench in the case of Ruia
Stud&Agrl. Farms (P.) Ltd. (supra) is not conclusive of the issue, whether the
horse is plant for the purpose of claim of depreciation because the Special
Bench considered the issue only with reference to Section 32(1) read with
Section 36(l)(v)\- In other words, he pointed out that the scope of the
Special Bench was very much restricted with reference to allowance under
Section 36(l)(vi). Therefore, he, stated that the decision of the Special
Bench has not considered the issue in larger perspective from the point of
view of functional test of a plant and therefore, the decision is not correct,
inasmuch as the Tribunal restricted the scope of plant to inanimate objects
and excluded animals from the scope of the plant. Developing on this idea, he
vehemently contended that even if the decision of the Special Bench in the
case of Ruia Stud &. Agrl, Farms (P.) Ltd. (supra) negatives the claim of
depreciation, still the assessee is entitled to claim investment allowance. In
this connection, he relied on the decision of the Andhra Pradesh High Court in
the case of CIT v. Sri Venkateswara Hatcheries (P.)Ltd. [1988] 174 ITR 231'.
In particular, he referred to the observations of the Andhra Pradesh High
Court contained at page 239, last para at 240 and at 241, wherein their
Lordships have held that Sri Venkateswara Hatcheries (P.) Ltd. was eligible to
claim the deduction permissible under Section 80J as well as Section 80JJ and
both are not mutually exclusive. According to the High Court, the only proper
interpretation was that both the sections would apply if the requirements of
both the sections were satisfied. In this connection, it has been observed
that allowance of deduction under Section 80J would not lead to rejection of
claim under Section 80JJ because there was no provision in the Act to that
effect. To illustrate this conclusion, their Lordships have pointed out
certain provisions in the Statute wherein specific prohibition is mentioned
not to allow deduction in both the provisions. In this connection, he made a
pointed reference to the classic observations of Lindley L.J. in Yarmouth's
case (supra) in which horse has been held to be plant and which has been
considered by the Gujarat High Court in the case of Elecon Engg. Co. Ltd.
(supra) and also by the Supreme Court in the case of Scientific Engg. House
(P.) Ltd. (supra). Therefore, he vehemently urged that the wider meaning of
the word 'plant' and the inclusive definition of plant in Section 43(3) are
required to be considered and adopted to resolve the dispute in the assessee's
case. Based upon this provision, the learned counsel for the assessee relied
on the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of CITv. Taj Mahal Hotel
[1971 ] 82 ITR 44, in support of his claim for investment allowance. In that
case, the assessee ran a hotel and installed sanitary and pipeline fittings in
one of its branches. Depreciation was claimed on them under the head
"furniture and fittings". The question that arose for consideration was
whether the sanitary and pipeline fittings installed fell within the
definition of "plant" in Section 10(5) of the Income-tax Act, 1922 and whether
the assessee was entitled to development rebate in relation thereto under
Section 10(2)(vib). The Supreme Court held that the sanitary and pipeline
fittings fell within the definition of "plant" in Section 10(5) and the
assessee was entitled to development rebate under Section 10(2)(vib). It was
also held that the fact that the assessee claimed depreciation on the basis
that sanitary and pipeline fittings fell under the head "furniture and
fittings" in Rule 8(2) of the Income-tax Rules, 1922, did not detract from
this position. The Supreme Court highlighted the fact that the intention of
the legislature was to give the word "plant" a wide meaning. Relying on this
judgment, the learned counsel for the assessee submitted that though the claim
for depreciation allowance conflicted with the claim of development rebate in
the case of Tqj Mahal Hotel, the Supreme Court ruled that the assessee was
entitled to claim development rebate by acting on the legislative intention to
give the word "plant" a wide meaning. On the same analogy, the learned counsel
for the assessee argued with same fervor that notwithstanding the result of
the claim for depreciation on horses treating them as plant, the claim for
investment allowance was admissible to the assessee. He cited the decision of
the Tribunal, Pune Bench, in the case of A.B.C. Farms (P.) Ltd. (supra]
wherein the Tribunal held that in respect of cows used for the purpose of
breeding, depreciation and investment allowance was to be granted in the same
manner as depreciation has been granted for horse breeding by the Tribunal,
Bombay Bench 'A' in the case of Ruia Stud & Agrl. Farms (P.) Ltd. (supra). The
decision of the Tribunal, A Bench, Bombay in the case of M.D. Pendse v. Second
ITO (IT Appeal Nos. 586 to 588 (Bom.) of 1983 dated 2-2-1984] was also relied
on, wherein poultry farming has been held to be an industrial undertaking so
as to be eligible for investment allowance. In that case, the assessee was
running a business of scientifically managed poultry farm. On the same
analogy, through selection of high blood and high pedigree stallion and mares,
the progeny has the same characteristics. The foals are transformed into race
horses by providing nutritious food, exercise and training to make them as
race horses. The stud horses and mares are registered with the Stud Authority
of India. The offspring of such stud horses and mares is of different type
vis-a-vis the ordinary variety. His contention was that value is added and
transferred into different sellable commodity because millions of rupees are
punted on such race horses. He referred to the judgment of the Supreme Court
in the case of Dy. CAIT v. Palampadam Plantations Ltd. AIR 1969 SC 930 for the
meaning of the word "produce" appearing in the definition of dealer contained
in Section 2(viii) of the Kerala General Sales Tax Act. The Supreme Court
observed that word 'produced' can only mean to "to bring forth, bring into
being or existence - to bring (a thing) into existence from its raw materials
or elements". The Supreme Court further observed that the intention in
emplying the word "produced" obviously was to introduce an element of volition
and effort involving the employment of some process for bringing into
existence the goods. In that case, a person owning and maintaining private
forest and selling trees of spontaneous growth therein is held to be not a
dealer as such trees have grown spontaneously and without any plantation by
that person and therefore cannot be regarded as having been produced by him by
agriculture or horticulture. However, this case has been relied upon by the
learned counsel of the assessee to show that element of volition by human
effort is necessary for production. He also referred to the decision of the
Tribunal, Bangalore Bench in the case of Kiran Tobacco Products (P.) Ltd. v.
First ITO [IT Appeal Nos. 981 & 1630 (Bang.) of 1988 dated 24-10-1990] wherein
the aspect of production was discussed at great length. The article need not
change itself, but chemistry of the article can be changed and commercially
transformed good or different quality of article is produced. In this
connection, he has referred to certain other decisions pertaining to
processing of seeds and processing of Bidi patti etc. The learned counsel for
the assessee summed up as follows. The breeding of stallions and mares in the
stud farm are plants. Investment allowance under Section 32A is incentive
deduction for plant covered by Section 43(3) items. Section 36(1)(vi) has no
application for investment allowance, but it has application only to
depreciation under Section 32. The Special Bench decision in the case of Ruia
Stud & Agrl. Farms (P.) Ltd. (supra) is not applicable. The scheme laid down
by the Andhra Pradesh High Court is to be adopted for deciding the issue
involved in these appeals. Notwithstanding the decision of the Special Bench
the claim under Section 32A is not ousted. The ratio of the Supreme Court in
the case of Taj Mahal Hotel (supra) is applicable. The stallion and breeding
mares kept in the stud farm are tools with which the business was carried on
by the assessee and as many as 300 people are engaged in the business.
Schedule 11 to the Income-tax Act, 1961 is not applicable to the case of the
assessee.
10\. In reply, Shri Khaladkar, learned departmental representative stated that
the words, machinery or plant appeared both in Section 32 and Section 32A.
Section 43(3) defined plant and enumerated the items covered by such
definition and therefore, it does not cover other items. This according to
him, is the decision of the Special Bench also. When once Section 43(3) is
considered and the claim of depreciation is denied by the Special Bench on
stud horses and mares, the conclusion should also operate for the claim of
investment allowance under Section 32A. He stressed the fact that the Special
Bench has stated that the plant referred to inanimate objects only. The
principle of ejusdem generis applied and it was for the assessee to show that
horse is included in the definition of plant. He referred to the decision of
the Allahabad High Court in the case of CWTv. S.N. Kacker [1989] 175 ITR 1291
and stated that there must be specific genus but not general clauses of
objects and it is for the assessee to show that horse is included. He referred
to Section 31 of the Income Tax Act which permits deduction of current repairs
and insurance for damage or destruction of machinery, plant or furniture used
for the purpose of business or profession. According to him, this section is
not applicable to the animate objects. His point was that animate objects like
horse is not considered as plant. He referred to the text book on accountancy
by Pickles where at page 168 depreciation has been defined as wear and tear
etc. Several features enumerated in that book are not applicable to horse. The
point he was making was that such consideration would not apply to animate
objects like horse. He referred to the commentary on Income Tax by Chaturvedi
& Pithisaria, Vol. I at page 1053 that a plant is such that it decreases in
value by wear and tear because of constant use. Such phenomenon is not
applicable to animals such as horses, stallions and mares. He cited the
decision of the Supreme Court in the case of CITv. Alps Theatre [1967] 65 ITR
377, at page 380 where land is not held to be eligible for depreciation. The
point he was making was that depreciation is admissible according to the
Income-tax Act and according to the accounting principles only. Referring to
the judgment of the Bombay High Court in the case of CITv. Bombay State l
Yanspuri Corpn. [1979] 118 ITR 399 at page 405, he stated that, true profits
could be ascertained only after deducting wear and tear allowance. He also
referred to the provisions of Section 36(l)(vi) where depreciation is allowed
once and for all for dead and useless animals. He referred to the commentary
on Income Tax by Sampath Iyengar at page 2019 in para 69 for the proposition
that no depreciation is, however, admissible on animals. He also stated that
for the purpose of depreciation durability of the plant is contemplated by the
Statute. The wear and tear of the plant starts after use. In the case of
horse, it cannot be predicated whether the verility is maintainable after
racing career is over. Referring to the decision of the Supreme Court in the
case of P.K. Badiani v. CIT [1976] 105 ITR 642 at page 649, para 2, it was
pointed out that "there is nothing at all imaginary about depreciation as a
cost of business operation and at bottom it is just as much an out-of-pocket
cost as any other. The depreciation charge is merely the periodic operating
aspect of the fixed-asset costs, and there is no doubt as to the reality of
such costs." The point of the learned departmental representative was that in
the case of horse, the concept of periodic operating of fixed asset cost is
not applicable. Referring to the contention of the learned counsel of the
assessee that human efforts were involved in manipulation, he stated that the
mating process cannot be governed by human agency. The number of progeny
produced by each horse is not known. The basic instinct of animals cannot be
guided by human agency because it depends on instinct. He referred to the
judgment of the Bombay High Court in the case of CITv. Sandvik Asia Ltd.
[1983] 144 ITR 585' wherein the roads within the factory premises were not
held to be plant but must be treated as building. The Bombay High Court at
page 595 thereof in last, para stated that "we are unable to read the decision
of the Supreme Court in Taj Mahal Hotel's case (supra] as laying down any
general proposition; that decision must be restricted to the facts of that
case." This, according to the learned departmental representative, is binding
on the Tribunal vis-a-vis the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Tqj
Mahal Hotel (supra)f He also pointed out that the registration of horses did
not make any difference. Regarding the judgment of the Andhra Pradesh High
Court in the case of Sri Venkateswara Hatcheries (P.) Ltd. (supra), he
submitted that there were several sections called in question, but so far as
basic concepts are concerned investment allowance is not admissible to the
assessee. In the case of M.D. Pendse (supra) relied upon by the learned
counsel of the assessee, depreciation related to the kind of shed. For all
these reasons, he vehemently urged that the CIT(A) was not justified in his
decision and therefore, he supported the grounds taken by the revenue.
11\. The learned counsel for the assessee referred to the judgment of the
Supreme Court in the case of Scientific Engg. House (P.) Ltd. (supra) and
referred to page 96 thereof to contend that plant would include any article or
object fixed or movable, live or dead used by a business-man for carrying on
his business and it is not necessarily confined to an apparatus which is used
for mechanical operations or processes or is employed in mechanical or
industrial business. He submitted that the principle of ejusdem generis did
not apply at all. Horses are property of a business-man, insurance for life
and against lame conditions is made, Loss of profit policy is taken for that
purpose. Even repairs is also applicable because artificial support to legs is
given. All the ingenuity and human effort go to give different property to the
natural produce in the case of the assessee. Even if depreciation question is
against the assessee, investment allowance is admissible to the assessee.
12\. After due consideration of the rival submissions and on consideration of
the case laws cited on both sides, we are of the opinion that the orders
passed by the CIT(A) are not justified in law insofar as grant of depreciation
on horses is concerned. As regards grant of investment allowance, we uphold
the orders of the CIT(A) as they are justified in law. The Special Bench of
the Tribunal in the case of Ruia Stud &Agrl. Farms (P.) Ltd. (supra) is
directly on this point, whether horse is a plant or not. The Special Bench of
the Tribunal has duly considered the claim for depreciation in respect of
stallions and mares used in stud farm, vide para 11 of the said order. In this
connection, the various decisions cited on behalf of the assessee especially,
the classic case of Yarmouth (supra) which was duly considered by the Gujarat
High Court in the case of Elecon Engg. Co. Ltd. (supra) and the Supreme Court
in the case of Scientific Engg. House (P.) Ltd. (supra) and Taj Mahal Hotel
(supra) etc. were duly considered and yet decided the issue against the
assessee. The relevant portion of the order of the Special Bench is reproduced
below: -
12\. We find that the word 'plant' as an ordinary English word is a word of
wide and varied import susceptible of diverse meanings depending upon its
setting in the scheme of statute. Consequently, we have to decide the question
whether horses owned by the assessee for business of breeding could be
regarded as plant in the context of the scheme of the Act with which we are
concerned. The definition of plant in Section 43(3) is an inclusive definition
and that definition brings within its scope ships, vehicles, books scientific
apparatus and surgical equipments used for the purposes of business or
profession. Instances mentioned in the definition are all of inanimate
objects. As far as inanimate objects are concerned, the test to be applied is
the fundamental test. That test is: Is it the tool of tax payer's trade? Does
it fulfill the function of plant in the trading activity? These tests are laid
down in the several decisions cited on behalf of the assessee and it is not
necessary to discuss those decisions.
13\. However, as far as animals are concerned, they would be capital assets of
the assessee but would not come in the category of plant within the meaning of
that expression in the provision relating to depreciation in Section 32 of the
Act. We find that relief similar to the one provided in Section 32 of the Act
in respect of depreciable assets has been provided in Section 36(l)(vi) of the
Act in respect of animals used for the purposes of business which are not
stock-in-trade and which are capital assets used in the business. No intention
to grant double deduction, one under Section 32 and the other under Section
36( 1) (vi) in respect of animals is discernible in giving relief for the
entire capital cost of the animals on the death or permanent disablement only
because the animals do not come in the category of plant so as to be eligible
for depreciation and balancing allowance under Section 32(l)(iii) of the Act.
There is no other reason for enacting the said special provision in Section
36( l)(vi) of the Act in respect of animals. On death of animals allowance
under said provision is equal to the difference between the actual cost to the
assessee of the animal and the price, if any, at which its carcass is sold
while on becoming permanently useless for the purpose of the business, the
allowance is equal to the difference between the actual cost and the price, if
any, realised on sale. Section 32(l)(iii) provides a balancing allowance for
plant while Section 36(l)(vi) provides a write off allowance for animals
thereby indicating that under the scheme of the Income Tax Act, 1961, animals
would not come within the ambit of expression plant so as to be entitled to
depreciation and balancing allowance under Section 32 of the Act. We may
mention here that similar view, viz., animals do not come within the ambit of
plant in Section 32 of the Act has been expressed in "Law and Practice of
Income Tax" by Kanga & Palkhivala at page 375 & 436 on the basis of certain
English cases and we agree with that view. It is not necessary for us to
discuss those English decisions relied on by the learned authors in support of
the above view.
13\. Therefore, most of the decisions relied upon by the learned counsel for
the assessee have been duly considered by the Special Bench and yet it came to
the conclusion that horses could not be considered as plant, though they could
be capital assets of the business. It is not out of place to mention that even
the functional test to be applied to plant was also duly considered by the
Special Bench of the Tribunal. Therefore, the contention of the learned
counsel for the assessee that the Special Bench has approached the issue only
with reference to Section 32[1) read with Section 36[1 )(vi) and not in
broader perspective is not acceptable, because the functional test has also
been duly, considered by the Special Bench. The Special Bench has relied on
the judgment in the case of Earl of Derby v. Aylmer (Surveyor of Taxes) [1915]
6 TC 665 (KB) in which the claim of depreciation on the two stallions used for
the purpose of business claimed on the ground that stallions diminished in
value year after year, but the plea was rejected. Based on this judgment, the
Special Bench has concluded in para 16 of its order that the concept of
allowance for diminished value year by year by wear and tear during the year
is not at all conceivable in respect of animals as in respect of trees. Again,
the Special Bench pointed out in connection with the issue whether the horses
could be treated as a plant within the meaning of Section 32 so as to be
eligible for depreciation that the nature of the asset should be taken into
account and if so done, the diminution in value by ordinary wear and tear year
by year is not conceivable at all. Then such asset would not come within the
ambit of expression 'plant' in Section 32 of the Act. It is in the light of
the aforesaid reasons, it has been pointed out that a special provision has
been made in Section 36(l)(vi) of the Act for grant of similar allowance once
and for all, vide para 17 of the order. Thus the decision of the Special Bench
concludes the issue whether horse is a plant for the purpose of depreciation
under Section 32[1) of the Income-tax Act, 1961 and this decision of the
Special Bench of the Tribunal is binding or has persuasive value for the sake
of uniformity of decisions rendered by the various benches of the Tribunal.
14\. The decision of the Andhra Pradesh High Court in the case of Sri
Venkateswara Hatcheries (P.) Ltd. (supra) is not applicable to the assessee,
because in that admittedly, as found by the Hon'ble High Court, the assessee
fulfilled the conditions for the various allowances, whereas the eligiblity of
depreciation as well as investment allowance is very much in dispute. Strong
reliance has been placed by the learned counsel for the assessee on the
decision of the Supreme Court in the case of Taj Mahal Hotel (supra) for the
proposition that if depreciation is not eligible to the assessee, investment
allowance is admissible for in that case the assessee claimed depreciation
allowance under the head "furniture and fittings" on sanitary and pipeline
fittings installed, but it was held by the Supreme Court that those fittings
fell within the definition of "plant" and therefore, the assessee was entitled
to development rebate. The Supreme Court observed that the fact that the
assessee claimed depreciation under the head "furniture and fittings" did not
detract from the position that they constituted plant. In this connection, it
is relevant to refer to the question referred to the High Court for opinion in
that case. The question referred to was, "Whether the sanitary fittings and
pipelines installed in the King Kethi branch of the hotel constituted "plant'
within the meaning of Section 10(5) of the Indian Income-tax Act and whether
the assessee is entitled to development rebate in respect thereof under
Section 10(2) of the Act?" (emphasis supplied). The High Court answered the
question in affirmative and in favour of the assessee. The only question that
was argued before the High Court and which has been debated before the Supreme
Court was whether the sanitary and pipeline fittings in a building which is
run as a hotel would fall within the meaning of the word 'plant' in Section
10(2)(vib) of the Act or not. The Supreme Court considered the judgment in the
case of Jarrold (Inspector of Taxes) v. John Good & Sons Ltd. [1963] 1 WLR 214
(CA) wherein the flexibility of accommodation by providing partitions was held
to be a commercial necessity for carrying on the business to suit the
requirements therefrom and which helped the trader to cope with the
vicissitudes of the business as it increased or diminished and therefore, it
was held to be plant. This ratio was adapted by the Supreme Court in the case
of Taj Mahal Hotel (supra) because a hotelier had also adapted a building or
premises in a suitable way to be used as a residential hotel where visitors
come and stay and where there is arrangement for meals and other amenities are
provided for their comfort and convenience. It is from the context of the
business amenities required to be made by the hotelier, the question of
sanitary fittings in the bath rooms was regarded as one of the essential
amenities or conveniences which are normally provided in good hotel. Applying
the ratio of Jarrold's case, the Supreme Court held that the sanitary fittings
in the bath rooms in a hotel constituted plant especially when the intention
of the Legislature was to give it a wide meaning to the word plant. It is
relevant to highlight the significance of this case decided by the Supreme
Court because the question referred to the High Court itself stated that
sanitary fittings and pipelines were installed (emphasis supplied) in the
hotel. Therefore, the sanitary fittings and pipelines though fitted in the
bath-rooms of the hotel, they themselves could individually constitute a plant
when looked at from the point of view of sanitary fittings and pipelines,
because they are capable of being installed as a plant. Even if we look at
from the point of view of the conveniences provided by a hotelier, sanitary
fittings and pipelines is part of such amenities provided to the customers and
constitute a plant with which the hotel business is carried on. Therefore,
such sanitary fittings and pipelines satisfy the functional test required to
be satisfied of plant. The nature of sanitary fittings and pipelines are such
that the assessee had claimed depreciation allowance under the head furniture
and fittings which is a standard heading prescribed under the Companies Act.
Yet the nature of the individual plant and also the context in which the plant
plays a part were required to be taken into account to decide the issue
whether sanitary fittings and pipelines were really furniture and fittings or
a plant. The Supreme Court has decided likewise in that case. Therefore, there
is force in the contention of the learned departmental representative that the
aforesaid judgment of the Supreme Court has been interpreted by the Bombay
High Court in the case of Sandvik Asia Ltd. (supra) as not laying down any
general proposition, but that decision must be restricted to the facts of that
case, vide observations at page 595 of the judgment. In that case, the
contention raised on behalf of the assessee that, following the judgment of
the Supreme Court in the case of Taj Mahal Hotel (supra) the roads within the
premises of the factory must be treated as plant was rejected.
15\. Though a broader definition of plant was laid down in the case of
Yarmouth (supra) no definition was contained in the Employers' Liability Act,
1880 and the Supreme Court in the case of Scientific Engg. House (P.) Ltd.
(supra) adopted the same, yet it laid down at page 96, the functional test,
namely, Does the article fulfill the function of a plant in the assessee's
trading activity and is it a tool of his trade with which he carried on his
business? This functional test was duly considered by the Special Bench in the
case of Ruia Stud & Agrl. Farms (P.) Ltd. (supra), which was also carrying on
the business in stud farm. The Gujarat High Court in the case of Elecon Engg.
Co. Ltd. (supra) considered the various judgments of foreign Courts,
especially conflicting decisions in respect of horse and observed that in each
case the word "plant' was construed having regard to its context and
circumstances of the case and in none of the cases the Court was concerned
with the interpretation of the word plant occurring in a statute in which it
was defined. The Gujarat High Court has pointed out that in the case of
Yarmouth (supra), horse is being held to be plant in the context of the
Employers' Liability Act, 1880, whereas in the case of Creasey in the context
of the Bills of Sale Act [1878) Amendment Act, 1882, it has been held not to
be a plant. It is for this reason that the Gujarat High Court held that these
cases would be of little utility in seeking to interpret the word plant in
Section 32 of the Income-tax Act, 1961 in the context in which it occurs, all
the more so because of the fact that by an inclusive definition contained in
Section 43(3) its ordinary meaning has been enlarged so as to include many
things which could not be comprehended within its ordinary meaning. The
Gujarat High Court pertinently made an observation that what was relevant was,
what is its meaning in Section 32 of the Act and it cannot be resolved by
reference to decisions given under different statutes. The learned counsel for
the assessee furnished instances of statutory provisions to show that wherever
the Legislature wanted to restrict any allowance or dedviction under any other
provisions of the Act apart from the relevant provisions under which a
deduction is permitted the language is very specific to that effect. In the
absence of any specification in Section 36(l)(vi) or Section 32A, the claim of
the assessee under Section 32A cannot be denied. In this connection, we would
like to observe that only in cases where it is statutorily permissible to
allow deduction, such specification is required to be made so as to not to
grant double deduction for the same purpose. This is not the case in the
assessee, because depreciation under Section 32 per se is not admissible under
Section 32. Therefore, the whole edifice of the contentious arguments made by
the learned counsel for the assessee crumbles to the ground.
16\. There is also no force in the contention taken by the learned counsel for
the assessee, relying on the aforesaid judgment of the Supreme Court in the
case of Taj Mahal Hotel (supra), that if the claim for depreciation is not
permissible, the claim for investment allowance is admissible in the case of
the assessee. It is only in the light of the aforesaid judgments, the decision
of the Special Bench in the case of Ruia Stud & Agrl. Farms (P.) Ltd. (supra),
is to be appreciated. Even if the assessee had raised such contention as an
intervenor in the case of Ruia Stud &Agrl. Farms (P.) Ltd. (supra), it is
doubtful whether such contention would have prevailed over the Special Bench,
because the claim of treating horse as a plant itself was very much in dispute
and after considering all the relevant judgments, the Special Bench decided
the issue against the assessee. It. is pertinent to point out that the learned
counsel for the assessee in the case of Ruia Stud & Agrl. Farms (P.) Ltd.
(supra), has cited the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Taj Mahal
Hotel (supra) and yet the Special Bench decided the issue against the
assessee. The Commentaries of the Authors, Chaturvedi & Pithisaria, Sampath
Iyengar & Pickles clearly go to show that horse is not a plant and not
eligible for depreciation.
17\. In the facts and circumstances of the case, we hold that the CIT(A) was
not justified in allowing depreciation on horses, stallions and mares meant
for stud farm for the assessment years 1985-86 and 1986-87. However, we uphold
the order of the CIT(A) in rejecting the claim of investment allowance both
for assessment years 1985-86 and 1986-87, though he has not passed a separate
order of rectification for the assessment year 1985-86 holding that the
assessee is not entitled to investment allowance, but he has mentioned it in
the order relating to assessment year 1986-87. The objection raised by the
assessee is only technical, but insofar as investment allowance is concerned,
that portion of the order in appeal for the assessment year 1986-87 can be
read as rectification order for the assessment year 1985-86, because the
assessee is not interested in getting a separate rectification order, but
interested only in getting investment allowance.
18\. There is one more ground relating to assessment year 1986-87 in the
assessee's appeal which pertains to disallowance of vehicle maintenance
expenses of Rs. 56,850 claimed by the assessee. According to the Assessing
Officer, the expenses were in the nature of reimbursement of vehicle expenses
incurred by four employees. There is no contract to pay such reimbursement of
vehicle expenses. Therefore, the Assessing Officer concluded that such
expenses were not for the purpose of business. He also pointed out that the
cars were also used by the employees for their personal use and being
employees, they are bound to come to the place of work as a normal course and
even if any reimbursement is called for, it should be for specific purposes
connected with the business and not otherwise.
19\. On appeal, the assessee claimed that the stud farm is situated about 12
Kms. from the city. Doctors and staff of stud farm have to come to city very
often and the expenditure incurred by the firm for maintenance of cars is
essential for the business. In the absence of any contractual agreement with
the assessee to pay any conveyance allowance to them and in the absence of
details to show the basis on which reimbursement was made, the CIT(A) upheld
the disallowance made by the Assessing Officer. Reliance was placed on the
judgment of the Bombay High Court in the case of CIT v. Ballarpur Industries
Ltd.[1979] 119 ITR 817'. In that case, the admissibility of expenditure
incurred Rs. 1,00,000 on aerial survey for providing technical operational
data on the utilisation of hardwood for the manufacture of chemical pulp which
is a basic raw material for the manufacture of paper, came up for
consideration. While the Assessing Officer held that it was capital
expenditure because of the enduring benefit which would be available for all
the future years, as pulp is the raw material in the manufacture of paper the
AAC held that it was a cost reducing expenditure and is to be allowed as
revenue expenditure. The Tribunal agreed with the AAC. On reference, the
Bombay High Court held that to claim expenditure under Section 37(1) as wholly
and exclusively incurred for the purpose of business, the assessee must
establish that the expenditure was not capital in nature or personal expenses
in nature and inasmuch as the assessee had not discharged such burden, the
claim of deduction was not legally admissible.
20\. The learned counsel for the assessee reiterated the ground taken and
submitted that the claim of the assessee should be allowed. The learned
departmental representative, on the other ground, vehemently supported the
decisions of the Assessing Officer and the CIT(A).
21\. After due consideration, we are of the opinion that the authorities were
not justified in rejecting the claim because the expenses incurred were wholly
and necessarily for the purpose of business, even if there is no contract or
agreement for paying such allowance or for making such reimbursement of such
expenses. The expenses have been incurred actually and bona fide and there is
no dispute about it. It is immaterial whether the cars of the employees were
used partly for personal purposes or not. Insofar as the assessee has
reimbursed the expenses of the cars for user relating to business purposes,
they are admissible as a deduction as a commercial expediency. It is neither
capital expenditure nor personal expenses. Consequently, we reverse the
decision of the CIT(A) on this point for the assessment year 1986-87 and
direct the Assessing Officer to allow the deduction.
22\. Accordingly, the appeals of the revenue for the assessment years 1985-86
and 1986-87 are allowed, while the appeal of the assessee for the assessment
year 1986-87 is partly allowed.
claim of deduction was not legally admissible.
20\. The learned counsel for the assessee reiterated the ground taken and
submitted that the claim of the assessee should be allowed. The learned
departmental representative, on the other ground, vehemently supported the
decisions of the Assessing Officer and the CIT(A).
21\. After due consideration, we are of the opinion that the authorities were
not justified in rejecting the claim because the expenses incurred were wholly
and necessarily for the purpose of business, even if there is no contract or
agreement for paying such allowance or for making such reimbursement of such
expenses. The expenses have been incurred actually and bona fide and there is
no dispute about it. It is immaterial whether the cars of the employees were
used partly for personal purposes or not. Insofar as the assessee has
reimbursed the expenses of the cars for user relating to business purposes,
they are admissible as a deduction as a commercial expediency. It is neither
capital expenditure nor personal expenses. Consequently, we reverse the
decision of the CIT(A) on this point for the assessment year 1986-87 and
mares amounting to Rs. 24,69,812 out of the opening stock, to "plants
account". The cost of one stallion purchased during the previous year Rs.
2,64,994 was also claimed as plant. The assessee claimed depreciation and
investment allowance on the stock transferred to the plant account and
investment allowance, depreciation allowance and additional depreciation
allowance on new purchases made. For this purpose, the decision of the Income
Tax Appellate Tribunal, A Ben ch, Bombay in the case of Ruia Stud & Agrl.
Farms (P.) Ltd. v. Sixth ITO [1985] 14 ITD 429 was relied upon by the
assessee.
4\. This claim was rejected by the Assessing Officer for five-fold reasons
given in para 11 of his assessment order. Consequently, he computed the total
income at Rs. 6,29,721 for the assessment year 1985-86 declining the claim of
depreciation and investment allowance.
5\. On appeal, the CIT(A) held that the horses and the stallion were used only
as a medium for procreation of horses and livestock breeding and therefore,
they could be vely well be understood as plant. Consequently, the assessee was
clearly entitled to treat the value of horses as plant entitled to
depreciation and investment allowance thereon. For this conclusion, reliance
was placed on the English decision in the case of Yarmouthv. France [1987] 19
QBD 647 in which the horses were held to be "plant" and the decision of the
claim of deduction was not legally admissible.
20\. The learned counsel for the assessee reiterated the ground taken and
submitted that the claim of the assessee should be allowed. The learned
departmental representative, on the other ground, vehemently supported the
decisions of the Assessing Officer and the CIT(A).
21\. After due consideration, we are of the opinion that the authorities were
not justified in rejecting the claim because the expenses incurred were wholly
and necessarily for the purpose of business, even if there is no contract or
agreement for paying such allowance or for making such reimbursement of such
expenses. The expenses have been incurred actually and bona fide and there is
no dispute about it. It is immaterial whether the cars of the employees were
used partly for personal purposes or not. Insofar as the assessee has
reimbursed the expenses of the cars for user relating to business purposes,
they are admissible as a deduction as a commercial expediency. It is neither
capital expenditure nor personal expenses. Consequently, we reverse the
decision of the CIT(A) on this point for the assessment year 1986-87 and
mares amounting to Rs. 24,69,812 out of the opening stock, to "plants
account". The cost of one stallion purchased during the previous year Rs.
2,64,994 was also claimed as plant. The assessee claimed depreciation and
investment allowance on the stock transferred to the plant account and
investment allowance, depreciation allowance and additional depreciation
allowance on new purchases made. For this purpose, the decision of the Income
Tax Appellate Tribunal, A Ben ch, Bombay in the case of Ruia Stud & Agrl.
Farms (P.) Ltd. v. Sixth ITO [1985] 14 ITD 429 was relied upon by the
assessee.
4\. This claim was rejected by the Assessing Officer for five-fold reasons
given in para 11 of his assessment order. Consequently, he computed the total
income at Rs. 6,29,721 for the assessment year 1985-86 declining the claim of
depreciation and investment allowance.
5\. On appeal, the CIT(A) held that the horses and the stallion were used only
as a medium for procreation of horses and livestock breeding and therefore,
they could be vely well be understood as plant. Consequently, the assessee was
clearly entitled to treat the value of horses as plant entitled to
depreciation and investment allowance thereon. For this conclusion, reliance
was placed on the English decision in the case of Yarmouthv. France [1987] 19
QBD 647 in which the horses were held to be "plant" and the decision of the
claim of deduction was not legally admissible.
20\. The learned counsel for the assessee reiterated the ground taken and
submitted that the claim of the assessee should be allowed. The learned
departmental representative, on the other ground, vehemently supported the
decisions of the Assessing Officer and the CIT(A).
21\. After due consideration, we are of the opinion that the authorities were
not justified in rejecting the claim because the expenses incurred were wholly
and necessarily for the purpose of business, even if there is no contract or
agreement for paying such allowance or for making such reimbursement of such
expenses. The expenses have been incurred actually and bona fide and there is
no dispute about it. It is immaterial whether the cars of the employees were
used partly for personal purposes or not. Insofar as the assessee has
reimbursed the expenses of the cars for user relating to business purposes,
they are admissible as a deduction as a commercial expediency. It is neither
capital expenditure nor personal expenses. Consequently, we reverse the
decision of the CIT(A) on this point for the assessment year 1986-87 and
mares amounting to Rs. 24,69,812 out of the opening stock, to "plants
account". The cost of one stallion purchased during the previous year Rs.
2,64,994 was also claimed as plant. The assessee claimed depreciation and
investment allowance on the stock transferred to the plant account and
investment allowance, depreciation allowance and additional depreciation
allowance on new purchases made. For this purpose, the decision of the Income
Tax Appellate Tribunal, A Ben ch, Bombay in the case of Ruia Stud & Agrl.
Farms (P.) Ltd. v. Sixth ITO [1985] 14 ITD 429 was relied upon by the
assessee.
4\. This claim was rejected by the Assessing Officer for five-fold reasons
given in para 11 of his assessment order. Consequently, he computed the total
income at Rs. 6,29,721 for the assessment year 1985-86 declining the claim of
depreciation and investment allowance.
5\. On appeal, the CIT(A) held that the horses and the stallion were used only
as a medium for procreation of horses and livestock breeding and therefore,
they could be vely well be understood as plant. Consequently, the assessee was
clearly entitled to treat the value of horses as plant entitled to
depreciation and investment allowance thereon. For this conclusion, reliance
was placed on the English decision in the case of Yarmouthv. France [1987] 19
QBD 647 in which the horses were held to be "plant" and the decision of the
Tribunal, Bombay Bench in the case of Ruia Stud & Agrl. Farms (P.) Ltd.
(supra) and Pune Bench decision in the case of ARC. Farms (P.) Ltd. v. ITO (IT
Appeal Nos. 693, 694 & 1645 (Pune) of 1985 dated 24-9-1986] and the Gujarat
High Court decision in the case of CITv. Elecon Engg. Co. Ltd. [1974] 96 1TR
672. In view of the aforesaid decisions, the CIT(A) directed the Assessing
Officer to allow depreciation and investment allowance on the stallions and
mares used for the purpose of breeding after verifying the correctness of the
cost shown by the assessee and also to verify whether the assessee satisfied
all other conditions for allowing depreciation and investment allowance.
6\. For the assessment year 1986-87, similar claims were made by the assessee.
The CIT(A) maintained his decision sofar as grant of depreciation allowance
claim of deduction was not legally admissible.
20\. The learned counsel for the assessee reiterated the ground taken and
submitted that the claim of the assessee should be allowed. The learned
departmental representative, on the other ground, vehemently supported the
decisions of the Assessing Officer and the CIT(A).
21\. After due consideration, we are of the opinion that the authorities were
not justified in rejecting the claim because the expenses incurred were wholly
and necessarily for the purpose of business, even if there is no contract or
agreement for paying such allowance or for making such reimbursement of such
expenses. The expenses have been incurred actually and bona fide and there is
no dispute about it. It is immaterial whether the cars of the employees were
used partly for personal purposes or not. Insofar as the assessee has
reimbursed the expenses of the cars for user relating to business purposes,
they are admissible as a deduction as a commercial expediency. It is neither
capital expenditure nor personal expenses. Consequently, we reverse the
decision of the CIT(A) on this point for the assessment year 1986-87 and
mares amounting to Rs. 24,69,812 out of the opening stock, to "plants
account". The cost of one stallion purchased during the previous year Rs.
2,64,994 was also claimed as plant. The assessee claimed depreciation and
investment allowance on the stock transferred to the plant account and
investment allowance, depreciation allowance and additional depreciation
allowance on new purchases made. For this purpose, the decision of the Income
Tax Appellate Tribunal, A Ben ch, Bombay in the case of Ruia Stud & Agrl.
Farms (P.) Ltd. v. Sixth ITO [1985] 14 ITD 429 was relied upon by the
assessee.
4\. This claim was rejected by the Assessing Officer for five-fold reasons
given in para 11 of his assessment order. Consequently, he computed the total
income at Rs. 6,29,721 for the assessment year 1985-86 declining the claim of
depreciation and investment allowance.
5\. On appeal, the CIT(A) held that the horses and the stallion were used only
as a medium for procreation of horses and livestock breeding and therefore,
they could be vely well be understood as plant. Consequently, the assessee was
clearly entitled to treat the value of horses as plant entitled to
depreciation and investment allowance thereon. For this conclusion, reliance
was placed on the English decision in the case of Yarmouthv. France [1987] 19
QBD 647 in which the horses were held to be "plant" and the decision of the
Tribunal, Bombay Bench in the case of Ruia Stud & Agrl. Farms (P.) Ltd.
(supra) and Pune Bench decision in the case of ARC. Farms (P.) Ltd. v. ITO (IT
Appeal Nos. 693, 694 & 1645 (Pune) of 1985 dated 24-9-1986] and the Gujarat
High Court decision in the case of CITv. Elecon Engg. Co. Ltd. [1974] 96 1TR
672. In view of the aforesaid decisions, the CIT(A) directed the Assessing
Officer to allow depreciation and investment allowance on the stallions and
mares used for the purpose of breeding after verifying the correctness of the
cost shown by the assessee and also to verify whether the assessee satisfied
all other conditions for allowing depreciation and investment allowance.
6\. For the assessment year 1986-87, similar claims were made by the assessee.
The CIT(A) maintained his decision sofar as grant of depreciation allowance
claim of deduction was not legally admissible.
20\. The learned counsel for the assessee reiterated the ground taken and
submitted that the claim of the assessee should be allowed. The learned
departmental representative, on the other ground, vehemently supported the
decisions of the Assessing Officer and the CIT(A).
21\. After due consideration, we are of the opinion that the authorities were
not justified in rejecting the claim because the expenses incurred were wholly
and necessarily for the purpose of business, even if there is no contract or
agreement for paying such allowance or for making such reimbursement of such
expenses. The expenses have been incurred actually and bona fide and there is
no dispute about it. It is immaterial whether the cars of the employees were
used partly for personal purposes or not. Insofar as the assessee has
reimbursed the expenses of the cars for user relating to business purposes,
they are admissible as a deduction as a commercial expediency. It is neither
capital expenditure nor personal expenses. Consequently, we reverse the
decision of the CIT(A) on this point for the assessment year 1986-87 and
