Supreme Court of India
Sow Chandra Kanta And Another vs Sheik Habib on 13 March, 1975
Equivalent citations: 1975 AIR 1500, 1975 SCC (4) 457
Author: V Krishnaiyer
Bench: Krishnaiyer, V.R.
               PETITIONER:
    SOW CHANDRA KANTA AND ANOTHER
    	Vs.
    RESPONDENT:
    SHEIK HABIB
    DATE OF JUDGMENT13/03/1975
    BENCH:
    KRISHNAIYER, V.R.
    BENCH:
    KRISHNAIYER, V.R.
    SARKARIA, RANJIT SINGH
    CITATION:
     1975 AIR 1500		  1975 SCC  (4) 457
     CITATOR INFO :
     R	    1980 SC 674	 (8)
ineffectually covered ground or minor mistakes of inconsequential import are
obviously insufficient. The very strict need for compliance with these factors
is the rationale behind the insistence of counsel's certificate which should
not be a routine affair or a habitual step. It is neither fairness to the
court which decided nor awareness of the precious public time lost what with a
huge back-log of dockets waiting in the queue for disposal, for counsel to
issue easy certificates for entertainment of review and fight over again the
same battle which has been fought and lost. The Bench 934 and the Bar, we are
sure, are jointly concerned in the conservation of judicial time for maximum
use. We regret to say that this case is typical of the unfortunate but
frequent phenomenon of repeat performance with the review label as passport.
Nothing which we did not hear then has been heard now, except a couple of
rulings on points earlier put forward. May be, as counsel now urges and then
pressed, our order refusing special leave was capable of a different course.
The present stage is not a virgin ground but review of an earlier order which
has the normal feature of finality.
     R	    1980 SC 674	 (8)
     E	    1980 SC 808	 (8)
     F	    1980 SC2041	 (12)
     RF	    1983 SC1125	 (7)
     RF	    1990 SC 538	 (5)
    ACT:
    Constitution  of  India, 1950, Art. 137	 and  Supreme  Court
    Rules,	1966, Order XL--Review of an order refusing  special
    leave--Review proceeding, if amounts to re-hearing.
    HEADNOTE:
    Once an order refusing special leave has been passed by this
    Court, a review thereof must be subject to the rules of	 the
    Supreme	  Court	  Rules,  1966,	 and   cannot	be   lightly
    entertained.   Review  proceeding does not amount to  a	 re-
    hearing.   A  review  of a judgment is a  serious  step	 and
    reluctant  resort  to  it is proper  only  where  a  glaring
    omission or patent mistake or like grave error has crept  in
    earlier by judicial fallibility.  Even if the order refusing
    special	 leave was capable of a different course, review  of
    the  earlier order is not permissible because such an  order
    has the normal feature of finality. [933 F-G; 934 B]
    Observation  :	It is neither fairness to  the	Court  which
    decided nor awareness of the precious public time lost	what
    with  a	 huge back-log of dockets waiting in the  queue	 for
    disposal,  for	counsel	 'to  issue  easy  certificates	 for
    entertainment of review and fight over again the same battle
    which has been fought and lost. [933 H]
    JUDGMENT:
REVIEW JURISDICTION : Review Petition No. 62A of 1974. Petition for review of
this Court's Order dated the 18th January, 1974 in Spl. Leave Petition No.
2788 of 1973. C. K. Daphtary, S. K. Dholakia and R. C. Bhatia, for the
petitioner.
S. V. Tambwaker, for the respondents The Judgment of the Court was delivered
by KRISHNA IYER, J. Mr. Daphtary, learned counsel for the petitioners, has
argued at length all the points which were urged at the earlier stage when we
refused special leave thus making out that a review proceeding virtually
amounts to re-hearing. May be, we were not right in refusing special leave in
the first round; but, once an order has been passed by this Court, a review
thereof must be subject to the rules of the game and cannot be lightly
entertained. A review of a judgment is a serious step and reluctant resort to
it is proper only where a glaring omission or patent mistake or like grave
error has crept in earlier by judicial fallibility. A mere repetition, through
different counsel, of old and over-ruled arguments, a second trip over
ineffectually covered ground or minor mistakes of inconsequential import are
obviously insufficient. The very strict need for compliance with these factors
is the rationale behind the insistence of counsel's certificate which should
not be a routine affair or a habitual step. It is neither fairness to the
court which decided nor awareness of the precious public time lost what with a
huge back-log of dockets waiting in the queue for disposal, for counsel to
issue easy certificates for entertainment of review and fight over again the
same battle which has been fought and lost. The Bench 934 and the Bar, we are
sure, are jointly concerned in the conservation of judicial time for maximum
use. We regret to say that this case is typical of the unfortunate but
frequent phenomenon of repeat performance with the review label as passport.
Nothing which we did not hear then has been heard now, except a couple of
rulings on points earlier put forward. May be, as counsel now urges and then
pressed, our order refusing special leave was capable of a different course.
The present stage is not a virgin ground but review of an earlier order which
has the normal feature of finality.
We dismiss the petition unhesitatingly, but with these observations,
hopefully.
    V.M.K.		       Review petition dismissed.
    935
ineffectually covered ground or minor mistakes of inconsequential import are
obviously insufficient. The very strict need for compliance with these factors
is the rationale behind the insistence of counsel's certificate which should
not be a routine affair or a habitual step. It is neither fairness to the
court which decided nor awareness of the precious public time lost what with a
huge back-log of dockets waiting in the queue for disposal, for counsel to
issue easy certificates for entertainment of review and fight over again the
same battle which has been fought and lost. The Bench 934 and the Bar, we are
sure, are jointly concerned in the conservation of judicial time for maximum
use. We regret to say that this case is typical of the unfortunate but
frequent phenomenon of repeat performance with the review label as passport.
Nothing which we did not hear then has been heard now, except a couple of
rulings on points earlier put forward. May be, as counsel now urges and then
pressed, our order refusing special leave was capable of a different course.
The present stage is not a virgin ground but review of an earlier order which
has the normal feature of finality.
     R	    1980 SC 674	 (8)
     E	    1980 SC 808	 (8)
     F	    1980 SC2041	 (12)
     RF	    1983 SC1125	 (7)
     RF	    1990 SC 538	 (5)
    ACT:
    Constitution  of  India, 1950, Art. 137	 and  Supreme  Court
    Rules,	1966, Order XL--Review of an order refusing  special
    leave--Review proceeding, if amounts to re-hearing.
    HEADNOTE:
    Once an order refusing special leave has been passed by this
    Court, a review thereof must be subject to the rules of	 the
    Supreme	  Court	  Rules,  1966,	 and   cannot	be   lightly
    entertained.   Review  proceeding does not amount to  a	 re-
    hearing.   A  review  of a judgment is a  serious  step	 and
    reluctant  resort  to  it is proper  only  where  a  glaring
    omission or patent mistake or like grave error has crept  in
    earlier by judicial fallibility.  Even if the order refusing
    special	 leave was capable of a different course, review  of
    the  earlier order is not permissible because such an  order
ineffectually covered ground or minor mistakes of inconsequential import are
obviously insufficient. The very strict need for compliance with these factors
is the rationale behind the insistence of counsel's certificate which should
not be a routine affair or a habitual step. It is neither fairness to the
court which decided nor awareness of the precious public time lost what with a
huge back-log of dockets waiting in the queue for disposal, for counsel to
issue easy certificates for entertainment of review and fight over again the
same battle which has been fought and lost. The Bench 934 and the Bar, we are
sure, are jointly concerned in the conservation of judicial time for maximum
use. We regret to say that this case is typical of the unfortunate but
frequent phenomenon of repeat performance with the review label as passport.
Nothing which we did not hear then has been heard now, except a couple of
rulings on points earlier put forward. May be, as counsel now urges and then
pressed, our order refusing special leave was capable of a different course.
The present stage is not a virgin ground but review of an earlier order which
has the normal feature of finality.
     R	    1980 SC 674	 (8)
     E	    1980 SC 808	 (8)
     F	    1980 SC2041	 (12)
     RF	    1983 SC1125	 (7)
     RF	    1990 SC 538	 (5)
    ACT:
    Constitution  of  India, 1950, Art. 137	 and  Supreme  Court
    Rules,	1966, Order XL--Review of an order refusing  special
    leave--Review proceeding, if amounts to re-hearing.
    HEADNOTE:
    Once an order refusing special leave has been passed by this
    Court, a review thereof must be subject to the rules of	 the
    Supreme	  Court	  Rules,  1966,	 and   cannot	be   lightly
    entertained.   Review  proceeding does not amount to  a	 re-
    hearing.   A  review  of a judgment is a  serious  step	 and
    reluctant  resort  to  it is proper  only  where  a  glaring
    omission or patent mistake or like grave error has crept  in
    earlier by judicial fallibility.  Even if the order refusing
    special	 leave was capable of a different course, review  of
    the  earlier order is not permissible because such an  order
ineffectually covered ground or minor mistakes of inconsequential import are
obviously insufficient. The very strict need for compliance with these factors
is the rationale behind the insistence of counsel's certificate which should
not be a routine affair or a habitual step. It is neither fairness to the
court which decided nor awareness of the precious public time lost what with a
huge back-log of dockets waiting in the queue for disposal, for counsel to
issue easy certificates for entertainment of review and fight over again the
same battle which has been fought and lost. The Bench 934 and the Bar, we are
sure, are jointly concerned in the conservation of judicial time for maximum
use. We regret to say that this case is typical of the unfortunate but
frequent phenomenon of repeat performance with the review label as passport.
Nothing which we did not hear then has been heard now, except a couple of
rulings on points earlier put forward. May be, as counsel now urges and then
pressed, our order refusing special leave was capable of a different course.
The present stage is not a virgin ground but review of an earlier order which
has the normal feature of finality.
     R	    1980 SC 674	 (8)
     E	    1980 SC 808	 (8)
     F	    1980 SC2041	 (12)
     RF	    1983 SC1125	 (7)
     RF	    1990 SC 538	 (5)
    ACT:
    Constitution  of  India, 1950, Art. 137	 and  Supreme  Court
    Rules,	1966, Order XL--Review of an order refusing  special
    leave--Review proceeding, if amounts to re-hearing.
    HEADNOTE:
    Once an order refusing special leave has been passed by this
    Court, a review thereof must be subject to the rules of	 the
    Supreme	  Court	  Rules,  1966,	 and   cannot	be   lightly
    entertained.   Review  proceeding does not amount to  a	 re-
    hearing.   A  review  of a judgment is a  serious  step	 and
    reluctant  resort  to  it is proper  only  where  a  glaring
    omission or patent mistake or like grave error has crept  in
    earlier by judicial fallibility.  Even if the order refusing
    special	 leave was capable of a different course, review  of
    the  earlier order is not permissible because such an  order
    has the normal feature of finality. [933 F-G; 934 B]
    Observation  :	It is neither fairness to  the	Court  which
    decided nor awareness of the precious public time lost	what
    with  a	 huge back-log of dockets waiting in the  queue	 for
    disposal,  for	counsel	 'to  issue  easy  certificates	 for
    entertainment of review and fight over again the same battle
    which has been fought and lost. [933 H]
    JUDGMENT:
REVIEW JURISDICTION : Review Petition No. 62A of 1974. Petition for review of
this Court's Order dated the 18th January, 1974 in Spl. Leave Petition No.
2788 of 1973. C. K. Daphtary, S. K. Dholakia and R. C. Bhatia, for the
ineffectually covered ground or minor mistakes of inconsequential import are
obviously insufficient. The very strict need for compliance with these factors
is the rationale behind the insistence of counsel's certificate which should
not be a routine affair or a habitual step. It is neither fairness to the
court which decided nor awareness of the precious public time lost what with a
huge back-log of dockets waiting in the queue for disposal, for counsel to
issue easy certificates for entertainment of review and fight over again the
same battle which has been fought and lost. The Bench 934 and the Bar, we are
sure, are jointly concerned in the conservation of judicial time for maximum
use. We regret to say that this case is typical of the unfortunate but
frequent phenomenon of repeat performance with the review label as passport.
Nothing which we did not hear then has been heard now, except a couple of
rulings on points earlier put forward. May be, as counsel now urges and then
pressed, our order refusing special leave was capable of a different course.
The present stage is not a virgin ground but review of an earlier order which
has the normal feature of finality.
     R	    1980 SC 674	 (8)
     E	    1980 SC 808	 (8)
     F	    1980 SC2041	 (12)
     RF	    1983 SC1125	 (7)
     RF	    1990 SC 538	 (5)
    ACT:
    Constitution  of  India, 1950, Art. 137	 and  Supreme  Court
    Rules,	1966, Order XL--Review of an order refusing  special
    leave--Review proceeding, if amounts to re-hearing.
    HEADNOTE:
    Once an order refusing special leave has been passed by this
    Court, a review thereof must be subject to the rules of	 the
    Supreme	  Court	  Rules,  1966,	 and   cannot	be   lightly
    entertained.   Review  proceeding does not amount to  a	 re-
    hearing.   A  review  of a judgment is a  serious  step	 and
    reluctant  resort  to  it is proper  only  where  a  glaring
    omission or patent mistake or like grave error has crept  in
    earlier by judicial fallibility.  Even if the order refusing
    special	 leave was capable of a different course, review  of
    the  earlier order is not permissible because such an  order
    has the normal feature of finality. [933 F-G; 934 B]
    Observation  :	It is neither fairness to  the	Court  which
    decided nor awareness of the precious public time lost	what
    with  a	 huge back-log of dockets waiting in the  queue	 for
    disposal,  for	counsel	 'to  issue  easy  certificates	 for
    entertainment of review and fight over again the same battle
    which has been fought and lost. [933 H]
    JUDGMENT:
REVIEW JURISDICTION : Review Petition No. 62A of 1974. Petition for review of
this Court's Order dated the 18th January, 1974 in Spl. Leave Petition No.
2788 of 1973. C. K. Daphtary, S. K. Dholakia and R. C. Bhatia, for the
ineffectually covered ground or minor mistakes of inconsequential import are
obviously insufficient. The very strict need for compliance with these factors
is the rationale behind the insistence of counsel's certificate which should
not be a routine affair or a habitual step. It is neither fairness to the
court which decided nor awareness of the precious public time lost what with a
huge back-log of dockets waiting in the queue for disposal, for counsel to
issue easy certificates for entertainment of review and fight over again the
same battle which has been fought and lost. The Bench 934 and the Bar, we are
sure, are jointly concerned in the conservation of judicial time for maximum
use. We regret to say that this case is typical of the unfortunate but
frequent phenomenon of repeat performance with the review label as passport.
Nothing which we did not hear then has been heard now, except a couple of
rulings on points earlier put forward. May be, as counsel now urges and then
pressed, our order refusing special leave was capable of a different course.
The present stage is not a virgin ground but review of an earlier order which
has the normal feature of finality.
