Custom, Excise & Service Tax Tribunal
Appeal Nos. C/96 & 97/07 vs Commissioner Of Customs (Import) on 12 October,
2011
    IN THE CUSTOMS, EXCISE & SERVICE TAX APPELLATE TRIBUNAL
    WEST ZONAL BENCH AT MUMBAI
    COURT No. I
    APPEAL No.C/96, 97 & 432/07
    (Arising out of Order-in-Original No.130-132/2006/CAC/ CC(I)/ADP/Gr.VB & VA dated 3/11/2006   passed by Commissioner of  Customs (Imports), Mumbai)
    For approval and signature:
    Honble Mr. S.S. Kang, Vice President
    Honble Mr. P.R. Chandrasekharan,  Member (Technical)
    ======================================================
1\. Whether Press Reporters may be allowed to see :No the Order for
publication as per Rule 27 of the CESTAT (Procedure) Rules, 1982?
2\. Whether it should be released under Rule 27 of the :Yes CESTAT (Procedure)
Rules, 1982 for publication in any authoritative report or not?
3\. Whether Their Lordships wish to see the fair copy: Seen of the Order?
4\. Whether Order is to be circulated to the Departmental :Yes authorities?
====================================================== Appeal Nos. C/96 &
97/07 Mahindra & Mahindra Ltd.
of the Customs Act or not. Shri R.U. Prabhu was only an employee of the
appellant and he did not stand to gain personally by making the wrong
declarations. In as much as the appellant has been penalised, we are of the
view that penalty on Sri. Prabhu is not warranted and accordingly we set aside
the same.
19\. In sum, we uphold the confirmation of demand of differential duty
amounting to Rs.7,78,67,696/- under Section 28 of the Customs Act, 1962. We
also hold that the appellant/importer is liable to pay interest thereon at
appropriate rates on the said differential duty amount under the provisions of
Section 28AB of the Customs Act, 1962. We uphold the liability to confiscation
of the goods under the provisions of 111 (m) of the Customs Act, 1962.
Inasmuch as the goods are not available for confiscation, we set aside the
redemption fine of Rs.3.00 crore imposed on the appellant in lieu of
confiscation. We uphold the imposition of penalty of Rs.1.5 Crore on the
appellant M/s.Mahindra & Mahindra Ltd. under Section 112 (a) of the Customs
Act, 1962. We set aside the penalty imposed on Shri R.U. Prabhu, Dy General
97/07 Mahindra & Mahindra Ltd.
    Ramesh U. Prabhu					Appellants
    Vs.
    Commissioner of Customs (Import),
    Mumbai							Respondent
    Appeal No. C/432/07
    Commissioner of Customs (Import),
    Mumbai							Appellant
    Vs.
    Mahindra & Mahindra Ltd.,			Respondent
    Appearance:
    Shri.V. Sridharan, Advocate for appellants
    Shri.K.M. Mondal, Special Consultant, for respondent
    CORAM:
    Honble Mr. S. S. Kang, Vice President
    Honble Mr. P.R.Chandrasekharan, Member (Technical)
          Date of Hearing     :		25/08/2011
      	 		Date of Decision    :		    /10/2011	
    ORDER NO
    Per:  P.R. Chandrasekharan
    	These appeals are directed against Order-in-Original No.130-132/2006/CAC/CC(I)/AKP/Gr.VB & VA dated 03/11/2006 passed by the Commissioner of Customs (Imports), New Customs House, Mumbai. As they involve a common issue, they are taken up together for consideration and disposal.
    2.	The facts arising for consideration in the case are as follows:
2.1 M/s. Mahindra & Mahindra Ltd. (Mahindra in short) are manufacturers of
motor vehicles and parts thereof falling under Chapter 87 of the Central
Excise Tariff. The Director General of Central Excise Intelligence (DGCEI in
short) received intelligence to the effect that M/s. Mahindra had under-valued
certain goods imported by it and, therefore, they visited the factory of M/s.
Mahindra at Nasik on 31/08/2004. During the visit, it was found that M/s.
Mahindra had not declared the assessable value of the imported goods correctly
inasmuch as they had not included the assessable value of design and
engineering charges in the value of the imported goods. Therefore, a detailed
investigation was undertaken on the imports made by M/s. Mahindra.
Investigation revealed that M/s. Mahindra intended to develop a new vehicle
under its Scorpio vehicle programme. Pursuant to this, they entered into two
separate agreements with M/s. Nichimen Corporation, Japan (Nichimen in short).
These agreements were as follows:
i) Agreement bearing No.IDAM/REV/RUP/02 dated 20/11/98 (referred to as design
agreement) for technical consultancy, design and engineering of models, soft
tools and soft jigs/fixtures and assembly fixtures for the Scorpio vehicle
programme . Charges payable for this by M/s. Mahindra to M/s. Nichimen were
Japanese % 17,78,20,000.
ii) Agreement bearing No.AIAM/REV/RUP/03 dated 20/11/1998 (referred to as
supply agreement) for supply of 34 prototype Body-in-White (BIW in short) and
2 sets of panels for the Scorpio vehicle programme and charges payable for by
M/s. Mahindra to M/s. Nichimen was Japanese % 8,91,80,000.
2.2 Scrutiny of the above agreements and the bills of entry relating to
imports made by M/s. Mahindra revealed that M/s.Mahindra did not include
design and engineering charges of models, soft tools, soft jigs/fixtures and
assembly fixtures, etc. in the assessable value of BIW and panels. A statement
of Shri R.U. Prabhu, Dy. General Manager ( Capital Purchase of M/s. Mahindra
was recorded on 07/09/2004 wherein he, inter alia, stated that the object of
the design agreement was the design and engineering of models, soft tools,
soft jigs/fixtures and assembly fixtures required for Scorpio vehicle
programme and a consideration of Japanese %17,78,20,000 was paid for this. He
further stated that M/s. Mahindra had paid Japanese % 8,91,80,000 to M/s.
Nichimen as a consideration for supply of 34 BIWs and 2 sets of panels. In his
subsequent statement dated 08/09/2004 Shri R.U. Prabhu, inter alia, stated
that for the manufacture of BIWs, M/s. Nichimen had first produced the panels
and these panels were then assembled together to form BIWs and in order to
produce these panels and BIWs, M/s. Nichimen had designed and produced models,
soft tools, soft jigs/fixtures and assembly fixtures, which were used to
impart due shape to the said panels.
2.3 As part of the investigation, a statement of Shri Jagannathan Vasudevan,
Head (Programme Management) of M/s. Mahindra was recorded on 15/10/2004
wherein he inter alia admitted that the BIWs and panels were actually
manufactured by M/s. Chibha in Japan on behalf of M/s. Nichimen, who, in turn,
had supplied the same to M/s. Mahindra and the design and engineering of the
models, soft tools, soft jigs/fixtures and assembly fixtures too were done by
M/s. Chibha, Japan. He further informed that the design and engineering
information pertaining to the BIWs and panels was provided by M/s. Mahindra to
M/s. Nichimen and that the design and engineering of the said BIWs and panels
was carried out by M/s. Hawtal Whiting Design & Engineering Co. Ltd., England
(HW in short) by the engineers of both M/s. Mahindra and HW. He also informed
that the initial styling of BIW and panels was done by the engineers of M/s.
Mahindra in India and subsequently the design house facility of HW was used by
engineers of both M/s. Mahindra and HW. He also admitted that the design and
engineering of said BIW was carried out by HW, England and fine tuned in India
by the engineers of M/s. Mahindra and these engineering designs and
specifications were given to M/s. Nichimen for the manufacture of the said
BIWs by using soft tools, soft jigs/fixtures, at M/s. Chibha, Japan.
2.4 Investigation further revealed that HW was an international consultancy
agency specializing in automotive design and engineering and product
development and M/s. Mahindra had entered into an agreement with HW on
22/10/1996 for concept and feasibility - design and engineering of the IDAM
vehicles. As per this agreement, all designs, models, technical
documentation, calculations, data and other information was developed or
produced by HW for M/s. Mahindra in pursuance of the project. The scope and
duration of the project as per the agreement was concept and feasibility
design and engineering of the IDAM vehicle as represented by the already
approved full size clay model by M/s. Mahindra. The team to undertake the
above project was located at the premises of HW in England and they were to
carry out the work within an estimated period of 21 weeks. In consideration
for the information supplied and services rendered by HW under this agreement,
M/s. Mahindra paid to HW an amount of UK # 5,41,786. M/s. Mahindra also
entered into a supplemental agreement dated 04/11/1996 as per which HW was
required to provide consultancy services in respect of Computer Aided Design
(CAD) exterior surface development and in consideration for the information
supplied and services rendered by HW under this agreement M/s. Mahindra was
required to pay an amount of UK # 1,80,332.
2.5 In addition to the above M/s. Mahindra had also entered into an agreement
with M/s. Nichimen on 04/01/2000 for design changes and as a consideration for
providing design changes, M/s. Mahindra was required to pay to M/s. Nichimen
an additional amount of Japanese % 52,395,100. Thus, the total charges payable
for design, engineering and development of model, soft tools, dies, soft
jigs/fixtures by M/s. Mahindra to M/s. Nichimen amounted to Japanese %
23,02,15,100.
2.6 A statement of Shri B. Bhaumik, General Manager (Scorpio Project) was also
recorded by the investigating agencies on 14/10/2004 wherein Shri. Bhaumik
admitted that the design and engineering of the models, soft tools, soft
jigs/fixtures and assembly fixtures was carried out by M/s. Nichimen, Japan
and the same were required for preparing the said models and panels. Shri
Bhaumik in his further statement dated 26/10/2004 admitted that M/s. Mahindra
had a one time requirement of 34 Nos. BIWs and 2 sets of panels for testing
and validation of various kinds and the order for the supply of BIW and panels
was executed by M/s. Nichimen and the actual design and engineering of models,
soft tools, soft jigs/fixtures and assembly fixtures was carried out by M/s.
Chibha at Japan. He further confirmed that the concept and feasibility design
and engineering of the said BIWs was executed by HW, UK with the participation
of M/s. Mahindra at HWs facilities in UK.
2.7 Thus, M/s. Mahindra entered into a supply agreement with M/s. Nichimen for
supply of 34 BIWs and two sets of panels and as per the agreement M/s.
Mahindra was required to inform M/s. Nichimen of any further requirement over
and above the said 34 BIWs and 2 sets of panels. Further, in terms of the
agreement, soft jigs and pressing and hammering tools were required to be
dismantled and disposed of six months after the completion of last shipment of
BIW and panels.
2.8 Scrutiny of bills of entry relating to imports made by M/s. Mahindra
revealed that M/s. Mahindra did not include in the assessable value of the
goods imported, the amounts of UK # 7,21,366.75 paid to HW for the design and
engineering of BIW and panels and Japanese % 23,28,10,165 paid to M/s.
Nichimen towards design and engineering of models, soft tools, soft
jigs/fixtures and assembly fixtures. In terms of Rule 4 read with Rule 9 (1)
(b) (ii) and rule 9 (1) (b) (iv) of the Customs (Valuation) Rules, 1988 read
with Section 14 of the Customs Act, 1962, the aforesaid amounts were required
to be added to the assessable value of 34 BIWs and 2 sets of panels inasmuch
as the same were manufactured by using models, soft tools, soft jigs/fixtures
and assembly fixtures by M/s. Nichimen/Chiba, Japan.
2.9 An importer of goods into India is required to file a declaration in form
Annexure-I along with the bill of entry for the same in terms of provisions of
Section 46 of the Customs Act, 1962. As per serial no. 21 of the said
declaration, the importer is also required to declare cost and services not
included in the corresponding invoice value of such imported goods as per Rule
9 of the Customs (Valuation) Rules, 1988. However, M/s. Mahindra did not
declare/disclose Japanese % 23,28,10,165 paid to M/s. Nichimen and UK #
7,21,366.75 paid to HW against Sl.no. 21 of the Annexure I submitted by them
along with the bill of entry. Thus, it appeared that M/s. Mahindra had
contravened the provisions of Section 14 of the Customs Act, 1962 read with
provisions of Rules 4, 9 (1) (b) (ii) and 9 (1) (b) (iv) of the Customs
(Valuation) Rules, 1988 with an intent to evade payment of Customs duty. It
thus appeared that M/s. Mahindra had understated the assessable value of the
34 BIWs and panels imported with an intention to evade proper amount of
Customs duty. The said goods were imported through different Customs Ports,
viz., Nhava Sheva, Air Cargo Complex, Mumbai and New Customs House, Mumbai.
2.10 On completion of investigation, three show-cause notices were issued by
the ADG, DGCEI, Mumbai, answerable to the respective Commissioners ( in charge
of port of import). However, vide Notification No.55/2006-Cus(NT) dated
26/05/2006, the adjudication of the three show-cause notices was assigned by
the CBEC to the Commissioner of Customs, New Customs House, Mumbai. The three
show-cause notices issued sought to demand differential duty and interest
thereon and impose penalty under Section 112 (a) of the Customs Act, 1962 and
the details of the show-cause notices are as given below:
S.No.
SCN No.& date Period of import Duty demanded (Rs.) No. of BIW No. of Panel 01
DGCEI/MZU/I&ISC/30-57/04 dated 14/12/2004 Dec. 1999 to July 2000 5,11,13,730
17 1 02 DGCEI/MZU/I&ISC/30-57/04 dated 28/10/2004 August 1999 to October
1999 1,86,24,298 07 03 DGCEI/MZU/I&ISC/30-57/04 dated 08/04/2005 June 1999
to July 2000 2,53,01,70 10 Total 9,50,39,788 34 2.11 After receipt of replies
to the show-cause notice and grant of personal hearing, the Commissioner of
Customs, New Customs House, Mumbai, adjudicated the three show-cause notices
vide the impugned order. The Ld. Commissioner confirmed the demand for
differential Customs duty amounting to Rs.7,78,67,696/- after holding that the
balance amount of Rs.1,71,72,092/- is time barred (beyond the extended time
limit of 5 years). The Commissioner further held that no interest is payable
under Section 28AB of the Customs Act, 1962 on the duty demanded since the
importer had already paid the differential amount of customs duty even before
the issue of show cause notice. The Commissioner also held that 34 BIW and one
set of panels, which were imported, totally valued at Rs.17,76,27,591/- were
liable to confiscation under Section 111 (m) of the Custom Act, 1962 and since
the goods were not available for confiscation, the Commissioner imposed a fine
of Rs. 3 Crore in lieu of confiscation. The Commissioner imposed a penalty of
Rs.1.5 Crore on M/s. Mahindra under Section 112 (a) of the Customs Act, 1962
and a penalty of Rs.5.00 lakhs on Shri. R.U. Prabhu, Dy. General Manager
(Capital Purchase) of M/s. Mahindra under Section 112 (a) of the Customs Act,
1962. Hence, M/s. Mahindra and Shri R.U. Prabhu are in appeal before us
against the impugned order. (Appeal Nos.C/96 & 97/2007).
3\. The department also filed an appeal against the impugned order against the
non-levy of interest under Section 28AB of the Customs Act, by the Ld.
Commissioner. The ground urged in the departments appeal is that Section 28AB
of the Customs Act was amended with effect from 11/05/2001 making it
applicable to all types of cases of short levy. However, in cases involving
fraud, collusion, suppression of facts, willful misdeclaration, etc. interest
was chargeable under section 28AB with effect from 28/09/1996 (when the said
section came into force), i.e., even before 11/05/2001. In the case under
consideration, the import took place prior to 11/05/2001 (during June 1999 to
July, 2000) and there was a mis-declaration of the value of the imported goods
by suppression of material facts. Therefore, interest was chargeable as per
the provisions of Section 28AB at the material time and the Commissioner erred
in not charging interest on the amount of duty confirmed. Hence, the
department is also in appeal before us. (Appeal No.C/432/07).
4\. The Ld. Counsel for the appellants makes the following submissions:
4.1 Duty demand has been confirmed under Section 28 of the Customs Act. In the
instant case, the duty was paid by M/s. Mahindra in terms of bills of entry,
which were assessed at the time of importation. Thus, it was not a case of
duty being not levied, not paid, short levied or short paid. Section 28 of the
Customs Act, provides for issue of a notice for recovery of duties, which are
not levied or paid or short levied or short paid or erroneously refunded.
Since at the time of importation, the bills of entry were assessed, if the
department was aggrieved of the assessment, they should have reviewed the
order of assessment first. As assessment in the bills of entry is an
appealable/reviewable order, action should have been taken by the department
for review of the bills of entry under Section 129D of the Customs Act. In the
instant case, no such review has been done and the department has straightaway
issued a notice under Section 28 of the Customs Act, seeking to demand
differential duty, which is not sustainable in law.
4.1.1 In support of the above convention, the Ld. Counsel relies on the
judgment of apex Court in the case of CCE Vs. Cotspun Ltd., reported in 1999
(113) ELT 353 (SC) wherein the apex Court held that show-cause notice under
Section 11A of the Central Excise Act, cannot be issued contrary to approved
classification list. Similarly in the case of CC, Mumbai Vs. K.C. Shah &
Others, reported in 2004 (64) RLT 314 (T), this Tribunal had held that where
final assessments have not been reviewed under Section 129D, notice of demand
under Section 28 cannot be issued.
4.1.2 The Ld. Counsel further relies on the judgement of the apex Court in the
case of Priya Blue Industries Ltd., Vs. CC, reported in 2004 (172) ELT 145
(SC) wherein the apex Court held that in a case where the importer has not
challenged the order passed while assessing the bill of entry, the refund
claim is not maintainable. The Ld. Counsel also relies on the judgment of the
apex Court in Additional CCE Vs. Mahindra & Mahindra Ltd., reported in 2000
(120) ELT 290 (SC) wherein it was held that even when demand is sought to be
raised under Section 11A of the Central Excise Act, 1944, the principle laid
down in Cotspun case will apply and if there is an approved price list, notice
under Section 11A is not maintainable. Since Section 28 of the Customs Act are
pari materia with the provisions of Section 11A of the Central Excise Act,
1944, the apex Courts decisions in Cotspuns case and Mahindra & Mahindras
case cited above would apply.
4.1.3 In the light of the above judgement, it is his contention that the show-
cause notices issued under proviso to Section 28 are not maintainable in the
absence of an appeal against the bill of entry which had been finally assessed
by the department. Therefore, the Ld. Counsel argues that the impugned order-
in-original is liable to be set aside in its entirety as the same has been
issued without jurisdiction.
4.2 The second argument adduced by the Ld. Counsel relates to payments made to
HW. Vide the impugned order, the Ld. Commissioner has confirmed a duty demand
of Rs.2,37,68,213/- on the value relating to payments made to HW, UK. The
appellant received only rough concept sketches (drawings) in running length
from HW, UK and with the aid of these sketches, not even a single component
could be made. From the contract entered into with HW and terminology used
therein, it can be seen that it was for a project for concept and feasibility
of design and engineering of IDAM vehicle as represented by the already
approved full size clay model by M/s. Mahindra. On receipt of the sketches,
the engineers of M/s. Mahindra carried out detailed design and engineering at
Mumbai and it was these detailed designs and engineering, which were forwarded
to M/s. Nichimen for making prototype of BIWs/panels. In other words, it is
the appellants contention that the sketches/drawings received from HW, UK
were only concept/lay out sketches and with these not even a single component
could be made and, therefore, the amount paid to HW cannot be included in the
value of BIW in terms of Rule 9 (1) (b) (iv) of the Customs (Valuation) Rules,
1988. The Ld. Counsel submits that it is on record that the appellants
engineers worked in India for 1 = years on the sketches supplied by HW and
prepared detailed engineering drawings for manufacturable and assembleable
components for the vehicle. They had prepared designs of nearly 500 components
and 250 assembly drawings, which clearly shows that engineering design of the
vehicle was undertaken in India and it was these drawings and designs, which
were given to Nichimen, Japan in the form of DAT tapes to enable them to make
the prototypes according to M/s. Mahindras specifications.
4.2.1 The extensive engineering done in India cannot be referred to as some
preliminary work as held by the Commissioner. Therefore, the question of
adding the amount paid to HW, UK, in the value of the prototype bodies
received from M/s.Nichimen, Japan cannot arise. Rule 9 (1) (b) (iv) of the
Customs (Valuation) Rules deals with (iv) engineering, development, art work,
design work, and plans and sketches undertaken elsewhere than in India and
necessary for the production of the imported goods. Thus, the said clause
deals with assists, which are necessary for the production of imported goods.
Thus, this clause can be invoked only when the assists are necessary for the
production of imported goods and it should be undertaken elsewhere than in
India. It is their contention that the sketches obtained from HW, UK cannot be
held to be necessary for the production of the imported goods. These sketches
had to be further developed by undertaking extensive work for a long period of
time, which was done in India. Therefore, by no stretch of imagination, the
concept layout sketches received from HW could be considered as necessary for
production of imported goods as envisaged under Rule 9 (1) (b) (iv) and,
therefore, the question of including payments made to HW in the assessable
value of the bought out bodies imported from Nichimen, Japan, does not arise.
4.2.2 The Ld. Counsel also relies upon the following case laws in support of
the above contention:
i) SRF Ltd., Vs. CC, 2003 (161) ELT 721 (T)
ii) GE Plastic India Ltd., Vs. CC 2004 (169) ELT 46 (T) The Ld. Counsel
further submits that reliance placed by the adjudicating authority on the
judgment of the apex Court in the case of Gujarat Mineral Development
Corporation Ltd., Vs. CCE & C reported in 2005 (190) ELT 5 (SC) is not
applicable to the facts of the present case and is thus misplaced. Similarly
reliance placed by the Ld. Commissioner on the judgment in Andhra
Petrochemicals Vs. CC, Madras reported in 1997 (90) ELT 275 (SC) is also
misplaced as the facts are distinguishable.
4.3 The assessable value per body as computed in the show-cause notice works
out to Rs. 49 to 51 lakh per BIW. On the other hand, the complete vehicle is
being sold in the market in the price range of Rs. 6 to 8 lakhs, which proves
that there is something fundamentally wrong in the values computed in the
show-cause notice.
4.4 The total payments made to M/s. Nichimen for the BIWs/panels also created
an intellectual property right (IPR) in favour of the appellants, which can be
exploited in India apart from the tangible bodies. Hence, total
payment/aggregate consideration cannot be assessable value. The agreement with
M/s. Nichimen indicates that the appellants were in the process of development
and planning for manufacture and marketing of a new vehicle under the trade
name Scorpio and the preamble to the agreement dated 20/11/1998 clearly
evidences to this fact and para 7 (1) of the supply agreement and para 6 (1)
of the service agreement clearly states that both parties have acknowledged
and agreed to the fact that this is a design, engineering and prototype
building programme . Prior to the imports under consideration, there was no
body/vehicle named as Scorpio existing anywhere in the world. The body was
created by Nichimen, Japan at the appellants request and pursuant to the
agreement with the appellants. The design of Scorpio body was for the first
time registered under the Design Act, 2000 in India by the appellants as
evidenced from the copy of the certificate issued in this regard. The
certificate enumerates various novelty aspects in the design of the Scorpio
body. For a design to be registered, it must be both new and original. Thus an
IPR in the body was created for the first time ever which at all times vested
in the appellants. This is clear from clause 13 relating to intellectual
property right in the agreement (dated 20/11/98) wherein it is provided that:
The technical information generated/developed/ obtained by Nichimen and/or
its sub-contractor pursuant to this agreement shall become the sole and
exclusive property of M&M, and Nichimen nor its sub-contractor shall not be
entitled to use the same for any purpose other than for the purpose of this
agreement and shall not be entitled to apply for and register industrial
property in its own name, either in or outside India.
However, Nichimen and its sub-contractor may furnish the information to the
press tool die maker, nominated by M & M, if it seems helpful for design of
hard tools to be manufactured by the Press tool die maker.
4.4.1 Therefore, the design as applicable to the body created by Nichimens
efforts is the real intellectual property right. The IPR to reproduce a body
is a distinct right, existing apart and separately from the physical body as
such. Even if all the imported bodies-in-White/panels were destroyed, the
right to reproduce vested solely with the appellants in view of clause 13 of
the service agreement and clause 19 of supply agreement read with Section 11 &
15 (1) (a) of the Designs Act, 2000. Thus the payments made to Nichimen
created two things - first, the tangible BIWs and panels and second an
intangible property to be registered in favour of M/s. Mahindra. Since the
payments made to Nichimen is for both, the payment made for the IPR cannot be
included in the value of BIWs since such a right is distinguishable from the
tangible BIW and panel. In other words, the argument of the appellant is that
when they made payment to Nichimen it was for (i) BIW and panel and (ii) right
to get the design registered in India and exploit it further. Therefore, the
payment towards IPR cannot be part of the value of the goods, which have been
imported.
4.5 The payment for right to manufacture bodies in India is not related to the
imported goods, but rather to the bodies to be manufactured in India, which
are not in existence at the time of import of the consignments under
valuation. Therefore, the prototype bodies cannot be valued more than the
fully finished body sold in India. The appellants have paid duty on bodies at
an assessable value, which is around Rs.10 lakhs per body excluding insurance
and landing charges. Under no circumstances, it can be suggested that the
value of the bodies on which the duty has already been paid is unreasonable
when the value of fully built Scorpio vehicle was in the range of Rs.6 to 8
lakhs when sold in India.
4.5.1 As per interpretative note to Rule 9 (1) (c) of the Customs (Valuation)
Rules the royalties and license fees may include among other things, payments
in respect of patents, trademarks and copy rights. However, the charges for
the right to reproduce the imported goods in the country of importation shall
not be added to the price actually paid or payable for the imported goods in
determining the customs value.. This interpretative note makes it very clear
that the payments made for the right to reproduce cannot be part of the
customs value, whether it be under Rule 9 (1) (c) or 9 (1) (b).
4.6 The reliance placed by the department in the case of Associated Cement
Companies Ltd., reported in 2001 (128) ELT 21 (SC) is of no help as the case
pertained to valuation of drawings imported through a courier. In that case,
the Supreme Court held that IPR when put on a media is to be regarded as an
article and duty is payable on the total transaction value since there is no
scope for splitting the engineering drawing or the encyclopedia into
intellectual input on the one hand and the paper on which it is scribed on the
other. In other words in the Associated Cement Companys case, the articles
imported were copyrighted goods whereas in the case of imports under
consideration, they are prototype goods incorporating registrable IPR like
Design or Copy right and the transaction value would be only the material cost
and will not include the value of IPR.
4.7 Indian Income tax formed part or ingredient of the amount paid to M/s HW
and such amount cannot form part of the assessable value. As per the agreement
entered into with HW, no income tax was to be deducted at source by the
appellants and the same was paid to Government of India on behalf of HW. This
amount was part of the amount paid to HW. Such amount of taxes should be
excluded while arriving at the assessable value and customs duty cannot be
levied on the whole consideration. This is an established practice followed by
the Special Valuation Branch of the Customs/GATT Valuation Cell.
Interpretative note to Rule 4 specifically provides for exclusion of duties or
taxes in India from the assessable value of the goods imported. The said rule
does not distinguish between direct taxes and indirect duties. It simply
refers to duties and taxes of whatsoever nature. Therefore, any payment made
by way of taxes on behalf of the foreign supplier has to be excluded while
arriving at the cost of transaction for levy of Customs duty and the Counsel
relies on the advisory opinion 3.1 of WCO in this regard.
4.8 The apportionment and consideration paid to Nichimen should be over 150
bodies and not merely 34 bodies and two panels. The soft tools, soft jigs and
fixtures developed by Nichimen, Japan, were capable of producing 150 pieces,
which is their usual/normal capacity and capability. This position has been
confirmed by Nichimen; therefore, when the cost is apportioned, it has to be
done based on the capability of the tools and not on the basis of the goods
actually supplied. CBEC Circular dated 23/01/1996 also confirms how the cost
has to be apportioned in the case of patterns, which are used in the
manufacture of castings. The said circular clarifies that where there is any
difficulty in apportioning the cost of pattern, apportionment can be made
depending on the expected life and capability of the pattern and the quantity
of castings that can be manufactured from it and thus working out the cost to
be apportioned per unit. In the instant case, even though the appellant had
imported only 34 bodies and 2 panels for testing and validation, Nichimen were
capable of producing 150 bodies and therefore, the cost towards such tools,
jigs, fixtures etc. should be apportioned over 150 bodies and not 34 bodies/2
panels as has been done in the instant case. Therefore, the proposal in the
show-cause notice apportioning the entire cost on 34 BIWs/2 panels is against
well settled principles of valuation.
4.9 The show-cause notice was issued by the DGCEI without jurisdiction. Though
the show-cause notice has been issued in terms of Notification No.31/2000-Cus
(NT) dated 09/05/2000, the said notification does not specify any area in
respect of which the Additional Director General could have issued the notice.
The counsel relies on the judgments of this Tribunal in the following cases:
i) C.K. Geever Vs. CC (Seaports-Imports, 2009 (235) ELT 304 (T)
ii) Copier Force India Ltd., Vs. CC (I) Chennai, 2009 (235) ELT 282 (T) In the
light of these decisions, the present show-cause notice issued by ADG, DGCEI,
Mumbai is without jurisdiction even in respect of imports made through Mumbai
port, Mumbai Airport and Nhava Sheva port.
4.10 Notification 31/2000 was given retrospective effect vide section 92 of
the Finance (No.2) Act, 2009. As per explanation to the said Section 92, it
has been declared that no act or omission on the part of any person shall be
punishable as an offence which would not have been so punishable if the said
notification had not come into force retrospectively. In view of the said
explanation, no penalty can be imposed on the appellants and in identical
circumstances in the past, where retrospective validation was done (along with
an identical explanation) it has been held that no penalty can be imposed and
the Counsel relies on the following judgements:
i) Chemo Pulp Tissues Vs. CC 2000 (119) ELT 715 (T-LB)
ii) CCE Vs. Ranga Vilas GS & W Mills 2002 (149) ELT 742 (T-LB)
iii) Shaw Wallace Vs. CCE 2003 (156) ELT 406 (T) 4.11 There is no suppression
of facts involved in the instant case and, therefore, any demand of Customs
duty beyond the normal period is barred by limitation. The appellants were
under the bona fide belief that payments made to HW cannot be added to the
value of the prototype bodies since the connection was too remote and in any
case, the sketches supplied by HW were not necessary for the production of the
imported goods. The rulings in the case of SRF Ltd & GE Plastics, cited supra
holding that such value cannot be added under Rule 9 (1) (b) (iv) also
confirmed the belief of the appellants. In such circumstances there was no
suppression or willful mis-statement of facts with an intention to evade duty
and, therefore, the duty demand cannot be confirmed invoking the extended
period of time and only the duty demand for the normal period of limitation
can sustain. It is further argued that the BIWs and panels imported by the
appellants were required for validation and testing only. Since they are not
goods, they are not liable to Customs duty at all. Prototypes are not goods
as has been held in the context of Central Excise Act, 1944 in Richardson &
Cruddas (1972) Ltd., Vs. CCE reported in 1992 (57) ELT 336 (T). The ratio of
the above decision is applicable to the facts of the present case. Since in
the present case, the goods imported are prototypes, they cannot be considered
as goods liable to Customs duty.
4.12 The demand for countervailing duty (Addl. Customs duty) paid under
section 3 of the Customs Tariff Act, 1975, cannot be made under the proviso to
Section 28 as the appellants had taken Modvat/Cenvat credit of the entire
countervailing duty and there cannot be any suppression for the same.
4.13 The whole dispute pertains to interpretation of law where certainly two
views are possible. Under such circumstances, the appellant cannot be faulted
when subsequently it was found that the belief held by the appellants was
untenable in law.
4.14 The confiscation of goods and imposition of fine in lieu thereof is
untenable in law. In this case, the goods are not available for confiscation
and they were cleared on payment of proper duty and the clearance was not
provisional. Therefore, imposition of fine is not warranted and relied on the
following judgements:
i) Shiv Kripa Ispat Vs. CCE 2009 (235) ELT 623 (T-LB)
ii) Bombay High Court order in Customs Appeal No.70 of 2009 in CC Vs. Rishi
Ship Breakers
iii) Bombay High Court Order in Customs Appeal No.66 of 2009 in CC Vs. Finesse
Creations 4.15 Lastly, no penalty is imposable as there was no suppression or
mis-statement of facts. In any case, penalty cannot exceed 25% of the duty
demanded since the duty demanded has already been paid prior to the passing of
the impugned order.
4.16 As regards the penalty imposed on Shri R.U. Prabhu, Dy. General Manager,
the Counsel submits that he acted only on behalf of the company and acted bona
fide and in accordance with the well settled customs practices and procedures
and had not acted in breach of customs procedures or in any manner which would
render the goods liable to confiscation, or abetted such action. In any case,
there is no material or evidence cited in the impugned order to prove that
Shri R.U. Prabhu abetted in the evasion of duty by the importer in any way
and, therefore, penalty imposed under Section 112 (a) is not sustainable in
law.
5\. The special consultant appearing for the Revenue made the following
submissions:
5.1 The procedure for assessment under the Central Excise Act is very
different from that under the Customs Act. Prior to 1995, assessment on the
excise side used to be made on the basis of prior approval of classification
list and price list under Rules 173 B & C of the Central Excise Rules, 1944.
These were amended in 1995. In the amended provision prior approval of
classification list and price list has been dispensed with. In the Cotspun Ltd
case relied upon by the appellant, the honble apex Court has noticed the
changed position in law and in para 16 thereof has observed as follows:
We are informed that the position in law has. changed since the year 1995 or
thereabout. We have not considered these altered provisions. Nothing that we
have said in this judgment shall ipso facto apply thereto. In the light of
these observations, the ratio of the judgment in Cotspun Ltd. case has no
relevance. In a subsequent judgment in Easland Combines Vs. CCE, Coimbatore,
reported in 2003 (152) ELT 39 (SC) , the honble apex Court held that the
judgment in Cotspun Ltd case was not a good law. The consultant further argues
that like the amendment to Section 11A of the Central Excise Act, 1944, vide
Finance Act, 2000, there was no need for any amendment to Section 28 of the
Customs Act, 1962 and, therefore, the question of any retrospective validation
similar to Section 110 of the Finance Act, 2000, in the Customs Act, did not
arise at all.
5.2 The Special Consultant points out that on the Customs side, the assessment
of duty is made first either under Section 17 or section 18 and then clearance
is given under Section 47. The clearance under Section 47 cannot be said to be
final as can be seen from the definition of assessment under sub section 2 (2)
of Customs Act, 1962, which reads as follows:
Assessment includes provisional assessment, reassessment and any order of
assessment in which the duty assessed is nil.
5.3 In a Customs case, short levy or non-levy can be detected only after
clearance of the goods. Therefore, for raising any demand under Section 28 of
the Customs Act, there is no requirement of reviewing the assessment order on
the bill of entry. The demand can be straightaway raised within the prescribed
time limit under Section 28 and this position of law has been upheld by the
honble apex Court in the case of UOI Vs. Jain Shudh Vanaspati Ltd., reported
in 1996 (86) ELT 460 (SC). In that case, the honble apex Court held as
follows:
It is patent that a show cause notice under the? provisions of Section 28 for
payment of Customs duties not levied or short-levied or erroneously refunded
can be issued only subsequent to the clearance under Section 47 of the
concerned goods. Further, Section 28 provides time limits for the issuance of
the show cause notice thereunder commencing from the relevant date;
relevant date is defined by sub-section (3) of Section 28 for the purpose of
Section 28 to be the date on which the order for clearance of the goods has
been made in a case where duty has not been levied; which is to say that the
date upon which the permissible period begins to run is the date of the order
under Section 47. The High Court was, therefore, in error in coming to the
conclusion that no show cause notice under Section 28 could have been issued
until and unless the order under Section 47 had been first revised under
Section 130.
5.4 This decision of the apex Court has been consistently followed by the
Tribunal in the case of Venus Enterprises Vs. CCE, Chennai  2006 (199) ELT
661 wherein it was held that the issue of show-cause notice under Section 28
of the Customs Act for demand of short levy without reviewing the assessment
order is quite legal. When this was challenged before the honble High Court
of Madras, the honble High Court held that the law is settled that a show-
cause notice under the provisions of Section 28 of the Customs Act for payment
of Customs duties not levied or short levied or erroneously refunded can be
issued only subsequent to the clearance of the goods under Section 47 of the
Customs Act, otherwise Section 28 (1) of the Customs Act will become
unworkable and redundant. This judgement of the Madras High Court was
challenged before the apex Court and the apex Court dismissed the SLP as
reported in 2007 (209) ELT A061 (SC). The Special Consultant also relies on
the decision of this Tribunal in the case of ITI Ltd., Vs. CC, ACC, Mumbai in
order No.A/253/08/C-I/CSTB dated 09/05/2008 wherein it was held that the issue
of show-cause notice under Section 28 for recovery of erroneous refund is
sufficient to meet the requirement of law.
5.5 As regards the contention of the appellant regarding the jurisdiction of
ADG, DGCEI, Mumbai, for issue of show-cause notice in the present case, the
Special Consultant submits that only three show-cause notices have been issued
by the ADG, DGCEI, Mumbai. Vide notification No.31/2000-Cus (NT) dated
09/05/2000 (as amended), the Central Government has appointed officers of
DGCEI as officers of Customs and invested in them all the powers exercisable
by an officer of Customs. As per sub Section (2) of Section 1, the Customs Act
extends to the whole of India. From this, it is automatically follows that the
DGCEI officers, who have been made officers of Customs will have all India
jurisdiction. Therefore, non-mention of jurisdiction in the notification does
not mean that the DGCEI officers have no jurisdiction at all. Even if it is
assumed that ADG DGCEI, Mumbai, does not have all India jurisdiction, it
cannot be disputed that he has jurisdiction over Mumbai zone. In the present
case imports have been made through three Custom Houses, namely, New Customs
House, Mumbai, Jawahar Customs House, Nhava Sheva Port and Air Cargo Complex,
Sahar, Mumbai, which fall within the jurisdiction of Mumbai zone. Therefore,
the show-cause notices issued by ADG, DGCEI are perfectly in order and legally
valid. When a similar contention was raised before this Tribunal in the case
of OMI Textile Vs. CC & CE, Nashik, reported in 2004 (174) ELT 180, this
Tribunal rejected the said contention by holding that the DGCEI officers have
been appointed as Customs Officers by the Central Government and, hence, there
is no lack of jurisdiction in so far as the issue of show-cause notice is
concerned.
5.6 As regards the contention of the appellant that costs and services
pertaining to models, jigs and fixtures cannot be added to the assessable
value of the 34 prototype BIWs and 2 sets of panels for the reason that soft
models were basically resin models of the concerned parts and these were
neither tools nor moulds and were not used in the production of imported
goods, the Ld. Consultant submits as follows:
5.7 On a careful reading of all the agreements with M/s. Nichimen, Japan and
HW, England, it will be clear that the concept and feasibility design and
engineering of the BIW was executed by HW, England and this was essential for
making of the BIWs. With the help of these designs and engineering details,
M/s. Mahindra approached Nichimen, Japan to make the prototype BIWs.
M/s.Nichimen, Japan in turn, sub-contracted the work to Chibha, Japan to make
the BIWs. First soft models were made of resin to enable easy modifications in
the design. For making these soft models, soft tools were fabricated by
Chibha, Japan. The designs and engineering details along with soft models,
tools, jigs and fixtures were further used to make panels, which were
fabricated/assembled/welded into bare metallic bodies called Bodies-in-white
(BIWs) at Chibha Japan. These BIWs and panels were eventually supplied by
Nichimen, Japan to M/s. Mahindra, who then manufactured the Scorpio vehicles
with the help of BIWs and panels. Therefore, there is no doubt that the
payments made to HW and Nichimen were connected only with the
manufacture/fabrication of the imported BIWs and panels. Hence, these payments
have to be added to the cost of BIWs and panels in terms of Rules 9 (1) (b)
(ii) and 9 (1) (b) (iv) of the Customs (Valuation) Rules, 1988.
5.8 The Ld. Consultant relies on the judgment of the honble apex Court in the
case of Andhra Petrochemicals Vs. CC, Madras, 1997 (90) ELT 275 (SC). In this
judgement, the honble apex Court held that designs and engineering charges
are loadable when the goods imported are specially manufactured on the basis
of design and engineering specifications provided by the foreign supplier to
the third party who have actually manufactured the goods. In the present case,
the design and engineering drawings were supplied by HW, England to M/s.
Mahindra who after making improvements supplied the same to Nichimen, Japan,
who got the BIWs and panels made by Chibha, Japan. The only difference, if at
all, in the present case is that instead of sending the designs and
engineering drawings directly to Nichimen, Japan by HW, England, the same were
sent to Nichimen, Japan via India, i.e., through Mahindra. This, in no way
alters the factual position that the design and engineering drawings were made
outside India by HW and eventually supplied to M/s. Nichimen/Chiba, Japan, who
manufactured the BIWs and panels using the said designs and engineering
drawings.
5.9 The Ld. Special Consultant also relied on the judgment of Gujarat Mineral
Development Corporation Ltd., Vs. CCE & C 2005 (190) ELT 5 (SC) wherein the
honble apex Court held that design and engineering charges are addable to the
assessable value of the goods manufactured.
5.10 In the Dabhol Power Company Vs. CCE, Pune, case reported in 2004 (171)
ELT 354 (T-Del), an identical issue came up for consideration by the Tribunal.
In that case, the LNG project was manufactured/assembled by a foreign vendor
on the basis of drawings, data sheets, designs and engineering specifications,
etc. of an offshore service contractor and there was constant co-ordination
between the vendor and the off shore contractor. The Tribunal held that the
value of services rendered by the offshore contractor should be included in
the value of the goods as per Rule 9 (1) (b) (iv) of the Customs Valuation
Rules, 1988. The case under consideration is quite similar. Therefore, the
design and development work done by HW, UK and supplied by M/s. Mahindra to
Nichimen, Japan, who in turn got the goods manufactured through M/s.Chibha,
Japan and there was regular co-ordination between the technical experts of the
importers, the offshore service contractor HW, UK and the foreign vendor M/s.
Nichimen, Japan. Therefore, following the logic adopted in the case of Dhabol
Power Company, the charges paid to HW, UK are rightly addable in the
assessable value of BIW and panels under importation.
5.11 The Ld. Consultant submits that the reliance placed by the appellant in
the case of GE Plastic India Ltd. and Dalal Consultants & Engineers Ltd. for
non-inclusion of the cost of engineering drawings pertains to a totally
different set of facts. In those cases, the engineering drawings were prepared
in India and were supplied to the foreign supplier of the imported goods.
Therefore, it was held that the provisions of Rule 9 (1) (b) (iv) are not
attracted but in the case under consideration, the facts are entirely
different. The designs and engineering drawings were prepared by HW, UK and
they were supplied to the manufacturer of BIW in Japan, after making
modifications/improvements. Thus, the activity of designs and engineering
drawings have taken place outside India and, therefore, the provisions of Rule
9 (1) (b) (iv) are clearly attracted.
5.12 As regards the contention of the appellant that the income tax amount
deducted by way of TDS should be excluded while arriving at the assessable
value of the goods under importation, the Ld. Consultant submits that this
contention has no merits. He submits that as per the agreement entered into
with M/s. Nichimen, all taxes/levies by the Indian Income tax authorities on
Nichimen shall be borne by M/s. Nichimen and any increase thereon shall also
be borne by M/s. Nichimen and any decrease will be to the benefit of M/s.
Nichimen. M/s. Mahindra shall deduct the withholding tax assessed on
Nichimens income and pay the same to the Indian Income tax authorities. It is
thus clear that M/s. Mahindra paid income tax on behalf of the Nichimen on the
latters income in India. Therefore, the amount of income tax paid to the
Central Government from the total payment made to Nichimen cannot be deducted
while arriving at the assessable value of the imported goods. So is the case
in respect of income tax payments in respect of HW. Such payment of taxes,
duties, etc. are reciprocal. Whatever taxes, duties, etc. are payable in India
will be paid by M/s. Mahindra and wherever similar taxes are payable in
England, it will be paid by HW. Therefore, the contention that interpretative
note to Rule 4 of Customs Valuation Rules, 1988 provides for exclusion of
duties and taxes in India from the transaction value has no basis because the
income tax is a direct tax and it is not on the goods whereas Rule 4 and the
interpretative note thereto refers to taxes payable on the imported goods.
5.13 As regards the contention of the appellant that when they acquired the
BIW and panels and made payment thereto, it was in respect of two things - (i)
for the supply of goods and (ii) for the right to get the design registered in
India and exploit it further, this submission is without any merit. Neither
the design agreement nor the supply agreement provided for any such thing. On
the contrary, it can be seen from the agreement itself that intellectual
property is the sole and exclusive property of M/s. Mahindra. From clause 13
relating to intellectual property/title of the agreement, it is clear that no
consideration was paid to Nichimen, which was attributable to the so-called
intellectual property and, therefore, the submissions of the appellant that
payments related to the goods as well as intellectual property rights has no
basis whatsoever and merits to be rejected out right.
5.14 The Ld. Special Consultant submits that there was suppression and willful
mis-statement on the part of the importer M/s. Mahindra in the instant case
and, therefore, the extended period of time has been rightly invoked for
demand of duty. An importer of goods into India is required to file a
declaration in Form Annexure - I along with the bill of entry for the same in
terms of Section 46 of the Customs Act, 1962. As per the serial No. 21 of the
said declaration, the importer is required to declare costs and services not
included in the corresponding value of such imported goods as per Rule 9 of
the Customs Valuation Rules. Despite this requirement, M/s. Mahindra did not
declare Japanese % 23,28,10,165/- paid to Nichimen, Japan, and UK #
7,21,366.75 paid to HW, UK either in sub serial No. (d) or in sub-serial no.
(k) of the said declaration, thereby suppressing the fact of payments made to
Nichimen and HW. In the annexure-I, there is a declaration which is required
to be signed by the importer which says that information furnished above is
true, complete and correct in every respect. There is a further declaration
that the importer will undertake to bring to the notice of the proper officer,
any particulars which subsequently comes to his knowledge which will have a
bearing on valuation. This declaration was signed by the importer. However, at
no stage the importer brought to the notice of the Customs the fact of
payments made to Nichimen and HW. But for the intelligence received and
developed by DGCEI, this fact would not have come to the notice of the
department. The law requires the importer to give the details of payments made
in connection with the imported goods. It is not for the importer but for the
Customs to decide whether any charges are required to be included in the value
of the imported goods. Further, the importer in this case is a well known
corporate body. They cannot be presumed to be unaware of the requirements of
law. Thus, it is a clear case of suppression of facts and mis-declaration of
value with intent to evade Customs duty. In respect of similar four other
cases, the appellant admitted the duty liability before the honble Settlement
Commission and discharged the duty liability along with interest. In the light
of these, the Special Consultant submits that the appellant/importer
suppressed the facts and willfully mis-stated the facts with an intent to
evade customs duty and, therefore, the duty demand confirmed invoking the
extended period of time is valid and correct in law.
5.15 As regards the confiscation of imported goods and imposition of fine in
lieu thereof, the Ld. Special Consultant relies on the judgment of the honble
Supreme Court in the case of Weston Components Ltd., Vs. Commissioner  2000
(115) ELT 278 (SC). Though in that case the goods were allowed under a bond,
the honble apex Court nowhere held that its decision in that case will not be
applicable to a case where clearance has been obtained without furnishing any
undertaking or bond and, therefore, even though the goods were not available
for confiscation, the Commissioners decision to confiscate the same and
impose a fine in lieu of confiscation is valid in law.
5.16 The Ld. Special Consultant further submits that penalty of Rs.1.5 Crore
on M/s. Mahindra has been correctly imposed under Section 112 (a) of the
Customs Act, 1962 inasmuch as the goods were held liable for confiscation
under section 111 (m) of the Customs Act for under-stating the value of the
goods imported. Similarly, the penalty of Rs.5.00 lakhs was imposed on Shri.
R.U. Prabhu, for his omissions and commissions with respect to the import of
BIWs and panels. Shri. Prabhu had filed the bills of entry and furnished the
declarations in form Annexure-I. Therefore, he was guilty of suppression of
fact of payments made to Nichimen and HW and, therefore, he has been correctly
imposed with penalty.
5.17. As regards the departmental appeal, the Ld. Special Consultant submits
that Section 28AB of the Customs Act came into force on 28/09/96 wherein
interest on duty confirmed was made applicable in cases involving fraud,
collusion, suppression of facts, willful mis-statement, etc. The said section
was amended on 11/05/2001 so as to make the provisions applicable in all types
of cases of short levy. In the present case, clearances took place prior to
11/05/2001. Further, it was a case of mis-declaration of value of imported
goods by suppressing material facts. Therefore, the provisions of Section 28AB
could be rightly invoked for recovery of interest on the duty demanded and the
Ld. Commissioner made an error in not charging interest on the amount of duty
confirmed. Therefore, the impugned order of the Commissioner relating to non-
levy of interest on the duty confirmed requires to be set aside and the appeal
of the department in that regard allowed.
6\. We have considered the rival submissions very carefully.
7\. Regarding the contention of the appellant that the demand of duty under
Section 28 of the Customs Act, 1962 is not sustainable because the department
did not review the assessments made in the bills of entry at the time of
importation under Section 129D does not have any legal basis. The same issue
came up before the honble apex Court in the case of UOI Vs. Jain Shudh
Vanaspati Ltd case cited supra and the honble apex Court observed as follows:
It is patent that a show cause notice under the? provisions of Section 28 for
payment of Customs duties not levied or short-levied or erroneously refunded
can be issued only subsequent to the clearance under Section 47 of the
concerned goods. Further, Section 28 provides time limits for the issuance of
the show cause notice there under commencing from the relevant date;
relevant date is defined by sub-section (3) of Section 28 for the purpose of
Section 28 to be the date on which the order for clearance of the goods has
been made in a case where duty has not been levied; which is to say that the
date upon which the permissible period begins to run is the date of the order
under Section 47. The High Court was, therefore, in error in coming to the
conclusion that no show cause notice under Section 28 could have been issued
until and unless the order under Section 47 had been first revised under
Section 130.
7.1 From the above decision of the Supreme Court it is clear that when there
is a short levy or non-levy or short payment or non-payment or erroneous
refund, show-cause notice under Section 28 for recovery of duty can be issued
and the proceedings are sustainable. A similar view was taken by this Tribunal
in the case of Venus Enterprises cited supra wherein this Tribunal observed as
follows:
We have gone through the records of the case carefully and heard both? sides.
The appellants imported certain items by filing 11 Bills of Entry. After
assessment and clearance, certain investigations were conducted which revealed
undervaluation of the goods. We are of the view that the issue of show cause
notice under Section 28 of the Customs Act is quite legal to demand short levy
in the light of the investigations conducted subsequent to the clearance. If
the contention of the appellants that no demand notice can be issued without
reviewing the order of assessment, then Section 28 would become redundant.
Hence we do not accept the ld. Counsels contention that no show cause notice
under Section 28 can be invoked after clearance of the goods by enhancing the
declared value.
7.2 The said decision of the Tribunal was challenged before the honble High
of Madras and the honble High of Madras upheld the decision of the Tribunal
and observed as follows:
With regard to question No. 1, the law is well settled that a show cause
notice under the provisions of Section 28 of the Act for payment of customs
duties not levied or short-levied or erroneously refunded can be issued only
subsequent to the clearance of the goods under Section 47 of the Act vide
Union of India v. Jain Shudh Vanaspati Ltd. [1996 (86) E.L.T. 460 (S.C.)].
Therefore, as rightly held by the Tribunal, if the contention of the
appellants counsel that when the goods were already cleared, no demand notice
can be issued under Section 28 of the Act is accepted, we will be rendering
the words where any duty has been short-levied as found in Section 28(1) of
the Act as unworkable and redundant, inasmuch as the jurisdiction of the
authorities to issue notice under Section 28 of the Act with respect to the
duty, which has been short-levied, would arise only in the case where the
goods were already cleared. In view of the clear finding with regard to the
misdeclaration and suppression of value, which led to the under-valuation and
proposed short-levy of duty, we do not see any lack of jurisdiction on the
part of the adjudicating authority to issue notice under Section 28(1) of the
Act. 7.3 The SLP filed against the order of the Madras High Court was also
dismissed by the honble apex Court reported in 2007 (209) ELT A61 (SC). The
reliance placed by the appellant on the Cotspun case and Mahindra and Mahindra
case cited supra does not help their cause because these decisions pertains to
interpretation of section 11A of the Central Excise Act. When there are
decisions by the honble apex court, the honble high court of Madras and this
Tribunal directly on the scope of section 28 of the Customs Act itself, there
is no need to refer to any decisions pertaining to Central Excise Act at all.
Therefore, we reject the contention of the appellant that the show-cause
notices issued demanding duty short levied under Section 28 of the Customs
Act, after assessment of the bills of entry is not valid in law. In other
words, we uphold the right of the revenue to demand duty short levied or paid
or not levied or paid or erroneously refunded under section 28 of the Customs
Act, 1962. Thus there is no infirmity or illegality in the instant case as far
as demand of duty made under section 28 ibid is concerned.
8\. The next contention of the appellant relates to the competency of the ADG,
DGCEI to issue show-cause notice in the instant case. The contention of the
appellant is that even though the officers of DGCEI have been appointed as
officers of Customs vide Notification No.31/2000-Cus (NT) dated 09/05/2000,
the said Notification does not indicate any area of jurisdiction and,
therefore, the show-cause notice is vitiated. We do not find any merit in this
argument. An identical issue came up for consideration of this Tribunal in the
case of OMI Textile Vs. CC&CE, Nashik, 2004 (174) ELT 180. In the said case,
the Tribunal observed as follows:
The Central Government appointed the DGCEI officers as customs officers and
we see no lack of jurisdiction insofar as issue of show cause notice is
concerned.
8.1 Further a Larger Bench of this Tribunal in the case of Konica Trading Co.
Vs. CC, Jaipur reported in 2004 (170) ELT 51I held that DRI officers can issue
show-cause notices once they are appointed as Customs officers. In the instant
case, the DGCEI officers have been appointed as Customs Officers under Section
4 of the Customs Act. Therefore, following the ratio of Konica Trading Co.
case citied supra, the DGCEI officers can also issue show-cause notices and
their jurisdiction cannot be questioned at all. The only objection of the
appellant seems to be that in Notification No.31/2000, the area of
jurisdiction of the DGCEI officers has not been specified. If no area is
specified, it has to be presumed that the jurisdiction is all India. In any
case, in the instant case the show-case notices have been issued by the ADG,
DGCEI, Mumbai, whose area of jurisdiction covers the entire Mumbai zone. In
the instant case the imports have been taken place through various ports
/airport situated in the Mumbai zone. Therefore, even though notification
31/2000 does not specify any jurisdiction, the ADG, DGCEI, Mumbai can issue
show-cause notices with respect to offences/violations, which have been taken
place within his jurisdiction. Hence, we do not find any infirmity or lack of
jurisdiction in the show-cause notices issued by the ADG, DGCEI, Mumbai in the
instant case. Appellant has placed reliance on Devilog Systems India Vs. CCE,
Bangalore, reported in 1995 (76) ELT 520 (Kar) decided by the honble High
Court of Karnataka. The facts of that case are quite different. In that case,
the goods were imported through Madras Port but cleared for home consumption
through ICD, Bangalore. The show-cause notices were issued by the Asst.
Commissioner of Customs, IAD, Madras, who was assigned the audit functions of
ICD, Bangalore. There was no notification conferring powers on Asst.
Commissioner, Madras for the purpose of issue of notice under Section 28 in
respect of imports through ICD, Bangalore and, therefore, the High Court held
that there was lack of jurisdiction for issue of show-cause notices. No such
situation exists in the instant case. The ADG, DGCEI, Mumbai, has been
appointed as an officer of Customs and has been vested with all the powers of
the officer of Customs. Thus the facts of the instant case are quite distinct
and distinguishable and the judgment of the honble High Court of Karnataka in
Devlilog Systems case has no relevance whatsoever to the facts under
consideration. In fine, we hold that the ADG, DGCEI, Mumbai has jurisdiction
to issue show-cause notices in the instant case and the contention to the
contrary by the appellant has no merits whatsoever and accordingly, we reject
the same.
9\. The next issue for consideration is whether the payments made by the
appellant to HW, UK amounting to UK # 7,21,366.75 and to Nichimen, Japan
amounting to Japanese % 23,28,10,165 is liable to be included in the
assessable value of 34 BIWs and one panel imported by the appellant under the
provisions of Rule 9 (1) (b) (ii) and 9 (1) (b) (iv) of the Customs Valuation
Rules, 1988 or not. These payments have been made to HW, UK and to Nichimen,
Japan in terms of the agreements dated 22/10/96 and supplemental agreement
dated 4/4/1997 with HW and agreements dated 20/11/98 and supplemental
agreement dated 4/1/2000 with Nichimen, Japan.
9.1 It will be useful to reproduce the extracts from the relevant agreements
so as to put the issues in proper perspective:-
Extracts from the agreement with HW dated 22-10-1996.
CONTRACT AGREEMENT CONCEPT AND FEASIBILITY DESIGN AND ENGINEERING OF THE IDAM
VEHICLE Entered in to on 22nd October, 1996.
WITNESSETH WHEREAS, Mahindra is a manufacture and exporter inter alia of 4
wheel drive vehicles;
AND WHEREAS HW is an international consultancy specialising in automotive
design, engineering and product development;
AND WHEREAS Mahindra has approached HW for concept feasibility engineering
assistance on a 2/4 wheel drive vehicle;
AND WHEREAS HW is willing to provide Mahindra with the necessary study and
assistance therefor;
AND WHEREAS the Parties have thought it expedient to put forth the terms and
conditions in writing as hereinafter appearing.
ARTICLE 1 DEFINITIONS As used in this Agreement, the following terms have the
following meanings:
1.1 PROJECT shall mean the concept and feasibility phase of the programme.
The details of the Project are as provided in Article 2 and in Appendix A
hereto.
1.2 STAFF means 1.3 INFORMATION means all designs, models,
technical documentation, calculations, data and all other information
developed or produced by HW for Mahindra in pursuance of the Project.
ARTICLE 2 SCOPE AND DURATION OF PROJECT 2.1 The total Project shall consist of
the concept and feasibility design and engineering of the IDAM vehicle as
represented by the already Mahindra approved full size clay model. The team to
undertake this programme phase shall be comprised of both HW and M & M staff
and shall be located at HW premises for an estimated twenty-one (21) weeks.
For details of work scope see Appendix A.
ARTICLE 3 SERVICES AND INFORMATION TO BE PROVIDED BY HW 3.1 HW shall supply
Mahindra with the data specified in Appendix A in order that Mahindra may use
the Product to the best advantage without delay.
3.2 HW shall at the request of Mahindra, permit a reasonable number of
personnel designated by Mahindra to have the opportunity to study the design
and assist in the Project at HW premises pursuant of Article 7.
3.3 HW shall arrange to make available qualified personnel for consultations
with Mahindra personnel. Cost for round trips, meals, lodging and other
expenses of Mahindras personnel sent for liaison shall be borne by Mahindra.
3.4 All products, documentation and materials delivered to Mahindra by HW will
be produced to the appropriate HW standards, unless otherwise mutually agreed
in writing.
3.5 The Information to be provided to Mahindra shall be fully reflected in the
Project which HW shall conduct and be provided to Mahindra as required, by
means of exchange of documents, forwarding of drawings, electronic data and
reports to Mahindra, or through the visits of Mahindras personnel to HW
during the period of the Agreement.
ARTICLE 4 PAYMENT 4.1 In consideration of the Information supplied and
services rendered by HW under this Agreement, Mahindra shall pay to HW the
amount as shown below.
    	The budgeted cost, in Pounds Sterling, for the project is # 541,786 
    ARTICLE 5	   HWS WARRANTIES
    5.1	HW warrants that any feasibility drawings connected with the Project will be included in the engineering information, and be reasonable and proper information to enable Mahindra or HW to further develop on future projects.
    ARTICLE 12     TAXATION
    12.1	All the taxes (including Income Tax), duties and other charges arising in India will be borne by Mahindra. Further all taxes, duties and other charges arising outside India will be borne by HW. 
    12.2	All customs duties and taxes incurred as a result of importing vehicles. Components or data into the UK or India shall be borne by Mahindra. HW shall obtain prior written consent of Mahindra for incurring such expenditure. 
    12.3	All other taxes and similar charges which may occur in UK as a result of entering into this Agreement shall be paid by HW.
    12.4	Value Added Tax which may be imposed by the Government of India with respect to this Agreement shall be borne by Mahindra..
    Extracts from the agreement with HW  dated 4th November, 1996.
    CONTRACT AGREEMENT
    CAD SURFACE DEVELOPMENT
    Entered into on 4th November, 1996
    WITNESSETH
    WHEREAS, Mahindra is a manufacture and exporter inter alia of 4 wheel drive vehicles; 
    AND WHEREAS HW is an international consultancy specialising in automotive design, engineering and product development;
    AND WHEREAS Mahindra has approached HW for CAD surface development on a 2/4 wheel drive vehicle; 
    AND WHEREAS HW is willing to provide Mahindra with the necessary study and assistance therefor; 
    AND WHEREAS the Parties have thought it expedient to put forth the terms and conditions in writing as hereinafter appearing. 
           ARTICLE 1 	DEFINITIONS
    As used in this Agreement, the following terms have the following meanings:
    1.1	PROJECT shall mean CAD surface development. The details of the Project are as provided in Article 2 and in Appendix A hereto. 
    1.2.	STAFF means .. 
    1.3	INFORMATION means all designs, models, technical documentation, calculations, data and all other information developed or produced by HW for Mahindra in pursuance of the Project. 
          ARTICLE 2   SCOPE AND DURATION OF PROJECT 
    2.1 The total Project concerns the complete CAD development of the IDAM concept clay as previously produced by Hawtal Whiting. For detailed description see Appendix A.  
    	        The Total Project time shall be targeted for Twelve (12) weeks as per Article 6 herein below. Time shall be of the essence of the contract. HW shall execute the Project in accordance with the Schedule agreed and as per Appendix A hereto.  
    ARTICLE 3 	SERVICES AND INFORMATION TO BE PROVIDED BY HW
    3.1 	HW shall supply Mahindra with the data specified in Appendix A in order that Mahindra may use the Product to the best advantage without delay. 
    3.2	HW shall at the request of Mahindra, permit a reasonable number of personnel designated by Mahindra to have the opportunity to study the design and assist in the Project at HW premises pursuant of Article 7. 
    3.3	HW shall arrange to make available qualified personnel for consultations with Mahindra personnel. Cost for round trips, meals, lodging and other expenses of Mahindras personnel sent for liaison shall be borne by Mahindra. 
    3.4	All products, documentation and materials delivered to Mahindra by HW will be produced to the appropriate HW standards, unless otherwise mutually agreed in writing. 
3.5 The Information to be provided to Mahindra shall be fully reflected in the
Project which HW shall conduct and be provided to Mahindra as required, by
mans of the exchange of documents, forwarding of drawings, electronic data and
reports to Mahindra, or through the visits of Mahindras personnel to HW
during the period of the Agreement.
3.6 The release of information to Mahindra shall be on full payment being
received up to that point in time.
ARTICLE 4 PAYMENT 4.1 In consideration of the Information supplied and
services rendered by HW under this Agreement, Mahindra shall pay to HW the
amount as shown below.
The cost as a budget estimate total is #225,414.
The total costs reflect a 14 week duration although an aggressive project
duration of 12 weeks is targeted. The total is generated from a weekly cost of
#16,101. Should manning levels change during the 14 weeks, the costs will be
amended retrospectively..
9.2 The contention of the appellant is that HW provided only sketches in
respect of the project on the clay model supplied by Mahindra and these
sketches were brought into India by the engineers of Mahindra and those had to
be worked upon for more 1= years to convert them into usable engineering
drawings based on which the BIWs and the panels could be manufactured. The
engineers of Mahindra in India worked upon these sketches and produced 750
engineering drawings, which were then sent to Nichimen, Japan for further use.
In other words, the appellant contends that there is no proximate nexus
between the engineering sketches supplied by HW and import of goods from
Nichimen, Japan and, therefore, the cost of the engineering sketches provided
by HW cannot be included in the assessable value of BIWs and panels
manufactured and supplied by Nichimen, Japan.
9.3. The agreement dated 22/10/96 related to concept and feasibility design
and engineering of the IDAM vehicle and these included designs, models,
technical documentation, calculations, data and all other information
developed or produced by HW for Mahindra. The project consisted of concept and
feasibility design and engineering of the IDAM vehicle as represented by the
already Mahindra approved full size clay model and was undertaken by a team
comprising of both HW and Mahindra staff and the project was conducted at the
premises of HW in UK. The information developed by HW was conveyed to the
appellant M/s.Mahindra by exchange of documents, forwarding of drawings,
electronic data and reports to Mahindra, or through the visits of Mahindras
personnel to HW during the period of agreement. HW is an international
consultant specializing in automotive design engineering and project
development. Similarly, in the case of supplemental agreement entered into on
04/11/96 it was for CAD surface development on a 2/4 wheels drive concept
clay. It is inconceivable that M/s Mahindra engaged HW, an international
consultancy specialising in automotive design, engineering and product
development and paid them a huge amount of UK # 7,21,366.75 only for some
preliminary sketches which has no nexus with the production of Scorpio Vehicle
production. The terms and agreement of the contract entered into with HW
completely belies this proposition. Shri Bhaumik, General Manager (Scorpio
Project) in his statement given on 26/10/2004 has, inter alia, admitted that
the concept and feasibility design and engineering of BIW was executed by HW
with participation from Mahindra and it was carried out at their facilities in
UK. Similarly, in the context of supplemental agreement Shri Bhaumik has
stated that the CAD (Computer Aided Design) surface development envisaged in
the said agreement is basically defining complex surfaces accurately for the
purpose of exact reproduction in tooling. CAD surface is developed on
computer. He has also admitted that the CAD surface development of the IDAM
vehicle exterior style definition is a part of BIW design. Sri Jagannathan
Vasudevan, Head (Programme Management) in his statement dated 15-10-2004 has
categorically admitted that the design and engineering information pertaining
to the BIWs and panels was provided by M/s. Mahindra to M/s. Nichimen and that
the design and engineering of the said BIWs and panels was carried out by M/s.
Hawtal Whiting Design & Engineering Co. Ltd., England (HW in short) by the
engineers of both M/s. Mahindra and HW. Therefore, the contention of the
appellant that the engineering sketches provided by HW, UK has no proximate
nexus to the manufacture of BIWs and panels is totally contrary to the terms
and conditions of the agreement entered into with HW and also the statements
given by the Project General Manager and Head (Program Management), who have
very clearly admitted that the feasibility design and engineering and the CAD
surface development provided by HW had a close nexus with design and
production of BIW. As per the statement of Sri. Vasudevan, while the initial
styling of BIWs and panels was done by the engineers of Mahindra in India,
subsequently, the design house facility of HW was used by the engineers of
both Mahindra and HW. He has further admitted that the design and engineering
of said BIWs was carried out by HW England and fine-tuned in India by the
engineers of Mahindra and these engineering designs and specifications were
given to M/s Nichimen for the manufacture of BIWs by using the soft tools and
soft jigs/fixtures at M/s. Chibha, Japan. From these statements all the top
officials of the appellant company, who were concerned with the project and
also from the terms and conditions of the agreement entered into with HW, it
is clear that the designs and sketches provided by HW had proximate nexus with
the design and manufacture of BIWs and panels imported from Japan and these
were used in the manufacture of those products. Therefore the contention of
the appellant regarding lack of proximate nexus does not have any basis
whatsoever and is rejected in toto.
9.4 Rule 9 (1) (b) of the Customs Valuation Rules, 1988 reads as follows:-
 (1) In determining the transaction value, there shall be added to the price
actually paid or payable for the imported goods, -
a)..
(b) the value, apportioned as appropriate, of the following goods and services
where supplied directly or indirectly by the buyer free of charge or at
reduced cost for use in connection with the production and sale for export of
imported goods, to the extent that such value has not been included in the
price actually paid or payable, namely:-
(i) materials, components, parts and similar items incorporated in the
imported goods;
(ii) tools, dies, moulds and similar items used in the production of the
imported goods;
(iii) materials consumed in the production of the imported goods;
(iv) engineering, development, art work, design work, and plans and sketches
undertaken elsewhere than in India and necessary for the production of the
imported goods.
9.5 A perusal of the Rule 9 (1) (b) (iv) indicates that it includes
engineering, development, art work, design work and plans and sketches
undertaken elsewhere than in India and necessary for the production of the
imported goods. From the wordings used in the said Rule, it is clear that the
rule does not make any distinction whether the items referred to therein
should have proximate nexus for the production of goods or not. So long as
they are necessary for the production, their cost can be included in the cost
of products imported. Further, clause (iv) covers a wide range of
products/services such as engineering, development, art work, design work, and
plans and sketches . While some of them may have proximate nexus to the
production process, others might not have any such nexus. What is required to
be seen is whether they are necessary for the production of imported goods. So
long as they are necessary for the production of imported goods and they are
developed in a place other than in India, their cost is includible in the
transaction value of the imported goods in terms of Rule 9 (1) (b) (iv) of the
said Customs Rules. In the instant case, in respect of engineering designs and
surface development designs provided by HW these have been undertaken in UK in
terms of the agreement. As confirmed by the statements of top officials of the
appellant firm, these designs, whether they be sketches or plans, have been
used in the production of BIWs, which were imported. It is not necessary that
they have to be used as such or they need to be fine-tuned before further use.
So long as the sketches, plans and drawings have been used in the manufacture
of BIWs, whether directly or indirectly, it does not make any difference. From
the evidences available on record, it is amply clear that the drawings,
designs, sketches, plans, etc. supplied by HW, England in the instant case
have actually been used in the manufacture of BIWs and panels by M/s Nichimen,
Japan and, therefore, their cost is includable in the value of BIWs and panels
imported from Japan and we hold accordingly.
9.6 The appellant, during the course of argument, made a point that the
drawings and designs (supplied by M/s HW, UK) were exempt from payment of
customs duty when imported from abroad at the relevant time. There is a
fallacy in this argument. To a specific query from the Bench, how these
designs, drawings and sketches were brought into India from UK, it was
clarified that they were brought by the engineers, who had been sent to UK.
The appellant did not file any bill(s) of entry for importation of these goods
and it is obvious that these drawings and sketches were brought in the
personal baggage of the officials, who visited UK. When goods are brought as
part of baggage, they are assessable to customs duty not in their respective
chapters or headings but as baggage under Chapter 98 of the Customs Tariff.
The duty exemption limit for personal baggage, even now is only Rs.25000/- and
above this limit, duty is payable at a flat rate. In the instant case, the
goods are valued at more than # 7.5 lakhs, which is far in excess of the
exemption limit for goods, brought under baggage. Further, engineering
drawings and sketches cannot be considered as bona fide baggage so as to
attract any duty exemption. Therefore, import duty at the tariff rate(s) as
provided for in the Customs tariff would have been attracted, if proper
declarations had been made. No such thing appears to have been done.
Similarly, when a question was put as to how the designs further developed in
India were sent to M/s Nichimen, Japan, it was informed that this had been
sent by e-mail or through CDs, which were carried across by the staff of
Mahindra. It is, thus, obvious that the import of engineering drawings
/sketches from HW, U.K. and export of these engineering drawings and designs
to Nichimen, Japan have not been declared to the Customs authorities at any
point of time.
10\. Coming to the agreement entered into between the appellants and M/s
Nichimen, there were three agreements between Mahindra and Nichimen, Japan.
One was for the supply of 34 BIWs and two panels for the Scorpio programme for
which a sum of JY 8,91,80,000 was paid and which was included in the taxable
value of the BIWs and panels imported. The second agreement dated 20/11/98 was
Technical Consultancy & Engineering Agreement for the design and engineering
of MODELS, SOFT TOOLS AND SOFT JIGS/FIXTURES for the development of prototypes
for the Scorpio programme involving a payment of Japanese Yen 177,820,000. The
third agreement was a supplemental agreement dated 4/1/2000 for engineering
and design changes involving a payment of JY 5,23,95,100. It will be useful to
see relevant terms and conditions in respect of these agreements. The relevant
extracts from the 2nd and 3rd agreements are reproduced below:-
Agreement No.IDAM/REV/RUP/02 dated 20/11/98  Technical Consultancy &
Engineering Agreement.
AND WHEREAS M&M has approached, NICHIMEN for the design and engineering of
models, soft tools and soft jigs/fixtures for development for the Scorpio
programme.
AND WHEREAS NICHIMEN has expressed its willingness for the design and
engineering of models, soft tools and soft jigs/fixtures for development for
the Scorpio programme.
1\. DEFINITIONS
a) SCORPIO PROGRAM shall mean two or four wheel drive utility vehicles to be
manufactured by M&M under the IDAM Project.;
..
i) WORK shall mean the design and engineering of MODELS, SOFT TOOLS and SOFT
JIGS/ FIXTURES as set forth in Clause 3  SCOPE OF WORK.
2\. PURPOSE OF THIS AGREEMENT It is acknowledged by the Parties that the
purpose of this agreement is to set out the following:
a) The responsibilities and obligations of NICHIMEN for providing technical
services of design, engineering and development of MODELS, SOFT TOOLS and SOFT
JIGS/ FIXTURES for the Scorpio Program as per the data & information provided
by M&M set forth in Clause 4 of this Agreement.
b) The responsibilities and obligations of M&M for providing all necessary
data and information on schedule (including DESIGN CHANGE notice) and make
payment as per the terms and conditions of this Agreement.
c) The responsibilities and obligations of M&M for acquiring the technical
services of design, engineering and development of MODEL, SOFT TOOLS & SOFT
JIGS/FIXTURES for the SCORPIO PROGRAM by NICHIMEN as per the data and
information provided by M&M set forth in clause 4 of this Agreement.
d) The responsibilities and obligations of NICHIMEN for destroying the MODELS,
SOFT TOOLS 7 SOFT JIGS/FIXTURES after completion of WORK for the SCORPIO
PROGRAM as mentioned in Point 2.a) & 2.b).
3\. SCOPE OF WORK
1\. NICHIMEN will employ or cause to employ the following process for the
design and engineering of MODELS, SOFT TOOLS and SOFT JIGS/ FIXTURES based on
its or its sub-contractors experience and know-how.
(a) To receive fully surfaced & trimmed CAD data in CATIA format form M&M
(b) To establish preliminary assembly process with inputs from M&M.
(c) To establish optimum die tip angle and binder developments, if applicable.
The tip angle and binder development in case of all MAJOR PANELS shall be same
as that to be followed by M&M Die maker for PRODUCTION TOOLS as far as
possible.
(d) To check manufacturing feasibility in terms of optimum die tip angle and
binder development, as far as possible and give feedback to M&M.
(e) Generated CNC cutter path data by CAM PROGRAMMING.
(f) Design and engineer MODELS representing panel shape, (tip angle and binder
surface development.)
(g) Design and engineer a complete draw die set for each part by using this
CNC cutter path data, if it is applicable.
(h) Design and engineer CNC programs for trim lines and holes for cutting the
panels on Laser Cutting machine.
(i) Design and engineer any support stand required for each panel for laser
cutting machine.
(j) Design and engineer Hammer blocks from CNC data for any flanging
operation.
(k) Check weldability and fitability of all panels, which forms the body shell
and provide feedback of changes required in the panel drawings to ensure
weldability and fitability, and give feedback to M&M.
4\. 
5\. ..
6\. ENGINEERING CHANGES i. Both the Parties have acknowledged and agreed the
fact that this is a design, Engineering, prototype building program and there
are bound to be design changes from time to time during development stage.
ii. As per the time schedule, two (2) ENGINEERING CHANGE are expected during
design stage. However M&M shall be allowed to request one additional
ENGINEERING CHANGE i.e. total three ENGINEERING CHANGES are allowed if
required.
iii. ENGINEERING CHANGES will be incorporated in such manner as that all the
DESIGN CHANGE which are informed and delivered to NICHIMEN on or before the
respective deadline date, as mentioned in the time schedule of Annexure-A,
will be incorporated to the nest batch of the WORK.
.
9\. CONSIDERATION In consideration of TECHNICAL CONSULTANCY & ENGINEERING
along with technical services provided by NICHIMEN, M&M shall pay to NICHIMEN
a consideration of a sum of One hundred seventy seven million eight hundred
twenty thousand Japanese Yen (J% 177,820,000) by telegraphic transfer with the
following terms of payment.
The charges for the total scope of work is as follows,
i) Charges payable for Design, Engineering & Development charges of MODEL,
SOFT TOOL DIES SOFT JIGS / FIXTURES in the sum of Japanese Yen One hundred
seventy seven million eight hundred twenty thousand (J% 177,820,000) in the
following instalments:

10\. TAXES All income taxes in respect of the payments by M&M pursuant to this
agreement levied / to be levied by the Indian income tax authorities on
NICHIMEN, shall be borne by NICHIMEN. The parties understand that the current
rate of taxation is 20%. Any increase in the rate of taxation shall be borne
by NICHIMEN and any decrease in the rate taxation will be to the benefit of
NICHIMEN.
M&M shall deduct said withholding tax assessed on NICHIMENs income and pay
the same amount to Indian income tax authority. M&M shall provide the
originals of the tax deduction certificates to NICHIMEN within one month after
deduction of said withholding tax. Any benefits received on account of such
certificates as a result of Avoidance of Double Taxation Treaty between
Government of India and Japan, shall be to the account of NICHIMEN.
All taxes (including income tax) levied outside India, on such amounts payable
to NICHIMEN shall be borne and paid by NICHIMEN.
..
13\. INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY/TITLE The technical information
generated/developed/obtained by NICHIMEN and / or its sub-contractor pursuant
to this Agreement shall become the sole and exclusive property of M&M, and
NICHIMEN nor its sub-contractor shall not be entitled to use the same for any
purpose other than for the purpose of this Agreement and shall not be entitled
to apply for and register industrial property in its own name, either in or
outside India.
However, NICHIMEN and its sub-contractor may furnish the information to the
Press tool Die maker, nominated by M&M, if it seems helpful for design of
hard, tools to be manufactured by the Press tool die maker..
10.1 A relevant extract from the supplemental agreement dated 04/01/2000
relating to the engineering design changes are reproduced below:-
Now it is agreed by and between the parties as follows:
I. Nichimen shall carry out design change as requested by M&M in accordance
with the specifications set out in Data Cartridge tapes numbers from 1 through
10, which shall be provided by M & M to Nichimen.
II. As consideration for providing the design change, M&M shall pay to
Nichimen an additional amount of JY 52,395,100. Pursuant to the foregoing,
clause 9 of the Main agreement shall be modified to read as under:.
10.2 The appellants contention for the exclusion of payments made to
Nichimen, Japan, under the two agreements cited above is that if this value is
included in the assessable value of the goods under importation, then the
assessable value per body will work to Rs. 49 to Rs. 51 lakh whereas the
complete vehicle is being sold in the market at a price ranging from of Rs.6
to 8 lakhs. Therefore, there is something fundamentally wrong in the value
computed in the show-cause notice. An additional argument has also been made
that the payments made to Nichimen also created IPR in favour of the
appellant, which can be exploited in India apart from tangible bodies and,
hence, total payments made/aggregate considerations paid to Nichimen cannot be
considered in the assessable value of the goods imported. The agreement dated
20/11/98 is for technical consultancy and engineering and the purpose as per
clause 2 of the agreement is for providing technical services of design,
engineering and development of models, soft tools and soft jigs/fixtures for
the Scorpio program. Without these models, soft tools, soft jigs/fixtures, the
prototypes could not have been developed and without prototype, the commercial
production of Scorpio vehicles in India subsequently could not be undertaken.
In any product development project, the production of prototype entails a very
high cost. Once the prototype is developed and commercial production
commences, the economies of scale of production brings the cost of production
down. Therefore, comparison of the cost of production of the prototypes with
that of commercially produced vehicle is meaningless as the two are not
comparable at all. They represent two different categories of products
altogether. The products under assessment are the BIWs and panels which are
the prototypes. In the manufacture of these BIWs and panels, the models, soft
tools, soft jigs/fixtures have been used and payments have been made for the
same. Therefore, the argument that the cost of design, engineering and
development of models, soft tools, soft jigs, fixtures, etc. should not be
included in the cost of the goods imported has no basis whatsoever and has to
be out rightly rejected as devoid of logic and merits. Rule 9 (1) (b) (ii)
specifically states that the cost of tools, dies, moulds and similar items
used in the production of imported goods should be added to the transaction
value to arrive at the taxable value of the goods. Rule 9 (1) (b) (iv) covers
cost of engineering, development, art work, design work, and plans and
sketches for the production of the imported goods. In the instant case the
appellant has paid a sum of J% 230,215,100 for the technical consultancy and
engineering services provided by Nichimen for the design, engineering and
development of models, soft tools, soft jigs/fixtures for the Scorpio
programme. Without these models, soft tools, soft jigs/fixtures, the BIWs and
panels which were imported could not have been produced at all. Therefore,
these costs have to be necessarily added to the value of the imported goods
for the purpose of levy customs duty in terms of the provisions of Rule 9 (1)
(b) (ii) and (iv) of the Customs Valuation Rules and we hold accordingly.
10.3 The next contention of the appellant is that the payment made to Nichimen
is not only for the product but also for the IPR involved in the goods and the
appellant has registered the design of the body subsequently in India under
the Designs Act, 2000. This contention of the appellant is not tenable for the
following reasons.
10.4 According to clause 9 of the agreement dated 20/11/98, the payment has
been made for the technical consultancy and engineering along with technical
services and not for any IPR. Therefore, in terms of the agreement entered
into between two parties it is clear that consideration, which has been paid
by the appellant to Nichimen under the agreement dated 20/11/98 and
supplemental agreement dated 04/01/2000 is only for technical consultancy and
engineering along with technical service and not for anything else. No doubt,
there is a clause which states that the technical information
generated/developed/obtained by Nichimen and or its sub-contractor pursuant to
the agreement shall become the sole and exclusive property of Mahindra and
Nichimen or its sub-contractor shall not be entitled to use the same for any
purpose other than for the purpose of the agreement. When M/s Mahindra engaged
Nichimen and its sub-contractors for the design, technical consultancy and
engineering for the manufacture of BIWs, even without the specific clause
relating to the IPR, the IPR in the goods would have accrued to M/s Mahindra.
The IPR claimed by Mahindra is the copy right in design of the vehicle in
terms of the Copyright Act and the Designs Act. The design registered by the
appellant in the instant case is the design of the Land Vehicle as can be
seen from certificate of registration dated 7-8-2001. The vehicle is comprised
of not only the body, but also the glass, mirror, lights, the structure of the
chassis, tyres, etc. and all these form part of the design of the vehicle.
Therefore, the design registered by the appellant is different from the design
of the body for the simple reason that the design of whole vehicle is distinct
and different from the design of the body even though the latter may form part
of the former. That does not mean that the latter and former are the same in
design. Further, in the case of IPR, there are two important concepts - that
is - authorship and ownership. As per section 17 of the Indian Copyright Act,
1957, in the case of work created at the instance of another for a valuable
consideration, the ownership belongs to the provider of such valuable
consideration. Similarly in the case of design, the design can be registered
by the proprietor of the new or original design under section 5 of the Designs
Act, 2000. Further under section 2(j) of the said Act, proprietor of the
design, where the author of the design, for a good consideration executes the
work for some other person, means the person for whom the design is so
executed. In the case under consideration, the copy righted work or the
engineering design work has been undertaken at the instance of M/s Mahindra by
M/s Nichimen for a consideration and therefore, M/s Mahindra are the owners of
copy right or the proprietor of the design under the law. Therefore, under the
Indian laws, even without a specific provision in the contract, M/s Mahindra
can duplicate or reproduce the design or article covered by the design. Thus,
merely because the Nichimen has produced the design in the instant case, it
does not mean that they can claim the ownership of the IPR in the design.
Therefore, clause 13 relating to IPR/title has to seen as a
clarificatory/explanatory clause so as to remove any doubt/confusion in the
matter. Therefore, merely because there is an IPR clause in the agreement, it
does not mean that the payment made is for the IPR. If the appellant so
desired that part of the consideration was for IPR, there was nothing which
prevented them from specifying the consideration for the IPR separately. In
the absence of any such specification, it has to be presumed that the
consideration has been paid for the goods/services under import. Clause 9 of
the agreement with M/s Nichimen very clearly states that the consideration is
for the technical consultancy and engineering along with technical services
provided by Nichimen. This is further amplified in sub-clause (i) of clause 9
which reads as  charges payable for design, engineering and development
charges of MODEL, SOFT TOOL, DIES, SOFT JIGS/FIXTURES in the sum of Japanese
Yen ... Further Rule 9(1)(b)(iv) covers costs and services paid for
engineering, development, art work, design work, and plans and sketches. All
these services enumerated in the rule have IPR in them. But the rule does not
make any distinction between the IPR content of the work vis-`-vis the non-IPR
content. The total cost involved for these services have to be added to the
price paid or payable in determining the transaction value irrespective of
whether the payment made is for IPR and non-IPR. The appellant has quoted
several extracts from books relating to IPR in support of their contention.
However these have no bearing to the facts of the case in view of the specific
wordings of the agreement contained in clause 9 relating to consideration and
also the wordings of Rule 9(1) (b) (iv) of the Customs Valuation Rules.
Accordingly we reject the contention of the appellant that the consideration
paid to M/s Nichimen has to be apportioned between IPR and non-IPR and only
the consideration for non-IPR is to be added to the price to arrive at the
transaction value.
10.5 There is one more reason for holding the above view. As per Rule 9(1)(c)
of the Customs Valuation Rules, royalties and licence fees related to the
imported goods that the buyer is required to pay, directly or indirectly, as a
condition of the sale of the goods being valued, to the extent such royalties
and fees are not included in the price actually paid or payable have to added
to the price to arrive at the transaction value. Royalties and licence fees
are in the nature of payments for use of intellectual property. Since as per
the appellants contention, the payments made for IPR is as per the agreement
entered into with Nichimen, it is a condition of sale of the imported goods.
Further as per Rule 9(1)(e) all other payments actually made or to be made as
a condition of sale of the imported goods by the buyer or seller are to be
included in arriving at the transaction value. Therefore, any payment made by
the buyer to the seller for IPR as a condition of sale of the imported goods
will also get included in the transaction value of such goods. Therefore, as
per the contention of the appellant, if the IPR relating to the design is
contained in the 34 BIWs and panels (under the IPR laws for a design to be
registered should be contained in the goods by way of shape, size, form,
etc.), then the payment for the same has to be part of the transaction value
of the goods imported. Viewed from this angle also, there is no way the
payments made to M/s Nichimen under the technical consultancy and engineering
including technical services can be excluded from the value of goods imported.
10.6 In Tata Consultancy vs. State of Andhra Pradesh [2004(178)ELT 22], the
Supreme Court while holding canned software recorded on floppy/CD/hard drive
to be goods on which sales tax was leviable made the following observations:-
A software programme may consist of various commands which enable the
computer to perform a designated task. The copyright in that programme may
remain with the originator of the programme. But the moment copies are made
and marketed, it becomes goods, which are susceptible to sales tax. Even
intellectual property once it is put on to a media, whether it be in the form
of books or canvas (in case of painting) or computer discs or cassettes and
marketed would become goods. In all such cases, the intellectual
property has been incorporated on a media for purposes of transfer. Sale is
not just the media which by itself has very little value. The software and the
media can not be split up.As in the case of paintings or books or music or
films, the buyer is purchasing the intellectual property and not the media..
The conclusion emerging is that a product can not be segregated in terms of
the intellectual input and the medium in which it is stored. Similarly in the
case of Accel Frontline Limited [2008 (227) ELT 313(AAR)], the Advance Ruling
Authority held that data recorded on a medium has to be regarded as a
composite goods and it can not be given dual identity, once as data, and then
separately in terms of medium in which it happens to be recorded.
10.7 In the Associated Cement Companies Ltd case cited supra, a question arose
whether intellectual property when put on a media is to be regarded as an
article on the total transaction value of which customs duty is payable or the
value should be split into two - one for the intellectual input and other for
the media. The honble apex Court held as follows:
It is misconception to contend that what is being taxed is intellectual
input. What is being taxed under the Customs Act read with Customs Tariff Act
and the Customs Valuation Rules is not the input alone but goods whose value
has been enhanced by the said inputs. The final product at the time of import
is either the magazine or the encyclopedia or the engineering drawings as the
case may be. There is no scope for splitting the engineering drawing or the
encyclopedia into intellectual input on the one hand and the paper on which it
is scribed on the other. For example, paintings are also to be taxed. Valuable
paintings are worth millions. A painting or a portrait may be specially
commissioned or an article may be tailor made. This aspect is irrelevant since
what is taxed is the final product as defined and it will be an absurdity to
contend that the value for the purposes of duty ought to be the cost of the
canvas and the oil paint even though the composite product, i.e., the painting
is worth millions. In the said case , the apex Court further considered the
issue whether design and engineering charges are loadable to the value of the
goods imported when the goods are manufactured on the basis of design,
engineering, specifications provided by the foreign supplier and held as
follows:-
We are of the opinion that the Tribunal was right in holding that the
agreement relating to purchase of equipment cannot be disassociated from other
agreements and the authorities were right in loading the design and
engineering charges by # 11.50 lakhs owe to the value of the imported
equipment under Rule 9 read with Rule 4 of the Customs Valuation
(Determination of the Price of Imported Goods) Rules, 1988.
10.8 Similarly in the case of Gujarat Mineral Development Corporation Ltd.,
Vs. CCE & C, Ahmedabad 2005 (190) ELT 5 (SC) a question arose before the apex
Court whether the design and engineering charges going as input into
manufacture are includible in the transaction value of the imported goods. In
that case the apex Court held that the value of designs and engineering
charges going as input into manufacture are includable in the taxable value of
goods imported and remanded the matter back to the appellate Tribunal for
reconsideration of their order wherein they had held that they were not so
includible. A similar question arose in the case of Dabhol Power Company Vs.
CC, Pune  2004 (171) ELT 354 wherein this Tribunal held that the value of
services relating to drawings, data sheets, specifications, etc. were
includible in the cost of equipment imported in terms of provisions of Rule 9
(1) (b) (iv) of the Customs Valuation Rules, 1988, since in the absence of
these designs and engineering services the product could not have been
manufactured.
10.9 In the light of the foregoing discussion and the case laws analysed
above, we hold that the considerations paid to M/s Nichimen in terms of the
agreements dated 20-11-98 and 4-1-2000 shall be added to the price actually
paid for the imported goods in terms of Rule 9 (1)(b) (ii) and Rule 9 (1) (b)
(iv) of the Customs Valuation Rules, 1988.
11\. The next argument of the appellant is that the tools, moulds, etc. which
were designed and developed by Nichimen were capable of producing 150 Nos. of
BIWs and panels whereas they have actually imported only 34 BIWs and one panel
and while distributing the cost, the capability of moulds and dies should be
taken to account. In terms of the agreement, Nichimen supplied only 34 BIWs
and one panel and thereafter, they were required to destroy these moulds and
panels. In other words, the soft tools, moulds, jigs/fixtures etc. developed
by Nichimen were used for the production of only 34 BIWs and one panel and,
therefore, the cost of these goods etc. has to be apportioned over only for 34
BIWs and one panel and not based on the capability of what could have been
produced, using the moulds and dies. Clause 2(d) of the agreement dated
20-11-1998 specifically casts the responsibility and obligation on M/s
Nichimen for destroying the MODELS,SOFT TOOLS AND SOFT JIGS/FIXTURES after
completion of WORK for the SCORPIO PROGRAM.
11.1 The appellant has relied on CBEC circular dated 23-1-96 and certain
judgments in this regard. The said circular deals with a situation when
castings are made from the patterns supplied by the buyer. The circular
clarifies that apportionment (of the cost of the pattern) has to be done on
the basis of expected life and the capability of the patterns and the quantity
of castings that can be manufactured from it. The said circular specifically
states that in cases where there is difficulty in apportioning the cost of
pattern, apportionment can be made depending on the expected life and
capability of the pattern and the quantity of castings that can be
manufactured from it and thus working the cost to be apportioned per unit.
This clarification has been given to deal with a situation where the exact
number of units that can be produced with the pattern is not known. In that
context it was stated that expected life and capability of the pattern should
be taken into account. That is not the situation obtaining in the present
case. The number of BIWs/panels that were manufactured with the aid of models,
soft tools, soft jigs/fixtures in the case was clearly known. Further, there
was a condition that the moulds, tools, jigs/fixtures, etc. should be
destroyed after the programme is over. The total quantity of goods
manufactured with the aid of these goods were 34BIWs and one panel.
Thereafter, the moulds, tools, etc. were destroyed. Therefore, the cost of the
moulds, tools, jigs/fixtures has to be distributed over the 34 BIWs and one
panel and not on the basis of any assumed/estimated capability. The judicial
decisions cited by the assessee dealt with situations mentioned in the Boards
circular. When the said circular itself is not applicable to the facts of the
present case, the orders cited by the assessee has no relevance and the
argument has to be rejected outright.
12\. The next issue for consideration is the appellants claim for exclusion
of income tax paid by the appellant on behalf of the foreign vendor from the
taxable value of the goods imported. The appellant claims that in terms of the
agreement entered into with M/s Nichimen, they have discharged the income tax
liability of Nichimen by deducting the tax at source (TDS). In the case of
agreement with M/s HW, UK, the appellant has paid the income tax on behalf of
the foreign vendor. It has been argued that as per the interpretive notes to
Rule 4, the value of the imported goods shall not include duties and taxes in
India provided they are distinguishable from the price actually paid or
payable for the imported goods.
12.1 The appellant argues that duties and taxes in India will include all
types of duties and taxes including Income Tax, which is payable by the
appellants on behalf of the foreign supplier of the goods. They have also
relied on Advisory opinion issued by the WCO in this regard. The WCO advisory
opinion merely states that since the duties and taxes of the country of
importation are by their nature distinguishable from the price actually paid
or payable, they do not form part of the Customs value. What is being
determined under Section 14 read with the Customs Valuation (Determination of
Price of Imported Goods) Rules, 1988, is the price paid or payable for the
imported goods. All the elements which are provided for in the rules, whether
for inclusion or exclusion relates to the price paid or payable. Therefore,
the duties and taxes in India referred to in the interpretative note to Rule 4
should also be relatable to the goods. In other words, only those duties and
taxes, which are related to the imported goods can be deducted while arriving
at the taxable customs value. If duties and taxes paid have no nexus with the
goods, then no deduction can be permitted towards such duties and taxes.
Income tax is a tax on income and it is not a tax on goods. Irrespective of
nature of the income, income tax is payable, whether it is on account of
supply of goods or supply of services or on account of other activities.
Merely because the appellant is liable to deduct the tax at source in terms of
the Income tax laws, it does not mean that the income tax is paid for or on
the imported goods. The liability to pay income tax is on the person earning
income, which is the foreign supplier. Merely, because the appellant is
obliged to deduct the tax at source and pay to the exchequer on behalf of the
foreign supplier, it does not mean that the tax is payable by the appellant
buyer/importer or the tax is on the goods. Different aspects of a transaction
can be levied to different types of taxes. As has been held by the honble
apex Court in the case of Federation of Hotels and Restaurants Association Vs.
UOI  1989 (3) SCC 634-
 different aspects of a transaction can be subjected to different taxes, if
the law so provides. As has been succinctly stated in the said case subject
which in one aspect and for one purpose fall within the power of a particular
legislature may in another aspect and for another purpose fall within another
legislative power. There might be overlapping; but the overlapping must be in
law. The same transaction may involve two or more taxable events in its
different aspects. But the fact that there is overlapping does not detract
from the distinctiveness of the aspects..
Thus there is no merit in the claim for exclusion of income tax paid on behalf
of the foreign supplier from the value of the imported goods as such tax is
not relatable to the goods under supply. Accordingly we find no merit in this
contention and reject the same .
13\. In the light of the foregoing discussion and analysis, it has to be held
that charges amounting to UK # 7,21,366.75 paid to M/s. HW, UK , in terms of
the concept and feasibility design and engineering of the IDAM vehicle
agreement dated 22-10-1996 and CAD surface development agreement dated
4-11-1996 and the charges amounting to Japanese % 23,28,10,165 paid to M/s
Nichimen, Japan, in terms of the technical consultancy and engineering
agreement dated 20/11/98 and supplemental agreement dated 04/01/2000 have to
be added to arrive at the transaction value of the 34 BIWs and one panel
imported by the appellant, in terms of provisions of Rule 9 (1) (b) (ii) and
Rule 9 (1) (b) (iv) read with Rule 4 of Customs Valuation Rules, 1988, and
section 14 Of the Customs Act, 1962 and we hold accordingly. Accordingly the
duty demand of Rs. 7,78,67,696/- after re-determination of value at
Rs.17,76,27,591/- as aforesaid made in the impugned order has to be sustained
and we do so.
14\. The next issue for consideration is whether extended period of time could
be invoked in the instant case for demand of duty. The appellant has contended
that there was no suppression of facts and, therefore, extended period of time
could not have been invoked at all for demand of duty. This argument is
without any merit whatsoever. Along with bill of entry, the appellant was
required to file a declaration in form Annexure-I along with the bill of entry
as per the provisions of Section 46 of the Customs Act, 1962. This annexure is
in terms of provisions of Rule 10 of the Customs Valuation Rules, 1988.
Against Sl.No.21 of the said Annexure, the importer has to declare the cost
and services not included in the invoice value (Rule 9). The said Sl No. reads
as follows:-
21. Cost and services not included in the invoice value (Rule 9):
(a) Brokerage and commission
(b) Cost of containers
(c) Packing cost
(d) Cost of goods and services supplied by the buyer
(e) Royalties and licence fees;
(f) Value of proceeds which accrue to the seller
(g) Freight
(h) Insurance
(i) Loading, unloading, handling charges
(j) Landing charges
(k) Other payments, if any.
If the appellant had paid certain amounts to the foreign supplier on account
of these charges, which has not been included in the invoice value, the
particulars of the payments had to be declared before the Customs authorities,
so that the Customs authorities can decide whether the exclusion made in the
value is correct or not. Further in the said annexure-I, there is a
declaration to be made by the importer stating that that the information
furnished is true, complete and correct in every respect. The declaration
further provides that the importer undertakes to bring to the notice of the
proper officer any particulars, which subsequently comes to his knowledge
which will have a bearing on valuation. In the instant case, the
appellant/importer did not declare the various charges paid to HW, UK and
Nichimen, Japan towards various services rendered. Thus, there is a willful
mis-declaration made by the appellant with an intent to evade payment of
appropriate customs duty. Therefore, the argument of the appellant that in the
instant case, the extended period of time could not be invoked to demand
differential customs duty has no basis whatsoever and we totally reject the
claim of the appellant in this regard.
15\. The next issue for consideration is confiscability of the goods and
imposition of redemption fine in lieu of confiscation. In this case, the Ld.
Commissioner has held that the goods are liable for confiscation and has
imposed a fine of Rs.3.00 Crore in lieu of confiscation. Under Section 111 (m)
of the Customs Act, whenever there is a misdeclaration of value or any other
material particulars relating to the goods under importation, such goods are
liable to confiscation. In the instant case, there was a misdeclaration of
value in respect of 34 BIWs and one set of panel and, therefore, the goods
were rightly held as liable to confiscation. However, since the goods were not
available physically, no actual confiscation would have been possible. When
the goods are not available for confiscation, imposition of fine under Section
125 of the Customs Act can not be made unless the goods had been previously
released under bond. Section 125 of the Customs Act states that whenever
confiscation of any goods is authorised by this Act, the officer adjudging it
may give to the owner of the goods or from whose possession or custody such
goods have been seized, an option to pay in lieu of confiscation such fine as
he deems fit. There is no seizure of goods in this case and consequently no
confiscation either. In the absence of actual confiscation, the question of
payment of fine in lieu of confiscation does not arise and, therefore, the
imposition of redemption fine of Rs.3.00 Crore on the appellant in lieu of
confiscation is not tenable in law and has to be set aside.
16\. The department has also filed an appeal (C.No. 432/07) against the order
passed by the Commissioner on the ground that the Commissioners finding that
interest is not liable to be paid in this case as the clearances took place
prior to 11/05/2011, is incorrect in law. Section 28AB (effective from 28-9-96
and as it stood at the relevant time) of the Customs Act provided for levy of
interest on duty short paid or short levied or not paid or not levied or
erroneously refunded, in case involving fraud, suppression of facts,
collusion, willful misdeclaration or violation of any provisions of Act with
an intent to evade duty, etc. In the instant case the imports have taken place
during the period from June 1999 to July 2000. Therefore, interest on duty
demanded under section 28 of the Customs Act (invoking the extended period of
time) is leviable under Section 28AB, in cases involving suppression, fraud,
collusion, etc. In other words, wherever short payment or non-payment of duty
is on account of suppression, collusion, willful mis-statement, etc. interest
was leviable under section 28. Thus, the order passed by the Commissioner
holding that the appellant importer is not liable to pay interest under
Section 28AB of the Customs Act is legally incorrect and therefore, this
finding relating to interest needs to be set aside and the departmental appeal
in this regard ought to be allowed.
17\. The next issue for consideration relates to imposition of penalty on the
appellant under Section 112 (a) of the Custom Act. The Commissioner has
imposed a penalty of Rs.1.5 crore on the appellant under Section 112 (a). The
appellant has contested that imposition on two grounds. Inasmuch as the
appellant has paid the duty demanded prior to the passing of the order, the
penalty cannot be exceed 25% of the duty demanded. Another ground which they
have adduced is that Notification No.31/2000-Cus (NT) was given retrospective
effect and the action taken validated vide Section 92 of the Finance Act, 2009
and an explanation was also provided therein stating that Explanation.  for
the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that no act or omission on the
part of any person shall be punishable as an offence which would not have been
so punishable if the said notification had not come into force
retrospectively.
17.1 It is the contention of the appellant that since Notification No.31/2000
was validated by aforesaid provisions of Finance Act, 2009, penalty could not
be imposed on the appellants for the period prior to 2009 and they have relied
on the judgements of this Tribunal in the case of Chemo Pulp Tissues Vs. CC
reported in 2000 (119) ELT 715 (T-LB) and CCE Vs. Ranga Vilas GS & W Mills,
2002 (149) ELt 742 (T-LB). The case laws relied upon by the appellant pertain
to a totally different situation altogether. In the Chemo Pulp Tissues and
Ranga Vilas cases cited supra, the facts are altogether different. Vide
clause(1) of section 112 of the Finance Act, 2000, it was provided that no
credit of any duty paid on high speed diesel oil shall be deemed admissible
during the period from 16-3-95 to the date on which the said Finance Act, 2000
received Presidential assent. An explanation was provided in Section 112 for
non-imposition of penalty in case the credit has been taken wrongly prior to
Finance Act, 2000 coming into force. If anybody had taken the credit wrongly,
then they were not eligible for the same. However, taking of such inadmissible
credit was not made punishable if the credit had been taken prior to the
coming into force of Finance Act, 2000. In other words, in those cases there
was a doubt or dispute regarding admissibility of Cenvat credit and if anybody
had taken the credit wrongly, the credit was not admissible and had to be
reversed; however, such availment of credit was held to be non-punishable, in
view of the dispute involved. The facts in the present case are different and
distinguishable. Rule 9 of the Customs Valuation Rules, 1988 existed in the
statute from 1988 onwards, and the said rule provided for inclusion of costs
and services incurred, if any, in the transaction value of the goods imported,
if such costs and services were relatable to the manufacture of the imported
goods and such costs and services were incurred in a place other than India.
The said Rule 9 was very much in existence at the time of importation of the
goods in the instant case and it has not been amended in any manner, with
retrospective effect. If any importer did not include the costs and services
as provided for under Rule 9, then non-inclusion would have attracted penal
action under Section 111 and 112 of the Customs Act, irrespective of who
issued the show-cause notice. It is not the issue of show-cause notice which
determines the liability to penalty. Liability to penalty arises if the goods
are liable to confiscation under Section 111. None of these sections has been
amended in any way with retrospective effect so as to bring in its purview
mis-declaration of value as a punishable offence under the aforesaid sections.
In the instant case what has been validated by the Finance Act, 2009 is the
action taken by DGCEI officers in respect of issue of show-cause notices for
Customs violations. This has nothing to do with the confiscability of the
goods, if they had been imported in violation of the provisions of Customs
Act. Therefore, in the instant case, the penalty has been rightly imposed
under Section 112 (a) by the adjudicating authority for mis-declaration of
value and consequent evasion of customs duty by deliberately suppressing
material facts. The appellant has also made a point that penalty cannot be
exceed 25% of the duty liability. In the instant case, the penalty imposed is
only Rs. 1.5 Crore and the duty liability, which is confirmed is
Rs.7,78,66,696/-. Thus, the penalty imposed is less than 25% of the duty
liability confirmed. Therefore, we do not find any merit in the contentions
raised by the appellant and the same are rejected.
18\. The last issue for consideration is whether Shri R.U. Prabhu, Dy. General
Manager of the appellant company is liable for penalty under Section 112 (a)
of the Customs Act or not. Shri R.U. Prabhu was only an employee of the
appellant and he did not stand to gain personally by making the wrong
declarations. In as much as the appellant has been penalised, we are of the
view that penalty on Sri. Prabhu is not warranted and accordingly we set aside
the same.
19\. In sum, we uphold the confirmation of demand of differential duty
amounting to Rs.7,78,67,696/- under Section 28 of the Customs Act, 1962. We
also hold that the appellant/importer is liable to pay interest thereon at
appropriate rates on the said differential duty amount under the provisions of
Section 28AB of the Customs Act, 1962. We uphold the liability to confiscation
of the goods under the provisions of 111 (m) of the Customs Act, 1962.
Inasmuch as the goods are not available for confiscation, we set aside the
redemption fine of Rs.3.00 crore imposed on the appellant in lieu of
confiscation. We uphold the imposition of penalty of Rs.1.5 Crore on the
appellant M/s.Mahindra & Mahindra Ltd. under Section 112 (a) of the Customs
Act, 1962. We set aside the penalty imposed on Shri R.U. Prabhu, Dy General
Manager (Capital purchase) of Mahindra & Mahindra Ltd.
20\. The appeals are disposed of in the above terms.
(Pronounced in Court..) (S.S. Kang) Vice President (P.R.
Chandrasekharan) Member (Technical) pj 1 11
of the Customs Act or not. Shri R.U. Prabhu was only an employee of the
appellant and he did not stand to gain personally by making the wrong
declarations. In as much as the appellant has been penalised, we are of the
view that penalty on Sri. Prabhu is not warranted and accordingly we set aside
the same.
19\. In sum, we uphold the confirmation of demand of differential duty
amounting to Rs.7,78,67,696/- under Section 28 of the Customs Act, 1962. We
also hold that the appellant/importer is liable to pay interest thereon at
appropriate rates on the said differential duty amount under the provisions of
Section 28AB of the Customs Act, 1962. We uphold the liability to confiscation
of the goods under the provisions of 111 (m) of the Customs Act, 1962.
Inasmuch as the goods are not available for confiscation, we set aside the
redemption fine of Rs.3.00 crore imposed on the appellant in lieu of
confiscation. We uphold the imposition of penalty of Rs.1.5 Crore on the
appellant M/s.Mahindra & Mahindra Ltd. under Section 112 (a) of the Customs
Act, 1962. We set aside the penalty imposed on Shri R.U. Prabhu, Dy General
97/07 Mahindra & Mahindra Ltd.
    Ramesh U. Prabhu					Appellants
    Vs.
    Commissioner of Customs (Import),
    Mumbai							Respondent
    Appeal No. C/432/07
    Commissioner of Customs (Import),
    Mumbai							Appellant
    Vs.
    Mahindra & Mahindra Ltd.,			Respondent
    Appearance:
    Shri.V. Sridharan, Advocate for appellants
    Shri.K.M. Mondal, Special Consultant, for respondent
    CORAM:
    Honble Mr. S. S. Kang, Vice President
    Honble Mr. P.R.Chandrasekharan, Member (Technical)
          Date of Hearing     :		25/08/2011
      	 		Date of Decision    :		    /10/2011	
    ORDER NO
    Per:  P.R. Chandrasekharan
of the Customs Act or not. Shri R.U. Prabhu was only an employee of the
appellant and he did not stand to gain personally by making the wrong
declarations. In as much as the appellant has been penalised, we are of the
view that penalty on Sri. Prabhu is not warranted and accordingly we set aside
the same.
19\. In sum, we uphold the confirmation of demand of differential duty
amounting to Rs.7,78,67,696/- under Section 28 of the Customs Act, 1962. We
also hold that the appellant/importer is liable to pay interest thereon at
appropriate rates on the said differential duty amount under the provisions of
Section 28AB of the Customs Act, 1962. We uphold the liability to confiscation
of the goods under the provisions of 111 (m) of the Customs Act, 1962.
Inasmuch as the goods are not available for confiscation, we set aside the
redemption fine of Rs.3.00 crore imposed on the appellant in lieu of
confiscation. We uphold the imposition of penalty of Rs.1.5 Crore on the
appellant M/s.Mahindra & Mahindra Ltd. under Section 112 (a) of the Customs
Act, 1962. We set aside the penalty imposed on Shri R.U. Prabhu, Dy General
97/07 Mahindra & Mahindra Ltd.
    Ramesh U. Prabhu					Appellants
    Vs.
    Commissioner of Customs (Import),
    Mumbai							Respondent
    Appeal No. C/432/07
    Commissioner of Customs (Import),
    Mumbai							Appellant
    Vs.
    Mahindra & Mahindra Ltd.,			Respondent
    Appearance:
    Shri.V. Sridharan, Advocate for appellants
    Shri.K.M. Mondal, Special Consultant, for respondent
    CORAM:
    Honble Mr. S. S. Kang, Vice President
    Honble Mr. P.R.Chandrasekharan, Member (Technical)
          Date of Hearing     :		25/08/2011
      	 		Date of Decision    :		    /10/2011	
    ORDER NO
    Per:  P.R. Chandrasekharan
of the Customs Act or not. Shri R.U. Prabhu was only an employee of the
appellant and he did not stand to gain personally by making the wrong
declarations. In as much as the appellant has been penalised, we are of the
view that penalty on Sri. Prabhu is not warranted and accordingly we set aside
the same.
19\. In sum, we uphold the confirmation of demand of differential duty
amounting to Rs.7,78,67,696/- under Section 28 of the Customs Act, 1962. We
also hold that the appellant/importer is liable to pay interest thereon at
appropriate rates on the said differential duty amount under the provisions of
Section 28AB of the Customs Act, 1962. We uphold the liability to confiscation
of the goods under the provisions of 111 (m) of the Customs Act, 1962.
Inasmuch as the goods are not available for confiscation, we set aside the
redemption fine of Rs.3.00 crore imposed on the appellant in lieu of
confiscation. We uphold the imposition of penalty of Rs.1.5 Crore on the
appellant M/s.Mahindra & Mahindra Ltd. under Section 112 (a) of the Customs
Act, 1962. We set aside the penalty imposed on Shri R.U. Prabhu, Dy General
97/07 Mahindra & Mahindra Ltd.
    Ramesh U. Prabhu					Appellants
    Vs.
    Commissioner of Customs (Import),
    Mumbai							Respondent
    Appeal No. C/432/07
    Commissioner of Customs (Import),
    Mumbai							Appellant
    Vs.
    Mahindra & Mahindra Ltd.,			Respondent
    Appearance:
    Shri.V. Sridharan, Advocate for appellants
    Shri.K.M. Mondal, Special Consultant, for respondent
    CORAM:
    Honble Mr. S. S. Kang, Vice President
    Honble Mr. P.R.Chandrasekharan, Member (Technical)
          Date of Hearing     :		25/08/2011
      	 		Date of Decision    :		    /10/2011	
    ORDER NO
    Per:  P.R. Chandrasekharan
    	These appeals are directed against Order-in-Original No.130-132/2006/CAC/CC(I)/AKP/Gr.VB & VA dated 03/11/2006 passed by the Commissioner of Customs (Imports), New Customs House, Mumbai. As they involve a common issue, they are taken up together for consideration and disposal.
    2.	The facts arising for consideration in the case are as follows:
2.1 M/s. Mahindra & Mahindra Ltd. (Mahindra in short) are manufacturers of
motor vehicles and parts thereof falling under Chapter 87 of the Central
Excise Tariff. The Director General of Central Excise Intelligence (DGCEI in
short) received intelligence to the effect that M/s. Mahindra had under-valued
certain goods imported by it and, therefore, they visited the factory of M/s.
Mahindra at Nasik on 31/08/2004. During the visit, it was found that M/s.
Mahindra had not declared the assessable value of the imported goods correctly
inasmuch as they had not included the assessable value of design and
engineering charges in the value of the imported goods. Therefore, a detailed
of the Customs Act or not. Shri R.U. Prabhu was only an employee of the
appellant and he did not stand to gain personally by making the wrong
declarations. In as much as the appellant has been penalised, we are of the
view that penalty on Sri. Prabhu is not warranted and accordingly we set aside
the same.
19\. In sum, we uphold the confirmation of demand of differential duty
amounting to Rs.7,78,67,696/- under Section 28 of the Customs Act, 1962. We
also hold that the appellant/importer is liable to pay interest thereon at
appropriate rates on the said differential duty amount under the provisions of
Section 28AB of the Customs Act, 1962. We uphold the liability to confiscation
of the goods under the provisions of 111 (m) of the Customs Act, 1962.
Inasmuch as the goods are not available for confiscation, we set aside the
redemption fine of Rs.3.00 crore imposed on the appellant in lieu of
confiscation. We uphold the imposition of penalty of Rs.1.5 Crore on the
appellant M/s.Mahindra & Mahindra Ltd. under Section 112 (a) of the Customs
Act, 1962. We set aside the penalty imposed on Shri R.U. Prabhu, Dy General
97/07 Mahindra & Mahindra Ltd.
    Ramesh U. Prabhu					Appellants
    Vs.
    Commissioner of Customs (Import),
    Mumbai							Respondent
    Appeal No. C/432/07
    Commissioner of Customs (Import),
    Mumbai							Appellant
    Vs.
    Mahindra & Mahindra Ltd.,			Respondent
    Appearance:
    Shri.V. Sridharan, Advocate for appellants
    Shri.K.M. Mondal, Special Consultant, for respondent
    CORAM:
    Honble Mr. S. S. Kang, Vice President
    Honble Mr. P.R.Chandrasekharan, Member (Technical)
          Date of Hearing     :		25/08/2011
      	 		Date of Decision    :		    /10/2011	
    ORDER NO
    Per:  P.R. Chandrasekharan
    	These appeals are directed against Order-in-Original No.130-132/2006/CAC/CC(I)/AKP/Gr.VB & VA dated 03/11/2006 passed by the Commissioner of Customs (Imports), New Customs House, Mumbai. As they involve a common issue, they are taken up together for consideration and disposal.
    2.	The facts arising for consideration in the case are as follows:
2.1 M/s. Mahindra & Mahindra Ltd. (Mahindra in short) are manufacturers of
motor vehicles and parts thereof falling under Chapter 87 of the Central
Excise Tariff. The Director General of Central Excise Intelligence (DGCEI in
short) received intelligence to the effect that M/s. Mahindra had under-valued
certain goods imported by it and, therefore, they visited the factory of M/s.
Mahindra at Nasik on 31/08/2004. During the visit, it was found that M/s.
Mahindra had not declared the assessable value of the imported goods correctly
inasmuch as they had not included the assessable value of design and
engineering charges in the value of the imported goods. Therefore, a detailed
of the Customs Act or not. Shri R.U. Prabhu was only an employee of the
appellant and he did not stand to gain personally by making the wrong
declarations. In as much as the appellant has been penalised, we are of the
view that penalty on Sri. Prabhu is not warranted and accordingly we set aside
the same.
19\. In sum, we uphold the confirmation of demand of differential duty
amounting to Rs.7,78,67,696/- under Section 28 of the Customs Act, 1962. We
also hold that the appellant/importer is liable to pay interest thereon at
appropriate rates on the said differential duty amount under the provisions of
Section 28AB of the Customs Act, 1962. We uphold the liability to confiscation
of the goods under the provisions of 111 (m) of the Customs Act, 1962.
Inasmuch as the goods are not available for confiscation, we set aside the
redemption fine of Rs.3.00 crore imposed on the appellant in lieu of
confiscation. We uphold the imposition of penalty of Rs.1.5 Crore on the
appellant M/s.Mahindra & Mahindra Ltd. under Section 112 (a) of the Customs
Act, 1962. We set aside the penalty imposed on Shri R.U. Prabhu, Dy General
