Bombay High Court
Commissioner Of Income-Tax vs Shree Nirmal Commercial Ltd. (And ... on 27
April, 1994
Equivalent citations: 1995 213 ITR 361 Bom
Author: I Shah
Bench: I Shah, S Jhunjhunwala, V Mohta
JUDGMENT I.G. Shah, J.
1\. Income-tax Reference No. 1 of 1982 has been made by the Income-tax
Appellate Tribunal under section 256(1) of the Income-tax Act, 1961, both at
the instance of the Revenue and the assessee. It pertains to the assessment
years 1971-72 and 1972-73.
2\. The following three questions have been referred at the instance of the
Revenue :
"(1) Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case and in law,
the Tribunal was justified in holding that the compensation received from the
shareholders was to be taxed as income from business and not as income from
property and also in holding that the Income-tax Officer was not entitled to
enhance the compensation to the extent of the compensation received by the
shareholders in their own right ?
(2) Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case and in law, the
the applicant that losses of past years should be carried forward and adjusted
against the income of the applicant for the assessment years 1971-72 and
1972-73 has been rightly rejected by the Tribunal ?
Answered in the negative and against the Revenue.
16\. The following questions in Income-tax Reference No. 138 of 1982 are
answered as under :
(1) Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Tribunal
was right in law in holding that the amounts of Rs. 2,87,250, Rs. 13,000 and
Rs. 2,87,250 received by the assessee during the assessment years 1973-74,
1974-75 and 1975-76, respectively, as non-refundable deposits were assessable
as income of the assessee ?
Answered in the affirmative in favour of the Revenue.
(2) Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Tribunal
was right in law in holding that the claim of the assessee to deduct a sum of
Rs. 4,47,399, for the assessment year 1973-74, Rs. 4,16,775 for the assessment
year 1974-75 and Rs. 3,24,694 for the assessment year 1975-76, being payment
(2) Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case and in law, the
Tribunal was justified in cancelling the order passed under section 104 of the
Income-tax Act, 1961, thereby deleting the additional demand of Rs. 22,242 for
the assessment year 1970-71 ?
(3) Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case and in law, the
Tribunal was justified in holding that the Income-tax Officer was not entitled
to enhance the compensation to the extent of compensation received by the
shareholders in their own right ?"
The following three questions have been referred at the instance of the
assessee :
"(4) Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the sum of
Rs. 2,96,285 and Rs. 77,100 received by the applicant during the relevant
assessment years 1971-72 and 1972-73, respectively, as 'non-refundable'
deposits were income of the applicant ?
(5) Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the claim of
the applicant that the amount of Rs. 4,77,395 and Rs. 4,79,176 for the
assessment years 1971-72 and 1972-73, respectively, are allowable as deduction
either under section 28 or under section 37 of the Act has been rightly
rejected by the Tribunal ?
"(1) Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Tribunal
was right in law in holding that the amounts of Rs. 2,87,250, Rs. 13,000 and
Rs. 2,87,250 received by the assessee during the assessment years 1973-74,
1974-75 and 1975-76, respectively; as non-refundable deposits were assessable
as income of the assessee ?
(2) Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Tribunal
was right in law in holding that the claim of the assessee to deduct a sum of
Rs. 4,47,399 for the assessment year 1973-74, Rs. 4,16,775 for the assessment
year 1974-75 and Rs. 3,24,694 for the assessment year 1975-76; being payment
of interest on deposits either under section 28 and/or under section 37 of the
Act was not allowable ?"
3\. The said references came up before the Division Bench consisting of
learned brothers Dr. B. P. Saraf and D. R. Dhanuka JJ., of this court. The
Division Bench on consideration of the references in the background of the
facts and circumstances of the case and various authorities placed by counsel
for both the sides, felt that for a proper determination of the various legal
issues arising in the case, it was necessary to scrutinise some of the legal
propositions already laid down by some of the Division Benches of this court,
more particularly in the cases referred to in CIT v. Mahendra J. Shah [1979]
118 ITR 902 (Bom), CIT v. Shah Construction Co. Ltd. [1983] 142 ITR 696 and
the assessee's own case reported in Shree Nirmal Commercial Ltd. v. CIT [1992]
193 ITR 694 (Bom); and to take a fresh decision in case some of these
decisions were felt to be in conflict with others, it was necessary to refer
the matter to a larger Bench. They were also of the opinion that the decision
in the case of the assessee itself needs reconsideration in the light of the
Supreme Court decision, earlier decision of this court and the provisions of
the Income-tax Act, Transfer of Property Act, Registration Act, etc. The
Division Bench, therefore, without expressing any opinion on the merits of the
rival contentions of the parties directed that the Hon'ble Chief Justice be
moved for forming a Full Bench for the decision of these two references.
Accordingly, two references are placed before us after obtaining necessary
orders from the Hon'ble Chief Justice.
4\. The brief facts giving rise to these two references are as under :
By an agreement of lease dated November 28, 1964, the Government of
Maharashtra agreed to grant a long-term lease in respect of certain plots of
land situate at the Backbay Reclamation, Nariman Point, Bombay, in favour of
the assessee. The assessee has constructed a multi-storeyed building on the
said plots of land known as "Nirmal". The assessee is the owner of the said
building and lessee of the said plots. The assessee collected large amounts
from its shareholders during the course of years under the caption "non-
refundable deposits". The assessee allotted floor space in the said building
to its shareholders and conferred rights on the shareholders allottees to
transfer their occupancy rights to the third parties. The shareholders-
allottees are liable to pay periodical amounts to the assessee labelled as
"compensation" as fixed by the assessee, mainly having regard to the object of
covering maintenance charges and liabilities for municipal taxes, etc.,
payable for the property. The shareholders-allottees charge higher
"compensation" to the third party occupants. The third party occupants are
inducted in the premises forming part of the building. Income-tax References
Nos. 108 of 1977 and 216 of 1977 - Shree Nirmal Commercial Ltd. v. CIT [1992]
193 ITR 694 (concerning the assessee) for the assessment years 1967-68,
1968-69 and 1969-70 were decided by this court by its judgment and order dated
April 10-25, 1991. By the said judgment and order, this court, inter alia,
held -
"(1) Notwithstanding the use of the nomenclature of 'deposit', the so-called
non-refundable deposits were in essence the consideration paid by the
shareholder for sale of occupancy rights. The amounts of the so-called
deposits were liable to be treated as 'revenue receipts' in the hands of the
assessee. The so-called deposits were taxable as 'business income of the
assessee' after deducting therefrom the cost of construction.
(2) The assessee continued to retain the residuary ownership rights in the
building although the 'occupancy rights' were sold out by the assessee to its
shareholders.
(3) Section 22 of the Income-tax Act was inapplicable as the property was
inherently incapable of being let out by the assessee even though the assessee
had retained ownership rights in the building with itself while making
allotments of floor space in the building to the shareholders concerned.
(4) 'Compensation' received by the assessee from shareholders was liable to be
taxed as business income and not as income from house property under section
22 of the Act.
(5) For determination of the income of the assessee-company, the Income-tax
Officer cannot enhance the compensation to the extent of the compensation
received by the shareholders from other parties for occupation of the premises
allotted to them by the assessee."
5\. The contention of the assessee is that the controversy concerning
questions Nos. 1, 4 and 6 pertaining to the assessment years 1971-72 and
1972-73 and question No. 1 pertaining to the assessment years 1973-74, 1974-75
and 1975-76 stands concluded by the above referred judgment of this court
since reported in Shree Nirmal Commercial Ltd. v. CIT [1992] 193 ITR 694. The
assessee contends that the said judgment was delivered in the assessee's own
case and, therefore, is binding and the ratio of the said decision must be
followed in this reference. The assessee therefore in short contends that the
only question which needs to be considered in the present references is :
"whether the assessee is entitled to deduction of interest payable on the
amounts of 'non-refundable deposits' despite the so-called deposits themselves
having been held by this court as trading receipt/revenue receipts in the
hands of the assessee".
6\. The Division Bench of this court which has referred the matter to the Full
Bench has expressed that there appears to be some inconsistency in the views
expressed by this court earlier in the earlier decisions in CIT v. Union Land
and Building Society Pvt. Ltd. [1972] 83 ITR 794 and CIT v. Zorostrain
Building Society Ltd. [1976] 102 ITR 499 on one side and Shree Nirmal
Commercial Ltd. v. CIT [1992] 193 ITR 694. In the decisions in CIT v. Union
Land and Building Society Pvt. Ltd. [1972] 83 ITR 794 (Bom) and CIT v.
Zorostrain Building Society Ltd. [1976] 102 ITR 499 (Bom), it was held that
the liability of an owner to pay any tax under section 22 of the Income-tax
Act, 1961, does not depend either on the power of the owner to earn the income
therefrom or on the power or the capacity of the person to let out or his own
power to receive rent or income from bona fide annual value. Even the decision
of the Supreme Court in Nawab Sir Mir Osman Ali Khan v. CWT [1986] 162 ITR 888
which is relied upon lays down that the assessee-company is construed to be
the owner of the property arid the annual letting value of the said property
computed in the manner laid down in section 23 of the said Act is assessable
in the hand of the owner under the head "Income from house property". In view
of this, first it would be proper to consider whether any such conduct really
exists or not. On behalf of the Revenue also, the contention is raised that
there is conflict as indicated by the learned Division Bench and the view
taken by the Division Bench in the decision in Shree Nirmal Commercial Ltd. v.
CIT [1992] 193 ITR 694 (Bom) being in conflict with the earlier decisions at
the Division Bench of this court is not correct. It would be proper to state
here only that the decision in Shree Nirmal Commercial Ltd. v. CIT [1992] 193
ITR 694 (Bom) is in fact accepted by the Revenue as they have not appealed
against the said decision.
7\. To wriggle out of this situation, an attempt is made to contend on behalf
of the Revenue that there is no principle of res judicata applicable in the
matter of assessment under the Income-tax Act. There is no doubt that the said
contention is legally sound. However, at the same time, Shri Dastur, learned
counsel appearing for the assessee, has invited our attention to a decision of
our court in H. A. Shah and Co. v. CIT [19S6] 3D ITR 618, wherein Chagla C.J.
held that the effect of revising an earlier decision should not lead to
injustice and the court must always be anxious to avoid injustice being done
to the assessee and, therefore, the present case is not a fit case for which
the issue referred by the Division Bench to the Full Bench should be gone
into. It is further rightly contended by Shri Dastur that the Department
having accepted the decision, there is no occasion to take a different view.
We do feel that there is considerable force in the argument of Shri Dastur.
Having urged earlier that the income in the, earlier assessment years was
income from business or trade, it would not be proper to allow the Department
to completely turn around and now contend that the income of the assessee is
taxable under the head "House property" so as to disallow the deductions
claimed by the assessee in respect of interest paid on the non-refundable
deposits of the shareholders either under section 28 or section 37 of the
Income-tax Act, 1961. The income of the assessee must be treated as income
from trade or business.
8\. The second limb of the argument of Shri Jetley, learned counsel appearing
for the Department, is based on the decisions in CIT v. Union Land and
Building Society Pvt. Ltd. [1972] 83 ITR 794 (Bom) and CIT v. Zorostrain
Building Society Ltd. [1976] 102 ITR 499 (Bom). Relying on these two
decisions, he urged that it is already conclusively held that the non-
refundable deposits are sale proceeds and income of the assessee. The third
limb of the argument of Shri Jetley is that the property of "Nirmal" building
is of the ownership of the assessee as no conveyance is executed and,
therefore, the assessee is still the owner and, therefore, the assessee is
required to be held liable to pay tax under the head "House property". Not
only that it is further urged that as the assessee under the head of the
property is liable to pay tax on the annual letting value, in the present
case, if the shareholders have let out the premises at the higher rate, the
annual letting value being the basis for assessing the income from the house
property, the owner of the property is liable to pay tax on that annual
letting value. Shri Dastur, on the other hand, has urged that in fact the
Department cannot be allowed now to contend that the assessee is liable to be
assessed on the basis of income under the head of house property. The assessee
not being the owner of the property, the assessee is not liable to be assessed
under section 22 of the Income-tax Act, 1961, under the head "House property".
9\. Relying on the decisions in CIT v. Mahendra J. Shah [1979] 118 ITR 902
(Bom); CIT v. Shah Construction Co. Ltd. [1983] 142 ITR 696 (Bom); CIT v. R.
B. Jodhamal Kuthiala [1968] 69 ITR 598 (Delhi) [FB]; R. B. Jodha Mal Kuthiala
v. CIT ; Sir Currimbhoy Ebrahim Baronetcy Trust v. CIT [1963] 48 ITR 507 (Bom)
and D. M. Vakil v. CIT [1946] 14 ITR 298 (Bom), Shri Dastur contended that the
decisions relied upon by Shri Jetley have no application to the present case
on the facts. The cases relied upon by Shri Jetley were in respect of
classical property of house and land, while in the present case the property
is not such classical property. Shri Dastur for the assessee pointed out that
in CIT v. Shah Construction Co. Ltd. [1983] 142 ITR 696 (Bom), a building was
constructed by a limited company called Khetan Estate Ltd. The assessee-
company, viz., Shah Construction Co. Ltd., as shareholder had been allotted a
flat. Shareholders were required to pay monthly rent to the company, viz.,
Khetan Estate Ltd., for the flats allotted to them. The High Court held that
in view of the decision in CIT v. Mahendra J. Shah [1979] 118 ITR 902 (Bom)
the assessee, viz., Shah Construction Co., was the real owner of the flat in
question. In CIT v. Mahendra J. Shah [1979] 118 ITR 902 (Bom), the question
which was referred directly was as to whether the assessee, Mr. Mahendra J.
Shah, who was allotted a flat as a shareholder of the same company Khetan
Estate Ltd., was assessable to tax in respect of the said property as income
from house property under section 9 of the Indian Income-tax Act, 1922
(corresponding to section 22 of the Income-tax Act, 1961). The High Court
answered the question in the affirmative. It was submitted that the facts in
the two decisions cited above and the present case before us turn on their own
facts and the peculiar position emerging from the right of occupancy arising
from ownership of shares in a company and the principles to be applied in such
a case were wholly different from the principles to be applied in the case of
agreement to sell classical immovable property in the form of land and
structure which was considered by our court in CIT v. Union Land and Building
Society Ltd. Pvt. Ltd. [1972] 83 ITR 794 and CIT v. Zorostrian Building
Society Ltd. [1976] 102 ITR 499. Shri Dastur strenuously pointed out that in
these two earlier decisions the agreement for sale was entered into but
conveyance which was necessary to be executed for vesting title in the
transferee had not been executed. He further pointed out that in CIT v.
Mahendra J. Shah [1979] 118 ITR 902 (Bom) and CIT v. Shah Construction Co.
Ltd. [1983] 142 ITR 696 (Bom) and in the present case, there is nothing which
has remained to be executed, as a conveyance is not at all contemplated and by
virtue of ownership of shares being transferred, full ownership is vested in
the shareholder for occupying and enjoying the unit which goes with the
holding of the shares. Shri Dastur, therefore, pointed out that there is no
conflict to be resolved in the earlier two decisions and the decision in Shree
Nirmal Commercial Ltd. v. CIT [1992] 193 ITR 694 (Bom). In the decision
reported in CIT v. Mahendra J. Shah [1979] 118 ITR 902 (Bom), the court held
that where a building was constructed with the monies of the flat owners who
were in actual possession of the respective flats in the building, it was the
flat owners who should be regarded as owners of the area occupied by them and
the company to whom the land initially belonged could not claim ownership
rights. Without prejudice to the above contentions, Shri Dastur also submitted
that the earlier decisions of the High Court in CIT v. Union Land and Building
Society Pvt. Ltd. [1972] 83 ITR 794 (Bom) and CIT v. Zorostrian Building
Society Ltd. [1976] 102 ITR 499 (Bom) required reconsideration in the light of
the decision of the Supreme Court in R. B. Jodha Mal Kuthiala v. CIT [1971] 82
ITR 570. The Supreme Court in the said decision pointed out that for the
purposes of section 9 of the Indian Income-tax Act, 1922, the owner of a
property is a person who can exercise the rights of the owner in his own
right. The Supreme Court confirmed the decision of the Full Bench of the Delhi
High Court in CIT v. R. B. Jodhamal Kuthiala [1968] 69 ITR 598. In the
abovesaid decision, the Supreme Court noted particularly at page 579 the
consequences of taking a contrary view. In the present case also, according to
Shri Dastur, if a contrary view is taken, it would mean that in a case where a
person purchases a share in a company and where the shares entitle him to
occupy a certain unit, he would not be regarded as the owner and accordingly
the benefit conferred by section 54 of the Income-tax Act, 1961; where a
residential house is sold and another residential house is purchased, may not
be held to be available to him. He conceded that the consequences of
interpretation are not determinative of the issue normally, but according to
him they would be useful to fix the meaning of the statutory language where it
is of some doubt. To support this proposition, Shri Dastur relied upon a
decision in Add. CIT v. Surat Art Silk Cloth Manufacturers' Association . He
also submitted that it is for this very reason that the court observed in R.
B. Jodha Mal Kuthiala v. CIT : "It is therefore, that equitable considerations
are irrelevant in interpreting the tax laws. But those laws, like all other
laws, have to be interpreted reasonably and in consonance with justice. "Shri
Dastur also submitted that it is necessary to note that in CIT v. Union Land
and Building Society Pvt. Ltd. [1972] 83 ITR 794 (Bom), the High Court has
noticed that the decision of the Full Bench of the Delhi High Court was
contrary to the earlier decisions of the High Court of Bombay in Sir
Currimbhoy Ebrahim Baronetcy Trust v. CIT [1963] 48 ITR 507 and D. M. Vakil v.
CIT [1946] 14 ITR 298. He, therefore, pointed out that the decision in CIT v.
Union Land and Building Society Pvt. Ltd. [1972] 83 ITR 794 (Bom) was based on
the earlier decisions of this court in Sir Currimbhoy Ebrahim Baronetcy Trust
v. CIT [1963] 48 ITR 507 and D. M. Vakil v. CIT [1946] 14 ITR 298. Shri
Dastur, therefore, contended that it is clear from the decision in R. B.
Jodha. Mal Kuthiala v. CIT and the decision of the Delhi High Court in CIT v.
Jodhamal Kuthiala (R.B.) [1968] 69 ITR 598 [FB], that the decision in CIT v.
Union Land and Building Society Pvt. Ltd. [1972] 83 ITR 794 (Bom) is no longer
good law. He also pointed out that in CIT v. Zorostrian Building Society Ltd.
[1976] 102 ITR 499 (Bom), this apparent conflict was pointed out to the High
Court, but the High Court took the view that there was no contradiction and
unless a conveyance was executed the original owner continues to be the owner
of the house property. Shri Dastur then was at pains to point out that in view
of the decisions relied upon by him, the said view is erroneous and in the
present case this court should, if necessary, correct the said earlier
decisions. According to Shri Dastur, the said decisions overlook the fact that
a person would be assessable on income from house property even when he does
not enjoy any income from the property and even though someone else enjoys
that income and has been assessed thereon. He also contended that it would
lead to double assessment which is repugnant to the basic principles of the
law of taxation. Shri Dastur tried to contend by giving an example that if 'A'
has agreed to sell the land and building to 'B' and 'B' is in possession and
lets out the same to another, 'B' would be chargeable to tax in respect of the
income as he earns the same, but according to the Department 'A' would be also
chargeable as the alleged owner of the property if the contention of the
Department is acceptable. Shri Dastur also relied upon the decision in
Saiffuddin v. CIT [1985] 156 ITR 127 of the Rajasthan High Court wherein it is
held that the person who met the cost of construction was to be recorded as
the owner at the immovable property and the Rajasthan High Court had followed
the decision of this court in Fazalbhoy Investments' case [1977] 109 ITR 802
and also the decision of the Punjab and Haryana High Court in Kala Rani v. CIT
[1981] 130 ITR 321. He pointed out that the said courts have applied the
principles laid down in Kuthiala's case , that the owner must be the person
who can exercise the rights of the owner. He also pointed out that a similar
view has been taken by the Calcutta High Court in Madgul Udyog v. CIT [1990]
184 ITR 484. In that case, he pointed out, that a builder had built a building
and sold the individual flats to buyers and the conveyance had not been
executed. But it was held that individual purchasers of the flats were to be
regarded as the owners of the flats holding that the word "owner" appearing in
section 22 of the Income-tax Act, 1961, must be construed in the setting of
socio-economic development in the concept of ownership and it was also pointed
out that there cannot be and should not be a double assessment of the same
income, once in the hands of the assessee-firm and again in the hands of the
buyers. Shri Dastur also very strenuously pointed out that at page 502 of the
said decision, after referring to the decision in Kuthiala's case , it is
stated that the decision in CIT v. Ganga. Properties Ltd. , should be read and
understood in the light of the subsequent decision in Kuthiala's case and that
Ganga Properties Ltd.'s case did not deal with all aspects of ownership and
did not consider the recent development of the concept of multi-storeyed
buildings and issues incidental thereto and he also further pointed out that
in both the decisions, i.e., CIT v. Zorostrain Building Society Ltd. [1976]
102 ITR 499 (Bom), and CIT v. Union Land and Building Society Pvt. Ltd. [1972]
83 ITR 794 (Bom), this court had placed great reliance on the decision of the
Calcutta High Court in Ganga Properties Ltd.'s case [1970] 77 ITR 637 while
the Calcutta High Court itself in Madgul Udyog v. CIT [1990] 184 ITR 484
stated that the decision in Ganga Properties Ltd.'s , would have to be read in
the context of the decision in Kuthiala's case , and should not be regarded as
laying down the final law. Similarly, he also further pointed out that the
Calcutta High Court again in Chitpore Golabari Co. Pvt. Ltd. v. CIT [1971] 82
ITR 753, held that the decision in Ganga Properties Ltd.'s case , has not
considered all aspects of ownership.
10\. The decisions relied upon by Shri Dastur support his contention that, the
property of the assessee in the present case is of a different nature than
that of classical property where a conveyance is necessary. Real owner ship in
fact is to be taken as the basis according to the decisions relied upon by
Shri Dastur and in the present ease the assessee cannot be considered as the
real owner of the property. At the highest, the assessee has only some
residuary interest in the property. Therefore, the assessee in the present
case cannot. be assessed under the head "Income from house property". The
income of the assessee has to be assessed as trading or business income.
11\. The next question that arises is whether the assessee in view of the fact
that his income is to be assessed as income from trade or business is entitled
to deduction of interest payable by him on non-refundable deposits under
section 28 or section 37 of the Income-tax Act, 1961. On behalf of the
Department, the said claim is strenuously resisted on the ground that under
section 28 of the Income-tax Act deduction of interest is allowed on borrowed
capital only : In view of the fact that the non-refundable deposits are
already held to be the income of the assessee, they are the property of the
assessee and hence interest cannot be allowed to be deducted under section 28
of the Income-tax Act. Shri Dastur, however, tried to contend that even if the
non-refundable deposits are held by the Department as revenue receipts or
trading receipts for the purposes of tax, their basic nature of being deposits
cannot be lost or forgotten, and they continue to be non-refundable deposits
on which under contractual obligation the assessee has to pay interest, at 6
per cent. as per terms of the contract and hence the same must be allowed as
deduction permissible under section 28 of the Income-tax Act. Alternatively,
according to Shri Dastur, the interest payable being a payment for business or
trade in any case would be required to be allowed as deductible under section
37 of the Income-tax Act. The contention of Shri Dastur needs to be accepted.
Shri Dastur has rightly pointed out that the Department has never disputed the
terms of the contract and, therefore, the argument of Shri Jetley that by this
arrangement the assessee is trying to siphon off the taxable income will have
to be negatived. Shri Dastur contended that there is not even a whisper at any
point of time from the side of the Department that the agreement for payment
of interest was fraudulent. He was at pains to point out that the Department
had not even contended so at any point of time and this, according to him, is
apparent from the observations made by the Tribunal also. He relied upon the
observations made by the Tribunal at page 116 of the paper book wherein it is
stated as under :
"It is of course true that nobody has doubted the genuineness of the agreement
or clause 3 under which the interest is said to have been paid on the said
initial deposits."
12\. Shri Dastur also pointed out that even the High Court at page 707 in the
decision reported in Shri Nirmal Commercial Ltd. v. CIT [1992] 193 ITR 694
(Bom) has observed :
"The Department had not produced any material to show that the agreements
between the assessee and its members were collusive arrangements."
13\. Shri Dastur, therefore, is right in inviting us to hold that the payment
of interest being accepted as genuine, the same would be required to be
allowed as deductible at least under section 37 if not under section 28 of the
Income-tax Act. Shri Jetley in the last tried to contend that there was no
occasion for payment of interest at all as the amounts are "non-refundable
deposits" and there was no necessity to agree to pay any interest at all. Shri
Dastur tried to meet the said argument by contending that such an argument is
untenable as it is for the assessee to decide as to what expenditure should be
incurred for the betterment of the business of the assessee, and nobody can
challenge the assessee's decision unless it is claimed to be a fraudulent
claim which obviously is not the case of the Department in view of the
material already on record. To substantiate this contention, Shri Dastur has
relied upon a number of decisions. He has first pointed out that this court in
the assessee's own case reported in Shree Nirmal Commercial Ltd. v. CIT [1992]
193 ITR 694, at page 700, has observed that the arrangement arrived at by the
assessee in the present case was devised for raising finance as the assessee-
company was faced with the stupendous task of raising funds of about Rs. 80
lakhs which was the estimated cost of construction of a commercial building
and that the arrangement between the assessee-company and its shareholder was
a genuine and bon fide arrangement for payment of a sum of money designated as
interest in return for the company obtaining finance for construction of the
building. Shri Dastur also pointed out that the Income-tax Department and the
Tribunal did not allow the assessee's claim for deduction of the sum of Rs.
4.77 lakhs and Rs. 4.79 lakhs for the two years on the ground that the
deposits were trading receipts and accordingly the interest would not be
payable on what constituted the assessee's trading receipt or income. Shri
Dastur contended that the fact that the said receipts were considered as
trading receipts did not alter the situation at all. They were part of the
arrangement for obtaining funds for carrying its activities under which the
assessee-company received the deposits and also collected monthly sums from
the occupants. The sums were paid under the contractual liability. The payment
was in no way excessive as it was only at the rate of 6 per cent. of the
amount deposited, and, as pointed out earlier, the genuineness and bona fides
of the arrangement are not under dispute at all and the Tribunal has found
that there is no device or scheme in the said arrangement and though the
amounts were deposits they partook of the character of trading receipts and
have been taken into account in determining the business profit or loss of the
assessee-company and what has been held is that the nature of the amount paid
by way of deposit was a trading receipt and the High Court had set out how the
amount was to be dealt with in the books of the assessee-company, i.e., it was
to remain to the credit of the unitholder. This court in the assessee's case
has observed that the Tribunal was right in holding that the said deposits
were in essence the consideration paid by the shareholders for allotment of
the floor space and that the Tribunal was right in its view that this was in
the nature of sale proceeds. Shri Dastur, however, contended that this does
not mean that the said deposits completely lose their character as deposits.
Relying upon the decisions reported in Punjab Distilling Industries Ltd. v.
CIT and CIT v. Punjab Distilling Industries Ltd. , wherein the Supreme Court
while determining the character of empty bottles return security deposit
account held that the receipts reflected under that account partook of the
character of trading receipts. But that, however, did not mean that as between
the parties the said amount would cease to be a deposit. The Supreme Court
also observed in the said case that the amount described as security deposits
were also returned as and when the bottles were returned and, therefore,
though they were treated as trading receipts in the hands of the
manufacturers, they did not cease to be deposits as between the parties to the
agreement. Shri Dastur contended that in the present case also the interest at
the rate of 6 per cent. has in fact been paid as per the terms of the
agreement between the assessee and the shareholders on the said non-refundable
deposits and, therefore, even if the said deposits were considered as taxable
income on account of trade or business the interest paid thereon treating them
as deposits, on which interest as per the terms of the contract was payable,
cannot be disallowed as claimed by the Department. Reliance was also placed on
the decision reported in CIT v. Tata Sons Ltd. [1939] 7 ITR 195 (Bom), wherein
n annual amount payable to a lender of money which was needed by the assessee
was held to be deductible even if it was payable after the entire loan had
been repaid. Shri Dastur relied upon the observation made in Tata Sons Ltd. v.
CIT [1950] 18 ITR 460, 467 (Bom), wherein it has been observed that "one has
to consider the deductibility of the amount claimed by the assessee-company by
taking into account commercial expediency and the principles of ordinary
commercial trading and whether the expenditure was a part of the process of
profit making". He also relied upon the observations made in Eastern
Investments Ltd. v. CIT , wherein it is observed that in order to claim a
deduction it is enough if it is shown that the money was expended not of
necessity but voluntarily and on the ground of commercial expediency and in
order to facilitate the carrying on of the business. Reliance was also placed
on the observations made in Tata Sons Ltd. v. CIT [1950] 18 ITR 460, 468
(Bom), wherein it was observed "Even a voluntary payment, if for commercial
expediency, would still be an expenditure for the purpose of business." Shri
Dastur has also relied upon the observations made in the case of Eastern
Investments Ltd. , cited above to point out that it was observed in the said
decision "one is not concerned with the legality-or propriety of a transaction
or whether the result could have been achieved in another way. What one is
concerned with is whether the transaction was done in the ordinary course of
business, however mistaken the directors and shareholders may have been", and
also the further observations "It is irrelevant that a transaction was forced
on the company by its principal shareholders." Shri Dastur also relied upon
the observations made in F. E. Dinshaw Ltd. v. CIT [1959] 36 ITR 114, 121
(Bom), wherein it has been held that in the absence of fraud, the questions
whether the transaction has the effect of diminishing an assessee's taxable
income and whether it was necessary for the assessee to enter into the
transaction are irrelevant. Shri Dastur also relied upon the decision in CIT
v. Nainital. Bank Ltd. Ltd. , wherein it is held that "the sole question for
determination is whether in incurring the expenditure the assessee-company
acted in the interests of and for the purpose of its business. Even if it is
held-which is not at all admitted-that the assessee-company was under no legal
liability to make the payment, still if it made the payment for the purpose of
its business the same would have been deductible". In Sasoon J. David and Co.
Pvt. Ltd. v. CIT , it has been held that "Payment for the purposes of business
is deductible whatever be the motive behind the payment, and it is for the
assessee to decide whether the expenditure should be incurred in the course of
its business. Such expenditure may be incurred voluntarily and without any
necessity, and if it is incurred for promoting the business and to earn
profit, the same can be claimed as deduction". The above said decisions no
doubt clearly support the contention of Shri Dastur and view of the same the
proposition advanced by Shri Dastur in this respect has got to be accepted.
We, therefore, hold that the payment of interest on non-refundable deposits
will have to be allowed as deductible expenditure under section 37 if not
under section 28 of the Income-tax Act, 1961. In the view which we have taken
on the basis of the above discussion, it must be held that the Income-tax
Officer was not entitled to enhance the compensation to the extent of the
compensation received by the share-holders in their own right.
14\. The next question arises for consideration as to whether the claim of the
assessee that losses of the past years should be carried forward and adjusted
against the income of the assessee for the assessment years 1971-72 and
1972-73 has been rightly rejected by the Tribunal. The said claim of the
assessee was rejected merely because the matter was finally not decided. In
the view which we have taken, the losses would be required to be carried
forward and adjusted against the income of the assessee for the assessment
years 1971-72 and 1972-73.
15\. In the result, the questions in Income-tax Reference No. 1 of 1982 are
answered as under :
(1) Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case and in law, the
Tribunal was justified in holding that the compensation received from the
shareholders was to be taxed as income from business and not as income from
property and also in holding that the Income-tax Officer was not entitled to
enhance the compensation to the extent of the compensation received by the
shareholders in their own right ?
Answered in the affirmative in favour of the assessee.
(2) Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case and in law, the
Tribunal was justified in cancelling the order passed under section 104 of the
Income-tax Act, 1961, thereby deleting the additional demand of Rs. 22,242 for
the assessment year 1970-71 ?
Answered in the affirmative in favour of the assessee.
(3) Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case and in law, the
Tribunal was justified in holding that the Income-tax Officer was not entitled
to enhance the compensation to the extent of compensation received by the
shareholders in their own right ?
Answered in the affirmative in favour of the assessee.
(4) Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the sum of Rs.
2,96,285 and Rs. 77,100 received by the applicant during the relevant
assessment years 1971-72 and 1972-73, respectively, as 'non-refundable'
deposits were income of the applicant ?
Answered in the affirmative, as income from business and trade.
(6) Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the claim of
the applicant that losses of past years should be carried forward and adjusted
against the income of the applicant for the assessment years 1971-72 and
1972-73 has been rightly rejected by the Tribunal ?
Answered in the negative and against the Revenue.
16\. The following questions in Income-tax Reference No. 138 of 1982 are
answered as under :
(1) Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Tribunal
was right in law in holding that the amounts of Rs. 2,87,250, Rs. 13,000 and
Rs. 2,87,250 received by the assessee during the assessment years 1973-74,
1974-75 and 1975-76, respectively, as non-refundable deposits were assessable
as income of the assessee ?
Answered in the affirmative in favour of the Revenue.
(2) Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Tribunal
was right in law in holding that the claim of the assessee to deduct a sum of
Rs. 4,47,399, for the assessment year 1973-74, Rs. 4,16,775 for the assessment
year 1974-75 and Rs. 3,24,694 for the assessment year 1975-76, being payment
of interest on deposits either under section 28 or under section 37 of the Act
was not allowable ?
Answered in the negative and against the Revenue.
17\. No order as to costs.
the applicant that losses of past years should be carried forward and adjusted
against the income of the applicant for the assessment years 1971-72 and
1972-73 has been rightly rejected by the Tribunal ?
Answered in the negative and against the Revenue.
16\. The following questions in Income-tax Reference No. 138 of 1982 are
answered as under :
(1) Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Tribunal
was right in law in holding that the amounts of Rs. 2,87,250, Rs. 13,000 and
Rs. 2,87,250 received by the assessee during the assessment years 1973-74,
1974-75 and 1975-76, respectively, as non-refundable deposits were assessable
as income of the assessee ?
Answered in the affirmative in favour of the Revenue.
(2) Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Tribunal
was right in law in holding that the claim of the assessee to deduct a sum of
Rs. 4,47,399, for the assessment year 1973-74, Rs. 4,16,775 for the assessment
year 1974-75 and Rs. 3,24,694 for the assessment year 1975-76, being payment
(2) Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case and in law, the
Tribunal was justified in cancelling the order passed under section 104 of the
Income-tax Act, 1961, thereby deleting the additional demand of Rs. 22,242 for
the assessment year 1970-71 ?
(3) Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case and in law, the
Tribunal was justified in holding that the Income-tax Officer was not entitled
to enhance the compensation to the extent of compensation received by the
shareholders in their own right ?"
The following three questions have been referred at the instance of the
assessee :
"(4) Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the sum of
Rs. 2,96,285 and Rs. 77,100 received by the applicant during the relevant
assessment years 1971-72 and 1972-73, respectively, as 'non-refundable'
deposits were income of the applicant ?
(5) Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the claim of
the applicant that the amount of Rs. 4,77,395 and Rs. 4,79,176 for the
assessment years 1971-72 and 1972-73, respectively, are allowable as deduction
either under section 28 or under section 37 of the Act has been rightly
rejected by the Tribunal ?
"(1) Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Tribunal
the applicant that losses of past years should be carried forward and adjusted
against the income of the applicant for the assessment years 1971-72 and
1972-73 has been rightly rejected by the Tribunal ?
Answered in the negative and against the Revenue.
16\. The following questions in Income-tax Reference No. 138 of 1982 are
answered as under :
(1) Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Tribunal
was right in law in holding that the amounts of Rs. 2,87,250, Rs. 13,000 and
Rs. 2,87,250 received by the assessee during the assessment years 1973-74,
1974-75 and 1975-76, respectively, as non-refundable deposits were assessable
as income of the assessee ?
Answered in the affirmative in favour of the Revenue.
(2) Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Tribunal
was right in law in holding that the claim of the assessee to deduct a sum of
Rs. 4,47,399, for the assessment year 1973-74, Rs. 4,16,775 for the assessment
year 1974-75 and Rs. 3,24,694 for the assessment year 1975-76, being payment
(2) Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case and in law, the
Tribunal was justified in cancelling the order passed under section 104 of the
Income-tax Act, 1961, thereby deleting the additional demand of Rs. 22,242 for
the assessment year 1970-71 ?
(3) Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case and in law, the
Tribunal was justified in holding that the Income-tax Officer was not entitled
to enhance the compensation to the extent of compensation received by the
shareholders in their own right ?"
The following three questions have been referred at the instance of the
assessee :
"(4) Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the sum of
Rs. 2,96,285 and Rs. 77,100 received by the applicant during the relevant
assessment years 1971-72 and 1972-73, respectively, as 'non-refundable'
deposits were income of the applicant ?
(5) Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the claim of
the applicant that the amount of Rs. 4,77,395 and Rs. 4,79,176 for the
assessment years 1971-72 and 1972-73, respectively, are allowable as deduction
either under section 28 or under section 37 of the Act has been rightly
rejected by the Tribunal ?
"(1) Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Tribunal
the applicant that losses of past years should be carried forward and adjusted
against the income of the applicant for the assessment years 1971-72 and
1972-73 has been rightly rejected by the Tribunal ?
Answered in the negative and against the Revenue.
16\. The following questions in Income-tax Reference No. 138 of 1982 are
answered as under :
(1) Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Tribunal
was right in law in holding that the amounts of Rs. 2,87,250, Rs. 13,000 and
Rs. 2,87,250 received by the assessee during the assessment years 1973-74,
1974-75 and 1975-76, respectively, as non-refundable deposits were assessable
as income of the assessee ?
Answered in the affirmative in favour of the Revenue.
(2) Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Tribunal
was right in law in holding that the claim of the assessee to deduct a sum of
Rs. 4,47,399, for the assessment year 1973-74, Rs. 4,16,775 for the assessment
year 1974-75 and Rs. 3,24,694 for the assessment year 1975-76, being payment
(2) Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case and in law, the
Tribunal was justified in cancelling the order passed under section 104 of the
Income-tax Act, 1961, thereby deleting the additional demand of Rs. 22,242 for
the assessment year 1970-71 ?
(3) Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case and in law, the
Tribunal was justified in holding that the Income-tax Officer was not entitled
to enhance the compensation to the extent of compensation received by the
shareholders in their own right ?"
The following three questions have been referred at the instance of the
assessee :
"(4) Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the sum of
Rs. 2,96,285 and Rs. 77,100 received by the applicant during the relevant
assessment years 1971-72 and 1972-73, respectively, as 'non-refundable'
deposits were income of the applicant ?
(5) Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the claim of
the applicant that the amount of Rs. 4,77,395 and Rs. 4,79,176 for the
assessment years 1971-72 and 1972-73, respectively, are allowable as deduction
either under section 28 or under section 37 of the Act has been rightly
rejected by the Tribunal ?
"(1) Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Tribunal
was right in law in holding that the amounts of Rs. 2,87,250, Rs. 13,000 and
Rs. 2,87,250 received by the assessee during the assessment years 1973-74,
1974-75 and 1975-76, respectively; as non-refundable deposits were assessable
as income of the assessee ?
(2) Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Tribunal
was right in law in holding that the claim of the assessee to deduct a sum of
Rs. 4,47,399 for the assessment year 1973-74, Rs. 4,16,775 for the assessment
year 1974-75 and Rs. 3,24,694 for the assessment year 1975-76; being payment
of interest on deposits either under section 28 and/or under section 37 of the
Act was not allowable ?"
3\. The said references came up before the Division Bench consisting of
the applicant that losses of past years should be carried forward and adjusted
against the income of the applicant for the assessment years 1971-72 and
1972-73 has been rightly rejected by the Tribunal ?
Answered in the negative and against the Revenue.
16\. The following questions in Income-tax Reference No. 138 of 1982 are
answered as under :
(1) Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Tribunal
was right in law in holding that the amounts of Rs. 2,87,250, Rs. 13,000 and
Rs. 2,87,250 received by the assessee during the assessment years 1973-74,
1974-75 and 1975-76, respectively, as non-refundable deposits were assessable
as income of the assessee ?
Answered in the affirmative in favour of the Revenue.
(2) Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Tribunal
was right in law in holding that the claim of the assessee to deduct a sum of
Rs. 4,47,399, for the assessment year 1973-74, Rs. 4,16,775 for the assessment
year 1974-75 and Rs. 3,24,694 for the assessment year 1975-76, being payment
(2) Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case and in law, the
Tribunal was justified in cancelling the order passed under section 104 of the
Income-tax Act, 1961, thereby deleting the additional demand of Rs. 22,242 for
the assessment year 1970-71 ?
(3) Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case and in law, the
Tribunal was justified in holding that the Income-tax Officer was not entitled
to enhance the compensation to the extent of compensation received by the
shareholders in their own right ?"
The following three questions have been referred at the instance of the
assessee :
"(4) Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the sum of
Rs. 2,96,285 and Rs. 77,100 received by the applicant during the relevant
assessment years 1971-72 and 1972-73, respectively, as 'non-refundable'
deposits were income of the applicant ?
(5) Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the claim of
the applicant that the amount of Rs. 4,77,395 and Rs. 4,79,176 for the
assessment years 1971-72 and 1972-73, respectively, are allowable as deduction
either under section 28 or under section 37 of the Act has been rightly
rejected by the Tribunal ?
"(1) Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Tribunal
was right in law in holding that the amounts of Rs. 2,87,250, Rs. 13,000 and
Rs. 2,87,250 received by the assessee during the assessment years 1973-74,
1974-75 and 1975-76, respectively; as non-refundable deposits were assessable
as income of the assessee ?
(2) Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Tribunal
was right in law in holding that the claim of the assessee to deduct a sum of
Rs. 4,47,399 for the assessment year 1973-74, Rs. 4,16,775 for the assessment
year 1974-75 and Rs. 3,24,694 for the assessment year 1975-76; being payment
of interest on deposits either under section 28 and/or under section 37 of the
Act was not allowable ?"
3\. The said references came up before the Division Bench consisting of
the applicant that losses of past years should be carried forward and adjusted
against the income of the applicant for the assessment years 1971-72 and
1972-73 has been rightly rejected by the Tribunal ?
Answered in the negative and against the Revenue.
16\. The following questions in Income-tax Reference No. 138 of 1982 are
answered as under :
(1) Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Tribunal
was right in law in holding that the amounts of Rs. 2,87,250, Rs. 13,000 and
Rs. 2,87,250 received by the assessee during the assessment years 1973-74,
1974-75 and 1975-76, respectively, as non-refundable deposits were assessable
as income of the assessee ?
Answered in the affirmative in favour of the Revenue.
(2) Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Tribunal
was right in law in holding that the claim of the assessee to deduct a sum of
Rs. 4,47,399, for the assessment year 1973-74, Rs. 4,16,775 for the assessment
year 1974-75 and Rs. 3,24,694 for the assessment year 1975-76, being payment
