Madras High Court
Kokila Kaliamoorthy vs K.Mani on 15 December, 2009
     IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT MADRAS
    Dated  :  15.12.2009
    Coram
    The Honourable Mr.Justice M.JEYAPAUL
    S.A.No.1260 of 1995
    and
    C.M.P.No.1900 of 2009
    Kokila Kaliamoorthy				       	        ...   Appellant
    Vs.
    1. K.Mani
    2. R.Prema Bai
    3. S.Mythili
    4. K.Rajagopalan
    5. K.Nagarajan
    6. Corporation of Madras
        By its Commissioner
        having its office at
        Rippon Buildings,
Metropolitan Area. The first appellate court has rightly analysed the evidence
of PW1 and arrived at a decision that as per his own admission, the enjoyment
of her property was not affected.
47\. Considering the fact that the plaintiff had knocked at the doors of the
court only after the first defendant had put up the entire construction, the
first appellate court made an observation that the plaintiff had kept quiet
without filing a suit in time to prevent the construction on deviation made by
the first defendant. It is a casual observation made by the first appellate
court based on the fact situation of the case. The plaintiff was not non-
suited on that sole account by the first appellate court.
48\. In view of the above facts and circumstances, the court finds that the
first appellate court has rightly analysed the evidence on record and has
returned a finding that the plaintiff is not entitled to the relief sought for
by her. There is no warrant for interference with the well considered judgment
of the first appellate court. Therefore, the appeal fails and it is dismissed.
There is no order as to costs.
        Rippon Buildings,
        Poonamallee High Road,
        Madras  600 003.					        ...   Respondents
        (1st defendant in the suit who was
         the sole appellant in A.S.No.41/94
         died during the pendency of the 
         appeal. The second appellant in
         A.S.No.41/94 died after the disposal
         of the appeal. The respondents 1 to 5
         are the Legal representatives of the 
         deceased 1st defendant in O.S. and
         the deceased 2nd appellant in A.S.)
    	Second Appeal filed under Section 100 of Civil Procedure Code of second appeal against the Judgment and Decree dated 24.10.1994 and made in A.S.No.41 of 1994 on the file of the II Additional City Civil Judge's Court at Madras reversing the decree and Judgment dated 03.09.1993 and made in O.S.No.8024 of 1983 on the file of the XIII Assistant City Civil Judge's Court at Madras.
    		For Appellant	     :Mr.Sinthamathar
    		For RR 1, 3, 4	     : Mr.S.V.Jeyaraman, Senior Counsel
    						for V.V.Krishnamoorthy
    		For R 6		      : Mr.T.Mathi
    		For RR 2 & 5	     : No appearance
    JUDGMENT
The plaintiff is the appellant herein.
2\. The suit was filed seeking mandatory injunction directing the defendants
to demolish the unauthorised construction shown in the sketch attached
alongwith the plaint and also for permanent injunction restraining the first
defendant from putting up any unauthorised construction. A direction has also
been sought against the second defendant not to sanction any plan or approval
in the process of the regularisation of the illegal and unlawful Act of the
first defendant.
3\. The plaintiff has alleged in the plaint that she is the owner of the
property bearing Door No.56, Hospital Road, Saidapet, Chennai-16. The adjacent
property bearing Door No.57 is owned by the first defendant. The first
defendant has recently started putting up unauthorised construction in his
premises. He has made an attempt to make a window near the compound wall of
the plaintiff's house. The unauthorised construction has been put up
encroaching upon the easementary rights of the plaintiff for light and air.
The first defendant has started construction without any sanctioned plan from
the Corporation of Chennai, the second defendant herein. The Corporation
authorities, having taken cognizance of the complaint emanated by the
plaintiff, took action against the first defendant and the first defendant was
fined heavily by the Corporation of Chennai. The authorities concerned have
not taken suitable action for demolishing the unauthorised construction. The
second defendant has no right to regularise the illegal action of the first
defendant. Hence the suit for the aforesaid reliefs.
4\. In the written statement, the first defendant has contended that it was
true that the first defendant at the first instance constructed a staircase
adjacent to the compound wall of the plaintiff and he also put up a ventilator
on the wall facing the plaintiff's property. The plaintiff, however, took
objection thereof. The first defendant demolished the staircase that was put
up adjacent to the plaintiff's property. There is no staircase adjacent to the
plaintiff's property or a ventilator near the compound wall as on date. The
first defendant has obtained now a new plan duly sanctioned by the Corporation
of Chennai. The present structure has been put up by the first defendant only
in conformity with the duly sanctioned plan. The present staircase has been
constructed only as per the sanctioned plan. It is not for the plaintiff to
prescribe either to the second defendant or to the M.M.D.A. (Madras
Metropolitan Development Authorities) as to what sort of plans should be
sanctioned for the neighboring owners of property. Every property owner has
right to make a construction suitable for him. There was no hampering of the
easementary right to light and air and free passage to the plaintiff. There is
virtually no cause of action for the suit. With the aforesaid contentions the
first defendant sought for dismissal of the suit.
5\. In the additional written statement filed by the first defendant it has
been contended that there was no easementary rights for the plaintiff. The
easementary right, if any, for the plaintiff automatically gets extinguished
upon the demolition of the super-structure in the plaintiff's property.
6\. In the further additional written statement filed by the first defendant
it has been contended that the plan sanctioned by the Corporation was approved
by the Madras Metropolitan Development Authorities. Inasmuch as the plaintiff
having demolished the existing building in his property put up a new
construction without adhering to the conditions laid by the Madras
Metropolitan Development Authorities cannot seek for such a direction against
the defendants.
7\. The second defendant has contended that the first defendant put up
unauthorised construction adjacent of the compound wall of the plaintiff's
premises. The second defendant took steps against the first defendant for
removal of unauthorised construction. In fact, the first defendant was
penalised by the Metropolitian Magistrate Court at Nungambakkam. The first
defendant applied for a new plan for regularising the unauthorised
construction under the M.C.M.C. Act, and the same was approved except the
staircase constructed by the first defendant. The first defendant had also
given an undertaking to remove the staircase within one month. On the basis of
the said undertaking, the new plan was regularised and the second defendant
has authority and jurisdiction to regularise the unauthorised construction, if
at all the unauthorised construction satisfies the building rules framed by
the Madras Metropolitan Development Authorities. The second defendant has
sought for dismissal of the suit.
8\. In the reply statement filed by the plaintiff it has been contended that
only after the Metropolitan Magistrate fined the first defendant, the first
defendant submitted the plans for approval to the Corporation. There is no
question of cessation of easementary right by mere improvement made by the
plaintiff to the existing building. The first defendant is attempting the
curtail plaintiff's easementary rights by putting up construction without
adhering to the rules and regulations.
9\. The trial Court, having adverted to the evidence on record, returned a
finding that the easementary right to light and air of the plaintiff was
affected. The plaintiff also established that the first defendant put up
construction not in accordance with the sanctioned plan. The first defendant,
having undertaken to remove the offending structure, failed to remove the
same, but, he had chosen to remove only the staircase. The trial Court also
found that the plaintiff could not be non-suited just because he has put up a
new structure in his premises. The trial Court ultimately decreed the suit as
prayed for.
10\. The first appellate court held that in the approved plan for the
construction of second floor marked as Ex.B5, the lumber room was shown and
therefore, in the considered decision of the first appellate court the
existence of the lumber room was not against the approved plan. The
easementary right to light and air of the plaintiff was not affected. When the
first defendant had put up construction leaving 5 feet minimum open space, no
mandatory injunction could be issued as prayed for by the plaintiff. Further,
the approved plan had already been issued by the second defendant for the
construction put up by the first defendant. Therefore, the plaintiff is not
entitled to any relief against the second defendant to restrain it from
sanctioning any plan.
11\. At the time of the admission of the second appeal the following
substantial questions of law were framed by this Court for determination:
1\. Whether the lower appellate court has not failed to note that the present
existing unauthorised construction, namely, the entire rear portion of the
stair-case as shown in Exhibits A.10, A.27 and A.28 to A.33 has not been
removed by the first defendant.
2\. Whether the lower appellate court has factually erred in observing that
PW.1 admitted in evidence that by the construction of the defendant the
plaintiff's comforts were not affected.
3\. Whether the lower appellate court also factually erred in observing that
the plaintiff kept quiet without filing any suit to prevent the construction
and allowed the defendant to complete construction.
12\. On a perusal of the averment in C.M.P.No.1900 of 2009, the point that
arises for determination is:
1\. Whether the memo of compromise signed by the first respondent, who is one
of the legal heirs of the deceased first defendant shall be received as
additional evidence to determine the case.
13\. Learned counsel appearing for the appellant/plaintiff would submit that
the deceased first defendant was prosecuted for putting up unauthorised
construction in his premises. Exs.A12 and A14 would go to show that the
deceased first defendant was imposed with penalty of fine under section 362 of
the M.C.M.C. Act. Even after the first defendant was punished, the substantial
portion of the deviation made by the deceased first respondent has not been
set right. In the counter filed for the injunction application moved by the
plaintiff before the Trial Court, it has been unambiguously admitted that
there had been unauthorised construction made by the first defendant. In fact,
he had undertaken to demolish the offending portion put up in his premises.
Quite against the undertaking given by the first defendant, the rear portion
of construction which was made behind the staircase was not removed. The
revised sanction plan alleged to have been obtained by the first defendant was
not produced by him. The construction put up on the sideways was not in
accordance with the sanctioned plan obtained by the first defendant. It is his
further submission that despite the fact that the plaintiff has come forward
with a prayer as against the Corporation, Chennai not to accord sanction for
putting up construction by the first defendant, the Corporation had the
audacity to ignore the pendency of the suit and sanction revised plan
beforeever any original plan was sanctioned. The plaintiff, who was fighting
the case before the court, was not given opportunity by the Corporation to air
her views. In the compromise memo filed in the year 1994 before the first
appellate court, the first respondent has unambiguously admitted the offending
construction existing in the said premises and offered, in view of the
compromise clinched by the parties, to remove the offending construction. To
top it all, the undertaking given by the first defendant to the Corporation of
Chennai when the plan was sanctioned was not adhered to by the first
defendant. The expression 'sanctioned' does not find a place in Ex.B1 produced
before the court. The Commissioner of Corporation chose to file a report
before this court wherein he has specifically referred to an unauthorised
structure in existence in the property of the first defendant. The learned
counsel appearing for the appellant would vehemently attack the report
submitted by the Commissioner of Corporation on the ground that the
subordinate, who in fact, visited the property in question did not subscribe
his signature to the report filed by the Commissioner. It is also not the case
of the Corporation that the Commissioner himself paid a visit to the property
in dispute. The first defendant failed to establish before the court the
nature of condition imposed on him while granting the sanction by the
Corporation of Chennai and compliance of those conditions while putting up
construction in his property. It is his vehement submission that the
undertaking given by the first respondent before the Trial Court that he would
remove the offending constructions had not been complied with. Such an act of
the first defendant would amount to contempt of court. Inasmuch as the first
respondent has admitted unambiguously and that there are offending
constructions in his property and the same are proposed to be removed, the
first defendant cannot set up a plea now that there is no offending
construction in his property. When the Corporation of Chennai has not woken up
to set right the wrong committed by the first defendant, the plaintiff, being
a neighbour, is entitled to agitate before the Civil forum to protect her
right. Even after demolition of the old structure and putting up a new
construction, the right of the plaintiff is still affected on account of the
failure to remove the offending construction put up by the first defendant.
The first appellate court, without actually adverting to the core issues
involved in this case, has casually upset the judgment of the Trial Court.
Therefore, he would submit that the judgment of the first appellate court
warrants interference.
14\. The learned Senior Counsel appearing for respondents 1, 3 and 4, who are
the legal representatives of the first defendant, would submit that the
plaintiff failed to establish before the court that her easementary right to
light and air enjoyed by her for so long a time was adversely affected on
account of the alleged unauthorised construction put up by the deceased first
defendant. There is no specific pleading as to the nature and extent of
easementary right offended by the first defendant. It is his submission that
no cause of action for the easementary right claimed by the plaintiff now
survives inasmuch as the old structure put up by the plaintiff was admittedly
removed and a new structure has come up. The plaintiff has not come up with
any amended pleadings that the right to light and air to the new structure is
affected on account of the alleged offending construction put up by the first
defendant. Referring to the evidence of PW1, he would submit that PW1
categorically admits in his evidence that there is no disturbance at all to
his property with new construction on account of the superstructure put up by
the first defendant. The plaintiff has come out with an atrocious suit as
against the first defendant, who had put up construction within his premises.
Inspite of the fact that the construction put up by the first defendant does
not affect in any way the right of the plaintiff, the plaintiff has simply
filed the suit only to harass the first defendant. The first defendant
undertook to remove the staircase and close the ventilator put up by him in
his property. The plea made in the additional written statement was not denied
in the reply statement filed by the plaintiff with respect thereto. PW1
categorically admits that the staircase was removed and the ventilators were
closed by the first defendant. Therefore, there is no question of committing
any contempt for having not complied with any undertaking given by the first
defendant. Referring to Exs.B1, B4 and B5, the learned Senior Counsel
appearing for respondents 1, 3 and 4 would submit that the existing structure
found in the premises of the first defendant is only in accordance with the
plan sanctioned by the Corporation as well as MMDA. Specifically referring to
Ex.B5, the learned Senior counsel appearing for respondents 1, 3 and 4 would
submit that the existence of the lumber room was specifically shown in Ex.B5
which was approved by MMDA. Even if the deceased first defendant had made any
deviation, the second defendant has the required authority to regularise the
unauthorised construction. Referring to the MMDA Rules, he would submit that
any deviation with respect to the construction of lumber room can very well be
condoned by the authorities concerned. As far as the compromise memo sought to
be produced at the second appellate stage, it is his submission that the said
compromise memo cannot be received as additional evidence before this court.
Just to purchase peace, a small portion found on the rearside was agreed to be
demolished by the first respondent in the compromise memo. The said deviation
was specifically noted down by the Commissioner of Corporation of Chennai in
his report. Inasmuch as the said compromise memo was not signed by the
plaintiff, the said compromise memo cannot be given effect to. Secondly, he
would submit that the MMDA Rules with respect to the deviation made by
constructing a lumber room comes to his rescue. Therefore, the question of
removing the portion agreed to be removed in the compromise memo at this
distance of time does not arise for consideration. The learned Senior Counsel
appearing for respondents 1, 3 and 4 would submit that no substantial question
of law has arisen in this case for determination and therefore, the appeal
deserves to be dismissed.
15\. Respondents 2 and 5 remained absent during the course of hearing of the
second appeal.
16\. Learned counsel appearing for the 6th respondent Corporation would submit
that except a small portion found on the rear side of the property of the
first defendant, no other deviation was found. Therefore, he leaves the issues
for the determination of this court.
17\. It is true, as contended by the learned counsel appearing for the
plaintiff, that the deceased first defendant was charge-sheeted for the
unauthorized construction he made under section 362 of the M.C.M.C. Act as
found from Ex.A12. In fact, the learned Metropolitan Magistrate, having found
that about 242 sqft of unauthorised construction was made without prior
sanction, imposed fine on the deceased first defendant as found from Ex.A14.
Having pleaded guilty, it appears that the first defendant had paid a fine of
Rs.140/=. The aforesaid proceedings initiated as against the first defendant
by the Corporation of Chennai, of course, would show that there had been some
deviation made by the first defendant originally. The court will have to find
whether the first defendant got any sanction for revised plan for the
structures he had put up in the premises.
18\. On a perusal of Ex.B1, it is found that the expression 'sanctioned' is
clearly found on the reverse thereof. A staircase and the portion behind the
staircase shown in Ex.B1 was directed to be removed by the Corporation of
Chennai while sanctioning Ex.B1 plan submitted by the first defendant. It
appears that the first defendant applied for sanction of plan for the
construction of the first and second floors. Under Ex.B4, the first defendant
was directed to come out with a revised plan showing specifically the
construction he had already made. The first defendant had submitted a plan
thereafter showing the existing structure and the proposed construction of the
first and second floors. It is to be noted that a staircase has now been put
up leaving sufficient space from the compound wall. The space behind the
staircase also was shown a few feet away from the compound wall. The plan,
Ex.B5 was sanctioned by the Madras Metropolitan Development Authority. Though
Ex.B5 plan has been sanctioned for putting up first and second floor
construction, the Madras Metropolitan Development Authority wanted to
ascertain as to whether the ground floor was constructed as per the sanctioned
plan. The court will have to presume that the said act of the authority had
been done only after the site inspection made by them.
19\. On a perusal of the sanctioned plan, Ex.B5, it is found that not only the
staircase portion but also the portion behind the staircase had been put up
not adjoining the compound wall, but, well beyond the compound wall.
20\. In this context, it is relevant to refer to the additional written
statement filed by the first defendant. He has specifically stated that the
staircase and the ventilators were completely removed. As rightly pointed out
by the learned Senior Counsel appearing for respondents 1, 3 and 5, in the
reply statement filed by the plaintiff, the aforesaid removal spoken to by the
first defendant in the additional written statement was not denied. PW1 in his
evidence has categorically admitted that the staircase was removed and the
ventilators were closed by the first defendant.
21\. Of course, the lumber room was not removed by the first defendant. But,
it is found that the first defendant, having specifically shown in the
application the existence of the lumber room, got sanction. It is also
pertinent to note that the plaintiff has not pleaded about the existence of
the lumber room in the plaint.
22\. Therefore, it is found that though there was imposition of fine for the
deviations in construction made originally, the said deviations have been
removed prior to the sanction obtained under Ex.B5.
23\. It is the specific case of the plaintiff that the constructions put up by
the first defendant affects the easementary right to light and air of the
plaintiff. Except the ipse dixit of the plaintiff, no other material is
produced or any other witness has been examined on her side to establish that
the structure which has been put up by the first defendant affects the air and
light that has been enjoyed quite a long time by the plaintiff. In fact, the
plaintiff, during the course of cross-examination before the Trial Court, has
candidly admitted that the construction put up by the first defendant, in no
way, affects his right of enjoyment.
24\. It is in evidence that the plaintiff completely demolished the original
superstructure standing in her property and put up a pacca new structure. The
plaintiff has to establish that the cause of action which originally existed
at the time of filing of the suit continued even thereafter. Ex.B5 would go to
show that the staircase and the portion behind the staircase have been newly
constructed leaving a space of about 5 to 7 feet. In the changed scenario, the
plaintiff has to establish that the right to light and air enjoyed by her is
affected even after she has put up new construction in her premises. No
convincing evidence has been adduced by the plaintiff to show that the right
to enjoy light and air to the new structure put up by the plaintiff is also
affected.
25\. In the counter filed by the first defendant in the application for
appointment of advocate commissioner moved by the plaintiff, the first
defendant had undertaken that he would carry out the demolition of staircase
and a portion shown in the revised sanctioned plan. He had also undertaken to
remove the window and close it. The proposal to remove the lumber room has not
been specifically referred to in the counter affidavit filed by the deceased
first defendant. As per the plan submitted showing the existing structure for
the purpose of obtaining sanction for constructing first and second floor, the
removal of the staircase and a small portion lying behind the staircase have
been indicated. Admittedly, the window was also closed by the first defendant.
Therefore, there is no question of violation of any undertaking given by the
first defendant before the court in this matter.
26\. Of course, there is a small deviation measuring 4'10" x 8'3" in the rear
portion of the superstructure built by the first defendant as per the report
filed by the 6th respondent before the court. The said report is attacked on
the ground that the official, who, in fact, visited the premises, has not
subscribed his signature. We cannot expect the Commissioner of Corporation of
Chennai to go and visit a small disputed portion and file a report. He has
every authority to employ his own subordinate official to discharge such a
function to enable him to file a report before the court. Secondly, it is
found that no direction has been issued to the Commissioner of Corporation of
Chennai to go over to the disputed premises for personal inspection and file a
report. Therefore, the report submitted by the Commissioner of Corporation of
Chennai based on the personal inspection done by his subordinate official is
proper.
27\. In the very same report, it has been mentioned that the subject
properties fall under the category of contiguous areas as defined under the
Master Plan. Wall to wall constructions could be allowed, provided 35% of the
plot area is left open to sky for air and sunlight. As per Ex.B5, more than
35% of the plot area has been left open by the first defendant.
28\. Development Control Rules for Chennai Metropolitan Area provides that
structures like lavatory, lumber room, garage, etc., not intended for human
habitation and servant quarters may be permitted in the rural set up provided
such structures do not occupy more than 1/3 of the real width of the site and
6 metres of depth of the site and that the height of such structures does not
exceed 4 metres measuring from the ground level of the site.
29\. As per the aforesaid norms fixed under the Development Control Rules for
Chennai Metropolitan Area, the first defendant can very well approach the
authorities concerned seeking permission for the alleged deviated portion
measuring 4'10" x 8'3" pointed out by the Commissioner of Corporation of
Chennai in his report filed before the court.
30\. The 6th defendant has categorically taken a stand in the written
statement that the 6th defendant has the authority to regularise any deviation
made in construction of the buildings in accordance with the rules and
regulations. Therefore, the plaintiff, who could not establish that the
easementary right of light and air was adversely affected, cannot supervise
the plan sanctioned by the authority concerned and the structure put up by the
first defendant. If any deviation has been made, it is for the authorities to
take personal inspection and remove the same in accordance with the rules.
31\. It is found that the 6th respondent, in fact, prosecuted the first
defendant having found that there was a deviation from the sanctioned plan
accorded to him under Ex.B1. Therefore, it is not as if the 6th defendant has
completely slept over any deviation that was made by the persons who got
sanction of plan.
32\. The plan, Ex.B5 was sanctioned during the pendency of the suit. The
grievance of the plaintiff is that she was not associated while considering
the sanction of the plan, Ex.B5. Firstly, it is found that the plaintiff had
not obtained any prohibitory order as against the 6th defendant from according
sanction of any plan submitted by the first defendant. Secondly, the 6th
defendant is not supposed to give any audience to a third party to decide a
matter which lies within his domain as far as the decision to grant or not to
grant sanction for putting up construction is concerned. The Corporation or
the MMDA, as the case may, are the authorities to take a decision. The third
parties cannot poke their nose in the power of sanction accorded on the
authorities concerned.
33\. Coming to the compromise memo now sought to be introduced as additional
evidence before this court, it is found that it was only the first respondent,
who had mooted a compromise and having signed the compromise memo, circulated
the same to the plaintiff. It is to be noted that the said compromise memo was
not signed by the other respondents who were parties to the suit. It is also
seen that the said compromise memo was not signed by the plaintiff. When a
compromise memo was not signed by both the parties who are concerned with the
issues arisen in the lis, the said compromise memo is only a trash which
cannot be acted upon by the court of law.
34\. Concessions are made by the respective parties for purchasing peace
during the pendency of the suit. Such a concession is made only to bring an
amicable settlement between the litigating parties. The party, who has
extended such a concession, has liberty to withdraw such a concession when
such a concession was not accepted by the opponent party. Here is a case where
the compromise mooted by the first respondent was not accepted by the
plaintiff. Such a compromise cannot be held to be a compromise in the eye of
law. Therefore, the petition filed by the plaintiff seeking to mark the said
compromise memo circulated to her by the first defendant cannot be marked as
additional evidence at this second appellate stage for the aforesaid reasons.
Hence, the petition in C.M.P.No.1900 of 2009 stands dismissed.
35\. It is submitted by the learned counsel appearing for the plaintiff that
the deceased first defendant has not disclosed as to what are actually the
conditions imposed on him while according sanction for putting up construction
of the building. Admittedly, there was some deviation made by the first
defendant from the plan Ex.B1 sanctioned by the authority concerned. The
existing structure shown in Ex.B5 would go to show that the material part of
the deviation had been removed by the first defendant. If at all the
conditions imposed by the Corporation or by the MMDA have not been properly
adhered to by the first defendant, it is for the authorities concerned to take
action as against the first defendant. Unless and until the plaintiff
establishes that her right has been affected on account of the construction
put up by the first defendant, she has no right to question the plan
sanctioned by the authority concerned. Sanction of the plan, construction of
the building and adherence of the conditions imposed in the plan are the
issues between the first defendant and the Corporation or the MMDA concerned.
36\. Of course, the plaintiff has every right to question the construction put
up by the first defendant only when she establishes that her right to enjoy
her property was in any way affected by such construction put up by the first
defendant. The first appellate court has rightly held that the claim for
easementary right for light and air was not established by the plaintiff.
Under such circumstances, the plaintiff cannot question the wisdom of sanction
of the plan by the Corporation or MMDA or the construction put up by the first
defendant in his premises.
37\. Admittedly, a different shape of construction has now been put up by the
plaintiff demolishing the erstwhile construction in her premises. The cause of
action to lay a suit for easementary right of light and air would survive only
if the plaintiff establishes that the new construction put up by the plaintiff
also does not receive air or light. As already pointed out by this court, PW1
has categorically admitted that the construction now in existence in the
premises of the first defendant does not affect her right. No evidence has
been let in by the plaintiff to establish that the light and air for the newly
put up construction was also affected.
38\. The learned counsel appearing for the plaintiff refers to a decision in
BALRAM SINGH v. BHIKAM CHAND JAIN ((1985) 4 SCC 246) wherein it has been held
as follows:-
"The only question is whether the breach of the said undertaking amounts to
contempt. To go beyond that might come into the field of discussion of the
merits of the case. It is true that the contemnors have deleted the caption or
legend "Design invented by Shri Bhikam Chand Jain" from the advertisements,
brochures etc issued by them, but instead they have prominently printed the
photograph of Tikam Chand Jain, partner of the said firm. Prima facie a
reading of the advertisement, brochure etc issued by the contemnors is bound
to mislead the public. Faced with this situation, learned counsel for the
contemnors in sheer desperation offered that the contemnors would drop the
trade description "Balram Septic Tank". As a last resort, he contended that
even if they are committed for contempt, they should be sentenced to pay a
fine. It would be a travesty of justice if the Court were to allow such gross
contempt of Court to go unpunished, without an adequate sentence and we find
no mitigating circumstances whatever not to pass a sentence of imprisonment.
We accordingly commit the contemnors for contempt of Court and sentence each
of them to undergo simple imprisonment for a period of three months and to pay
a fine of Rs.1000 or in default, to undergo simple imprisonment for a further
period of one month."
39\. That was a case where an assurance given before the Honourable Supreme
Court was wilfully dishonoured in its essence and spirit by the contemnor.
Therefore, the Supreme Court has held that such a contemnor will have to be
punished. In this case, there was no undertaking given by the first defendant
before the High Court which has the authority to invoke the provisions of the
Contempts of Courts Act. Secondly, the first defendant had undertaken only to
remove the staircase as well as the ventilator. On facts, it is found that the
staircase was removed and the windows were closed. There is also material
compliance of the undertaking given by the first defendant before the court
below. Therefore, the aforesaid ratio will not apply to the facts and
circumstances of this case.
40\. The learned counsel appearing for the plaintiff also referred to the
decision of this court in T.M.A. ABDUL HAMEED v. S.RADHAKRISHNAN (1989 TLNJ
13). That was a case where the tenant, who undertook to vacate the premises
within a timeframe before the High Court, refused to comply with such an
undertaking. The aforesaid ratio also will not apply to the facts and
circumstances of this case.
41\. The decision in MANDAL PANCHAYAT, HUNSAGI v. NORTH-EASTERN KARNATAKA RTC
((2009) 7 SCC 450) was also cited by the learned counsel appearing for the
plaintiff. That was a case where the Mandal Panchayat started constructing
shops under a Social Welfare Scheme on the land not belonging to it. Such a
construction virtually blocked the ingress and egress of the passengers using
the bus stand. The Road Transport Corporation challenged the said construction
made by Mandal Panchayat. It was contended by the Mandal Panchayat, Hunsagi
that the construction had been put up only based on the sanction granted by
Zilla Parishad. It was held by the Supreme Court that mere grant of approval
for construction by Zilla Parishad would not non-suit the Road Transport
Corporation which has a right to maintain the suit as Mandal Panchayat,
Hunsagi has started putting up construction not in their land, but, in the
land of others.
42\. In the instant case, admittedly, the construction had been put up by the
first defendant in his site. In view of the above, the aforesaid ratio also
will not apply to the facts of this case.
43\. The learned Counsel appearing for the plaintiff cited the decisions of
the Supreme Court in MANOMATI CHETHIA AND OTHERS v. NAREN PATHAK AND OTHERS
((2004) 10 SCC 146), MATHAKALA KRISHNAIAH v. RAJAGOPAL ((2004) 10 SCC 676) AND
WYAWAHARE & SONS v. MADHUKAR RAGHUNATH BHAVE (2007 (3) CTC 82) wherein it has
been held that in the second appeal, the High Court, under Section 100 of the
Code of Civil Procedure, is bound to frame the substantial question of law
beforeever taking up the appeal for determination. With due respect, I may say
that those decisions would apply only in a case where this court failed to
frame substantial questions of law for determination of the second appeal and
they would not apply to a case where the first appellate court failed to frame
points for determination. Therefore, the aforesaid ratios also have no
relevance to the facts on issue.
44\. Sustainable claim for easementary right has been succinctly stated by the
Supreme court in CHAPSIBHAI DHANJIBHAI DANAD v. PURUSHOTTAM ((1971) SCC. SCR.
335) as follows:-
"As to the light and air through the windows on the western side, it is clear
from Explanations II and III to S.33 that to constitute an actionable
obstruction of free passage of light or air to the openings in a house it is
not enough that the light or air is less than before. There must be a
substantial privation of light, enough to render the occupation of the house
uncomfortable, according to the ordinary notions of mankind. See Colls v. Home
and Colonial Stores"
45\. In the instant case, it has been established that the material part of
the deviation made by the first defendant from that of the sanctioned plan
Ex.B1 was set right when he obtained sanctioned plan under Ex.B5. The burden
lies all the more on the plaintiff to establish that even after removal of
such portion of constructions made by the first defendant, there has been
substantial privation of light and air to render the occupation of the
plaintiff uncomfortable. A partial blockage of light or air on account of
construction made by the opponent party cannot give a cause of action to raise
a suit for easementary right. There should have been substantial blockage of
light and air leaving the aggrieved party to face uncomforts. As already
pointed out, there was no pleading to highlight the point that there was
substantial deprivation of light and air on account of the deviations made by
the first defendant. Sufficient evidence also was not let in by the plaintiff
to substantiate the plea that there was substantial privation of light and
air.
46\. It is not as if the first appellate court failed to note down the
deviations made by the first defendant in the aftermath of the sanction
obtained by him under Ex.B1 and the removal of the substantial portions of the
deviations made by him. This court has held that negligible portion of
deviation could very well be regularized even as per the case of the 6th
respondent in accordance with the Development Control Rules for Chennai
Metropolitan Area. The first appellate court has rightly analysed the evidence
of PW1 and arrived at a decision that as per his own admission, the enjoyment
of her property was not affected.
47\. Considering the fact that the plaintiff had knocked at the doors of the
court only after the first defendant had put up the entire construction, the
first appellate court made an observation that the plaintiff had kept quiet
without filing a suit in time to prevent the construction on deviation made by
the first defendant. It is a casual observation made by the first appellate
court based on the fact situation of the case. The plaintiff was not non-
suited on that sole account by the first appellate court.
48\. In view of the above facts and circumstances, the court finds that the
first appellate court has rightly analysed the evidence on record and has
returned a finding that the plaintiff is not entitled to the relief sought for
by her. There is no warrant for interference with the well considered judgment
of the first appellate court. Therefore, the appeal fails and it is dismissed.
There is no order as to costs.
ps/ssk.
To
1\. The II Additional City Civil Judge's Court Madras.
2\. The XIII Assistant City Civil Judge's Court Madras
Metropolitan Area. The first appellate court has rightly analysed the evidence
of PW1 and arrived at a decision that as per his own admission, the enjoyment
of her property was not affected.
47\. Considering the fact that the plaintiff had knocked at the doors of the
court only after the first defendant had put up the entire construction, the
first appellate court made an observation that the plaintiff had kept quiet
without filing a suit in time to prevent the construction on deviation made by
the first defendant. It is a casual observation made by the first appellate
court based on the fact situation of the case. The plaintiff was not non-
suited on that sole account by the first appellate court.
48\. In view of the above facts and circumstances, the court finds that the
first appellate court has rightly analysed the evidence on record and has
returned a finding that the plaintiff is not entitled to the relief sought for
by her. There is no warrant for interference with the well considered judgment
of the first appellate court. Therefore, the appeal fails and it is dismissed.
There is no order as to costs.
        Rippon Buildings,
        Poonamallee High Road,
        Madras  600 003.					        ...   Respondents
        (1st defendant in the suit who was
         the sole appellant in A.S.No.41/94
         died during the pendency of the 
         appeal. The second appellant in
         A.S.No.41/94 died after the disposal
         of the appeal. The respondents 1 to 5
         are the Legal representatives of the 
         deceased 1st defendant in O.S. and
         the deceased 2nd appellant in A.S.)
    	Second Appeal filed under Section 100 of Civil Procedure Code of second appeal against the Judgment and Decree dated 24.10.1994 and made in A.S.No.41 of 1994 on the file of the II Additional City Civil Judge's Court at Madras reversing the decree and Judgment dated 03.09.1993 and made in O.S.No.8024 of 1983 on the file of the XIII Assistant City Civil Judge's Court at Madras.
    		For Appellant	     :Mr.Sinthamathar
    		For RR 1, 3, 4	     : Mr.S.V.Jeyaraman, Senior Counsel
    						for V.V.Krishnamoorthy
    		For R 6		      : Mr.T.Mathi
    		For RR 2 & 5	     : No appearance
    JUDGMENT
The plaintiff is the appellant herein.
Metropolitan Area. The first appellate court has rightly analysed the evidence
of PW1 and arrived at a decision that as per his own admission, the enjoyment
of her property was not affected.
47\. Considering the fact that the plaintiff had knocked at the doors of the
court only after the first defendant had put up the entire construction, the
first appellate court made an observation that the plaintiff had kept quiet
without filing a suit in time to prevent the construction on deviation made by
the first defendant. It is a casual observation made by the first appellate
court based on the fact situation of the case. The plaintiff was not non-
suited on that sole account by the first appellate court.
48\. In view of the above facts and circumstances, the court finds that the
first appellate court has rightly analysed the evidence on record and has
returned a finding that the plaintiff is not entitled to the relief sought for
by her. There is no warrant for interference with the well considered judgment
of the first appellate court. Therefore, the appeal fails and it is dismissed.
There is no order as to costs.
        Rippon Buildings,
        Poonamallee High Road,
        Madras  600 003.					        ...   Respondents
        (1st defendant in the suit who was
         the sole appellant in A.S.No.41/94
         died during the pendency of the 
         appeal. The second appellant in
         A.S.No.41/94 died after the disposal
         of the appeal. The respondents 1 to 5
         are the Legal representatives of the 
         deceased 1st defendant in O.S. and
         the deceased 2nd appellant in A.S.)
    	Second Appeal filed under Section 100 of Civil Procedure Code of second appeal against the Judgment and Decree dated 24.10.1994 and made in A.S.No.41 of 1994 on the file of the II Additional City Civil Judge's Court at Madras reversing the decree and Judgment dated 03.09.1993 and made in O.S.No.8024 of 1983 on the file of the XIII Assistant City Civil Judge's Court at Madras.
    		For Appellant	     :Mr.Sinthamathar
    		For RR 1, 3, 4	     : Mr.S.V.Jeyaraman, Senior Counsel
    						for V.V.Krishnamoorthy
    		For R 6		      : Mr.T.Mathi
    		For RR 2 & 5	     : No appearance
    JUDGMENT
The plaintiff is the appellant herein.
Metropolitan Area. The first appellate court has rightly analysed the evidence
of PW1 and arrived at a decision that as per his own admission, the enjoyment
of her property was not affected.
47\. Considering the fact that the plaintiff had knocked at the doors of the
court only after the first defendant had put up the entire construction, the
first appellate court made an observation that the plaintiff had kept quiet
without filing a suit in time to prevent the construction on deviation made by
the first defendant. It is a casual observation made by the first appellate
court based on the fact situation of the case. The plaintiff was not non-
suited on that sole account by the first appellate court.
48\. In view of the above facts and circumstances, the court finds that the
first appellate court has rightly analysed the evidence on record and has
returned a finding that the plaintiff is not entitled to the relief sought for
by her. There is no warrant for interference with the well considered judgment
of the first appellate court. Therefore, the appeal fails and it is dismissed.
There is no order as to costs.
        Rippon Buildings,
        Poonamallee High Road,
        Madras  600 003.					        ...   Respondents
        (1st defendant in the suit who was
         the sole appellant in A.S.No.41/94
         died during the pendency of the 
         appeal. The second appellant in
         A.S.No.41/94 died after the disposal
         of the appeal. The respondents 1 to 5
         are the Legal representatives of the 
         deceased 1st defendant in O.S. and
         the deceased 2nd appellant in A.S.)
    	Second Appeal filed under Section 100 of Civil Procedure Code of second appeal against the Judgment and Decree dated 24.10.1994 and made in A.S.No.41 of 1994 on the file of the II Additional City Civil Judge's Court at Madras reversing the decree and Judgment dated 03.09.1993 and made in O.S.No.8024 of 1983 on the file of the XIII Assistant City Civil Judge's Court at Madras.
    		For Appellant	     :Mr.Sinthamathar
    		For RR 1, 3, 4	     : Mr.S.V.Jeyaraman, Senior Counsel
    						for V.V.Krishnamoorthy
    		For R 6		      : Mr.T.Mathi
    		For RR 2 & 5	     : No appearance
    JUDGMENT
The plaintiff is the appellant herein.
2\. The suit was filed seeking mandatory injunction directing the defendants
to demolish the unauthorised construction shown in the sketch attached
alongwith the plaint and also for permanent injunction restraining the first
defendant from putting up any unauthorised construction. A direction has also
been sought against the second defendant not to sanction any plan or approval
in the process of the regularisation of the illegal and unlawful Act of the
first defendant.
3\. The plaintiff has alleged in the plaint that she is the owner of the
property bearing Door No.56, Hospital Road, Saidapet, Chennai-16. The adjacent
property bearing Door No.57 is owned by the first defendant. The first
defendant has recently started putting up unauthorised construction in his
Metropolitan Area. The first appellate court has rightly analysed the evidence
of PW1 and arrived at a decision that as per his own admission, the enjoyment
of her property was not affected.
47\. Considering the fact that the plaintiff had knocked at the doors of the
court only after the first defendant had put up the entire construction, the
first appellate court made an observation that the plaintiff had kept quiet
without filing a suit in time to prevent the construction on deviation made by
the first defendant. It is a casual observation made by the first appellate
court based on the fact situation of the case. The plaintiff was not non-
suited on that sole account by the first appellate court.
48\. In view of the above facts and circumstances, the court finds that the
first appellate court has rightly analysed the evidence on record and has
returned a finding that the plaintiff is not entitled to the relief sought for
by her. There is no warrant for interference with the well considered judgment
of the first appellate court. Therefore, the appeal fails and it is dismissed.
There is no order as to costs.
        Rippon Buildings,
        Poonamallee High Road,
        Madras  600 003.					        ...   Respondents
        (1st defendant in the suit who was
         the sole appellant in A.S.No.41/94
         died during the pendency of the 
         appeal. The second appellant in
         A.S.No.41/94 died after the disposal
         of the appeal. The respondents 1 to 5
         are the Legal representatives of the 
         deceased 1st defendant in O.S. and
         the deceased 2nd appellant in A.S.)
    	Second Appeal filed under Section 100 of Civil Procedure Code of second appeal against the Judgment and Decree dated 24.10.1994 and made in A.S.No.41 of 1994 on the file of the II Additional City Civil Judge's Court at Madras reversing the decree and Judgment dated 03.09.1993 and made in O.S.No.8024 of 1983 on the file of the XIII Assistant City Civil Judge's Court at Madras.
    		For Appellant	     :Mr.Sinthamathar
    		For RR 1, 3, 4	     : Mr.S.V.Jeyaraman, Senior Counsel
    						for V.V.Krishnamoorthy
    		For R 6		      : Mr.T.Mathi
    		For RR 2 & 5	     : No appearance
    JUDGMENT
The plaintiff is the appellant herein.
2\. The suit was filed seeking mandatory injunction directing the defendants
to demolish the unauthorised construction shown in the sketch attached
alongwith the plaint and also for permanent injunction restraining the first
defendant from putting up any unauthorised construction. A direction has also
been sought against the second defendant not to sanction any plan or approval
in the process of the regularisation of the illegal and unlawful Act of the
first defendant.
3\. The plaintiff has alleged in the plaint that she is the owner of the
property bearing Door No.56, Hospital Road, Saidapet, Chennai-16. The adjacent
property bearing Door No.57 is owned by the first defendant. The first
defendant has recently started putting up unauthorised construction in his
Metropolitan Area. The first appellate court has rightly analysed the evidence
of PW1 and arrived at a decision that as per his own admission, the enjoyment
of her property was not affected.
47\. Considering the fact that the plaintiff had knocked at the doors of the
court only after the first defendant had put up the entire construction, the
first appellate court made an observation that the plaintiff had kept quiet
without filing a suit in time to prevent the construction on deviation made by
the first defendant. It is a casual observation made by the first appellate
court based on the fact situation of the case. The plaintiff was not non-
suited on that sole account by the first appellate court.
48\. In view of the above facts and circumstances, the court finds that the
first appellate court has rightly analysed the evidence on record and has
returned a finding that the plaintiff is not entitled to the relief sought for
by her. There is no warrant for interference with the well considered judgment
of the first appellate court. Therefore, the appeal fails and it is dismissed.
There is no order as to costs.
