Kerala High Court
M/S.Mulamoottil Finance & Kuries vs T.I.Geroge on 9 September, 2009
      IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM
    CRP.No. 354 of 2009()
    1. M/S.MULAMOOTTIL FINANCE & KURIES,
                          ...  Petitioner
                            Vs
    1. T.I.GEROGE,
                           ...       Respondent
    2. KUNJOOJAMMA GEORGE,
                    For Petitioner  :SRI.V.PHILIP MATHEW
                    For Respondent  :SRI.JACOB P.ALEX
    The Hon'ble MR. Justice S.S.SATHEESACHANDRAN
     Dated :09/09/2009
     O R D E R
                         S.S. SATHEESACHANDRAN, J.
                   - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
                         C.R.P.Nos.354 and 357 of 2009
                    - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
                            Dated: 9th September, 2009
evidence and when the case was came up for final hearing, the applications
were moved in the respective suits by the plaintiff for its withdrawal seeking
liberty to institute a fresh suit. That being so, such withdrawal and liberty
to file fresh suit can be granted only compensating the defendants who had
been compelled to defend the suit claims wasting their energy and money. So
much so, in reversal of the orders impugned in the revision, the applications
moved by the petitioner for withdrawal with liberty to file fresh suit on the
same cause of action will stand allowed subject to payment of cost of
Rs.1500/- each to the defendants, both of them together in O.S.No.339 of 2007,
and also similar sum to the defendants, both of them together, in O.S.No.453
of 2007, within a period of four weeks from the date of this order.
Compensation ordered to the defendants in the respective suits, as indicated
above, shall be given to the counsel appearing for the respondents in the two
revisions within the time stipulated and a memo filed before this court
evidencing such payment on or before 5th October, 2009. In default of CRP
Nos.354 & 357/09 - 6 - payment of cost as directed above within the time
                            Dated: 9th September, 2009
                                       ORDER
The common petitioner in both these revisions challenges the orders passed by
the learned Munsiff, Pathanamthitta dismissing the applications moved for
withdrawal of the suits, two in number, instituted against the respondent in
the respective revision. Though separate orders are passed by the court below
on the application for withdrawal in the respective suits and the defendants
in the suits are different, as common question of law is involved, both these
revisions, after being heard together are disposed under this common order.
2\. Facts are not in dispute. Suit was filed by a financing concern, the
petitioner, for recovery of money from the defendants in the respective suits,
O.S.No.339 of 2007 and O.S.No.453 of 2007. Petitioner/plaintiff laid the suits
claiming to be a partnership firm, the registration of which was disputed by
the defendants. That contention was, however, pressed into service only after
the evidence was recorded and when the case came up for final hearing. Since
the firm was not registered and as such the suits liable to fail in view of
the bar under Section 69 of the Indian Partnership Act, 1932 (for short CRP
Nos.354 & 357/09 - 2 - 'the Act'), the plaintiff moved separate applications
in the respective suits seeking permission to withdraw the suits with liberty
to file fresh suits. The applications were opposed to by the defendants in the
respective suits contending that the request for withdrawal with liberty to
file fresh suit is not entertainable. The learned Munsiff, after hearing both
sides, was not inclined to accept the case of the plaintiff that the
prosecution of the suit by a nonregistered firm was a formal defect and
holding that the noncompliance of the mandate for registration of the firm in
the matter of suing a third party was fatal to the plaintiff firm, its
applications, both of them, were dismissed. Propriety and correctness of those
orders are challenged in these two revisions.
3\. I heard the counsel on both sides. Learned counsel for the petitioner
relied on Raptakos Brett & Co. Ltd. v. Ganesh Property [ (1998) 7 S.C.C. 184]
and M/s.Haldiram Bhujiawala v. M/s.Anand Kumar Deepak Kumar (AIR 2000 S.C.
1287) to contend that the suit against a third party by a nonregistered firm
in respect of a cause of action arising from a breach of a contract which is
barred under Section 69(2) of the Act at the most would render the suit as not
entertainable from the inception and, so much so, the CRP Nos.354 & 357/09 - 3
- plaint is liable to be rejected under Order 7 Rule 11 C.P.C. and not
dismissal of such suits. Where such a defect is noticed after the institution
of the suit, it is submitted by the learned counsel, that the plaintiff is at
liberty to seek for withdrawal of the suit with liberty to institute a fresh
suit. Learned counsel appearing for the respondents, however, sought to
sustain the orders passed by the court below dismissing the suit turning down
the request of the plaintiff for withdrawal and liberty to file fresh suit,
contending the defect in view of the nonregistration of the plaintiff firm was
not formal, but, fatal to the suit claim. I do not find any merit in the
submission of the learned counsel for the respondents. Where the suit is not
entertainable in view of the nonregistration of the plaintiff firm, from its
inception the suit was not entertainable, which means the suit which was
received on file was stillborn even if it was prosecuted and evidence let in
in the case by the parties. Such a suit is liable to be rejected in view of
the bar of the statute interdicting its entertainability, under Order 7 Rule
11 C.P.C. The apex court considering this aspect in M/s.Haldiram Bhujiawala v.
M/s.Anand Kumar Deepak Kumar (AIR 2000 S.C. 1287) has observed that in a case
where the firm is not registered on date of suit and the suit is to enforce a
right arising CRP Nos.354 & 357/09 - 4 - out of a contract with a third party
in the course of its business, then "it will be open to the plaintiff to seek
withdrawal of the plaint with leave and file a fresh suit after registration
of the firm subject of course to the law of limitation and subject to the
provisions of the Limitation Act." The apex court has further observed that in
such a case exemption of time under Section 14 of the Limitation Act will be
available to the plaintiff since the suit has failed because of the defect of
nonregistration which falls within the words "other cause of like nature" in
Section 14 of the Limitation Act. Such being the present position of law, it
is futile to contend that the defect was not formal, but, fatal as held by the
court below under the impugned orders in the present cases. It is also
submitted by the learned counsel for the petitioner that pursuant to the
passing of the impugned orders, now the petitioner firm has been registered
and, as such any fresh suit by the petitioner in respect of the claim raised
in the previous suit is fully entertainable under law. Having regard to the
facts and the circumstances involved and the submissions made, I find the
impugned orders are liable to be set aside and the applications moved by the
petitioners allowed, but, of course, subject to terms compensating the injury
likely to be suffered by the respondents in CRP Nos.354 & 357/09 - 5 - the
respective revisions, the defendants in the respective suits. In spite of the
defendants contending in their written statement the petitioner firm was
unregistered, the suit claim was prosecuted and it was only after recording of
evidence and when the case was came up for final hearing, the applications
were moved in the respective suits by the plaintiff for its withdrawal seeking
liberty to institute a fresh suit. That being so, such withdrawal and liberty
to file fresh suit can be granted only compensating the defendants who had
been compelled to defend the suit claims wasting their energy and money. So
much so, in reversal of the orders impugned in the revision, the applications
moved by the petitioner for withdrawal with liberty to file fresh suit on the
same cause of action will stand allowed subject to payment of cost of
Rs.1500/- each to the defendants, both of them together in O.S.No.339 of 2007,
and also similar sum to the defendants, both of them together, in O.S.No.453
of 2007, within a period of four weeks from the date of this order.
Compensation ordered to the defendants in the respective suits, as indicated
above, shall be given to the counsel appearing for the respondents in the two
revisions within the time stipulated and a memo filed before this court
evidencing such payment on or before 5th October, 2009. In default of CRP
Nos.354 & 357/09 - 6 - payment of cost as directed above within the time
stipulated, both the revisions are stand dismissed without any further orders.
Revisions are disposed as indicated above.
Post for report on 12.10.2009.
    srd                          S.S. SATHEESACHANDRAN, JUDGE
evidence and when the case was came up for final hearing, the applications
were moved in the respective suits by the plaintiff for its withdrawal seeking
liberty to institute a fresh suit. That being so, such withdrawal and liberty
to file fresh suit can be granted only compensating the defendants who had
been compelled to defend the suit claims wasting their energy and money. So
much so, in reversal of the orders impugned in the revision, the applications
moved by the petitioner for withdrawal with liberty to file fresh suit on the
same cause of action will stand allowed subject to payment of cost of
Rs.1500/- each to the defendants, both of them together in O.S.No.339 of 2007,
and also similar sum to the defendants, both of them together, in O.S.No.453
of 2007, within a period of four weeks from the date of this order.
Compensation ordered to the defendants in the respective suits, as indicated
above, shall be given to the counsel appearing for the respondents in the two
revisions within the time stipulated and a memo filed before this court
evidencing such payment on or before 5th October, 2009. In default of CRP
Nos.354 & 357/09 - 6 - payment of cost as directed above within the time
                            Dated: 9th September, 2009
                                       ORDER
The common petitioner in both these revisions challenges the orders passed by
the learned Munsiff, Pathanamthitta dismissing the applications moved for
withdrawal of the suits, two in number, instituted against the respondent in
the respective revision. Though separate orders are passed by the court below
on the application for withdrawal in the respective suits and the defendants
in the suits are different, as common question of law is involved, both these
revisions, after being heard together are disposed under this common order.
2\. Facts are not in dispute. Suit was filed by a financing concern, the
petitioner, for recovery of money from the defendants in the respective suits,
O.S.No.339 of 2007 and O.S.No.453 of 2007. Petitioner/plaintiff laid the suits
claiming to be a partnership firm, the registration of which was disputed by
the defendants. That contention was, however, pressed into service only after
the evidence was recorded and when the case came up for final hearing. Since
the firm was not registered and as such the suits liable to fail in view of
the bar under Section 69 of the Indian Partnership Act, 1932 (for short CRP
Nos.354 & 357/09 - 2 - 'the Act'), the plaintiff moved separate applications
in the respective suits seeking permission to withdraw the suits with liberty
to file fresh suits. The applications were opposed to by the defendants in the
evidence and when the case was came up for final hearing, the applications
were moved in the respective suits by the plaintiff for its withdrawal seeking
liberty to institute a fresh suit. That being so, such withdrawal and liberty
to file fresh suit can be granted only compensating the defendants who had
been compelled to defend the suit claims wasting their energy and money. So
much so, in reversal of the orders impugned in the revision, the applications
moved by the petitioner for withdrawal with liberty to file fresh suit on the
same cause of action will stand allowed subject to payment of cost of
Rs.1500/- each to the defendants, both of them together in O.S.No.339 of 2007,
and also similar sum to the defendants, both of them together, in O.S.No.453
of 2007, within a period of four weeks from the date of this order.
Compensation ordered to the defendants in the respective suits, as indicated
above, shall be given to the counsel appearing for the respondents in the two
revisions within the time stipulated and a memo filed before this court
evidencing such payment on or before 5th October, 2009. In default of CRP
Nos.354 & 357/09 - 6 - payment of cost as directed above within the time
                            Dated: 9th September, 2009
                                       ORDER
The common petitioner in both these revisions challenges the orders passed by
the learned Munsiff, Pathanamthitta dismissing the applications moved for
withdrawal of the suits, two in number, instituted against the respondent in
the respective revision. Though separate orders are passed by the court below
on the application for withdrawal in the respective suits and the defendants
in the suits are different, as common question of law is involved, both these
revisions, after being heard together are disposed under this common order.
2\. Facts are not in dispute. Suit was filed by a financing concern, the
petitioner, for recovery of money from the defendants in the respective suits,
O.S.No.339 of 2007 and O.S.No.453 of 2007. Petitioner/plaintiff laid the suits
claiming to be a partnership firm, the registration of which was disputed by
the defendants. That contention was, however, pressed into service only after
the evidence was recorded and when the case came up for final hearing. Since
the firm was not registered and as such the suits liable to fail in view of
the bar under Section 69 of the Indian Partnership Act, 1932 (for short CRP
Nos.354 & 357/09 - 2 - 'the Act'), the plaintiff moved separate applications
in the respective suits seeking permission to withdraw the suits with liberty
to file fresh suits. The applications were opposed to by the defendants in the
evidence and when the case was came up for final hearing, the applications
were moved in the respective suits by the plaintiff for its withdrawal seeking
liberty to institute a fresh suit. That being so, such withdrawal and liberty
to file fresh suit can be granted only compensating the defendants who had
been compelled to defend the suit claims wasting their energy and money. So
much so, in reversal of the orders impugned in the revision, the applications
moved by the petitioner for withdrawal with liberty to file fresh suit on the
same cause of action will stand allowed subject to payment of cost of
Rs.1500/- each to the defendants, both of them together in O.S.No.339 of 2007,
and also similar sum to the defendants, both of them together, in O.S.No.453
of 2007, within a period of four weeks from the date of this order.
Compensation ordered to the defendants in the respective suits, as indicated
above, shall be given to the counsel appearing for the respondents in the two
revisions within the time stipulated and a memo filed before this court
evidencing such payment on or before 5th October, 2009. In default of CRP
Nos.354 & 357/09 - 6 - payment of cost as directed above within the time
                            Dated: 9th September, 2009
                                       ORDER
The common petitioner in both these revisions challenges the orders passed by
the learned Munsiff, Pathanamthitta dismissing the applications moved for
withdrawal of the suits, two in number, instituted against the respondent in
the respective revision. Though separate orders are passed by the court below
on the application for withdrawal in the respective suits and the defendants
in the suits are different, as common question of law is involved, both these
revisions, after being heard together are disposed under this common order.
2\. Facts are not in dispute. Suit was filed by a financing concern, the
petitioner, for recovery of money from the defendants in the respective suits,
O.S.No.339 of 2007 and O.S.No.453 of 2007. Petitioner/plaintiff laid the suits
claiming to be a partnership firm, the registration of which was disputed by
the defendants. That contention was, however, pressed into service only after
the evidence was recorded and when the case came up for final hearing. Since
the firm was not registered and as such the suits liable to fail in view of
the bar under Section 69 of the Indian Partnership Act, 1932 (for short CRP
Nos.354 & 357/09 - 2 - 'the Act'), the plaintiff moved separate applications
in the respective suits seeking permission to withdraw the suits with liberty
to file fresh suits. The applications were opposed to by the defendants in the
respective suits contending that the request for withdrawal with liberty to
file fresh suit is not entertainable. The learned Munsiff, after hearing both
sides, was not inclined to accept the case of the plaintiff that the
prosecution of the suit by a nonregistered firm was a formal defect and
holding that the noncompliance of the mandate for registration of the firm in
the matter of suing a third party was fatal to the plaintiff firm, its
applications, both of them, were dismissed. Propriety and correctness of those
orders are challenged in these two revisions.
3\. I heard the counsel on both sides. Learned counsel for the petitioner
relied on Raptakos Brett & Co. Ltd. v. Ganesh Property [ (1998) 7 S.C.C. 184]
and M/s.Haldiram Bhujiawala v. M/s.Anand Kumar Deepak Kumar (AIR 2000 S.C.
evidence and when the case was came up for final hearing, the applications
were moved in the respective suits by the plaintiff for its withdrawal seeking
liberty to institute a fresh suit. That being so, such withdrawal and liberty
to file fresh suit can be granted only compensating the defendants who had
been compelled to defend the suit claims wasting their energy and money. So
much so, in reversal of the orders impugned in the revision, the applications
moved by the petitioner for withdrawal with liberty to file fresh suit on the
same cause of action will stand allowed subject to payment of cost of
Rs.1500/- each to the defendants, both of them together in O.S.No.339 of 2007,
and also similar sum to the defendants, both of them together, in O.S.No.453
of 2007, within a period of four weeks from the date of this order.
Compensation ordered to the defendants in the respective suits, as indicated
above, shall be given to the counsel appearing for the respondents in the two
revisions within the time stipulated and a memo filed before this court
evidencing such payment on or before 5th October, 2009. In default of CRP
Nos.354 & 357/09 - 6 - payment of cost as directed above within the time
                            Dated: 9th September, 2009
                                       ORDER
The common petitioner in both these revisions challenges the orders passed by
the learned Munsiff, Pathanamthitta dismissing the applications moved for
withdrawal of the suits, two in number, instituted against the respondent in
the respective revision. Though separate orders are passed by the court below
on the application for withdrawal in the respective suits and the defendants
in the suits are different, as common question of law is involved, both these
revisions, after being heard together are disposed under this common order.
2\. Facts are not in dispute. Suit was filed by a financing concern, the
petitioner, for recovery of money from the defendants in the respective suits,
O.S.No.339 of 2007 and O.S.No.453 of 2007. Petitioner/plaintiff laid the suits
claiming to be a partnership firm, the registration of which was disputed by
the defendants. That contention was, however, pressed into service only after
the evidence was recorded and when the case came up for final hearing. Since
the firm was not registered and as such the suits liable to fail in view of
the bar under Section 69 of the Indian Partnership Act, 1932 (for short CRP
Nos.354 & 357/09 - 2 - 'the Act'), the plaintiff moved separate applications
in the respective suits seeking permission to withdraw the suits with liberty
to file fresh suits. The applications were opposed to by the defendants in the
respective suits contending that the request for withdrawal with liberty to
file fresh suit is not entertainable. The learned Munsiff, after hearing both
sides, was not inclined to accept the case of the plaintiff that the
prosecution of the suit by a nonregistered firm was a formal defect and
holding that the noncompliance of the mandate for registration of the firm in
the matter of suing a third party was fatal to the plaintiff firm, its
applications, both of them, were dismissed. Propriety and correctness of those
orders are challenged in these two revisions.
3\. I heard the counsel on both sides. Learned counsel for the petitioner
relied on Raptakos Brett & Co. Ltd. v. Ganesh Property [ (1998) 7 S.C.C. 184]
and M/s.Haldiram Bhujiawala v. M/s.Anand Kumar Deepak Kumar (AIR 2000 S.C.
evidence and when the case was came up for final hearing, the applications
were moved in the respective suits by the plaintiff for its withdrawal seeking
liberty to institute a fresh suit. That being so, such withdrawal and liberty
to file fresh suit can be granted only compensating the defendants who had
been compelled to defend the suit claims wasting their energy and money. So
much so, in reversal of the orders impugned in the revision, the applications
moved by the petitioner for withdrawal with liberty to file fresh suit on the
same cause of action will stand allowed subject to payment of cost of
Rs.1500/- each to the defendants, both of them together in O.S.No.339 of 2007,
and also similar sum to the defendants, both of them together, in O.S.No.453
of 2007, within a period of four weeks from the date of this order.
Compensation ordered to the defendants in the respective suits, as indicated
above, shall be given to the counsel appearing for the respondents in the two
revisions within the time stipulated and a memo filed before this court
evidencing such payment on or before 5th October, 2009. In default of CRP
Nos.354 & 357/09 - 6 - payment of cost as directed above within the time
