Madras High Court
Sree Arunachalaeswara Mills vs State Of Tamil Nadu on 18 January, 1991
Equivalent citations: 1991 81 STC 137 Mad
Author: Venkataswami
Bench: A Hadi, Venkataswami
JUDGMENT Venkataswami, J.
1\. In all these cases, a common question of law arises for our consideration,
namely, whether cotton yarn blended with staple fibre in small percentage will
still be cotton yarn for the purpose of section 14(ii-b) of the Central Sales
Tax Act, 1956, and consequently, will also be "cotton yarn" for the purpose of
entry 3 of the Second Schedule to the Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax Act, 1959,
as it stood prior to 1st March, 1982. If our answer to the above question is
in the affirmative, the further question that also arises for our
consideration, is whether the introduction of entry 18A in the First Schedule
to the Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax Act by Tamil Nadu Act 28 of 1980 makes any
change in the above position.
2\. Section 14(ii-b) of the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956 (hereinafter called
"the Central Act") and entry 3 of the Second Schedule to the Tamil Nadu
General Sales Tax Act, 1959 (hereinafter referred to as "the State Act") as
they stood prior to 1st March 1982, read as follows :
(Arasappa v. Commissioner of Commercial Taxes), a Division Bench of the Mysore
High Court considered entry 8A of the Fifth Schedule to the Mysore Sales Tax
Act, 1957. The learned Judges were considering the import of the word "pure
silk" in that entry. The learned Judges held that "pure silk" will not include
any addition. We are not considering an entry preceded by the word "pure". The
entry under consideration is "cotton yarn but not including cotton waste".
18\. For all these reasons, we agree with the contentions raised by the
learned counsel for the petitioners, and consequently allow T.C. No. 1213 of
1980. The writ petitions are ordered in the following terms :
The reopening of the assessments or fresh assessments shall be in the light of
the conclusions reached by us, namely, "cotton yarn" blended with non-
cellulosic fibre up to 16 2/3 per cent by weight will still be "cotton yarn"
within the meaning of section 14(ii-b) of the Central Act and therefore, will
be declared goods. Consequently, notwithstanding entry 18A of the First
Schedule to the State Act, the restrictions and conditions attached to
declared goods as contemplated under section 15 of the Central Sales Tax Act
they stood prior to 1st March 1982, read as follows :
"Cotton yarn, but not including cotton yarn waste."
3\. Broadly put, the rival submissions are the following :
The learned Additional Government Pleader (Taxes) contends that to come under
the above classification, the cotton yarn must be 100 per cent cotton yarn.
Any blending to staple fibre or similar material, irrespective of percentage
will cease to be cotton yarn. On the other hand, the contention of Mr. C.
Natarajan, learned counsel appearing for all the assessees in these cases, is
that in the absence of any definition of "cotton yarn" in the Sales Tax Acts,
and having regard to the definitions of "yarn" and "cotton yarn" in the Cotton
Textiles (Control) Orders, 1948 and 1986, "blended" yarn will still be cotton
yarn provided cotton forms a major portion in the blending.
4\. In W.P. Nos. 6860 to 6863 of 1980 and 360, 361, 363, 364, 969 and 970 and
1981, writs of prohibition are prayed for by different assessees restraining
the respective assessing officers from proceeding with reopening of
assessments for the year 1978-79 or 1979-80, as the case may be, both under
the Central Act and the State Act. In W.P. Nos. 1484 and 1485 of 1985, the
assessees have prayed for writs of mandamus directing the assessing officer to
give effect to a notification issued by the State Government in G.O.P. 394,
C.T. & R.E., dated 19th March, 1976. In writ Petition Nos. 649 and 650 of
1981, the assessee has prayed for the issue of a writ certiorari to quash the
assessment passed under the Central Act and State Act for the assessment year
1979-80.
5\. T.C. No. 1213 of 1980 is against an order of the Sales Tax Appellate
Tribunal Additional Bench, Coimbatore, in C.T.A. No. 226 of 1980 dated 11th
August, 1980, relating to assessment year 1978-79. In that case, Tribunal has
taken the view that the cotton yarn blended with manmade staple fibre will not
fall under section 14(ii-b) of the Central Act as well as under entry 3 of the
Second Schedule to the State Act.
6\. As the facts are common, the question is common and common arguments were
addressed, we propose to dispose of these cases by this common order.
7\. In all these cases, the assessees are manufacturers and sellers of cotton
yarn. It is the case of the assessees in all the cases that blending of staple
fibre is only below 10 per cent whereas the case of the Revenue, as seen from
the counter-affidavit, it that the blending of staple fibre varies from 10 per
cent to 16 per cent.
8\. The contention of Mr. C. Natarajan, learned counsel appearing for the
petitioners are summarised below :
Cotton yarn is an item of declared goods by virtue of article 286(3) of the
Constitution of India as the Parliament has declared it so, it being a
commodity of special interest in inter-State trade and commerce and by
bringing the same under section 14(ii-b) of the Central Act. Section 15 of the
Central Act places restriction on the power of the State of levy tax on items
of declared goods specified under section 14 of the said Act. On account of
scarcity in the availability of cotton during the year 1976, the Government of
India was forced to insert a clause in the Cotton Textiles (Control) (Third
Amendment) Order, 1976, dated 21st December, 1976, compelling the manufactured
of cotton yarn to include not less than 10 per cent of man-made cellulosic and
non-cellulosic staple fibre in the manufacture of cotton yarn. In the light of
the above direction of the Central Government there was no alternative left to
the manufacturers except to blend staple fibre at least 10 per cent while
manufacturing cotton yarn. As a matter of fact, the definition of "yarn" under
the Cotton Textiles (Control) Order, 1948, was to the effect that "yarn" means
any type of yarn manufactured either wholly from cotton or partly from any
other material. There cannot be two meanings for cotton yarn, one for the
purpose of the Cotton Textiles (Control) Order and other for the purpose of
the Central Sales Tax Act, especially in the absence of a separate definition
for "cotton yarn" in the latter enactment. It is the international practice to
manufacture cotton yarn wholly out of cotton as well as predominantly out of
cotton blended with staple fibre. The definition of "cotton yarn" during the
relevant period under the First Schedule to the Central Excises and Salt Act,
1944, also contemplated only predominance of cotton in weight in the
manufacture of cotton yarn. It is the definite case of all the petitioners
that they never used staple fibre beyond 10 per cent of the total fibre
content of the yarn. The rest was always cotton. While so, one of the sales
tax authorities raised a doubt about the classification of blended cotton yarn
manufactured by one Kandasami Spinning Mills. The matter was taken up to the
Sales Tax Appellate Tribunal (Additional Bench), Coimbatore, in C.T.A. No. 150
of 1972, and the Tribunal, by its order dated 15th July, 1972, held that the
blended cotton yarn which contained less than 40 per cent by weight of staple
fibre continued to be cotton yarn for the purpose of section 14(ii-b) of the
Central Act. The Revenue, not accepting the decision of the Tribunal,
preferred a revision in T.C. No. 47 of 1974 [Deputy Commissioner (CT) v.
Kandasami Spinning Mills] and a Division Bench of this Court confirmed the
view taken by the Tribunal and dismissed the tax revision case. Thereafter,
the Revenue itself always treated and classified the yarn as cotton yarn even
though it was blended with staple fibre in small quantity. In the light of the
circular issued by the then Board of Revenue in B.P. Rt. No. 4155 of 1976
dated 31st August, 1976, the assessing authority considered cotton yarn with
less than 12.5 per cent staple fibre blend only as cotton yarn coming under
section 14(ii-b) of the Central Act, However, the same Board of Revenue issued
another circular in B.P. Rt. No. 2265 of 1979 dated 4th July, 1979 stating
that blended cotton yarn irrespective of the percentage of staple fibre, must
be treated multi-point commodity and not as declared goods. On the basis of
the second circular, the assessing officers issued notices for reopening
assessments already made. The aggrieved assessees, while submitting their
objections to the reopening of the assessments, also brought to the notice of
the Government through their Association about the second circular dated 4th
July, 1979, issued by the then Board of Revenue and its invalidity. The
Government, by their communication dated 7th May, 1982, addressed to the
Secretary, Southern India Mills' Association, informed that a revised
clarification has been issued by the Commissioner of Commercial Taxes on 17th
August, 1981, to the effect that the blended cotton yarn will be assessed as
cotton yarn at 3 per cent single point up to 4th December, 1979. In fact, on
the basis of the clarification issued by the Government, several writ
petitions challenging the reopening of assessment were allowed to be
dismissed, pointing out the fact that the assessing officers dropped further
proceedings - vide W.P. Nos. 3805 of 1981, 5425 and 5426 of 1981, 1578 and
1579 of 1981, 4075 of 1981 and 2082 of 1981. The inclusion of blended yarn
under entry 18A of the First Schedule to the State Act treating it is non-
declared goods is contrary to the judgment of this Court in T.C. No. 47 of
1974 [Deputy Commissioner (CT) v. Kandasami Spinning Mills], and in any event,
the restrictions contemplated under section 15 of the Central Act will apply
to entry 18A of the First Schedule to the State Act. The assumption on the
part of the Revenue that by classifying blended yarn as non-declared goods and
thereby bringing the same under the First Schedule to the State Act, they can
get over the judgment of this Court in T.C. No. 47 of 1974 [Deputy
Commissioner (CT) v. Kandasami Spinning Mills] is wrong and contrary to the
spirit of article 286(3) of the Constitution of India read with sections 14
and 15 of the Central Act. Therefore, notwithstanding the classification of
blended yarn as non-declared goods and bringing the same under entry 18A of
the First Schedule, in the light of the judgment of this Court in T.C. No. 47
of 1974 [Deputy Commissioner (CT) v. Kandasami Spinning Mills], the cotton
yarn blended with staple fibre of small quantity will have to be treated as
cotton yarn coming under section 14(ii-b) of the Central Act. In this
connection, he also submitted that a reading of sections 2(h), 3(2) and 4 of
the State Act will clearly show that in respect of declared goods, tax shall
be levied in accordance with those provisions which are in conformity with
sections 14 and 15 of the Central Act. Therefore, even though the new entry
for blended cotton yarn, namely 18 A, is introduced in the First Schedule to
the State Act by Tamil Nadu Act 28 of 1980 with effect from 5th December,
1979, in event of this Court holding that "cotton yarn" blended with minor
quantity of staple fibre as manufactured by the assessees will still be cotton
yarn for the purpose of section 14(ii-b) of the Central Act, the levy on such
cotton yarn should be only on the footing that such goods are declared goods.
He also submitted that as between entry 18A under the First Schedule to the
State Act and sections 2(h), 32) and 4 of the State Act, the sections will
prevail in the event of doubt or conflict between the two.
9\. In support of all his submissions, he placed reliance on the following
judgments : T.C. No. 47 of 1974 dated 6th March, 1974 [Deputy Commissioner
(CT) v. Kandasami Spinning Mills], Mohammad Siddiq Gautamlal v. State of
Madhya Bharat reported in AIR 1956 MB 214, T.R.C. Nos. 18, 21, etc., of 1986
dated 23rd February, 1989 of Andhra Pradesh High Court (State of Andhra
Pradesh v. Sri Akkamamba Textiles Ltd.) reported in [1990] 79 STC 357, State
of Orissa v. Radheshyam Gudakhu Factory reported in [1988] 68 STC 92 (SC),
Bhor Industries Limited v. Union of India reported in 1980 ELT 752 (Guj),
Sterling Foods v. State of Karnataka , Alladi Venkateswarlu v. Government of
Andhra Pradesh , Aphali Pharmaceuticals Ltd. v. State of Maharashtra and Modi
Spinning and Weaving Mills Co. v. Commissioner of Sales Tax .
10\. Contending contra, leaned Additional Government Pleader, submitted that
"cotton yarn" coming under section 14(ii-b) of the Central Act will not
include any blending and in case of anything blended with cotton yarn,
irrespective of the quantum of blending, it will lose the character of cotton
yarn. He also submitted that though the reasoning given by the Tribunal are
not quite correct, the conclusion reached by the Tribunal is right and,
therefore, no interference is called for in T.C. No. 1213 of 1980. He also
submitted that a reading of the full judgment of the Andhra Pradesh High Court
in T.R.C. Nos. 18, 21, 23, etc., of 1986 dated 23rd February, 1989 in State of
Andhra Pradesh v. Sri Akkamamba Textile Ltd. [1990] 79 STC 357, will support
his submissions. He also placed reliance on the following judgments : India
Jute Co. Ltd. v. Assistant Collector of Central Excise reported in (1988) 34
ELT 452 of the Calcutta High Court, National Fire Works Factory v. Deputy
Commercial Tax Officer reported in [1973] 31 STC 132 (Mad.) and Arasappa v.
Commissioner of Commercial Taxes reported in [1969] 23 STC 68 (Mys).
11\. We have considered the rival submissions. It is seen that "cotton yarn"
is not defined either in the Central Act or in the State Act. As pointed out
by the learned counsel for the petitioner, "yarn" is defined under the Cotton
Textiles (Control) Order, 1948, to mean any type of yarn manufactured either
wholly from cotton or partly from any other material. Likewise, "cloth" has
been defined to mean any fabric made either wholly from cotton or partly from
cotton or partly from any other material. It is necessary to bear in mind that
the Control Order which defined these terms was one dealing with cotton
textiles. The Cotton Textiles (Control) Order, 1948, was repeated by the
Textiles (Control) Order, 1986. This order defines "cotton yarn" or "cloth" in
clause 3(7) in the following terms :
"'Cotton yarn or cloth' means any type of yarn or cloth manufactured either
wholly from cotton or partly from cotton and partly from any other material
where cotton is predominant by weight."
These Control Orders are issued from time to time by exercising power
conferred on the Central Government under section 3 of the Essential
Commodities Act, 1955. We have also seen the circumstances under which the
manufacturers of cotton yarn were obliged to blend a small percentage of
staple fibre in the manufacture of cotton yarn under statutory directions. As
seen from clause 20-D(1) of the Cotton Textiles (Control) (Third Amendment)
Order, 1976, dated 21st December, 1976, the manufactures were obliged to blend
staple fibre while manufacturing cotton yarn. That clause reads as follows :
"Save in accordance with a permission, in writing, issued by the Textile
Commissioner, no manufacturer shall produce yarn without using man-made
cellulosic and non-cellulosic staple fibre which shall in no case be less than
10 per cent of his total fibre consumption in a quarter.
Provided that in computing the total fibre consumption the fibre used in the
production specified for exports and the fibre used in the production of yarn
of 18s counts and below shall not be taken into account."
12\. While deciding the issue, we have to bear the above in mind. As noticed
earlier, this Court had occasion to consider whether "cotton yarn"
manufactured by blending with staple fibre up to 40 per cent will still be
"cotton yarn" for the purpose of section 14(ii-b) of the Central Act. This
Court in T.C. No. 47 of 1974 (Deputy Commissioner (CT) v. Kandasami Spinning
Mills), while confirming the order of the Tribunal in C.T.A. No. 150 of 1972,
held that the "cotton yarn" manufactured by blending staple fibre up to 40 per
cent will still be cotton yarn. As this Court merely affirmed the view of the
Tribunal, it is necessary to point out the view taken by the Tribunal in that
case. The Tribunal, in C.T.A. No. 150 of 1972, held as follows :
"........... It must also be remembered that 'blended yarn' manufactured and
sold by the appellants is known in the commercial circles as cotton yarn and
that the prices charged are the same for yarn manufactured wholly out of the
cotton and yarn manufactured out of an admixture of cotton and staple fibre.
This circumstance would also point out that the goods in question have to be
treated as 'cotton yarn'. There is also a certificate issued by the
Superintendent of Central Excise dated 30-11-1971 to the effect in the
assessment year in question the appellants had been licensed only to
manufacture 'cotton yarn' and the 'cotton yarn' manufactured by the 'blended
yarn' (cotton mixed with staple fibre up to 40 per cent) as well as other
varieties of 'cotton yarn' manufactured by them have been cleared as 'cotton
only' as per the Central Excise Rules. Under these circumstances, we hold that
the 'cotton yarn' sold by the appellants must be held to be declared goods
coming under item (ii-b) of section 14 and liable to be assessed at 2 per cent
under the Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax Act read with sections 14 and 15 of the
Central Sales Tax Act."
The Revenue, though filed a petition for leave to appeal to the Supreme Court
in this Court, which was dismissed, did not pursue the matter further, and
therefore, the view taken by this Court has become final. Presumably on the
basis of the judgment of this Court in T.C. No. 47 of 1974 [Deputy
Commissioner (CT) v. Kandasami Spinning Mills] and on the representation made
by the manufacturers of "cotton yarn", the Government, by their letter dated
7th May, 1982, informed the Secretary, South India Mills' Association as
follows :
"............
Sub : Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax Act, 1959 - Sales Tax on cotton yarn
containing blend of staple fibre - Reopening of assessment - Representation -
Reply sent.
Ref : Your representation No. 2673/81 dated 20-8-1981.
I am directed to invite attention to the reference cited and to state that the
clarification issued by the erstwhile Board of Revenue in its B.P.Rt. No.
2265/79, dated 4-7-1979, holding that blended yarn was taxable at 4 per cent
multi-point has been cancelled. A revised clarification has been issued by the
Commissioner of Commercial Taxes in his reference D. Dis. No. 9180/80 dated
17-8-1981, to the effect that blended cotton yarn is to be assessed as cotton
yarn at 3 per cent single point up to 4-12-1979 and as blended yarn (again 3
per cent single point only) from 5-12-1979 under the new entry 18 A the First
Schedule to the Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax Act, 1959. Thus the question of
levy of tax on blended yarn at 4 per cent multi-point prior to 5-12-1979 does
not arise.
Yours faithfully, Sd/-............
for Commissioner & Secretary to Government."
Thereafter, the Revenue purporting to treat "blended cotton yarn" as non-
declared goods, introduced entry 18A to the First Schedule of the State Act,
by Tamil Nadu Act 28 of 1980. In the light of this Court's judgment in T.C.
No. 47 1974 [Deputy Commissioner (CT) v. Kandasami Spinning Mills] holding
that "cotton yarn" manufactured by blending staple fibre up to 40 per cent
will still be "cotton yarn" for the purpose of section 14(ii-b) of the Central
Act, it will not be open to the State Government to treat cotton yarn blended
with staple fibre not exceeding 16 2/3 per cent by weight as a separate
category of blended yarn and also as non-declared goods by bringing that
category under the First Schedule. Because, such a change can be made only by
the Parliament by introducing appropriate amendment to section 14 of the
Central Sales Tax Act.
13\. We shall consider the effect of bringing "blended yarn" under the First
Schedule by introducing entry 18A in the State Act at the appropriate stage.
14\. We shall now continue to consider the issue whether the "cotton yarn"
manufactured by the assessees blended in small percentage with staple fibre
will still be cotton yarn or not. A Division Bench of the Andhra Pradesh High
Court in T.R.C. Nos. 18, 21, etc., of 1986 batch (State of Andhra Pradesh v.
Sri Akkamamba Textile Ltd. [1990] 79 STC 357), by judgment dated 23rd
February, 1989, has considered an identical issue. In that decision, Jeevan
Reddy, J., speaking for the Bench, held as follows :
"........... The question is whether cotton yarn cease to be cotton yarn on
account of mixing of 10 per cent of non-cotton material. In this connection,
it is necessary to notice that the Central Government had issued a statutory
order called 'the Cotton Textile (Control) Order, 1948'. As amended in 1977,
the said Order provided that except where expressly permitted, no manufacturer
shall produce yarn without using man-made cellulosic and non-cellulosic staple
fibre, which shall in no case be less than 10 per cent of his total fibre
consumption in a quarter. It is because of this statutory compulsion that the
manufacturer had used 10 per cent of non-cotton material in manufacturing the
cotton yarn. Entry 10 in the Third Schedule reads as follows :
'Cotton yarn, but not including cotton yarn waste.' The petitioner's
contention is that the very expression 'blended yarn' means yarn, where
artificial fibre is mixed with cotton yarn. Be that as it may, it is admitted
that there is no separate entry for blended cotton yarn. The fact remains that
the goods before us is cotton yarn mixed with man-made staple fibre to an
extent of 10 per cent. Applying the test of predominance, we hold that the
blended yarn concerned herein is cotton yarn within the meaning of entry 10 in
the Third Schedule to the Andhra Pradesh General Sales Tax Act. We may also
mention in this regard that the reason for placing cotton yarn in the Third
Schedule is because they are goods, which are declared to be essential in the
interest of inter-State trade (declared goods). Placing the above construction
would be consistent with the object and purpose underlying the placing of the
said goods in the Third Schedule."
In AIR 1956 MB 214 (Mohammad Siddiq Gautamlal v. State of Madhya Bharat), a
Division Bench of that High Court, while considering the scope of items 19 and
20 of the charging Schedule of the Madhya Bharat Sales Tax Act, has held as
follows :
"The literal meaning of the term 'cotton cloth' would be cloth made of cotton.
Where there are embellishments in the texture by making use of a negligible
quantity of other fabrics such as of jari or silk, the cloth in my opinion,
will still be cotton cloth. But where the embellishment on account of use of
jari or silk or other fibre is substantial in quantity causing a substantial
increase in price it would be difficult to call it cotton cloth. In my
opinion, it is in each case a question of fact as to whether a particular
variety of cloth can legitimately fall within the category of cotton cloth or
not. (Para 47) The object of granting exemption to handloom cotton cloth is to
stimulate production of cheap cloth which would provide cloth to the poor and
provide employment to the people. In producing such cloth attention has to be
given to popular tests and cloth of different varieties and standards has to
be produced. This will involve use of fibre such as jari or silk.
If even where a small amount of these fibres is used the cloth is to be
subjected to a tax, the purpose of exemption will substantially be adversely
affected. Where the quantity of fibres other than cotton is substantial and
the use of it has substantially increased the value of the cloth it is
difficult to call it a cotton cloth. As I held above it will in each case be a
question of fact as to particular variety is a cotton cloth or not as
explained above. (Para 48) .............
As I held above if the admixture of other material is small or negligible the
essential description or quality of cloth is not altered. But if the material
other than cotton is used to a substantial extent or in a manner so as to
increase its value materially principle of apportionment will have to be
followed as in my opinion Sales Tax Act is a fiscal statute and taxing
provisions and exemptions have got to be strictly construed. The extent and
value of apportionment of tax will in each case be a question of fact." (Para
78) In [1988] 68 STC 92 (State of Orissa v. Radheshyam Gudakhu Factory)' the
Supreme Court, while considering the question whether "gudakhu" is a product
of tobacco, has held as follows :
"............ It appears that "gudakhu" is a product of tobacco and that
although a major part of molasses and other constituents are added to the
tobacco the essential and effective ingredient remains tobacco, and therefore
'gudakhu' is known as a product of tobacco in common parlance. The High Court
has referred to 'gudakhu' as a form of smoking tobacco and has observed that
even though it is also used as a paste for cleansing the gums of the teeth, it
would still be regarded as a product of tobacco. We may point out that the
Calcutta High Court in Gulabchand Harekchand v. State of West Bengal [1985] 59
STC 224; 23 ELT 306 has also held that 'gudakhu' is manufactured out of
tobacco and that its essential character is that of a tobacco product even
though molasses and other constituents are added to the tobacco and that it is
commonly used for cleansing the teeth. We are satisfied that 'gudakhu' is a
product which falls within the exemption covered by serial No. 35 of the
Schedule to the Orissa Sales Tax and that the High Court is right in holding
that the assessees in these appeals are entitled to that exemption."
In [1978] 41 STC 394 (Alladi Venkateswarlu v. Government of Andhra Pradesh),
the Supreme Court held and "muramaralu" was after all rice even though it was
puffed. Likewise, "atukulu" even though parched was still called rice. The
Supreme Court observed in the said decision as follows :
"........... Even if parched rice and puffed rice could be looked upon as
separate in commercial character from rice as grain offered for sale in a
market, yet, keeping in view the other matters mentioned above, it could not
be presumed that it was intended to exclude from entry 66 'rice', which, at
any rate, had not so changed its identity as not to be describable as 'rice'
at all. 'Muramaralu' was after all rice even though it was puffed. 'Atukulu'
even though parched was still called rice. We must also remember that the
schedule which we have to interpret is in the English language where the term
'rice' is still found in the rendering or description of 'pelalu' as well as
that of 'muramaralu' in the English language. And, in any case, if two
interpretations of a provision are possible, we think that we ought to, in
such a case, apply the principle that the interpretation which favours the
assessee should be preferred."
A Division Bench of the Gujarat High Court, while considering a similar issue,
under the Central Excise Act, has held as follows in 1980 ELT 752 (Bhor
Industries Limited v. Union of India) :
"............ There, can we say that tiles in the manufacture of which 10 per
cent of plastic material is used are 'articles made of plastics' ? The court
has got to bear in mind the part which plastic material in such a case plays.
There is no doubt about the fact that the plastic material operates only as a
binding agent and not the principal ingredient of the said tiles manufactured
by the petitioners. What operated only as a binding agent cannot determine the
basic character of the product. The real character of the product is
determined, in a case of this type, by materials which are predominantly used
therein. The only predominant material which is used by the petitioners in the
said tiles is lime-stone. It forms 45 per cent of the total quantity of a
tile. The next in importance is asbestos which forms 26 per cent. The rest of
the materials are incidentally used in order to transform those two raw
materials, by the process of manufacture, into tiles. (Para 8) In our opinion,
Marblex Asbestos Vinyl Floor Tiles manufactured by the petitioners are not
'articles made of plastics' because the plastic material constitutes only 10
per cent to 15 per cent of the total quantity of a tile and works only as a
binding agent. It is not the principal ingredient in the said tiles. A blue
paper is essentially a paper and not a blue colour merely because the latter
has been used therein to impart a blue colour. A garment is essentially cloth
and not thread which keeps its different parts together in the form of a
garment. Therefore, the said tiles manufactured by the petitioner do not
attract excise duty under item 15A(2) in the First Schedule to the Central
Excises and Salt Act, 1944. They are, therefore, not liable to pay excise duty
in respect of the said excisable goods under the said item. The petitioners
have been classifying these goods under item 68 - the residuary item. Mr.
Mehta has argued that these excisable goods may as well fall under item 22F in
the First Schedule to the Act. The notice which was issued to the petitioners
and which led to the present litigation called upon them to show cause why the
said tiles manufactured by them should not be classified under item 15A(2) or
under item 22F. Item 22F came into force on 16th March, 1976. Because the
Central excise authorities recorded a finding that the said tiles manufactured
by the petitioners fell under item 15A(2), they could not record any finding
in respect of the applicability of item 22F because an excisable goods would
not fall under two tariff items. Mr. Andhyarujina is, therefore, justified in
arguing that the show cause notice which the Central excise authorities issued
to the petitioners and which has led to the present litigation has exhausted
itself. However, if the Central excise authorities intend to hold a fresh
enquiry into the applicability of item 22F, they may do so after issuing a
fresh show cause notice to the petitioners." (Para 18) In [1965] 16 STC 310
(Modi Spinning and Weaving Mills Co. Ltd. v. Commissioner of Sales Tax), on
the scope of article 286(3) of the Constitution of India, the Supreme Court
observed as follows :
"The meaning or the intention of clause (3) of article 286 of the Constitution
of India is not to destroy all charging sections in the Sales Tax Acts of the
States which are discrepant with section 15(a) of the Central Sales Tax Act,
but to modify them in accordance therewith. The law of the State is declared
to be subject to the restrictions and condition contained in the law made by
Parliament and the rate in the State Act would pro tanto stand modified."
In (Aphali Pharmaceuticals Ltd. v. State of Maharashtra), the Supreme Court
held as follows :
"A Schedule in an Act of Parliament is a mere question of drafting. It is the
legislative intent that is material. An explanation to the Schedule amounts to
an explanation in the Act itself. As we read in Halsbury's Laws of England,
Third Edition, Vol. 36, para 551 : 'To simplify the presentation of statutes,
it is the practice for their subject-matter to be divided, where appropriate,
between sections and Schedules, the former setting out matters of principle,
and introducing the latter, and the latter containing all matters of detail.
This is purely a matter of arrangement, and a Schedule is as much a part of
the statute, and as much an enactment, as is the section by which it is
introduced.' The Schedule may be used in construing provisions in the body of
the Act. It is as much an act of Legislature as the Act itself and it must be
read together with the Act for all purposes of construction. Expressions in
the Schedule cannot control or prevail against the express enactment and in
case of any inconsistency between the Schedule and the enactment the enactment
is to prevail and if any part of the Schedule cannot be made to correspond it
must yield to the Act. Lord Sterndale, in Inland Revenue Commissioners v.
Gittus [1920] 1 KB 563, said :
'It seems to me there are two principles of rules of interpretation which
ought to be applied to the combination of Act and Schedule. If the Act says
that the Schedule is to be used for a certain purpose and the heading of the
part of the Schedule in question shows that it is prima facie at any rate
devoted to that purpose, then you must read the Act and the Schedule as though
the Schedule were operating for the purpose, and if you can satisfy the
language of the section without extending it beyond that purpose you sought to
do it. But if in spite of that you find in the language of the Schedule words
and terms that go clearly outside that purpose, then you must give effect to
them and you must not consider them as limited by the heading of that part of
the Schedule or by the purpose mentioned in the Act for which the Schedule is
prima facie to be used. You cannot refuse to give effect to clear words simply
because prima facie they seem to be limited by the heading of the Schedule and
the definition of the purpose of the Schedule contained in the Act.' The above
observation was not disapproved in appeal [1921] 2 AC 81 Gittus v. Inland
Revenue Commissioners. However, the basic principle is that in case of a
conflict between the body of the Act and the Schedule, the former prevails. In
the instant case, we do not find any such conflict." (Page 129 of STC; paras
30 and 31 of AIR)
15\. In the light of the above decisions and discussions, in particular, in
view of the decision of this Court in T.C. No. 47 of 1974 [Deputy Commissioner
(CT) v. Kandasami Spinning Mills] with which we are in agreement, we hold that
the "cotton yarn" manufactured by the assessees notwithstanding the blending
of staple fibre up to 16 2/3 per cent (with which quantity alone we are
concerned in this case) will still be "cotton yarn" within the meaning of
section 14(ii-b) of the Central Sales Tax Act and, therefore, will be one of
the items of goods declared by the Parliament as goods of special importance
for the purpose of article 286(3) of the Constitution of India and, therefore,
all restrictions and conditions in regard to levy of tax on sale or purchase
of such declared goods, namely cotton yarn, will be governed by section 15 of
the Central Sales Tax Act.
16\. Regarding entry 18A treating cotton yarn blended with staple fibre up to
16 2/3 per cent as separate category of blended yarn and also of non-declared
goods, we are of the view that that will not take away the character of cotton
yarn as declared goods and the consequences thereof. As pointed out earlier,
merely declaring that cotton yarn blended with non-cellulosic fibre not
exceeding 16 2/3 per cent by weight to that of cotton yarn will be treated as
non-declared goods under entry 18A will be of no consequence unless such an
amendment is made by the Parliament by appropriately amending section 14(ii-b)
of the Central Act, particularly, in the light of the earlier Division Bench
judgment of this Court in T.C. No. 47 of 1974 [Deputy Commissioner (CT) v.
Kandasami Spinning Mills] which is binding on the Revenue. In this connection,
the decision of the Supreme Court in (Aphali Pharmaceuticals Ltd. v. State of
Maharashtra) is apposite and the relevant passage extracted above clearly
supports the case of the petitioners-assessees. Therefore, even though the
blended yarn is brought under entry 18A of the First Schedule to the State
Act, all the restrictions and conditions contemplated under section 15 of the
Central Act will apply in the matter of levy of tax on cotton yarn blended
with 16 2/3 per cent of non-cellulosic fibre by weight and the assessment can
be sustained only on that basis. We have to point out that this aspect has not
been fully dealt with by the Andhra Pradesh High Court in T.R.C. Nos. 18, 21,
etc. of 1986 batch (State of Andhra Pradesh v. Sri Akkamamba Textile Ltd.
[1990] 79 STC 357). In that decision, the learned Judges have, in passing held
that after the introduction of entry 165 in the First Schedule to the Andhra
Pradesh General Sales Tax Act (which is similar to entry 18A of the State
Act), there will be no room for controversy. The following are the very words
of the learned Judges :
"The assessment years concerned herein are no doubt difference, but all of
them fall prior to July 1, 1985. The amending Act 18 of 1985 was brought into
force with effect from July 1, 1985. Entry 165, inter alia, wad added in the
First Schedule. Entry 165 reads as follows :
'Blended cotton yarn with non-cellulosic fibre content not exceeding 16 2/3
per cent by weight to that of cotton yarn (i.e., cotton/viscose or
cotton/polysonic).' After the introduction of this entry, there is no room for
controversy, since the goods concerned herein would fall clearly under entry
165. We are, however, concerned herein with the position obtaining prior to
the introduction of the said entry."
We are of the view that since the learned Judges were not, concerned with that
question, they have, in passing, observed as above with which, with respect,
we are not able to agree for the reasons already given, namely, when the
cotton yarn blended with certain percentage of non-cellulosic fibre was
considered as declared goods, the State cannot by itself unilaterally treat
such declared goods as non-declared goods. We accordingly answer the further
question.
17\. Now, about the decisions cited by the learned Additional Government
Pleader, we hold that they are not at all helpful. In (1988) 34 ELT 452 (India
Jute Co. Ltd. v. Assistant Collector of Central Excise), a learned single
Judge of the Calcutta High Court, while considering item 18E of the Central
Excise Tariff Act, has taken the view that the "blended cotton yarn" cannot be
considered as "cotton yarn". With respect, we are not able to agree with this
view. In [1973] 31 STC 132 (National Fire Works Factory v. Deputy Commercial
Tax Officer), a Division Bench of this court held that matches will not
include coloured matches or star matches for the reason that matches,
popularly known, will mean only "safety matches". In [1969] 23 STC 68
(Arasappa v. Commissioner of Commercial Taxes), a Division Bench of the Mysore
High Court considered entry 8A of the Fifth Schedule to the Mysore Sales Tax
Act, 1957. The learned Judges were considering the import of the word "pure
silk" in that entry. The learned Judges held that "pure silk" will not include
any addition. We are not considering an entry preceded by the word "pure". The
entry under consideration is "cotton yarn but not including cotton waste".
18\. For all these reasons, we agree with the contentions raised by the
learned counsel for the petitioners, and consequently allow T.C. No. 1213 of
1980. The writ petitions are ordered in the following terms :
The reopening of the assessments or fresh assessments shall be in the light of
the conclusions reached by us, namely, "cotton yarn" blended with non-
cellulosic fibre up to 16 2/3 per cent by weight will still be "cotton yarn"
within the meaning of section 14(ii-b) of the Central Act and therefore, will
be declared goods. Consequently, notwithstanding entry 18A of the First
Schedule to the State Act, the restrictions and conditions attached to
declared goods as contemplated under section 15 of the Central Sales Tax Act
will squarely apply. The writ petitions except W.P. Nos. 649 and 650 of 1981
are ordered accordingly. The Writ Petition Nos. 649 and 650 of 1981 are
allowed. There will be no order as to costs in all these cases.
19\. Petitions allowed.
(Arasappa v. Commissioner of Commercial Taxes), a Division Bench of the Mysore
High Court considered entry 8A of the Fifth Schedule to the Mysore Sales Tax
Act, 1957. The learned Judges were considering the import of the word "pure
silk" in that entry. The learned Judges held that "pure silk" will not include
any addition. We are not considering an entry preceded by the word "pure". The
entry under consideration is "cotton yarn but not including cotton waste".
18\. For all these reasons, we agree with the contentions raised by the
learned counsel for the petitioners, and consequently allow T.C. No. 1213 of
1980. The writ petitions are ordered in the following terms :
The reopening of the assessments or fresh assessments shall be in the light of
the conclusions reached by us, namely, "cotton yarn" blended with non-
cellulosic fibre up to 16 2/3 per cent by weight will still be "cotton yarn"
within the meaning of section 14(ii-b) of the Central Act and therefore, will
be declared goods. Consequently, notwithstanding entry 18A of the First
Schedule to the State Act, the restrictions and conditions attached to
declared goods as contemplated under section 15 of the Central Sales Tax Act
they stood prior to 1st March 1982, read as follows :
"Cotton yarn, but not including cotton yarn waste."
3\. Broadly put, the rival submissions are the following :
The learned Additional Government Pleader (Taxes) contends that to come under
the above classification, the cotton yarn must be 100 per cent cotton yarn.
Any blending to staple fibre or similar material, irrespective of percentage
will cease to be cotton yarn. On the other hand, the contention of Mr. C.
Natarajan, learned counsel appearing for all the assessees in these cases, is
that in the absence of any definition of "cotton yarn" in the Sales Tax Acts,
and having regard to the definitions of "yarn" and "cotton yarn" in the Cotton
Textiles (Control) Orders, 1948 and 1986, "blended" yarn will still be cotton
yarn provided cotton forms a major portion in the blending.
4\. In W.P. Nos. 6860 to 6863 of 1980 and 360, 361, 363, 364, 969 and 970 and
1981, writs of prohibition are prayed for by different assessees restraining
the respective assessing officers from proceeding with reopening of
assessments for the year 1978-79 or 1979-80, as the case may be, both under
the Central Act and the State Act. In W.P. Nos. 1484 and 1485 of 1985, the
assessees have prayed for writs of mandamus directing the assessing officer to
give effect to a notification issued by the State Government in G.O.P. 394,
C.T. & R.E., dated 19th March, 1976. In writ Petition Nos. 649 and 650 of
(Arasappa v. Commissioner of Commercial Taxes), a Division Bench of the Mysore
High Court considered entry 8A of the Fifth Schedule to the Mysore Sales Tax
Act, 1957. The learned Judges were considering the import of the word "pure
silk" in that entry. The learned Judges held that "pure silk" will not include
any addition. We are not considering an entry preceded by the word "pure". The
entry under consideration is "cotton yarn but not including cotton waste".
18\. For all these reasons, we agree with the contentions raised by the
learned counsel for the petitioners, and consequently allow T.C. No. 1213 of
1980. The writ petitions are ordered in the following terms :
The reopening of the assessments or fresh assessments shall be in the light of
the conclusions reached by us, namely, "cotton yarn" blended with non-
cellulosic fibre up to 16 2/3 per cent by weight will still be "cotton yarn"
within the meaning of section 14(ii-b) of the Central Act and therefore, will
be declared goods. Consequently, notwithstanding entry 18A of the First
Schedule to the State Act, the restrictions and conditions attached to
declared goods as contemplated under section 15 of the Central Sales Tax Act
they stood prior to 1st March 1982, read as follows :
"Cotton yarn, but not including cotton yarn waste."
3\. Broadly put, the rival submissions are the following :
The learned Additional Government Pleader (Taxes) contends that to come under
the above classification, the cotton yarn must be 100 per cent cotton yarn.
Any blending to staple fibre or similar material, irrespective of percentage
will cease to be cotton yarn. On the other hand, the contention of Mr. C.
Natarajan, learned counsel appearing for all the assessees in these cases, is
that in the absence of any definition of "cotton yarn" in the Sales Tax Acts,
and having regard to the definitions of "yarn" and "cotton yarn" in the Cotton
Textiles (Control) Orders, 1948 and 1986, "blended" yarn will still be cotton
yarn provided cotton forms a major portion in the blending.
4\. In W.P. Nos. 6860 to 6863 of 1980 and 360, 361, 363, 364, 969 and 970 and
1981, writs of prohibition are prayed for by different assessees restraining
the respective assessing officers from proceeding with reopening of
assessments for the year 1978-79 or 1979-80, as the case may be, both under
the Central Act and the State Act. In W.P. Nos. 1484 and 1485 of 1985, the
assessees have prayed for writs of mandamus directing the assessing officer to
give effect to a notification issued by the State Government in G.O.P. 394,
C.T. & R.E., dated 19th March, 1976. In writ Petition Nos. 649 and 650 of
(Arasappa v. Commissioner of Commercial Taxes), a Division Bench of the Mysore
High Court considered entry 8A of the Fifth Schedule to the Mysore Sales Tax
Act, 1957. The learned Judges were considering the import of the word "pure
silk" in that entry. The learned Judges held that "pure silk" will not include
any addition. We are not considering an entry preceded by the word "pure". The
entry under consideration is "cotton yarn but not including cotton waste".
18\. For all these reasons, we agree with the contentions raised by the
learned counsel for the petitioners, and consequently allow T.C. No. 1213 of
1980. The writ petitions are ordered in the following terms :
The reopening of the assessments or fresh assessments shall be in the light of
the conclusions reached by us, namely, "cotton yarn" blended with non-
cellulosic fibre up to 16 2/3 per cent by weight will still be "cotton yarn"
within the meaning of section 14(ii-b) of the Central Act and therefore, will
be declared goods. Consequently, notwithstanding entry 18A of the First
Schedule to the State Act, the restrictions and conditions attached to
declared goods as contemplated under section 15 of the Central Sales Tax Act
they stood prior to 1st March 1982, read as follows :
"Cotton yarn, but not including cotton yarn waste."
3\. Broadly put, the rival submissions are the following :
The learned Additional Government Pleader (Taxes) contends that to come under
the above classification, the cotton yarn must be 100 per cent cotton yarn.
Any blending to staple fibre or similar material, irrespective of percentage
will cease to be cotton yarn. On the other hand, the contention of Mr. C.
Natarajan, learned counsel appearing for all the assessees in these cases, is
that in the absence of any definition of "cotton yarn" in the Sales Tax Acts,
and having regard to the definitions of "yarn" and "cotton yarn" in the Cotton
Textiles (Control) Orders, 1948 and 1986, "blended" yarn will still be cotton
yarn provided cotton forms a major portion in the blending.
4\. In W.P. Nos. 6860 to 6863 of 1980 and 360, 361, 363, 364, 969 and 970 and
1981, writs of prohibition are prayed for by different assessees restraining
the respective assessing officers from proceeding with reopening of
assessments for the year 1978-79 or 1979-80, as the case may be, both under
the Central Act and the State Act. In W.P. Nos. 1484 and 1485 of 1985, the
assessees have prayed for writs of mandamus directing the assessing officer to
give effect to a notification issued by the State Government in G.O.P. 394,
C.T. & R.E., dated 19th March, 1976. In writ Petition Nos. 649 and 650 of
1981, the assessee has prayed for the issue of a writ certiorari to quash the
assessment passed under the Central Act and State Act for the assessment year
1979-80.
5\. T.C. No. 1213 of 1980 is against an order of the Sales Tax Appellate
Tribunal Additional Bench, Coimbatore, in C.T.A. No. 226 of 1980 dated 11th
August, 1980, relating to assessment year 1978-79. In that case, Tribunal has
taken the view that the cotton yarn blended with manmade staple fibre will not
fall under section 14(ii-b) of the Central Act as well as under entry 3 of the
Second Schedule to the State Act.
6\. As the facts are common, the question is common and common arguments were
addressed, we propose to dispose of these cases by this common order.
(Arasappa v. Commissioner of Commercial Taxes), a Division Bench of the Mysore
High Court considered entry 8A of the Fifth Schedule to the Mysore Sales Tax
Act, 1957. The learned Judges were considering the import of the word "pure
silk" in that entry. The learned Judges held that "pure silk" will not include
any addition. We are not considering an entry preceded by the word "pure". The
entry under consideration is "cotton yarn but not including cotton waste".
18\. For all these reasons, we agree with the contentions raised by the
learned counsel for the petitioners, and consequently allow T.C. No. 1213 of
1980. The writ petitions are ordered in the following terms :
The reopening of the assessments or fresh assessments shall be in the light of
the conclusions reached by us, namely, "cotton yarn" blended with non-
cellulosic fibre up to 16 2/3 per cent by weight will still be "cotton yarn"
within the meaning of section 14(ii-b) of the Central Act and therefore, will
be declared goods. Consequently, notwithstanding entry 18A of the First
Schedule to the State Act, the restrictions and conditions attached to
declared goods as contemplated under section 15 of the Central Sales Tax Act
they stood prior to 1st March 1982, read as follows :
"Cotton yarn, but not including cotton yarn waste."
3\. Broadly put, the rival submissions are the following :
The learned Additional Government Pleader (Taxes) contends that to come under
the above classification, the cotton yarn must be 100 per cent cotton yarn.
Any blending to staple fibre or similar material, irrespective of percentage
will cease to be cotton yarn. On the other hand, the contention of Mr. C.
Natarajan, learned counsel appearing for all the assessees in these cases, is
that in the absence of any definition of "cotton yarn" in the Sales Tax Acts,
and having regard to the definitions of "yarn" and "cotton yarn" in the Cotton
Textiles (Control) Orders, 1948 and 1986, "blended" yarn will still be cotton
yarn provided cotton forms a major portion in the blending.
4\. In W.P. Nos. 6860 to 6863 of 1980 and 360, 361, 363, 364, 969 and 970 and
1981, writs of prohibition are prayed for by different assessees restraining
the respective assessing officers from proceeding with reopening of
assessments for the year 1978-79 or 1979-80, as the case may be, both under
the Central Act and the State Act. In W.P. Nos. 1484 and 1485 of 1985, the
assessees have prayed for writs of mandamus directing the assessing officer to
give effect to a notification issued by the State Government in G.O.P. 394,
C.T. & R.E., dated 19th March, 1976. In writ Petition Nos. 649 and 650 of
1981, the assessee has prayed for the issue of a writ certiorari to quash the
assessment passed under the Central Act and State Act for the assessment year
1979-80.
5\. T.C. No. 1213 of 1980 is against an order of the Sales Tax Appellate
Tribunal Additional Bench, Coimbatore, in C.T.A. No. 226 of 1980 dated 11th
August, 1980, relating to assessment year 1978-79. In that case, Tribunal has
taken the view that the cotton yarn blended with manmade staple fibre will not
fall under section 14(ii-b) of the Central Act as well as under entry 3 of the
Second Schedule to the State Act.
6\. As the facts are common, the question is common and common arguments were
addressed, we propose to dispose of these cases by this common order.
(Arasappa v. Commissioner of Commercial Taxes), a Division Bench of the Mysore
High Court considered entry 8A of the Fifth Schedule to the Mysore Sales Tax
Act, 1957. The learned Judges were considering the import of the word "pure
silk" in that entry. The learned Judges held that "pure silk" will not include
any addition. We are not considering an entry preceded by the word "pure". The
entry under consideration is "cotton yarn but not including cotton waste".
18\. For all these reasons, we agree with the contentions raised by the
learned counsel for the petitioners, and consequently allow T.C. No. 1213 of
1980. The writ petitions are ordered in the following terms :
The reopening of the assessments or fresh assessments shall be in the light of
the conclusions reached by us, namely, "cotton yarn" blended with non-
cellulosic fibre up to 16 2/3 per cent by weight will still be "cotton yarn"
within the meaning of section 14(ii-b) of the Central Act and therefore, will
be declared goods. Consequently, notwithstanding entry 18A of the First
Schedule to the State Act, the restrictions and conditions attached to
declared goods as contemplated under section 15 of the Central Sales Tax Act
