Orissa High Court
Bidulata Das vs Braja Bihari Palit And Ors. on 12 March, 1992
Equivalent citations: AIR 1993 Ori 78
Author: S Mohapatra
Bench: S Mohapatra
ORDER S.C. Mohapatra, J.
1\. Plaintiff is petitioner in this civil revision.
2\. In the suit for title, possession and permanent injunction with other
consequential reliefs in respect of a house in Cuttack town, plaintiff filed
an application for temporary injunction against defendant No. 1 along with the
application for temporary injunction, plaintiff filed an application invoking
power of the trial court to record reasons as required under Order 39, Rule 3,
C.P.C., for passing an order of ex parte ad interim injunction. Trial court
having refused to exercise such power, plaintiff filed an appeal against the
order treating it to be refusal to pass an order of injunction. Appellate
court dismissed the appeal on the finding that the appeal is not maintainable.
This is grievance of the plaintiff in the revision.
3\. Short question for consideration is whether an appeal lies against an
order of the court declining to pass an ex parte ad interim order of
injunction.
to extract a sentence here and there from a judgment and to base upon it.
Accordingly, the decision of Gauhati High Court is to be read on the facts and
circumstances in which it was rendered. In the aforesaid decision, it has been
observed that a decision is only an authority for what it actually decides and
what is of the essence in a decision is its ratio and not every observation
found therein nor what logically follows from the various observations made in
it.
16\. Mr. Mohanty in course of submission brought to my notice that the
application for injunction in the trial court is not being heard since notice
is not sufficient on opposite party No. 1. Since opposite party No. 1 has
entered appearance in this Court through Mr. M. M. Sahoo, I treated the Order
P. No. has sufficient notice of the proceeding pending in the trial court. Mr.
Mohanty shall serve a copy of the petition for injunction on Mr. M. M. Sahoo
with a memorandum indicating the date to which the application is posted, on
basis of which, opposite party No. 1 if so advised may appear on the date
fixed and show-cause, failing which it shall be accepted by the trial court
injunction.
4\. It is now settled by this Court in 1975 (1) CWR 18 (Padmanav Das v.
Dhabaleswar Satpathy) that an appeal lies against an order of ex parte ad
interim injunction. In 1989 (II) OLR 455 : (AIR 1991 NOC 70) (Naliniprava
Patnaik v. Smt. Jyotirmayee Das) it has been held that no appeal lies against
an order of the Court refusing to pass an ex parte order of ad interim
injunction without notice as provided under Order 39, Rule 3, CPC.
5\. Normally, earlier decision of this Court in 1989 (II) OLR 455 : (AIR 1991
NOC 70) (supra) is binding on me. Mr. B. H. Mohanty, learned counsel for the
petitioner however, submits that the said decision requires reconsideration.
Mr. M. M. Sahoo, learned counsel for respondent No. 1 submitted that the
principle decided in the aforesaid decision is correct and requires no
reconsideration.
6\. Mr. B. H. Mohanty, learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that an
order declining to pass an ex parte order of injunction before notice is an
order refusing to pass an order under Rule 1 or 2 of Order 39 and accordingly
is an order thereunder since Order 39, Rule 3, CPC, does not envisage any
order to be passed. Accordingly, Order 43, Rule l(r) CP.C vests right on a
party to prefer appeal. Mr, Mohanty relied upon the decisions reported in AIR
1982 Sikkim 20, (Ashok Tahering Lama v. Tahering Wangdi) and AIR 1984 Gau 86
(Akmal Ali v. State of Assam) in support of his contention.
7\. When an application for granting temporary injunction under Order 39 Rule
1 or Rule 2 C.P.C. is filed in a Court by a party, natural justice demands
that a party against whom the order is sought for is to be given opportunity
of being heard since an adverse order is prayed is to be passed against him.
This is reflected under Order 39, Rule 3, CPC. Situation, however, may demand
an immediate order which if not passed would defeat the very purpose of the
application. Since Courts were exercising the power under Order 39, Rule 1 or
2, CPC liberally to pass an ex parte order of injunction, whereafter, parties
getting the order were trying to delay the final hearing of such an
application. Parliament took note of the same and has inserted a proviso to
Order 39, Rule 3, CPC, prohibiting a Court from passing an order ex parte
without notice to the adverse party and required that in case of emergency
where it is proposed to grant an injunction without giving notice of the
application to the opposite party, Court is to record the reason for its
opinion that the object of granting injunction would be defeated by delay.
8\. It has been held in AIR 1982 Orissa 245 (State of Orissa v. Orissa Oil
Industries Ltd.) that in case, reasons are not recorded as required under
Order 39, Rule 3 proviso, the order is to be taken as illegal. This decision
has been relied on in a latter decision reported in (1987) CLT (Supp) 198
(Raghunath Jew Takhur v. Sk. Alii Hussain).
9\. In view of the aforesaid two decisions, it is clear that a duty is cast on
the Court to first consider whether it would consider the question of granting
an injunction without giving notice of the application for injunction to the
opposite party. Only question at that stage is to consider the nature of
emergency. Its satisfaction is to be recorded in writing supported by reasons.
When it is not satisfied, it has only to direct issue of notice Such an order
is not an order under Order 39, Rule 1 or 2, CPC. When the Court is not
satisfied that it should consider the application for temporary injunction
under Order 39, Rule I and 2, CPC. before notice to opposite party, it does
not pass an order under Order 39, Rule 1 or 2 CPC. It postpones the
consideration of such application to a later date after notice to the opposite
party as envisaged under Order 39, Rule 3 proviso CPC. Such order not being an
order under Order 39, Rule 1 or 2 CPC, right of appeal Order 43, Rule l(r)
cannot be exercised in respect of such an order.
10\. An order under Order 39, Rule 1 or 2 CPC, may be either by grant of
temporary injunction or refusal to grant such injunction. Where that order is
passed ad interim for further consideration it has the same effect as an order
of temporary injunction till it remains in force. Thus, right of the party
restraining is effected. In that view of the matter, an appeal lies against
such an order. Where, however, the Court adjourns such an application to the
future date after notice to opposite party, no right of any party is affected.
Application of the party making the application remains pending for future
consideration. Such an order cannot be treated as an order refusing to grant
injunction. An illustration would make the position clear. Court hears the
application ex parte after recording reason there for as envisaged under Order
39, rule 3 proviso CPC. After hearing it reserves the order to be passed of
another date. It cannot be said that immediate order not having been passed,
the same amounts to refusal to grant ex parte ad interim injunction.
11\. Thus, on the reasons indicated by me there being no refusal to grant
injunction, appeal does not lie. This is in addition to the reasons indicated
in 1989 (II) OLR 455: (AIR 1991 NOC 70) (supra).
12\. In AIR 1982 Sikkim 20 (Ashok Tahering Lema v. Tahering Wangdi), it was
observed as follows ;--
"........when a party makes an application for an immediate and ex parte order
of injunction and the Court refuses to grant such an injunction and instead
issues notice of the application to the opposite party, the order of refusal
would be an order under Rule I or Rule 2, as the case may be and not under
Rule 3 and hence appealable under Order 43 Rule 1 (r)....."
13\. I have already given illustration how such an order would not amount to
refusal to grant of injunction. Thus, I am not inclined to accept the reasons
in the said decision. Decision of Full Bench of Gauhati High Court reported in
AIR 1984 Gau 86 (supra) was considering the question whether an appeal lies
under Order 43 Rule I (r) of the CPC. 1908 against the ex parte order of ad
interim injunction. Gauhati High Court held that an appeal lies. This is also
the view of this Court reported in 1975 (1) CWR 18 (supra). Mr. Mohanty,
however, relies upon an observation in paragraph 8 which reads as follows :--
".......We hold that an order made under Order 39, Rule 1, 2 and 4 refusing to
grant an ex parte order of ad interim injunction is appealable because Order
43 Rule l(r) enables a party to prefer an appeal against "an order", positive
or negative, passed under Rule 1, 2, 2-A and 4 of Order 39. An order refusing
an ad interim injunction is a negative order, but falls within the expressions
"an order."
14\. When a negative order is passed the application stands disposed of and an
appeal would lie. Where the application for injunction under Order 39, Rule 1
or 2, CPC, does not stand disposed of and remains pending for future
consideration, no appeal lies. Same would not be the case where on injunction
is granted exparte as an ad interim. Although an application does not stand
disposed of, it has prejudicial effect on the right of a party. Accordingly,
appeal lies. Postponement of consideration of an application to a future date
does not amount to a negative order as envisaged in the aforesaid passage.
15\. Supreme Court has made it clear in the decision reported in AIR 1968 SC
647 (State of Orissa v. Sudhansu Sekhar Misra) that it is not profitable task
to extract a sentence here and there from a judgment and to base upon it.
Accordingly, the decision of Gauhati High Court is to be read on the facts and
circumstances in which it was rendered. In the aforesaid decision, it has been
observed that a decision is only an authority for what it actually decides and
what is of the essence in a decision is its ratio and not every observation
found therein nor what logically follows from the various observations made in
it.
16\. Mr. Mohanty in course of submission brought to my notice that the
application for injunction in the trial court is not being heard since notice
is not sufficient on opposite party No. 1. Since opposite party No. 1 has
entered appearance in this Court through Mr. M. M. Sahoo, I treated the Order
P. No. has sufficient notice of the proceeding pending in the trial court. Mr.
Mohanty shall serve a copy of the petition for injunction on Mr. M. M. Sahoo
with a memorandum indicating the date to which the application is posted, on
basis of which, opposite party No. 1 if so advised may appear on the date
fixed and show-cause, failing which it shall be accepted by the trial court
that notice on him is sufficient and there-upon proceed to dispose of the
application in accordance with law.
17\. In the result, there is no merit in this civil revision which is
accordingly dismissed. No costs.
to extract a sentence here and there from a judgment and to base upon it.
Accordingly, the decision of Gauhati High Court is to be read on the facts and
circumstances in which it was rendered. In the aforesaid decision, it has been
observed that a decision is only an authority for what it actually decides and
what is of the essence in a decision is its ratio and not every observation
found therein nor what logically follows from the various observations made in
it.
16\. Mr. Mohanty in course of submission brought to my notice that the
application for injunction in the trial court is not being heard since notice
is not sufficient on opposite party No. 1. Since opposite party No. 1 has
entered appearance in this Court through Mr. M. M. Sahoo, I treated the Order
P. No. has sufficient notice of the proceeding pending in the trial court. Mr.
Mohanty shall serve a copy of the petition for injunction on Mr. M. M. Sahoo
with a memorandum indicating the date to which the application is posted, on
basis of which, opposite party No. 1 if so advised may appear on the date
fixed and show-cause, failing which it shall be accepted by the trial court
injunction.
4\. It is now settled by this Court in 1975 (1) CWR 18 (Padmanav Das v.
Dhabaleswar Satpathy) that an appeal lies against an order of ex parte ad
interim injunction. In 1989 (II) OLR 455 : (AIR 1991 NOC 70) (Naliniprava
Patnaik v. Smt. Jyotirmayee Das) it has been held that no appeal lies against
an order of the Court refusing to pass an ex parte order of ad interim
injunction without notice as provided under Order 39, Rule 3, CPC.
5\. Normally, earlier decision of this Court in 1989 (II) OLR 455 : (AIR 1991
NOC 70) (supra) is binding on me. Mr. B. H. Mohanty, learned counsel for the
petitioner however, submits that the said decision requires reconsideration.
Mr. M. M. Sahoo, learned counsel for respondent No. 1 submitted that the
principle decided in the aforesaid decision is correct and requires no
reconsideration.
6\. Mr. B. H. Mohanty, learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that an
order declining to pass an ex parte order of injunction before notice is an
order refusing to pass an order under Rule 1 or 2 of Order 39 and accordingly
is an order thereunder since Order 39, Rule 3, CPC, does not envisage any
order to be passed. Accordingly, Order 43, Rule l(r) CP.C vests right on a
party to prefer appeal. Mr, Mohanty relied upon the decisions reported in AIR
1982 Sikkim 20, (Ashok Tahering Lama v. Tahering Wangdi) and AIR 1984 Gau 86
to extract a sentence here and there from a judgment and to base upon it.
Accordingly, the decision of Gauhati High Court is to be read on the facts and
circumstances in which it was rendered. In the aforesaid decision, it has been
observed that a decision is only an authority for what it actually decides and
what is of the essence in a decision is its ratio and not every observation
found therein nor what logically follows from the various observations made in
it.
16\. Mr. Mohanty in course of submission brought to my notice that the
application for injunction in the trial court is not being heard since notice
is not sufficient on opposite party No. 1. Since opposite party No. 1 has
entered appearance in this Court through Mr. M. M. Sahoo, I treated the Order
P. No. has sufficient notice of the proceeding pending in the trial court. Mr.
Mohanty shall serve a copy of the petition for injunction on Mr. M. M. Sahoo
with a memorandum indicating the date to which the application is posted, on
basis of which, opposite party No. 1 if so advised may appear on the date
fixed and show-cause, failing which it shall be accepted by the trial court
injunction.
4\. It is now settled by this Court in 1975 (1) CWR 18 (Padmanav Das v.
Dhabaleswar Satpathy) that an appeal lies against an order of ex parte ad
interim injunction. In 1989 (II) OLR 455 : (AIR 1991 NOC 70) (Naliniprava
Patnaik v. Smt. Jyotirmayee Das) it has been held that no appeal lies against
an order of the Court refusing to pass an ex parte order of ad interim
injunction without notice as provided under Order 39, Rule 3, CPC.
5\. Normally, earlier decision of this Court in 1989 (II) OLR 455 : (AIR 1991
NOC 70) (supra) is binding on me. Mr. B. H. Mohanty, learned counsel for the
petitioner however, submits that the said decision requires reconsideration.
Mr. M. M. Sahoo, learned counsel for respondent No. 1 submitted that the
principle decided in the aforesaid decision is correct and requires no
reconsideration.
6\. Mr. B. H. Mohanty, learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that an
order declining to pass an ex parte order of injunction before notice is an
order refusing to pass an order under Rule 1 or 2 of Order 39 and accordingly
is an order thereunder since Order 39, Rule 3, CPC, does not envisage any
order to be passed. Accordingly, Order 43, Rule l(r) CP.C vests right on a
party to prefer appeal. Mr, Mohanty relied upon the decisions reported in AIR
1982 Sikkim 20, (Ashok Tahering Lama v. Tahering Wangdi) and AIR 1984 Gau 86
to extract a sentence here and there from a judgment and to base upon it.
Accordingly, the decision of Gauhati High Court is to be read on the facts and
circumstances in which it was rendered. In the aforesaid decision, it has been
observed that a decision is only an authority for what it actually decides and
what is of the essence in a decision is its ratio and not every observation
found therein nor what logically follows from the various observations made in
it.
16\. Mr. Mohanty in course of submission brought to my notice that the
application for injunction in the trial court is not being heard since notice
is not sufficient on opposite party No. 1. Since opposite party No. 1 has
entered appearance in this Court through Mr. M. M. Sahoo, I treated the Order
P. No. has sufficient notice of the proceeding pending in the trial court. Mr.
Mohanty shall serve a copy of the petition for injunction on Mr. M. M. Sahoo
with a memorandum indicating the date to which the application is posted, on
basis of which, opposite party No. 1 if so advised may appear on the date
fixed and show-cause, failing which it shall be accepted by the trial court
injunction.
4\. It is now settled by this Court in 1975 (1) CWR 18 (Padmanav Das v.
Dhabaleswar Satpathy) that an appeal lies against an order of ex parte ad
interim injunction. In 1989 (II) OLR 455 : (AIR 1991 NOC 70) (Naliniprava
Patnaik v. Smt. Jyotirmayee Das) it has been held that no appeal lies against
an order of the Court refusing to pass an ex parte order of ad interim
injunction without notice as provided under Order 39, Rule 3, CPC.
5\. Normally, earlier decision of this Court in 1989 (II) OLR 455 : (AIR 1991
NOC 70) (supra) is binding on me. Mr. B. H. Mohanty, learned counsel for the
petitioner however, submits that the said decision requires reconsideration.
Mr. M. M. Sahoo, learned counsel for respondent No. 1 submitted that the
principle decided in the aforesaid decision is correct and requires no
reconsideration.
6\. Mr. B. H. Mohanty, learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that an
order declining to pass an ex parte order of injunction before notice is an
order refusing to pass an order under Rule 1 or 2 of Order 39 and accordingly
is an order thereunder since Order 39, Rule 3, CPC, does not envisage any
order to be passed. Accordingly, Order 43, Rule l(r) CP.C vests right on a
party to prefer appeal. Mr, Mohanty relied upon the decisions reported in AIR
1982 Sikkim 20, (Ashok Tahering Lama v. Tahering Wangdi) and AIR 1984 Gau 86
(Akmal Ali v. State of Assam) in support of his contention.
7\. When an application for granting temporary injunction under Order 39 Rule
1 or Rule 2 C.P.C. is filed in a Court by a party, natural justice demands
that a party against whom the order is sought for is to be given opportunity
of being heard since an adverse order is prayed is to be passed against him.
This is reflected under Order 39, Rule 3, CPC. Situation, however, may demand
an immediate order which if not passed would defeat the very purpose of the
application. Since Courts were exercising the power under Order 39, Rule 1 or
2, CPC liberally to pass an ex parte order of injunction, whereafter, parties
getting the order were trying to delay the final hearing of such an
application. Parliament took note of the same and has inserted a proviso to
to extract a sentence here and there from a judgment and to base upon it.
Accordingly, the decision of Gauhati High Court is to be read on the facts and
circumstances in which it was rendered. In the aforesaid decision, it has been
observed that a decision is only an authority for what it actually decides and
what is of the essence in a decision is its ratio and not every observation
found therein nor what logically follows from the various observations made in
it.
16\. Mr. Mohanty in course of submission brought to my notice that the
application for injunction in the trial court is not being heard since notice
is not sufficient on opposite party No. 1. Since opposite party No. 1 has
entered appearance in this Court through Mr. M. M. Sahoo, I treated the Order
P. No. has sufficient notice of the proceeding pending in the trial court. Mr.
Mohanty shall serve a copy of the petition for injunction on Mr. M. M. Sahoo
with a memorandum indicating the date to which the application is posted, on
basis of which, opposite party No. 1 if so advised may appear on the date
fixed and show-cause, failing which it shall be accepted by the trial court
injunction.
4\. It is now settled by this Court in 1975 (1) CWR 18 (Padmanav Das v.
Dhabaleswar Satpathy) that an appeal lies against an order of ex parte ad
interim injunction. In 1989 (II) OLR 455 : (AIR 1991 NOC 70) (Naliniprava
Patnaik v. Smt. Jyotirmayee Das) it has been held that no appeal lies against
an order of the Court refusing to pass an ex parte order of ad interim
injunction without notice as provided under Order 39, Rule 3, CPC.
5\. Normally, earlier decision of this Court in 1989 (II) OLR 455 : (AIR 1991
NOC 70) (supra) is binding on me. Mr. B. H. Mohanty, learned counsel for the
petitioner however, submits that the said decision requires reconsideration.
Mr. M. M. Sahoo, learned counsel for respondent No. 1 submitted that the
principle decided in the aforesaid decision is correct and requires no
reconsideration.
6\. Mr. B. H. Mohanty, learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that an
order declining to pass an ex parte order of injunction before notice is an
order refusing to pass an order under Rule 1 or 2 of Order 39 and accordingly
is an order thereunder since Order 39, Rule 3, CPC, does not envisage any
order to be passed. Accordingly, Order 43, Rule l(r) CP.C vests right on a
party to prefer appeal. Mr, Mohanty relied upon the decisions reported in AIR
1982 Sikkim 20, (Ashok Tahering Lama v. Tahering Wangdi) and AIR 1984 Gau 86
(Akmal Ali v. State of Assam) in support of his contention.
7\. When an application for granting temporary injunction under Order 39 Rule
1 or Rule 2 C.P.C. is filed in a Court by a party, natural justice demands
that a party against whom the order is sought for is to be given opportunity
of being heard since an adverse order is prayed is to be passed against him.
This is reflected under Order 39, Rule 3, CPC. Situation, however, may demand
an immediate order which if not passed would defeat the very purpose of the
application. Since Courts were exercising the power under Order 39, Rule 1 or
2, CPC liberally to pass an ex parte order of injunction, whereafter, parties
getting the order were trying to delay the final hearing of such an
application. Parliament took note of the same and has inserted a proviso to
to extract a sentence here and there from a judgment and to base upon it.
Accordingly, the decision of Gauhati High Court is to be read on the facts and
circumstances in which it was rendered. In the aforesaid decision, it has been
observed that a decision is only an authority for what it actually decides and
what is of the essence in a decision is its ratio and not every observation
found therein nor what logically follows from the various observations made in
it.
16\. Mr. Mohanty in course of submission brought to my notice that the
application for injunction in the trial court is not being heard since notice
is not sufficient on opposite party No. 1. Since opposite party No. 1 has
entered appearance in this Court through Mr. M. M. Sahoo, I treated the Order
P. No. has sufficient notice of the proceeding pending in the trial court. Mr.
Mohanty shall serve a copy of the petition for injunction on Mr. M. M. Sahoo
with a memorandum indicating the date to which the application is posted, on
basis of which, opposite party No. 1 if so advised may appear on the date
fixed and show-cause, failing which it shall be accepted by the trial court
