Bombay High Court
Schering Corporation vs Messrs.United Biotech(P) Ltd. on 8 October, 2010
Bench: D.K. Deshmukh, R.P. Sondurbaldota
        PVR                     1                                 app548/07
              IN THE HIGH COURT JUDICATURE AT BOMBAY
               ORDINARY ORIGINAL CIVIL JURISDICTION
                      APPEAL NO.548 OF 2007
                                IN
                 NOTICE OF MOTION NO.3459 OF 2004
                                IN
                       SUIT NO.3419 OF 2004
        1.Schering Corporation, a            )
        Corporation organized and            )
        existing under the laws              )
        of the State of New Jersey,
                       ig                    )
        United States of America and         )
        having its Principal Place of        )
        business at 2000 Galloping           )
        Hill Road, Kenilworth,               )
bulk by the hospitals and not by the common consumers, they are not sold over
the counter. Whereas the Appellants goods are sold over the counter to the
consumers. In our opinion, the manner in which the drug is administered and
that the product of the Respondents is used only in the hospitals by the
Doctors after carrying out sensitivity culture test, is enough to rule out any
possibility of any confusion as the chemical used in both the products is
same. Even if by mistake one is used for the other, no injury is likely to be
suffered by the consumer or patient. In our opinion, therefore, this
circumstance coupled with the circumstance that both the trade marks are
registered and that from the year 2003 the Respondents have been using its
trade mark uninterruptedly dis-entitles the Plaintiffs-
Appellants to interim injunction restraining the  ::: Downloaded on -
09/06/2013 16:31:22 ::: PVR 21 app548/07 Defendants-Respondents from using its
trade mark.
13\. So far as the complaint in relation to the product insert is concerned,
admittedly, the Respondents have changed the contents of the product insert.
        Hill Road, Kenilworth,               )
        New Jersey, U.S.A.                   )
                                             )
        2. Fulfort(India)Limited,            )
        a Company Incorporated under         )
        the Indian Companies Act 1913        )
        and having its registered            )
        Office at Eureka Tower,              )
        8th floor, Mindspace, Malad          )
        Link Road, Malad(W),                 )
        Mumbai-400064.                       )...Appellants
                vs.
        1.Messrs.United Biotech(P) Ltd.      )
        incorporated by the provisions       )
        of the Companies Act,1956 and        )
        having its registered office at      )
        A-127 Synthofine Industrial          )
        Estate, Goregaon(E), Mumbai          )
        400063 and also an office at         )
        FC/B-1(Extn), Mohan Co-op.           )
        Industrial Estate Mathura Road,      )
        New Delhi   110 044.                 )
                                          ::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 16:31:21 :::
         PVR                             2                              app548/07
        2. Messrs.Oscar Remedies Pvt.Ltd.         )
        incorporated under the provisions         )
        of the Companies Act,1956, having         )
        its office at Badi Mazra,                 )
        Yamunanagar 135 001, Haryana              )...Respondents
                                       ---
        Dr.V.V.Tulzapurkar, Sr.Advocate i/b.M/s.Cr.Baylay
        & Co., for Appellants.
        Mr.H.W.Kane, for Respondents.
                               ig      ---
                              CORAM: D.K.DESHMUKH &
                                     Smt.R.P.SONDURBALDOTA,JJ.
DATED: 8th October, 2010 ORAL JUDGMENT: (Per D.K.Deshmukh, J.)
1\. This appeal takes exception to the order dated 14th July,2006 passed by
the learned Single Judge of this Court dismissing Notice of Motion No.3459 of
2004. That Notice of Motion was taken out by the Appellants seeking certain
interim reliefs in Suit no.3419 of 2004. The civil suit was filed by the
present Appellants seeking decree of permanent injunction restraining the  :::
Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 16:31:21 ::: PVR 3 app548/07 Defendants-Respondents
from infringing the Plaintiffs registered trade mark NETROMYCIN and from
passing off the defendants goods by using the trade mark NETMICIN . The
Appellants had also prayed for permanent injunction restraining the
Respondents-Defendants from using label, copy of which was filed with the
Plaint, on the ground that by using that label the Defendants were passing off
their goods as and for goods of the Appellants. The Appellants had also prayed
for permanent injunction restraining the Respondents from infringing the
copyright of the Appellants in the literary work of the package insert, as
according to the Appellants, the Respondents had copied the same. The
Appellants had prayed for interim reliefs in the Notice of Motion in the
similar terms. At the hearing of the Notice of Motion, however, as the
Respondents had contended that their mark was also registered, the relief in
relation to passing of only was pressed by the Appellants.
The learned Single Judge by her order impugned in  ::: Downloaded on -
09/06/2013 16:31:21 ::: PVR 4 app548/07 the Appeal, rejected the Notice of
Motion holding that (i) the Appellants have failed to prove distinctiveness of
their mark or packaging; (ii) Two marks viz. NETROMYCIN and NETMICIN are not
deceptively similar; (iii) there is no possibility of any confusion as the
Respondents goods were purchased in bulk by the hospitals and that the same
were not sold over the counter, whereas the Appellants ig goods were sold over
the counter and that the purchasers of the Defendants goods have requisite
knowledge and technical expertise in dealing with the drugs;
(iv) the essential features of the Appellants mark are different from that of
the Respondents;
(v) There would not be any adverse effect on the consumer since the chemicals
used in both the products are common; and (vi) there were many medicines and
pharmaceutical products being manufactured and traded in the market ending
with the letters Mycin , Micin and Cin .
        2.           The      learned         Counsel         appearing                for
                                                         ::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 16:31:21 :::
         PVR                                5                                   app548/07
        Appellants        submitted       that      the       Learned            Judge
failed to apply the proper test of comparison of the two words NETROMYCIN and
NETMICIN . It is also submitted that the true test is that the two marks are
to be compared as whole. It is submitted that the learned Judge has held that
there is no phonetic similarity between the two words because the number of
syllables in the two words is different and that for phonetic resemblance, the
number of syllables has to be the same. It is submitted that the similarity is
to be judged by not making microscopic examination, and the principle that the
word must be considered as a whole and compared with the other word as a whole
was noted by the Supreme Court in the case of Cadila Health Care Ltd. Vs.
Cadila Pharmaceuticals Ltd. (2001)PTC 300 and also in the case of Corn
Products Refining Co.
Vs. Shangrila Food Products Ltd., (1960)(1) SCR
968\. It is submitted that in the latter case it was held, in respect of the
two concerned trademarks therein viz. Glucovita and  ::: Downloaded on -
09/06/2013 16:31:21 ::: PVR 6 app548/07 Gluvita , that apart from the syllable
co in the Appellant s mark, the two marks were identical and that the syllable
Co was not in the opinion of the Court, such as would enable the buyers in our
country to distinguish the one mark from the other. It is submitted that in
the case of Amritdhara Pharmacy vs. Satyadeo Gupta, AIR 1963 SC 449 which was
referred to by the Supreme Court in the Cadila s case referred to above, the
two words Amritdhara and Lakshmandhara were held to be similar. It is further
submitted that the learned Single Judge erred in holding that visually and
structurally the two words Netromycin and Netmicin were different. It is
submitted that the said finding is contrary to the principle of comparison, as
laid down by the Supreme Court in the aforesaid cases and the overall
similarity is to be judged. It is submitted that it is a matter of the first
impression as to whether the two words are similar, and such impression is to
be formed by taking a broad view and not comparing letter by  ::: Downloaded
on - 09/06/2013 16:31:21 ::: PVR 7 app548/07 letter, or syllable by syllable,
and the overall effect of the two words is required to be considered. It is
submitted that the learned Judge erred in making a microscopic examination.
It is further submitted that the goods can be ordered on telephone and
therefore, the printing of the words on the carton in a slightly different
manner in two cases will not make any difference at all. It is submitted that
the argument that the goods of the Respondents are sold in bulk to the
hospitals and that the Appellants product is sold over the counter would rule
out the possibility of confusion is not a factor which can be taken into
account in view of the decision of the Supreme Court in Cadila Case referred
to above and in the said decision, the Supreme Court referred to various
authorities in which it was categorically observed that the physicians and
pharmacists are not immune from mistaking one mark for another.
3\. It is further submitted that the learned  ::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013
16:31:21 ::: PVR 8 app548/07 Single Judge erred in refusing injunction on the
ground that the essential features on the Plaintiffs mark are different from
the Defendants. It is submitted that it is necessary to consider the essential
features of the word marks which are prominently written on the packaging of
both the products, and the dissimilar features in the packaging cannot
outweigh the similarity of the word marks. It is submitted that in any event,
in the present case, the colour scheme and the placement of material is very
similar on the packaging of the two products. It is submitted that even if the
packaging is taken into account, the effect of the resemblance and deceptive
similarity of the two words is not in any manner reduced. It is submitted that
the so-called added matter cannot outweigh the impression created by the
similarity of the word marks themselves and in this regard, reference may be
made to M/s.Girnar Tea Vs. Brooke Bond(India)Ltd., 1990PTC 245: (1991)93 BomLR
97 in which case the two marks Girnar  ::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 16:31:21
::: PVR 9 app548/07 and Gulnar were held to be deceptively similar and that
the packaging differences thereof did not outweigh the impression created by
the two words. It is submitted that in that case, as in the instant case, was
a passing-off action. It is submitted that the Division Bench in the said
case, referred to the decision of the Supreme Court in the case Kaviraj Pandit
Durga Dutta Sharma Vs. Navaratna Pharmaceutical Laboratories AIR 1965 SC 980
in which it was held that the Defendants in a passing-off action can escape
liability by relying on added matters to show that there is no likelihood of
deception and confusion. It is further submitted that the Division Bench in
Girnar case held that the added matter must outweigh the similarity in the two
words. It is submitted that in the instant case, prima facie there are no such
differences considering the two packages with reference to the colour scheme,
layout and placement of material, which will outweigh the impression created
by the two words Netromycin and  ::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 16:31:21 :::
PVR 10 app548/07 Netmicin .
4\. It is submitted that any argument to the effect that there are various
marks ending with letters Mycin , Micin and Cin and that therefore, there
would not be confusion, is totally irrelevant in the present case in as much
as the peculiar facts of the case show that both the Appellants ig mark and
the Respondents mark are registered, each one having established
distinctiveness. It is submitted that, according to the Respondents, in
addition to the fact that there are various products with Mycin , Micin and
Cin as suffix there are at least three products with the prefix Net , and that
both the marks Netromycin and Netmicin are derived from the common generic
name Netilmicin Sulphate and therefore, there is no likelihood of confusion.
It is submitted that the aforesaid contention cannot be countenanced in the
present case for the following reasons:- (a) the Respondents having obtained
registration of the  ::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 16:31:21 ::: PVR 11
app548/07 mark containing Net and Mycin and pleading registration as a defence
to the Appellants action for infringement of registered trademark, are
reiterating the position that the mark Netmycin is distinctive and it
distinguishes Respondents mark Netmycin from all other marks containing Mycin,
Micin and Cin. It is further submitted that the Respondents are, therefore,
estopped by their conduct from raising the aforesaid contention and in this
regard, reference may be made to the decision in Automatic Electric Ltd. Vs.
R.K.Dhawan & Anr, (1999) OTC 81, and in the said case the Defendant had got
its trade mark Dimmer Dot registered in Australia and it was observed that the
fact that the Defendant itself had sought to claim trade proprietary right and
monopoly in Dimmer Dot , it did not lie in its mouth to say Dimmer in the
Plaintiffs trademark Dimmer Stat is a generic expression and this decision of
Single Judge of the Delhi High Court was approved of by the Division Bench of
Delhi High Court in Indian  ::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 16:31:21 ::: PVR 12
app548/07 Hotels Co.Ltd. Vs. Jiva Institute of Vedic Science & Culture, 2008
PTC 468 ; and (b) the adoption of the mark Netmycin by the Respondents is not
honest.
5\. It is submitted that if the intention is proved to be dishonest, then
there is no need to make any further enquiry whether there would be likelihood
of ig deception or confusion. It is submitted that in view of the dishonest
intention in adopting the impugned mark and the impugned packaging, the
Respondents contentions that both the marks are derived from the generic name
i.e. Netilmicin, or that the letters Micin are commonly used, cannot be
countenanced. It is submitted that in view of the aforesaid, the authorities
relied upon by the Respondents to the effect that due to common elements or
marks being derived from generic drug there would be no confusion, become
inapplicable.
        6.         It    is       submitted         that    the       Respondents
                                                           ::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 16:31:21 :::
         PVR                                   13                                    app548/07
        contention        that         the    surrounding            circumstances
        such    as    (a)        the     drug      being       administered                 by
doctors after sensitivity culture test, (b) the price of the Appellants
product being higher than that of the Respondents product, (c) Micin being
common to trade, cannot and do not outweigh the impression created by the
similarity in the two marks. It is submitted that as stated above, the Supreme
Court ig in the Candila case referred to above has accepted the position that
the doctors and personnel in the hospital are not infallible.
It is submitted that the aforementioned factors
(b) and (c) are variables in as much as the use of the impugned mark by the
Respondents, in respect of pharmaceutical preparations other than the
pharmaceutical preparations presently sold by the Respondents, cannot be ruled
out and that the prices also can vary.
        7.           It     is        further         submitted             that          the
        authorities       are     useful        for    the      principles              laid
        down   therein       and       not    for     the     findings            that        a
                                                            ::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 16:31:21 :::
         PVR                              14                                 app548/07
particular mark is or is not deceptively similar to another.
8\. On the other hand on behalf of the Respondents it is submitted that both
the Appellants and 1st Respondent have coined their respective trade marks
from the generic drug name Netilmicin, and the Appellants have substituted the
letters il ig in Netilmicin by the letters ro where as the 1st Respondent has
coined its trade mark by telescoping the first 3 and the last 5 letters of the
said generic name, and both have done so with a view to indicate the contents
of the injection upon and in relation to which the respective trade marks are
used. It is submitted that the said injection is consumed mostly by hospitals
and medical institutions and is administered by doctors only after carrying
out culture sensitivity test and the said injection is an expensive drug and
the price of the 1st Respondent s drug is higher than the price of the
Appellants drug. It is submitted that the  ::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013
16:31:21 ::: PVR 15 app548/07 suffixes Micin , Mycin in the rival trade marks
are common to the trade and this fact is not disputed by the Appellants. It is
submitted that the 1st Respondent has also secured registration of its trade
mark Netmicin . It is submitted that though the 1st Respondent had not
conducted official search of the Register of Trade Marks prior to the adoption
of the trade mark Netmicin, it had requested its Trade Mark Agent to conduct
personal search at the Trade Mark Registry to ascertain availability of inter
alia the trade mark Netmicin and the said Trade Mark Agent had advised the
said Respondent after conducting such search that the trade mark Netmicin can
be adopted by the said Respondent.
It is submitted that the Trade Mark Agent s search report is on record and the
said fact is not disputed.
9\. It is further submitted that the Appellants had objected to the use of the
product insert/product literature by the 1st Respondent on  ::: Downloaded on
- 09/06/2013 16:31:21 ::: PVR 16 app548/07 the ground that the 1st Respondent
s product insert is identical to the Appellants product insert and that the
1st Respondent has thereby committed infringement of the Appellants alleged
copyright in their product insert. It is submitted that the 1st Respondent, in
its Affidavit in reply filed at the ad-interim stage, contended that the
contents of the product insert are merely of general descriptive nature and
are taken from common source and no copyright could be claimed by the
Appellants in their product insert, however, later the 1st Respondent changed
the contents of the product insert so as to avoid any possible conflict with
the Appellants on the said issue.
10\. It is to be noted that in the Notice of Motion taken out by the
Appellants, the learned Single Judge of this Court had granted ad-interim
injunction. However, that order was challenged before the Division Bench of
this Court and by consent of parties, ad-interim injunction was set  :::
Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 16:31:22 ::: PVR 17 app548/07 aside, and the
learned Single Judge was requested to hear the Notice of motion finally.
Thereafter, the Notice of Motion was finally heard and the order which is
impugned in this appeal was passed dismissing the Notice of Motion. Thus,
during the pendency of the Suit since the year 2004, admittedly, no injunction
is operating against the Respondents and it is the case of the Respondents
that the Respondents have been using their trade mark NETMICIN since
January,2003.
11\. After having heard the learned Counsel appearing for both the sides in
detail and after having gone through the judgments relied on by both the
learned Counsels and the record, we find that disturbing the order passed by
the learned Single Judge would not be proper. The trade mark of the
Respondents NETMICIN is admittedly registered, and therefore, the Respondents
have statutory right to use that trade mark. The Appellants have adopted their
trade mark NETROMYCIN from the generic drug name  ::: Downloaded on -
09/06/2013 16:31:22 ::: PVR 18 app548/07 Netilmicin . When a trade mark is
found from the common generic name, no single proprietor can claim absolute
monopoly in such name or trade mark. When a proprietor adopts a trade mark on
the basis of name of generic drug or ingredient, it will be safe to assume
that he is aware that the other proprietors are also likely to adopt and use
similar marks in case their product is based ig on the same generic drug or
ingredient. In such a case, the first user cannot claim exclusivity in his
trade mark or in the name which is derived from the generic drug.
At the most such proprietor can claim exclusivity in those added features
which differentiates his trade mark from the name of the generic drug or
ingredient. When two trade marks are coined from the same generic drug or
ingredient, there are bound to be similarities between the two and in such a
case, even if the differences between the two trade marks are minor or small,
then also at least at the prima facie stage no injunction can be granted.
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 16:31:22 :::
         PVR                               19                                  app548/07
        12.         It    has    come    on    record     that        the       other
manufacturers and traders of medicinal goods have also adopted trade marks
with prefix NET to indicate the drug name Netilmicin Sulfate and the suffix
MICIN/MYCIN is common to pharmaceutical trade. Both the trade marks are used
in respect of Netilmicin Sulfate and both the trade marks owe their origin to
the said medicine name. Since there is commonality in origin, ingredient,
composition and purpose, even if one drug is consumed for the other, there
cannot be disastrous consequences. It is an established position on record
that Netilmicin Sulphate injection is an expensive drug, consumed and used by
doctors, generally in hospitals and medical institutions while treating
patient with critical condition and is administered to patients after carrying
out sensitivity culture test and only if the doctors are satisfied that such
injection is appropriate medicine to be given to the patient. In our opinion,
the learned  ::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 16:31:22 ::: PVR 20 app548/07
Single Judge has rightly considered this aspect while rejecting the notice of
motion. It is further to be noted that the Respondents goods are purchased in
bulk by the hospitals and not by the common consumers, they are not sold over
the counter. Whereas the Appellants goods are sold over the counter to the
consumers. In our opinion, the manner in which the drug is administered and
that the product of the Respondents is used only in the hospitals by the
Doctors after carrying out sensitivity culture test, is enough to rule out any
possibility of any confusion as the chemical used in both the products is
same. Even if by mistake one is used for the other, no injury is likely to be
suffered by the consumer or patient. In our opinion, therefore, this
circumstance coupled with the circumstance that both the trade marks are
registered and that from the year 2003 the Respondents have been using its
trade mark uninterruptedly dis-entitles the Plaintiffs-
Appellants to interim injunction restraining the  ::: Downloaded on -
09/06/2013 16:31:22 ::: PVR 21 app548/07 Defendants-Respondents from using its
trade mark.
13\. So far as the complaint in relation to the product insert is concerned,
admittedly, the Respondents have changed the contents of the product insert.
14\. In the result, therefore, the Appeal fails and is dismissed. No order as
to costs.
(D.K.DESHMUKH,J.) (Smt.R.P.SONDURBALDOTA,J.) ...
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 16:31:22 :::
bulk by the hospitals and not by the common consumers, they are not sold over
the counter. Whereas the Appellants goods are sold over the counter to the
consumers. In our opinion, the manner in which the drug is administered and
that the product of the Respondents is used only in the hospitals by the
Doctors after carrying out sensitivity culture test, is enough to rule out any
possibility of any confusion as the chemical used in both the products is
same. Even if by mistake one is used for the other, no injury is likely to be
suffered by the consumer or patient. In our opinion, therefore, this
circumstance coupled with the circumstance that both the trade marks are
registered and that from the year 2003 the Respondents have been using its
trade mark uninterruptedly dis-entitles the Plaintiffs-
Appellants to interim injunction restraining the  ::: Downloaded on -
09/06/2013 16:31:22 ::: PVR 21 app548/07 Defendants-Respondents from using its
trade mark.
13\. So far as the complaint in relation to the product insert is concerned,
admittedly, the Respondents have changed the contents of the product insert.
        Hill Road, Kenilworth,               )
        New Jersey, U.S.A.                   )
                                             )
        2. Fulfort(India)Limited,            )
        a Company Incorporated under         )
        the Indian Companies Act 1913        )
        and having its registered            )
        Office at Eureka Tower,              )
        8th floor, Mindspace, Malad          )
        Link Road, Malad(W),                 )
        Mumbai-400064.                       )...Appellants
                vs.
        1.Messrs.United Biotech(P) Ltd.      )
        incorporated by the provisions       )
        of the Companies Act,1956 and        )
        having its registered office at      )
        A-127 Synthofine Industrial          )
        Estate, Goregaon(E), Mumbai          )
        400063 and also an office at         )
        FC/B-1(Extn), Mohan Co-op.           )
bulk by the hospitals and not by the common consumers, they are not sold over
the counter. Whereas the Appellants goods are sold over the counter to the
consumers. In our opinion, the manner in which the drug is administered and
that the product of the Respondents is used only in the hospitals by the
Doctors after carrying out sensitivity culture test, is enough to rule out any
possibility of any confusion as the chemical used in both the products is
same. Even if by mistake one is used for the other, no injury is likely to be
suffered by the consumer or patient. In our opinion, therefore, this
circumstance coupled with the circumstance that both the trade marks are
registered and that from the year 2003 the Respondents have been using its
trade mark uninterruptedly dis-entitles the Plaintiffs-
Appellants to interim injunction restraining the  ::: Downloaded on -
09/06/2013 16:31:22 ::: PVR 21 app548/07 Defendants-Respondents from using its
trade mark.
13\. So far as the complaint in relation to the product insert is concerned,
admittedly, the Respondents have changed the contents of the product insert.
        Hill Road, Kenilworth,               )
        New Jersey, U.S.A.                   )
                                             )
        2. Fulfort(India)Limited,            )
        a Company Incorporated under         )
        the Indian Companies Act 1913        )
        and having its registered            )
        Office at Eureka Tower,              )
        8th floor, Mindspace, Malad          )
        Link Road, Malad(W),                 )
        Mumbai-400064.                       )...Appellants
                vs.
        1.Messrs.United Biotech(P) Ltd.      )
        incorporated by the provisions       )
        of the Companies Act,1956 and        )
        having its registered office at      )
        A-127 Synthofine Industrial          )
        Estate, Goregaon(E), Mumbai          )
        400063 and also an office at         )
        FC/B-1(Extn), Mohan Co-op.           )
bulk by the hospitals and not by the common consumers, they are not sold over
the counter. Whereas the Appellants goods are sold over the counter to the
consumers. In our opinion, the manner in which the drug is administered and
that the product of the Respondents is used only in the hospitals by the
Doctors after carrying out sensitivity culture test, is enough to rule out any
possibility of any confusion as the chemical used in both the products is
same. Even if by mistake one is used for the other, no injury is likely to be
suffered by the consumer or patient. In our opinion, therefore, this
circumstance coupled with the circumstance that both the trade marks are
registered and that from the year 2003 the Respondents have been using its
trade mark uninterruptedly dis-entitles the Plaintiffs-
Appellants to interim injunction restraining the  ::: Downloaded on -
09/06/2013 16:31:22 ::: PVR 21 app548/07 Defendants-Respondents from using its
trade mark.
13\. So far as the complaint in relation to the product insert is concerned,
admittedly, the Respondents have changed the contents of the product insert.
        Hill Road, Kenilworth,               )
        New Jersey, U.S.A.                   )
                                             )
        2. Fulfort(India)Limited,            )
        a Company Incorporated under         )
        the Indian Companies Act 1913        )
        and having its registered            )
        Office at Eureka Tower,              )
        8th floor, Mindspace, Malad          )
        Link Road, Malad(W),                 )
        Mumbai-400064.                       )...Appellants
                vs.
        1.Messrs.United Biotech(P) Ltd.      )
        incorporated by the provisions       )
        of the Companies Act,1956 and        )
        having its registered office at      )
        A-127 Synthofine Industrial          )
        Estate, Goregaon(E), Mumbai          )
        400063 and also an office at         )
        FC/B-1(Extn), Mohan Co-op.           )
        Industrial Estate Mathura Road,      )
        New Delhi   110 044.                 )
                                          ::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 16:31:21 :::
         PVR                             2                              app548/07
        2. Messrs.Oscar Remedies Pvt.Ltd.         )
        incorporated under the provisions         )
        of the Companies Act,1956, having         )
        its office at Badi Mazra,                 )
        Yamunanagar 135 001, Haryana              )...Respondents
                                       ---
        Dr.V.V.Tulzapurkar, Sr.Advocate i/b.M/s.Cr.Baylay
bulk by the hospitals and not by the common consumers, they are not sold over
the counter. Whereas the Appellants goods are sold over the counter to the
consumers. In our opinion, the manner in which the drug is administered and
that the product of the Respondents is used only in the hospitals by the
Doctors after carrying out sensitivity culture test, is enough to rule out any
possibility of any confusion as the chemical used in both the products is
same. Even if by mistake one is used for the other, no injury is likely to be
suffered by the consumer or patient. In our opinion, therefore, this
circumstance coupled with the circumstance that both the trade marks are
registered and that from the year 2003 the Respondents have been using its
trade mark uninterruptedly dis-entitles the Plaintiffs-
Appellants to interim injunction restraining the  ::: Downloaded on -
09/06/2013 16:31:22 ::: PVR 21 app548/07 Defendants-Respondents from using its
trade mark.
13\. So far as the complaint in relation to the product insert is concerned,
admittedly, the Respondents have changed the contents of the product insert.
        Hill Road, Kenilworth,               )
        New Jersey, U.S.A.                   )
                                             )
        2. Fulfort(India)Limited,            )
        a Company Incorporated under         )
        the Indian Companies Act 1913        )
        and having its registered            )
        Office at Eureka Tower,              )
        8th floor, Mindspace, Malad          )
        Link Road, Malad(W),                 )
        Mumbai-400064.                       )...Appellants
                vs.
        1.Messrs.United Biotech(P) Ltd.      )
        incorporated by the provisions       )
        of the Companies Act,1956 and        )
        having its registered office at      )
        A-127 Synthofine Industrial          )
        Estate, Goregaon(E), Mumbai          )
        400063 and also an office at         )
        FC/B-1(Extn), Mohan Co-op.           )
        Industrial Estate Mathura Road,      )
        New Delhi   110 044.                 )
                                          ::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 16:31:21 :::
         PVR                             2                              app548/07
        2. Messrs.Oscar Remedies Pvt.Ltd.         )
        incorporated under the provisions         )
        of the Companies Act,1956, having         )
        its office at Badi Mazra,                 )
        Yamunanagar 135 001, Haryana              )...Respondents
                                       ---
        Dr.V.V.Tulzapurkar, Sr.Advocate i/b.M/s.Cr.Baylay
bulk by the hospitals and not by the common consumers, they are not sold over
the counter. Whereas the Appellants goods are sold over the counter to the
consumers. In our opinion, the manner in which the drug is administered and
that the product of the Respondents is used only in the hospitals by the
Doctors after carrying out sensitivity culture test, is enough to rule out any
possibility of any confusion as the chemical used in both the products is
same. Even if by mistake one is used for the other, no injury is likely to be
suffered by the consumer or patient. In our opinion, therefore, this
circumstance coupled with the circumstance that both the trade marks are
registered and that from the year 2003 the Respondents have been using its
trade mark uninterruptedly dis-entitles the Plaintiffs-
Appellants to interim injunction restraining the  ::: Downloaded on -
09/06/2013 16:31:22 ::: PVR 21 app548/07 Defendants-Respondents from using its
trade mark.
13\. So far as the complaint in relation to the product insert is concerned,
admittedly, the Respondents have changed the contents of the product insert.
