Madras High Court
Union Of India vs Indo-French Pharmaceutical ... on 4 November, 1982
Equivalent citations: 1984 (2) ECC 237, 1983 ECR 41 D Madras, 1983 (12) ELT
725 Mad
Author: Padmanabhan
Bench: K Singh, Padmanabhan
ORDER Padmanabhan, J.
1\. This writ appeal has been filed by the Union of India against the order of
a learned single Judge of this court in W.P. No. 2967 of 1973.
2\. The question to be decided in the writ appeal centres round the fact
whether the respondent Messrs Indo-French Pharmaceutical Company can be said
to have used a mark, symbol, monogram or label in marketing its medicinal
preparations. The respondent is a manufacturer of pharmaceutical products,
some of which are liable to excise duty, and others not. The respondent has
admittedly taken out a licence for the manufacture of those pharmaceutical
products in respect of which they are bound to pay excise duty. They
manufactured three Indian Pharmacopoeia products, viz. (1) Sulphagunidire
tablets, (2) Sulpha Dimidine tablets and (3) Calcium Gluconets tablets. These
items had been classified as non-excisable, and the respondent has been
clearing the items without payment of excise duty with the approval of the
Eucalyptus oil. In that case, the manufacturer bottled the product and put it
in cardboard cartons. The cartons contained a picture of a child with the
following particulars among others - "Vintone oil of Eucalyptus (I.P.) for
cold, headache, and pains - repacked - Dentone Chemical Works, No. 13
Kondichetti Street, Madras-I". It also contained an indication that it was a
medicine or 'Cushadam' for curing cold, headache, and pains. In the light of
these facts, the learned Judge followed the decision in Writ App. No. 23 of
1964 and held that the product was liable to excise duty. We are of the
opinion that the facts before the learned Judge were entirely different from
the facts in this case.
8\. To conclude, we agree with the learned single Judge that the symbol used
by the respondent cannot be said to be distinctive enough to attract item 14-E
read with Explanation 1 of the First Schedule to the Central Excises and Salt
Act. It is also admitted that the said symbol or mark is not the registered
trade mark of the respondent. It is equally admitted that this mark is being
used by the respondent in respect of all their preparations. There is
clearing the items without payment of excise duty with the approval of the
Central Excise authorities. While so, on 2nd February 1971, the third
appellant called upon the respondent to show cause why duty should not be
levied on the said three preparations from 19th September 1966 to 9th April
1970 and why a penalty should not be levied. The respondent contended that
these items were not excisable, and consequently no duty was liable to be
paid. However the third appellant ultimately levied a sum of Rs. 11,319.90 by
way excise duty. The respondent having exhausted all the statutory remedies,
filed a writ petition which was allowed by a learned single Judge.
3\. The label used by the respondent contains the name of the products as per
the Indian Pharmacopoeia, and it also contains the name of the respondent as
manufacturers. The label shows in bold letters that it is poison. It also
contains the Schedule H drug warning. Above all this, the label contains a
symbol with the words superscribed 'Indo-French'. The symbol is a very small
one and appears to be very insignificant when compared to the over all size of
the label.
4\. The contention of Mr. K. N. Balasubramaniam, the learned Additional
Central Government Standing counsel, is that since the medicine bears on
itself or its container the monogram or a symbol to indicate the connection
between the medicine and the manufacturer, it will attract excise duty on the
item under item 14-E of the First Schedule to the Central Excises and Salt Act
read with the Explanation I thereof. The question is how far this contention
can be sustained.
Item 14-E reads as follows :
       "Patent or proprietary medicine not containing       Sixty per cent
    alcohol, opium, Indian hemp or other narcotic,       ad valorem.
    drugs or other narcotics other than those
    medicines which are exclusively ayurvedic,
    unani, sidha or homeopathic.
Explanation 1. - 'Patent or proprietary medicines' means any drugs or
medicinal preparation, in whatever form, for use in the internal or external
treatment of, or for the prevention of ailments in, human beings or animals
which bears either on itself or on its container or both, a name which is not
specified in a monograph in a pharmacopoeia, formulary or other publications
notified in this behalf by the Central Government in the official Gazette or
which is a brand name, that is, a name or a registered trade mark under the
Trade and Merchandise Marks Act, 1958 (43 of 1958), or any other work, such as
a symbol, monogram, label, signature or invented words or any writing which is
issued in relation to the medicine for the purpose of indicating or so as to
indicate a connection in the course or trade between the medicine and some
person having the right either as proprietor or otherwise to use the name or
mark with or without any indication of the identity of that person."
5\. It is admitted that the three products manufactured by the respondent are
Indian Pharmacopoeia products. In the Explanation, these products will become
patent and proprietary medicines only if a symbol, monogram, label, signature
or invented words or any writing which is used in relation to that medicine
for the purpose of indicating or so as to indicate a connection in the course
of trade between the medicine and some person having the right either as
proprietor or otherwise to use the name or mark. In other words, if a
manufacturer uses a word, symbol or monogram, apart from a monograph in a
pharmacopoeia, formulary or other publications, that could be treated as
indicating that the manufacturer has a proprietary interest in the medicine
manufactured by him. The symbol used by the respondent cannot be described as
a monogram. In the Concise Oxford Dictionary, 6th Edition, the meaning of
'monogram' is given thus - 'Two or more letters, especially person's initials,
interwoven as device'. In view of this meaning of the word 'monogram', the
learned Standing Counsel contended that it might be taken to be a symbol and
even then these products would become patent or proprietary medicines under
Explanation I to Item 14-E. We are unable to accept this contention of the
learned Standing Counsel. In order to attract the Explanation I to Item 14-E,
the symbol must indicate a connection in the course of trade between the
medicine and some person having the right either as proprietor or otherwise to
use the name or mark with or without any indication of the identity of that
person. The label itself contains the name of the respondent in full as "Indo-
French Manufacturing Co. (P) Ltd., Nanganallur, Madras 61". The symbol, as
already stated is a small rectangle with a flame and the words 'Indo-French'
super added. The symbol by itself cannot be said to be intended to indicate a
connection in the course of trade between medicine and the respondent. Further
it is so insignificant in appearance compared to the over all size of the
label that an ordinary prudent and reasonable man is not likely to draw any
connection between the respondent and the medicine in the course of the trade.
6\. The learned Standing Counsel drew our attention to two decisions of this
Court, one in W.A. 23 of 1964 (The Collector of Central Excise, Madras v. A.
P. Basava Prabhu, Proprietor Messrs T. C. Nagalingappa & Co., Madras) and the
other in W.P. 1477 of 1966 (V. Susheela v. The Assistant Collector of Central
Excise, Integrated Division, Madras). The preparation that was the subject-
matter of consideration before the Bench in W.A. No. 23 of 1964 was Eucalyptus
oil. In that case, the bottle marketed by Messrs Nagalingappa & Co. contained
besides the words 'Nilgiri Thailam', in Tamil, the photograph, signature and
name or initials or the Manufacturing Company. These features were taken by
the learned Judges to be distinctive features, and by these distinctive
features, a connection was sought to be established in the course of trade
between the company and the Eucalyptus oil. We are of the view that the facts
of the case with which the Bench were concerned were entirely different. In
the view of the presence of the photograph, signature and name or the initials
of the manufacturer, the learned Judges, we may say so with respect, came to
the right conclusion that the manufacturer used a distinctive mark or symbol
to connect the medicinal preparations with the company in the course of the
trade.
7\. In W.P. No. 1477 of 1966, the learned Judge was again concerned with
Eucalyptus oil. In that case, the manufacturer bottled the product and put it
in cardboard cartons. The cartons contained a picture of a child with the
following particulars among others - "Vintone oil of Eucalyptus (I.P.) for
cold, headache, and pains - repacked - Dentone Chemical Works, No. 13
Kondichetti Street, Madras-I". It also contained an indication that it was a
medicine or 'Cushadam' for curing cold, headache, and pains. In the light of
these facts, the learned Judge followed the decision in Writ App. No. 23 of
1964 and held that the product was liable to excise duty. We are of the
opinion that the facts before the learned Judge were entirely different from
the facts in this case.
8\. To conclude, we agree with the learned single Judge that the symbol used
by the respondent cannot be said to be distinctive enough to attract item 14-E
read with Explanation 1 of the First Schedule to the Central Excises and Salt
Act. It is also admitted that the said symbol or mark is not the registered
trade mark of the respondent. It is equally admitted that this mark is being
used by the respondent in respect of all their preparations. There is
absolutely nothing in the mark to indicate a connection in the course of trade
between the medicine and the respondent. We therefore confirm the order of the
learned single Judge and dismiss the appeal. There will, however, be no order
as to costs.
Eucalyptus oil. In that case, the manufacturer bottled the product and put it
in cardboard cartons. The cartons contained a picture of a child with the
following particulars among others - "Vintone oil of Eucalyptus (I.P.) for
cold, headache, and pains - repacked - Dentone Chemical Works, No. 13
Kondichetti Street, Madras-I". It also contained an indication that it was a
medicine or 'Cushadam' for curing cold, headache, and pains. In the light of
these facts, the learned Judge followed the decision in Writ App. No. 23 of
1964 and held that the product was liable to excise duty. We are of the
opinion that the facts before the learned Judge were entirely different from
the facts in this case.
8\. To conclude, we agree with the learned single Judge that the symbol used
by the respondent cannot be said to be distinctive enough to attract item 14-E
read with Explanation 1 of the First Schedule to the Central Excises and Salt
Act. It is also admitted that the said symbol or mark is not the registered
trade mark of the respondent. It is equally admitted that this mark is being
used by the respondent in respect of all their preparations. There is
clearing the items without payment of excise duty with the approval of the
Central Excise authorities. While so, on 2nd February 1971, the third
appellant called upon the respondent to show cause why duty should not be
levied on the said three preparations from 19th September 1966 to 9th April
1970 and why a penalty should not be levied. The respondent contended that
these items were not excisable, and consequently no duty was liable to be
paid. However the third appellant ultimately levied a sum of Rs. 11,319.90 by
way excise duty. The respondent having exhausted all the statutory remedies,
filed a writ petition which was allowed by a learned single Judge.
3\. The label used by the respondent contains the name of the products as per
the Indian Pharmacopoeia, and it also contains the name of the respondent as
manufacturers. The label shows in bold letters that it is poison. It also
contains the Schedule H drug warning. Above all this, the label contains a
symbol with the words superscribed 'Indo-French'. The symbol is a very small
one and appears to be very insignificant when compared to the over all size of
the label.
4\. The contention of Mr. K. N. Balasubramaniam, the learned Additional
Central Government Standing counsel, is that since the medicine bears on
itself or its container the monogram or a symbol to indicate the connection
between the medicine and the manufacturer, it will attract excise duty on the
Eucalyptus oil. In that case, the manufacturer bottled the product and put it
in cardboard cartons. The cartons contained a picture of a child with the
following particulars among others - "Vintone oil of Eucalyptus (I.P.) for
cold, headache, and pains - repacked - Dentone Chemical Works, No. 13
Kondichetti Street, Madras-I". It also contained an indication that it was a
medicine or 'Cushadam' for curing cold, headache, and pains. In the light of
these facts, the learned Judge followed the decision in Writ App. No. 23 of
1964 and held that the product was liable to excise duty. We are of the
opinion that the facts before the learned Judge were entirely different from
the facts in this case.
8\. To conclude, we agree with the learned single Judge that the symbol used
by the respondent cannot be said to be distinctive enough to attract item 14-E
read with Explanation 1 of the First Schedule to the Central Excises and Salt
Act. It is also admitted that the said symbol or mark is not the registered
trade mark of the respondent. It is equally admitted that this mark is being
used by the respondent in respect of all their preparations. There is
clearing the items without payment of excise duty with the approval of the
Central Excise authorities. While so, on 2nd February 1971, the third
appellant called upon the respondent to show cause why duty should not be
levied on the said three preparations from 19th September 1966 to 9th April
1970 and why a penalty should not be levied. The respondent contended that
these items were not excisable, and consequently no duty was liable to be
paid. However the third appellant ultimately levied a sum of Rs. 11,319.90 by
way excise duty. The respondent having exhausted all the statutory remedies,
filed a writ petition which was allowed by a learned single Judge.
3\. The label used by the respondent contains the name of the products as per
the Indian Pharmacopoeia, and it also contains the name of the respondent as
manufacturers. The label shows in bold letters that it is poison. It also
contains the Schedule H drug warning. Above all this, the label contains a
symbol with the words superscribed 'Indo-French'. The symbol is a very small
one and appears to be very insignificant when compared to the over all size of
the label.
4\. The contention of Mr. K. N. Balasubramaniam, the learned Additional
Central Government Standing counsel, is that since the medicine bears on
itself or its container the monogram or a symbol to indicate the connection
between the medicine and the manufacturer, it will attract excise duty on the
Eucalyptus oil. In that case, the manufacturer bottled the product and put it
in cardboard cartons. The cartons contained a picture of a child with the
following particulars among others - "Vintone oil of Eucalyptus (I.P.) for
cold, headache, and pains - repacked - Dentone Chemical Works, No. 13
Kondichetti Street, Madras-I". It also contained an indication that it was a
medicine or 'Cushadam' for curing cold, headache, and pains. In the light of
these facts, the learned Judge followed the decision in Writ App. No. 23 of
1964 and held that the product was liable to excise duty. We are of the
opinion that the facts before the learned Judge were entirely different from
the facts in this case.
8\. To conclude, we agree with the learned single Judge that the symbol used
by the respondent cannot be said to be distinctive enough to attract item 14-E
read with Explanation 1 of the First Schedule to the Central Excises and Salt
Act. It is also admitted that the said symbol or mark is not the registered
trade mark of the respondent. It is equally admitted that this mark is being
used by the respondent in respect of all their preparations. There is
clearing the items without payment of excise duty with the approval of the
Central Excise authorities. While so, on 2nd February 1971, the third
appellant called upon the respondent to show cause why duty should not be
levied on the said three preparations from 19th September 1966 to 9th April
1970 and why a penalty should not be levied. The respondent contended that
these items were not excisable, and consequently no duty was liable to be
paid. However the third appellant ultimately levied a sum of Rs. 11,319.90 by
way excise duty. The respondent having exhausted all the statutory remedies,
filed a writ petition which was allowed by a learned single Judge.
3\. The label used by the respondent contains the name of the products as per
the Indian Pharmacopoeia, and it also contains the name of the respondent as
manufacturers. The label shows in bold letters that it is poison. It also
contains the Schedule H drug warning. Above all this, the label contains a
symbol with the words superscribed 'Indo-French'. The symbol is a very small
one and appears to be very insignificant when compared to the over all size of
the label.
4\. The contention of Mr. K. N. Balasubramaniam, the learned Additional
Central Government Standing counsel, is that since the medicine bears on
itself or its container the monogram or a symbol to indicate the connection
between the medicine and the manufacturer, it will attract excise duty on the
item under item 14-E of the First Schedule to the Central Excises and Salt Act
read with the Explanation I thereof. The question is how far this contention
can be sustained.
Item 14-E reads as follows :
       "Patent or proprietary medicine not containing       Sixty per cent
    alcohol, opium, Indian hemp or other narcotic,       ad valorem.
    drugs or other narcotics other than those
    medicines which are exclusively ayurvedic,
    unani, sidha or homeopathic.
Explanation 1. - 'Patent or proprietary medicines' means any drugs or
medicinal preparation, in whatever form, for use in the internal or external
Eucalyptus oil. In that case, the manufacturer bottled the product and put it
in cardboard cartons. The cartons contained a picture of a child with the
following particulars among others - "Vintone oil of Eucalyptus (I.P.) for
cold, headache, and pains - repacked - Dentone Chemical Works, No. 13
Kondichetti Street, Madras-I". It also contained an indication that it was a
medicine or 'Cushadam' for curing cold, headache, and pains. In the light of
these facts, the learned Judge followed the decision in Writ App. No. 23 of
1964 and held that the product was liable to excise duty. We are of the
opinion that the facts before the learned Judge were entirely different from
the facts in this case.
8\. To conclude, we agree with the learned single Judge that the symbol used
by the respondent cannot be said to be distinctive enough to attract item 14-E
read with Explanation 1 of the First Schedule to the Central Excises and Salt
Act. It is also admitted that the said symbol or mark is not the registered
trade mark of the respondent. It is equally admitted that this mark is being
used by the respondent in respect of all their preparations. There is
clearing the items without payment of excise duty with the approval of the
Central Excise authorities. While so, on 2nd February 1971, the third
appellant called upon the respondent to show cause why duty should not be
levied on the said three preparations from 19th September 1966 to 9th April
1970 and why a penalty should not be levied. The respondent contended that
these items were not excisable, and consequently no duty was liable to be
paid. However the third appellant ultimately levied a sum of Rs. 11,319.90 by
way excise duty. The respondent having exhausted all the statutory remedies,
filed a writ petition which was allowed by a learned single Judge.
3\. The label used by the respondent contains the name of the products as per
the Indian Pharmacopoeia, and it also contains the name of the respondent as
manufacturers. The label shows in bold letters that it is poison. It also
contains the Schedule H drug warning. Above all this, the label contains a
symbol with the words superscribed 'Indo-French'. The symbol is a very small
one and appears to be very insignificant when compared to the over all size of
the label.
4\. The contention of Mr. K. N. Balasubramaniam, the learned Additional
Central Government Standing counsel, is that since the medicine bears on
itself or its container the monogram or a symbol to indicate the connection
between the medicine and the manufacturer, it will attract excise duty on the
item under item 14-E of the First Schedule to the Central Excises and Salt Act
read with the Explanation I thereof. The question is how far this contention
can be sustained.
Item 14-E reads as follows :
       "Patent or proprietary medicine not containing       Sixty per cent
    alcohol, opium, Indian hemp or other narcotic,       ad valorem.
    drugs or other narcotics other than those
    medicines which are exclusively ayurvedic,
    unani, sidha or homeopathic.
Explanation 1. - 'Patent or proprietary medicines' means any drugs or
medicinal preparation, in whatever form, for use in the internal or external
Eucalyptus oil. In that case, the manufacturer bottled the product and put it
in cardboard cartons. The cartons contained a picture of a child with the
following particulars among others - "Vintone oil of Eucalyptus (I.P.) for
cold, headache, and pains - repacked - Dentone Chemical Works, No. 13
Kondichetti Street, Madras-I". It also contained an indication that it was a
medicine or 'Cushadam' for curing cold, headache, and pains. In the light of
these facts, the learned Judge followed the decision in Writ App. No. 23 of
1964 and held that the product was liable to excise duty. We are of the
opinion that the facts before the learned Judge were entirely different from
the facts in this case.
8\. To conclude, we agree with the learned single Judge that the symbol used
by the respondent cannot be said to be distinctive enough to attract item 14-E
read with Explanation 1 of the First Schedule to the Central Excises and Salt
Act. It is also admitted that the said symbol or mark is not the registered
trade mark of the respondent. It is equally admitted that this mark is being
used by the respondent in respect of all their preparations. There is
