Delhi High Court - Orders
Dan Singh @ Danveer Singh @ Danu vs State on 29 January, 2021
                          $~3
                          *      IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
                          +      BAIL APPLN. 675/2020
                                 DAN SINGH @ DANVEER SINGH @ DANU                    ..... Petitioner
                                                    Through:     Mr.Vikas Gautam, Advocate.
                                                    versus
                                 STATE                                               ..... Respondent
                                                    Through:     Mr. Kamal Kumar Ghai, APP for
                                                                 State with Insp. Dalip Kumar, Special
                                                                 Cell.
                                 CORAM:
                                 HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE ANU MALHOTRA
                                         ORDER
% 29.01.2021 The applicant, vide the present application seeks the grant of
bail in relation to FIR No.14/2014, PS Special Cell, Delhi dated 26.03.2014
under Sections 20/29 of the NDPS Act, 1985 and Sections 468/471 r/w Section
201 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
It has been submitted on behalf of the applicant that the applicant has been
presently, the stated conversation between the applicant as well as the voice
samples of the applicant, as examined by the CFSL/CBI in the circumstances of
the case where the commercial quantity of contraband is involved, bring forth
the applicability of Section 37 of the NDPS Act, 1985 wholly against the
applicant and thus put an embargo to the grant of bail in the instant case.
The Bail Appl. No.675/2020 is declined. However, in as much as, the applicant
is on interim bail till today which has been extended in view of the orders of
the Hon'ble Supreme Court vide order dated 19.01.2021 till date in view of the
orders of the Hon'ble Supreme Court dated 21.01.2021 in Special Leave to
Appeal (C) No(s).13021/2020, whereby interim bails as a consequence thereof
stand  BAIL APPLN. 675/2020 Page 8 of 9 Signature Not Verified Digitally
Signed By:SUMIT GHAI Signing Date:01.02.2021 16:08:15 This file is digitally
signed by PS to HMJ ANU MALHOTRA.
extended till the date 25.02.2021, the applicant in the instant case is thus,
directed to surrender on 26.02.2021 before the Superintendent Jail, Delhi
concerned.
It has been submitted on behalf of the applicant that the applicant has been
falsely implicated in the instant case; that there was no recovery effected
from the applicant of any contraband and that the allegations levelled against
the applicant of being involved in relation to the recovery of Charas of 2.210
kgs of commercial quantity do not relate to him and that he has been falsely
implicated in the instant case. It has been submitted on  BAIL APPLN. 675/2020
Page 1 of 9 Signature Not Verified Digitally Signed By:SUMIT GHAI Signing
Date:01.02.2021 16:08:15 This file is digitally signed by PS to HMJ ANU
MALHOTRA.
behalf of the applicant that there is no overt role whatsoever that the State
has been able to bring forth qua him and that there are only alleged
disclosure statements made by the co-accused which would be hit by the verdict
of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Tofan Singh vs. The State of Tamil Nadu, 2020
SCC Online SC 882 case and that thus, there is nothing available with the
Investigating Agency to indicate any culpability of the applicant.
Taking into account the averments that had been made in the status report that
had been submitted by the State dated 25.11.2020, vide order dated 19.01.2021
in view of the submissions that have been made in the status report filed by
the State that there are a number of calls between the present applicant and
the other accused persons which had been intercepted through the legal
interception orders of the Competent Authority in which the contents of their
intercepted calls relate to the recovered Narcotic Drug/Stuff and that the
voice samples of those accused persons also matched with their intercepted
calls as per the report of the CFSL/CBI, the copy of the CFSL result and the
copy of the transcripts of the intercepted calls between the petitioner and
the other accused persons in relation to the alleged consignment recovered in
the instant case of the alleged contraband was directed to be placed on record
by the State qua which on behalf of the State, vide an index dated 27.01.2021,
additional documents have been placed on the record which comprise of
Annexure-A, the transcript of intercepted calls and Annexure-B, the CFSL
results related to the examination of the voice samples.
The allegations levelled against the applicant in the instant case as per
BAIL APPLN. 675/2020 Page 2 of 9 Signature Not Verified Digitally Signed
By:SUMIT GHAI Signing Date:01.02.2021 16:08:15 This file is digitally signed
by PS to HMJ ANU MALHOTRA.
the status report dated 25.11.2020 alleged to the effect that one Danveer @
Daanu r/o Kangra, Himachal Pradesh i.e. the present applicant would come to
Karol Bagh, Delhi alongwith his other associates in an Alto Car bearing number
HP-01D-3703, and would deliver a consignment of narcotic drugs/substances
(Charas/Hashish) to one of his associates of Russian origin at Gurudwara Road,
behind Jassa Ram Hospital, Karol Bagh, Delhi at about 11 AM and that if a raid
could be conducted, they could be apprehended, as a consequence of which a
raid was conducted in the area of Karol Bagh, opp. Jassa Ram Fortis Hospital,
Gurudwara Road, New Delhi and three accused persons including one foreigner
namely Georgi Dedov @ Gausa r/o Moscow, Russia, with the co-accused namely
Anil Kumar @ Nillu (aged 42 yrs.) r/o Village Chougan, Distt. Kangra, Himachal
Pradesh and Anil Kumar @ Lucky (aged 24 yrs.) t/o Distt. Mandi, Himachal
Pradesh, were apprehended. The accused persons namely Anil Kumar @ Nillu and
Anil Kumar @ Lucky were stated to have reached the spot in a Maruti Alto Car
bearing number HP-01D-3703, and handed over a consignment of 2.210 kgs of
Narcotic Drugs Cannabis (Charas/Hashish) which is a "commercial quantity' as
per the provisions of NDPS Act to Georgii Dedov@ Gausa @ Gosa. The recovered
narcotic drugs (Charas/Hashish) was found to be total 2.210 Kgs., whereafter
the FIR was registered and the accused persons namely Georgii Dedov @ Gausa,
Anil Kumar @ Nillu, and Anil Kumar @ Lucky, were arrested in the case. As per
the interrogation conducted of these accused persons, it was allegedly
revealed to the Investigating Agency that the said consignment of the
recovered narcotic drug (Charas/Hashish) had  BAIL APPLN. 675/2020 Page 3 of 9
Signature Not Verified Digitally Signed By:SUMIT GHAI Signing Date:01.02.2021
16:08:15 This file is digitally signed by PS to HMJ ANU MALHOTRA.
been sent by the present petitioner/accused Dan Singh @ Danveer Singh @Daanu
r/o Village Chaugan, Distt. Kangra, HP through his associates namely Anil
Kumar @ Nillu and Anil Kumar Lucky to be delivered to the said Russian Georgii
Dedov Gausa in Delhi and that during investigation, it was also revealed that
the said accused Georgii Dedov @ Gausa was in constant touch with the present
applicant since long and had been receiving such drugs from the applicant
earlier also.
It is stated further through the said status report that the co-accused Gausa
had already sent the part payment for the recovered drugs to the applicant
through bank, and the remaining payment was to be made at the time of
delivery, which was also recovered from the possession of the co- accused
Gausa at the time of his apprehension in the instant case. It has been
submitted through the status report and also through the course of submissions
made on behalf of the State that efforts were made to trace out the present
applicant, raids were conducted at his residence and other hideouts of the
accused Dan Singh (i.e. the present applicant), at the pointing out of other
arrested accused persons, but that the applicant intentionally absconded and
non-bailable warrants (NBW) were thus got issued from the concerned Court for
his apprehension and subsequently, on the basis of secret information, the
present applicant was arrested in the case on 24.05.2014, from his
neighbouring village. at Distt. Kangra, Himachal Pradesh, whereafter the
aspect of the applicant being involved in the supply of narcotic drugs and
running a illegal drugs business from his various business houses/Hotels etc.
was investigated.
It has been submitted on behalf of the State through the status report  BAIL
APPLN. 675/2020 Page 4 of 9 Signature Not Verified Digitally Signed By:SUMIT
GHAI Signing Date:01.02.2021 16:08:15 This file is digitally signed by PS to
HMJ ANU MALHOTRA.
that the name of the applicant is mentioned in the initial secret information
as well as in the FIR; that there are number of intercepted calls between the
present applicant/accused Dan Singh@ Danvir Singh @ Daanu and his co- accused
Georgii Dedov @ Gausa, regarding demand and supply of the recovered
consignment of narcotic drugs (Charas/Hashish), which has since been recovered
and that the contents of intercepted calls, secret information, subsequent
recovery and other corroborated evidence bring out the allegations levelled
against the applicant of his being involved in the syndicate of narcotic
drugs. It has also been stated through the status report to the effect that
the CDRs of the mobile number of the applicant bearing No. 9817044974 and the
CDRs of Georgii Dedov @ Gausa from his international number (79015325808) and
Indian number (8447715839) have been intercepted through legal interception
orders of the competent authorities in which the contents of their talks were
related to the consignment of recovered narcotic drug/stuff and that these
voice samples of these persons had matched with their intercepted calls as per
the report of experts CFSL/CBI, Delhi.
It is also stated through the status report submitted by the State dated
25.11.2020 that part payment of the recovered consignment of drug as received
from the co-accused Georgii Dedov @ Gausa through the bank account of his
friend Manjeet Singh @ Mannu, who is now a prosecution witness has been
received by the applicant. The State has also submitted to the effect that the
mobile phone numbers (i.e. number 9817044974, 8894643410, 8679233443 and
8894846585), used by the present applicant were found to be subscribed in the
names of other persons i.e. a student and  BAIL APPLN. 675/2020 Page 5 of 9
Signature Not Verified Digitally Signed By:SUMIT GHAI Signing Date:01.02.2021
16:08:15 This file is digitally signed by PS to HMJ ANU MALHOTRA.
also other employees of the applicant and all these persons are arrayed as
prosecution witnesses in the case. The applicant is also stated to have been
in Delhi with his other friends and stayed in the Hotel Royal Palace, Karol
Bagh, Delhi on 26.03.2014 and he has left Delhi on the same day. It is
submitted through the status report that the matter is at the stage of
prosecution evidence of which there are 47 witnesses cited and 17 witnesses
remained to be examined.
The State has opposed the prayer made by the applicant seeking the grant of
bail submitting to the effect that there is likelihood of the applicant
absconding and evading the criminal trial.
On behalf of the applicant, it has been submitted that the applicant has been
on interim bail several times and is presently also on interim bail pursuant
to the orders in the present proceedings on applications filed by the
applicant seeking the grant of interim bail and is presently on interim bail
till today which had been extended as per the terms and conditions as imposed
vide order dated 28.05.2020 in CRL.M.(BAIL)5914/2020 and it has been submitted
on behalf of the applicant that the bona fides of the applicant are brought
forth from the factum that the applicant has not misused the grant of interim
bail. It has further been submitted on behalf of the applicant that the
allegations levelled by the State against the applicant are based only on
probabilities, conjectures and surmises and that even as per the status report
that has been put forth by the State, there is only a probability of the voice
sample of Georgii Dedov @ Gausa and the applicant being similar to those of
the applicant and Georgii Dedov @ Gausa.
It has also been submitted on behalf of the applicant that the  BAIL APPLN.
675/2020 Page 6 of 9 Signature Not Verified Digitally Signed By:SUMIT GHAI
Signing Date:01.02.2021 16:08:15 This file is digitally signed by PS to HMJ
ANU MALHOTRA.
transcripts/intercepted calls between Georgii Dedov @ Gausa and the applicant
as alleged by the State, do not make any mention of the words Charas/Hashish
or any contraband and that thus, whereas, in as much as, the applicant is
involved in the hotel business, the statement of Georgii Dedov @ Gausa in
relation to the aspect of his requirement of some 'soft stuff' could be in
relation to any edible material which may be atta or otherwise. It has also
been submitted on behalf of the applicant that there is nothing to indicate
any monetary transaction between the applicant and Georgii Dedov @ Gausa also
in relation to the alleged contraband. Inter alia reliance is sought to be
placed on behalf of the applicant on the verdict of the Hon'ble Supreme Court
in "Chenna Boyanna Krishna Yadav Vs. State of Maharashtra & Anr." 2007
CRL.L.J.782, a case under the MCOCA, 1999 to submit to the effect that even in
a case under the MCOCA, 1999 where there are stringent conditions equally
applicable, the aspect of the broad principles of the non-requirement of
weighing the evidence meticulously at the stage of consideration of grant or
otherwise of bail, have to be taken into account and that the applicant be
thus, released on bail.
Reliance has also been placed on behalf of the applicant on the verdict of the
Hon'ble High Court of Punjab & Haryana in "Desh Raj Vs. Central Bureau of
Investigation" on the observations in paragraph 20 thereof to contend to the
effect that the technical question in relation to the voice samples cannot be
determined at this stage and the evidentiary value of the voice samples can
only be considered at the stage of trial and consideration thereof, presently
at the stage of bail would prejudice the rights both of the applicant and the
prosecution and can be determined only by the trial Court.
BAIL APPLN. 675/2020 Page 7 of 9
Signature Not Verified Digitally Signed By:SUMIT GHAI Signing Date:01.02.2021
16:08:15 This file is digitally signed by PS to HMJ ANU MALHOTRA.
On behalf of the State whilst placing reliance on the intercepted calls, it is
sought to be submitted that the conversation dated 08.03.2014 between the
applicant and Georgii Dedov @ Gausa makes mention of the problems faced by the
applicant if he goes to a place namely Manikaran because there would be
police; that there are repeated conversations between the applicant and
Georgii Dedov @ Gausa in relation to money transfers and that there is also a
conversation between the applicant and one person named Manjit, a prosecution
witness now in relation to the money transfer being effected.
On a consideration of the submissions that have been made on behalf of either
side, without any observations on the merits or demerits of the trial in
progress where the evidentiary value of the intercepted calls as well as of
the FSL result would be taken into account, it is essential to observe that
presently, the stated conversation between the applicant as well as the voice
samples of the applicant, as examined by the CFSL/CBI in the circumstances of
the case where the commercial quantity of contraband is involved, bring forth
the applicability of Section 37 of the NDPS Act, 1985 wholly against the
applicant and thus put an embargo to the grant of bail in the instant case.
The Bail Appl. No.675/2020 is declined. However, in as much as, the applicant
is on interim bail till today which has been extended in view of the orders of
the Hon'ble Supreme Court vide order dated 19.01.2021 till date in view of the
orders of the Hon'ble Supreme Court dated 21.01.2021 in Special Leave to
Appeal (C) No(s).13021/2020, whereby interim bails as a consequence thereof
stand  BAIL APPLN. 675/2020 Page 8 of 9 Signature Not Verified Digitally
Signed By:SUMIT GHAI Signing Date:01.02.2021 16:08:15 This file is digitally
signed by PS to HMJ ANU MALHOTRA.
extended till the date 25.02.2021, the applicant in the instant case is thus,
directed to surrender on 26.02.2021 before the Superintendent Jail, Delhi
concerned.
ANU MALHOTRA, J JANUARY 29, 2021 'neha chopra' BAIL APPLN. 675/2020 Page 9 of
9 Signature Not Verified Digitally Signed By:SUMIT GHAI Signing
Date:01.02.2021 16:08:15 This file is digitally signed by PS to HMJ ANU
MALHOTRA.
presently, the stated conversation between the applicant as well as the voice
samples of the applicant, as examined by the CFSL/CBI in the circumstances of
the case where the commercial quantity of contraband is involved, bring forth
the applicability of Section 37 of the NDPS Act, 1985 wholly against the
applicant and thus put an embargo to the grant of bail in the instant case.
The Bail Appl. No.675/2020 is declined. However, in as much as, the applicant
is on interim bail till today which has been extended in view of the orders of
the Hon'ble Supreme Court vide order dated 19.01.2021 till date in view of the
orders of the Hon'ble Supreme Court dated 21.01.2021 in Special Leave to
Appeal (C) No(s).13021/2020, whereby interim bails as a consequence thereof
stand  BAIL APPLN. 675/2020 Page 8 of 9 Signature Not Verified Digitally
Signed By:SUMIT GHAI Signing Date:01.02.2021 16:08:15 This file is digitally
signed by PS to HMJ ANU MALHOTRA.
extended till the date 25.02.2021, the applicant in the instant case is thus,
directed to surrender on 26.02.2021 before the Superintendent Jail, Delhi
concerned.
It has been submitted on behalf of the applicant that the applicant has been
falsely implicated in the instant case; that there was no recovery effected
from the applicant of any contraband and that the allegations levelled against
the applicant of being involved in relation to the recovery of Charas of 2.210
kgs of commercial quantity do not relate to him and that he has been falsely
implicated in the instant case. It has been submitted on  BAIL APPLN. 675/2020
Page 1 of 9 Signature Not Verified Digitally Signed By:SUMIT GHAI Signing
Date:01.02.2021 16:08:15 This file is digitally signed by PS to HMJ ANU
MALHOTRA.
behalf of the applicant that there is no overt role whatsoever that the State
has been able to bring forth qua him and that there are only alleged
disclosure statements made by the co-accused which would be hit by the verdict
of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Tofan Singh vs. The State of Tamil Nadu, 2020
SCC Online SC 882 case and that thus, there is nothing available with the
Investigating Agency to indicate any culpability of the applicant.
Taking into account the averments that had been made in the status report that
had been submitted by the State dated 25.11.2020, vide order dated 19.01.2021
in view of the submissions that have been made in the status report filed by
the State that there are a number of calls between the present applicant and
the other accused persons which had been intercepted through the legal
presently, the stated conversation between the applicant as well as the voice
samples of the applicant, as examined by the CFSL/CBI in the circumstances of
the case where the commercial quantity of contraband is involved, bring forth
the applicability of Section 37 of the NDPS Act, 1985 wholly against the
applicant and thus put an embargo to the grant of bail in the instant case.
The Bail Appl. No.675/2020 is declined. However, in as much as, the applicant
is on interim bail till today which has been extended in view of the orders of
the Hon'ble Supreme Court vide order dated 19.01.2021 till date in view of the
orders of the Hon'ble Supreme Court dated 21.01.2021 in Special Leave to
Appeal (C) No(s).13021/2020, whereby interim bails as a consequence thereof
stand  BAIL APPLN. 675/2020 Page 8 of 9 Signature Not Verified Digitally
Signed By:SUMIT GHAI Signing Date:01.02.2021 16:08:15 This file is digitally
signed by PS to HMJ ANU MALHOTRA.
extended till the date 25.02.2021, the applicant in the instant case is thus,
directed to surrender on 26.02.2021 before the Superintendent Jail, Delhi
concerned.
It has been submitted on behalf of the applicant that the applicant has been
falsely implicated in the instant case; that there was no recovery effected
from the applicant of any contraband and that the allegations levelled against
the applicant of being involved in relation to the recovery of Charas of 2.210
kgs of commercial quantity do not relate to him and that he has been falsely
implicated in the instant case. It has been submitted on  BAIL APPLN. 675/2020
Page 1 of 9 Signature Not Verified Digitally Signed By:SUMIT GHAI Signing
Date:01.02.2021 16:08:15 This file is digitally signed by PS to HMJ ANU
MALHOTRA.
behalf of the applicant that there is no overt role whatsoever that the State
has been able to bring forth qua him and that there are only alleged
disclosure statements made by the co-accused which would be hit by the verdict
of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Tofan Singh vs. The State of Tamil Nadu, 2020
SCC Online SC 882 case and that thus, there is nothing available with the
Investigating Agency to indicate any culpability of the applicant.
Taking into account the averments that had been made in the status report that
had been submitted by the State dated 25.11.2020, vide order dated 19.01.2021
in view of the submissions that have been made in the status report filed by
the State that there are a number of calls between the present applicant and
the other accused persons which had been intercepted through the legal
presently, the stated conversation between the applicant as well as the voice
samples of the applicant, as examined by the CFSL/CBI in the circumstances of
the case where the commercial quantity of contraband is involved, bring forth
the applicability of Section 37 of the NDPS Act, 1985 wholly against the
applicant and thus put an embargo to the grant of bail in the instant case.
The Bail Appl. No.675/2020 is declined. However, in as much as, the applicant
is on interim bail till today which has been extended in view of the orders of
the Hon'ble Supreme Court vide order dated 19.01.2021 till date in view of the
orders of the Hon'ble Supreme Court dated 21.01.2021 in Special Leave to
Appeal (C) No(s).13021/2020, whereby interim bails as a consequence thereof
stand  BAIL APPLN. 675/2020 Page 8 of 9 Signature Not Verified Digitally
Signed By:SUMIT GHAI Signing Date:01.02.2021 16:08:15 This file is digitally
signed by PS to HMJ ANU MALHOTRA.
extended till the date 25.02.2021, the applicant in the instant case is thus,
directed to surrender on 26.02.2021 before the Superintendent Jail, Delhi
concerned.
It has been submitted on behalf of the applicant that the applicant has been
falsely implicated in the instant case; that there was no recovery effected
from the applicant of any contraband and that the allegations levelled against
the applicant of being involved in relation to the recovery of Charas of 2.210
kgs of commercial quantity do not relate to him and that he has been falsely
implicated in the instant case. It has been submitted on  BAIL APPLN. 675/2020
Page 1 of 9 Signature Not Verified Digitally Signed By:SUMIT GHAI Signing
Date:01.02.2021 16:08:15 This file is digitally signed by PS to HMJ ANU
MALHOTRA.
behalf of the applicant that there is no overt role whatsoever that the State
has been able to bring forth qua him and that there are only alleged
disclosure statements made by the co-accused which would be hit by the verdict
of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Tofan Singh vs. The State of Tamil Nadu, 2020
SCC Online SC 882 case and that thus, there is nothing available with the
Investigating Agency to indicate any culpability of the applicant.
Taking into account the averments that had been made in the status report that
had been submitted by the State dated 25.11.2020, vide order dated 19.01.2021
in view of the submissions that have been made in the status report filed by
the State that there are a number of calls between the present applicant and
the other accused persons which had been intercepted through the legal
interception orders of the Competent Authority in which the contents of their
intercepted calls relate to the recovered Narcotic Drug/Stuff and that the
voice samples of those accused persons also matched with their intercepted
calls as per the report of the CFSL/CBI, the copy of the CFSL result and the
copy of the transcripts of the intercepted calls between the petitioner and
the other accused persons in relation to the alleged consignment recovered in
the instant case of the alleged contraband was directed to be placed on record
by the State qua which on behalf of the State, vide an index dated 27.01.2021,
additional documents have been placed on the record which comprise of
Annexure-A, the transcript of intercepted calls and Annexure-B, the CFSL
results related to the examination of the voice samples.
presently, the stated conversation between the applicant as well as the voice
samples of the applicant, as examined by the CFSL/CBI in the circumstances of
the case where the commercial quantity of contraband is involved, bring forth
the applicability of Section 37 of the NDPS Act, 1985 wholly against the
applicant and thus put an embargo to the grant of bail in the instant case.
The Bail Appl. No.675/2020 is declined. However, in as much as, the applicant
is on interim bail till today which has been extended in view of the orders of
the Hon'ble Supreme Court vide order dated 19.01.2021 till date in view of the
orders of the Hon'ble Supreme Court dated 21.01.2021 in Special Leave to
Appeal (C) No(s).13021/2020, whereby interim bails as a consequence thereof
stand  BAIL APPLN. 675/2020 Page 8 of 9 Signature Not Verified Digitally
Signed By:SUMIT GHAI Signing Date:01.02.2021 16:08:15 This file is digitally
signed by PS to HMJ ANU MALHOTRA.
extended till the date 25.02.2021, the applicant in the instant case is thus,
directed to surrender on 26.02.2021 before the Superintendent Jail, Delhi
concerned.
It has been submitted on behalf of the applicant that the applicant has been
falsely implicated in the instant case; that there was no recovery effected
from the applicant of any contraband and that the allegations levelled against
the applicant of being involved in relation to the recovery of Charas of 2.210
kgs of commercial quantity do not relate to him and that he has been falsely
implicated in the instant case. It has been submitted on  BAIL APPLN. 675/2020
Page 1 of 9 Signature Not Verified Digitally Signed By:SUMIT GHAI Signing
Date:01.02.2021 16:08:15 This file is digitally signed by PS to HMJ ANU
MALHOTRA.
behalf of the applicant that there is no overt role whatsoever that the State
has been able to bring forth qua him and that there are only alleged
disclosure statements made by the co-accused which would be hit by the verdict
of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Tofan Singh vs. The State of Tamil Nadu, 2020
SCC Online SC 882 case and that thus, there is nothing available with the
Investigating Agency to indicate any culpability of the applicant.
Taking into account the averments that had been made in the status report that
had been submitted by the State dated 25.11.2020, vide order dated 19.01.2021
in view of the submissions that have been made in the status report filed by
the State that there are a number of calls between the present applicant and
the other accused persons which had been intercepted through the legal
interception orders of the Competent Authority in which the contents of their
intercepted calls relate to the recovered Narcotic Drug/Stuff and that the
voice samples of those accused persons also matched with their intercepted
calls as per the report of the CFSL/CBI, the copy of the CFSL result and the
copy of the transcripts of the intercepted calls between the petitioner and
the other accused persons in relation to the alleged consignment recovered in
the instant case of the alleged contraband was directed to be placed on record
by the State qua which on behalf of the State, vide an index dated 27.01.2021,
additional documents have been placed on the record which comprise of
Annexure-A, the transcript of intercepted calls and Annexure-B, the CFSL
results related to the examination of the voice samples.
presently, the stated conversation between the applicant as well as the voice
samples of the applicant, as examined by the CFSL/CBI in the circumstances of
the case where the commercial quantity of contraband is involved, bring forth
the applicability of Section 37 of the NDPS Act, 1985 wholly against the
applicant and thus put an embargo to the grant of bail in the instant case.
The Bail Appl. No.675/2020 is declined. However, in as much as, the applicant
is on interim bail till today which has been extended in view of the orders of
the Hon'ble Supreme Court vide order dated 19.01.2021 till date in view of the
orders of the Hon'ble Supreme Court dated 21.01.2021 in Special Leave to
Appeal (C) No(s).13021/2020, whereby interim bails as a consequence thereof
stand  BAIL APPLN. 675/2020 Page 8 of 9 Signature Not Verified Digitally
Signed By:SUMIT GHAI Signing Date:01.02.2021 16:08:15 This file is digitally
signed by PS to HMJ ANU MALHOTRA.
extended till the date 25.02.2021, the applicant in the instant case is thus,
directed to surrender on 26.02.2021 before the Superintendent Jail, Delhi
concerned.
