Central Government Act
Section 46 in BANKING REGULATION ACT,1949
46\. Penalties.—
(1) Whoever in any return, balance-sheet or other document 1[or in any
information required or furnished] by or under or for the purposes of any
provision of this Act, wilfully makes a statement which is false in any
material particular, knowing it to be false, or wilfully omits to make a
material statement, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may
extend to three years and shall also be liable to fine.
(2) If any person fails to produce any book, account or other document or to
furnish any statement or information which under sub-section (2) of section 35
it is his duty to produce or fur­nish, or to answer any question relating to
the business of a banking company which is asked by 2[an officer making an
inspec­tion or scrutiny under that section] he shall be punishable with a fine
which may extend to 3[two thousand rupees] in respect of each offence, and if
he persists in such refusal, to a further fine which may extend to 4[one
hundred rupees] for every day during which the offence continues.
(3) If any deposits are received by a banking company in contra­vention of an
order under clause (a) of sub-section (4) of section 35, every director or
other officer of the banking company, unless he proves that the contravention
person who, at the time the contravention or default was committed, was in
charge of, and was responsible to, the company, for the conduct of the
business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty
of the contra­vention or default and shall be liable to be proceeded against
and punished accordingly: Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section
shall render any such person liable to any punishment provided in this Act if
he proves that the contravention or default was committed without his
knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the contravention
or default.
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (5), where a
contravention or default has been committed by a company, and it is proved
that the same was committed with the consent or connivance of, or is
attributable to any gross negligence on the part of, any director, manager,
secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary
or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that contravention or
default and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
other officer of the banking company, unless he proves that the contravention
took place without his knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to
prevent it shall be deemed to be guilty of such contravention and shall be
punishable with a fine which may extend to twice the amount of the deposits so
received. 5[6[7[(4) If any other provision of this Act is contravened or if
any default is made in—
(i) complying with any requirement of this Act or of any order, rule or
direction made or condition imposed thereunder, or
(ii) carrying out the terms of, or the obligations under, a scheme sanctioned
under sub-section (7) of section 45, by any person, such person shall be
punishable with fine which may extend to 8[fifty thousand rupees or twice the
amount in­volved in such contravention or default where such amount is
quantifiable, whichever is more, and where a contravention or default is a
continuing one, with a further fine which may extend to two thousand and five
hundred rupees] for every day, during which the contravention or default
continues.]]
(5) Where a contravention or default has been committed by a company, every
person who, at the time the contravention or default was committed, was in
charge of, and was responsible to, the company, for the conduct of the
business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty
of the contra­vention or default and shall be liable to be proceeded against
and punished accordingly: Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section
shall render any such person liable to any punishment provided in this Act if
he proves that the contravention or default was committed without his
knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the contravention
or default.
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (5), where a
contravention or default has been committed by a company, and it is proved
that the same was committed with the consent or connivance of, or is
attributable to any gross negligence on the part of, any director, manager,
secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary
or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that contravention or
default and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,—
(a) “company” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other
association of individuals, and
(b) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.]
person who, at the time the contravention or default was committed, was in
charge of, and was responsible to, the company, for the conduct of the
business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty
of the contra­vention or default and shall be liable to be proceeded against
and punished accordingly: Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section
shall render any such person liable to any punishment provided in this Act if
he proves that the contravention or default was committed without his
knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the contravention
or default.
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (5), where a
contravention or default has been committed by a company, and it is proved
that the same was committed with the consent or connivance of, or is
attributable to any gross negligence on the part of, any director, manager,
secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary
or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that contravention or
default and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
other officer of the banking company, unless he proves that the contravention
took place without his knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to
prevent it shall be deemed to be guilty of such contravention and shall be
punishable with a fine which may extend to twice the amount of the deposits so
received. 5[6[7[(4) If any other provision of this Act is contravened or if
any default is made in—
(i) complying with any requirement of this Act or of any order, rule or
direction made or condition imposed thereunder, or
(ii) carrying out the terms of, or the obligations under, a scheme sanctioned
under sub-section (7) of section 45, by any person, such person shall be
punishable with fine which may extend to 8[fifty thousand rupees or twice the
amount in­volved in such contravention or default where such amount is
quantifiable, whichever is more, and where a contravention or default is a
continuing one, with a further fine which may extend to two thousand and five
hundred rupees] for every day, during which the contravention or default
continues.]]
(5) Where a contravention or default has been committed by a company, every
person who, at the time the contravention or default was committed, was in
charge of, and was responsible to, the company, for the conduct of the
business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty
person who, at the time the contravention or default was committed, was in
charge of, and was responsible to, the company, for the conduct of the
business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty
of the contra­vention or default and shall be liable to be proceeded against
and punished accordingly: Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section
shall render any such person liable to any punishment provided in this Act if
he proves that the contravention or default was committed without his
knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the contravention
or default.
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (5), where a
contravention or default has been committed by a company, and it is proved
that the same was committed with the consent or connivance of, or is
attributable to any gross negligence on the part of, any director, manager,
secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary
or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that contravention or
default and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
other officer of the banking company, unless he proves that the contravention
took place without his knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to
prevent it shall be deemed to be guilty of such contravention and shall be
punishable with a fine which may extend to twice the amount of the deposits so
received. 5[6[7[(4) If any other provision of this Act is contravened or if
any default is made in—
(i) complying with any requirement of this Act or of any order, rule or
direction made or condition imposed thereunder, or
(ii) carrying out the terms of, or the obligations under, a scheme sanctioned
under sub-section (7) of section 45, by any person, such person shall be
punishable with fine which may extend to 8[fifty thousand rupees or twice the
amount in­volved in such contravention or default where such amount is
quantifiable, whichever is more, and where a contravention or default is a
continuing one, with a further fine which may extend to two thousand and five
hundred rupees] for every day, during which the contravention or default
continues.]]
(5) Where a contravention or default has been committed by a company, every
person who, at the time the contravention or default was committed, was in
charge of, and was responsible to, the company, for the conduct of the
business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty
person who, at the time the contravention or default was committed, was in
charge of, and was responsible to, the company, for the conduct of the
business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty
of the contra­vention or default and shall be liable to be proceeded against
and punished accordingly: Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section
shall render any such person liable to any punishment provided in this Act if
he proves that the contravention or default was committed without his
knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the contravention
or default.
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (5), where a
contravention or default has been committed by a company, and it is proved
that the same was committed with the consent or connivance of, or is
attributable to any gross negligence on the part of, any director, manager,
secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary
or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that contravention or
default and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
other officer of the banking company, unless he proves that the contravention
took place without his knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to
prevent it shall be deemed to be guilty of such contravention and shall be
punishable with a fine which may extend to twice the amount of the deposits so
received. 5[6[7[(4) If any other provision of this Act is contravened or if
any default is made in—
(i) complying with any requirement of this Act or of any order, rule or
direction made or condition imposed thereunder, or
(ii) carrying out the terms of, or the obligations under, a scheme sanctioned
under sub-section (7) of section 45, by any person, such person shall be
punishable with fine which may extend to 8[fifty thousand rupees or twice the
amount in­volved in such contravention or default where such amount is
quantifiable, whichever is more, and where a contravention or default is a
continuing one, with a further fine which may extend to two thousand and five
hundred rupees] for every day, during which the contravention or default
continues.]]
(5) Where a contravention or default has been committed by a company, every
person who, at the time the contravention or default was committed, was in
charge of, and was responsible to, the company, for the conduct of the
business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty
of the contra­vention or default and shall be liable to be proceeded against
and punished accordingly: Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section
shall render any such person liable to any punishment provided in this Act if
he proves that the contravention or default was committed without his
knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the contravention
or default.
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (5), where a
contravention or default has been committed by a company, and it is proved
that the same was committed with the consent or connivance of, or is
attributable to any gross negligence on the part of, any director, manager,
secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary
person who, at the time the contravention or default was committed, was in
charge of, and was responsible to, the company, for the conduct of the
business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty
of the contra­vention or default and shall be liable to be proceeded against
and punished accordingly: Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section
shall render any such person liable to any punishment provided in this Act if
he proves that the contravention or default was committed without his
knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the contravention
or default.
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (5), where a
contravention or default has been committed by a company, and it is proved
that the same was committed with the consent or connivance of, or is
attributable to any gross negligence on the part of, any director, manager,
secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary
or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that contravention or
default and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
other officer of the banking company, unless he proves that the contravention
took place without his knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to
prevent it shall be deemed to be guilty of such contravention and shall be
punishable with a fine which may extend to twice the amount of the deposits so
received. 5[6[7[(4) If any other provision of this Act is contravened or if
any default is made in—
(i) complying with any requirement of this Act or of any order, rule or
direction made or condition imposed thereunder, or
(ii) carrying out the terms of, or the obligations under, a scheme sanctioned
under sub-section (7) of section 45, by any person, such person shall be
punishable with fine which may extend to 8[fifty thousand rupees or twice the
amount in­volved in such contravention or default where such amount is
quantifiable, whichever is more, and where a contravention or default is a
continuing one, with a further fine which may extend to two thousand and five
hundred rupees] for every day, during which the contravention or default
continues.]]
(5) Where a contravention or default has been committed by a company, every
person who, at the time the contravention or default was committed, was in
charge of, and was responsible to, the company, for the conduct of the
business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty
of the contra­vention or default and shall be liable to be proceeded against
and punished accordingly: Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section
shall render any such person liable to any punishment provided in this Act if
he proves that the contravention or default was committed without his
knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the contravention
or default.
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (5), where a
contravention or default has been committed by a company, and it is proved
that the same was committed with the consent or connivance of, or is
attributable to any gross negligence on the part of, any director, manager,
secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary
person who, at the time the contravention or default was committed, was in
charge of, and was responsible to, the company, for the conduct of the
business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty
of the contra­vention or default and shall be liable to be proceeded against
and punished accordingly: Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section
shall render any such person liable to any punishment provided in this Act if
he proves that the contravention or default was committed without his
knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the contravention
or default.
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (5), where a
contravention or default has been committed by a company, and it is proved
that the same was committed with the consent or connivance of, or is
attributable to any gross negligence on the part of, any director, manager,
secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary
or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that contravention or
default and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
