Gujarat High Court
5 Whether It Is To Be Circulated To ... vs Yogesh Quarry And Concrete Works &
on 21 February, 2014
              C/FA/1147/2008                                                 CAV JUDGEMNT
          IN THE HIGH COURT OF GUJARAT AT AHMEDABAD
                               FIRST APPEAL  No. 1147 of 2008
    FOR APPROVAL AND SIGNATURE:
    HONOURABLE Mr. JUSTICE JAYANT PATEL 
    and
    HONOURABLE Ms. JUSTICE SONIA GOKANI
    ================================================================
1 Whether Reporters of Local Papers may be allowed to see the judgment ? 2 To
be referred to the Reporter or not ?
3 Whether their Lordships wish to see the fair copy of the judgment ? 4
Whether this case involves a substantial question of law as to the
interpretation of the Constitution of India, 1950 or any order made thereunder
? 5 Whether it is to be circulated to the civil judge ?
================================================================ PASCHIM
GUJARAT VIJ COMPANY LIMITED....Appellant(s) Versus YOGESH QUARRY AND CONCRETE
WORKS & 1....Defendant(s)
reasons have been given by the arbitrator in making the award, the Court
cannot examine the reasonableness of the reasons. If the parties have selected
their own forum, the deciding forum must be conceded the power of appraisement
of evidence. The Arbitrator is the sole judge of the quality as well as the
quantity of evidence and it will not be for the court to take upon itself the
task of being a judge on the evidence before the arbitrator."
Thus, the appraisement of evidence by the arbitrator is ordinarily never a
matter which the Court questions and considers in coming to a different
conclusion from the self same set of evidence and that by itself cannot be a
ground for setting aside the award.
This Court since is not to go into whether it can be a correct view but when
the evidence leads to conclude that it is a possible view then also, no
interference is warranted. From the cumulative examination of the entire
material, none of the grounds raised in this Appeal is found sustainable.
Both­ the learned Arbitrator and the Court below have acted in accordance with
law and the decisions are not vulnerable on any of the grounds raised in the
WORKS & 1....Defendant(s)
================================================================ Appearance:
Mr PREMAL R JOSHI, ADVOCATE for the Appellant(s) No. 1 Mr KG SUKHWANI,
ADVOCATE for the Defendant(s) No. 1 NOTICE SERVED for the Defendant(s) No. 2
================================================================ CORAM:
HONOURABLE Mr. JUSTICE JAYANT PATEL and HONOURABLE Ms. JUSTICE SONIA GOKANI
February 21, 2014.
CAV JUDGEMNT (PER : Hon'ble Ms. Justice SONIA GOKANI) The appellant in this
Appeal has challenged the legality and propriety of  Page 1 of 27
C/FA/1147/2008 CAV JUDGEMNT the judgment and order dated 23rd March 2006
passed by the learned 5th Addl. Senior Civil Judge, Vadodara rendered in Civil
Misc. Application No. 95 of 2004, rejecting the application preferred by the
present appellant for setting aside the Award dated 22nd January 2004, in the
following factual background. Factual background :
The appellant had advertised by way of local newspapers for the contract for
manufacture and supply of poles, wherein, the respondents were found to be the
successful bidder. Some disputes and differences arose between the parties,
and therefore, the respondents/claimants filed Civil Misc. Application No. 214
of 1982 under Sections 8 &9 of the Arbitration Act, 1940 before the learned
Civil Judge [SD], Vadodara for the appointment of Arbitrator. The Court
appointed one Shri M.S Iyengar, Chief Engineer [Arbitrations], Roads &
Buildings Department, Government of Gujarat as the sole Arbitrator. However,
Shri Iyengar vide his communication dated 30th January 1985 showed his
unwillingness to act as an Arbitrator.
The respondent thereafter preferred Civil Misc. Application No. 130 of 1985
before the very Court for appointment of another arbitrator and the Court vide
its order dated 30th June 1988 appointed Shri R.G Patel, retired Chief
Engineer & Joint Secretary as the Sole Arbitrator. However, before the said
Arbitrator undertakes the work of arbitration, he passed away and as a result,
Page 2 of 27 C/FA/1147/2008 CAV JUDGEMNT the claimant filed yet another Civil
Misc. Application No. 87 of 1998 for appointment of another Arbitrator and the
learned 9th Jt. Civil Judge [SD], Vadodara appointed Shri A.B Marathe, retired
District Judge as the sole Arbitrator for adjudicating the disputes by and
between the parties on 2nd December 2000.
The respondent claimed compensation under different heads by filing statements
of claim before the learned sole Arbitrator. Such claim statement also was
objected to by the appellant and after adjudication of the disputes between
the parties, the learned Arbitrator passed an award dated 22nd January 2004
whereby he directed the appellant­company to pay a sum of Rs. 3,42,257=25p and
the cost of Rs. 23,000/= to the respondent­original claimant with 12% interest
per annum from 22nd April 2004, till realization on the principal amount.
An application, being Misc. Civil Application No. 95 of 2004, was made under
section 14 of the Arbitration Act, 1940 ["Act" for short] by the appellant to
direct the Arbitrator to produce original award alongwith evidences in the
form of deposition and documents to be filed before the Court in compliance
with the provisions of section 14 of the Act, with a further request to issue
notice to the parties for filing the objections, wherein, summons/notice was
issued by the Court to the parties to the proceedings.  Page 3 of 27
C/FA/1147/2008 CAV JUDGEMNT The appellant also filed an application before the
Court seeking direction of setting aside of the award passed by the Arbitrator
being Misc. Civil Application No. 45/2004. On the Arbitrator having filed such
award before the Court both the sides have been heard at length in both the
Misc. Civil Application No. 95/2004 and 45/2004 and the Court rejected the
application for setting aside the Award dated 22nd January 2004 by a detailed
order and judgment dated 23rd March 2006.
The appellant has approached this Court against such order and judgment,
raising various following grounds in the present appeal.
Impugned judgment is essentially attacked on the ground that the very issue of
maintainability of arbitration proceedings was addressed to by the Arbitrator
in accordance with law against the respondent and yet, to grant any amount to
the respondent, is illegal and erroneous. It is also further challenged on the
ground of perversity by emphasizing the fact that the amount of compensation
granted in favour of the respondent is based on presumption and surmises and
without there being any basis or documentary evidence, the Arbitrator awarded
such an amount by exceeding his jurisdiction and such award has been confirmed
by the Court, resulting into gross illegality and injustice to the appellant.
    Oral Submissions :­
                                              Page 4 of 27
              C/FA/1147/2008                                                 CAV JUDGEMNT
We have heard extensively learned advocate Shri Premal Joshi for the appellant
and learned advocate Mr. K.G Sukhwani for the respondent. It is forcefully
submitted by the learned counsel Shri Joshi on the point of maintainability of
arbitral proceeding that the respondent firm admittedly was a partnership firm
which did not possess registration at the time of filing the proceeding for
appointment of sole arbitrator, and therefore, under section 69 of the
Partnership Act, the very maintainability of such proceedings against the
third party was a question. He put forth the case law on the subject and urged
empathetically that the suit since is barred by Section 69 of the Partnership
Act by an unregistered firm against the third party, no proceedings under the
Arbitration Act also is permissible. He urged that the Supreme Court while so
holding in a later decision rendered in case of U.P State Sugar Corporation
Limited v. Jain Construction Company & Anr., reported in AIR 2004 SC 4335 has
taken into consideration the judgment rendered in case of Delhi Development
Authority v. Kochhar Construction Work [1998] 8 SCC 559. He further urged that
this issue has gone against the respondent in an arbitration award, and hence,
on that very count, the arbitration proceeding could not have resulted into
passing of the award in favour of the respondent. He further urged that the
subsequent registration of the firm also may not serve any purpose and
therefore also, on this very ground, the present appeal deserves to  Page 5 of
27 C/FA/1147/2008 CAV JUDGEMNT be allowed. Secondly, on the ground of
perversity, he attempted to point out that though various issues have been
addressed by the learned Arbitrator, without assigning any valid reason, the
award has been passed. In absence of any evidence on record, the different
claims made by the respondent have been examined and therefore also, the award
deserves to be set at naught.
Per contra, learned advocate Shri K.G Sukhwani has urged that the registration
of the firm was very much in existence. The receipt issued by the Registrar of
Firms was also indicative of his having made such an application and the
registration would relate back to the date on which the respondent had applied
for registration. He further urged that by way of an affidavit, this issue has
been explained elaborately and therefore, on factual matrix itself, the ground
of maintainability is not tenable. He further more contended that three times
Misc. Civil Applications for appointment of sole arbitrator under section 8 &
9 of the Act had been preferred before the learned Sr. Civil Judge at Vadodara
right from the year 1982 and at no point of time, such a ground has been
raised by the appellant. On the contrary, it is clearly mentioned in the order
made on the last application, by which sole Arbitrator Shri Marathe was
appointed that the parties had agreed and by way of consent, the learned
Arbitrator was appointed and therefore, after two decades when the appellant
had chosen to raise the objection with regard to the maintainability, the
learned  Page 6 of 27 C/FA/1147/2008 CAV JUDGEMNT Arbitrator had rightly not
dismissed the proceedings on such ground of maintainability.
He emphasized on the aspect of constructive res judicata. He also further
urged that the Supreme Court in case of Firm Ashok Traders & Anr. v. Gurumukh
Das Saluja & Ors., reported in AIR 2004 SC 1433 has been categorical that non
registration would not bar the proceeding under the Arbitration Act, and while
so holding, it has relied upon the decisions rendered in case of Kamal Pushp
Enterprises v. D.R Construction Company, reported in AIR 2000 SC 2676. He also
extensively dealt with the issue of alleged perversity and urged that for
every claim that has been sanctioned by the learned Arbitrator, he has given
sufficient reasonings to rationalize his conclusion, and therefore, it is
absolutely untrue to say that the award is vulnerable on account of absence of
reasonings or for want of any evidences. In support of his submissions,
learned counsel Shri Sukhwani has placed reliance on the following decisions
:­ [a] U.P vs. Nawab Hussain, reported in AIR 1977 SC 1680; [b] K.V George v.
The Secretary to the Government, Water & Power Department, Trivandrum & Anr.,
reported in AIR 1990 SC 53; [c] P.K Vijayan v. Kamalakshi Amma & Ors.,
reported in AIR 1994 SC 2145;
    [d]     In case of  State of Gujarat & Anr. vs. Nitin Construction Company 
                                               Page 7 of 27
              C/FA/1147/2008                                                 CAV JUDGEMNT
First Appeal No. 1379 of 1992 :: Decided on 22/3/2013 : Coram - Hon'ble the
Chief Justice Mr. Justice Bhaskar Bhattacharya & J.B Pardiwala, J.} Learned
counsel further urged that there are plethora of judgments of the Apex Court
to indicate that the power of the Court to set­aside the award is restricted
as set out in Section 30 and when none of the grounds mentioned in the said
provision exists, the concerned Court was right in not acceding to the request
for setting aside the award, and therefore, when no ground is made out for
either setting aside the award or for re­consideration, the Court must dismiss
the Appeal.
First ground of challenge : Issue of Maintainability Before adverting the
facts and considering the challenge to the award on the ground of perversity,
the issue of maintainability of the arbitral proceeding deserves consideration
at this stage. The useful reference can be made to the following decisions:
[a] U.P State Sugar Corporation Limited v. Jain Construction Company & Anr.,
reported in AIR 2004 SC 4335;
[b] Firm Ashok Traders & Anr. vs. Gurumukh Das Saluja & Ors., reported in AIR
2004 SC 1433;
[c] Kamal Pushpa Enterprises v. D.R Construction Company, reported in AIR 2000
SC 2676;
Page 8 of 27
              C/FA/1147/2008                                                CAV JUDGEMNT
    [d]     Delhi Development Authority v. Kochhar Construction Works & Anr., 
            reported in [1998] 8 SCC 559.
It can be noticed that the Supreme Court in case of U.P State Sugar
Corporation Limited [Supra] has taken into consideration the decision rendered
in case of D.D.A v. Kochhar Construction Work [Supra]. However, reference of
the decision rendered in case of Kamal Pushpa Enterprises [Supra] is missing.
However, the Apex Court in the very year and the Bench of the same strength in
case of Firm Ashok Traders & Anr. [Supra] taken note of the decision in case
of Kamal Pushpa Enterprise [Supra] wherein the Supreme Court was directly and
essentially concerned with the maintainability of the petition under Section 8
& 9 of the Arbitration Act in connection with unregistered partnership firm,
and where the Apex Court has favoured the view of filing of the arbitration
proceedings even by unregistered firms. Without further delving into this
aspect, what is relevant and necessary for the purpose of present petition is
the principles of constructive res judicata as well laid down in number of
decisions rendered over a period of time.
Issue of constructive res judicata :
What can be noted is the fact that when three Misc. Civil Applications were
preferred under sections 8 & 9 of the Arbitration Act, 1940 being Misc. Civil
Applications No. 214/1982; 130/1985 & 87/1998 in the factual  Page 9 of 27
C/FA/1147/2008 CAV JUDGEMNT background narrated hereinabove, at no point of
time, such issue was raised by the appellant herein. Not only that, as
mentioned hereinabove, when the present Arbitrator Shri Marathe was appointed,
the Court in its order dated 2nd December 2000 passed in Civil Misc.
Application No. 87 of 1998 had noted that since both the parties had agreed
and consensually a request was made for appointment of sole arbitrator, the
Court had no option but to appoint the sole arbitrator. Thus, the appellant
without referring to any right with regard to the challenge in connection with
the non registration of the firm chose not to contest this aspect knowing
fully well that the arbitration proceeding was for the differences and
disputes which had arisen out of the contract, entered into by and between the
parties. At no stage, the appellant chose to dispute this aspect and later on
when it has attempted to non­suit the respondent on the ground of
maintainability, the principle of res judicata would need to be applied.
The Apex Court in case of State of U.P v/s. Nawab Hussain [Supra] has held
that this efficacious rule of evidence has been recognized over a period of
time and is also applicable to the writ petitions. The Apex Court also
referred to the decision rendered in case of Amalgamated Coalfields Limited v.
Janapada Sabha, Chhindwara, reported in AIR 1964 SC 1013 to hold that the rule
of constructive res judicata was in a sense a somewhat technical or artificial
rule  Page 10 of 27 C/FA/1147/2008 CAV JUDGEMNT prescribed by the Code of
Civil Procedure. In the words of the Apex Court, "... This rule postulates
that if a plea could have been taken by a party in a proceeding between him
and his opponent, he would not be permitted to take that plea against the same
party in a subsequent proceeding which is based on the same cause of action;
but basically, even this view is founded on the same considerations of public
policy, because if the doctrine of constructive res judicata is not applied to
writ proceedings, it would be open to the party to take one proceedings after
another and urge new grounds every time; and that plainly is inconsistent with
considerations of public policy to which we have just referred."
In case of K.V George v. Secretary to Government, Water & Power Department,
Trivandrum [Supra], the Apex Court held that the principles of re judicata and
constructive res judicata would be applicable to the arbitration proceedings.
The claimant having raised some of the issues arising out of the termination
of the contract in first claim petition was precluded from seeking second
reference for the remaining issues.
In yet another decision rendered in case of P.K Vijayan v. Kamalakshi Amma &
Ors. [Supra], the Apex Court held that, "..it is a sheer abuse of the process
of the Court to raise at each successive stage different pleas to protract the
proceedings. It would be fair and just that the parties to raise all available
relevant pleas in the suits or the proceedings when the action is initiated
and the omission thereof does constitute  Page 11 of 27 C/FA/1147/2008 CAV
JUDGEMNT constructive res judicata to prevent raising of the same at a later
point of time. Thereby, it must be deemed that they are waived."
In this case, as noted hereinabove, the parties had agreed to appoint a sole
arbitrator never ever reserved the right to contend the aspect of
maintainability before the Arbitrator. After nearly two decades of the first
appointment of the sole arbitrator for adjudicating the lis between the
parties when the question of maintainability on the ground of non­registration
had been raised which otherwise was available with the appellant herein at the
first instance, the learned Arbitrator has rightly not sustained the
contention of the appellant on this count.
We are concerned here essentially with the appointment of sole arbitrator by
the Civil Court, and therefore, when such appointment had been made on a
bipartite hearing on all contentions; including the legal contentions
available with the parties are expected to be raised. In absence of any such
contention at an appropriate time, later on may not preclude the Arbitrator to
examine that legal contention but he is right in not accepting such contention
of maintainability after lapse of huge time gap.
In the instant case also, the plea of maintainability could have been raised
by the appellant at the first instance. Neither in the year 1982, nor in 1985
and even thereafter in the year 1998, when last application was made, such a
Page 12 of 27 C/FA/1147/2008 CAV JUDGEMNT plea of maintainability was raised.
On the contrary, what clearly emerges is the fact of giving consent to the
appointment of the sole arbitrator before the Court concerned, which is a
clear revelation of the fact that the pleas which were available and could
have been raised in the proceedings at the initiation, when have been either
omitted or not taken, it does constitute constructive res judicata. And thus,
the principle governing the field would prevent raising of such pleas at the
later point of time as they could be deemed to have been waived by the
appellant, and therefore, the learned Arbitrator was correct not to have
rejected the claim of respondent on the ground of maintainability of the
arbitral proceedings.
On being satisfied of its having dealt with the issue adhering to the
principles (of constructive res judicata) well laid down over the period of
time, the issue of maintainability of the proceedings raised by the appellant
is not finding favour with this Court.
Second ground of Challenge : Perversity - Absence of reasonings :
Adverting to the second ground of challenge, it is contended by the learned
counsel appearing for the appellant that the award is per verse on account of
absence of reasonings and lack of evidence much emphasis is laid on the facts
that arbitrator exceeded jurisdiction by granting compensation, which was
never claimed and the Court below in confirming the same, without  Page 13 of
27 C/FA/1147/2008 CAV JUDGEMNT considering the aspect of perversity.
It would be quite relevant and profitable to refer to the judgment of this
Court rendered in case of State of Gujarat v. Nitin Construction Company
{First Appeal No. 1379/2009 :: Decided on 22/03/2013} wherein the Court
considered the scope and extent of examination by the Court of an award made
by the Arbitrator, by relying on the various decisions of the apex Court. In
paragraphs 16 & 17, the Court observed thus ­ "16. The scope and extent of
examination by the Court of an award made by the Arbitrator has been laid down
in various decisions. We may profitably quote decision of the Supreme Court in
the case of Gujarat Water Supply & Sewerage Board Vs. Unique Erectors
(Gujarat) (P) Ltd., reported in AIR 1989 SC 972, wherein the Bench held in
para 9 as under:"
It has to be noted that there is a trend in modern times that reasons should
be stated in the award though the question whether the reasons are necessary
in ordinary arbitration awards between the parties is pending adjudication by
the Constitution bench of this Court. Even,however, if it be held that it is
obligatory for the arbitrator to state reasons, it is not obligatory to give
any detailed judgment. An award of an arbitrator should be read reasonably as
a whole to find out the implication and the meaning thereof. Short
intelligible indications of the grounds should be discernible to find out the
mind of the arbitrator for his action even if it be enjoined that in all cases
of award by any arbitrator reasons have to be stated. The reasons should not
only be intelligible but  Page 14 of 27 C/FA/1147/2008 CAV JUDGEMNT should
also deal either expressly or impliedly with the substantial points that have
been raised. Even in a case where the arbitrator has to state reasons, the
sufficiency of the reasons depends upon the facts and the circumstances of the
case. The Court, however, does not sit in appeal ever the award and review the
reasons. The Court can set aside the award only if it is apparent from the
award that there is no evidence to support the conclusion or if the award is
based upon any legal proposition which is erroneous. See the observations of
this Court in Indian Oil Corporation Ltd. v. Indian Carbon Ltd., [1988] 3 SCC
36."
In M.C.D. Vs. M/s. Jagan Nath Ashok Kumar, reported in (1987) 4 SCC 497, the
Supreme Court observed thus:" In this case, there was no violation of any
principles of natural justice. It is not a case where the arbitrator has
refused cogent and material factors to be taken into consideration. The award
cannot be said to be vitiated by non-reception of material or non-
consideration of the relevant aspects of the matter. Appraisement of evidence
by the arbitrator is ordinarily never a matter which the court questions and
considers. The parties have selected their own forum and the deciding forum
must be conceded the power of appraisement of the evidence. In Page 9 of 23
the instant case, there was no evidence of violation of any principle of
natural justice. The arbitrator in our opinion is the sole judge of the
quality as well as quantity of evidence and it will not be for this Court to
take upon itself the task of being a judge of the evidence before the
arbitrator. It may be possible that on the same evidence the court might have
arrived at a different conclusion than the one arrived at by the arbitrator
but that by itself is no ground in our view for setting aside the award of an
Page 15 of 27 C/FA/1147/2008 CAV JUDGEMNT arbitrator."
The Supreme Court further concluded:
"After all an arbitrator as a judge in the words of Benjamin N. Cardozo, has
to exercise a discretion informed by tradition, methodized by analogy,
disciplined by system, and subordinated to "the primordial necessity of order
in the social life". In P.M. Paul Vs. Union of India, reported in (1989) Supp
1 SCC 368, the Supreme Court held as under:
It was submitted that if the contract work was not completed within the
stipulated time which it appears was not done then the contractor has got a
right to ask for extension of time, and he could claim difference in price.
This is precisely what he has done and has obtained a portion of the claim in
the award. It was submitted on behalf of the Union of India that failure to
complete the contract was not the case. Hence, there was no substance in the
objections raised. Furthermore, in the objections raised, it must be within
the time provided for the application under Section 30 i.e., 30 days during
which the objection was not specifically taken, we are of the opinion that
there is no substance in this objection sought to be raised in opposition to
the award. Once it was found that the arbitrator had jurisdiction to find that
there was delay in execution of the contract due to the conduct of the
respondent, the respondent was liable for the consequences of the delay,
namely, increase in prices. Therefore, the arbitrator had jurisdiction to go
into this question. He has gone into that question and has awarded as he did."
In one of the recent pronouncements of the Supreme Court in the case of
Ravindra Kumar Gupta and Company Vs. Union of India, reported in (2010) 1 SCC
409, the Supreme Court has considered the law with  Page 16 of 27
C/FA/1147/2008 CAV JUDGEMNT regard to the scope and ambit of the jurisdiction
of the Courts to interfere with an arbitration award after taking note of
catena of judgments. The relevant paragraphs are quoted below:-
"9. The law with regard to scope and ambit of the jurisdiction of the courts
to interfere with an arbitration award has been settled in a catena of
judgments of this Court. We may make a reference here only to some of the
judgments. In the case of State of Rajasthan v. Puri Construction Company Ltd.
1994 (6) SCC 485 : (1994 AIR SCW 5061), this Court observed as follows:
"The arbitrator is the final arbiter for the dispute between the parties and
it is not open to challenge the award on the ground that the arbitrator has
drawn his own conclusion or has failed to appreciate the facts. In Sudarsan
Trading Co. v. Govt. of Kerala, 1989 Ind law SC 463 : (AIR 1989 SC 890) it has
been held by this Court that there is a distinction between disputes as to the
jurisdiction of the arbitrator and the disputes as to in what way that
jurisdiction should be exercised. There may be a conflict as to the power of
the arbitrator to grant a particular remedy. One has to determine the
distinction between an error within the jurisdiction and an error in excess of
the jurisdiction. Court cannot substitute its own evaluation of the conclusion
of law or fact to come to the conclusion that the arbitrator had acted
contrary to the bargain between the parties. Whether a particular amount was
liable to be paid is a decision within the competency of the arbitrator. By
purporting to construe the contract the court cannot take upon itself the
burden of saying that this was contrary to the contract and as such beyond
jurisdiction. If on a view taken of a contract, the decision of the arbitrator
on certain amounts awarded is a possible view though perhaps not the only
correct view, the award cannot be examined by the court. Where the reasons
have been given by the arbitrator in making the award the court cannot examine
the reasonableness of the reasons. If the parties have selected their awn
forum, the deciding forum must be conceded the power of appraisement of
evidence. The arbitrator is the sole judge of the quality as well as the
quantity of evidence and it will not be for the court to take upon itself the
task of being a judge on the evidence before the  Page 17 of 27 C/FA/1147/2008
CAV JUDGEMNT arbitrator. In the case of Municipal Corpn. of Delhi v. Jagan
Nath Ashok Kumar, 1987 (4) SCC 497 : (AIR 1987 SC 2316), it has been held by
this Court that appraisement of evidence by the arbitrator is ordinarily never
a matter which the court questions and considers. It may be possible that on
the same evidence the court may arrive at a different conclusion than the one
arrived at by the arbitrator but that by itself is no ground for setting aside
the award. It has also been held in the said decision that it is difficult to
give an exact definition of the word 'reasonable'. Reason varies in its
conclusions according to the idiosyncrasies of the individual and the time and
circumstances in which thinks. In cases not covered by authority, the verdict
of a jury or the decision of a judge sitting as a jury usually determines what
is 'reasonable' in each particular case. The word reasonable has in law prima
facie meaning of reasonable in regard to those circumstances of which the
actor, called on to act reasonably knows or ought to know. An arbitrator
acting as a judge has to exercise a discretion informed by tradition,
methodized by analogy disciplined by system and subordinated to the primordial
necessity or order in the social life. Therefore, where reasons germane and
relevant for the arbitrator to hold in the manner he did, have been indicated,
it cannot be said that the reasons are unreasonable."
10\. In the case of Arosan Enterprises Ltd. v. Union of India, 1999 (9) SCC
449 : (1999 AIR SCW 3872), this Court upon analysis of numerous earlier
decisions, held as follows:
36\. Be it noted that by reasons of a long catena of cases, it is now a well-
settled principle of law that reappraisal of evidence by the court is not
permissible and as a matter of fact exercise of power by the court to
reappraise the evidence is unknown to proceedings under section 30 of the
Arbitration Act. In the event of there being no reasons in the award, question
of interference of the court would not arise at all. In the event, however,
there are reasons, the interference would still be not available within the
jurisdiction of the Court unless of course, there exist a total perversity in
the award or the judgment is based on a wrong proposition of law. In the event
however two views are possible on a question of law as well, the court would
not be justified in interfering with the award.
37\. The common phraseology "error apparent on the face of the record" does
not itself, however, mean and imply closer scrutiny of the merits of documents
and  Page 18 of 27 C/FA/1147/2008 CAV JUDGEMNT materials on record. The Court
as a matter of fact cannot substitute its evaluation and come to the
conclusion that the arbitrator had acted contrary to the bargain between the
parties. If the view of the, arbitrator is a possible view the award or the
reasoning contained therein cannot be examined."
11\. This view has been reiterated by this Court in the case of Oil and
Natural Gas Corporation Ltd. v. SAW Pipes Ltd. 2003 AIR SCW 3041:
"53. In the light of the aforesaid decisions, in our view, there is much force
in the contention raised by the learned counsel for the appellant. However,
the learned senior counsel Mr. Dave submitted that even if the award passed by
the arbitral tribunal is erroneous, it is settled law that when two views are
possible with regard to interpretation of statutory provisions and or facts,
the Court would refuse to interfere with such award.
54\. It is true that if the arbitral tribunal has committed mere error of fact
law in reaching its conclusion on the disputed question submitted to it for
adjudication then the Court would have no jurisdiction to interfere with the
award. But, this would depend upon reference made to the arbitrator : (a) if
there is a general reference for deciding the contractual dispute between the
parties and if the award is based on erroneous legal proposition, the Court
could interfere; (b) It is also settled law that in a case of reasoned award,
the Court can set aside the same if it is, on the face of it, erroneous on the
provision of law or its application; (c) If a specific question of law is
submitted to the arbitrator, erroneous decision in point of law does not make
the award bad, so as to permit of its being set aside, unless the Court is
satisfied that the arbitrator had proceeded illegally."
12\. In the M/s. Kwality Manufacturing Corporation v. Central Warehousing
Corporation it was held : "10. At the outset, it should be noted that the
scope of interference by courts in regard to arbitral awards is limited. A
court considering an application under Section 30 or 33 of the Act, does not
sit in appeal over the findings and decision of the arbitrator. Nor can it
reassess or reappreciate evidence or examine the sufficiency or otherwise of
the evidence. The award of the arbitrator is final and the only grounds on
which it can be challenged are those mentioned in Sections 30 and 33 of the
Act. Therefore, on the contentions urged,  Page 19 of 27 C/FA/1147/2008 CAV
JUDGEMNT the only question that arose for consideration before the High Court
was, whether there was any error apparent on the face of the award and whether
the arbitrator misconducted himself or the proceedings."
13\. Again it is reiterated in the judgment of Madhya Pradesh Housing Board v.
Progressive Writers and Publishers (2009) 5 SCC 678 : (2009 AIR SCW 2484) as
follows :
"28. The finding arrived at by the arbitrator in this regard is not even
challenged by the Board in the proceedings initiated by it under Section 30 of
the Act. It is fairly well settled and needs no restatement that the award of
the arbitrator is ordinarily final and the courts hearing applications under
Section 30 of the Act do not exercise any appellate jurisdiction. Reappraisal
of evidence by the court is impermissible."
14\. In this case, the Supreme Court notice the earlier judgment in the case
of Ispat Engineering and Foundry Works, B.S. City, Bokaro v. Steel Authority
of India, B.S. City, Bokaro [(2001) 6 SCC 347] : (2007 AIR SCW 2723) wherein
it was held as follows :
"4. Needless to record that there exists a long catena of cases through which
the law seems to be rather well settled that the reappraisal of evidence by
the court is not permissible. This Court in one of its latest decisions
[Arosan Enterprises Ltd. v. Union of India (1999) 9 SCC 449 : (1999 AIR SCW
3872)] upon consideration of decisions in Champsey Bhara and Co. v. Jivraj
Balloo Spg. and Wvg. Co. Ltd. [AIR 1923 PC 66], Union of India v. Bungo Steel
Furniture (P) Ltd. [(1967) 1 SCR 324] : (AIR 1967 SC 1032) N. Chellappan v.
Secy., Kerala SEB [(1975) 1 SCC 289] : (AIR 1975 SC 230), Sudarshan Trading
Co. v. Govt. of Kerala [(1989) 2 SCC 38], State of Rajasthan v. Puri
Construction Co. Ltd. [(1994) 6 SCC 485] : (1994 AIR SCW 5061) as also in
Olympus Superstructures (P) Ltd. v. Meena Vijay Khetan [(1999) 5 SCC 651]:
(1999 AIR SCW 1831) has stated that reappraisal of evidence by the court is
not permissible and as a matter of fact, exercise of power to reappraise the
evidence is unknown to a proceeding under Section 30 of the Arbitration Act,
1940. This court in Arosan Enterprises categorically stated that in the event
of there being no reason in the award, question of interference of the court
would not arise at all. In the event, however, there are reasons, interference
would still be not available unless of course, there exist a total perversity
in the award or the judgment is based on a wrong proposition of law. This
Court went on to record  Page 20 of 27 C/FA/1147/2008 CAV JUDGEMNT that in the
event, however, two views are possible on a question of law, the court would
not be justified in interfering with the award of the arbitrator if the view
taken recourse to is a possible view. The observations of Lord Dunedin in
Champsey Bhara stand accepted and adopted by this Court in Bungo Steel
Furniture to the effect that the court had no jurisdiction to investigate into
the merits of the case or to examine the documentary and oral evidence in the
record for the purposes of finding out whether or not the arbitrator has
committed an error of law. The court as a matter of fact, cannot substitute
its own evaluation and come to the conclusion that the arbitrator had acted
contrary to the bargain between the parties."
17\. From the various decisions referred to above, it could safely be stated
that:
(a) In the award, the arbitrator is not required to give reasons in detail.
(b) The award can be set aside only on the ground of error of law on the face
of it, i.e. to say, if the award is based upon any legal proposition which is
erroneous.
(c) The Civil Court has no jurisdiction to sit in appeal over the award and
review the reasons assigned by the arbitrator and the award cannot be set
aside merely because by process of inference and arguments it could be
demonstrated that the arbitrator has committed some mistake in arriving at his
conclusion.
(d) The award cannot be interfered with even in the case where on an
interpretation of any contract or documents, two views are plausible and the
arbitrator accepts one view while the other view is more appealing to the
Court.
(e) The award can be set aside by the Civil Court if the arbitrator has
misconducted himself or the arbitrator has acted contrary to or gone beyond
the  Page 21 of 27 C/FA/1147/2008 CAV JUDGEMNT terms of the reference."
Going by the parameters which can be deduced from these decision, it is to be
noted that this Court does not sit in appeal and review the order of the
Arbitrator. Even if another angle is feasible from the very set of evidence,
the Court is not expected to replace its own reasons with those of the learned
Arbitrator. For apparent error on the face of the award, if is made out, the
award needs to be interfered with.
Although, in the instant case with great vehemence, learned counsel for the
appellant had urged that the Arbitrator has misconducted himself for having
exceeded his jurisdiction by awarding the claim not even requested for in the
statement of claim by the claimant and on account of absence of any reason,
much less cogent reasons, the Court would have jurisdiction to investigate
into the merits of the case and examine the documents and oral evidence for
the purpose of finding out that the arbitrator committed an error of law. As
well laid down under the law, there could be no substantive evaluation of
evidence by this Court unless those grounds exist for the Court to interfere
with in wake of the total perversity in the award or the judgment.
We do notice that none of the grounds raised before us challenging the award
on the ground of perversity is sustainable.
There is no dispute to the fact that the arbitrator is not expected to give
Page 22 of 27 C/FA/1147/2008 CAV JUDGEMNT reasons in detail, while passing the
award. However, if there is no error of law on the face of the award,
interference would not be necessary. On thorough and complete examination of
the material on record, we could notice that there is not a single claim which
is absent in the statement of claims and yet the arbitrator awarded such claim
to the respondent, and therefore, this ground of exceeding the jurisdiction
merits no consideration.
With regard to the absence of the reasons also, the appellant had failed to
substantiate this ground in as much as the award clearly depicts assigning of
the reasons, while awarding or dismissing any of the claims of the respondent.
It will not be necessary for us to elaborate on each and every claim of
compensation awarded in favour of the respondent, however, to negate the
contention raised by the appellant and to give a few instances from the award
itself, it can be unfailingly asserted that there are apt reasons given by the
learned Arbitrator for award of every claim. It is to be noted that all the
claims allowed in favour of the respondents are summarized at paragraph 31 of
the award. From out of the total claim originally made by the petitioner of
Rs. 30,05,739/=, the Arbitrator awarded a sum of RS. 3,78,626/=. Whereas, the
respondent­Board claimed the total sum of Rs. 8,11,547=75p, which according to
the Arbitrator was of Rs. 8,05,671=60p. The entitlement of the respondent was
upheld to the tune of Rs. 36,368=75 p., and accordingly, the net amount the
Page 23 of 27 C/FA/1147/2008 CAV JUDGEMNT petitioner was found to be entitled
for was Rs. 3,42,257=25p. Following is summary given by the Arbitrator while
allowing some of the claims :­ "[31] Issue No. (xvii) Therefore, what the
claimant can get from the respondent can be summarized as under :­ (1) Rs.
75,000=00 Amount the claimant must have paid to the labour when the factory
remained closed.
    (2)    Rs.    23,512=00       Labour Escalation charges
    (3)    Rs. 1,17,800=00        Refund of bank guarantee amount.
    (4)    Rs.    21,957=00       For losses suffered on being forced to work
                                  beyond the contract period.
    (5)    Rs. 1,19,457=00        Payable as per final bill but withheld
                                  for unexplained reasons.
    (6)    Rs.    15,900=00       Sales Tax refund
    (7)    Rs.      5,000=00      For payment made to labour etc for having
                                  to work with defective 284 bags of cement.
           ===========
           Rs. 3,78,626=00        Total
           Rs.    36,368=75       Amount which the respondent is entitled
                                  to recover from claimant
           ===========
           Rs. 3,42,257=25        Net amount recoverable by claimant."
For claim no.8, the award is of Rs. 75,000/=. Learned Arbitrator had discussed
the issue at paragraph 18 of its Award and exhaustively considered the fact
that the factory remained closed for want of cement for 121 days and for 24
days for non­availability of HT steel; calculating the production of poles and
the total number of labours employed and the payment made to it, the total
amount of Rs. 75,000/= which the claimant would have required to spend  Page
24 of 27 C/FA/1147/2008 CAV JUDGEMNT for 151 days when the factory remained
closed. And therefore, the said amount of compensation is awarded.
Towards labour escalation charges the sum of Rs. 23,512/= is awarded, and such
discussion finds place at paragraph 25 of the award. The oral version given by
Dayaljibhai Chandarana was of Rs. 23,512/=. In absence of any challenge to the
amount paid towards the labour escalation by the otherside, based on the
detailed reasons, the arbitrator concluded to award the said amount under this
head.
We also notice that while refunding the amount of bank guarantee to the tune
of Rs. 1,17,800/=, the Arbitrator noted that the GEB encashed the bank
guarantee on 5th September 1990 where in fact it owed the claimant a sum of
Rs. 1,19,457=90p. The bank guarantee was furnished by way of security deposit
till the matter was decided by the Arbitrator, the GEB was unable to intimate
the Arbitrator that such an order was in fact passed by the competent
authority. Therefore, it concluded that GEB wrongly encashed the bank
guarantee which was needed to be refunded to the respondent.
{A} The award is specific in respect of the reasonings assigned by the
Arbitrator to the issue of registration of the partnership firm. On having
found that the claimant failed to prove registration of the firm. On this
count also, cogent reasons are given by the Arbitrator while holding this
issue in favour of  Page 25 of 27 C/FA/1147/2008 CAV JUDGEMNT the respondents
which require no reproduction here. {B} The Apex Court in Ravindra Kumar Gupta
& Company v. Union of India [Supra] had in terms held that, "..where the
reasons have been given by the arbitrator in making the award, the Court
cannot examine the reasonableness of the reasons. If the parties have selected
their own forum, the deciding forum must be conceded the power of appraisement
of evidence. The Arbitrator is the sole judge of the quality as well as the
quantity of evidence and it will not be for the court to take upon itself the
task of being a judge on the evidence before the arbitrator."
Thus, the appraisement of evidence by the arbitrator is ordinarily never a
matter which the Court questions and considers in coming to a different
conclusion from the self same set of evidence and that by itself cannot be a
ground for setting aside the award.
This Court since is not to go into whether it can be a correct view but when
the evidence leads to conclude that it is a possible view then also, no
interference is warranted. From the cumulative examination of the entire
material, none of the grounds raised in this Appeal is found sustainable.
Both­ the learned Arbitrator and the Court below have acted in accordance with
law and the decisions are not vulnerable on any of the grounds raised in the
present appeal.
Resultantly, appeal fails. Dismissed accordingly with no order as to  Page 26
of 27 C/FA/1147/2008 CAV JUDGEMNT costs.
{Jayant Patel, J.} {Ms. Sonia Gokani, J.} Prakash*  Page 27 of 27
reasons have been given by the arbitrator in making the award, the Court
cannot examine the reasonableness of the reasons. If the parties have selected
their own forum, the deciding forum must be conceded the power of appraisement
of evidence. The Arbitrator is the sole judge of the quality as well as the
quantity of evidence and it will not be for the court to take upon itself the
task of being a judge on the evidence before the arbitrator."
Thus, the appraisement of evidence by the arbitrator is ordinarily never a
matter which the Court questions and considers in coming to a different
conclusion from the self same set of evidence and that by itself cannot be a
ground for setting aside the award.
This Court since is not to go into whether it can be a correct view but when
the evidence leads to conclude that it is a possible view then also, no
interference is warranted. From the cumulative examination of the entire
material, none of the grounds raised in this Appeal is found sustainable.
Both­ the learned Arbitrator and the Court below have acted in accordance with
law and the decisions are not vulnerable on any of the grounds raised in the
WORKS & 1....Defendant(s)
================================================================ Appearance:
Mr PREMAL R JOSHI, ADVOCATE for the Appellant(s) No. 1 Mr KG SUKHWANI,
ADVOCATE for the Defendant(s) No. 1 NOTICE SERVED for the Defendant(s) No. 2
================================================================ CORAM:
HONOURABLE Mr. JUSTICE JAYANT PATEL and HONOURABLE Ms. JUSTICE SONIA GOKANI
February 21, 2014.
CAV JUDGEMNT (PER : Hon'ble Ms. Justice SONIA GOKANI) The appellant in this
Appeal has challenged the legality and propriety of  Page 1 of 27
C/FA/1147/2008 CAV JUDGEMNT the judgment and order dated 23rd March 2006
passed by the learned 5th Addl. Senior Civil Judge, Vadodara rendered in Civil
Misc. Application No. 95 of 2004, rejecting the application preferred by the
present appellant for setting aside the Award dated 22nd January 2004, in the
following factual background. Factual background :
The appellant had advertised by way of local newspapers for the contract for
manufacture and supply of poles, wherein, the respondents were found to be the
successful bidder. Some disputes and differences arose between the parties,
and therefore, the respondents/claimants filed Civil Misc. Application No. 214
of 1982 under Sections 8 &9 of the Arbitration Act, 1940 before the learned
Civil Judge [SD], Vadodara for the appointment of Arbitrator. The Court
reasons have been given by the arbitrator in making the award, the Court
cannot examine the reasonableness of the reasons. If the parties have selected
their own forum, the deciding forum must be conceded the power of appraisement
of evidence. The Arbitrator is the sole judge of the quality as well as the
quantity of evidence and it will not be for the court to take upon itself the
task of being a judge on the evidence before the arbitrator."
Thus, the appraisement of evidence by the arbitrator is ordinarily never a
matter which the Court questions and considers in coming to a different
conclusion from the self same set of evidence and that by itself cannot be a
ground for setting aside the award.
This Court since is not to go into whether it can be a correct view but when
the evidence leads to conclude that it is a possible view then also, no
interference is warranted. From the cumulative examination of the entire
material, none of the grounds raised in this Appeal is found sustainable.
Both­ the learned Arbitrator and the Court below have acted in accordance with
law and the decisions are not vulnerable on any of the grounds raised in the
WORKS & 1....Defendant(s)
================================================================ Appearance:
Mr PREMAL R JOSHI, ADVOCATE for the Appellant(s) No. 1 Mr KG SUKHWANI,
ADVOCATE for the Defendant(s) No. 1 NOTICE SERVED for the Defendant(s) No. 2
================================================================ CORAM:
HONOURABLE Mr. JUSTICE JAYANT PATEL and HONOURABLE Ms. JUSTICE SONIA GOKANI
February 21, 2014.
CAV JUDGEMNT (PER : Hon'ble Ms. Justice SONIA GOKANI) The appellant in this
Appeal has challenged the legality and propriety of  Page 1 of 27
C/FA/1147/2008 CAV JUDGEMNT the judgment and order dated 23rd March 2006
passed by the learned 5th Addl. Senior Civil Judge, Vadodara rendered in Civil
Misc. Application No. 95 of 2004, rejecting the application preferred by the
present appellant for setting aside the Award dated 22nd January 2004, in the
following factual background. Factual background :
The appellant had advertised by way of local newspapers for the contract for
manufacture and supply of poles, wherein, the respondents were found to be the
successful bidder. Some disputes and differences arose between the parties,
and therefore, the respondents/claimants filed Civil Misc. Application No. 214
of 1982 under Sections 8 &9 of the Arbitration Act, 1940 before the learned
Civil Judge [SD], Vadodara for the appointment of Arbitrator. The Court
reasons have been given by the arbitrator in making the award, the Court
cannot examine the reasonableness of the reasons. If the parties have selected
their own forum, the deciding forum must be conceded the power of appraisement
of evidence. The Arbitrator is the sole judge of the quality as well as the
quantity of evidence and it will not be for the court to take upon itself the
task of being a judge on the evidence before the arbitrator."
Thus, the appraisement of evidence by the arbitrator is ordinarily never a
matter which the Court questions and considers in coming to a different
conclusion from the self same set of evidence and that by itself cannot be a
ground for setting aside the award.
This Court since is not to go into whether it can be a correct view but when
the evidence leads to conclude that it is a possible view then also, no
interference is warranted. From the cumulative examination of the entire
material, none of the grounds raised in this Appeal is found sustainable.
Both­ the learned Arbitrator and the Court below have acted in accordance with
law and the decisions are not vulnerable on any of the grounds raised in the
WORKS & 1....Defendant(s)
================================================================ Appearance:
Mr PREMAL R JOSHI, ADVOCATE for the Appellant(s) No. 1 Mr KG SUKHWANI,
ADVOCATE for the Defendant(s) No. 1 NOTICE SERVED for the Defendant(s) No. 2
================================================================ CORAM:
HONOURABLE Mr. JUSTICE JAYANT PATEL and HONOURABLE Ms. JUSTICE SONIA GOKANI
February 21, 2014.
CAV JUDGEMNT (PER : Hon'ble Ms. Justice SONIA GOKANI) The appellant in this
Appeal has challenged the legality and propriety of  Page 1 of 27
C/FA/1147/2008 CAV JUDGEMNT the judgment and order dated 23rd March 2006
passed by the learned 5th Addl. Senior Civil Judge, Vadodara rendered in Civil
Misc. Application No. 95 of 2004, rejecting the application preferred by the
present appellant for setting aside the Award dated 22nd January 2004, in the
following factual background. Factual background :
The appellant had advertised by way of local newspapers for the contract for
manufacture and supply of poles, wherein, the respondents were found to be the
successful bidder. Some disputes and differences arose between the parties,
and therefore, the respondents/claimants filed Civil Misc. Application No. 214
of 1982 under Sections 8 &9 of the Arbitration Act, 1940 before the learned
Civil Judge [SD], Vadodara for the appointment of Arbitrator. The Court
appointed one Shri M.S Iyengar, Chief Engineer [Arbitrations], Roads &
Buildings Department, Government of Gujarat as the sole Arbitrator. However,
Shri Iyengar vide his communication dated 30th January 1985 showed his
unwillingness to act as an Arbitrator.
The respondent thereafter preferred Civil Misc. Application No. 130 of 1985
before the very Court for appointment of another arbitrator and the Court vide
its order dated 30th June 1988 appointed Shri R.G Patel, retired Chief
Engineer & Joint Secretary as the Sole Arbitrator. However, before the said
Arbitrator undertakes the work of arbitration, he passed away and as a result,
Page 2 of 27 C/FA/1147/2008 CAV JUDGEMNT the claimant filed yet another Civil
Misc. Application No. 87 of 1998 for appointment of another Arbitrator and the
reasons have been given by the arbitrator in making the award, the Court
cannot examine the reasonableness of the reasons. If the parties have selected
their own forum, the deciding forum must be conceded the power of appraisement
of evidence. The Arbitrator is the sole judge of the quality as well as the
quantity of evidence and it will not be for the court to take upon itself the
task of being a judge on the evidence before the arbitrator."
Thus, the appraisement of evidence by the arbitrator is ordinarily never a
matter which the Court questions and considers in coming to a different
conclusion from the self same set of evidence and that by itself cannot be a
ground for setting aside the award.
This Court since is not to go into whether it can be a correct view but when
the evidence leads to conclude that it is a possible view then also, no
interference is warranted. From the cumulative examination of the entire
material, none of the grounds raised in this Appeal is found sustainable.
Both­ the learned Arbitrator and the Court below have acted in accordance with
law and the decisions are not vulnerable on any of the grounds raised in the
WORKS & 1....Defendant(s)
================================================================ Appearance:
Mr PREMAL R JOSHI, ADVOCATE for the Appellant(s) No. 1 Mr KG SUKHWANI,
ADVOCATE for the Defendant(s) No. 1 NOTICE SERVED for the Defendant(s) No. 2
================================================================ CORAM:
HONOURABLE Mr. JUSTICE JAYANT PATEL and HONOURABLE Ms. JUSTICE SONIA GOKANI
February 21, 2014.
CAV JUDGEMNT (PER : Hon'ble Ms. Justice SONIA GOKANI) The appellant in this
Appeal has challenged the legality and propriety of  Page 1 of 27
C/FA/1147/2008 CAV JUDGEMNT the judgment and order dated 23rd March 2006
passed by the learned 5th Addl. Senior Civil Judge, Vadodara rendered in Civil
Misc. Application No. 95 of 2004, rejecting the application preferred by the
present appellant for setting aside the Award dated 22nd January 2004, in the
following factual background. Factual background :
The appellant had advertised by way of local newspapers for the contract for
manufacture and supply of poles, wherein, the respondents were found to be the
successful bidder. Some disputes and differences arose between the parties,
and therefore, the respondents/claimants filed Civil Misc. Application No. 214
of 1982 under Sections 8 &9 of the Arbitration Act, 1940 before the learned
Civil Judge [SD], Vadodara for the appointment of Arbitrator. The Court
appointed one Shri M.S Iyengar, Chief Engineer [Arbitrations], Roads &
Buildings Department, Government of Gujarat as the sole Arbitrator. However,
Shri Iyengar vide his communication dated 30th January 1985 showed his
unwillingness to act as an Arbitrator.
The respondent thereafter preferred Civil Misc. Application No. 130 of 1985
before the very Court for appointment of another arbitrator and the Court vide
its order dated 30th June 1988 appointed Shri R.G Patel, retired Chief
Engineer & Joint Secretary as the Sole Arbitrator. However, before the said
Arbitrator undertakes the work of arbitration, he passed away and as a result,
Page 2 of 27 C/FA/1147/2008 CAV JUDGEMNT the claimant filed yet another Civil
Misc. Application No. 87 of 1998 for appointment of another Arbitrator and the
reasons have been given by the arbitrator in making the award, the Court
cannot examine the reasonableness of the reasons. If the parties have selected
their own forum, the deciding forum must be conceded the power of appraisement
of evidence. The Arbitrator is the sole judge of the quality as well as the
quantity of evidence and it will not be for the court to take upon itself the
task of being a judge on the evidence before the arbitrator."
Thus, the appraisement of evidence by the arbitrator is ordinarily never a
matter which the Court questions and considers in coming to a different
conclusion from the self same set of evidence and that by itself cannot be a
ground for setting aside the award.
This Court since is not to go into whether it can be a correct view but when
the evidence leads to conclude that it is a possible view then also, no
interference is warranted. From the cumulative examination of the entire
material, none of the grounds raised in this Appeal is found sustainable.
Both­ the learned Arbitrator and the Court below have acted in accordance with
law and the decisions are not vulnerable on any of the grounds raised in the
