Delhi District Court
In The Case Of M/S. Kumar Exports V. ... vs . on 6 April, 2009
Author: Sh. Dig Singh
              IN THE COURT OF SH. DIG VINAY SINGH, ADDITIONAL CHIEF METROPOLITAN 
                                                MAGISTRATE­03 (IPR), ROHINI, DELHI
                In re:                                 
              ANKIT SAINI                                  ...COMPLAINANT
              VS.
              BALENDER                                     ...ACCUSED
                C.C. NO.20/01
              U/S. 138 N.I. ACT
              PS MODEL TOWN
    DATE OF RESERVATION OF JUDGMENT: 01.4.2009
    DATE OF PRONOUNCEMENT OF JUDGMENT: 06.4.2009
                                                           JUDGEMENT
    (a) The serial no. of the case                               : R0038692008.
    (b) The date of commission of offence                        : 19.10.2008
    (c) The name of complainant                                  : ANKIT SAINI S/O. LATE RAMESH SAINI
    (d) The name, parentage, residence of accused                : BALENDER S/O. RAMPAR
                                                                   R/O.B­14/89, SECTOR­3, 
mistake returned the cheque due to insufficient funds and not stop payment.
The defence of the accused that he issued the two cheques to the complainant
as extension of loan by the accused to the complainant gets belied from one
more fact. That is, that the accused and his defence witness claims that he
issued the two cheques to the complainant on 20/07/2008. both cheques were
issued together. DW­1 Manoj mittal stated that both the cheques were issued
from same cheque book. Had it been so both the cheques would have been of
continuous serial number or at least serial number of same cheque book. But
the two cheques in these two cases are having absolutely different numbers.
14\. In such circumstances, the accused has failed to rebut the presumptions
u/s.118 & 139 of N.I.
Act. Issuance of cheque by the accused in favour of complainant is not in
dispute nor its dishonour is disputed, receipt of legal notice by the accused
demanding cheque amount and the limitation prescribed is also not in dispute.
Accordingly, the accused failed to rebut the presumption in favour of the
complainant and accused is thus held guilty and convicted for the offence
                                                                   R/O.B­14/89, SECTOR­3, 
                                                                   ROHINI, DELHI.
    (e) The offence complained of/ proved                        : U/s.138 N.I. ACT.
    (f) The plea of accused                                      : pleaded not guilty
    (g) The final order                                          : CONVICTED.
    (h) The date of such order                                   : 06.4.2009.
     (i) Brief statement of the reasons for the decision         
                                                                 :­
1\. Brief facts of the case are that the complainant Ankit Saini filed the
present complaint u/s.138 of Negotiable Instruments Act against the accused
Balender, claiming that in discharge of legally enforceable liability, the
accused issued a cheque for Rs.25,000/­ in favour of the complainant,
Judgement in case Ankit Saini Vs. Balender u/s.138 N.I. Act CC no. 20/1/08
Page no. 1 of 9 dtd.06.4.2009/k but the said cheque was dishonoured due to
reason "Stop Payment" vide memo dated 22.9.2008. Legal notice was sent to the
accused within stipulated period and when accused failed to make payment of
cheque amount within prescribed period, the complaint the filed within
limitation. The accused was summoned for offence u/s. 138 N.I. Act on
15.11.2008.
2\. A notice as required u/s.251 P.C. was framed against the accused for the
offence u/s.138 N.I. Act, to which the accused claimed trial. In answer to the
notice, the accused admitted that he issued the cheque in question in favour
of complainant and that the entire body of the cheque including date, name of
complainant, amount in numericals and words, are in his own handwriting and
also the cheque bears his signatures.
3\. The defence taken by the accused was that he did not take any amount of
Rs.25,000/­ from the complainant rather it was the complainant who asked the
accused for a loan amount of Rs.75,000/­, for which he issued two cheques ,
one for rs. 25000/­ ,(which is subject matter of this case) alongwith another
cheque of Rs.50,000/­ (which is subject matter of another complaint case
no.21/1/2008) between the same parties. The accused claimed that he issued two
cheques in favour of the complainant when he wanted to extend loan to the
complainant. Accused claimed that he issued these two cheques to the
complainant in the month of July, 2008, but both these cheques were post dated
for the month of September, 2008. Accused further claimed that in the
meantime, the accused changed his mind and, therefore, issued instructions to
his bankers not to encash the cheque. Accordingly, the defence of accused is
that he has no legally enforceable liability towards the complainant,
therefore, he cannot be held liable for dishonour of cheque.
4\. Complainant Ankit Saini examined himself as PW1, in which he deposed that
accused was known to him and, the accused started one firm namely M/s. Smart
Services and was in need of money since he was to deposit a security amount of
Rs.25,000/­ with M/s. Haier Appliances India Pvt. Ltd., for business purposes
and, accordingly he got issued one pay order no.511620 dated 09.6.2007
directly in the name of M/s. Haier Appliances on behalf of the firm of
accused. Complainant deposed that since he extended this amount as a loan, he
did not charge any interest Judgement in case Ankit Saini Vs. Balender u/s.138
N.I. Act CC no. 20/1/08 Page no. 2 of 9 dtd.06.4.2009/k from the accused.
Complainant also deposed that he was in service of the accused which he left
in August, 2008, and when he demanded this amount of Rs.25,000/­, the accused
issued post dated cheque no.024258 dated 10.9.2008 for Rs.25,000/­ drawn on
Corporation Bank, Sonepat, Haryana, which is Ex. PW1/A, in favour of the
complainant. However, the said cheque was returned dishonoured due to "Stop
Payment" on 22.9.2008 vide memo Ex. PW1/B. Thereafter, the complainant issued
the legal notice Ex. PW1/C dated 04.10.2008 to the accused demanding the
cheque amount, which was sent through registered AD post and UPC Ex. PW1/D &
Ex. PW1/E. The accused failed to make payment of cheque amount within 15 days
period from date of receipt of notice and, therefore, present complaint was
filed. This witness was subjected to cross examination on behalf of accused
and the accused put his defence in the form of suggestions to this witness,
which the witness denied. Nothing material could be brought out on record from
the cross examination of PW1 in support of defence of the accused. The
testimony of PW1 remained unimpeached. Accused did not deny the fact that such
a draft of Rs.25,000/­ was prepared in favour of M/s. Haier Appliances India
Pvt. Ltd. on behalf of the accused firm rather the accused suggested to this
witness that for the preparation of the said draft, accused had paid cash
amount of Rs.25,000/­. This suggestion was denied by PW1, who deposed that
this amount of Rs.25,000/­ towards draft was debited from the account of his
mother.
5\. PW2 Pradeep Aggarwal from the bankers of complainant deposed and proved
that pay order no. 511620 dated 09.6.2007 for Rs.25,000/­ was drawn on Punjab
National Bank, Rana Pratap Bagh, Dehi, which was prepared in favour of M/s.
Haier Appliances India Pvt. Ltd. He also proved that this draft was prepared
from the money from the account of mother of complainant. Accordingly, this
witness proved that indeed there was a draft prepared in favour of M/s. Haier
Appliances India Pvt. Ltd. from the account of mother of complainant. Accused
has not denied that no such draft was prepared or deposited on behalf of firm
of accused Judgement in case Ankit Saini Vs. Balender u/s.138 N.I. Act CC no.
20/1/08 Page no. 3 of 9 dtd.06.4.2009/k rather the accused says that he paid
Rs.25,000/­ in cash to the complainant for preparation of the draft.
6\. Entire incriminating evidence was put to the accused in his statement
u/s.313 r/w section 281 P.C. to which he admitted that he issued the cheque to
the complainant which bears his signatures and bears his handwriting on date,
name of complainant and the amount. Accused also admitted that he received
legal notice, but the accused stated that for the draft in favour of M/s.
Haier Appliances India Pvt. Ltd., he had paid cash amount of Rs.25,000/­ to
the complainant as he had no time to go to bank. Accused also claimed that the
cheque in question was issued by him as a loan to the complainant.
7\. Accused in his favour examined one Manoj Mittal as DW­1, who deposed that
he knew the complainant as well as the accused and, on 20.7.2008 he was
sitting in the office of accused where the complainant came requesting for a
loan of Rs.75,000/­ as friendly loan from the accused, where the accused
stated that he can give the amount in September, 2008 and he issued two post
dated cheques worth Rs.50,000/­ and Rs.25,000/­ (cheque in question) to the
complainant. This witness was subjected to cross examination by the
complainant and although this witness claimed that he knew the complainant and
the accused both but he was even unable to tell whether the complainant was in
the service of firm of the accused or not or whether the complainant left the
services of accused. Rather in the cross examination, he claimed that he knew
both of them since both of them were working in Samsung Company, whereas in
his examination in chief, he stated that he was introduced to the complainant
by the accused. The complainant even challenged that he was never working in
the Samsumg Company and it was suggested to this witness who expressed his
ignorance about the office of company.
8\. Ld. counsel for the accused argued that accused is entitled to be
acquitted since the complainant did not mention the fact that Rs.25,000/­
towards draft in favour of M/s. Haier Appliances India Ltd., was debited from
the account of his mother and, therefore, the complainant has not approached
the Court with clean hands. It is also argued that mother of accused is not
examined Judgement in case Ankit Saini Vs. Balender u/s.138 N.I. Act CC no.
20/1/08 Page no. 4 of 9 dtd.06.4.2009/k as a witness and also when the
complainant did not pay anything himself, the whole case goes. It is also
argued that complainant failed to prove as to whether the transaction in the
present case took place earlier or whether the alleged loan amount taken by
the accused from the complainant for Rs.50,000/­ regarding which separate
complaint is filed took place prior in time and, therefore, also the case
stands demolished. Accused also argues that complainant has failed to prove
specific date as to when the cheque in question was given by the accused to
the complainant and, therefore, accused deserves acquittal.
9\. I am afraid, none of the contentions raised by the accused has any force.
When PW2 bankers of accused proved that the draft was prepared from the
account of mother of complainant, there is no need to examine the mother of
complainant. Also whether the accused paid the amount from his own pocket for
preparation of draft or whether he took the money from his mother does not
make any difference so far as the liability of accused towards the cheque
involved is concerned. The money taken by the complainant from his mother's
account or paid by himself is internal matter and the liability of the accused
does not get affected in any manner from this fact. Nor failure to mention
about this in the complaint and failure to mention about specific date of
handing over of the cheque makes any difference. Also non mention of date of
both the transactions does not make any difference.
10\. Under section 139 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, there is a legal
presumption in favour of complainant and against the accused, that the cheque
in question was received by the complainant in discharge of any debt or other
liability from the accused either in whole or in part. As per this section,
the burden to rebut the presumption was on the accused which the accused
failed to rebut in the present case. Mere oral allegations by the accused that
the cheque was not given in discharge of his liability or that he gave the
cheque to the complainant towards extending loan would not suffice. To rebut
the presumption u/s.138 N.I. Act, there has to be some more evidence from the
accused besides making of bare oral denial. The accused has not proved any
documentary proof to show that he gave the cheque to the complainant towards
extension of loan Judgement in case Ankit Saini Vs. Balender u/s.138 N.I. Act
CC no. 20/1/08 Page no. 5 of 9 dtd.06.4.2009/k by the accused in favour of the
complainant. If such a defence without any document are to be taken as
sufficient rebuttal, in every case u/s.138 N.I. Act, the accused can escape
his liability by mere oral claim that the cheque was not in discharge of his
liability or that he wanted to extend loan to the complainant.
11\. Under section 118 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, there is a legal
presumption in favour of the complainant that every negotiable instrument
(which includes a cheque) was made or drawn for consideration. The legal
presumption is also regarding date of cheque, time of its acceptance, time of
transfer, order of endorsement and also as to stamps. Reading section 118 and
139 of Negotiable Instruments Act, a presumption arises in favour of the
complainant and not in favour of accused that, when this cheque was received
by the complainant, it was against consideration and also towards discharge of
liability by the accused.
1\. In the case of M/s. Kumar Exports v. M/s. Sharma Carpets , 2009(1)
R.C.R.(Criminal) 478 : 2009(1) R.C.R.(Civil) 453 : 2009(1) R.A.J. 154 hon'ble
Supreme court of India, held as follows;
"9. In order to determine the question whether offence punishable under
Section 138 of the Act is made out against the appellant, it will be necessary
to examine the scope and ambit of presumptions to be raised as envisaged by
the provisions of Sections 118 and 139 of the Act. In a suit to enforce a
simple contract, the plaintiff has to aver in his pleading that it was made
for good consideration and must substantiate it by evidence. But to this rule,
the negotiable instruments are an exception. In a significant departure from
the general rule applicable to contracts, Section 118 of the Act provides
certain presumptions to be raised. This Section lays down some special rules
of evidence relating to presumptions. The reason for these presumptions is
that, negotiable instrument passes from hand to hand on endorsement and it
would make trading very difficult and negotiability of the instrument
impossible, unless certain presumptions are made. The presumption, therefore,
is a matter of principle to facilitate negotiability as well as trade. Section
118 of the Act provides presumptions to be raised until the contrary is proved
(i) as to consideration, (ii) as to date of instrument, (iii) as to time of
acceptance, (iv) as to time of transfer, (v) as to order of indorsements,
(vi) as to appropriate stamp and (vii) as to holder being a holder in due
course. Section 139 of the Act provides that it shall be presumed, unless the
contrary is proved, that the holder of a cheque received the cheque of the
nature referred to in Section 138 for the discharge, in whole or in part, of
any debt or other liability. Presumptions are devices by use of which the
courts are enabled and entitled to pronounce on an issue notwithstanding that
there is no evidence or insufficient evidence. Under the Indian Evidence Act
all presumptions must come under one or the other class of the three classes
mentioned in the Act, namely, (1) "may presume" (rebuttable), (2) "shall
presume" Judgement in case Ankit Saini Vs. Balender u/s.138 N.I. Act CC no.
20/1/08 Page no. 6 of 9 dtd.06.4.2009/k (rebuttable) and (3) "conclusive
presumptions" (irrebuttable). The term `presumption' is used to designate an
inference, affirmative or disaffirmative of the existence a fact, conveniently
called the "presumed fact" drawn by a judicial tribunal, by a process of
probable reasoning from some matter of fact, either judicially noticed or
admitted or established by legal evidence to the satisfaction of the tribunal.
Presumption literally means "taking as true without examination or proof".
Section 4 of the Evidence Act inter-alia defines the words `may presume' and
`shall presume as follows: -
"(a) `may presume' - Whenever it is provided by this Act that the Court may
presume a fact, it may either regard such fact as proved, unless and until it
is disproved or may call for proof of it.
(b) `shall presume' - Whenever it is directed by this Act that the Court shall
presume a fact, it shall regard such fact as proved, unless and until it is
disproved."
In the former case the Court has an option to raise the presumption or not,
but in the latter case, the Court must necessarily raise the presumption. If
in a case the Court has an option to raise the presumption and raises the
presumption, the distinction between the two categories of presumptions ceases
and the fact is presumed, unless and until it is disproved." "10. Section 118
of the Act inter alia directs that it shall be presumed, until the contrary is
proved, that every negotiable instrument was made or drawn for consideration.
Section 139 of the Act stipulates that unless the contrary is proved, it shall
be presumed, that the holder of the cheque received the cheque, for the
discharge of, whole or part of any debt or liability. "
Applying the definition of the word `proved' in Section 3 of the Evidence Act
to the provisions of Sections 118 and 139 of the Act, it becomes evident that
in a trial under Section 138 of the Act a presumption will have to be made
that every negotiable instrument was made or drawn for consideration and that
it was executed for discharge of debt or liability once the execution of
negotiable instrument is either proved or admitted. As soon as the complainant
discharges the burden to prove that the instrument, say a note, was executed
by the accused, the rules of presumptions under Sections 118 and 139 of the
Act help him shift the burden on the accused. The presumptions will live,
exist and survive and shall end only when the contrary is proved by the
accused, that is, the cheque was not issued for consideration and in discharge
of any debt or liability. A presumption is not in itself evidence, but only
makes a prima facie case for a party for whose benefit it exists."
" 11. The use of the phrase "until the contrary is proved" in Section 118 of
the Act and use of the words "unless the contrary is proved" in Section 139 of
the Act read with definitions of "may presume" and "shall presume" as given in
Section 4 of the Evidence Act, makes it at once clear that presumptions to be
raised under both the provisions are rebuttable. When a presumption is
rebuttable, it only points out that the party on whom lies the duty of going
forward with evidence, on the fact presumed and when that party has produced
evidence fairly and reasonably tending to show that the real fact is not as
presumed, the purpose of the presumption is over. The accused in a trial under
Section 138 of the Act has two options. He can either show that consideration
and debt did not exist or that under the particular circumstances of the case
the non-existence of consideration and debt is so probable that a prudent man
ought to suppose that no consideration and debt existed. To rebut the
statutory presumptions an accused is not expected to prove his defence beyond
reasonable doubt as is expected of the complainant in a criminal trial. The
accused may adduce direct evidence Judgement in case Ankit Saini Vs. Balender
u/s.138 N.I. Act CC no. 20/1/08 Page no. 7 of 9 dtd.06.4.2009/k to prove that
the note in question was not supported by consideration and that there was no
debt or liability to be discharged by him. However, the court need not insist
in every case that the accused should disprove the non-existence of
consideration and debt by leading direct evidence because the existence of
negative evidence is neither possible nor contemplated. At the same time, it
is clear that bare denial of the passing of the consideration and existence of
debt, apparently would not serve the purpose of the accused. Something which
is probable has to be brought on record for getting the burden of proof
shifted to the complainant. To disprove the presumptions, the accused should
bring on record such facts and circumstances, upon consideration of which, the
court may either believe that the consideration and debt did not exist or
their non-existence was so probable that a prudent man would under the
circumstances of the case, act upon the plea that they did not exist. Apart
from adducing direct evidence to prove that the note in question was not
supported by consideration or that he had not incurred any debt or liability,
the accused may also rely upon circumstantial evidence and if the
circumstances so relied upon are compelling, the burden may likewise shift
again on to the complainant. The accused may also rely upon presumptions of
fact, for instance, those mentioned in Section 114 of the Evidence Act to
rebut the presumptions arising under Sections 118 and 139 of the Act. The
accused has also an option to prove the non-existence of consideration and
debt or liability either by letting in evidence or in some clear and
exceptional cases, from the case set out by the complainant, that is, the
averments in the complaint, the case set out in the statutory notice and
evidence adduced by the complainant during the trial. Once such rebuttal
evidence is adduced and accepted by the court, having regard to all the
circumstances of the case and the preponderance of probabilities, the
evidential burden shifts back to the complainant and, thereafter, the
presumptions under Sections 118 and 139 of the Act will not again come to the
complainant's rescue. "
12\. It was the accused who had to rebut the presumption by leading some
cogent evidence which he has failed. Rather it is the complainant who has led
cogent evidence to show that indeed prior to the date of cheque in question, a
draft was prepared from the account of mother of complainant in favour of M/s.
Haier Appliances India Pvt. Ltd., on behalf of the firm of accused. The fact
that such a draft was given in favour of M/s. Haier Appliances India Pvt.
Ltd., on behalf of firm of accused is admitted by accused. Although, the
accused claimed that he had paid cash amount of Rs.25,000/­ for this draft
also to the complainant, but again no evidence is led by the accused to
substantiate this claim.
13\. Although, the accused claimed that he had gave the two cheques of
Rs.50,000/­ and 25,000/­ to the complainant as extension of loan to the
complainant by the accused , but again no evidence is led by the accused to
substantiate this claim. The accused although claims that he changed his
Judgement in case Ankit Saini Vs. Balender u/s.138 N.I. Act CC no. 20/1/08
Page no. 8 of 9 dtd.06.4.2009/k mind and did not want to extend the loans and
that he instructed the bankers to stop the payment of cheque in this case. But
the cheque in connected case has been dishonoured due to insufficient funds
and not stop payment. Accused did not prove any document to show that he had
instructed his bankers to stop payment of that cheque. Nor he examined his
bankers to prove that he had so instructed the bankers but his bankers by
mistake returned the cheque due to insufficient funds and not stop payment.
The defence of the accused that he issued the two cheques to the complainant
as extension of loan by the accused to the complainant gets belied from one
more fact. That is, that the accused and his defence witness claims that he
issued the two cheques to the complainant on 20/07/2008. both cheques were
issued together. DW­1 Manoj mittal stated that both the cheques were issued
from same cheque book. Had it been so both the cheques would have been of
continuous serial number or at least serial number of same cheque book. But
the two cheques in these two cases are having absolutely different numbers.
14\. In such circumstances, the accused has failed to rebut the presumptions
u/s.118 & 139 of N.I.
Act. Issuance of cheque by the accused in favour of complainant is not in
dispute nor its dishonour is disputed, receipt of legal notice by the accused
demanding cheque amount and the limitation prescribed is also not in dispute.
Accordingly, the accused failed to rebut the presumption in favour of the
complainant and accused is thus held guilty and convicted for the offence
punishable u/s. 138 N.I. Act.
ANNOUNCED IN OPEN COURT ON 06th April 2009 DIGVINAY SINGH ADDITIONAL CHIEF
METROPOLITAN MAGISTRATE­03 IPR, ROHINI, DELHI Judgement in case Ankit Saini
Vs. Balender u/s.138 N.I. Act CC no. 20/1/08 Page no. 9 of 9 dtd.06.4.2009/k
mistake returned the cheque due to insufficient funds and not stop payment.
The defence of the accused that he issued the two cheques to the complainant
as extension of loan by the accused to the complainant gets belied from one
more fact. That is, that the accused and his defence witness claims that he
issued the two cheques to the complainant on 20/07/2008. both cheques were
issued together. DW­1 Manoj mittal stated that both the cheques were issued
from same cheque book. Had it been so both the cheques would have been of
continuous serial number or at least serial number of same cheque book. But
the two cheques in these two cases are having absolutely different numbers.
14\. In such circumstances, the accused has failed to rebut the presumptions
u/s.118 & 139 of N.I.
Act. Issuance of cheque by the accused in favour of complainant is not in
dispute nor its dishonour is disputed, receipt of legal notice by the accused
demanding cheque amount and the limitation prescribed is also not in dispute.
Accordingly, the accused failed to rebut the presumption in favour of the
complainant and accused is thus held guilty and convicted for the offence
                                                                   R/O.B­14/89, SECTOR­3, 
                                                                   ROHINI, DELHI.
    (e) The offence complained of/ proved                        : U/s.138 N.I. ACT.
    (f) The plea of accused                                      : pleaded not guilty
    (g) The final order                                          : CONVICTED.
    (h) The date of such order                                   : 06.4.2009.
     (i) Brief statement of the reasons for the decision         
                                                                 :­
1\. Brief facts of the case are that the complainant Ankit Saini filed the
present complaint u/s.138 of Negotiable Instruments Act against the accused
Balender, claiming that in discharge of legally enforceable liability, the
accused issued a cheque for Rs.25,000/­ in favour of the complainant,
Judgement in case Ankit Saini Vs. Balender u/s.138 N.I. Act CC no. 20/1/08
Page no. 1 of 9 dtd.06.4.2009/k but the said cheque was dishonoured due to
reason "Stop Payment" vide memo dated 22.9.2008. Legal notice was sent to the
accused within stipulated period and when accused failed to make payment of
cheque amount within prescribed period, the complaint the filed within
limitation. The accused was summoned for offence u/s. 138 N.I. Act on
15.11.2008.
2\. A notice as required u/s.251 P.C. was framed against the accused for the
mistake returned the cheque due to insufficient funds and not stop payment.
The defence of the accused that he issued the two cheques to the complainant
as extension of loan by the accused to the complainant gets belied from one
more fact. That is, that the accused and his defence witness claims that he
issued the two cheques to the complainant on 20/07/2008. both cheques were
issued together. DW­1 Manoj mittal stated that both the cheques were issued
from same cheque book. Had it been so both the cheques would have been of
continuous serial number or at least serial number of same cheque book. But
the two cheques in these two cases are having absolutely different numbers.
14\. In such circumstances, the accused has failed to rebut the presumptions
u/s.118 & 139 of N.I.
Act. Issuance of cheque by the accused in favour of complainant is not in
dispute nor its dishonour is disputed, receipt of legal notice by the accused
demanding cheque amount and the limitation prescribed is also not in dispute.
Accordingly, the accused failed to rebut the presumption in favour of the
complainant and accused is thus held guilty and convicted for the offence
                                                                   R/O.B­14/89, SECTOR­3, 
                                                                   ROHINI, DELHI.
    (e) The offence complained of/ proved                        : U/s.138 N.I. ACT.
    (f) The plea of accused                                      : pleaded not guilty
    (g) The final order                                          : CONVICTED.
    (h) The date of such order                                   : 06.4.2009.
     (i) Brief statement of the reasons for the decision         
                                                                 :­
1\. Brief facts of the case are that the complainant Ankit Saini filed the
present complaint u/s.138 of Negotiable Instruments Act against the accused
Balender, claiming that in discharge of legally enforceable liability, the
accused issued a cheque for Rs.25,000/­ in favour of the complainant,
Judgement in case Ankit Saini Vs. Balender u/s.138 N.I. Act CC no. 20/1/08
Page no. 1 of 9 dtd.06.4.2009/k but the said cheque was dishonoured due to
reason "Stop Payment" vide memo dated 22.9.2008. Legal notice was sent to the
accused within stipulated period and when accused failed to make payment of
cheque amount within prescribed period, the complaint the filed within
limitation. The accused was summoned for offence u/s. 138 N.I. Act on
15.11.2008.
2\. A notice as required u/s.251 P.C. was framed against the accused for the
mistake returned the cheque due to insufficient funds and not stop payment.
The defence of the accused that he issued the two cheques to the complainant
as extension of loan by the accused to the complainant gets belied from one
more fact. That is, that the accused and his defence witness claims that he
issued the two cheques to the complainant on 20/07/2008. both cheques were
issued together. DW­1 Manoj mittal stated that both the cheques were issued
from same cheque book. Had it been so both the cheques would have been of
continuous serial number or at least serial number of same cheque book. But
the two cheques in these two cases are having absolutely different numbers.
14\. In such circumstances, the accused has failed to rebut the presumptions
u/s.118 & 139 of N.I.
Act. Issuance of cheque by the accused in favour of complainant is not in
dispute nor its dishonour is disputed, receipt of legal notice by the accused
demanding cheque amount and the limitation prescribed is also not in dispute.
Accordingly, the accused failed to rebut the presumption in favour of the
complainant and accused is thus held guilty and convicted for the offence
                                                                   R/O.B­14/89, SECTOR­3, 
                                                                   ROHINI, DELHI.
    (e) The offence complained of/ proved                        : U/s.138 N.I. ACT.
    (f) The plea of accused                                      : pleaded not guilty
    (g) The final order                                          : CONVICTED.
    (h) The date of such order                                   : 06.4.2009.
     (i) Brief statement of the reasons for the decision         
                                                                 :­
1\. Brief facts of the case are that the complainant Ankit Saini filed the
present complaint u/s.138 of Negotiable Instruments Act against the accused
Balender, claiming that in discharge of legally enforceable liability, the
accused issued a cheque for Rs.25,000/­ in favour of the complainant,
Judgement in case Ankit Saini Vs. Balender u/s.138 N.I. Act CC no. 20/1/08
Page no. 1 of 9 dtd.06.4.2009/k but the said cheque was dishonoured due to
reason "Stop Payment" vide memo dated 22.9.2008. Legal notice was sent to the
accused within stipulated period and when accused failed to make payment of
cheque amount within prescribed period, the complaint the filed within
limitation. The accused was summoned for offence u/s. 138 N.I. Act on
15.11.2008.
2\. A notice as required u/s.251 P.C. was framed against the accused for the
offence u/s.138 N.I. Act, to which the accused claimed trial. In answer to the
notice, the accused admitted that he issued the cheque in question in favour
of complainant and that the entire body of the cheque including date, name of
complainant, amount in numericals and words, are in his own handwriting and
also the cheque bears his signatures.
3\. The defence taken by the accused was that he did not take any amount of
Rs.25,000/­ from the complainant rather it was the complainant who asked the
accused for a loan amount of Rs.75,000/­, for which he issued two cheques ,
one for rs. 25000/­ ,(which is subject matter of this case) alongwith another
cheque of Rs.50,000/­ (which is subject matter of another complaint case
no.21/1/2008) between the same parties. The accused claimed that he issued two
mistake returned the cheque due to insufficient funds and not stop payment.
The defence of the accused that he issued the two cheques to the complainant
as extension of loan by the accused to the complainant gets belied from one
more fact. That is, that the accused and his defence witness claims that he
issued the two cheques to the complainant on 20/07/2008. both cheques were
issued together. DW­1 Manoj mittal stated that both the cheques were issued
from same cheque book. Had it been so both the cheques would have been of
continuous serial number or at least serial number of same cheque book. But
the two cheques in these two cases are having absolutely different numbers.
14\. In such circumstances, the accused has failed to rebut the presumptions
u/s.118 & 139 of N.I.
Act. Issuance of cheque by the accused in favour of complainant is not in
dispute nor its dishonour is disputed, receipt of legal notice by the accused
demanding cheque amount and the limitation prescribed is also not in dispute.
Accordingly, the accused failed to rebut the presumption in favour of the
complainant and accused is thus held guilty and convicted for the offence
                                                                   R/O.B­14/89, SECTOR­3, 
                                                                   ROHINI, DELHI.
    (e) The offence complained of/ proved                        : U/s.138 N.I. ACT.
    (f) The plea of accused                                      : pleaded not guilty
    (g) The final order                                          : CONVICTED.
    (h) The date of such order                                   : 06.4.2009.
     (i) Brief statement of the reasons for the decision         
                                                                 :­
1\. Brief facts of the case are that the complainant Ankit Saini filed the
present complaint u/s.138 of Negotiable Instruments Act against the accused
Balender, claiming that in discharge of legally enforceable liability, the
accused issued a cheque for Rs.25,000/­ in favour of the complainant,
Judgement in case Ankit Saini Vs. Balender u/s.138 N.I. Act CC no. 20/1/08
Page no. 1 of 9 dtd.06.4.2009/k but the said cheque was dishonoured due to
reason "Stop Payment" vide memo dated 22.9.2008. Legal notice was sent to the
accused within stipulated period and when accused failed to make payment of
cheque amount within prescribed period, the complaint the filed within
limitation. The accused was summoned for offence u/s. 138 N.I. Act on
15.11.2008.
2\. A notice as required u/s.251 P.C. was framed against the accused for the
offence u/s.138 N.I. Act, to which the accused claimed trial. In answer to the
notice, the accused admitted that he issued the cheque in question in favour
of complainant and that the entire body of the cheque including date, name of
complainant, amount in numericals and words, are in his own handwriting and
also the cheque bears his signatures.
3\. The defence taken by the accused was that he did not take any amount of
Rs.25,000/­ from the complainant rather it was the complainant who asked the
accused for a loan amount of Rs.75,000/­, for which he issued two cheques ,
one for rs. 25000/­ ,(which is subject matter of this case) alongwith another
cheque of Rs.50,000/­ (which is subject matter of another complaint case
no.21/1/2008) between the same parties. The accused claimed that he issued two
mistake returned the cheque due to insufficient funds and not stop payment.
The defence of the accused that he issued the two cheques to the complainant
as extension of loan by the accused to the complainant gets belied from one
more fact. That is, that the accused and his defence witness claims that he
issued the two cheques to the complainant on 20/07/2008. both cheques were
issued together. DW­1 Manoj mittal stated that both the cheques were issued
from same cheque book. Had it been so both the cheques would have been of
continuous serial number or at least serial number of same cheque book. But
the two cheques in these two cases are having absolutely different numbers.
14\. In such circumstances, the accused has failed to rebut the presumptions
u/s.118 & 139 of N.I.
Act. Issuance of cheque by the accused in favour of complainant is not in
dispute nor its dishonour is disputed, receipt of legal notice by the accused
demanding cheque amount and the limitation prescribed is also not in dispute.
Accordingly, the accused failed to rebut the presumption in favour of the
complainant and accused is thus held guilty and convicted for the offence
