Central Government Act
Section 33 in The Companies Act, 1956
33\. Registration of memorandum and articles.
(1) There shall be presented for registration, to the Registrar of the State
in which the registered office of the company is stated by the memorandum to
be situate-
(a) the memorandum of the company;
(b) its articles, if any; and
(c) 1 the agreement, if any, which the company proposes to enter into with any
individual for appointment as its managing or whole- time director or
manager.]
(2) A declaration by an advocate of the Supreme Court or of a High Court, an
attorney or a plader entitled to appear before a High Court, or 2 a secretary,
or a chartered accountant, in whole- time practice in India"] who is engaged
in the formation of a company, or by a person named in the articles as a
director, 2 manager or secretary of the company, that all the requirements of
this Act and the rules thereunder have been complied with in respect of
registration and matters precede- nt and incidental thereto, shall be filed
with the Registrar; and the Registrar may accept such a declaration as
sufficient evidence of such compliance. 3 Explanation.- For the purposes of
(c) 1 the agreement, if any, which the company proposes to enter into with any
individual for appointment as its managing or whole- time director or
manager.]
(2) A declaration by an advocate of the Supreme Court or of a High Court, an
attorney or a plader entitled to appear before a High Court, or 2 a secretary,
or a chartered accountant, in whole- time practice in India"] who is engaged
in the formation of a company, or by a person named in the articles as a
director, 2 manager or secretary of the company, that all the requirements of
this Act and the rules thereunder have been complied with in respect of
registration and matters precede- nt and incidental thereto, shall be filed
with the Registrar; and the Registrar may accept such a declaration as
sufficient evidence of such compliance. 3 Explanation.- For the purposes of
this sub- section," chartered accountant in whole- time practice in India"
means a chartered accountant within the meaning of clause (b) of sub- section
(1) of section 2 of the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949 (38 of 1949 ), who is
practising in India and who is not in fultime employment.]
sufficient evidence of such compliance. 3 Explanation.- For the purposes of
this sub- section," chartered accountant in whole- time practice in India"
means a chartered accountant within the meaning of clause (b) of sub- section
(1) of section 2 of the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949 (38 of 1949 ), who is
practising in India and who is not in fultime employment.]
(3) If the Registrar is satisfied that all the requirements aforesaid have
been complied with by the company and that it is authorised to be registered
under this Act, he shall retain and register the memorandum, the articles, if
any, and the agreement referred to in clause (c) of sub- section (1), if any.
(c) 1 the agreement, if any, which the company proposes to enter into with any
individual for appointment as its managing or whole- time director or
manager.]
(2) A declaration by an advocate of the Supreme Court or of a High Court, an
attorney or a plader entitled to appear before a High Court, or 2 a secretary,
or a chartered accountant, in whole- time practice in India"] who is engaged
in the formation of a company, or by a person named in the articles as a
director, 2 manager or secretary of the company, that all the requirements of
this Act and the rules thereunder have been complied with in respect of
registration and matters precede- nt and incidental thereto, shall be filed
with the Registrar; and the Registrar may accept such a declaration as
sufficient evidence of such compliance. 3 Explanation.- For the purposes of
this sub- section," chartered accountant in whole- time practice in India"
means a chartered accountant within the meaning of clause (b) of sub- section
(1) of section 2 of the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949 (38 of 1949 ), who is
practising in India and who is not in fultime employment.]
sufficient evidence of such compliance. 3 Explanation.- For the purposes of
this sub- section," chartered accountant in whole- time practice in India"
means a chartered accountant within the meaning of clause (b) of sub- section
(1) of section 2 of the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949 (38 of 1949 ), who is
practising in India and who is not in fultime employment.]
(3) If the Registrar is satisfied that all the requirements aforesaid have
been complied with by the company and that it is authorised to be registered
under this Act, he shall retain and register the memorandum, the articles, if
any, and the agreement referred to in clause (c) of sub- section (1), if any.
(c) 1 the agreement, if any, which the company proposes to enter into with any
individual for appointment as its managing or whole- time director or
manager.]
(2) A declaration by an advocate of the Supreme Court or of a High Court, an
attorney or a plader entitled to appear before a High Court, or 2 a secretary,
or a chartered accountant, in whole- time practice in India"] who is engaged
in the formation of a company, or by a person named in the articles as a
director, 2 manager or secretary of the company, that all the requirements of
this Act and the rules thereunder have been complied with in respect of
registration and matters precede- nt and incidental thereto, shall be filed
with the Registrar; and the Registrar may accept such a declaration as
sufficient evidence of such compliance. 3 Explanation.- For the purposes of
this sub- section," chartered accountant in whole- time practice in India"
means a chartered accountant within the meaning of clause (b) of sub- section
(1) of section 2 of the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949 (38 of 1949 ), who is
practising in India and who is not in fultime employment.]
sufficient evidence of such compliance. 3 Explanation.- For the purposes of
this sub- section," chartered accountant in whole- time practice in India"
means a chartered accountant within the meaning of clause (b) of sub- section
(1) of section 2 of the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949 (38 of 1949 ), who is
practising in India and who is not in fultime employment.]
(3) If the Registrar is satisfied that all the requirements aforesaid have
been complied with by the company and that it is authorised to be registered
under this Act, he shall retain and register the memorandum, the articles, if
any, and the agreement referred to in clause (c) of sub- section (1), if any.
(c) 1 the agreement, if any, which the company proposes to enter into with any
individual for appointment as its managing or whole- time director or
manager.]
(2) A declaration by an advocate of the Supreme Court or of a High Court, an
attorney or a plader entitled to appear before a High Court, or 2 a secretary,
or a chartered accountant, in whole- time practice in India"] who is engaged
in the formation of a company, or by a person named in the articles as a
director, 2 manager or secretary of the company, that all the requirements of
this Act and the rules thereunder have been complied with in respect of
registration and matters precede- nt and incidental thereto, shall be filed
with the Registrar; and the Registrar may accept such a declaration as
sufficient evidence of such compliance. 3 Explanation.- For the purposes of
this sub- section," chartered accountant in whole- time practice in India"
means a chartered accountant within the meaning of clause (b) of sub- section
(1) of section 2 of the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949 (38 of 1949 ), who is
practising in India and who is not in fultime employment.]
sufficient evidence of such compliance. 3 Explanation.- For the purposes of
this sub- section," chartered accountant in whole- time practice in India"
means a chartered accountant within the meaning of clause (b) of sub- section
(1) of section 2 of the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949 (38 of 1949 ), who is
practising in India and who is not in fultime employment.]
(3) If the Registrar is satisfied that all the requirements aforesaid have
been complied with by the company and that it is authorised to be registered
under this Act, he shall retain and register the memorandum, the articles, if
any, and the agreement referred to in clause (c) of sub- section (1), if any.
(c) 1 the agreement, if any, which the company proposes to enter into with any
individual for appointment as its managing or whole- time director or
manager.]
(2) A declaration by an advocate of the Supreme Court or of a High Court, an
attorney or a plader entitled to appear before a High Court, or 2 a secretary,
or a chartered accountant, in whole- time practice in India"] who is engaged
in the formation of a company, or by a person named in the articles as a
director, 2 manager or secretary of the company, that all the requirements of
this Act and the rules thereunder have been complied with in respect of
registration and matters precede- nt and incidental thereto, shall be filed
with the Registrar; and the Registrar may accept such a declaration as
sufficient evidence of such compliance. 3 Explanation.- For the purposes of
this sub- section," chartered accountant in whole- time practice in India"
means a chartered accountant within the meaning of clause (b) of sub- section
(1) of section 2 of the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949 (38 of 1949 ), who is
practising in India and who is not in fultime employment.]
sufficient evidence of such compliance. 3 Explanation.- For the purposes of
this sub- section," chartered accountant in whole- time practice in India"
means a chartered accountant within the meaning of clause (b) of sub- section
(1) of section 2 of the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949 (38 of 1949 ), who is
practising in India and who is not in fultime employment.]
(3) If the Registrar is satisfied that all the requirements aforesaid have
been complied with by the company and that it is authorised to be registered
under this Act, he shall retain and register the memorandum, the articles, if
any, and the agreement referred to in clause (c) of sub- section (1), if any.
(c) 1 the agreement, if any, which the company proposes to enter into with any
individual for appointment as its managing or whole- time director or
manager.]
(2) A declaration by an advocate of the Supreme Court or of a High Court, an
attorney or a plader entitled to appear before a High Court, or 2 a secretary,
or a chartered accountant, in whole- time practice in India"] who is engaged
in the formation of a company, or by a person named in the articles as a
director, 2 manager or secretary of the company, that all the requirements of
this Act and the rules thereunder have been complied with in respect of
registration and matters precede- nt and incidental thereto, shall be filed
with the Registrar; and the Registrar may accept such a declaration as
sufficient evidence of such compliance. 3 Explanation.- For the purposes of
this sub- section," chartered accountant in whole- time practice in India"
means a chartered accountant within the meaning of clause (b) of sub- section
(1) of section 2 of the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949 (38 of 1949 ), who is
practising in India and who is not in fultime employment.]
