Gauhati High Court
Akmal Ali And Ors. Etc. vs State Of Assam And Ors. on 5 October, 1983
Equivalent citations: AIR 1984 Gau 86
Author: Lahiri
Bench: K Lahiri, N I Singh, B Hansaria
JUDGMENT Lahiri, J.
1\. One of us (Hansaria, J.) sitting singly posed the question whereupon this
Bench has been constituted to answer the same :
"Whether are appeal lies under Order 43, Rule 1 (r) of the Civil P. C., 1906,
against an ex parte order of ad interim injunction?"
2\. In our opinion, the answer sought is very much there in the question
itself. If an order of ad interim injunction is passed under Order 39, Rule 1
or 2 of the Civil P. C., whether ex parte or otherwise, it is appealable, as
Order 43, Rule 1 (r) enables a party aggrieved by any order under Order 39,
Rule 1 or 2 to prefer an appeal. However, the question requires further
consideration as although this High Court has persistently and consistently
held, since its inception, that an appeal does lie against an enter of ad
interim injunction if rendered under Order 39, Rule 1 or 2 and the rule was
confirmed by Mehrotra, C. J. in United Club v. Nowgong Foot Ball Association
AIR 1964 Assam 81. This court permits appeal against any order made under
Section 2 "unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context". If
there is any repugnancy in Order 43, Rule 1 (r) read with Order 39, Rules 1
and 2, the meaning of the term 'order' should be understood as set out in
those provisions and definition need not be resorted to. That apart any order
rendered under Order 39, Rule 1 or 2 is a formal expression of the decision
arrived at by the Civil Court relating to granting of ad interim injunction.
How could a court injunct a party without deciding whether to grant it or not.
Form No. 8 of Appendix F to the Civil P. C., 1908, clearly shows the manner in
which the formal expression of the decision is required to be made. Further,
to say that reasons must find place in an order to be regarded as a decision
would land the litigants in great difficulty, as, one word 'Dismissed' would
then not be 'Orders'. Such a proposition cannot be accepted. It is a different
matter that all orders, interim or final, should contain reasons. But to
regard all non-speaking disposals as net even 'orders' of the appropriate
authorities would create stalemate, as, such disposals might then become non-
appealable or non-revisable, even under the relevant statutory provisions.
AIR 1964 Assam 81. This court permits appeal against any order made under
Order 39; Rule 1 or 2, ex parte, speaking or non-speaking. However, the
opposite view has been expressed by some High Courts and hence the reference.
3\. To resolve the question it is necessary to set out the provisions of Order
43, Rule 1 (r) of the Code :
"1. Appeals from orders -- An appeal shall He from the following orders under
the provisions of Section 104 namely:--
     (a) **               **               **  
     (r) an order under Rule 1, Rule 2, Rule 2-A, Rule 4 or Rule 10 of Order XXXIX."   
On a plain reading of the provision it appears obvious that all orders
rendered under "Rule 1, Rule 2, Rule 2-A, Rule 4 and Rule 10 of Order 39" are
appealable. It is evident that any other restraint order passed under any
other provision, though falling in Order 39, is not appealable as Order 43,
Rule 1 (r) permits an appeal against specific orders referred in Order 43,
Rule 1 (r). Order 39 has been compartmentalised into two divisions : (1)
temporary injunction, and (2) interlocutory orders. Rules 1 and 5 fall, under
the head "temporary injunction", whereas Rules 6 to 10 fall under
interlocutory orders. It is thus seen that all orders under Rules 1 to 5 of
Order 39 are nothing but order of ''temporary injunction". We lay emphasis
that Order 39, Rule 4 is also an enabling provision to grant temporary
injunction like Order 39, Rules 1 and 2. Amongst the "interlocutory orders"
only an order passed under Rule 10 of Order 39 is appealable in spite of the
fact that it is an "interlocutory order". The expression "interlocutory" means
provisional, interim or temporary, but not final. Similarly the term
"temporary" in the expressions "temporary injunction" means provisional and
interim, and, therefore orders of temporary injunction cannot by their very
nature be final. Notwithstanding the characteristics of 'interim',
'provisional' or 'temporary' nature of the orders, they have been expressly
made appealable, if they are parsed under Rules 1, 2, 2-A, 4 and 10. In our
opinion, therefore, the court cannot refuse to entertain an appeal only on the
ground that such orders are temporary or interim or provisional. Similarly, by
their very nature ad interim injunctions passed under Order 1 or 2 are always
rendered ex parte. Parliament being fully aware of the situation permitted
appeals against such orders. In our opinion,, therefore, an ex parte order of
temporary injunction, whether provisional, temporary or interim are
appealable, if rendered under Order 39, Rules 1 and 2. On perusal of Order 43,
Rule 1 (r), we notice that it speaks that an appeal shall He from an "order"
under Rule 1, Rule 2, Rule 2-A, Rule 4 and Rule 10 of Order 39. Therefore, any
order under Rules 1, 2, 2-A and 4 is appealable.
4\. Now, let us turn to Order 39, Rules 1, 2, 2-A and 4 to find out the nature
and character of the process by which an ad interim injunction is issued,
Order 39, Rule 1 states that on fulfilment of the "conditions precedent the
Court may by Order grant a "temporary injunction", and what is more important,
grant the order "until the disposal of the suit or until further orders".
Thus, ad interim order of temporary injunction is clearly visualised by Rule
1. Similarly Rule 2 provides that "the Court may by order grant such
injunction......" Rule 2-A also provides that the Court "may order the
property of the person guilty of such disobedience......to be attached and may
also order such person to be detained...". Similarly Rule 4 of Order 39 which
deals with discharge, variation or cancellation of "any order for an
injunction" recognises the power of the Court to discharge, vary or set aside
"any order of injunction". Therefore, the power of discharge, vary or set
aside can be invoked if there is in existence an "order for an injunction". If
orders rendered under Rules 1, 2, 2-A are not orders of injunctions the Court
cannot exercise power under Order 39, Rule 4. However, in our opinion, all
orders rendered under Order 39, Rules 1, 2, 2-A have been designated as
"orders" and Rule 4 empowers the trial Court to discharge, vary or set aside
any of such orders. It does not stand to scrutiny that if the order is an ex
parte order or it is non-speaking order, it would not be revisable by the
trial Court under Order 39, Rule 4 of the Code. Rule 4 empowers the trial
Court to vary, alter or cancel any order of injunction, which undoubtedly
includes orders under Rules 1, 2, 2-A of Order 39. As such, all orders which
are dischargeable variable or cancellable, are appealable under Order 43, Rule
1 (r), because an appeal lies against any order of injunction made under Order
39, Rules 1, 2 and 2-A However, there is a line of decisions in which it has
been held that an ex parte or ad. interim order of injunction under Order 39,
Rules 1, 2, 2-A is not appealable as it is temporary or ex parte or non-
speaking. But in the same breath the High Courts recognise the right of
petition against such orders under Order 39, Rule 4 of the Code. An ex parte
non-speaking temporary of ad interim order of injunction is revisable but it
is not appealable, although the characteristics of the impugned order are
absolutely the same both in Order 39, Rule 4 as well as in Order 43, Rule 1
(r), seems to be irreconcilable. If it is an order of injunction, it is
appealable as well. Similarly, if it is an order of injunction it is revisable
under Order 39, Rule 4. Situated thus, we find it difficult to accept the line
of reasoning and respectfully differ from the view. In our opinion, all ex
parte ad interim injunction are appealable under Order 43, Rule 1 (r) as well
as revisable under Order 39, Rule 4 of the Code.
5\. The right of appeal conferred by Order 43, Rule 1 (r) read with Section
104 is a statutory right. The right cannot be restricted when no restriction
is found in Section 104 and Order 43, Rule 1 (r). The legislature created an
unqualified right of appeal against "any order" passed under Order 39, Rules
1, 2, 2-A, 4 and 10, whether inter partes or ex parte, by a speaking or non-
speaking order. The legislature may provide for two reliefs or alternative
reliefs and/or may provide two forums for reliefs. The statutory provisions
for obtaining reliefs, both under Order 43, Rule 1 (r) and Order 39, Rule 4,
is legislative will. The intention is clear, precise and direct and this
should end all judicial speculations. In Shri Mandir Sitaramji v. Lt. Governor
of Delhi, AIR 1974 SC 1868 Mathew, J. speaking for the Court observed that the
well-established rule of law is that where legislature has spoken, the Judges
cannot afford to be wiser. We are, therefore, of the opinion that against an
ex parte order of ad interim injunction relief can be obtained under Order 39,
Rule 4 as well as under Order 43, Rule 1 (r). When the legislature willed that
reliefs may be had in two forums, the Court cannot shut the relief on the plea
that if appeals are permitted it would open flood-gate of litigation and
create difficulties to the appellate Courts. To deny the right on this score
is to defy the legislative mandate, which in " our opinion, is not
permissible. For the same reason we cannot subscribe the view that no appeal
lies against an ex parte order of ad interim injunction but an appeal is
competent only "after both the parties are heard and a reasoned order is given
by the trial Court under Order 39, Rule 4 of "the Code". Such a construction
overlooks the provisions of Order 43, Rule 1 (r), which pro-vide for appeal
against Order under Rules 1, 2 and 2-A apart from an order under Rule 4. If it
were so, the legislature would have surely provided for appeal only against an
order under Order 39, Rule 4 and would have omitted Rules 1, 2, 2-A from Rule
1 (r) of Order 43. We cannot hold that the expressions "R. 1, Rule 2, Rule
2-A" in Order 43, Rule 1 (r) are superfluous or unnecessary and can be omitted
or overlooked, in spite of the expressed legislative will.
6\. Any controversy as to whether reasons need be recorded while making an ex
parte order of ad interim injunction has been removed by the introduction of
Rule 3, which provides that the Court after recording reasons for its
satisfaction that the object of granting injunction would be defeated by delay
etc., may pass an order of ex parte ad interim injunction under Rules 1 and 2
of Order 39. It does not stand to scrutiny that an ad interim ex parte order
devoid of reasons, rendered in violation of the well-known principles that a
judicial order must contain reasons, and, in violation of the mandatory
provision of Rule 3 can escape the jurisdiction of the appellate Court, but
the same order can be revised by the very same Court, Judicial order must be
reasoned order. After the amendment, it must contain reason. The trial Court
must apply its mind to the materials placed before it, and, on being
"satisfied about the requirements of Order 39, Rules 1 and 2 make the Order.
Further, Rule 3 enjoins ''reasons to be recorded". Under these circumstances
when the trial Court is required by law to state reasons, but does not furnish
them in its order, it violates the provisions of 'the Code'. By its own
inaction or intentional violation of the mandatory provisions of the Rules a
Court cannot take away the right of appeal of a person aggrieved by that
order; As such, an ex parte order of injunction, whether speaking or non-
speaking, is appealable.
7\. Similarly, the reasoning that an ex parte order of ad interim- injunction
is short-lived so it is not appealable cannot be accepted. There is nothing to
show or indicate in Section 104 or Order 43, Rule 1 (r) that a short-term
injunction is not appealable. We have stated that all such orders passed under
Rules 1 to 5, are "interlocutory orders". If all such orders are interim or
interlocutory orders or short-lived orders, it does not stand to scrutiny how
an order rendered under Rule 4 of Order 39 can be appealable. We, therefore,
hold that all orders rendered under Rules 1, 2, 2-A and 4 are short-term
orders and they have been made appealable expressly by Order 43, Rule 1 (r) of
'the Code'.
8\. We hold that against an order of ad interim injunction under Section 151
of the Code is not appealable, as Order 43, Rule 1 (r) is not attracted. Order
43, Rule 1 (r) does not provide for an appeal against any order of injunction
made under Section 151 of 'the Code'. We hold that an order made under Order
39, Rules 1, 2 and 4 refusing to grant an ex parte order of ad interim
injunction is appealable because Order 43, Rule 1 (r) enables a party to
prefer an appeal against "an order", positive or negative, passed under Rules
1, 2, 2-A and 4 of Order 39. An order refusing an ad interim injunction is a
negative order, but falls within the expressions "an order". The question is
no longer res integra in view of the decisions of the Supreme Court in firm
Ishar Das Devi Chand v. Prakash Chand, AIR 1969 SC 938 : (1969) 1 SCC 664 and
Shah Babulal Khimji v. Jayaben, AIR 1981 SC 1786 : (1981) 4 SCC 8. We hold
that refusal to grant an ex parte order of ad interim injuction is appealable
under Order 43, Rule 1 (r) of 'the Code'. Further, we hold that no appeal lies
against an ex parte order of ad interim injunction if it is rendered under any
provision of 'the Code', other than under Rules 1, 2, 2-A, 4 and 10 of Order
39. The view finds support in Keshardeo v. Radha Kishan, AIR 1953 SC 23 : 1953
SCR 136; Chaube Jagdish Prasad v. Ganga Prasad, AIR 1950 SC 492 (para 17). We
also hold that an appeal lies against an ex parte order of ad interim
injunction passed under Order 39, Rules 1, 2, 2-A and 4, no matter whether it
is a short-term or long-term, speaking or non-speaking, ex parte or inter
parte.
9\. Now, we have but one task left, that is to consider the decisions brought
to our notice. We entirely agree with the view expressed by Mehrotra, C. J. in
United Club v. Nowgong Football Association, AIR 1964 Assam 81. The law was
correctly enunciated and it was correctly held that appeal was competent
against an ex parte order of injunction passed under Rules 1 and 2 of Order
39. We respectfully agree with the view expressed by the Orissa High Court in
State of Orissa v. Orissa Oil Industries Ltd. AIR 1982 Orissa 245, wherein it
has been held that an ex parte ad interim injunction rendered without
recording reasons is violative of O. 39, Rule 3 and is illegal and the order
is appealable under Order 43, Rule 1 (r). We respectfully agree with the views
expressed in E. Mangamma v. A. Muniswamy Naidu, AIR 1983 Andh Pra 128, wherein
the High Court has held that such an appeal is competent against an ex parte
order of injunction rendered under O. 39, Rule 1. We also respectfully agree
with the opinion expressed in Saraju Prasad, AIR 1951 Cal 446 wherein the
Calcutta High Court has held that an appeal is competent against an ex parte
order of ad interim injunction passed under Rules 1, 2 of Order 39. We
respectfully agree with the views expressed in Zilla Parishad v. B. R. Sharma,
AIR 1970 All 376 (FB); Raja Ramakaran v. B. Ramalu, AIR 1982 Andh Pra 256;
Patel Jasmat Sangaji Padalia v. Gujarat Electricity Board, AIR 1982 Guj 264.
We also agree with the opinion expressed in Shaik Jusa v. Ganpat Dagdu, AIR
1976 Bom 222 wherein the High Court has held that an appeal against an ex
parte order of ad interim injunction under Order 39, Rules 1, 2 and/or 4 is
appealable. We respectfully agree with the view expressed by Karnataka High
Court in Parijatha v. Kamalaksha Nayak, AIR 1982 Kant 105 but only to a
limited extent. " We agree to the extent that there cannot be any distinction
between a reasoned or a unreasoned order regarding the appeal-ability of such
order, and that unreasoned as well as a reasoned order have the same effect,
and therefore, must get the same relief. However, we respectfully differ from
the view expressed that no appeal lies against "an ex parte order of
injunction", for the reasons alluded. According to us, Order 39, Rule 4
provides an alternative remedy, and not the sole remedy. We agree partly with
the opinion expressed in Astral Traders v. Haji Mohammed, AIR 1982 J & K 124
(FB) that every order of ad interim injunction; whether ex parte or otherwise
is appealable. However we cannot subscribe to the view expressed therein that
means should be adopted to restrict the right of appeal. When a right has been
expressly conferred, in our opinion, no means should be adopted to restrict
the same. It would amount to imposing conditions which are not warranted by
the provisions of the law. In our opinion, in a country, where the Rule of Law
prevails, the Courts are under the law. As such, the view that the Court
should drive the party to the trial Court to obtain relief under Order 39,
Rule 4, in our opinion, cannot be accepted as the correct proposition of law.
However, these appeals are against discretionary orders and the appellate
court would undoubtedly bear in mind, while entertaining and disposing of an
appeal under Order 43, Rule 1 (r), that an alternative relief is available to
the appellant in the trial Court itself. It has to be cautious in granting ex
parte stay, as the same may cause irreparable loss to the other side. While
granting such stay, the Court ought to bear in mind the nature of the order
passed, and the likely effect of stay. But, if the order is bad, illegal or
void, relief must be given to the aggrieved person; courts cannot shirk
responsibilities only on the ground that the relief granted by the legislature
would open a flood-gate for litigation entering into the appellate courts,
including the High Court. In Abdul Shukoor Sahib v. Umachander, AIR 1976 Mad
350, a Division Bench of the Madras High Court has held that no appeal lies
against an ex parte ad interim order of injunction as (i) a specific remedy is
available under Order 39, Rule 4, which must be availed by the interdicted
party; (ii) that an appeal is competent only against a final and reasoned
order which could be obtained in the trial Court under Order 39, Rule 4 and
only against such an order an appeal under Order 43, Rule 1 (r) is available;
(iii) that an ad interim injunction is, by its very nature, not conclusive and
no relief by way of appeal against an inconclusive order is permissible, as
such order does not fall within the definition of order under Section 2(14) of
'the Code'; (iv), that an ex parte order is not a decision but just a step-in-
aid to a reasoned order which is to be passed after notice and upon hearing
both the parties. It is nothing but an order maintaining 'status quo' and, as
such, it is a preliminary order. However, the High Court has held that an
appeal against an order under Rule 4 of Order 39 is appealable. It appears
that the views of the members of the Bar Association were taken and learned
counsel exhorted that the established practice of the Madras High Court was
not to entertain any appeal against an ex parte order of ad interim
injunction, other than an order rendered under Rule 4 of Order 39. We have
given our reasons to show that all orders rendered under Rules 1 to 5 are of
temporary nature, and, injunction issued thereunder are 'temporary' including
an order passed under Rule 4 of Order 39. We have given reasons why ex parte
as well as inter parte orders rendered under Rules 1, 2, 2-A and 4 are
appealable. We have also stated our reasons why an order rendered under Rules
1, 2, 2-A and 4 is to be treated as "order", contemplated in Rule 1 (r) of
Order 43. For the reasons set forth, we could not pursuade ourselves,
notwithstanding our best efforts, to accept the view of the Hon'ble Madras
High Court, we requested learned Advocates General of Nagaland, Meghalaya and
Tripura as well as the President of the High Court Bar Association and other
learned members of the Bar and they expressed that the law laid down by this
Court in United Club (AIR 1964 Assam 81) (supra) should be followed as it has
become the law of the land Following the principles of adhering to the
established practice, we would have held that we should continue to follow the
practice to entertain appeal but we have grave doubt whether we can avoid the
mandate of law by taking refuge under the expressions 'Gurus curiae est lex
curiae", which means that the practice of the Court is the law of the Court.
In our humble opinion the practice of the Court cannot override the express
provision of law. Order 43 read with Section 104 confer right of appeal, a
substantive right, and it cannot be whittled down by taking recourse to the
established practice. The practice may have some application in respect of
procedural matters as distinct from substantive matters. With utmost respect,
we differ from the view expressed by the Madras High Court.
10\. As alluded, even an ex parte ad interim order rendered under Rule 1 or 2
of Order 39 is an order falling within the purview of Order 43, Rule 1 (r).
Orders rendered under Rules 1 and 2 of Order 39 have been designated as orders
appealable under Order 43, Rule 1 (r) and, as such we are not to look at
Section 2(9) or Section 2(14) of the Code'. Section 2 of 'the Code' dearly
states that the definition should be understood in the manner stated in
Section 2 "unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context". If
there is any repugnancy in Order 43, Rule 1 (r) read with Order 39, Rules 1
and 2, the meaning of the term 'order' should be understood as set out in
those provisions and definition need not be resorted to. That apart any order
rendered under Order 39, Rule 1 or 2 is a formal expression of the decision
arrived at by the Civil Court relating to granting of ad interim injunction.
How could a court injunct a party without deciding whether to grant it or not.
Form No. 8 of Appendix F to the Civil P. C., 1908, clearly shows the manner in
which the formal expression of the decision is required to be made. Further,
to say that reasons must find place in an order to be regarded as a decision
would land the litigants in great difficulty, as, one word 'Dismissed' would
then not be 'Orders'. Such a proposition cannot be accepted. It is a different
matter that all orders, interim or final, should contain reasons. But to
regard all non-speaking disposals as net even 'orders' of the appropriate
authorities would create stalemate, as, such disposals might then become non-
appealable or non-revisable, even under the relevant statutory provisions.
11\. For the reasons aforesaid, we hold that an appeal lies under Order 43,
Rule 1 (r) of 'the Code' against an ex parte order of ad interim injunction
passed under Rules 1 and 2 of Order 39. In our opinion this is the answer to
the question posed before us.
Section 2 "unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context". If
there is any repugnancy in Order 43, Rule 1 (r) read with Order 39, Rules 1
and 2, the meaning of the term 'order' should be understood as set out in
those provisions and definition need not be resorted to. That apart any order
rendered under Order 39, Rule 1 or 2 is a formal expression of the decision
arrived at by the Civil Court relating to granting of ad interim injunction.
How could a court injunct a party without deciding whether to grant it or not.
Form No. 8 of Appendix F to the Civil P. C., 1908, clearly shows the manner in
which the formal expression of the decision is required to be made. Further,
to say that reasons must find place in an order to be regarded as a decision
would land the litigants in great difficulty, as, one word 'Dismissed' would
then not be 'Orders'. Such a proposition cannot be accepted. It is a different
matter that all orders, interim or final, should contain reasons. But to
regard all non-speaking disposals as net even 'orders' of the appropriate
authorities would create stalemate, as, such disposals might then become non-
appealable or non-revisable, even under the relevant statutory provisions.
AIR 1964 Assam 81. This court permits appeal against any order made under
Order 39; Rule 1 or 2, ex parte, speaking or non-speaking. However, the
opposite view has been expressed by some High Courts and hence the reference.
3\. To resolve the question it is necessary to set out the provisions of Order
43, Rule 1 (r) of the Code :
"1. Appeals from orders -- An appeal shall He from the following orders under
the provisions of Section 104 namely:--
     (a) **               **               **  
     (r) an order under Rule 1, Rule 2, Rule 2-A, Rule 4 or Rule 10 of Order XXXIX."   
On a plain reading of the provision it appears obvious that all orders
rendered under "Rule 1, Rule 2, Rule 2-A, Rule 4 and Rule 10 of Order 39" are
appealable. It is evident that any other restraint order passed under any
other provision, though falling in Order 39, is not appealable as Order 43,
Rule 1 (r) permits an appeal against specific orders referred in Order 43,
Rule 1 (r). Order 39 has been compartmentalised into two divisions : (1)
temporary injunction, and (2) interlocutory orders. Rules 1 and 5 fall, under
the head "temporary injunction", whereas Rules 6 to 10 fall under
interlocutory orders. It is thus seen that all orders under Rules 1 to 5 of
Order 39 are nothing but order of ''temporary injunction". We lay emphasis
that Order 39, Rule 4 is also an enabling provision to grant temporary
Section 2 "unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context". If
there is any repugnancy in Order 43, Rule 1 (r) read with Order 39, Rules 1
and 2, the meaning of the term 'order' should be understood as set out in
those provisions and definition need not be resorted to. That apart any order
rendered under Order 39, Rule 1 or 2 is a formal expression of the decision
arrived at by the Civil Court relating to granting of ad interim injunction.
How could a court injunct a party without deciding whether to grant it or not.
Form No. 8 of Appendix F to the Civil P. C., 1908, clearly shows the manner in
which the formal expression of the decision is required to be made. Further,
to say that reasons must find place in an order to be regarded as a decision
would land the litigants in great difficulty, as, one word 'Dismissed' would
then not be 'Orders'. Such a proposition cannot be accepted. It is a different
matter that all orders, interim or final, should contain reasons. But to
regard all non-speaking disposals as net even 'orders' of the appropriate
authorities would create stalemate, as, such disposals might then become non-
appealable or non-revisable, even under the relevant statutory provisions.
AIR 1964 Assam 81. This court permits appeal against any order made under
Order 39; Rule 1 or 2, ex parte, speaking or non-speaking. However, the
opposite view has been expressed by some High Courts and hence the reference.
3\. To resolve the question it is necessary to set out the provisions of Order
43, Rule 1 (r) of the Code :
"1. Appeals from orders -- An appeal shall He from the following orders under
the provisions of Section 104 namely:--
     (a) **               **               **  
     (r) an order under Rule 1, Rule 2, Rule 2-A, Rule 4 or Rule 10 of Order XXXIX."   
On a plain reading of the provision it appears obvious that all orders
rendered under "Rule 1, Rule 2, Rule 2-A, Rule 4 and Rule 10 of Order 39" are
appealable. It is evident that any other restraint order passed under any
other provision, though falling in Order 39, is not appealable as Order 43,
Rule 1 (r) permits an appeal against specific orders referred in Order 43,
Rule 1 (r). Order 39 has been compartmentalised into two divisions : (1)
temporary injunction, and (2) interlocutory orders. Rules 1 and 5 fall, under
the head "temporary injunction", whereas Rules 6 to 10 fall under
interlocutory orders. It is thus seen that all orders under Rules 1 to 5 of
Order 39 are nothing but order of ''temporary injunction". We lay emphasis
that Order 39, Rule 4 is also an enabling provision to grant temporary
Section 2 "unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context". If
there is any repugnancy in Order 43, Rule 1 (r) read with Order 39, Rules 1
and 2, the meaning of the term 'order' should be understood as set out in
those provisions and definition need not be resorted to. That apart any order
rendered under Order 39, Rule 1 or 2 is a formal expression of the decision
arrived at by the Civil Court relating to granting of ad interim injunction.
How could a court injunct a party without deciding whether to grant it or not.
Form No. 8 of Appendix F to the Civil P. C., 1908, clearly shows the manner in
which the formal expression of the decision is required to be made. Further,
to say that reasons must find place in an order to be regarded as a decision
would land the litigants in great difficulty, as, one word 'Dismissed' would
then not be 'Orders'. Such a proposition cannot be accepted. It is a different
matter that all orders, interim or final, should contain reasons. But to
regard all non-speaking disposals as net even 'orders' of the appropriate
authorities would create stalemate, as, such disposals might then become non-
appealable or non-revisable, even under the relevant statutory provisions.
AIR 1964 Assam 81. This court permits appeal against any order made under
Order 39; Rule 1 or 2, ex parte, speaking or non-speaking. However, the
opposite view has been expressed by some High Courts and hence the reference.
3\. To resolve the question it is necessary to set out the provisions of Order
43, Rule 1 (r) of the Code :
"1. Appeals from orders -- An appeal shall He from the following orders under
the provisions of Section 104 namely:--
     (a) **               **               **  
     (r) an order under Rule 1, Rule 2, Rule 2-A, Rule 4 or Rule 10 of Order XXXIX."   
On a plain reading of the provision it appears obvious that all orders
rendered under "Rule 1, Rule 2, Rule 2-A, Rule 4 and Rule 10 of Order 39" are
appealable. It is evident that any other restraint order passed under any
other provision, though falling in Order 39, is not appealable as Order 43,
Rule 1 (r) permits an appeal against specific orders referred in Order 43,
Rule 1 (r). Order 39 has been compartmentalised into two divisions : (1)
temporary injunction, and (2) interlocutory orders. Rules 1 and 5 fall, under
the head "temporary injunction", whereas Rules 6 to 10 fall under
interlocutory orders. It is thus seen that all orders under Rules 1 to 5 of
Order 39 are nothing but order of ''temporary injunction". We lay emphasis
that Order 39, Rule 4 is also an enabling provision to grant temporary
injunction like Order 39, Rules 1 and 2. Amongst the "interlocutory orders"
only an order passed under Rule 10 of Order 39 is appealable in spite of the
fact that it is an "interlocutory order". The expression "interlocutory" means
provisional, interim or temporary, but not final. Similarly the term
"temporary" in the expressions "temporary injunction" means provisional and
interim, and, therefore orders of temporary injunction cannot by their very
nature be final. Notwithstanding the characteristics of 'interim',
'provisional' or 'temporary' nature of the orders, they have been expressly
made appealable, if they are parsed under Rules 1, 2, 2-A, 4 and 10. In our
opinion, therefore, the court cannot refuse to entertain an appeal only on the
ground that such orders are temporary or interim or provisional. Similarly, by
Section 2 "unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context". If
there is any repugnancy in Order 43, Rule 1 (r) read with Order 39, Rules 1
and 2, the meaning of the term 'order' should be understood as set out in
those provisions and definition need not be resorted to. That apart any order
rendered under Order 39, Rule 1 or 2 is a formal expression of the decision
arrived at by the Civil Court relating to granting of ad interim injunction.
How could a court injunct a party without deciding whether to grant it or not.
Form No. 8 of Appendix F to the Civil P. C., 1908, clearly shows the manner in
which the formal expression of the decision is required to be made. Further,
to say that reasons must find place in an order to be regarded as a decision
would land the litigants in great difficulty, as, one word 'Dismissed' would
then not be 'Orders'. Such a proposition cannot be accepted. It is a different
matter that all orders, interim or final, should contain reasons. But to
regard all non-speaking disposals as net even 'orders' of the appropriate
authorities would create stalemate, as, such disposals might then become non-
appealable or non-revisable, even under the relevant statutory provisions.
AIR 1964 Assam 81. This court permits appeal against any order made under
Order 39; Rule 1 or 2, ex parte, speaking or non-speaking. However, the
opposite view has been expressed by some High Courts and hence the reference.
3\. To resolve the question it is necessary to set out the provisions of Order
43, Rule 1 (r) of the Code :
"1. Appeals from orders -- An appeal shall He from the following orders under
the provisions of Section 104 namely:--
     (a) **               **               **  
     (r) an order under Rule 1, Rule 2, Rule 2-A, Rule 4 or Rule 10 of Order XXXIX."   
On a plain reading of the provision it appears obvious that all orders
rendered under "Rule 1, Rule 2, Rule 2-A, Rule 4 and Rule 10 of Order 39" are
appealable. It is evident that any other restraint order passed under any
other provision, though falling in Order 39, is not appealable as Order 43,
Rule 1 (r) permits an appeal against specific orders referred in Order 43,
Rule 1 (r). Order 39 has been compartmentalised into two divisions : (1)
temporary injunction, and (2) interlocutory orders. Rules 1 and 5 fall, under
the head "temporary injunction", whereas Rules 6 to 10 fall under
interlocutory orders. It is thus seen that all orders under Rules 1 to 5 of
Order 39 are nothing but order of ''temporary injunction". We lay emphasis
that Order 39, Rule 4 is also an enabling provision to grant temporary
injunction like Order 39, Rules 1 and 2. Amongst the "interlocutory orders"
only an order passed under Rule 10 of Order 39 is appealable in spite of the
fact that it is an "interlocutory order". The expression "interlocutory" means
provisional, interim or temporary, but not final. Similarly the term
"temporary" in the expressions "temporary injunction" means provisional and
interim, and, therefore orders of temporary injunction cannot by their very
nature be final. Notwithstanding the characteristics of 'interim',
'provisional' or 'temporary' nature of the orders, they have been expressly
made appealable, if they are parsed under Rules 1, 2, 2-A, 4 and 10. In our
opinion, therefore, the court cannot refuse to entertain an appeal only on the
ground that such orders are temporary or interim or provisional. Similarly, by
Section 2 "unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context". If
there is any repugnancy in Order 43, Rule 1 (r) read with Order 39, Rules 1
and 2, the meaning of the term 'order' should be understood as set out in
those provisions and definition need not be resorted to. That apart any order
rendered under Order 39, Rule 1 or 2 is a formal expression of the decision
arrived at by the Civil Court relating to granting of ad interim injunction.
How could a court injunct a party without deciding whether to grant it or not.
Form No. 8 of Appendix F to the Civil P. C., 1908, clearly shows the manner in
which the formal expression of the decision is required to be made. Further,
to say that reasons must find place in an order to be regarded as a decision
would land the litigants in great difficulty, as, one word 'Dismissed' would
then not be 'Orders'. Such a proposition cannot be accepted. It is a different
matter that all orders, interim or final, should contain reasons. But to
regard all non-speaking disposals as net even 'orders' of the appropriate
authorities would create stalemate, as, such disposals might then become non-
appealable or non-revisable, even under the relevant statutory provisions.
