Calcutta High Court (Appellete Side)
Abdul Rahaman Kunji vs The State Of West Bengal on 14 November, 2014
Author: Nishita Mhatre
                      IN THE HIGH COURT AT CALCUTTA
                     CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                              APPELLATE SIDE
    PRESENT:
    The Hon'ble Justice Nishita Mhatre
    And
    The Hon'ble Justice Tapash Mookherjee
                                   CRA 454 of 2009
                        Abdul Rahaman Kunji ... Appellant
                                         vs.
                       The State of West Bengal ... Respondent
                                           With
                                   CRA 624 of 2009
                      Akib Ali Khan and Another ... Appellants
                                        vs.
                      The State of West Bengal ... Respondent
    For the Appellant
evident from the call records. The e-mails prove that the ransom was received
and that Akib Ali claimed to have participated in equal measure as the others
in the abduction. These circumstances prove the prosecution case beyond all
reasonable doubt. There is thus a complete chain of circumstances which admits
no other conclusion but that the appellants are guilty of commission of the
criminal acts alleged against them.
52
89\. The Sessions Court has assessed the evidence on record correctly and
found the appellants guilty as charged. We do not find any reason to differ
with the findings of the Sessions Court. The appeals therefore fail and the
conviction of and the sentence imposed on Akib Ali, Ashabuddin and Abdul
Rahaman Kunji is upheld. As mentioned earlier the appeal of Happy Singh has
abated.
90\. The appeals are dismissed.
91\. The LCR be sent to the trial Court, i.e., the Court of Additional
Sessions Judge, 2nd Court, Alipore, immediately as the trial in respect of
    For the Appellant
    in CRA 454 of 2009      : Mr. Jayanta Narayan Chatterjee
                              Ms. Mandira Basu
                              Mr. Sirsendu Sinharoy
                              Mr. Dwaipayan Biswas
                              Mr. Apalak Basu
    For the Appellants
    in CRA 624 of 2009      : Mr. Sandip Kumar Bhattacharya
                              Mr. Sovan Kumar Dutta
                              Mr. Joydeep Chatterjee
                              Ms. Nabanita Bhadra
    For the State           : Mr. Saswata Gopal Mukherjee
                              Mr. Rudradipta Nandy
                              Mr. Sanjay Banerjee
    Judgment on             : 14.11.2014
    Nishita Mhatre, J.:
    1     These appeals are directed against the judgment and order of the
    Additional Sessions Judge, 2nd Court, Alipore in Sessions Trial No. 1(6)05
    corresponds to Sessions case no. 65(1) of 2003 which was decided on 20th May,
    2009. The Sessions Court has convicted the appellants for offences punishable
    under Sections 364A, 120B of the IPC.         They have been sentenced to suffer
    imprisonment for life together with a fine of `5000/- and in default of payment of
    fine they have been directed to undergo rigorous imprisonment for two months.
    The trial Court has not convicted the appellants separately under Section 342
                                              2
    IPC as the charge under that Section had merged with the main Section, i.e.,
    364A.
    Facts
2\. On 25th July, 2001 one Partha Roy Barman, a Director of Khadim Shoe
Company, was abducted on his way to work. He was proceeding to his place of
work from his residence at Salt Lake in his SUV, a Tata Safari being driven by
his chauffeur. When his car reached C. N. Roy Road at about 11.30 a.m., it was
stopped at the junction by two miscreants. They struck the front windscreen
and a window of the car. The driver was forcibly dragged out of the car. Two
or three other miscreants pulled Partha Roy Barman out of his vehicle and
bundled him into a waiting white Maruti 800 car. In the melee, he was shot on
his hands. He was made to wear dark glasses and was seated on the rear seat of
the waiting car. He was forced to drink some liquid which made him
unconscious. When he regained his senses he found himself lying on the floor
in a dark room. The victim's driver in the meantime hailed a cab and rushed to
his employer's residence. He narrated the incident to Siddhartha Roy Barman,
the younger brother of the victim. Siddhartha Roy Barman then lodged a
complaint at the Tiljala Police Station. He narrated the manner in which
Partha was abducted and mentioned that it was a clear case of abduction for
ransom.
3\. On receipt of the complaint the police interrogated Siddhartha Roy Barman
and Suman Roy Barman, a cousin of Partha. A phone call was received on the
landline at Siddhartha Roy Barman's residence from Dubai demanding `20 crores
as ransom for the release of Partha Roy Barman. Siddhartha Roy Barman was
directed by the caller to use a new SIM card for his cell phone. Calls made to
this phone were then intercepted by the police. The CBI Interpol was
approached to secure the assistance of other agencies in order to intercept
these calls. Accordingly, the Federal Bureau of Investigation, USA
(hereinafter referred to as 'FBI'), found that these calls emanated from Dubai
and Pakistan. Investigations led to the arrest of Abdul Rahaman Kunji, the
appellant in CRA  3 454 of 2009 and one Swati Paul in Mumbai on 19th August,
2001. The appellants in CRA 624 of 2009, Ashabuddin @ Saukat @ Sahabuddin was
arrested on 3rd November, 2001 in Delhi and Akib Ali @ Farasat Ali Khan @ Vali
was arrested in Bhopal on 6th November, 2001. Happy Singh @ Harpreet Singh,
one of the convicts who had filed CRA 486 of 2009, was arrested in New Delhi.
The police arrested several others and ultimately twenty two persons faced the
trial. Seventeen of these persons were acquitted by the Sessions Court. Five
persons were found guilty by the Sessions Court, three of whom have filed the
present appeals before this Court. Happy Singh whose appeal was being heard
along with these appeals expired while in custody during the hearing of the
present appeals. His appeal being CRA 486 of 2009 has abated and an order to
that effect has been passed by us on 5th June, 2014.
4\. The foundation of the case of the prosecution is a conspiracy allegedly
hatched by the present appellants and one Aftab Ansari who has been convicted
but has not filed any appeal. The prosecution examined 139 witnesses in order
to prove its case of a conspiracy hatched for the abduction for ransom of
Partha Roy Barman. The prosecution case is mainly based on the testimony of
two approvers - Noor Ahmed Molla (PW 34) and Bablu Zaffar @ Sikander (PW 35).
Besides this, the prosecution has emphasised the testimony of Swati Paul (PW
44) who was initially arrested, but later discharged from the case. The victim
Partha Roy Barman who has been examined as PW 54 and the members of his
family, his friends and employees of Khadim India Limited who have been
examined as prosecution witnesses have been all declared hostile. The other
evidence relied on by the prosecution is the e-mails exchanged between the
accused, the call charts and the voice recordings of the accused. The seven
remaining persons out of thirty five persons charge-sheeted are facing trial
today as they were absconding when the trial was conducted against the other
accused.
5\. According to the prosecution, the conspiracy was contrived by Aftab Ahmed
Ansari and Abdul Rahaman Kunji in Dubai. The details of the execution of the
4 plot were chalked out by the conspirators, including the appellants before
us, and were finalised in a flat at 21B, Gorachand Lane. The conspiracy took
effect with the abduction of Partha Roy Barman for ransom and his confinement
in a room in village Pukuria, which the prosecution witnesses have referred to
as the 'Bhoot Bungalow'.
Evidence
6\. It is necessary for us to consider the nature of the evidence led by the
prosecution to prove its case against the appellants. The victim, who has been
examined as PW 54, has supported the prosecution case initially, regarding his
abduction and confinement. He has stated that he was proceeding in his SUV
Tata Safari to his Company's godown from his Salt Lake residence on 25th July,
2001 at about 9.45 a.m. When he reached the C. N. Roy Road, his vehicle was
blocked by another car. 2/3 persons encircled his car. He heard the sound of
the windscreen shattering. He realised that he had been shot after his hands
became numb and started bleeding. He was dragged out of his own car and forced
to wear dark glasses and pushed into the waiting car which had blocked his
SUV. He was compelled to drink some liquid due to which he lost his senses.
After regaining consciousness he found himself lying on the floor of a dark
room. He noticed that he was wearing a lungi and T-shirt and not the clothes
in which he had left his residence. One person attended to the wounds
sustained on his hands. Due to the darkness in the room he could not
differentiate between day and night. He has spoken about the fact that he was
made to dress in a kurta- pyjama, shoes and wear the dark glasses once again
and forced to sit in the rear seat of a car. He was dropped off after
travelling a certain distance. He hailed an auto rickshaw and ascertained that
the area in which he found himself was in Dum Dum. The victim travelled in
this rickshaw to Jessore Road. On finding a taxi he paid the rickshaw driver
by borrowing money from the taxi driver who drove him to his residence in Salt
Lake. The doorkeeper at his residence paid off the taxi driver. Partha Roy
Barman has spoken about being admitted to Woodlands Nursing Home on the same
day i.e. on 2nd August, 2001 and his  5 return home on being discharged from
the hospital on 15th August, 2001. He failed to identify the voices recorded
on the cassettes which were produced in Court though one of those voices was
his own. He was declared hostile after he denied having seen any of his
abductors. The witness denied having any knowledge about the demand for ransom
having been made by the appellants or anybody else. He also denied any
knowledge about ransom being paid to his abductors. From the evidence of this
witness the prosecution has been able to prove that he was abducted by some
persons at C. N. Roy Road and that he was shot on his hands. He was confined
in a dark room till he was released after 8 days. There is evidence on record
to prove that the victim was under treatment in a nursing home, after his
release and that he was treated for the wounds on his hands. However, this
witness has not been useful to the prosecution to prove that ransom had been
demanded or paid to the appellants.
7\. The younger brother of Partha Roy Barman, Siddhartha Roy Barman was
examined as PW 60. He was the Managing Director of Khadim Shoe Company when
the abduction occurred. He has stated that Partha Roy Barman was untraceable
from 25th July to 2nd August, 2001. After he denied having received a call
from Dubai on 26th July, 2001 on his landline this witness was declared
hostile. He denied that a demand of `20 crores was made by the caller from
Dubai for the release of Partha Roy Barman. He also denied making any
statement to the police on 31st July, 2001 about the abduction of Partha Roy
Barman by unknown miscreants. He further denied having settled the ransom
amount for `5 crores out of which `3.75 crores were to be paid immediately and
the balance of `1.25 crores, within 11/2 months. He also failed to identify
his own voice. He was unable to identify any of the accused in the test
identification parade.
8\. The prosecution has relied on the evidence of customers at roadside tea
stalls to support its case about Partha Roy Barman having been abducted at C.
N. Roy Road. PW 5 was a customer at one such tea stall on the aforesaid road.
6 He claims to have seen a Maruti 800 car bearing number WB 5144 blocking the
road due to which a Tata Safari approaching from the by-pass coming to a halt.
He heard the sound of firing and then saw a person from the Tata Safari being
forcefully whisked into the Maruti car after which the latter car sped away
from the place of occurrence in the direction of the by-pass. The witness has
been declared hostile as he did not support the prosecution's case thereafter.
His evidence has been corroborated by PW 17 a customer at another tea stall on
the same road, except that he has not mentioned the number of the car.
Although PW 14, a paan stall owner, has been declared hostile, he has admitted
that one person was forcibly dragging out another from the Tata Safari and
that he heard the sound of gunshots. He has also admitted having stated to the
police that the same person was pushed into the Maruti car which was then
driven away. PW 27 has stated that while he was in his shop at C. N. Roy Road,
he heard a sound and found that a Tata Safari car had dashed on a lamppost. He
also saw a white Maruti car reversing and stopping at the middle of C. N. Roy
Road. He noticed a bearded man being pushed out of the Tata Safari and forced
into white Maruti 800 car, which then sped away. The prosecution has also
relied on the evidence of a garage mechanic, PW 15 in support of its case that
a Maruti 800 car was used for the abduction and that its tail light, which was
broken during the incident, was repaired by him.
9\. Considering the evidence of Partha and the other witnesses, there is no
doubt that Partha Roy Barman was abducted and confined in a dark room. Some of
these witnesses including the victim who was supposed to be the star witness
for the prosecution have been declared hostile. However it is well settled
that the testimony of a hostile witness need not be discarded in its entirety.
The evidence on record also proves that Partha returned home nine days after
being abducted. It has also been established that he sustained gunshot wounds
on his hands for which he was treated while in captivity. His hospitalization
on his release has also been proved. It is now necessary for us to ascertain
whether the  7 appellants before us were involved in any manner in this crime,
either in the abduction of Partha or in the demand for ransom or both.
10\. As stated earlier the prosecution has attempted to prove the involvement
of the appellants through witnesses who, according to the prosecution, have
proved the conspiracy which was initially contrived in Dubai by Aftab Ansari
and was formalised at 21B, Gorachand Lane. The plan was executed first at C.
N. Roy Road when Partha Roy Barman was abducted and later at the Bhoot
Bungalow in village Pukuria where the victim was confined in a dark room for
several days. We will now have to ascertain whether the appellants were
present either at 21B, Gorachand Lane where the conspiracy was furthered and
roles were assigned to those present or when the abduction occurred or at
Pukuria where the victim was confined.
11\. PW 1 is the owner of the house at 21B, Gorachand Lane. He has spoken
about one Mehmood Hasan having rented a flat in the building for residential
purposes as well as for his shoe business. According to this witness Mehmood
Hasan did not live in the flat. However, the flat was looked after by one
Bablu Zaffar and one Asraf who was the cook. He identified Bablu Zaffar and
Asraf Molla, i.e., the approvers in this case, in Court.
12\. Zahid Ali, PW 3, claims to have visited the aforesaid place along with
one Asif and Amir. When he visited 21B, Gorachand Lane on 18th or 20th July,
2001 in the afternoon with Imran, he was introduced to some persons he named
who were the accused in this case. The witness has also mentioned the name of
Akib who is the appellant in CRA 624 of 2009. According to this witness, when
he met Bablu Zaffar (PW 35) on 25th July, 2001 he was not inclined to talk to
the witness, as he was rushing for a meeting to be attended by many people at
21B, Gorachand Lane. This witness speaks of having seen Amir entering the
premises. He has identified Akib in Court. The witness has stated that on  8
enquiring from Asif he learnt later that the latter had detained a shoe
merchant and had released him after collecting money from him.
13\. The prosecution has relied on the evidence of PWs 34 and 35 to prove the
presence of Akib and the other accused at 21B, Gorachand Lane.
14\. PW 34 Noor Ahmed Molla is one of the approvers in this case. He has
stated that he was a vegetable vendor. In the latter part of the year 2000,
his neighbour Jalal Molla @ Omar bhai offered to find for him a job in a shoe
factory belonging to his friend. About 3 to 4 months later, PW 34 was
introduced to one Miraj bhai, who he came to know later was Asif Reza Khan.
This person assured PW 34 employment in his new office room. Three months
later he accompanied Omar bhai to 21B, Gorachand Lane. He claimed that he was
told to stay in the room of Asif Reza Khan. This witness has conceded that he
was also known as Asraf. He claimed that when he reached 21B, Gorachand Lane,
one Abdullah was present and he was directed by Asif Reza Khan to stay there
as a cook for the persons visiting that office. According to him many people
visited 21B, Gorachand Lane. They discussed about the abduction of the
proprietor of Khadim Shoe Company and about the requirement of a room, vehicle
and arms. He has disclosed the names of those persons: Asif Reza Khan,
Abdullah, Dilsad, Omar bhai, Sahajahan @ Mizanur Rahaman, Mansur bhai,
Sikander, Akram, Abdul Khaleque, Abu Ubaida, Hasan bhai, Sahabaz, Sahadat,
Mayem, Abu Aslam, Happy, Rahaman and others. According to this witness, on
23rd July, 2001 Asif Reza Khan directed each of the persons assembled to work
as per his instructions, after which they all left at noon from 21B, Gorachand
Lane. On 24th July, 2001 many of those persons assembled again at the same
place and dispersed at mid-day. The witness has said that only Abdullah
returned that night. He has stated that none of these persons visited 21B,
Gorachand Lane either on 25th July or till the night of 26th July except
Abdullah who returned at night on each of the days. He has then stated that he
was directed to return home thereafter. He was arrested about 9 to 10 months
later. This witness has  9 identified Happy Singh, Rahaman @ Abdul Rahaman,
Abdul Khaleque in Court and has mentioned that he was detained in the same
jail as Happy Singh and Abdul Khaleque. He has identified Sikander who was
also known as Bablu Zaffar and who is the other approver in this case. The
witness has denied the suggestions put to him in the cross-examination that he
never visited 21B, Gorachand Lane nor seen the persons who visited that place.
He has stated in his cross-examination that he applied for pardon and that he
signed the application in English. The witness has further conceded in his
cross- examination that he was produced before the SDJM together with all the
other accused and that he had met all of them earlier as well as at the time
of production. The witness agreed that he had no formal appointment letter as
a cook at 21B, Gorachand Lane nor had he any document to indicate that he
stayed there or received a salary. He has stated that in the afternoon on 26th
July, 2001, two persons enquired about Abdulla and Asif. The witness claimed
that he could identify Rahaman, i.e., Abdul Rahaman Kunji and Bablu Zaffar.
Thus, this witness has only spoken about the presence of the appellant Abdul
Rahaman Kunji and not the other appellants Akib Ali and Ashabuddin at 21B,
Gorachand Lane.
15\. PW 35 Bablu Zaffar, the other approver, claimed that he knew Asif Reza
Khan as they stayed in the same locality since their childhood. According to
him, Asif Reza Khan was arrested by the Delhi Police in connection with a TADA
case and about 5 years later in the year 1999 he was released and returned to
their locality. Asif Reza Khan and this witness boarded a Maruti van on Ripon
Street and he was introduced to the driver of the van, Azahar bhai. This
witness stated that Asif Reza Khan informed him 2 to 3 days later that the
driver of the van was Aftab Ansari and he was warned not to disclose that to
anybody. He then identified Aftab Ansari @ Azahar in Court. Asif Reza Khan
offered PW 35 a job and directed the witness to inform his family that he was
leaving the city for work. Asif Reza Khan then led him to 21B, Gorachand Lane
where he found people sitting in a room. He was introduced by Asif Reza Khan
to the others as  10 Sikander bhai. The witness claims that he stayed at 21B,
Gorachand Lane for more than 3 months. Several persons came to this place.
They discussed how to secure a room and a vehicle. He claimed that Asif Reza
Khan enquired of him whether he knew of any rich man or businessman whose
abduction would ensure a huge amount of money for them as ransom. According to
this witness, he stated that he was unable to suggest any such name. After a
few days Asif Reza Khan mentioned the name of the proprietor of Khadim Shoe
Company and asked whether he would be a suitable target. PW 35 has claimed
that he could not opine on this issue. Asif Reza Khan then informed him that
he would have to visit a different place within 2 or 3 days. According to this
witness, the others who would visit 21B, Gorachand Lane were Abdullah, Umar
bhai, Mansur bhai, Sahajahan, Asraf, Akram, Aslam, Nayeem, Naved, Sahabaz,
Sahadat, Akib, Saukat, Happy, Vinod, Pawan, Karim, Hasan, Abu Ubaida, Ishaque,
Firoz and others. The witness claims that Aftab Ansari was the prime mover and
the person who devised the plan. Asif Reza Khan would execute the plan for
Aftab Ansari with the assistance of PW 35 and others. The witness has claimed
that on 23rd July, 2001 Asif Reza Khan instructed him to leave for the Bhoot
Bungalow, Haroa in village Pukuria, accompanied by Sahajahan. This Bhoot
Bungalow was an incomplete two storeyed building. He mentioned that when he
entered the building he found Abdullah, Mansur bhai, Umar bhai and Akram there
and that he started staying with them in that Bhoot Bungalow. The witness has
stated that on 25th July, 2001 on about 12.45 p.m. a white Maruti 1000 car
entered and Sahajahan closed the gate of the building. He saw 3 persons
alighting from the car. They were Asif Reza Khan, Abu Ubaida and Sahabaz. Asif
Reza Khan called PW 35 down when he found a fair complexioned man sitting in
the car, wearing goggles. Asif Reza Khan informed him that the person in the
car was Partha Roy Barman. The witness has claimed that he saw blood oozing
out from the wounds on Partha Roy Barman's hands. The latter was taken
upstairs. Asif Reza Khan directed Sahajahan to purchase medicines on the
instruction of Abu Ubaida. The witness has claimed that on enquiring with Asif
Reza Khan he learnt that despite having forbidden him, Aslam, a Pakistani
national, shot  11 Partha on his hands. On that same night Asif Reza
instructed him and Akram to stay in the Bhoot Bungalow to look after Partha
Roy Barman. He claims that Asif Reza Khan told him that Maharoof, Aslam,
Sahajahan and Abu Ubaida were deputed to abduct Partha Roy Barman and that a
Maruti 800 car No. DL-6C-D- 4964 was deployed for that purpose. He was also
informed that Asif Reza Khan and Akib Ali were waiting at Basanti Road in a
Maruti 1000 car No. WB-02B- 8771\. The witness claimed that Asif told him that
on the date of the abduction, Partha Roy Barman was shifted to a Maruti 1000
car from the car used to abduct him. Aslam and Akib then drove away the Maruti
800 car to a garage to repair a damaged rear light. Asif Reza Khan told the
witness that as Aslam's shirt was bloodstained, a new shirt was purchased for
him. PW 35 saw Asif Reza Khan bringing a tape recorder on 30th July, 2011 to
the house. He approached Partha Roy Barman and informed him that he would have
to answer some questions for recording his voice because the members of his
family did not believe that he was being held captive. The witness has claimed
that on 31st July or on 1st August, 2011 Abu Ubaida came to the Bhoot Bungalow
in a blue Maruti 800 car bearing the doctor's insignia and with the number
plate WB-02J-9240. He claimed that Abu Ubaida informed them that the amount of
`3.75 crores had already been realised from Partha Roy Barman's house. That
money was delivered to Aftab Ansari in Dubai through Karim and Vinod via
Hyderabad. He has spoken about dressing Partha Roy Barman on 2nd August, 2001
before he was released. Asif Reza Khan instructed this witness to flee to
Bangladesh or Nepal. However, he continued to remain in India. Asif Reza Khan
also instructed Akram and PW 35 to deposit the pistols with Abdullah.
Thereafter Abu Ubaida and Asif Reza Khan left the place with Partha Roy Barman
in the blue Maruti 800 car. According to the witness when he heard that the
police would visit his house and that of Asif Reza Khan, he fled to
Bangladesh. He returned to India and was arrested at Ripon Street, Calcutta.
He has stated that he could identify the accused Akib, Naved @ Md. Amran,
Happy Singh, Saukat @ Abdullah and Rahaman @ Abdul Rahaman who were all
produced in Court. He claimed that he made a statement before the Magistrate
after he was arrested, disclosing everything that had  12 occurred leading to
the abduction of Partha Roy Barman. In his cross- examination he was not able
to mention the exact number of persons who resided at 21B, Gorachand Lane nor
could he remember exactly whether he had mentioned the name of Abdul Rahaman
and Happy Singh in his statement before the Magistrate. He has conceded that
he was closely connected with the conspiracy to abduct Partha Roy Barman. He
has further stated that he was produced in Court from custody together with
Happy Singh and Abdul Rahaman.
16\. The witness was then asked about the e-mails which were on record when he
stated that he did not know how to use an e-mail account. According to this
witness no application had been made by him before the Magistrate for making a
confessional statement. He claims that he did not remember whether he
mentioned the names of Akib Ali and Saukat before the Magistrate when he
confessed.
17\. Thus the conspiracy to abduct Partha Roy Barman for ransom has been
conclusively proved through PW 34 and PW 35. It is true that it is not safe to
convict a person only on the basis of the testimony of an approver. Such
evidence has to be assessed with caution and should be corroborated by other
evidence. As noted earlier the victim himself has spoken about being abducted
and his confinement in a dark room. The evidence of PW 1 establishes that the
premises at 21B Gorachand Lane were rented out to Asif Reza Khan. The
depositions of PWs 3 and 16 indicate that several persons met in these
premises. The evidence of PWs 34 and 35 who were privy to the discussions held
in the flat, establishes the manner in which the plot was engineered and the
details about its execution.
18\. It is now necessary to determine whether each of the appellants before us
was actively involved in the conspiracy and whether they shared a common
object with others to abduct Partha for ransom. For the sake of convenience we
will deal with the evidence against each of the appellants separately.  13
19\. Ashabuddin - The prosecution has tried to implicate Ashabuddin @ Saukat @
Shabuddin by relying on the evidence of PWs 9, 27, 35, 80, 81, 83, 90 and
116\.
20\. PW 9 is motor van driver who claims to have driven Akib, Saukat and
others from Malatipur Station in his motor van to the house of Rafiquiddin who
was his grandfather in village Pukuria (the Bhoot Bungalow). According to him,
he developed an acquaintance with them and came to know the names. This
witness has not disclosed the number of occasions on which he ferried the
persons in his motor van. He claims that his grandfather Rafiquiddin sold his
house to a businessman of Calcutta and that one Mizanur, one of the accused in
this case, had brokered the deal. It is difficult to believe that the witness
would remember the names of all the persons he ferried on just one occasion
even after four years when he deposed in Court. In fact it has been recorded
that he took a long time to identify the accused in Court. Surprisingly he was
not a witness to the T. I. Parade.
21\. PW 27 is another witness on whose testimony the prosecution has relied to
prove the involvement of Ashabuddin. This witness has stated that while he was
in his shop at C. N. Roy Road, he heard a sound and found that a Tata Safari
car had dashed on a lamppost. He also saw a white Maruti car reversing and
stopping at the middle of C. N. Roy Road. He noticed a bearded man being
pushed out of the Tata Safari and forced into Maruti 800 car, which then sped
away. However, he has not named any of the accused.
22\. PW 80 is the other witness on whom the prosecution relied to prove the
involvement of Ashabuddin @ Saukat. This witness is a journalist who sold his
Maruti 800 car bearing No. DL-6-CD-469 through PW 83 to one Abdul Sultan. The
latter was accompanied by two other persons. This witness has not spoken about
Ashabuddin. This car was used for the abduction after being sold.  14
23\. PW 81 who is an estate broker of Delhi speaks about Ashabuddin having
approached him with one Vinod Kumar to purchase property in New Delhi. He has
identified Ashabuddin in Court. He claims that a white Maruti car was seized
in front of his office at the instance of Ashabuddin. He was witness to the
seizure.
24\. The next witness that the prosecution has relied on to implicate
Ashabuddin is PW 83, the owner of Amba Leasing and Finance Company. He has
spoken of selling a white Maruti 800 car of his friend PW 80. He claims that
on 21st July, 2001, three persons came to his office to buy an old Maruti 800
car. One of them was Abdul Sultan and the others were Farasat @ Akib. He could
not remember the third person whose name according to him perhaps was
Sahabuddin i.e. one of the aliases used by Ashabuddin.
25\. PW 90 is the Inspector of Police, CID, who was posted at Bhabani Bhawan.
He was a member of the special team formed to investigate the present case,
i.e., Tiljala P.S. case no. 223 dated 25th July, 2001. He has spoken about
receiving a requisition to arrest Rabindranath Das. He proceeded to Farukabad
P.S. and arrested him. After completing the necessary formalities he returned
to Kolkata and handed over the accused, Rabindranath Das to the Investigating
Officer in this case. He claims that the Investigating Officer received
information that the CBI had arrested Akib Ali and Saukat @ Ashabuddin whose
names transpired in the present case.
26\. PW 116 arrested Ashabuddin in connection with some other case in New
Delhi. He seized a car bearing No. DL-6-CD-4694, at the instance of
Ashabuddin. There is evidence on record to indicate that this car had been
used to abduct Partha after changing its number plate. According to this
witness, on the disclosure made by Ashabuddin, Akib Ali was arrested in Bhopal
on 6th November, 2001.
15
27\. Considering the testimony of the witnesses on whom the prosecution has
relied to implicate Ashabuddin @ Sahabuddin @ Saukat it is evident that he was
a conspirator and had the common object with the others of abducting Partha
Roy Barman. He was involved in the procurement of the white Maruti car bearing
No. DL-6-CD-4694 which was used to abduct the victim. It was seized at his
instance. The approver PW 35 has spoken about his presence in the premises
used by the conspirators to meet and discuss their plan of action. Therefore,
in our opinion, there is no doubt about the complicity of Ashabudin in the
abduction of Partha Roy Barman for ransom.
28\. Akib Ali - The next accused is Akib Ali @ Farasat @ Vali. The prosecution
has relied on the evidence of PWs 9, 12, 15, 16, 21, 22, 27, 35, 82, 83, 85,
90, 110, 111, 116, 117, 118 and 132.
29\. PW 9, a motor van driver as stated earlier, claims that he remembered the
names of the accused including Akib Ali and Saukat as he had ferried them in
his van to the house of Rafiquiddin, his grandfather. He claimed that he could
identify Akib in Court. But the evidence does not indicate that he did
actually identify Akib Ali. He has not been cross-examined on behalf of Akib
Ali. As mentioned earlier this witness had not stated the number of times he
interacted with the accused; nor was he a witness at the T. I. Parade.
Therefore it is difficult to believe that he would remember the accused after
five years when he deposed in Court when there is no evidence on record to
indicate that there was any special circumstance which prompted him to recall
the names and the identity of the accused.
30\. PW 12 is another witness on whose testimony the learned Advocate for the
State has laid emphasis. He was an employee of a cloth store, Jashoda
Bastralaya in 2001. According to this witness, one tall Hindi speaking person
bought a T-shirt from the shop. He claims that he saw a stationary Maruti car,
outside their store in which a bare bodied person was sitting. The person who
16 purchased the shirt drove the car away. He identified the T-shirt in Court
as Jashoda Bastralaya was the manufacturer of that brand of T-shirts which
were available only in their shop in West Bengal. PW 12 is a witness to the T.
I. Parade where he identified Akib Ali. He also identified him in Court. He
conceded that he had not described any special mark of identification of the
person who visited their shop to the police.
31\. PW 15 is a garage mechanic who has stated that on 25th July, 2001 a tall
fair complexioned person drove a Marui 800 car into the garage when he was
working. The tail light of the car was not working and he repaired it as
requested by that person. This witness identified Akib Ali in the T. I. parade
and in Court.
32\. PW 16 Imran Khan has claimed that he and Zahid Ali (PW 3) were walking
towards Gorachand Lane when they met Khurram and Bablu. He and PW 3 went to
the premises occupied by Asif Reza Khan at 21B, Gorachand Lane. They visited
the place again on 18th or 20th July, 2001 when they met Asif, Amir, Bablu and
Khuram. They were introduced to Akib Ali and others who were present as
persons who were connected with their business. He claims that they visited
the premises at Gorachand Lane again on 24th July, 2001. This witness
identified Akib Ali in Court besides the other accused persons, namely, Bablu
Zaffar and Asraf, i.e., the two approvers. This witness reiterated his
statement made to the police that he saw Akib Ali in the flat at 21B,
Gorachand Lane. He denied the suggestion that he was shown a photograph of
Akib earlier in the CID headquarters at Bhabani Bhaban and that he had
identified Akib Ali on the basis of that photograph.
33\. The prosecution has then relied on the evidence of PW 35 Bablu Zaffar @
Sikander to implicate Akib Ali. He has spoken of Akib Ali's presence at 21B,
Gorachand Lane when discussions about the abduction of Partha Roy Barman took
place between the conspirators. This witness, as stated earlier, was present
at the Bhoot Bungalow when the victim was driven to the entrance of the  17
Bungalow in a Maruti 1000 car. He stated that Asif Reza Khan who was present
there told him the next morning that 4 persons had abducted Partha Roy Barman
while he (Asif) and Akib were waiting at Basanti Road with a Maruti 1000 car.
The witness claims to have been told by Asif Reza Khan that the abduction had
been executed by 4 others by pushing the victim into a Maruti 800 car
No.DL-6-CD-4964. According to this witness Asif told him either on 27th or
28th July 2001 that Akib Ali had driven away the Maruti 800 car once Partha
Roy Barman was shifted to the Maruti 1000 car at Basanti Road. The witness
identified Akib Ali and stated that while Akib was fair complexioned, Saukat
i.e. Ashabuddin was dark. He denied that he had implicated Akib and Saukat on
the instructions of the I.O.
34\. PW 50 is the Judicial Magistrate who conducted the T.I. parade in respect
of Akib and Aslam. There were two witnesses to the T.I. parade - PWs 12 and
15, who identified the suspect Akib @ Farasat Ali. He has conceded that he had
not mentioned the individual description, social status or the distinguishing
features of Akib Ali in his report. The witness has stated that he has not
mentioned any mark of identification of Akib in his report on the T. I.
parade. After seeing Akib Ali in the Court he mentioned that he had a dimple
on the chin. This witness was unable to mention the correct provisions of law
under which the T.I. parade was held.
35\. PW 83 is the proprietor of Amba Leasing and Finance Company. He claimed
to have sold a Maruti 800 car bearing No.DL-6-CD-4694 to one Abdul Sultan who
was accompanied by two persons on 21st July, 2001. He claims that he asked for
photocopies of driving licences of those who were accompanying him. These
photocopies were produced in Court and the driving licences were those of Akib
and Ashabuddin.
36\. PW 85 claims that the owner of a "guild property" executed an agreement
to rent the property to Akib in his presence on 30th August 2001. He has  18
mentioned the amount of rent agreed to by the parties. He has identified Akib
in Court.
37\. PW 90 has stated that both Akib Ali and Saukat were arrested by the
C.B.I. in connection with a different case on 28.10.2001. They were both shown
arrested in the present case after following the due procedure in law. He has
identified as Akib Ali who was also known as Farasat @ Vali and Saukat. The
car bearing No.DL-6-CD-4694 was seized by the C.B.I. at the instance of
Saukat. It was tagged to this case after making the requisite application.
Akib Ali was arrested on 6th November, 2001 by PW 116. Both PW 90 and PW 116
have identified Akib Ali and Saukat in Court. PW 117 intercepted certain
telephone calls. The specimen was matched and it was found that Akib was one
of the persons involved in the conversation.
38\. PW 118 is a wireless operator who printed 23 e-mails from Akib Ali's
e-mail account after he had disclosed his e-mail identities and passwords. He
claims that Akib Ali was present along with the expert from Webel Technology
Ltd, an undertaking of the State Government, i.e., PW 132 in the Computer room
when the mails were downloaded and printed. However Akib Ali refused to sign
these documents though they were endorsed by both PW 118 and PW 132. He
identified Akib in Court. The witness's testimony has been corroborated by the
expert from Webel, PW 132, who is an independent witness.
39\. On scanning the evidence we are of the opinion that Akib Ali was
certainly involved in the abduction and confinement of Partha. He participated
actively and was involved in every stage of the execution of the crime. He was
present when the Maruti car used for the abduction was bought in New Delhi. He
participated in the confabulations held at 21B, Gorachand Lane and was present
when Partha was transferred into the Maruti 1000 car from the Maruti 800 car
after his abduction. We will refer to the e-mails a little later to ascertain
whether they throw additional light on the involvement of Akib Ali in the
present crime.  19
40\. Abdul Rahaman Kunji - This accused has been named by PWs 34, 44, 88, 89
and 92.
41\. PW 34, the approver, was the cook at 21B, Gorachand Lane. According to
him, he personally heard the plan to abduct Partha Roy Barman. He has spoken
about the presence of Rahaman, i.e., Abdul Rahaman Kunji at the meeting held
in 21B, Gorachand Lane, besides some of the other accused persons. He denied
the suggestion that he identified Rahaman at the instance of the police.
42\. PW 44 Swati Paul is the witness on whom the prosecution has relied
heavily to support its allegations against Abdul Rahaman Kunji. This witness
claimed that she came into contact with Abdul Rahaman in Dubai when she was
performing in Dubai Grand Hotel. She has said that she had a relationship with
Rahaman. She has spoken about her visit to the office of Rahaman's boss,
namely, Raju Bhai @ Farhan in Nihar Building in Dubai. According to her, she
overheard Farhan and Rahaman extort money from people by threatening them over
the telephones installed in the office. She has mentioned a phone number from
which these calls were made and it is included in the call list produced by
the prosecution. According to her, the idea to abduct Partha originated in
Dubai. She has spoken of returning to Mumbai from Dubai with Rahaman on 6th
July, 2001\. She claimed that Rahaman left on 19.07.2001 disclosing to her
"kalkattaka Khadim Jutawala ko uthane ke lia ja raha hu" (I am going to kidnap
Khadim, a shoe merchant of Kolkata). He returned after completing his role on
28th July, 2001 and told her on her probing "Jutawala ka uthana ka come ho
gaya" (The job of kidnapping the shoe merchant has been completed). He also
informed her that the mission had been planned by Raju Bhai @ Farhan Bhai. She
and Rahaman then left for Bangalore on 2nd August, 2001. They returned to
Mumbai and were arrested there on 19th August, 2001. She identified Rahaman as
well as Raju Bhai @ Farhan who claimed to be Aftab Ansari in Court. She also
20 identified the voice of Farhan @ Raju Bhai from the recordings of the calls
which were intercepted when the ransom was demanded.
43\. PW 88 is the CID Inspector, who arrested Rahaman and Swati Paul in Mumbai
on 19th August, 2001. He seized 4 mobile phones from their possession. He has
identified Rahaman in Court. Strangely, he also identified Swati Paul in Court
although she was examined as a prosecution witness. There was thus no need for
him to identify Swati.
44\. PW 89 is a witness to the seizure of the passport of Abdul Rahaman and
other articles recovered from his room in Bangalore. He identified Rahaman in
Court. PW 92 is the CID Inspector who prepared the seizure list of the
articles seized from Rahaman's room in Bangalore.
45\. Thus the aforementioned evidence leaves no room for doubt regarding the
complicity of Abdul Rahaman Kunji. He has made an extra judicial confession to
PW 44 which has been corroborated by the other circumstances and evidence on
record.
Test Identification Parade
46\. It has been argued by the learned Counsel appearing for Akib Ali and
Ashabuddin that the T.I. parade was not held in accordance with law. He
criticised the test identification parade by submitting that the victim was
not a witness to the T.I. parade although he would have been the best person
to identify the persons who had in fact abducted him or who had kept him
captive. He submitted that the evidence of the T.I. parade witnesses cannot be
believed because the I.O. had accompanied those witnesses to the T.I. parade
and on his way he had shown them the photographs of the suspects. He pointed
out from the evidence on record that two accused persons were kept in the same
line for identification. According to him, if the T.I. parade is found faulty
by this Court, there is no identification of the accused by any person. He
points out that the  21 identification in Court after four years by some
witnesses is of no use. PW 16 who claims that he used to accompany PW 3 to
21B, Gorachand Lane identified Akib Ali in Court. According to this witness it
was Asif Reza Khan who told him about the abduction of a shoe merchant for
ransom. However, he was not a witness to the T.I. parade although he said that
he had seen Akib Ali and Asif Reza Khan on more than one occasion. The motor
van driver PW 9, who said that Akib Ali and Saukat visited the house of
Rafiquiddin, i.e., the Bhoot Bungalow, was also not a witness to the T.I.
parade. PW 3, who claimed to have seen Akib Ali on 18th and 20th July, 2001 at
21B, Gorachand Lane, was not a witness to the T.I. parade. The prosecution has
relied on the evidence of PW 12, the employee of Jashoda Bastralaya and PW 15,
the garage mechanic who repaired the tail light of the Maruti 800 car as they
were the T.I. parade witnesses. Surprisingly these persons who claimed to have
seen the appellant Akib Ali only once were able to identify him in the T.I.
parade. However, both these witnesses have not mentioned any special reason
for remembering Akib Ali out of the many customers who visited the shop or
garage. The learned Counsel for the appellants submitted that the evidence of
PW 12 regarding the identification of the accused was based on the photographs
shown to him prior to the T.I. parade. The learned Counsel criticised the
manner in which the T.I. parade was held by PW 50. Akib Ali admittedly had a
dimple on his chin, which was a special identification mark. This mark was not
covered when the T.I. parade was held. PW 139 has admitted that being the I.O.
of the case he had accompanied the T.I. parade witnesses to the Magistrate who
conducted the parade and that he had photographs of Akib Ali in his
possession. The learned Counsel for the appellants submitted that we must
presume that those photographs were shown to the T.I. parade witnesses prior
to the identification of the accused by these witnesses. The learned Counsel
has placed reliance on the judgments in the case of Provash Kumar Bose & Anr.
v. The King reported in AIR (38) 1951 Calcutta 475, Wakil Singh & Ors. v.
State of Bihar reported in 1981 SCC (Cri) 634, Fagu Das & Others v. State of
Orissa reported in 1996 Cri.L.J. 2245 and State of Madhya Pradesh v. Chamru @
Bhagwandas 22 etc. etc. reported in 2007 Cri.L.J. 3509. These judgments
emphasise that the T.I. parade must be held fairly. Non-suspects with similar
features are to be included in the T.I. parade. If a suspect has any prominent
features or scars on the face, those marks or scars are to be concealed before
such identification is made. A similar concealment must be made by using a
tape on others present in the test identification parade as if they had the
same mark. The evidence on record suggests that the T.I. parade was not held
in accordance with law as rightly submitted by the learned Counsel for the
appellants. Akib Ali was one of the suspects in the T.I. parade. He was known
to have a dimple on his chin. However, that was not covered, nor was any such
mark placed on the chin of any of the others in the parade.
47\. The State has relied on several judgements of the Supreme Court to
counter the argument on behalf of the accused that the identification of the
accused during the test identification parade is not trustworthy. Reliance has
been placed on the judgements in the case of Munna Kumar Upadhyay alias Munna
Upadhyaya v. State of Andhra Pradesh reported in (2012) 3 SCC (Cri) 42, State
of Maharashtra v. Lahu alias Lahukumar Ramchandra Dhekhane reported in (2014)
1 SCC (Cri) 395, Ankush Maruti Shinde and Others v. State of Maharashta
reported in (2009) 3 SCC (Cri) 308 and Shyamal Ghosh v. State of West Bengal
reported in (2012) 3 SCC (Cri) 685. The Supreme Court has in these judgements
held, consistently, that the identification of an accused in a T. I. Parade
provides corroborative or confirmative evidence. The Court has held that
although it is desirable to hold the parade at the earliest, failure to do so
is not fatal to the prosecution always. This is because the evidence is not
substantive in nature and therefore cannot be rejected if the parade has been
held in accordance with law. The Court has also held that publication of the
photograph of the accused in the newspaper would not have an effect on the
validity of the parade. The learned Counsel for the State has relied on the
judgment in the case of Sidhartha Vashisht alias Manu Sharma v. State (NCT of
Delhi) reported in (2010) 2 SCC (Cri) 1385 to submit  23 that the Court need
not discard the testimony of a witness who identified the accused in the T.I.
parade merely because some photographs were shown to him.
48\. The learned Counsel for the appellants has also submitted that it is
unsafe to rely on the identification of an accused for the first time in
Court, especially when it is done after a lapse of several years. He pointed
out the decisions in the cases of Raju alias Rajendra v. State of Maharashtra
reported in 1998 Cri.L.J. 493, and Har Pal Singh and etc. v. State of U.P.
reported in 2000 Cri.L.J. 4552 to support this submission.
49\. Mr. Mukherjee the learned Counsel for the State argued that the
identification of the accused in the dock need not be disbelieved in every
case. He pointed out that in Manu Sharma's case (supra) the Supreme Court
approved of such identification. It was held that identification of the
accused in the dock even in a case where no TIP is held can be considered to
be above board and more than conclusive.
50\. Several witnesses in this case have identified the appellants in Court.
These witnesses have seen them for the first time in the Court when the
deposition was recorded in 2006 after the incident occurred in the year 2001.
Many of these witnesses, like the motor van driver PW 9, PWs 80, 81, 82 and 83
had allegedly seen the appellants on one stray occasion. We agree with
submission of the learned Counsel for the appellant that it is difficult to
believe that these witnesses would have remembered the identity of the
appellants after more than 5 years.
51\. Mr. Mukherjee has pointed out the decision of the Supreme court in State
of Maharashtra vs Lahu reported in (2014) 1 SCC (Cri) 395 to submit that the
evidence of these witnesses need not be discarded. He urged that these were
independent witnesses with no animosity towards the appellants. Therefore they
would not have implicated the appellants falsely.
24
52\. Be that as it may, the identification of an accused in a T.I. parade is
merely a corroborative piece of evidence and the involvement of the appellants
in the crime cannot be ruled out only because the test identification parade
was not held in accordance with law and the accused had been identified by
some of the witnesses for the first time before the Court. As mentioned
earlier the Test Identification Parade merely gives a direction for conducting
the investigation. Evidence of Approvers
53\. The learned Counsel for the appellants has then submitted that the
reliance placed on the evidence of the approvers and on PW 44 is not valid or
in consonance with law. He submitted that the confessional statement of an
accused, who after making the statement was subsequently discharged and is not
facing trial, cannot be used against the co-accused. He pointed out that if
such a statement is exculpatory in nature, it cannot be treated as a
confessional statement. According to the learned Counsel, PW 44 Swati Paul was
discharged by the Court on the prayer made by the I.O. on the ground that she
had made the statement to the Magistrate. He submitted that an accused cannot
be discharged on this ground as the possibility of an allurement being offered
to her by the investigating agency for making the statement cannot be ruled
out. He pointed out that Swati Paul was in custody for 90 days and she was
released on bail only after completion of the statutory period. She prayed for
being discharged when the charge-sheet was filed and not earlier. He also
submitted that all the evidence of Swati Paul shows lack of complicity and
that it is exculpatory in nature. Therefore, her statement cannot be treated
as a confessional statement. The learned Counsel has relied on the judgment in
the case of Suresh Budharmal Kalani alias Pappu Kalani v. State of Maharashtra
reported in 1998 Cri.L.J. 4592 where the Supreme Court has observed that under
Section 30 of the Evidence Act a confession of an accused is relevant and
admissible against a co-accused if both are jointly facing trial for the same
offence. The statement which is made by such a person if self-exculpatory  25
is not admissible in evidence as a confession. On the question of pardon, the
learned Counsel has relied on the judgment of the Rajasthan High Court in the
case of State of Rajasthan and etc. v. Ram Niwas & Anr. reported in 2006
Cri.L.J. 2477 where it has been held as follows:
> 20\. It follows, then, that a pardon can be granted only to an accomplice;
> an accomplice being a person who participates in the commission of the crime
> charged against a co-accused. He needs to be a "participes criminis." And
> crime consists of two elements, the actus reus (the actual act of the
> commission of the offence) and the mens rea (the guilty mind preparatory to
> the act done). So, the participation has to be in the actus reus and/or in
> the mens rea. Such participation could be "directly" or "indirectly" linked,
> or be "a privy" to an offence. Direct participation would consist of mere
> physical presence, or of actual physical participation. This would include
> vicarious liability under Section 34, I.P.C., or an offence under Section
> 149, I.P.C.
> Indirect participation could well be mental or physical. Mental, when one
> has an interest in the outcome of an offence, or when one is involved in the
> planning. The latter would reflect either a criminal conspiracy or an
> abetment. Physical, when in a crime consisting of a series of acts, one, or
> more acts are committed by the person. One is said to be "privy to the
> offence" when one has secret knowledge of or "is a person who is in privity
> with another. One who is a partaker or has any part of interest in any
> action, matter or thing." (per Black's Law Dictionary). In conclusion, there
> has to be some connectivity between the crime and the accomplice.
> 21\. A person totally unrelated to the offence is deemed to be innocent, and
> an innocent person cannot be called, or treated as, an approver. Lack of
> complicity is, indeed, a disqualification for approvership. To be eligible
> as an approver, there should be some interest, on the part of the person, in
> the commission of the crime.
26
22\. In the case of Suresh Chandra Bahri v. State of Bihar 1995 Supp (1) SCC
80 : 1994 Cri LJ 3271 the Hon'ble Supreme Court had emphasised the object
behind Section 306, Cr. P.C. However, on this specific aspect of the issue the
Hon'ble Supreme Court has not weighed in. The most critical analysis of
Section 306, Cr.
P.C. has been done by the Hon'ble Gujarat High Court in the case of State of
Gujarat v. Ramasi Devasi Bhil alias Bhalaka 1991 Cri LJ (Guj) 2801. But, the
Hon'ble Gujarat High Court has held a contrary point of view.
It has held that, "Thus, the very basis of the section is that a person who
applies for pardon under the provisions of Sections 306 and 307 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure can be assumed to be directly or indirectly concerned in
the offence. Similarly, he may be assumed to be privy to an offence. The
assumption does not mean that he is party to the offence. Thus the person
applying may not be actual culprit. If he is not an actual culprit there does
not arise any question of exculpating one's own self."
> (Emphasis added).
         23.   However,    we     respectfully             disagree     with        this
    interpretation         of     the     provision.             The    very        word
"accomplice" means that the person who seeks pardon, or for whom pardon is
sought, has been 'complicit,' an "associate," connected with the offence. For,
in case he is unconnected, then he is innocent. And an innocent person does
not need any pardon. Moreover, the supposition of his connection cannot be
imagined or assumed as suggested by the Hon'ble Gujarat High Court. "Suppose,"
means "likely to be" or "some probability of." However, the "likelihood" of a
connection is a question of fact. The existence of a fact has to be found in
some evidence. A judicious mind has to examine the relevant evidence to arrive
at a supposition that the person was "directly," or "indirectly," connected
to, or was "privy" to, the offence. In order to see the existence of the
connection, there has to be some inculpation by the accomplice about his role
in the commission of the offence. Unless there is some inculpation, the  27
difference between an accomplice and an eye-witness gets blurred. The
inculpation might be ever so slight, but the accomplice cannot paint himself
totally as a protestor, as a victim, as an innocent person, and place the
entire blame on the other co-accused persons for the commission of the crime.
In case he were to do so, then he removes himself from the category of an
accomplice and places himself as an eye-witness.
54\. In P. V. Narasimha Rao v. State through CBI reported in 2002 Cri.L.J.
2401 the Delhi High Court has observed that to make a statement of a co-
conspirator relevant under Section 10 of the Evidence Act, the accused should
be the agent of any other co-conspirator to make him an approver. The evidence
of the approver is liable to be discarded if he was not present at the
particular place where the meeting was allegedly held as that testimony would
be hearsay and barred under Section 60 of the Evidence Act.
55\. From the record, it appears that Bablu Zaffar - PW 35 and Noor Ahmed
Molla - PW 34 filed separate petitions on 20th April, 2004 for permission to
depose as witnesses/approvers in the case. They sought pardon. The prosecution
on 21st May, 2004 informed the trial Court that it had no objection if PWs 34
and 35 were tendered pardon on condition that they made a true and full
disclosure relating to the offence and the offenders. The appellants here
submitted a joint written objection on 21st May, 2004 to the application for
tendering pardon to Bablu Zaffar and Noor Ahmed Molla. After hearing the
parties and on considering several judgments cited at the bar, the Court
recorded that it had examined both Bablu Zaffar and Noor Ahmed Molla to
ascertain whether they had presented petitions under any threat, allurement or
promise. After being satisfied, the Court granted pardon to Bablu Zaffar and
Noor Ahmed Molla and they were treated as approvers.
56\. Noor Ahmed Molla - PW 34 was arrested on 3rd May, 2002. He was forwarded
to the SDJM, Alipore on 4th May, 2002 and remanded to custody till  28 17th
May, 2002. Police interrogated him on 3rd, 5th, 11th and 16th May, 2002.
Thereafter on 18th May, 2002 he was forwarded to the Court for jail custody
with a prayer for recording his statement under Section 161 Cr.P.C. On 20th
May, 2002 he made a confessional statement before the Judicial Magistrate, 2nd
Court, Alipore which was recorded under Section 164 Cr.P.C. He was charge-
sheeted along with the others on 30th May, 2002 under Sections 364A, 307, 326,
341, 379, 411 and 120B IPC and 27 of the Arms Act. He was granted pardon on
24th June, 2004 but remained in jail custody till he deposed before the trial
Court on 4th May, 2006 and 3rd July, 2006.
57\. Bablu Zaffar, was also arrested on 3rd May, 2002 at Beniapukur, Kolkata.
He was forwarded immediately to the SDJM, Alipore. He was remanded to custody
till 17th May, 2002. Bablu Zaffar was interrogated by the police on 3rd, 5th,
11th and 16th May, 2002. He was forwarded on 18th May, 2002 in the Court for
jail custody with a prayer to record his statement under Section 164 Cr.P.C.
His confessional statement was recorded by the Judicial Magistrate, 2nd Court,
Alipore under Section 164 Cr.P.C. on 20th May, 2002. He was similarly charge-
sheeted on 30th May, 2002. He was granted pardon along with Noor Ahmed Molla
on 24th June, 2004 and deposed in Court while he was in jail custody.
58\. In the case of Mohd. Khalid v. State of West Bengal reported in (2002) 7
SCC 334 the Supreme Court has observed that the acceptability of a confession
is based on the twin tests of whether the confession was truly voluntary and
whether it is trustworthy. If the confessional statement satisfies these two
tests it can be used against a co-accused who is being tried along with the
maker of the statement. It has been held further that the Court must decide
what weight should be attached to such evidence.
59\. On considering these arguments relating to the admissibility of the
evidence of the approvers, we do not find any merit in them. PW 34 and PW 35,
the two approvers in this case had applied for pardon in accordance with the
29 provisions of law and the Sessions Court has granted their application. We
have perused that order of the Sessions Court and find that it is a well-
considered order which requires no interference. The approvers were not
released immediately after the Sessions Court granted their application and
their confessional statements were recorded, but were kept in custody till
they deposed in Court. While there cannot be any quarrel with the proposition
of law enunciated in the aforesaid judgements, they do not come to the rescue
of the appellants for discarding the evidence of the approvers. We have
noticed that the confessional statements of the approvers were made
voluntarily. The learned Magistrate recorded their confessional after
informing both these approvers the consequences of making such statements and
ensuring that there was neither any inducement nor threat nor coercion from
the prosecution which prompted them to confess to the crime. They have been
examined in Court as prosecution witnesses and their testimonies have been
tested by searching cross- examinations on behalf of the appellants. Their
evidence would naturally have to be scrutinised carefully and accepted if it
is corroborated.
60\. The criticism regarding the acceptance of the evidence of Swati Paul is
unfounded. She was arrested along with Abdul Rahaman Kunji on 19.08.2001. Her
statement under section 161 Cr.P.C. was recorded on six different occasions
between 22.08.2001 and 30.08.2001. On 01.09.2001 her statement was recorded by
PW 51, the Judicial Magistrate, under section 164 Cr.P.C. A statement made by
the accused or any other person may be recorded under this provision of law by
any magistrate during the course of investigation. She was released on
statutory bail due to the non-compliance of Section 167 of the Cr.P.C. As the
police did not find a case against her she was not sent up for trial and was
discharged. It is well settled that it is within the domain of the police to
decide who among the arrested persons in a given case should be tried. If
there is no case against an arrested person at all the police need not file a
charge-sheet against that person. Swati Paul was then examined as a witness in
Court. She was not considered an approver by the Court obviously because she
was  30 discharged as there was no case against her. Therefore her evidence
cannot be discarded on the ground that it is exculpatory. The evidence of an
approver may be ignored when it is exculpatory but Swati Paul was not an
approver nor did she submit any application to be treated as one. Her evidence
will have to be assessed in the same manner as any other piece of evidence.
61\. The prosecution has tried to implicate the appellants by relying on
e-mails which, according to the prosecution, were exchanged between the
appellants and other accused persons. These e-mails, according to the
prosecution, corroborate the theory that the appellants were part of an
organised crime syndicate with international ramifications. It was argued by
the learned Counsel for the State that the money extorted by these persons
from several businessmen was used to advance the cause of Jihad. The learned
Counsel submitted that some of the accused before the trial Court were
Pakistani nationals and the accused were also involved in several other cases
of conspiracy where bombs exploded killing several people. These submissions
of the learned Counsel for the State are not based on any evidence led before
the trial Court and, therefore, this theory of the money being extorted for
Jihad cannot be accepted in this case. However on a careful scrutiny of the
e-mails produced by the prosecution, it is evident that the accused persons
along with a few others were involved in cross border organised crime.
Electronic Mails
62\. We will now turn to the electronic mails which the prosecution has relied
on. It has sought to prove this evidence by relying on the testimonies of PW
132, the expert from the West Bengal Electronics Ltd. (Webel), PW 118, the
wireless operator and the I.O. According to these witnesses, Akib Ali
disclosed his e-mail identities and passwords in their presence in the
computer room at Bhabani Bhawan (the C.I.D. headquarters). They claim to have
downloaded these e-mails from Akib Ali's e-mail account. The e-mails were then
printed in their presence. All these printed e-mails have been signed by the
aforesaid witnesses. It has  31 been noted on these e-mails that Akib Ali
refused to endorse the printed copies of the mails. Under Section 88A of the
Evidence Act the Court may presume that an electronic message, forwarded by
the originator through an electronic mail server to the addressee to whom the
message purports to be addressed corresponds with the message as fed in the
computer for transmission. However, the Court cannot draw any presumption
about the person who sent the message. The term 'originator' has been defined
in the Information and Technology Act, 2000 under Section 2(za) as a person
who sends, generates, stores or transmits any electronic message; or causes
any electronic message to be sent, generated, stored or transmitted to any
other person but does not include an intermediary. Thus on analysing Section
88A of the Evidence Act and the relevant provisions of the Information and
Technology Act, it is apparent that the Court may presume the veracity of the
message fed into the computer for transmission by the originator through his
mail server to an addressee, that is, the person who is intended by the
originator to receive the electronic record and does not include any
intermediary. However, this is a rebuttable presumption. Besides, no
presumption can be drawn about the person who has sent such a message.
Therefore, even if we accept the fact that these e-mails have been downloaded
as stated by the Webel expert or sent by using the e-mail address of Akib Ali,
it was necessary for the prosecution to prove that Akib Ali was in fact the
originator of these e-mails. The disclosure, if any, made by Akib Ali of the
e-mail address and password would have to be made under Section 27 of the
Evidence Act. PWs 118 and 132 have both stated that Akib Ali has disclosed his
e-mail identities and passwords in their presence. They have signed the
seizure list under which the e- mails accessed from these accounts and printed
have been seized. Therefore, in our opinion, these e-mails are admissible in
evidence.
63\. The learned Counsel for Akib Ali submitted that there was no
certification of the e-mails by the Certifying authority as mandated by
Section 65B of the Evidence Act and therefore these e-mails are not
admissible. The Section provides as follows:
32
65B. Admissibility of electronic records.-
(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, any information contained
in an electronic record which is printed on a paper, stored, recorded or
copied in optical or magnetic media produced by a computer (hereinafter
referred to as the computer output) shall be deemed to be also a document, if
the conditions mentioned in this section are satisfied in relation to the
information and computer in question and shall be admissible in any
proceedings, without further proof or production of the original, as evidence
of any contents of the original or of any fact stated therein of which direct
evidence would be admissible.
(2) The conditions referred to in sub-section(1) in respect of a computer
output shall be the following, namely:-
(a) the computer output containing the information was produced by the
computer during the period over which the computer was used regularly to store
or process information for the purposes of any activities regularly carried on
over that period by the person having lawful control over the use of the
computer;
(b) during the said period, information of the kind contained in the
electronic record or of the kind from which the information so contained is
derived was regularly fed into the computer in the ordinary course of the said
activities;
(c) throughout the material part of the said period, the computer was
operating properly or, if not, then in respect of any period in which it was
not operating properly or was out of operation during that pert of the period,
was not such as to affect the electronic record or the accuracy of its
contents; and
(d) the information contained in the electronic record reproduces or is
derived from such information fed into the computer in the ordinary course of
the said activities.
33
(3) Where over any period, the function of storing or processing information
for the purposes of any activities regularly carried on over that period as
mentioned in clause (a) of sub-section (2) was regularly performed by
computers, whether -
(a) by a combination of computers operating over that period; or
(b) by different computers operating in succession over that period; or
(c) by different combinations of computers operating in succession over that
period; or
(d) in any other manner involving the successive operation over that period,
in whatever order, of one or more computers and one or more combinations of
computers, all the computers used for that purpose during that period shall be
treated for the purposes of this section as constituting a single computer;
and references in this section to a computer shall be construed accordingly.
(4) In any proceedings where it is desired to give a statement in evidence by
virtue of this section, a certificate doing any of the following things, that
is to say, -
(a) identifying the electronic record containing the statements and describing
the manner in which it was produced;
(b) giving such particulars of any device involved in the production of that
electronic record as may be appropriate for the purpose of showing that the
electronic record was produced by a computer;
(c) dealing with any of the matters to which the conditions mentioned in sub-
section (2) relate, and purporting to be signed by a person occupying a
responsible official position in relation to the operation of the relevant
device or the management of the relevant activities (whichever is appropriate)
shall be evidence of any matter stated in the certificate; and for the
purposes of this sub-section it shall be sufficient for a matter to be stated
to the best of the knowledge and belief of the person stating it.
34
(5) For the purposes of this section,-
(a) information shall be taken to be supplied to a computer if it is supplied
thereto in any appropriate form and whether it is so supplied directly or
(with or without human intervention) by means of any appropriate equipment;
(b) whether in the course of activities carried on by any official information
is supplied with a view to its being stored or processed for the purposes of
those activities by a computer operated otherwise than in the course of those
activities, that information, if duly supplied to that computer, shall be
taken to be supplied to it in the course of those activities;
(c) a computer output shall be taken to have been produced by a computer
whether it was produced by it directly or (with or without human intervention)
by means of any appropriate equipment.
64\. The learned Counsel for the State has relied on the judgment of the Delhi
High Court in the case of Rakesh Kumar and Ors. v. State reported in 183
(2009) Delhi Law Times 658. The Delhi High Court dealt with call records and
the question as to whether they were genuine. After considering the provisions
of the Evidence Act and the Information Technology Act, the Court observed as
follows:
> 198\. Sub-section (1) of Section 65B makes admissible as a document, paper
> print-out of electronic records stored in optical or magnetic media produced
> by a computer, subject to the fulfillment of the conditions specified in
> Sub-section (2) of Section 65B. Following are the conditions specified by
> Sub-section (2):
                 a)     The     computer       from         which        the    record     is
                 generated was regularly used to store or process
                 information         in     respect         of    activity          regularly
                 carried on by a person having lawful control over
                 the period, and relates to the period over which
                 the computer was regularly used;
                                                35
         b)     Information          was       fed    in       the    computer        in   the
         ordinary      course        of    the       activities           of    the   person
         having lawful control over the computer;
         c)     The computer was operating properly, and if
         not,    was    not     such       as       to    affect          the   electronic
         record or its accuracy;
         d)     Information reproduced is such as is fed into
         computer in the ordinary course of activity.
> 199\. Under Sub-section (3) of Section 65B, Sub-section (1) and (2) would
> apply where single or combination of computers, is used for storage or
> processing in the regular course of activities and the computers used shall
> be construed as a single computer.
200\. Under Sub-section (5), information shall be taken to be supplied to a
computer by means of an appropriate equipment, in the course of normal
activities intending to store or process it in the course of activities and a
computer output is produced by it whether directly or by means of appropriate
equipment.
201\. The normal rule of leading documentary evidence is the production and
proof of the original document itself. Secondary evidence of the contents of a
document can also be led under Section 65 of the Evidence Act. Under Sub-
clause "d" of Section 65, secondary evidence of the contents of a document can
be led when the original is of such a nature as not to be easily movable.
Computerised operating systems and support systems in industry cannot be moved
to the court. The information is stored in these computers on magnetic tapes
(hard disc). Electronic record produced there from has to be taken in the form
of a print out. Sub-section (1) of Section 65B makes admissible without
further proof, in evidence, print out of a electronic record contained on a
magnetic media subject to the satisfaction of the conditions mentioned in the
section. The conditions are mentioned in Sub-section (2). Thus compliance with
36 Sub-section (1) and (2) of Section 65B is enough to make admissible and
prove electronic records.
202\. Sub-section (4) of Section 65B provides for an alternative method to
prove electronic record. Sub-
section (4) allows the proof of the conditions set out in Sub-section (2) by
means of a certificate issued by the person described in Sub-section 4 and
certifying contents in the manner set out in the sub-section.
The sub-section makes admissible an electronic record when certified that the
contents of a computer printout are generated by a computer satisfying the
conditions of Sub-section 1, the certificate being signed by the person
described therein.
65\. We are in respectful agreement with the view taken by the Delhi High
Court in the aforesaid judgement. Section 65B provides that any electronic
data which is printed on a paper, stored, recorded or copied in optical or
magnetic image produced by a computer shall be deemed to be a document. The
document is admissible in any proceedings, without further proof or production
of the original, as evidence of any contents of the original, if the
conditions mentioned in the Section are satisfied. These conditions are:
> (i) the computer output during which period the computer was used regularly
> to store or process information for the purposes of any activities regularly
> carried on over the period by the person having lawful control over the use
> of the computer;
> (ii) the electronic record sought to be derived was regularly fed in the
> computer in the ordinary course of activities;
> (iii) the computer was operating properly, continuously without affecting
> the electronic record or the accuracy of its contents;
> (iv) information contained in the electronic record reproduced or is derived
> in the ordinary course of activities.
37
66\. The section covers those cases where an electronic record is generated
from a computer which is used regularly in the normal course of business. A
certificate is to be issued in that regard by a person occupying a responsible
official position in relation to the operation of the relevant device or the
management of the relevant activities. The documents which are produced in
this case are downloaded and printed from an e-mail account of an individual
on a computer which was not used by that individual in his normal course of
activities. Those documents can be proved by leading evidence to show that the
e-mails were downloaded on a computer which was regularly in use by the police
and were then printed. A witness would have to testify that such a procedure
was carried out. This has been done by the prosecution in this case. It is
true that merely sending e-mail from a particular e-mail address would not
lead to a presumption that the particular e-mail was sent by the originator,
i.e., the person from whose e-mail address a mail emanates. Hacking is not an
unknown phenomenon in the world of electronic records. Therefore, the salutary
provision in law is that the presumption relating to the genuineness of an
electronic message is rebuttable and the Court cannot presume that the message
has been sent by a particular person. The prosecution has proved that Akib Ali
was in fact the originator of these mails as they were recovered at his
instance when he disclosed his e-mail identities and passwords. It was
suggested by Mr. Bhattacharya the learned Counsel for the Akib Ali that
anybody could create an e-mail account and send mails through that account by
impersonating the originator. This is the line of cross-examination of PW 118
and PW 132. However the depositions of these witnesses in the examination-in-
chief have not been shaken in their respective cross-examinations. There is no
reason to doubt that the e-mails were sent and received by Akib Ali through
the e-mail accounts and passwords that he mentioned. It has been suggested in
the cross examination of these witnesses that the e-mails were doctored and
Akib Ali was not the originator. There is no evidence on record to suggest
that the Internet Protocol (IP) addresses found on the e-mails were not those
of the accused. Moreover besides denying everything in his statement recorded
under section 313 Cr.P.C.  38 Akib Ali has not given any specific explanation
about his e-mail accounts and passwords or about the contents of the e-mails.
Therefore, in our opinion, these e-mails are admissible in evidence under
section 65B of the Evidence Act and have been duly proved.
67\. The learned Counsel has then submitted that even assuming the e-mails
sent or received by Akib Ali are admissible in evidence unless they are proved
like any other document, they cannot be relied on by the Court to convict Akib
Ali. He argued that secondary evidence relating to the contents of the
documents is admissible if it is proved in consonance with sections 63 and 65
of the Indian Evidence Act. The secondary evidence must be authenticated by
foundational evidence that the alleged copy is in fact true copy of the
original. The Court is required to decide the question of admissibility of a
document in secondary evidence before accepting the evidence.
68\. This submission of the learned Counsel is fallacious. The Indian Evidence
Act contains special provisions with regard to proving electronic evidence.
These provisions have been inserted by Act 21 of 2000 with effect from
17-10-2000 by way of sections 65A and 65B. Electronic evidence is admissible
and is required to be proved only under these provisions. Section 65B starts
with a non obstante clause and appears to be a complete code in itself
governing the proof of electronic evidence. The question of proving the
printed mails as secondary evidence therefore does not arise.
69\. The other criticism of Mr. Bhattacharya about these e-mails is that the
PW 118 and PW 132 have spoken about downloading the e-mails from the account
of Akib Ali. He submitted that it is not possible to download an e-mail and
only an attachment to the e-mail can be downloaded. It is trite that when an
e-mail is sent it is initially saved on the server used by the e-mail account
holder. It has then to be downloaded on a computer temporarily by the
recipient in order to read it. A temporary path is created showing its exact
location on the computer.  39 This path is shown at the foot of every e-mail
when it is printed. All the e-mails produced by the prosecution show a
definite path which is mentioned at the foot of every page evidencing that the
e-mail was temporarily downloaded from the server on to the computer which was
used to print the same. Therefore the term downloaded is not a misnomer as
suggested by Mr. Bhattacharya.
70\. As we have held that the prosecution has been able to prove that Akib Ali
was the originator of 23 e-mails the contents must be presumed to be correct
under section 88A. Apart from this provision the e-mails have been proved
under Section 65B. On perusal of these e-mails as well as those accessed from
the accounts of Asif Reza Khan and Akram in a similar manner by the
prosecution, there is no doubt at all that there was a conspiracy to abduct
"Khadim Jutawala". In fact the e-mails dated 17th and 18th December 2000
exchanged between Asif Reza Khan and Aftab Ahmed indicate that the initial
target was "Haldiram" and was later changed to "Khadim Jutawala". The e-mails
also direct that a safe house should be organised to further the plot. There
is a thread showing the e-mails exchanged between "babaali" i.e. Akib Ali and
"baba firdous". Akib Ali has mentioned the receipt of `3.75 crores and
complained about having to account for every paisa spent when according to him
he had contributed equally in the successful abduction in the Khadim case. The
e-mails also mention that "jobs" were to be carried out in various other
Indian cities. Thus the contents of these e-mails which can be presumed to be
correct leave no manner of doubt that there was a conspiracy to abduct
somebody from the Khadim organisation for ransom, that a safe house was to be
selected, that an amount of `3.5 crores was received by the conspirators, Akib
Ali being one of them.
71\. With the rise in crimes involving electronic communications, whether by
using the Ethernet, Wi-Fi (wireless fidelity) connections or mobile networks,
we are of the opinion that a competent officer from the Cyber Police Station,
which has been formed on 08.09.2010, must be inducted mandatorily into the
investigating team immediately such a case arises. This would ensure that the
originator of the electronic communication is nabbed swiftly and appropriate
40 evidence is collected and led to prove the e-mails, telephone calls, or
electronic messages during trial of the case. In cases such as the present one
it would be more useful perhaps in future for the prosecution to pursue leads
from the Internet Protocol (IP) address from which the mails are sent. This
would provide the exact location of the computer or smartphone or other
devices from where the mails are sent. Thus even if an e-mail or electronic
communication were to be sent from a computer in a cybercafé, a coffee shop or
any location where a local area network (LAN), Wi-Fi (wireless fidelity)
connection or mobile network is available it would be possible to identify the
originator. Today, closed circuit television cameras are being installed in
most areas where computers are accessible or where it is possible to use one's
own devices which access Wi-Fi connections, or mobile networks, e.g., personal
computers, mobile phones, tablet computers etc. The evidence obtained from
such video recordings could be used to corroborate the identity of the
originator of the electronic communications who sends such communications
especially from a closed area. This would make it easier for the investigating
officers in future to unearth the truth in crimes involving electronic
messaging and communications with more certainty. It is necessary for the
investigation agencies to keep pace with the technological advances in the
world of electronics and to prove their case in accordance with the Evidence
Act by making the best use of such technologies. Ransom
72\. The entire story of the prosecution is based on the theory that the
accused have all conspired to abduct Partha Roy Barman and seek ransom. The
oral evidence on record does not prove that the ransom was actually paid in
order to release Partha Roy Barman. The prosecution has sought to prove the
payment of ransom through the testimony of PWs 60, 61, 62, 63, 64 and 65 who
were either related to the victim or friends of the victim. However, all of
them have been declared hostile. Faced with this situation, the prosecution
has then relied on the evidence of the Duty Manager at Taj Krishna Hotel where
PWs 61, 62 and 63 stayed overnight for the alleged payment of ransom. It must
be recorded here  41 that the trial Court has acquitted those who the
prosecution alleges were the conduits for paying the ransom money. This would
not necessarily lead to the inference that the abduction was not for the
purpose of ransom. The meaning of ransom in Concise Oxford English Dictionary,
11th Edition, is (n.) a sum of money demanded or paid for the release of a
captive; (v.) obtain the release of (someone) by paying a ransom; hold
(someone) captive and demand a ransom for their release. Thus, the word ransom
need not be given a restrictive meaning as argued by Counsel for the
Appellants as it is the amount either demanded or paid. In Vinod v. State of
Haryana reported in (2008) 1SCC (Cri) 338 and Malleshi v. State of Karnataka
reported in (2004) SCC (Cri) 2115 the Supreme Court has observed that offence
under Section 364A of the IPC is committed even though there may not be any
actual payment of ransom but a demand has been made. In the present case as
mentioned earlier the e-mails exchanged between the appellants and the other
accused speak of the receipt of the ransom money and the equal contribution of
all in the "arduous task" undertaken.
Conspiracy
73\. The next issue is whether the conspiracy is proved and the appreciation
of evidence in such a case. The Learned Counsel for the State has pointed out
the judgements in the case of Devender Pal Singh v. State N.C.T. of Delhi and
another reported in AIR 2002 SC 1661, Mohd. Khalid v. State of West Bengal
reported in (2002) 7 SCC 334, Govt. of NCT of Delhi v. Jaspal Singh reported
in (2003) 10 SCC 586, Suman Sood alias Kamal Jeet Kaur v. State of Rajasthan
reported in (2007) 2 SCC (Cri) 637, Gulam Sarbar v. State of Bihar reported in
(2014) 2 SCC (Cri) 195 to fortify his contention that the criminal conspiracy
has been proved. The Supreme Court has articulated the manner in which
evidence is to be assessed to ascertain whether there is a criminal conspiracy
in a given case and how such a conspiracy is to be proved.  42
74\. In the case of Suman Sood alias Kamal Jeet Kaur (supra) the Court
considered several of its earlier judgments and the term "conspiracy" as
described in Halsbury's Laws of England thus:
> 48\. In Halsbury's Laws of England (4th Edn., Vol. 11, para 58), it has been
> stated:
> "58. Conspiracy consists in the agreement of two or more persons to do an
> unlawful act, or to do a lawful act by unlawful means. It is an indictable
> offence at common law, the punishment for which is imprisonment or fine or
> both in the discretion of the court.
> The essence of the offence of conspiracy is the fact of combination by
> agreement. The agreement may be express or implied, or in part express and
> in part implied. The conspiracy arises and the offence is committed as soon
> as the agreement is made; and the offence continues to be committed so long
> as the combination persists, that is until the conspiratorial agreement is
> terminated by completion of its performance or by abandonment or frustration
> or however it may be. The actus reus in a conspiracy is the agreement to
> execute the illegal conduct, not the execution of it. It is not enough that
> two or more persons pursued the same unlawful object at the same time or in
> the same place; it is necessary to show a meeting of minds, a consensus to
> effect an unlawful purpose. It is not, however, necessary that each
> conspirator should have been in communication with every other."
> 49\. In Bhagwan Swarup Lal Bishan Lal v. State of Maharashtra4 this Court
> stated: (AIR p. 687, para 8) "The essence of conspiracy is, therefore, that
> there should be an agreement between persons to do one or other of the acts
> described in the section. The said agreement may be proved by direct
> evidence or may be inferred from acts and conduct of the parties. There is
> no difference between the mode of proof of the offence of conspiracy and
> that of any  43 other offence: it can be established by direct evidence or
> by circumstantial evidence."
(emphasis supplied)
50\. In Baburao Bajirao Patil v. State of Maharashtra5 this Court observed
that there is seldom, if ever, that direct evidence of conspiracy is
forthcoming.
Conspiracy from its very nature is conceived and hatched in complete secrecy,
for otherwise the whole purpose would be frustrated.
51\. In Kehar Singh v. State (Delhi Admn.)6, Shetty, J.
said: (SCC pp. 732-33, para 275) "275. Generally, a conspiracy is hatched in
secrecy and it may be difficult to adduce direct evidence of the same. The
prosecution will often rely on evidence of acts of various parties to infer
that they were done in reference to their common intention. The prosecution
will also more often rely upon circumstantial evidence. The conspiracy can be
undoubtedly proved by such evidence direct or circumstantial. But the court
must enquire whether the two persons are independently pursuing the same end
or they have come together in the pursuit of the unlawful object. The former
does not render them conspirators, but the latter does. It is, however,
essential that the offence of conspiracy requires some kind of physical
manifestation of agreement.
The express agreement, however, need not be proved.
Nor actual meeting of two persons is necessary. Nor it is necessary to prove
the actual words of communication. The evidence as to transmission of thoughts
sharing the unlawful design may be sufficient."
52\. In Nazir Khan v. State of Delhi7 this Court observed: (SCC p. 477, para
18) "18. Privacy and secrecy are more characteristic of a conspiracy, than of
a loud discussion in an elevated place open to public view. Direct evidence
44 in proof of a conspiracy is seldom available, offence of conspiracy can be
proved by either direct or circumstantial evidence. It is not always possible
to give affirmative evidence about the date of the formation of the criminal
conspiracy, about the persons who took part in the formation of the
conspiracy, about the object, which the objectors set before themselves as the
object of conspiracy, and about the manner in which the object of conspiracy
is to be carried out, all this is necessarily a matter of inference."
75\. In Gulam Sarbar v. State of Bihar (supra) the Supreme Court observed that
the essential ingredients of criminal conspiracy are (i) an agreement between
two or more persons; (ii) the agreement must relate to doing or causing to be
done either (a) an illegal act, or (b) an act which is not illegal in itself
but is done by illegal means. After referring to its earlier judgments the
Court observed that it was not necessary for the accused to know each detail
of the conspiracy. The knowledge of main object of the conspiracy would
suffice for the guilt of the accused to be established. Thus, what is
essential is that all the alleged conspirators must be privy to an agreement
to either perform an illegal act or an act which is legal but through illegal
means. By the very nature of the offence, a conspiracy would be hatched in
total secrecy. If there is sufficient material to reasonably believe that
there was concert between the persons charged with a common design, it is
immaterial as to whether they were strangers or ignorant of the role ascribed
to each of them.
76\. In the case Mohd. Khalid v. State of West Bengal (supra) the Supreme
Court held that the prosecution need not necessarily prove that the
perpetrators expressly agreed to do or caused to be done an illegal act for
the offence punishable under Section 120-B. An agreement between the
perpetrators which is the foundation for the offence of criminal conspiracy
can be proved through necessary implication. If the design rests only in the
intention, it is not indictable. When two or more persons agree to carry out
the design into effect,  45 the very plot or agreement is an act in itself. If
the agreement is for completion of an act which constitutes an offence then no
overt act is necessary to be proved by the prosecution. It can establish the
criminal conspiracy by proving the agreement itself. This is sufficient to
bring about a conviction under Section 120- B. The Court has further observed
in Mohd. Khalid's case (supra) that the evidence of conspiracy can be proved
either by direct or circumstantial evidence. Privacy and secrecy are the
characteristics of a conspiracy. Therefore, direct evidence to demonstrate a
conspiracy is seldom available. The circumstances proved before, during and
after the occurrence of the incident have to be considered to decide the
complicity of the accused. If there is trustworthy evidence establishing the
links in the general or circumstantial evidence the confession of a co-accused
about the conspiracy even without corroborative evidence can be taken into
consideration. A criminal conspiracy can in some cases be inferred from the
acts and conduct of the parties.
77\. The learned Counsel for Akib Ali and Ashabuddin has submitted that PW 34
does not mention the name of either Akib Ali or Ashabuddin @ Saukat being
present at 21B, Gorachand Lane. He pointed out that PW 35 has mentioned that
Akib Ali and Ashabuddin had visited 21B, Gorachand Lane. This witness sought
to implicate Akib Ali by stating that Asif Reza Khan told him that Akib Ali
was waiting in the Maruti 800 car. However, PW 35 has not mentioned the name
of Akib Ali when his statement was recorded by the Magistrate under Section
164 of the Cr.P.C. The learned Counsel pointed out that even assuming this
statement was true it is not admissible in evidence as it amounts to hearsay
evidence. PW 35 had no direct knowledge about the presence of Akib Ali in the
Maruti car.
78\. Both Mr. Sandip Kumar Bhattacharya and Mr. Jayanta Narayan Chatterjee,
appearing for the appellants, have criticised the evidence of Swati Paul. They
pointed out that the prosecution had failed to establish that there was any
conspiracy or that the appellants here were privy to the plan to abduct Partha
Roy Barman for ransom. They have urged that the prosecution has failed  46 to
establish the payment of ransom through any credible witness, and therefore
the entire theory of there being a conspiracy to abduct Partha Roy Barman for
ransom fails. They have been vehement in their condemnation of the prosecution
case by pointing out that neither the victim, Partha Roy Barman, nor the
members of his family nor his friends have supported the case of the
prosecution with regard to abduction for ransom. The learned Counsel urged
that even assuming the story of Partha Roy Barman as stated by him is to be
believed, at best, the prosecution case would be that he was abducted and
confined in the Bhoot Bungalow. According to them, the entire case against the
appellants is concocted and the appellants have had no role to play at all.
They have pointed out that there was no unbroken chain of events which would
lead to the unmistakable conclusion that there was a conspiracy hatched which
led to the abduction of Partha Roy Barman for ransom. Mr. Bhattacharya has
then drawn our attention to the several inconsistencies and contradictions in
the evidence of the witnesses and that of the I.O. He pointed out that these
are major contradictions which cannot be ignored. According to him, the
witnesses on whose evidence the prosecution relies heavily have embellished
their versions in Court after their statements recorded by the police earlier.
Such evidence, according the learned Counsel, has to be disbelieved, as there
are material improvements in the evidence recorded in Court. He relied on the
judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Vijay Kumar v. State of Rajasthan
reported in (2014) 2 SCC (Cri) 205, and Sampath Kumar v. Inspector of Police,
Krishnagiri reported in (2012) 2 SCC (Cri) 42. The Supreme Court in the case
of Sampath Kumar (supra) has observed that minor contradictions or
discrepancies are bound to appear in statements of truthful witnesses as
memory sometimes plays false and the sense of observation differs from person
to person. However, the Court has observed that it is unsafe to rely upon a
version with material improvements unless it is corroborated by some other
independent evidences.
47
79\. As regards circumstantial evidence, the learned Counsel has pointed out
the judgments in the case of Ghurey Lal v. State of Uttar Pradesh reported in
(2009) 1 SCC (Cri) 60, Arun Bhanudas Pawar v. State of Maharashtra reported in
(2009) 1 SCC (Cri) 112, Asraf Sk and Anr. v. State of West Bengal reported in
2008 (4) Crimes 288 (SC), A. Jayaram and Another v. State of A.P. reported in
1995 SCC (Cri) 864, Roop Singh @ Rupa v. The State of Punjab reported in 2008
(3) Crimes 52 (SC). In the case of Mohd. Faizan Ahmad alias Kalu v. State of
Bihar reported in (2013) 1 SCC (Cri) 872 where the Supreme Court has observed
that suspicion, however grave, cannot take the place of proof. The criminal
Courts cannot be swayed by the gravity of the offence and proceed to hand out
a punishment on that basis unless the conviction is based on legally
admissible evidence and not far-fetched conjectures and surmises.
80\. The learned Counsel submitted that when the entire case is based on
circumstantial evidence, the motive for the crime must be established
unmistakably by the prosecution. He relies on the judgment in the case of Smt.
Omwati etc. v. Mahendra Singh and Others reported in 1998 Cri.L.J. 401 where
the Supreme Court has observed that though the proof of the motive is not
necessary to sustain a conviction when the prosecution has put forward a
specific case for the motive for the crime. The evidence regarding the same
must be acceptable motive for a crime is a satisfactory circumstance of
corroboration when there is convincing evidence to prove the guilt of a co-
accused person but it cannot fill up a lacuna in the evidence.
81\. The learned Counsel has also pointed out that there was no corroboration
between the I.O. and PW 60 regarding the presence of the I.O. when the alleged
ransom call was made. He also pointed out that out of the 22 accused persons
17 had been acquitted, some of whom were Pakistani nationals.  48
82\. The learned Counsel for the State had, as mentioned earlier, submitted
that the accused had demanded ransom in order to use the money for Jihad. Mr.
Bhattacharya, learned Counsel for the appellants, urged that this submission
on behalf of the State is made without there being any foundation on record.
He pointed out, rightly, that none of the appellants have been charged under
Section 121A of the IPC, nor is there any evidence, according to him,
regarding the fact that the ransom money was to be used for Jihad. Therefore,
according to Mr. Bhattacharya, this submission of the learned Counsel for the
State is merely a conjecture or speculation and has been advanced to prejudice
the mind of the Court against the appellants.
83\. Mr. Chatterjee, the learned Counsel for Abdul Rahaman Kunji, has
submitted that the charge has not been framed properly as it does not
stipulate where and when the alleged conspiracy was hatched. He submitted that
the FIR does not disclose that there was any demand for ransom made and
therefore the appellants should not have been charged under Section 364A. He
also submitted that no incriminating article had been seized at the instance
of Abdul Rahaman Kunji. According to him, the evidence of Swati Paul that she
was privy to the conversation between Aftab Ansari and Abdul Rahaman Kunji has
not been established beyond doubt. Furthermore if the alleged conspiracy was
hatched in 21B, Gorachand Lane then Swati Paul could not be aware of the plan
as no prosecution witness has spoken of her presence in these premises. The
learned Counsel has pointed out that no T.I. parade was held for Abdul Rahaman
Kunji. He relied on the judgment in the case of State of Tamil Nadu v. Nalini
and Others reported in 1999 Cri.L.J. 3124 where the Supreme Court has observed
in the facts of that case that mere association with hard-core militants or
the fact that those militants turned out to be the persons responsible for the
killing of the victim would not make a person member of a conspiracy to kill
him. The learned Counsel has submitted that Swati Paul's evidence regarding
the talk between Aftab Ansari and Abdul Rahaman Kunji has to be treated as
hearsay evidence  49 and therefore is not admissible. He relies on the
judgment in the case of Vijender v. State of Delhi reported in (1997) 6 SCC
171.
84\. The learned Counsel for the State has pointed out that the prosecution
has been able to prove the abduction and confinement of the victim by several
pieces of evidence. He pointed out that the articles seized at the place of
captivity, i.e., the Bhoot Bungalow and that the bloodstains found in the
premises matched the blood of the victim. According to him the plot was
hatched at 21B, Gorachand Lane. Amir Reza Khan and his brother Asif Reza Khan
were the prime movers of the plot and were working under the instructions of
Aftab Ansari. Asif Reza Khan was killed in an encounter. The victim has proved
the abduction and his consequent confinement and release. He then pointed out
that the evidences of PWs 5, 9 and 11 show the involvement of the appellants
in the conspiracy. He then submitted that the prosecution had a herculean task
to prove the charges against the appellant because the witnesses of the
prosecution had turned hostile. He relied on the judgment in the case of
Ramesh Harijan v. State of Uttar Pradesh reported in (2012) 2 SCC (Cri) 905 in
support of his submission that the evidence of a prosecution witness cannot be
rejected in toto merely because the prosecution has chosen to treat him as a
hostile witness. He also drew our attention to the observations of the Supreme
Court in Shyamal Ghosh (supra). The learned Counsel submitted that though the
victim was found to be hostile, his testimony proves his abduction and
confinement. However, this witness was unable to identify any of his captors.
We have noticed that besides the victim, the members of his family, his
friends and his employees who have all been examined as witnesses have been
declared hostile. The reason for this is not far to seek. When the evidence of
these witnesses was recorded in the latter part of the year 2006 and
thereafter, some of the accused in this case were being tried for grievous
offences in this State as well as in other parts of the country. It is not
impossible that these witnesses felt intimidated by the situation and
therefore did not answer the questions relating to the payment of ransom.  50
85\. The learned Counsel for the State has then relied on the judgments in
State of West Bengal v. Mir Mohammad Omar and Others reported in 2000 SCC
(Cri) and State of U.P. v. Krishna Master reported in 2010 Cri.L.J. 3889 which
expound on the appreciation of evidence in a criminal trial. The Supreme Court
has opined that minor discrepancies which do not touch the core of the case
cannot be considered to be fatal to the case of the prosecution. The Court
observed that when a witness is subjected to gruelling cross-examination for a
long period some inconsistencies are bound to occur. Such inconsistencies or
discrepancies should not be blown out of proportion while evaluating the
evidence, if they do not go against general tenor of the evidence.
86\. The judgements of the Supreme Court which have been cited before us
elucidate that the evidence with regard to a conspiracy may be direct or
circumstantial. The Court has observed that it is generally difficult to find
direct evidence given the nature of the crime. The participants in the
conspiracy must have a common object even though each of them may not know the
role ascribed to the others for furtherance of the plot. Indeed, the
conspirators need not physically meet in order to chalk out the plan. The
meeting of the minds of the conspirators to execute their ultimate goal must
be reflected from the evidence on record.
87\. Bearing in mind the observations of the Supreme Court with regard to the
appreciation of evidence in a case of conspiracy we will now consider the
chain of events from which it can be unmistakably deduced that there was a
conspiracy to abduct Partha for ransom and that the appellants were
participants in the commission of the crime.
88\. As mentioned earlier there is evidence on record which proves that there
was a plan to abduct the chief of Khadim Shoe Company. This idea which
occurred to Aftab Ansari and Asif Reza Khan took shape at 21B, Gorachand Lane.
Akib Ali and Ashabuddin were present at the meetings which were held at  51
the aforesaid premises. Besides the approvers, there are other witnesses who
have seen them in the premises. The appellants have not been able to explain
their presence at 21B Gorachand Lane in their statements recorded under
section 313 Cr.P.C. Swati Paul has spoken about Abdul Rahaman Kunji leaving
for Kolkata from Mumbai on arriving there from Dubai. He mentioned to her that
a shoe manufacturer was to be abducted. On his return to Mumbai he informed
her that the task had been completed successfully. The approvers have vouched
for his presence in 21B Gorachand Lane. Separate acts were assigned to each of
the conspirators. Akib Ali and Ashabuddin were responsible for procuring the
Maruti 800 car for the abduction. Akib Ali was waiting with Asif Reza Khan to
transfer the victim from this car to a Maruti 1000 which the latter drove to
the Bhoot Bunglow. Akib Ali then drove the Maruti 800 to a garage to get the
tail light repaired. The car was seized from Ashabuddin in New Delhi in
November 2001 by a CBI officer in another case. This officer has identified
Ashabuddin in Court. Partha Roy Barman has testified about being abducted and
confined in a dark room. Three prosecution witnesses have seen the manner in
which the abduction occurred. They have spoken about a tall bearded man being
pulled out of his car and being pushed into a waiting white Maruti 800 car.
Both of them visited the Bhoot Bungalow where the victim was confined. The
police produced the CFSL report relating to the DNA test of the bloodstained
clothes found in the Bhoot Bungalow. The bloodstains matched with the victim's
blood. The motive for the abduction has been proved both through oral evidence
as well as the electronic evidence. The abduction of Partha Roy Barman was
undertaken for ransom. The demand was made by one of the conspirators as
evident from the call records. The e-mails prove that the ransom was received
and that Akib Ali claimed to have participated in equal measure as the others
in the abduction. These circumstances prove the prosecution case beyond all
reasonable doubt. There is thus a complete chain of circumstances which admits
no other conclusion but that the appellants are guilty of commission of the
criminal acts alleged against them.
52
89\. The Sessions Court has assessed the evidence on record correctly and
found the appellants guilty as charged. We do not find any reason to differ
with the findings of the Sessions Court. The appeals therefore fail and the
conviction of and the sentence imposed on Akib Ali, Ashabuddin and Abdul
Rahaman Kunji is upheld. As mentioned earlier the appeal of Happy Singh has
abated.
90\. The appeals are dismissed.
91\. The LCR be sent to the trial Court, i.e., the Court of Additional
Sessions Judge, 2nd Court, Alipore, immediately as the trial in respect of
some of the accused is still pending.
92\. Urgent certified photocopies of this judgment, if applied for, be given
to the learned advocates for the parties upon compliance of all formalities.
          (Tapash Mookherjee, J.)                              (Nishita Mhatre, J.)
evident from the call records. The e-mails prove that the ransom was received
and that Akib Ali claimed to have participated in equal measure as the others
in the abduction. These circumstances prove the prosecution case beyond all
reasonable doubt. There is thus a complete chain of circumstances which admits
no other conclusion but that the appellants are guilty of commission of the
criminal acts alleged against them.
52
89\. The Sessions Court has assessed the evidence on record correctly and
found the appellants guilty as charged. We do not find any reason to differ
with the findings of the Sessions Court. The appeals therefore fail and the
conviction of and the sentence imposed on Akib Ali, Ashabuddin and Abdul
Rahaman Kunji is upheld. As mentioned earlier the appeal of Happy Singh has
abated.
90\. The appeals are dismissed.
91\. The LCR be sent to the trial Court, i.e., the Court of Additional
Sessions Judge, 2nd Court, Alipore, immediately as the trial in respect of
    For the Appellant
    in CRA 454 of 2009      : Mr. Jayanta Narayan Chatterjee
                              Ms. Mandira Basu
                              Mr. Sirsendu Sinharoy
                              Mr. Dwaipayan Biswas
                              Mr. Apalak Basu
    For the Appellants
    in CRA 624 of 2009      : Mr. Sandip Kumar Bhattacharya
                              Mr. Sovan Kumar Dutta
                              Mr. Joydeep Chatterjee
                              Ms. Nabanita Bhadra
    For the State           : Mr. Saswata Gopal Mukherjee
                              Mr. Rudradipta Nandy
                              Mr. Sanjay Banerjee
    Judgment on             : 14.11.2014
    Nishita Mhatre, J.:
    1     These appeals are directed against the judgment and order of the
    Additional Sessions Judge, 2nd Court, Alipore in Sessions Trial No. 1(6)05
    corresponds to Sessions case no. 65(1) of 2003 which was decided on 20th May,
    2009. The Sessions Court has convicted the appellants for offences punishable
evident from the call records. The e-mails prove that the ransom was received
and that Akib Ali claimed to have participated in equal measure as the others
in the abduction. These circumstances prove the prosecution case beyond all
reasonable doubt. There is thus a complete chain of circumstances which admits
no other conclusion but that the appellants are guilty of commission of the
criminal acts alleged against them.
52
89\. The Sessions Court has assessed the evidence on record correctly and
found the appellants guilty as charged. We do not find any reason to differ
with the findings of the Sessions Court. The appeals therefore fail and the
conviction of and the sentence imposed on Akib Ali, Ashabuddin and Abdul
Rahaman Kunji is upheld. As mentioned earlier the appeal of Happy Singh has
abated.
90\. The appeals are dismissed.
91\. The LCR be sent to the trial Court, i.e., the Court of Additional
Sessions Judge, 2nd Court, Alipore, immediately as the trial in respect of
    For the Appellant
    in CRA 454 of 2009      : Mr. Jayanta Narayan Chatterjee
                              Ms. Mandira Basu
                              Mr. Sirsendu Sinharoy
                              Mr. Dwaipayan Biswas
                              Mr. Apalak Basu
    For the Appellants
    in CRA 624 of 2009      : Mr. Sandip Kumar Bhattacharya
                              Mr. Sovan Kumar Dutta
                              Mr. Joydeep Chatterjee
                              Ms. Nabanita Bhadra
    For the State           : Mr. Saswata Gopal Mukherjee
                              Mr. Rudradipta Nandy
                              Mr. Sanjay Banerjee
    Judgment on             : 14.11.2014
    Nishita Mhatre, J.:
    1     These appeals are directed against the judgment and order of the
    Additional Sessions Judge, 2nd Court, Alipore in Sessions Trial No. 1(6)05
    corresponds to Sessions case no. 65(1) of 2003 which was decided on 20th May,
    2009. The Sessions Court has convicted the appellants for offences punishable
evident from the call records. The e-mails prove that the ransom was received
and that Akib Ali claimed to have participated in equal measure as the others
in the abduction. These circumstances prove the prosecution case beyond all
reasonable doubt. There is thus a complete chain of circumstances which admits
no other conclusion but that the appellants are guilty of commission of the
criminal acts alleged against them.
52
89\. The Sessions Court has assessed the evidence on record correctly and
found the appellants guilty as charged. We do not find any reason to differ
with the findings of the Sessions Court. The appeals therefore fail and the
conviction of and the sentence imposed on Akib Ali, Ashabuddin and Abdul
Rahaman Kunji is upheld. As mentioned earlier the appeal of Happy Singh has
abated.
90\. The appeals are dismissed.
91\. The LCR be sent to the trial Court, i.e., the Court of Additional
Sessions Judge, 2nd Court, Alipore, immediately as the trial in respect of
    For the Appellant
    in CRA 454 of 2009      : Mr. Jayanta Narayan Chatterjee
                              Ms. Mandira Basu
                              Mr. Sirsendu Sinharoy
                              Mr. Dwaipayan Biswas
                              Mr. Apalak Basu
    For the Appellants
    in CRA 624 of 2009      : Mr. Sandip Kumar Bhattacharya
                              Mr. Sovan Kumar Dutta
                              Mr. Joydeep Chatterjee
                              Ms. Nabanita Bhadra
    For the State           : Mr. Saswata Gopal Mukherjee
                              Mr. Rudradipta Nandy
                              Mr. Sanjay Banerjee
    Judgment on             : 14.11.2014
    Nishita Mhatre, J.:
    1     These appeals are directed against the judgment and order of the
    Additional Sessions Judge, 2nd Court, Alipore in Sessions Trial No. 1(6)05
    corresponds to Sessions case no. 65(1) of 2003 which was decided on 20th May,
    2009. The Sessions Court has convicted the appellants for offences punishable
    under Sections 364A, 120B of the IPC.         They have been sentenced to suffer
    imprisonment for life together with a fine of `5000/- and in default of payment of
    fine they have been directed to undergo rigorous imprisonment for two months.
    The trial Court has not convicted the appellants separately under Section 342
                                              2
    IPC as the charge under that Section had merged with the main Section, i.e.,
    364A.
    Facts
2\. On 25th July, 2001 one Partha Roy Barman, a Director of Khadim Shoe
Company, was abducted on his way to work. He was proceeding to his place of
work from his residence at Salt Lake in his SUV, a Tata Safari being driven by
evident from the call records. The e-mails prove that the ransom was received
and that Akib Ali claimed to have participated in equal measure as the others
in the abduction. These circumstances prove the prosecution case beyond all
reasonable doubt. There is thus a complete chain of circumstances which admits
no other conclusion but that the appellants are guilty of commission of the
criminal acts alleged against them.
52
89\. The Sessions Court has assessed the evidence on record correctly and
found the appellants guilty as charged. We do not find any reason to differ
with the findings of the Sessions Court. The appeals therefore fail and the
conviction of and the sentence imposed on Akib Ali, Ashabuddin and Abdul
Rahaman Kunji is upheld. As mentioned earlier the appeal of Happy Singh has
abated.
90\. The appeals are dismissed.
91\. The LCR be sent to the trial Court, i.e., the Court of Additional
Sessions Judge, 2nd Court, Alipore, immediately as the trial in respect of
    For the Appellant
    in CRA 454 of 2009      : Mr. Jayanta Narayan Chatterjee
                              Ms. Mandira Basu
                              Mr. Sirsendu Sinharoy
                              Mr. Dwaipayan Biswas
                              Mr. Apalak Basu
    For the Appellants
    in CRA 624 of 2009      : Mr. Sandip Kumar Bhattacharya
                              Mr. Sovan Kumar Dutta
                              Mr. Joydeep Chatterjee
                              Ms. Nabanita Bhadra
    For the State           : Mr. Saswata Gopal Mukherjee
                              Mr. Rudradipta Nandy
                              Mr. Sanjay Banerjee
    Judgment on             : 14.11.2014
    Nishita Mhatre, J.:
    1     These appeals are directed against the judgment and order of the
    Additional Sessions Judge, 2nd Court, Alipore in Sessions Trial No. 1(6)05
    corresponds to Sessions case no. 65(1) of 2003 which was decided on 20th May,
    2009. The Sessions Court has convicted the appellants for offences punishable
    under Sections 364A, 120B of the IPC.         They have been sentenced to suffer
    imprisonment for life together with a fine of `5000/- and in default of payment of
    fine they have been directed to undergo rigorous imprisonment for two months.
    The trial Court has not convicted the appellants separately under Section 342
                                              2
    IPC as the charge under that Section had merged with the main Section, i.e.,
    364A.
    Facts
2\. On 25th July, 2001 one Partha Roy Barman, a Director of Khadim Shoe
Company, was abducted on his way to work. He was proceeding to his place of
work from his residence at Salt Lake in his SUV, a Tata Safari being driven by
evident from the call records. The e-mails prove that the ransom was received
and that Akib Ali claimed to have participated in equal measure as the others
in the abduction. These circumstances prove the prosecution case beyond all
reasonable doubt. There is thus a complete chain of circumstances which admits
no other conclusion but that the appellants are guilty of commission of the
criminal acts alleged against them.
52
89\. The Sessions Court has assessed the evidence on record correctly and
found the appellants guilty as charged. We do not find any reason to differ
with the findings of the Sessions Court. The appeals therefore fail and the
conviction of and the sentence imposed on Akib Ali, Ashabuddin and Abdul
Rahaman Kunji is upheld. As mentioned earlier the appeal of Happy Singh has
abated.
90\. The appeals are dismissed.
91\. The LCR be sent to the trial Court, i.e., the Court of Additional
Sessions Judge, 2nd Court, Alipore, immediately as the trial in respect of
