Delhi District Court
Cbi vs . 1) Radhey Shyam Sharma on 29 August, 2016
                 IN THE COURT OF SH. BRIJESH KUMAR GARG 
              SPECIAL JUDGE:CBI­01: CENTRAL: TIS HAZARI, DELHI
    Registration No.: 532255/2016
    CNR No.: DLCT01­000039­1998
    CC No. : 34/09
                                            RC :  59(A)/1995
                                            PS :  CBI/ACB/New Delhi
                                            U/s:  120­B r/w 420, 467/471 of 
                                                     IPC & 13(2) r/w Sec.13 (1)(d)
                                                     of P.C. Act, 1988
    CBI  Vs.   1)  Radhey Shyam Sharma
                   S/o Sh. Surajmal Sharma,
                   R/o Dhampur, Bijnore (U.P.).
               2) Subodh Kumar Gupta (since deceased)
                   S/o Sh. Suresh Chand Gupta,
                   R/o 6/233, Mohalla Dungar,
                   Farsh Bazar, Shahdara, 
                   Delhi.
Kumar Gupta (A­3); Ashok Luthra (A­4); D.K.Parashar (A­5) and Suresh Chand
Gupta (A­8). The prosecution has also successfully proved its case against
accused Pawan Kumar Gupta (A­3), beyond a shadow of doubt, for the substantive
offences punishable under Section 467/468/420 IPC. The prosecution has also
successfully proved its case, beyond a shadow of doubt, against accused
R.S.Sharma (A­1); Ashok Luthra (A­4) and D.K.Parashar (A­5) for the
substantive offence punishable under Section 13(2) read with Section
13(1)(d)(iii) of The Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988. They are,
accordingly, held guilty and convicted for the said offences. However, the
prosecution has failed to prove any case against accused Manoj Kumar Sharma
(A­6) and Arvind Kumar Sharma (A­7) and therefore, both of them are hereby
acquitted of the charges for all the offences, as framed against them, in the
present case.
CBI Vs. R.S.Sharma etc.(CC No. 34/2009) Page 96 of 97 Special Judge, CBI­01,
Central, Delhi Let the convicts be heard on the point of sentence, on the next
date of hearing.
                   Delhi.
               3) Pawan Kumar Gupta
                   S/o Sh. Suresh Chand Gupta,
                   R/o 6/233, Mohalla Dungar,
                   Farsh Bazar, Shahdara,
                   Delhi.
               4) Ashok Luthra
                   S/o Sh. Suraj Prakash,
                   R/o 13/87, Subhadra Colony,
                   Sarai Rohilla,
                   Delhi­110 035.
               5) D.K. Parashar
                   S/o Late Sh.Kali Charan Sharma,
                   R/o 1449/16. Gali No.10,
                   Durgapuri, Delhi­110 093.
    CBI  Vs. R.S.Sharma etc.(CC No. 34/2009)      Page  1   of  97                         Special Judge, CBI­01, Central, Delhi 
                        6) Manoj Kumar Sharma
                          S/o Sh. Bhagwan Sahai Sharma,
                          R/o 27/91, Gali No. 7,
                          Viswash Nagar, Shahdara,
                          Delhi­110 032.
                       7) Arvind Kumar Sharma
                          S/o Sh. K.S. Sharma,
                          R/o 4/39, Subhash Gali,
                          Viswash Nagar, Shahdara,
                          Delhi.
                       8) Suresh Chand Gupta
                          R/o 6/233, Mohalla Dungar,
                          Farsh Bazar, Shahdara,
                          Delhi.
    Date of Institution                                      :   24.11.1998
    Judgment Reserved on                                     :   19.08.2016
    Judgment Delivered on                                    :   29.08.2016
                                                   J U D G M E N T  
                  FACTS OF THE CASE
         1.
In the present case, RC No. 59(A)/95 DLI was registered on 21.07.1995 on the
basis of a source information. It was alleged that in the year 1990, accused
R.S. Sharma, while functioning as Chief Manager, Punjab National Bank, Gandhi
Nagar Delhi, entered into a criminal conspiracy with accused Subodh Kumar
Gupta and Pawan Kumar Gupta to cheat the Punjab National Bank, Gandhi Nagar.
It was further alleged that in pursuance to CBI Vs. R.S.Sharma etc.(CC No.
34/2009) Page 2 of 97 Special Judge, CBI­01, Central, Delhi the criminal
conspiracy, accused Subodh Kumar Gupta, proprietor of M/s V.V. Industries,
Vishwash Nagar, Shahdara, Delhi, dishonestly applied, on 17.07.90, for a term
loan of Rs.4,10,000/­, for purchase of machinery and submitted false and
forged quotations in the name of M/s. Gupta Engineering Works, Friends Colony,
Shahdara, along with three forged receipts of the said company for
Rs.1,25,000/­ and deposited a cash amount of Rs.13,000/­, as margin money.
2\. It was further alleged that accused R.S. Sharma dishonestly and
fraudulently, by misusing his position as chief manager, accepted false and
forged documents, knowingly and obtained sanction of loan and credit
facilities to M/s V.V. Industries, to the tune of Rs.14 Lacs, for purchasing
the machinery, which had already been financed by the bank.
3\. It was further alleged that in pursuance to the conspiracy, co­ accused
Pawan Kumar Gupta, stood as guarantor and accused R.S. Sharma, dishonestly
handed over the pay order of Rs.4.23 Lacs to accused Subodh Kumar Gupta, which
was encashed by him, by opening a fictitious account in the name of M/s. Gupta
Engineering Works at Punjab National Bank, Katra Mohan, CBI Vs. R.S.Sharma
etc.(CC No. 34/2009) Page 3 of 97 Special Judge, CBI­01, Central, Delhi
Chandni Chowk, Delhi. M/s. Gupta Engineering Works had denied to have supplied
any machinery to M/s V.V. Industries, Shahdara, Delhi, and also denied to have
received any payment against the pay order issued by the Punjab National Bank,
Gandhi Nagar.
4\. It has been stated in the chargesheet that investigations had revealed
that accused Subodh Kumar Gupta, vide his application dated 17.07.90, applied
for various loan facilities from Punjab National Bank, Gandhinagar, worth
about Rs.19.1 Lacs, for starting a small scale industry in the name of M/s.
V.V. Industries at Vishwas Nagar, Delhi­32. He hypothecated the machinery and
stock and mortgaged property No. 41/1B, Halkara Kuan, Jwala Nagar, as
security, which was in the name of his brother co­accused Pawan Kumar Gupta.
He also submitted the project report, quotation of one Suman Engineering Works
for Rs.5,77,800/­ and forged quotation and bill of M/s Gupta Engineering Works
for Rs.5,48,000/­. Co­accused Pawan Kumar Gupta, who was enjoying facilities
from Punjab National Bank in the name of M/s. Kavita Metals, stood as
guarantor.
5\. In the project report, accused Subodh Kumar Gupta proposed CBI Vs.
R.S.Sharma etc.(CC No. 34/2009) Page 4 of 97 Special Judge, CBI­01, Central,
Delhi to procure plant and machinery from M/s. Gupta Engineering Works and
submitted forged cash receipts of M/s. Gupta Engineering Works, for Rs.50,000
dated 11.07.90; Rs.50,000/­ dated 13.07.90 and Rs.25,000 dated 23.07.90.
6\. It is further stated in the chargesheet that accused R.S.
Sharma, Chief Manager, along with co­accused Ashok Luthra, Small Scale
Industries Officer, visited the premises of M/s. V.V. Industries at 500/5A,
Gali No. 11, Vishwash Nagar, Delhi, on 24.07.90, to assess the technical
feasibility and financial viability of the project. But, Sr. Manager, who was
the recommending authority and the appraising officer, was not taken to the
spot. Accused Ashok Luthra gave a vague and ambiguous report, to favour
co­accused Subodh Kumar Gupta.
7\. It is further stated in the chargesheet that co­accused D.K Parashar did
not verify the reputation of the firm M/s. V.V. Industries and the
confidential report of M/s V.V. Industries, in the bank's standard format,
dated 23.07.90, was not prepared authentically by him.
8\. It is further stated in the chargesheet that the investigations CBI Vs.
R.S.Sharma etc.(CC No. 34/2009) Page 5 of 97 Special Judge, CBI­01, Central,
Delhi had further revealed that no proposal on the printed form of the bank or
the bank's board­note­proforma, was prepared. A sanction note was prepared in
a vague manner and the limits were sanctioned by accused R.S. Sharma and the
term loan of Rs.4.10 lacs was disbursed on 25.07.90, on the same day, when the
limit was sanctioned by accused R.S. Sharma. He sanctioned the limit within
one day, after submission of the technical report by co­accused Ashok Luthra,
SSIO, on 24.07.90.
9\. During investigations, it was also revealed that the quotations, bill for
Rs.5,48,000/­ and cash receipts of Rs.50,000/­; Rs.50,000/­ & Rs.25,000/­
each, of M/s. Gupta Engineering Works, were forged documents and Sh. S.C.
Gupta, the proprietor of M/s. Gupta Engineering Works had also denied to have
received any pay order from Punjab National Bank. The CFSL report, dated
28.11.97, has opined that the quotations / cash receipt of Rs.50,000, dated
13.07.90, has been forged by co­accused Pawan Kumar Gupta.
10\. It is further stated in the chargesheet that the investigations revealed
that accused D.K Parashar Loan Officer, who was responsible for processing the
loan applications, had conducted CBI Vs. R.S.Sharma etc.(CC No. 34/2009) Page
6 of 97 Special Judge, CBI­01, Central, Delhi the confidential verification,
without actually interacting with the borrower Subodh Kumar Gupta. He also did
not verify the quotations and cash receipts of M/s Gupta Engineering Works,
with a view to favour the accused. He also handed over the pay order of
Rs.4.23 lacs to Subodh Kumar Gupta, instead of handing it over to M/s Gupta
Engineering Works. He also did not ensure that the pay order reached the
actual supplier.
11\. It is further stated in the chargesheet that the investigations have
revealed that the machinery lying at the premises of M/s V.V. Industries, were
purchased by Subodh Gupta from one Suresh Jain in the year 1989 and a
fictitious current account No. 5011, in the name of M/s. Gupta Engineering
Works was opened by co­accused Manoj Kumar Sharma, who was working with
accused Pawan Kumar Gupta, at the relevant time, by posing himself as Manoj
Kumar Gupta, the proprietor of M/s Gupta Engineering Works. The said account
was introduced by co­ accused Arvind Kumar Sharma, who was having current
account No. 4768, in the name of M/s. Dayal Engineering Works, at Punjab
National Bank, Shahdara, Delhi.
12\. It is further stated in the chargesheet that during CBI Vs. R.S.Sharma
etc.(CC No. 34/2009) Page 7 of 97 Special Judge, CBI­01, Central, Delhi
investigations it was learnt that the original account opening form of M/s
Gupta Engineering Works (Current Account No. 5011), along with deposit
voucher, withdrawal vouchers etc. were seized by Delhi Police in connection
with the investigation of FIR 47/95 of PS Gandhi Nagar, Delhi, wherein, the
specimen writing of accused Manoj Kumar Sharma, were also obtained and his
questioned writings, along with the documents were referred to CFSL, New
Delhi, for expert opinion and vide report No. CFSL­ 97/D­324, dated 15.07.97,
the CFSL has opined that the questioned writings were made by accused Manoj
Kumar Sharma.
13\. It is further stated in the chargesheet that the pay order for
Rs.4,23,000/­, issued by Punjab National Bank, Gandhi Nagar, in favour of
M/s.Gupta Engineering Works was deposited by accused Subodh Kumar Gupta in
current account No. 5011 and an amount of Rs.3,20,000/­ was withdrawn from it
and was deposited in the account of another fictitious firm, M/s. Rajiv Metals
(account No. 1236) at Andhra Bank, Vishwas Nagar. Accused Subodh Kumar Gupta
further issued two cheques bearing No. 177180, dated 08.08.90 for
Rs.2,28,925/­ and No. 177178, dated 03.08.90 for Rs.2,35,000/­, from the CC
account CBI Vs. R.S.Sharma etc.(CC No. 34/2009) Page 8 of 97 Special Judge,
CBI­01, Central, Delhi No. 153 of M/s. V. V. Industries at Punjab National
Bank, Gandhi Nagar and got the same credited in the fictitious account No.
1236 of M/s Rajiv Metals. A total of Rs.7,83,926/­ was got credited in the
fictitious account No. 1236 of M/s Rajiv Metals. This account was introduced
by Sh. Suresh Chand Gupta, the father of accused Subodh Kumar Gupta and Pawan
Kumar Gupta. The money was used by these two accused by withdrawing the same
from the account.
14\. It is further stated in the chargesheet that the investigations have
revealed that the credit disbursement of an initial amount of Rs.5,20,000/­
was made within two days of the sanction, i.e. on 27.07.90 and it was not
ensured that the payment released for machinery had actually reached the
supplier or the machinery had reached the factory and installed or not.
15\. The accused Subodh Kumar Gupta issued two cheques No.
177176, dated 27.07.90 for Rs.5,20,000/­ and cheque No. 177181, dated 11.09.90
for Rs.1,25,000/­ and the same were credited in CC account of M/s. Kavita
Metals at Punjab National Bank, Gandhi Nagar, which was owned by accused Pawan
Kumar Gupta. Accused Subodh Kumar Gupta had also CBI Vs. R.S.Sharma etc.(CC
No. 34/2009) Page 9 of 97 Special Judge, CBI­01, Central, Delhi deposited
Rs.1,30,000/­ in the CC account No. 153 of M/s. V.V. Industries on 11.09.90.
16\. It is further stated in the chargesheet that an amount of about Rs.14
Lacs was siphoned off by accused Subodh Kumar Gupta, in active connivance with
co­accused Pawan Kumar Gupta, through M/s. Kavita Metals and M/s.Rajiv Metals
from the CC account and term loan account of M/s. V.V. Industries.
17\. It is further stated in the chargesheet that sanction for prosecution of
accused R.S. Sharma was not obtained, as he was no longer in service of the
bank and the sanctions for prosecution of accused D.K Parashar and Ashok
Luthra have been duly granted by the competent authority.
18\. It is further stated that the aforesaid accused have committed various
offences punishable under Section 120­B read with Section 420, 467, 471 IPC
and Section 13(2) read with Section 13(1) (d) of The Prevention of Corruption
Act, 1988.
CHARGES
19\. After filing of the chargesheet, all the accused were duly CBI Vs.
R.S.Sharma etc.(CC No. 34/2009) Page 10 of 97 Special Judge, CBI­01, Central,
Delhi summoned and order on charge was passed by the Ld. Predecessor of this
court on 17.04.2006. In pursuance to it, the charges were framed against all
the accused persons on 20.06.2006, for the offence punishable under Section
120­B IPC read with Section 467, 468, 471, 419, 420 IPC and Section 13 (1)(d)
of The Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988. Additional charge for the offence
punishable under Section 13(2) read with Section 13(1) (d) of The Prevention
of Corruption Act, 1988, was also framed against accused Radhey Shyam Sharma,
Ashok Luthra and D.K. Parashar. Additional charges for the offences punishable
under Section 420, 471, 467 & 468 IPC, were also framed against accused Subodh
Kumar Gupta. Additional charges for the offences punishable under Section 467,
468 & 420 IPC, were also framed against accused Pawan Kumar Gupta. Additional
charges for the offences punishable under Section 419 & 420 IPC, were also
framed against accused Manoj Kumar Sharma. All the accused persons pleaded not
guilty to all the charges and claimed trial.
20\. It is pertinent to mention here that during the trial, after framing of
charges, the accused Subodh Kumar Gupta (A­2) had expired and therefore, the
proceedings against him were dropped CBI Vs. R.S.Sharma etc.(CC No. 34/2009)
Page 11 of 97 Special Judge, CBI­01, Central, Delhi by the Ld. Predecessor of
this Court, vide orders dated 17.01.2008, since abated.
PROSECUTION EVIDENCE
21\. During the course of trial, the prosecution has examined the following
witnesses, namely:
i) PW­1 Sh. Brij Mohan Mittal, who was posted as Dy. General Manager at Zonal
Office, Central UP Zone, Agra. He has granted sanction for prosecution of
accused D.K Parashar, Loan Officer, PNB, Gandhi Nagar, Delhi, vide sanction
order Ex.PW1/A.
ii) PW­2 Sh. Vijay Narain Saxena, Zonal Manager, Punjab National Bank, who has
granted sanction for prosecution of accused Ashok Luthra, Small Scale
Industries Officer, vide sanction order Ex.PW2/A.
iii) PW­3 Sh. D.K. Gupta, who was working as Officer in Punjab National Bank,
Gandhi Nagar Branch, during the period w.e.f. January, 1997 to July, 2000. He
has handed over various documents, pertaining to the loan facilities availed
by accused Subodh Kumar Gupta as proprietor of M/s. V.V. Industries, to the
CBI, during investigations, vide production­cum­seizure memo, dated 30.04.97,
Ex.PW3/A.
iv) PW­4 Sh. Suresh Chand Gupta s/o Sh. M.P.Gupta, actual CBI Vs. R.S.Sharma
etc.(CC No. 34/2009) Page 12 of 97 Special Judge, CBI­01, Central, Delhi
proprietor of M/s. Gupta Engineering Works, 1/422, Friends Colony Industrial
Area, Shahdara, Delhi. He has deposed that he was not knowing the V.V.
Industries (sic. V.B. Industries) and has not supplied any "furnaces annealing
1000 kgs." to V.V. Industries (sic. V.B. Industries). He has further deposed
that the quotation, dated 09.07.90, Ex.PW4/1, was not on his letterhead and it
does not bear his signatures, though it bears the name of Gupta Engineering
Works. He has further deposed that the bill dated 10.09.90, Ex.PW4/2 and the
receipt dated 13.07.90, Ex.PW4/3, does not bear his signatures. He has further
stated that his propriety concern M/s. Gupta Engineering Works was not having
any account with PNB. He has further deposed that the demand draft, Ex.P­5, in
favour of Gupta Engineering Works was not received by him.
v) PW­5 Sh. Javed Iqbal Khan, who was posted as Officer, Andhra Bank, Vishwas
Nagar, Delhi, during the year 1997. He has handed over various documents,
pertaining to current account No. 1236, in the name of Rajiv Metals, to the
CBI officials, vide seizure memos Ex.PW5/A & Ex.PW5/E.
vi) PW­6 Sh. Subodh Kumar Gupta s/o Sh. Bulaki Dass, who was the proprietor of
M/s. Manoj Metals. He has deposed that his wife Smt. Kamlesh Rani was the
proprietor of Rajiv Metal CBI Vs. R.S.Sharma etc.(CC No. 34/2009) Page 13 of
97 Special Judge, CBI­01, Central, Delhi Industries and Punjab National Bank,
Gandhi Nagar, Delhi was their banker for some time. He has further stated that
he was never a proprietor of M/s V.V. Industries and he was having no concern
with any firm in the name and style of M/s. V.V. Industries.
vii) PW­7 Sh. Tarun Krishan Aggarwal. This witness was not examined by the Ld.
Sr. PP for the CBI and was given up.
viii) PW­8 Sh. S.K. Nigam, who was working as Assistant Director of Industries
(East) at Kashmere Gate, Delhi, on 16.10.98. He has proved his letter dated
16.10.98, as Ex.PW8/A.
ix) PW­9 Sh. Nirbhay Kumar, who was posted as Manager, Punjab National Bank,
Katra Dhulia Branch, Chandni Chowk, Delhi, during the period w.e.f. the year
1989 to January, 1992. He has deposed that on 17.02.90, current account No.
5011, was opened in his branch in the name of Gupta Engineering Works, through
its proprietor Manoj Kumar Gupta, on the introduction of one account holder
M/s. Dayal Engineering Works and the same was attested by the official of
another branch of Punjab National Bank.
x) PW­10 Sh. Vinod Kumar Garg, who was posted as Assistant Manager, Punjab
National Bank, Shahdara Branch, Delhi, on 16.02.1990. He has deposed that in
the account opening form, CBI Vs. R.S.Sharma etc.(CC No. 34/2009) Page 14 of
97 Special Judge, CBI­01, Central, Delhi pertaining to current account No.
5011, in the name of Gupta Engineering Works, through its proprietor Manoj
Kumar Gupta, he has attested the signatures of introducer Sh. A.K. Sharma of
Dayal Engineering Works, with current account No. 4768. He has further stated
that the signatures of introducer A.K Sharma were checked from the specimen
signature card of current account No. 4768\.
xi) PW­11 Sh. Chander Mohan Gupta, who was posted as Manager, Scale­II, Punjab
National Bank, Katra Mohan, Chandni Chowk Branch, Delhi­6, during the period
w.e.f. 1994 to January, 1998\. He has deposed that vide seizure memo dated
06.09.96, Ex.PW11/A, various documents pertaining to current account No. 5011
of M/s. Gupta Engineering Works, were handed over to the CBI. He has also
proved the statement of account, pertaining to current account No. 5011 of
M/s. Gupta Engineering Works, for the period w.e.f. 17.02.90 to 27.09.1992, as
Ex.PW11/B.
xii) PW­12 Sh. Bali Ram, who was posted as Manager, Punjab National Bank,
Gandhi Nagar Branch, during the period w.e.f. September, 1989 to May, 1991. He
has identified accused R.S. Sharma and D.K Parashar, in the court. He has
further stated that the loan sanction order dated 24.07.90 was proposed by
Senior Manager K.N. Zariwala and was approved by accused CBI Vs. R.S.Sharma
etc.(CC No. 34/2009) Page 15 of 97 Special Judge, CBI­01, Central, Delhi R.S.
Sharma. He has further deposed that the cheque dated 27.07.90, Ex.PW12/B and
cheque dated 11.09.90, Ex.PW12/C, for Rs.5,20,000/­ and Rs.1,25,000/­
respectively, were issued by accused Subodh Kumar Gupta for M/s. V.V.
Industries, in favour of Kavita Metals and the same were passed by him. He has
further stated that the cheque dated 27.07.90 Ex.PW12/B­1 was also passed by
him, after tallying the signatures.
xiii) PW­13 Sh. Girdhari Lal, who was posted as Manager, Punjab National Bank,
Transaction Banking Division at Head Office, New Delhi. He has deposed that
vide seizure memo dated 06.09.96, Ex.PW11/A, the photocopies of the documents
mentioned in it were handed over to the CBI. The original of these documents
were seized by some ASI from PS Gandhi Nagar. He has further stated that as
per the statement of account of M/s. Gupta Engineering Works, Ex.PW11/B, a sum
of Rs.4,23,000/­ in the form of cheque, was deposited in it.
xiv) PW­14 SI Narottam Singh of P.S. Janak Puri, Delhi, who has deposed that
in the year 1997, he was posted as ASI, EOW Crime Branch and he was entrusted
with the investigation of FIR No. 47/95 of PS Gandhi Nagar, which was being
investigated earlier by ASI Dhan Singh. He has further stated that accused
Manoj Sharma had opened account No. 5011 in the name of M/s CBI Vs. R.S.Sharma
etc.(CC No. 34/2009) Page 16 of 97 Special Judge, CBI­01, Central, Delhi Gupta
Engineering Works, at Punjab National Bank, Gandhi Nagar, by posing as Manoj
Gupta.
xv) PW­15 Sh. Mahender Kumar Gupta, who has deposed that in the year 1990, he
was engaged in the business of copper work along with Suresh Chand Gupta for
about eight months. He has further stated that the "self" cheque No. 77456,
dated 25.06.90, for a sum of Rs.80,000/­, Ex.PW5/G­1, was encashed by him and
he handed over the cash amount of Rs.80,000/­ to accused Pawan Kumar son of
accused Suresh Chand Gupta.
xvi) PW­16 Sh. Rajiv Nigam, who was posted as Deputy Manager, Punjab National
Bank, Assets Recovery Management Branch, Tolstoy Marg, New Delhi. He has
deposed that vide production­cum­seizure memos Ex.PW16/1 & Ex.PW16/4, he
delivered photocopies of various documents to the CBI. He has proved the
statement of term loan account No. 46/2 in the name of V.V. Industries, as
Ex.PW16/2. He has also proved the statement of account pertaining to CC
account No. 153 in the name of V.V. Industries as Ex.PW16/3. He has also
narrated the procedure for sanction of loan facilities, for starting small
scale industry. He has also proved various documents pertaining to the loan
facilities extended to M/s. V.V. Industries, as Ex.PW16/5 to Ex.PW16/11.
CBI Vs. R.S.Sharma etc.(CC No. 34/2009) Page 17 of 97 Special Judge, CBI­01,
Central, Delhi xvii) PW­17 Sh. Debasish Sengupta, who was working as Junior
Assistant in NDMC. On 14.05.1997, he visited the CBI office, where the
specimen signatures and handwriting of accused Subodh Kumar Gupta, S­45 to
S­61, were taken by the IO Inspector B.K Pradhan in his presence, on the
sheets Ex.PW17/A­1 to Ex.PW17/A­17.
xviii) PW­18 Sh. B.B.Arora, who was posted as Officer, Punjab National Bank,
Gandhi Nagar Branch, Delhi, in February, 1997. He has deposed that vide
production­cum­seizure memo, dated 21.02.97, Ex.PW18/A, he handed over various
documents pertaining to M/s. V.V. Industries to Inspector B.K. Pradhan. xix)
PW­19 Sh. N.K.Aggarwal, P.S.O., C.F.S.L., CBI, New Delhi, who has examined the
various questioned documents and had compared the same with the specimen
handwritings and signatures of the accused persons. He has proved his report
dated 28.11.97 as Ex.PW19/1, and his supplementary report dated 26.02.99, as
Ex.PW19/2.
xx) PW­20 Sh. R.Kanan, who was posted as Chief Manager, Punjab National Bank,
Head Office, at Parliament Street, New Delhi. In the year 1992, he had
inspected the loan accounts at various branches of Punjab National Bank and
during inspection of the account of M/s. V.V. Industries, Shahdara at Gandhi
Nagar CBI Vs. R.S.Sharma etc.(CC No. 34/2009) Page 18 of 97 Special Judge,
CBI­01, Central, Delhi Branch, he observed that the borrower had preplanned to
cheat the bank. He had deposed about the manner in which the accused persons
had connived together and had cheated the bank. He has also deposed about
various guidelines, rules and procedure, which were not followed by the bank
officials, in connivance with the other accused persons. He has also stated
that each officer has contributed towards facilitating the borrower. This
witness has also narrated the general procedure for dealing with the loan
applications of the intending borrowers. xxi) PW­21 Sh. J.C.Prabhakar,
Additional Superintendent of Police, CBI, who had conducted the investigations
of this case, after registration of the FIR on 21.07.1995, till 02.06.1996.
xxii) PW­22 Sh. B.K.Pradhan, Inspector, CBI, ACB, Delhi. He has conducted the
investigation of this case after transfer of the first investigating officer
DSP J.C. Prabhakar (PW­21).
22\. After completion of the prosecution evidence, the statements of the
accused were recorded, u/s 313 Cr.P.C., wherein, all of them have denied all
the incriminating evidence against them and have deposed that they are
innocent and have been falsely implicated in this case.
CBI Vs. R.S.Sharma etc.(CC No. 34/2009) Page 19 of 97 Special Judge, CBI­01,
Central, Delhi
23\. Accused Radhey Shyam Sharma, has further stated that he had discharged
his duties with diligence and sincerity and in case of V.V. Industries,
proposal was vetted and facts were verified by the various officers of the
bank and acting upon their reports, he sanctioned the limit of C.C.
(Hypothecation) of term loan (machinery), C.C. (Booked debts) and then D.D.
The borrower had paid back the entire dues of the bank. Sh. Subodh Kumar Gupta
was proprietor of the business and Pawan Kumar Gupta has stood as a guarantor
and none of them were related to him nor he had any direct or indirect
interest with them. He has further stated that the decision was taken upon
merits and after considering the relevant facts and material placed before
him. He has further stated that no question was ever raised by the bank about
his sanctioning limit to M/s. V.V. Industries and at that time, Sh. H.A.S.
Subramanian was working as chief manager of Punjab National Bank, Gandhi Nagar
Branch and he lodged FIR No.47/1995 at PS Gandhi Nagar, Delhi, on 23.03.1995,
imputing offences under section 120­B, 419, 468, 471 IPC, against him; Pawan
Kumar Gupta and Manoj Kumar Sharma. He has further stated that all the three
accused have already been acquitted in the said case, by the court of Sh. J.P.
Narayan, the then Ld. M.M., Karkardooma Courts, Delhi, vide order dated
01.07.2002.
CBI Vs. R.S.Sharma etc.(CC No. 34/2009) Page 20 of 97 Special Judge, CBI­01,
Central, Delhi
24\. Accused Pawan Kumar Gupta, has also stated that he stood as guarantor for
Subodh Kumar Gupta, Proprietor of M/s. V.V. Industries, for his loan
transactions and apart from that, he had done no other transaction. He has
further stated that the bank has never issued any notice to him, alleging any
default committed by Subodh Kumar Gupta and the dispute had already been
settled between the bank and Sh. Subodh Kumar Gupta, as he had already paid
the dues of the bank.
25\. Accused Ashok Luthra, has also stated that he was a qualified engineer
and was posted as small scale industries officer at Punjab National Bank,
Kirti Nagar, Delhi and was looking after the work of 10 to 12 branches of the
bank, in the year 1990. He used to visit the branches on specific requests and
after submitting his technical report, he used to return to his headquarter
branch at Kirti Nagar. He has further stated that he used to assist the branch
manager on technical aspect of the loan proposal and there is nothing wrong in
his technical report Ex.PW20/D­2. He has further stated that he highlighted
the actual facts in the report, which were found on inspection at the site of
the unit. He has not concealed any fact in the report and CBI Vs. R.S.Sharma
etc.(CC No. 34/2009) Page 21 of 97 Special Judge, CBI­01, Central, Delhi he
has mentioned all the positive and negative features of the project in his
report. He has further stated that his role was confined to give technical
assistance to the branch and it was not his duty to verify the genuineness of
the documents submitted by the borrower. He, as technical officer, has no role
in processing/ recommending / sanctioning / disbursement of the loan by the
branch. He has further stated that it is the prerogative of the branch officer
to accept or reject his advice and branch manager was not bound by the advice
of the technical officer. It was the job of the branch officials to take
appropriate independent decision on any loan proposal. He has further stated
that the branch had sanctioned and released the loan, ignoring the
stipulations made by him in his technical report and his suggestions in the
report were not considered by Gandhi Nagar Branch, while recommending /
sanctioning /disbursing loan to M/s. V.V. Industries.
26\. Accused D.K. Parashar, has stated that he never recommended any proposal
for sanction of loan to M/s. V.V. Industries, as he was neither posted nor
worked as functional manager.
CBI Vs. R.S.Sharma etc.(CC No. 34/2009) Page 22 of 97 Special Judge, CBI­01,
Central, Delhi
27\. Accused Manoj Kumar Sharma, has stated that he was never involved in any
of the alleged transactions.
28\. Accused Arvind Kumar Sharma, has also stated that he had not opened any
account as somebody else had opened the account by forging his signatures. He
has further stated that none of the accused were known to him, till the time
of his appearance in the court. He came to know about the identity of the
accused persons, for the first time, in the court, when he was summoned to
face the trial in the present case. He was never involved in any of the
alleged transactions.
29\. Accused Suresh Chand Gupta, has stated that no wrong has been committed
by him and he has been falsely implicated in this case.
30\. No witness has been examined by any of the accused persons, in his
defence, despite opportunity.
31\. After completion of trial, final arguments were addressed at length, by
Shri Praneet Sharma, Ld. Sr. PP for the CBI; Shri A.K.Singh, Advocate, for
accused R.S.Sharma (A­1); Shri CBI Vs. R.S.Sharma etc.(CC No. 34/2009) Page 23
of 97 Special Judge, CBI­01, Central, Delhi P.K.Sharma, Advocate for accused
Pawan Kumar Gupta (A­3) and Suresh Chand Gupta, (A­8); Shri I.D. Vaid,
Advocate, for accused Ashok Luthra (A­4); Shri R.P.Sharma, Advocate, for
accused D.K.Parashar (A­5); Sh. Neeraj Shrotriya, Advocate for accused Manoj
Kumar Sharma (A­6) and Shri R.P.Arora, Advocate, for accused Arvind Kumar
Sharma (A­7).
ARGUMENTS ON BEHALF OF THE CBI / PROSECUTION
32\. It has been argued by Shri Praneet Sharma, Ld. Sr. PP for the CBI that
all the accused persons have connived together and have cheated Punjab
National Bank for a total amount of Rs.18,51,925/­. He has argued that accused
Subodh Kumar Gupta (A­2) (since deceased) moved a loan application on behalf
of M/s. V.V. Industries, a small scale industry, as its proprietor, for
sanction of a term loan of Rs.4.10 lacs, Cash Credit (Hypothecation) limit for
Rs.10 lacs, book debts Rs.3 lacs and DD (cheque) Rs. 2 lacs, vide application,
dated 17.07.90, Ex.PW.16/5 and alongwith the said loan application, he
submitted forged and fabricated quotations and receipts issued in favour of
M/s. V.V. Industries, by a fictitious firm, in the name of M/s. Gupta
Engineering Works. Accused Pawan Kumar Gupta (A­3), proprietor of M/s. Kavita
Metals, the brother of accused Subodh CBI Vs. R.S.Sharma etc.(CC No. 34/2009)
Page 24 of 97 Special Judge, CBI­01, Central, Delhi Kumar Gupta, executed
these quotations & receipts and stood as guarantor for M/s. V.V. Industries.
33\. He has further argued that co­accused Manoj Kumar Sharma (A­6) had opened
a fictitious current account in the name of the fictitious firm M/s. Gupta
Engineering Works, 1/422, Friends Colony, Street No.6, Shahdra, Delhi­32, at
Punjab National Bank, Gandhi Nagar, bearing current account No. 5011. For
opening the said account, accused Manoj Kumar Sharma, impersonated himself as
'Manoj Kumar Gupta', the proprietor of the aforesaid firm. Accused Manoj Kumar
Sharma was introduced as 'Manoj Kumar Gupta', the proprietor of M/s. Gupta
Engineering Works, by co­accused Arvind Kumar Sharma (A­7), proprietor of M/s.
Dayal Engineering Works.
34\. Ld. Sr. PP for the CBI has further argued that the loan application of
accused Subodh Kumar Gupta(A­2) was marked to co­accused Ashok Luthra (A­4),
who was working as Small Scale Industries Officer at that time, for inspection
and preparation of a technical feasibility report. Accused Ashok Luthra (A­4)
prepared a false report Ex.P/A­6, on 24.07.1990 and on the basis of the said
report, accused D.K.Parashar (A­5) alongwith senior CBI Vs. R.S.Sharma etc.(CC
No. 34/2009) Page 25 of 97 Special Judge, CBI­01, Central, Delhi manager
K.N.Zariwala recommended the sanction of various loan facilities to M/s. V.V.
Industries, vide their recommendation (Ex.P­
4) Ex.PW.16/11, dated 24.07.1990. Accused D.K.Parashar had deliberately not
verified the fake quotations and the receipts issued by M/s. Gupta Engineering
Works, in favour of M/s. V.V. Industries, which were submitted by accused
Subodh Kumar Gupta (since deceased), with his loan application. He has also
not mentioned the fact of availing of loan by his sister concern, namely, M/s.
Kavita Metals, of which, his brother Pawan Kumar Gupta was the proprietor.
35\. Ld. Sr. PP for the CBI has further argued that on the basis of the false
report and recommendations submitted by accused Ashok Luthra and D.K.Parashar,
accused R.S.Sharma (A­1) sanctioned the facilities and ordered the amount to
be released to M/s. V.V. Industries, on 25.07.90 itself, without following the
rules and regulations of the bank. Accused R.S.Sharma (A­1) has visited the
site alongwith co­accused Ashok Luthra and he observed various irregularities
in the functioning of M/s. V.V. Industries, as pointed out in the report
Ex.P/A­6, submitted by co­ accused Ashok Luthra, SSIO. Furthermore, various
terms and conditions were also mentioned in the recommendation dated CBI Vs.
R.S.Sharma etc.(CC No. 34/2009) Page 26 of 97 Special Judge, CBI­01, Central,
Delhi 24.07.1990, Ex.PW16/11, and it was specifically mentioned that the
facilities may be extended to the borrower only after fulfilling of the
conditions, but, still, accused R.S.Sharma (A­1) sanctioned and released
various amounts to M/s. V.V. Industries. Furthermore, accused R.S.Sharma (A­1)
was not authorized to sanction various loan facilities to M/s. V.V.
Industries, as per the rules of the bank, as the brother of accused Subodh
Kumar Gupta, namely, accused Pawan Kumar Gupta was running another firm in the
name and style of M/s. Kavita Metals, as its proprietor and the said firm had
also availed a loan facility of Rs.14 lacs, from the same bank and therefore,
only the Zonal Manager was competent to sanction the loan facilities to M/s.
V.V. Industries. But, accused R.S.Sharma had deliberately not forwarded the
loan application to the zonal office and sanctioned the loan facilities to
M/s. V.V. Industries himself and got various amounts released in its favour.
36\. Ld. Sr. PP for the CBI has further argued that accused Suresh Chand
Gupta(A­8), is the father of accused Subodh Kumar Gupta (A­2) (Since deceased)
and Pawan Kumar Gupta (A­3) and he alongwith co­accused Subodh Kumar Gupta
opened a fictitious bank account bearing No. 1236 in the name of the CBI Vs.
R.S.Sharma etc.(CC No. 34/2009) Page 27 of 97 Special Judge, CBI­01, Central,
Delhi fictitious firm Rajiv Metals. Suresh Chand Gupta signed the account
opening form Ex.PW.5/B­1 & Ex.PW.5/B­2, as introducer, whereas, his son,
accused Subodh Kumar Gupta (A­
2) signed the specimen signature card Ex.PW.5/B­3, as the proprietor of Rajiv
Metals, Shri Rajiv Kumar and he signed the specimen signature card as 'R.
Kumar'. These facts have been corroborated by the CFSL report Ex.PW.19/1.
37\. Ld. Sr. PP for the CBI has further argued that on 25.07.1990, accused
R.S.Sharma got released an amount of Rs.4.23 lacs in favour of M/s. Gupta
Engineering Works, vide demand draft / cash order, Ex.P­5 (admitted document)
and the said demand draft was duly deposited in the fictitious account of M/s.
Gupta Engineering Works, by accused Subodh Kumar Gupta and was duly credited
in its account on 27.07.1990. The statement of account of M/s. Gupta
Engineering Works Ex.PW.11/B, corroborates this fact.
38\. Ld. Sr. PP for the CBI has further argued that after availing the loan
facilitate, accused Subodh Kumar Gupta transferred an amount of Rs.6.45 lacs
from the account of M/s. V.V. Industries to the account of M/s. Kavita Metals
of his brother, co­accused CBI Vs. R.S.Sharma etc.(CC No. 34/2009) Page 28 of
97 Special Judge, CBI­01, Central, Delhi Pawan Kumar Gupta (A­3), vide cheques
Ex.PW12/B and Ex.PW12/C, for Rs.5.20 lacs and Rs.1.25 lacs, respectively, by
availing the overdraft facility. He further transferred a total amount of
Rs.7,83,925/­ from the account of M/s. V.V. Industries to the fictitious
account of Rajiv Metals (a fictitious company, floated by him), vide three
cheques for Rs.3.20 lacs; Rs.2.28,925/­; and Rs.2.35 lacs, respectively. The
accused Subodh Kumar Gupta had also withdrawn various amounts, by way of self
cheques Ex.PW.5/E­1 to Ex.PW.5/E­10 and Ex.PW5/G­1 and Ex.PW.5/G­
2\. The bank statements of M/s. Gupta Engineering Works, Rajiv Metals and
Kavita Metals have corroborated these facts.
39\. Ld. Sr. PP for the CBI has further argued that accused Subodh Kumar Gupta
(since deceased), in connivance with his other co­accused, has siphoned off a
total amount of Rs.18,51,925/­ and has utilized the same for his own use and
has cheated his banker Punjab National Bank, Gandhi Nagar, for the said
amount.
40\. Ld. Sr. PP for the CBI has further argued that the prosecution witnesses
have duly proved the various documents on record and have also deposed about
the individual roles of the CBI Vs. R.S.Sharma etc.(CC No. 34/2009) Page 29 of
97 Special Judge, CBI­01, Central, Delhi accused persons, in the entire
conspiracy and have successfully proved the prosecution case against them.
Therefore, all the accused persons be held guilty and convicted for the
offences charged against them.
41\. The Ld. Sr. PP for the CBI has relied upon the following judgments, in
support of his above contentions: (I) Parkash Singh Badal & others vs. State
of Punjab & Ors., reported as (2007) 1 SCC 1;
(ii) Smt. Neera Yadav vs. CBI (Bharat Sangh), reported as 2006 (2) RCR (Crl.)
765;
(iii) Runu Ghosh vs. CBI, reported as 2011 SCC Online Del.5501;
(iv) Mohd. Hadi Raja Vs. State of Bihar & another, reported as AIR 1998 SC
1945.
ARGUMENTS ON BEHALF OF THE ACCUSED R.S.SHARMA (A­1)
42\. On the other hand, Sh. A.K.Singh, Advocate, for the accused R.S.Sharma
(A­1) has argued that accused R.S.Sharma sanctioned the loan facilities to
M/s. V.V.Industries, on the basis of the report, dated 24.07.90, submitted by
the SSIO Sh. Ashok Luthra, Ex.P/A­6 and the recommendations, dated 24.07.90,
submitted by the loan officer D.K. Parashar and the Sr. Manager Sh. K.N.
Zariwala and no prosecution witness has deposed about flouting of any rules by
accused R.S.Sharma. He has further CBI Vs. R.S.Sharma etc.(CC No. 34/2009)
Page 30 of 97 Special Judge, CBI­01, Central, Delhi argued that even the rules
or the guidelines, which were allegedly flouted by accused R.S.Sharma, have
not been placed on record and none of the prosecution witnesses have disclosed
any specific rule or procedure or guidelines of the Bank, which has been
flouted by accused R.S. Sharma. Furthermore, the sanctioning of the loan
facilities was well within the powers of accused R.S. Sharma.
43\. The Ld. Defence counsel has further argued that no witness has been
examined by the prosecution to prove the fact that the report, dated 24.07.90,
Ex.P/A­6, submitted by the SSIO and the recommendation, dated 24.07.90, Ex.P­4
(Ex.PW16/11), on the basis of which the loan facilities were granted to M/s.
V.V.Industries, were false. No shortcomings in the report have been mentioned
by any of the prosecution witnesses. Therefore, any lapse on the part of the
government officials, regarding the non­abiding of some rules of procedure,
while sanctioning various loan facilities to M/s. V.V.Industries, cannot give
any criminality to their official acts to attract the provisions of Section 13
(1)(d), read with 13(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988.
CBI Vs. R.S.Sharma etc.(CC No. 34/2009) Page 31 of 97 Special Judge, CBI­01,
Central, Delhi ARGUMENTS ON BEHALF OF ACCUSED PAWAN KUMAR GUPTA (A­3) AND
SURESH CHAND GUPTA (A­8)
44\. Sh. P.K.Sharma, Advocate, for the accused Pawan Kumar Gupta (A­3) and
Suresh Chand Gupta (A­8) has argued that there is no evidence on record to
prove any conspiracy between the accused persons and any amount of suspicion
will not prove the conspiracy between the accused persons. He has argued that
the chain of events, to prove the conspiracy, is broken at various stages.
45\. He has further argued that the alleged incident had taken place in the
month of July 1990, but, the FIR was registered after a delay of about five
years, on 21.07.1995. The prosecution has miserably failed to explain this
delay of about five years.
46\. He has further argued that no complaint was ever lodged by any of the
bank officials and the FIR was registered only on the basis of some source
information. But, the said source information was never reduced into writing
and was never subjected to any kind of verification. He has further argued
that no preliminary inquiry was conducted on the basis of the alleged source
information. It was not ascertained by the CBI, before CBI Vs. R.S.Sharma
etc.(CC No. 34/2009) Page 32 of 97 Special Judge, CBI­01, Central, Delhi
registration of the FIR that another FIR bearing No. 47/95 had already been
registered at PS Gandhi Nagar, against some of the accused persons, for the
similar offences and the same was being investigated by the police officers of
PS Gandhi Nagar and therefore, they should not have registered a fresh FIR in
the present case. He has further argued that all the aforesaid acts and the
registration of the FIR in the present case was done by the CBI, in violation
of its own Manual. He has further argued that even the FIR Ex.PW21/A, could
not be proved on record, as the original FIR was never produced before the
court during the trial.
47\. The Ld. Defence counsel has further argued that PW­20 Sh.
R.Kanan had allegedly inspected the records and detected the alleged fraud and
he submitted a report, but his report is not on record. He has further argued
that PW­20 R. Kanan was not even posted in Delhi, in the year 1990 and
therefore, there was no occasion for him to inspect any bank or its branches
in Delhi. He has further argued that even in his deposition before the court,
he has failed to point out any specific shortcoming, either in the SSIO
report, dated 24.07.90, Ex.P/A­6 or the recommendation, dated 24.07.90, Ex.P­4
(Ex.PW16/11) and has also failed to CBI Vs. R.S.Sharma etc.(CC No. 34/2009)
Page 33 of 97 Special Judge, CBI­01, Central, Delhi specify the specific
provisions of rules, which were flouted by the bank officials. On the
contrary, he has admitted, in his cross­ examination, that accused R.S. Sharma
was within his powers to sanction the limits to M/s. V.V. Industries.
48\. It is further argued by the Ld. Defence counsel that there is no loss to
any bank, as the Punjab National Bank had already settled its dispute with
M/s. V.V. Industries and the entire loan amount stands paid by the accused
persons. He has further argued that no criminality can be attached to the acts
of accused Pawan Kumar Gupta (A­3), who was only a guarantor to M/s. V.V.
Industries and executed the Guarantee Agreement on 25.07.1990. Prior to
25.07.1990, no knowledge or act can be imputed to accused Pawan Kumar Gupta
and therefore, it cannot be alleged that accused Pawan Kumar Gupta was also a
party to the criminal conspiracy.
49\. The Ld. Defence counsel has further argued that there is no cogent
evidence to prove the conspiracy between the accused persons. He has further
argued that the bank account in the name of Rajiv Metals and M/s Gupta
Engineering Works, were opened in the month of February, 1990 and the
prosecution has CBI Vs. R.S.Sharma etc.(CC No. 34/2009) Page 34 of 97 Special
Judge, CBI­01, Central, Delhi failed to prove, by leading cogent evidence that
these two companies were fictitious companies. He has further argued that the
original record of bank account No. 5011, in the name of M/s. Gupta
Engineering Works could not be produced or proved during the trial and there
is no evidence on record to show that accused Subodh Kumar Gupta (A­2) (since
deceased) had impersonated himself as "R. Kumar" for opening the bank account
in the name of Rajiv Metals. He has further argued that the documents
containing the admitted signatures of PW­4 Suresh Chand Gupta, actual
proprietor of M/s. Gupta Engineering Works, were never taken by the CBI during
investigations, for comparison with his forged signatures on questioned
documents. He has further argued that no separate charges for impersonation or
cheating have been alleged or framed against the accused Subodh Kumar Gupta
(A­2, since deceased), regarding opening of the bank account in the name of
Rajiv Metals, by impersonating as its proprietor Rajiv Kumar.
50\. The Ld. Defence counsel has further argued that during the
investigations, the specimen writings and signatures were obtained from
accused Pawan Kumar Gupta, wherein, he was directed to sign as "Suresh Chand
Gupta" and the same were CBI Vs. R.S.Sharma etc.(CC No. 34/2009) Page 35 of 97
Special Judge, CBI­01, Central, Delhi submitted to the CFSL, for comparison
and expert opinion. But, the admitted signatures of actual Suresh Chand Gupta
were never taken and were not sent to CFSL for comparison. He has further
argued that the CFSL report, dated 28.11.97, Ex.PW.19/1, has also mentioned
that for a thorough scientific examination and opinion, specimen and
admittedly genuine writings & signatures of alleged persons were required.
Therefore, the CFSL report Ex.PW19/1 & Ex.PW19/2, are not conclusive in
nature. Even otherwise, the CFSL reports are only a corroborative piece of
evidence and no conviction can be based, solely on the basis of the CFSL
reports. He has further argued that the CFSL reports, Ex.PW19/1 & Ex.PW19/2,
were duly received in the CBI office on 18.12.1997 and 10.03.1999,
respectively, and the same were available with the CBI, at the time of the
filing of the chargesheet, but, still these reports were not filed on record
with the chargesheet, for the reasons best known to the CBI.
51\. The Ld. Defence counsel has further argued that accused R.S. Sharma has
advanced the loan facilities to V.V. Industries as per his discretion, without
flouting any rule or guideline of the bank and sanctioning of the loan
facilities was not without public interest. Rather, it was the business of the
bank to advance CBI Vs. R.S.Sharma etc.(CC No. 34/2009) Page 36 of 97 Special
Judge, CBI­01, Central, Delhi loans and was in public interest. He has further
argued that the various loan facilities were advanced to M/s. V.V. Industries,
purely on business considerations and payments of several EMIs were also made
by M/s. V.V. Industries, but, lateron, they failed to make the payments of
EMIs on time and therefore, the present case was only a case of delayed
repayment of the loan amount. Furthermore, the matter has already been settled
by the accused persons with the bank, before the DRT and the entire loan
amount stands settled and paid by the accused persons and therefore, there is
no loss to the bank and no pecuniary advantage to any accused. Hence, no
criminality can be attached to the acts of any of the accused persons.
52\. The Ld. Defence counsel has further argued that the act of sanctioning of
loan facilities to M/s V.V. Industries was done by the bank officials, namely,
R.S. Sharma (A­1), Ashok Luthra (A­4) & D.K. Parashar (A­5), in their oficial
capacities, while discharging their official functions and in view of the
judgment of Hon'ble Supreme Court in Prof. N.K. Ganguly's case, the CBI should
have obtained the sanction under Section 197 Cr.P.C also and therefore, the
absence of the sanction under Section 197 Cr.P.C has vitiated the entire
trial.
CBI Vs. R.S.Sharma etc.(CC No. 34/2009) Page 37 of 97 Special Judge, CBI­01,
Central, Delhi
53\. The Ld. Defence counsel has relied upon the following judgments, in
support of his above contentions:
(i) T.T.Antony vs. State of Kerala, reported as, 2001 AIR (SC) 2637;
(ii) Prof. N.K.Ganguly vs. CBI, New Delhi, reported as, 2016 Cr.LJ 371;
(iii) CBI Vs. Ashok Kumar Aggarwal, reported as, 2014 AIR (SC) 827;
(iv) Kehar Singh & Ors. vs. State (Delhi Administration), reported as, (1989)
3 SCC 609;
(v) C. Chenga Reddy & Ors. vs. State of A.P., reported as, (1996) 10 SCC 193;
(vi) S. Gopal Reddy vs. State of Andhra Pradesh, reported as, 1996 AIR (SC)
2184;
(vii) State vs. S.B. Yadav, Crl. Rev. P. 224/2014, Decided on 29th July, 2016.
(viii) Central Bureau of Investigation Hyderabad vs. K. Narayana Rao, reported
as, 2012 Cr.L.J 4610;
(ix) A. Sivaprakash vs. State of Kerala, reported as, 2016 AIR (SC) 2287;
(x) State of Punjab vs. Labh Singh, reported as, I 2015 SLT 120;
(xi) International Advanced Research Centre for Power Metallurgy and New
Materials (ARCI) vs. Nimra Cerglass Technics (P) Ltd. & Anr., reported as, VII
(2015) SLT 477;
(xii) Vinod Chandra Semwal vs. Special Police Establishment, Ujjain, reported
as, 2015 Cri.L.J. 3606.
CBI Vs. R.S.Sharma etc.(CC No. 34/2009) Page 38 of 97 Special Judge, CBI­01,
Central, Delhi ARGUMENTS ON BEHALF OF ACCUSED ASHOK LUTHRA (A­4)
54\. Shri I.D.Vaid, Advocate, for accused Ashok Luthra (A­4) has argued that
accused Ashok Luthra was posted as Small Scale Industries Officer and was
looking after about 10 to 12 branches of the bank, for the purposes of
preparing the technical feasibility reports, in respect of the loan
applications of the borrowers. In this case also, he had visited the factory
premises of M/s. V.V. Industries alongwith co­accused R.S.Sharma (A­1) and
prepared his report Ex.P/A­6 (an admitted document). He has further argued
that the report Ex.P/A­6 was prepared correctly and this report had mentioned
various shortcomings in the loan proposal of M/s. V.V. Industries and it was
for the bank officials, posted at Gandhi Nagar branch of PNB to ask for
necessary documents from M/s. V.V. Industries, before sanctioning and
releasing the loan to it.
55\. The Ld. Defence counsel has further argued that the role of accused Ashok
Luthra was only confined to preparation of a technical feasibility report of
the project and he was neither the recommending authority nor the sanctioning
authority and therefore, no criminality can be attributed to his acts.
CBI Vs. R.S.Sharma etc.(CC No. 34/2009) Page 39 of 97 Special Judge, CBI­01,
Central, Delhi Furthermore, no prosecution witness has deposed that the report
prepared by accused Ashok Luthra, Ex.P/A­6, was a false or incorrect report or
he prepared this report to favour the accused Subodh Kumar Gupta (since
deceased) or his firm M/s. V.V. Industries. Furthermore, no evidence has come
on record to connect him with the alleged conspiracy. Therefore, the act of
accused Ashok Luthra, in preparing the correct technical feasibility report
Ex.P/A­6, does not attract the provisions of Section 13 (1)(d) of The
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988.
56\. The Ld. Defence counsel has relied upon the following judgments in
support of his above contentions :
(i) V.C.Shukla & Ors. vs. State (Delhi Administration)", reported as "AIR 1980
Supreme Court 1382";
(ii) John Pandian vs. State, rep. By Inspector of Police T.Nadu, reported as
"2011 (1) Crimes 1 (Supreme Court)".
ARGUMENTS ON BEHALF OF ACCUSED D.K.PARASHAR(A­5)
57\. Shri R.P.Sharma, Advocate, for accused D.K.Parashar (A­5) has argued that
accused D.K.Parashar was posted at Gandhi Nagar Branch of PNB as a Loan
Officer and he was having no authority, either to sanction the loan facilities
or to release the loan amount to M/s. V.V. Industries. He has further argued
that CBI Vs. R.S.Sharma etc.(CC No. 34/2009) Page 40 of 97 Special Judge,
CBI­01, Central, Delhi as a loan officer, the accused D.K.Parashar, alongwith
witness K.N.Zariwala, Senior Manager (since deceased) had prepared the
confidential reports Ex.P/A­3 and Ex.P/A­4 (admitted documents) and also
prepared the recommendation dated 24.07.1990, Ex.PW.16/11, on the basis of the
report of S.S.I.O. Ashok Luthra (A­4), Ex.PW.P/A­6 and these reports were
prepared correctly and the general terms and conditions were prescribed by
them in the recommendation, prior to sanction or release of the loan amount to
the borrower M/s. V.V. Industries. Therefore, it was for accused R.S.Sharma,
either to accept or reject the recommendation and in case, he had accepted the
recommendation, he should have asked for fulfillment of the terms and
conditions mentioned in the report of the SSIO and the recommendation
Ex.PW.16/11, prior to the sanction or release of the loan amount.
58\. The Ld. Defence counsel has further argued that the confidential reports
Ex.P/A­3 & Ex.P/A­4 and the recommendation dated 24.07.90, Ex.PW16/11, were
correctly prepared by accused D.K. Parashar and no prosecution witness has
proved on record that these reports were factually incorrect.
CBI Vs. R.S.Sharma etc.(CC No. 34/2009) Page 41 of 97 Special Judge, CBI­01,
Central, Delhi
59\. The Ld. Defence counsel has further argued that the sanction order
Ex.PW.1/A was also passed in a mechanical manner without perusal of entire
record and the same cannot be considered as a valid or legally sustainable
sanction order, under Section 19 of The Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988, to
prosecute the accused in the present case.
ARGUMENTS ON BEHALF OF ACCUSED MANOJ KUMAR SHARMA (A­6)
60\. Sh. Neeraj Shrotriya, Advocate for accused Manoj Kumar Sharma (A­6) has
argued that no prosecution witness has identified the accused Manoj Kumar
Sharma (A­6), as the impersonator Manoj Kumar Gupta, who allegedly opened the
fictitious account in the name of M/s. Gupta Engineering Works. He has further
argued that none of the prosecution witness has identified the accused Manoj
Kumar Sharma or his introducer, accused Arvind Kumar Sharma, in the court,
during the trial and therefore, the identity of the person, who impersonated
as Manoj Kumar Gupta, could not be established, during the trial. He has
further argued that accused Manoj Kumar Sharma was also falsely implicated in
case FIR No. 47/95 of PS Gandhi Nagar, for the same offences. But, even in
that case, he had been acquitted CBI Vs. R.S.Sharma etc.(CC No. 34/2009) Page
42 of 97 Special Judge, CBI­01, Central, Delhi by the Ld. Trial Court, vide
judgment dated 01.07.2002. Therefore, he cannot be tried again, in the present
case, for the same offence.
ARGUMENTS ON BEHALF OF ACCUSED ARVIND KUMAR SHARMA (A­7)
61\. Shri R.P.Arora, Advocate, for accused Arvind Kumar Sharma (A­7) has
argued that no evidence has come on record against the accused Arvind Kumar
Sharma to implicate him in the alleged conspiracy. He has further argued that
the only role attributed to accused Arvind Kumar Sharma is that he introduced
the co­ accused Manoj Kumar Sharma as 'Manoj Kumar Gupta', the proprietor of
M/s. Gupta Engineering Works, when co­accused Manoj Kumar Sharma opened the
fictitious current account No. 5011 in the name of M/s. Gupta Engineering
Works, as its proprietor.
62\. He has further argued that PW­9 Sh. Nirbhay Kumar and PW­10 Sh. Vinod
Kumar Garg have deposed about the opening of the current account No. 5011 in
the name of M/s. Gupta Engineering Works through its proprietor Manoj Kumar
Gupta, but, none of these witnesses has deposed anything about CBI Vs.
R.S.Sharma etc.(CC No. 34/2009) Page 43 of 97 Special Judge, CBI­01, Central,
Delhi accused Arvind Kumar Sharma and they have not even identified him, as
the person, who introduced accused Manoj Kumar Sharma as Manoj Kumar Gupta,
proprietor of M/s. Gupta Engineering Works. Furthermore, the original account
opening form of account No. 5011, has not been produced on record during the
trial and only a photocopy of the same has been placed on record as Mark
PW9/X. He has further argued that the said document was seized by PW­14 SI
Narottam Singh of PS Gandhi Nagar, during the investigation of case FIR No.
47/95 of PS Gandhi Nagar and the same were placed with the charge sheet in the
said case. In the said case, all the accused persons had already been
acquitted by the concerned court vide Judgment dated 01.07.2002 and even the
record of the said case had already been destroyed. During the investigations
or the trial of the present case, the CBI has not made any efforts to produce
the original documents and therefore, the same could not be proved during the
trial. He has further argued that there is no evidence on record to show any
involvement of accused Arvind Kumar Sharma in the alleged offences.
63\. The Ld. Defence counsel has relied upon the following judgments, in
support of his above contentions:
CBI Vs. R.S.Sharma etc.(CC No. 34/2009) Page 44 of 97 Special Judge, CBI­01,
Central, Delhi
(i) Damodar vs. State of Rajasthan, reported as AIR 2003, Supreme Court 4414;
(ii) Velmurugan, Vs. State, reported as 2008 Crl. LJ 4511 (Madras High Court).
OBSERVATIONS / FINDINGS
64\. I have carefully perused the case file and I have given my considered
thoughts to the arguments addressed by the Ld. Sr. PP for the CBI and the Ld.
Defence counsels and I have also perused the various judgments, cited by them.
65\. In order to understand the alleged conspiracy between the accused
persons, let us first understand the legal position, regarding the offence of
'conspiracy'. It has been held by the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India, in case
titled as, "K.R.Purushothaman Vs. State of Kerala", reported as (2005) 12
Supreme Court Cases 631, as under :
11\. Section 120­A IPC defines "criminal conspiracy". According to this
Section when two or more persons agree to do, or cause to be done (i) an
illegal act, or (ii) an act which is not illegal by illegal means, such an
agreement is designated a criminal conspiracy. In Major E.G.Barsay V. State of
Bombay Subba Rao J., speaking for the Court has said :(SCR p.228) "The gist of
the offence is an agreement to break the law. The parties to such an agreement
will be guilty of criminal CBI Vs. R.S.Sharma etc.(CC No. 34/2009) Page 45 of
97 Special Judge, CBI­01, Central, Delhi conspiracy, though the illegal act
agreed to be done has not been done. So too, it is not an ingredient of the
offence that all the parties should agree to do a single illegal act. It may
comprise the commission of a number of acts."
12\. In State V. Nalini it was observed by S.S.M. Quadri, J. at JT para 677:
(SCC pp.568­69, para 662) "In reaching the stage of meeting of minds, two or
more persons share information about doing an illegal act or a legal act by
illegal means. This is the first stage where each is said to have knowledge of
a plan for committing an illegal act or a legal act by illegal means. Among
those sharing the information some or all may form an intention to do an
illegal act or a legal act by illegal means. Those who do form the requisite
intention would be parties to the agreement and would be conspirators but
those who drop out cannot be roped in as collaborators on the basis of mere
knowledge unless they commit acts or omissions from which a guilty common
intention can be inferred. It is not necessary that all the conspirators
should participate from the inception to the end of the conspiracy; some may
join the conspiracy after the time when such intention was first entertained
by any one of them and some others may quit from the conspiracy. All of them
cannot but be treated as conspirators. Where in pursuance of the agreement the
conspirators commit offences individually or adopt illegal means to do a legal
act which has a nexus with the object of conspiracy, all of them will be
liable for such offences even if some of them have not actively participated
in the commission of those offences."
13\. To constitute a conspiracy, meeting of minds of two or more persons for
doing an illegal act or an act by illegal means is the first and primary
condition and it is not necessary that all the conspirators must know each and
every detail of the conspiracy. Neither is it necessary that every one of the
conspirators take active part in the CBI Vs. R.S.Sharma etc.(CC No. 34/2009)
Page 46 of 97 Special Judge, CBI­01, Central, Delhi commission of each and
every conspiratorial acts. The agreement amongst the conspirators can be
inferred by necessary implication. In most of the cases, the conspiracies are
proved by the circumstantial evidence, as the conspiracy is seldom an open
affair. The existence of conspiracy and its objects are usually deduced from
the circumstances of the case and the conduct of the accused involved in the
conspiracy. While appreciating the evidence of the conspiracy, it is incumbent
on the court to keep in mind the well­known rule governing circumstantial
evidence viz. each and every incriminating circumstance must be clearly
established by reliable evidence and the circumstances proved must form a
chain of events from which the only irresistible conclusion about the guilt of
the accused can be safely drawn, and no other hypothesis against the guilt is
possible. Criminal conspiracy is an independent offence in the Penal Code. The
unlawful agreement is sine qua non for constituting offence under the Penal
Code and not an accomplishment. Conspiracy consists of the scheme or
adjustment between two or more persons which may be express or implied or
partly express and partly implied. Mere knowledge, even discussion, of the
plan would not per se constitute conspiracy. The offence of conspiracy shall
continue till the termination of agreement.
14\. Suspicion cannot take the place of legal proof and prosecution would be
required to prove each and every circumstance in the chain of circumstances so
as to complete the chain. It is true that in most of the cases, it is not
possible to prove the agreement between the conspirators by direct evidence
but the same can be inferred from the circumstances giving rise to conclusive
or irresistible inference of an agreement between two or more persons to
commit an offence. It is held in Noor Mohd. Mohd. Yusuf Momin V. State of
Maharashtra, that: (SCC pp.699­700, para 7) CBI Vs. R.S.Sharma etc.(CC No.
34/2009) Page 47 of 97 Special Judge, CBI­01, Central, Delhi "[I]n most cases
proof of conspiracy is largely inferential though the inference must be
founded on solid facts. Surrounding circumstances and antecedent and
subsequent conduct, among other factors, constitute relevant material."
15\. It is cumulative effect of the proved circumstances which should be taken
into account in determining the guilt of the accused. Of course, each one of
the circumstances should be proved beyond reasonable doubt. The acts or
conduct of the parties must be conscious and clear enough to infer their
concurrence as to the common design and its execution. While speaking for the
Bench it is held by P. Venkatarama Reddi, J. in State (NCT of Delhi) V. Navjot
Sandhu (p.63) as follows: (SCC pp.691­92, para 103) "103. We do not think that
the theory of agency can be extended thus far, that is to say, to find all the
conspirators guilty of the actual offences committed in execution of the
common design even if such offences were ultimately committed by some of them,
without the participation of others. We are of the view that those who
committed the offences pursuant to the conspiracy by indulging in various
overt acts will be individually liable for those offences in addition to being
liable for criminal conspiracy; but, the non­ participant conspirators cannot
be found guilty of the offence or offences committed by the other
conspirators. There is hardly any scope for the application of the principle
of agency in order to find the conspirators guilty of a substantive offence
not committed by them. Criminal offences and punishments therefor are governed
by the statute. The offender will be liable only if he comes within the plain
terms of the penal statute. Criminal liability for an offence cannot be
fastened by way of analogy or by extension of a common law principle.
(emphasis supplied by me) CBI Vs. R.S.Sharma etc.(CC No. 34/2009) Page 48 of
97 Special Judge, CBI­01, Central, Delhi
66\. In the present case, in order to prove the conspiracy between the accused
persons, the prosecution has examined PW­20 Sh. R. Kannan, who was posted as
Chief Inspector in Punjab National Bank Head Office at 5, Parliament Street,
New Delhi, in the year 1992. He has deposed that in June, 1992, he was
instructed to inspect the branch office at Minto Road, New Delhi and he
inspected all loan accounts and in certain accounts, there were suspected
frauds. Thereafter, he secured permission to inspect the branch at Regal
Building, New Delhi and Civil Lines, Delhi and during the inspection at Civil
Lines, he came to know about the involvement of the borrower in other branch
of Punjab National Bank. Thereafter, he got permission to verify those
accounts at Gandhi Nagar branch and Darya Ganj Branch and he inspected the
Gandhi Nagar branch, during September­ October 1992. He has further deposed
that he verified about twenty accounts, one of which was of M/s. V.V.
Industries, Shahdara. In those accounts, the borrower had pre­planned to cheat
the bank. They induced the bank to sanction a term loan for purchase of
machinery and got the amount by way of pay order in the name of the firm of
machinery supplier. One of the machinery supplier was M/s. Gupta Industries of
Friends Colony, CBI Vs. R.S.Sharma etc.(CC No. 34/2009) Page 49 of 97 Special
Judge, CBI­01, Central, Delhi Shahdara Branch. The branch did not forward the
pay order directly to the supplier, but handed over the same to the borrower.
67\. PW­20 Sh. R.Kannan has further deposed that as per the bank guidelines,
the payment is made to the supplier, after collecting the advance payment from
the borrower. In this case, the borrower had stated that they paid an advance
of Rs.1,25,000/­, but the branch did not verify the truth of the same and
issued the pay order in the name of the supplier. The borrower took the pay
order and opened a fictitious account in the name of the supplier in a
different bank and encashed the same for their benefit, without purchasing any
machinery. Thereafter, they approached the bank again for sanction of working
capital limit, called cash credit of Rs.10,00,000/­. Their need for working
capital was assessed by the Technical Field Officer designed as Small Scale
Industries Officer at Rs.18.50 lacs, assuming the annual sales of rupees one
crore. The borrower has to bring margin money of Rs.8.50 lacs for sanctioning
the cash credit limit and they declared to have secured about Rs.1,25,000/­ by
way of unsecured loan from friends and the balance amount as their own
capital. These facts were not verified by the bank. The borrower CBI Vs.
R.S.Sharma etc.(CC No. 34/2009) Page 50 of 97 Special Judge, CBI­01, Central,
Delhi produced invoices from their own group firm owned by the brother of the
borrower, stating to have purchased raw­materials. Thereafter, the bank
released a cash credit limit of rupees ten lacs in two installments.
Thereafter, the borrower never operated the account. In June, 1992, the
successor Manager visited the unit and it was found closed and was not
operating. He got the unit opened and found few items of junk machinery and
not the machinery financed by the bank. In this way, the borrower had cheated
the bank.
68\. PW­20 Sh. R.Kannan has further deposed that the fraud had happened
because the laid down procedures and safeguards of the bank with reference to
initial pre­sanction appraisal were not followed. Whatever statements the
borrower had made in the application were accepted as gospel truth at its face
value. The previous antecedents of the borrower were not verified as they were
already in business and were not young entrepreneurs entering in new business.
He has further deposed that the report about the dealings of the borrower with
the previous banker was not ascertained and the borrower was not even having a
factory premises of his own. The borrower had produced the rent receipts, but
no rent agreement was produced and the bank had CBI Vs. R.S.Sharma etc.(CC No.
34/2009) Page 51 of 97 Special Judge, CBI­01, Central, Delhi not verified the
facts from the landlord. The borrower needed power connection for running the
factory, but they had not even applied for the same. Furthermore, the borrower
has to secure permission from the MCD for running the factory, but they had
not complied.
69\. PW­20, R. Kanan, has further stated that the elder brother of the
borrower was having another unit by the name of M/s. Kavita Industries and
they were also sanctioned the loan by the Gandhi Nagar branch, but this fact
was not disclosed by the borrower in the loan proposal. He has further deposed
that the Chief Manager cannot exercise his delegated powers individually to
two firms of group concerns, owned by relatives of a family. Having sanctioned
loan for M/s. Kavita Industries, the Chief Manager was having no power to
sanction the loan to M/s. V.V. Industries. The proposal was to be processed by
the Zonal Office and the Zonal Manager alone was competent to sanction loan
for M/s. V.V. Industries. The sanction was, therefore, beyond the power of the
Chief Manager and was therefore, unauthorized. This witness has further
deposed that to allow the loan to the borrower, the branch has created records
suppressing the facts. The loan proposal­cum­sanction documents, the
confidential report of the CBI Vs. R.S.Sharma etc.(CC No. 34/2009) Page 52 of
97 Special Judge, CBI­01, Central, Delhi borrower and the technical report by
the small industries officer, were prepared by the Chief Manager, the Senior
Manager (Incharge of the credit of the branch) and the Small Industries
Officer and each officer had contributed towards facilitating the borrower and
each had subsequently indemnified himself by shifting the blame on the other.
70\. PW­20 Sh. R. Kannan has further deposed that the Chief Manager is the
competent authority to accept and consider loan sanction and the other
officers carry out the functions on the instructions of the Chief Manager. He
has further deposed that the project report must cover all information about
the facilities needed for starting the unit. The land and building needed, the
power needed, the number of skilled and unskilled workers needed, government
formalities like sales tax registration, municipal permission, the prospects
and arrangements of marketing the product and the amount of expected turnover
for the first 2­3 years was required to be stated.
71\. PW­20 Sh. R.Kannan has further deposed that the Chief Manager, on receipt
of loan application, would have entered it in the branch register, namely,
proposal register and the disposal CBI Vs. R.S.Sharma etc.(CC No. 34/2009)
Page 53 of 97 Special Judge, CBI­01, Central, Delhi register. Thereafter, the
Chief Manager would assign the duty to the loan incharge of the branch to
Small Industries Officer to process the proposal. The place of the borrower
was to be visited by the said two officers and all the facts stated by the
borrower in the project report and application were to be counter­ checked and
verified about their veracity. This process should reveal that the project is
technically feasible and economically viable. He has further deposed that the
Chief Manager of Gandhi Nagar Branch was equivalent in status to the Regional
Manager and in such cases, the proposal is to be put up in a format called
Board Note Proforma. But, this was not prepared by the branch at all. As per
the strength of verification report of the Small Industries Officer and the
particulars of the loan application, the Senior Manager recommended sanction
of the credit facility to the borrower and the Chief Manager sanctioned the
same.
72\. PW­20 Sh. R. Kannan has further deposed that after conducting the
inspection, he prepared his inspection report, regarding M/s. V.V. Industries
and submitted the same to the Head Office, Inspection Control Department and
to the Zonal Office, Delhi, but the same might have been misplaced at both the
Zonal office as well as the Head Office.
CBI Vs. R.S.Sharma etc.(CC No. 34/2009) Page 54 of 97 Special Judge, CBI­01,
Central, Delhi
73\. During the course of final arguments, the Ld. Defence counsels have
pointed out various contradictions in the cross­ examination of PW­20 R.
Kanan, from his examination­in­chief. But, in the considered opinion of this
court, the said improvements or contradictions are not such that the entire
testimony of this witness be discarded by the court. This witness has given a
consistent and trustworthy narration, about the entire fraud and conspiracy
and some minor contradictions cannot make him an unreliable witness. Some
contradictions are bound to occur, when the witnesses depose in the court
after a gap of several years. In the present case, the fraud was detected in
the year 1992 and this witness was examined in the court in the month of
October, 2011, i.e., after a lapse of more than 19 years. The testimony of
this witness has unfolded the entire conspiracy between the bank officials and
the other private accused persons. He has specifically pointed out various
shortcomings in the loan application of accused Subodh Kumar Gupta, which was
moved by him on 17.07.1990, as the proprietor of M/s. V.V. Industries. He has
also pointed out various anamolies in the SSIO report, dated 24.07.1990,
Ex.P/A­6, as well as the recommendation dated 24.07.1990, Ex.PW16/11. The
testimony of this witness CBI Vs. R.S.Sharma etc.(CC No. 34/2009) Page 55 of
97 Special Judge, CBI­01, Central, Delhi also finds corroboration from the
documentary evidence on record.
74\. Perusal of the record shows that on 21.02.90, accused Subodh Kumar Gupta
(since deceased) had opened a fictitious bank account in the name of Rajiv
Metals (bank account No. 1236), wherein, accused Subodh Kumar Gupta (since
deceased) signed as "R.Kumar", in the capacity of Rajiv Kumar, the proprietor
of the said fictitious firm and co­accused Suresh Chand Gupta, who is his
father, introduced him, as "Rajiv Kumar", proprietor of the said firm.
75\. Perusal of the record further shows that the 'application for opening of
current account in respect of sole­proprietory concerns', in respect of Rajiv
Metals (A/c No. 1236) has been proved on record as Ex.PW5/B­1. The second page
of this application has been proved on record as Ex.PW5/B­2. These two
documents indicate that one Rajiv Kumar son of Sh. Jayanti Prasad has declared
himself as the proprietor of Rajiv Metals at 438, Jwala Nagar, Delhi­32 and
the said Rajiv Kumar had signed these two documents as "R. Kumar", in the
capacity of the proprietor of Rajiv Metals. The said Rajiv Kumar has been CBI
Vs. R.S.Sharma etc.(CC No. 34/2009) Page 56 of 97 Special Judge, CBI­01,
Central, Delhi introduced by accused Suresh Chand Gupta (A­8), in the capacity
of partner of M/s Jyoti Metal Industries. In his introduction, accused Suresh
Chand Gupta had certified that he knew the said Rajiv Kumar and the
particulars submitted by the said Rajiv Kumar to the Andhra Bank, were
correct. The specimen signature card pertaining to the said account has been
proved on record as Ex.P­5/B­3. In the said specimen signature card the said
Rajiv Kumar has again signed at two places, in the capacity of the proprietor
of Rajiv Metals. During the investigations, these documents along with various
other documents, pertaining to the bank transactions, in this account of Rajiv
Metals were seized by the IO from PW­5 Javed Iqbal Khan, who was posted as
officer, Andhra Bank, Vishwas Nagar, Delhi, in the year 1997, vide seizure
memos Ex.PW5/A & Ex.PW5/E.
76\. During the investigations, the IO obtained the specimen signatures of
accused Suresh Chand Gupta on seven sheets, marked S­62 to S­68, which are
proved on record as Ex.P/B­3 (Collectively). During the trial accused Suresh
Chand Gupta had admitted that these specimen signatures were obtained by the
CBI during investigations and has admitted his signatures on these sheets
marked S­62 to S­68.
CBI Vs. R.S.Sharma etc.(CC No. 34/2009) Page 57 of 97 Special Judge, CBI­01,
Central, Delhi
77\. During the investigations, the IO also obtained the specimen of writings
and signatures of accused Subodh Kumar Gupta (since deceased), on seventeen
sheets marked S­45 to S­61 and his specimen signatures and writings have been
proved on record as Ex.PW17/A­1 to Ex.PW17/A­17.
78\. Perusal of the record further shows that during investigations, the
question documents pertaining to bank account No. 1236, in the name of Rajiv
Metals, bearing questioned handwritings and signatures of accused Subodh Kumar
Gupta and Suresh Chand Gupta, were sent to CFSL vide letter No.
DLI/AC/Cr/3/59(A)/95/9983 dated 14/22.07.97 for comparison with their specimen
signatures and handwritings and in pursuance to the said request, report No.
CFSL­97/D­415, dated 28.11.97, Ex.PW19/1, was submitted to the ACB, CBI, on
18.12.1997. As per this report, the questioned writings and signatures, marked
Q­50 to Q­76, had matched with the specimen writings and signatures marked
S­45 to S­61, of accused Subodh Kumar Gupta (since deceased). This report has
further stated that the questioned Hindi signatures marked Q­77 to Q­81 had
matched with the specimen signatures of accused CBI Vs. R.S.Sharma etc.(CC No.
34/2009) Page 58 of 97 Special Judge, CBI­01, Central, Delhi Suresh Chand
Gupta, marked as S­62 to S­68.
79\. The documents Ex.PW5/B­1 to Ex.PW5/B­3 bear the questioned writings and
signatures marked Q­5, Q­7, Q­8, Q­44, Q­45, Q­47, Q­48, Q­49, Q­61 & Q­62,
which, as per CFSL report Ex.PW19/1, had matched with the specimen signatures
and writings of accused Subodh Kumar Gupta (since deceased).
80\. The documents Ex.PW5/B­1 & Ex.PW5/B­2 also bear the questioned Hindi
signatures marked Q­77, Q­78 & Q­79, which, as per the CFSL report Ex.PW19/1
has matched with the Hindi signatures of accused Suresh Chand Gupta.
81\. The CFSL report Ex.PW19/1 has therefore, established on record that on
21.02.1990 accused Suresh Chand Gupta (A­8) had introduced his son, co­accused
Subodh Kumar Gupta (A­2) (since deceased), as Rajiv Kumar, the proprietor of
Rajiv Metals for opening the current account No. 1236 at Andhra Bank, Vishwas
Nagar, Delhi. At that time, accused Subodh Kumar Gupta, filled up the
application form Ex.PW5/B­1, Ex.PW5/B­2 and the specimen signature card
Ex.PW5/B­3, in his own handwriting and signed as "R.Kumar", the proprietor of
Rajiv CBI Vs. R.S.Sharma etc.(CC No. 34/2009) Page 59 of 97 Special Judge,
CBI­01, Central, Delhi Metals, at 438, Jwala Nagar, Delhi­32. It has,
therefore, also established that accused Suresh Chand Gupta, in connivance his
son accused Subodh Kumar Gupta (since deceased), had opened the fictitious
account bearing current account No. 1236 at Andhra Bank, Vishwas Nagar, Delhi,
on 21.02.1990. This finding is corroborated by the deposition of PW­6 Subodh
Kumar Gupta son of Gulati Dass, who had categorically stated that he was the
proprietor of M/s Manoj Metals and his wife Kamlesh Rani was the proprietor of
M/s Rajiv Metals Industries and Punjab National Bank, Gandhi Nagar, Delhi, was
their banker for some time. The deposition of this witness had remained
unchallenged or uncontroverted, as this witness was not subjected to any
cross­ examination by the Ld. Defence counsels.
82\. Perusal of the record further shows that on 17.02.1990, another
fictitious bank account, in the name of M/s. Gupta Engineering Works was
opened at Punjab National Bank, Katra Dhulia, Chandni Chowk, Delhi, bearing
account No. 5011 and for opening the said account, someone had impersonated as
Manoj Kumar Gupta, the proprietor of M/s. Gupta Engineering Works and at that
time, co­accused Arvind Kumar Sharma (A­7) had introduced the said person as
Manoj Kumar Gupta, the proprietor CBI Vs. R.S.Sharma etc.(CC No. 34/2009) Page
60 of 97 Special Judge, CBI­01, Central, Delhi of M/s. Gupta Engineering
Works. But, none of the bank officials have deposed anything about the
impersonation by accused Manoj Kumar Sharma as Manoj Kumar Gupta, the
proprietor of M/s. Gupta Engineering Works and they have also failed to
identify, either the accused Manoj Kumar Sharma or the accused Arvind Kumar
Sharma, in the court, during the trial.
83\. In order to prove the fact that accused Manoj Kumar Sharma impersonated
as Manoj Kumar Gupta and he was introduced by co­accused Arvind Kumar Sharma
as Manoj Kumar Gupta, the proprietor of M/s. Gupta Engineering Works, the
prosecution has examined two witnesses, namely, PW­9 Nirbhay Kumar and PW­ 10
Vinod Kumar Garg. PW­9 Nirbhay Kumar had deposed that on 17.02.1990, one Manoj
Kumar Gupta had come to the Katra Dhulia Branch, Chandni Chowk of Punjab
National Bank, for opening the current account No. 5011 in the name of M/s.
Gupta Engineering Works and he allowed this account to be opened. He has
further stated that this account was opened on the introduction of one account
holder M/s. Dayal Engineering Works and was attested by the official of
another branch of the PNB. He has further deposed that signatures of
A.K.Sharma were attested by Mr. Garg having code No. 5015. During his
examination, the CBI Vs. R.S.Sharma etc.(CC No. 34/2009) Page 61 of 97 Special
Judge, CBI­01, Central, Delhi Ld. PP for the CBI had stated that the original
documents pertaining to this account were not traceable and were not even
cited in the list of documents and therefor, he was not intending to examine
this witness in respect of the account opening form and other documents. In
his cross­examination, this witness has further stated that he was not
remembering the date when this account was opened and he was also not
remembering whether he had carried out any verification of the person, who had
come to open the account. He has further deposed that he allowed the opening
of the account on the basis of the form and the documents produced before him,
which he had not verified. He had categorically stated that he cannot identify
the persons, who opened the account.
84\. PW­10 Vinod Kumar Garg, who was working as Asstt.
Manager in PNB, on 16.02.1990, at Shahadra Branch, had also deposed that in
the account opening form of current account No. 5011, in the name of M/s.
Gupta Engineering Works, 21/7, Vishwas Nagar, Shahadra, Delhi, he had attested
the signatures of introducer A.K.Sharma of M/s. Dayal Engineering Works, with
current account No. 4768. He has further deposed that he checked the
signatures of the introducer A.K.Sharma from the CBI Vs. R.S.Sharma etc.(CC
No. 34/2009) Page 62 of 97 Special Judge, CBI­01, Central, Delhi record i.e.
the specimen signature card of current account No. 4768\. This witness has
also not deposed anything about the accused Manoj Kumar Sharma or accused
Arvind Kumar Sharma. During his cross­examination, he has deposed that he was
not remembering the status of the said A.K.Sharma in M/s. Dayal Engineering
works and the said A.K.Sharma had not put his signatures in his presence. This
witness was also not aware about the place of opening of the account of M/s.
Gupta Engineering Works, after attestation of the introducer by him. He was
also not aware about the name, in which, the introducer A.K.Sharma was having
his account in his branch. However, he has stated that the account was in the
name of M/s. Dayal Engineering Works.
85\. The testimony of these two witnesses has failed to prove on record that
the fictitious current account No. 5011, in the name of M/s. Gupta Engineering
Works was opened by accused Manoj Kumar Sharma by impersonating as Manoj Kumar
Gupta, the proprietor of M/s. Gupta Engineering Works and accused Arvind Kumar
Sharma introduced him as Manoj Kumar Gupta, in his capacity as the proprietor
of M/s. Dayal Engineering Works.
CBI Vs. R.S.Sharma etc.(CC No. 34/2009) Page 63 of 97 Special Judge, CBI­01,
Central, Delhi
86\. Perusal of the record further shows that the documents pertaining to the
fictitious bank account No. 5011 at Punjab National Bank, Chandani Chowk,
Delhi, in the name of M/s. Gupta Engineering Works, have been placed on record
as mark PW9/X. This account opening form could not be proved during the trial,
as the original of this document could not be produced before the court.
However, PW­14 SI Narottam Singh, who was posted as ASI in EOW, Crime Branch,
in the year 1997 and investigated case FIR No. 47/95 of PS Gandhi Nagar, under
Section 120­B, 419, 420, 468, 471 IPC, has deposed that during the
investigations of the said case, ASI Dhan Singh had seized the various
documents from Punjab National Bank and he had filed the original of account
opening form Mark­PW9/X, pertaining to account No. 5011 in the name of M/s.
Gupta Engineering Works, with the charge sheet of case FIR No. 47/95, before
the concerned court of Sh. R.K. Yadav, the then M.M.
87\. It is pertinent to mention here that case FIR No. 47/95 was registered at
P.S. Gandhi Nagar, u/s 420/419/468/471 and 120­B IPC against accused Manoj
Kumar Sharma, Pawan Kumar Gupta and R.S.Sharma, for committing fraud by M/s.
Kavita Metals, a CBI Vs. R.S.Sharma etc.(CC No. 34/2009) Page 64 of 97 Special
Judge, CBI­01, Central, Delhi proprietory concern of accused Pawan Kumar
Gupta, wherein, it was also alleged that accused Manoj Kumar Sharma had
declared himself as the proprietor of M/s. Gupta Engineering Works, 27/51,
Vishwas Nagar, Shahdra, Delhi and he opened the account at Katra Dulia branch
of PNB on 17.02.1990, by impersonating as Manoj Kumar Gupta and the said
account was introduced by the proprietor of M/s. Dayal Engineering Works. In
the said case, the original documents pertaining to the aforesaid account
bearing No. 5011 in the name of M/s. Gupta Engineering Works had been seized
and were filed with the charge sheet before the concerned court. However, in
the said case, all the three aforesaid accused persons had already been
acquitted by the concerned court vide judgment dated 01.07.2002.
88\. Perusal of the record further shows that on 17.07.90 accused Subodh Kumar
Gupta (since deceased), proprietor of M/s. V.V. Industries, Vishwas Nagar,
Shahdara, applied for various loan facilities, vide his application dated
17.07.1990, Ex.PW16/5. In the said loan application, he sought term loan
(machinery) of Rs.4.10 Lac, cash credit (hypothecation) worth Rs. 10 Lacs,
B/Debts for Rs.3 Lac & B/DD (cheque) for Rs. 2 Lacs. The said application was
accompanied with forged quotation dated CBI Vs. R.S.Sharma etc.(CC No.
34/2009) Page 65 of 97 Special Judge, CBI­01, Central, Delhi 09.07.1990,
Ex.PW4/1, forged bill dated 10.09.1990, Ex.PW4/2 and three forged receipts
dated 11.07.90, 13.07.90 & 23.07.90, for Rs.50,000/­, Rs.50,000/­ &
Rs.25,000/­ respectively. All these five documents have been issued on behalf
of the fictitious firm M/s. Gupta Engineering Works. All these five documents
were purported to be signed by the proprietor of M/s. Gupta Engineering Works,
Sh. Suresh Chand Gupta. Accused Subodh Kumar Gupta (since deceased) also
deposited a cash amount of Rs.13,000/­ with the bank in the name of his
proprietorship firm M/s. V.V. Industries, as margin money.
89\. During the trial, PW ­4 Suresh Chand Gupta son of Sh. M.P.
Gupta, has deposed in the court that he was the proprietor of M/s. Gupta
Engineering Works, at 1/422, Friends Colony Industrial Area, Shahdara, Delhi,
and his proprietory concern was manufacturing furnaces since 1977. He has
further stated that the quotation dated 09.07.1990 was not on his letterhead.
He has further stated that he was not knowing any M/s. V.B. Industries (sic
V.V. Industries) and the item mentioned in the quotation, i.e., "furnaces
annealing 1000 kgs" was not supplied to M/s. V.B. Industries (sic
V.V.Industries). He has further stated that the signatures on this quotation
Ex.PW4/1 at point­A were CBI Vs. R.S.Sharma etc.(CC No. 34/2009) Page 66 of 97
Special Judge, CBI­01, Central, Delhi not his signatures. He has further
stated that the bill dated 10.09.90, Ex.PW4/2, does not bear his signatures at
point­A and was not issued by his firm. He has further stated that the receipt
dated 13.07.1990, Ex.PW4/3 was not issued by him and it does not bear his
signatures at point­A. The testimony of this witness has also remained
unrebutted and unchallenged, as this witness was also not subjected to any
cross­examination by the Ld. Defence counsels for any of the accused.
90\. Perusal of the quotation dated 09.07.1990, Ex.PW4/1, issued on the forged
letterhead of M/s. Gupta Engineering Works also shows that this quotation does
not mention the necessary ingredients of a "Quotation". This quotation
Ex.PW4/1 does not mention the complete particulars, i.e., the make, model or
the company, of which, the machines were to be purchased by M/s. V.V.
Industries. It also does not contain any averment as to whether any old or new
machinery was to be purchased by M/s. V.V. Industries. It does not contain the
cost of any of the machines separately and also does not specify the rate or
amount of tax to be levied on these machines. However, a total amount of
Rs.5,48,000/­ has been mentioned as the cost of purchase of all the machines
and other articles, as mentioned in CBI Vs. R.S.Sharma etc.(CC No. 34/2009)
Page 67 of 97 Special Judge, CBI­01, Central, Delhi this quotation, inclusive
of the taxes. Even the bill dated 10.07.1990 (sic 10.09.1990) is lacking the
aforesaid particulars. All these documents, including the quotation, bill &
receipts, were submitted by accused Subodh Kumar Gupta (since deceased) to
Punjab National Bank, Gandhi Nagar, Delhi, along with his application for
sanction of loan facilities, Ex.PW16/5. The quotation Ex.PW4/1 also bears the
rubber stamp of M/s. V.V. Industries and signatures of accused Subodh Kumar
Gupta (since deceased), as its proprietor.
91\. During investigations, the specimen writings and signatures of accused
Pawan Kumar Gupta (A­3) were also obtained by the IO on thirteen sheets marked
S­10 to S­14 & S­19 to S­26, Ex.PW20/F collectively. These specimen writings
and signatures of accused Pawan Kumar Gupta along with specimen writings and
signatures of accused Subodh Kumar Gupta (since deceased), Ex.PW17/A­1 to
Ex.PW17/A­17, on sheets S­45 to S­ 61, were also sent to CFSL, along with the
quotation Ex.PW4/1, bill Ex.PW4/2, receipts Ex.PW4/3, Ex.PW22/1 & Ex.PW22/2,
for comparison, vide letter No. DLI/AC/Cr./3/59(A)/95/9983, dated
14/22.07.1997 & letter No. DLI/AC/Cr/3/59(A)/95/1347 dated 18.11.1998. In
pursuance to these letters, CFSL reports CBI Vs. R.S.Sharma etc.(CC No.
34/2009) Page 68 of 97 Special Judge, CBI­01, Central, Delhi Ex.PW19/1 &
Ex.PW19/2 were submitted to the ACB, CBI on 18.12.97 & 10.03.99, respectively.
92\. The receipt Ex.PW4/3 dated 13.07.90, bears the questioned writings and
signatures of accused Pawan Kumar Gupta, as Q­4. The CFSL report dated
28.11.97, Ex.PW19/1, has proved that the specimen writings of accused Pawan
Kumar Gupta marked as S­ 10 to S­14 & S­19 to S­26, had matched with the
questioned writings marked 'Q­4' on the receipt Ex.PW4/3. This report has
therefore, established on record that the receipt Ex.PW4/3 (a valuable
security), was a forged and fabricated document and was prepared by accused
Pawan Kumar Gupta (A­3), who is the brother of co­accused Subodh Kumar Gupta
(since deceased), in connivance with him.
93\. Perusal of the record further shows that the application Ex.PW16/5 of
accused Subodh Kumar Gupta (since deceased), on behalf of M/s. V.V.
Industries, was marked to co­accused Ashok Luthra (A­4), who was posted as
Small Scale Industries Officer (SSIO). On 24.07.1990, accused Ashok Luthra
visited the premises of M/s. V.V. Industries at 500/5A, Gali No. 11, Vishwas
Nagar, Shahdara, Delhi­32, along with co­accused R.S. Sharma CBI Vs.
R.S.Sharma etc.(CC No. 34/2009) Page 69 of 97 Special Judge, CBI­01, Central,
Delhi (A­1) and submitted his report Ex.P/A­6 to accused R.S. Sharma. This
report is an admitted documents and has been admitted by accused Ashok Luthra,
as correct. The report Ex.P/A­6, is reproduced below :
Inter­Office Date : 24/7/90 The Chief Manager, B/o Gandhi Nagar, Delhi.
Reg. :­ M/s. V.V. Industries, 500/5A, Gali No.11, Vishwas Nagar, Shahdara,
Delhi­32.
Sir, As desired, the place of the above unit was visited alongwith your
goodself and the loan proposal was discussed with Sh. Subodh Kr. Gupta, Prop.
on the basis of the discussions held & after going through the documents as
submitted by the party, I am to report as under.
M/s. V.V.Industries is reported to be a sole­prop.­ship concern of Sh. Subodh
Kr. Gupta s/o Sh. S.C.Gupta. The firm proposes to start a SSI Unit of Copper
Wire Drawing from Rod to 28 SWG at premises No. 500/5A, Gali No.11, Vishwas
Nagar, Shahdara, Delhi­32. For setting up the proposed project, the firm has
approached us for grant of following facilities.
                   1) Term Loan (Machinery)                                - Rs. 4.10 Lacs
                   2) C/C (Hyp.) Limit                                     - Rs.10.00 Lacs
                   3) Book Debts Limit                                     - Rs. 3.00 Lacs
                   4) Cheque Discounting Limit                             - Rs. 2.00 Lacs
The prop. of the firm Sh. Subodh Kr. Gupta is reported to be a young man with
good experience of the trade. He is said to have worked with some similar type
of unit in the fast & has gained practical experience there. Otherwise
however, the real brother of the prop. Sh. Pawan Kr. Gupta is already running
another unit of Copper Wire Drawing under the name M/s Kavita Metals, which is
already financed from this very branch. The conduct of that account may be
seen before making any advance to the present CBI Vs. R.S.Sharma etc.(CC No.
34/2009) Page 70 of 97 Special Judge, CBI­01, Central, Delhi concern.
The unit is proposed to be located in part premises No. 500/5A, Gali No.11,
Vishwas Nagar, Shahdara, Delhi­32. This place has been acquired by the firm on
Rental basis. The firm to submit copy of latest Rent Receipt & proper Rent
Agreement with the land­lord. The unit is reported to have applied for SSI
Regn., with the Directorate of Industries. The firm to submit copy of SSI
Regn. Certificate before release of facilities, if any. Three phase electrical
power connection is available at site in the name of owner. For the time
being, the firm to submit N.O.C., from the holder of this power connection,
but in the due course of time, the firm must obtain sufficient electrical
power connection in its own name to avoid any difficulties in future.
Otherwise, however, the unit being located in Vishwas Nagar, Shahdara area, a
cluster of copper industry, it will enjoy all infrastructural facilities. The
unit proposes to acquire the following Plant & machinery.
1) Wire Drawing Machine from Rod to 8 SWG ­ 1 No.
2) Wire Drawing Machine from 8 SWG to 12 SWG ­ 1 No.
3) Wire Drawing Machine from 12 SWG to 16 SWG ­ 1 No.
4) Wire Drawing Machine from 16 SWG to 20 SWG ­ 1 No.
5) Wire Drawing Machine from 16 SWG to 25 SWG ­ 2 Nos.
6) Wire Drawing Machine from 20 SWG to 28 SWG ­ 2 Nos.
                 7) Butt Welding Machine                                                          ­ 1 No.
                 8) Printing Machine                                                              ­ 1 No.
                 9) Acid Tank                                                                    ­ 1 No.
10) Annealing furnace with 1000 kgs. Pat. ­ 1 No.
11) Complete set of Dies for all the stages.
The above machinery is being acquired by the firm from M/s. Gupta Engineering
Works, 1/422, Friends Colony, Street No.6, Shahdara, Delhi­32 at a cost of
Rs.5.48 Lacs including Taxes as per the quotation available on record. Some of
the machinery is already lying installed at site. The party says that they
have procured the above machinery only on making part payment & they are yet
to make balance payment to the supplier. This aspect may be seen from the
banking point of view. However the above total set of plant & machinery is
considered sufficient & suitable for the proposed project & could be
considered for Bank finance with at least 25% ........ margin, if otherwise
found in order.
CBI Vs. R.S.Sharma etc.(CC No. 34/2009) Page 71 of 97 Special Judge, CBI­01,
Central, Delhi The Raw Materials as required for the project is Copper Rod /
Ingoss. Though these are available from the local market, but to avoid any
difficulties in its procurement, the firm must approach MMTC / HCL through the
Directorate of Industries for release of necessary quota.
Manpower as required for the project is e4asily available from the local
market & the firm is not likely to face any problem to employ them. A few are
even already working at the unit. As per the project report submitted by the
party, they propose to achieve 1st year sales of Rs.109.80 Lacs. The unit has
got the capacity for this much of production, but actual sale shall depend
upon the unit's marketing strategy and availability of quota of Raw Materials.
Thus release of working capital facilities may be linked with their
performance. The unit must obtain necessary Sales Tax / Excise Registration
after the unit comes into production. However for the projected turnover of
the unit, following working capital needs are assessed.
Stock of Raw Materials for One Month ­ Rs.8.50 Lacs Stock­in­process for Two
Days ­ Rs.0.55 Lacs Stock of Finished products for Two Weeks ­ Rs.4.50 Lacs
Provision for Receivables for Two Weeks ­ Rs.4.50 Lacs For the above project,
the raw material content is around 93%, the labour & other overheads content
is around 5.5% and thus leaving average profitability of around 1.5% covering
all expenses.
As per the project report, the party has to raise its own capital to Rs.5.00
Lacs & unsecured loans of Rs.1.43 Lacs. The party must raise funds to this
level & satisfy the Bank on this aspect.
Subject to the observations made above, the project is considered technically
feasible & economically viable. Financial / Security aspects may be looked
into & keeping in view the foregoing, the unit may be considered for sanction
of need based credit facilities on merits.
Submitted pl.
Sd/­ Ashok Luthra 24/7/90 AM (SSI)"
CBI Vs. R.S.Sharma etc.(CC No. 34/2009) Page 72 of 97 Special Judge, CBI­01,
Central, Delhi
94\. Perusal of the above report clearly indicate that this report has been
prepared with the sole ill­motive of favouring the accused Subodh Kumar
Grupta, Prop. of M/s. V.V.Industries. Accused Ashok Luthra (A­4) has prepared
this report after inspection of the site and after going through the
application dated 17.07.1990 as well as the documents submitted with it by
accused Subodh Kumar Gupta. Despite perusing the various documents, including
the quotation, the bill and the advance receipts, the accused Ashok Luthra has
not pointed out that the quotations Ex.PW.4/1, the bill Ex.PW.4/2 and the
receipt dated 13.7.90 Ex.PW.4/3 were not the genuine quotation or the bill. It
appears that accused Ashok Luthra had prepared his report Ex.P/A­6, as per the
wishes of co­accused Subodh Kumar Gupta and has therefore, not pointed out any
shortcomings in the quotation, the bill and the advance receipts. The
genuineness of the documents was never verified either by accused Ashok Luthra
or by accused R.S.Sharma. Furthermore, accused Ashok Luthra has not mentioned
the details of the machines which were found by him installed at the site. He
has not even mentioned the details like make, model or condition of these
installed machines. He has not mentioned whether these machines were new or
old.
CBI Vs. R.S.Sharma etc.(CC No. 34/2009) Page 73 of 97 Special Judge, CBI­01,
Central, Delhi He has not mentioned even the number or the cost of the
machines which were found installed at the site. This report has further
mentioned that a few workers were already working at the site, which is very
surprising because the application was moved by accused Subodh Kumar Gupta for
the purposes of starting a small scale industry unit of copper wire drawing,
for which an amount of Rs.8.50 Lacs was required for stock of raw material for
one month. The unit had not even started and the raw material was not
acquired, then how this report has mentioned that a few workers were already
working at the unit. Furthermore, for procuring the raw material required for
the project, the firm was required to approach MMTC / HCL through the
directorate of industries, but, even the necessary registration for small
scale industries with the directorate of industries was not taken by the firm.
It has been reported that the unit had applied for SSI registration with the
directorate of industries and this fact must have been disclosed to accused
Ashok Luthra by the accused Subodh Kumar Gupta himself. But, accused Ashok
Luthra had accepted the said contention of accused Subodh Kumar Gupta and had
not asked for any copy of the said application for verification. Furthermore,
the unit was to start at a rented premises and even the copy of the rent
agreement was not taken CBI Vs. R.S.Sharma etc.(CC No. 34/2009) Page 74 of 97
Special Judge, CBI­01, Central, Delhi on record. Furthermore, the unit was not
having any electricity connection in its name and it has been reported that
the power connection was in the name of the landlord, but, even the No
Objection Certificate from the landlord was not seen and even the power
connection in the name of the firm was never applied. This report has also
mentioned the requirement of the machines, as mentioned in the quotation
Ex.PW.4/1 and no technical specifications of the machines have been mentioned,
even by accused Ashok Luthra, in his report. The report Ex.P/A­6 has been
submitted by accused Ashok Luthra in a vague manner without any technical
specifications and this report, by no stretch of imagination, be termed as a
complete or correct technical feasibility report of the project. There is
nothing 'technical' in this technical feasibility report.
95\. On the same day, i.e., on 24.07.1990, co­accused D.K.
Parashar (A­5), who was posted as the loan officer, prepared his
recommendation Ex.PW16/11 (Ex.P­4), along with senior manager Sh. K.N.
Zariwala. This recommendation was accepted by co­accused R.S. Sharma (A­1)
chief manager on 25.07.1990 itself, without fulfilling the pre­conditions by
M/s. V.V. Industries, as reported by accused Ashok Luthra, in his report
Ex.P/A­6 and CBI Vs. R.S.Sharma etc.(CC No. 34/2009) Page 75 of 97 Special
Judge, CBI­01, Central, Delhi the recommendation Ex.PW16/11, by co­accused
D.K. Parashar (loan officer). The recommendation is also reproduced below :
" The Chief Manager 24.7.90 On the basis of S.S.I. Officers report and
projections of the party, it is recommended that following limits may be
sanctioned in favour of the party as per terms and conditions mentioned
thereof.
            Facility No. 1
            Nature                          :  Cash Credit (Hyphothecation)
            Amount                          :  Rs.10,00,000/­ (Rupees Ten lac only)
            Intt.                           :  5.50% OBR with minimum of 15.50% p.a. with
                                               quarterly rests.
            Security                        : Hypothecation of stock of copper ingots rods,   
                                              semi­finished   and   finished   drawn   wire   of    
difference guages, and other such related items.
            Margin                          :  25%
            Conditions :
1\. The party to route entire sales through the account.
2\. The party to submit inventories every month latest by 7 th of following
month;
3\. No unpaid/obsolete/unrelated stocks to be financed;
4\. The account to be covered under DICGC;
            Facility No. 2 
            Nature                          :  Term Loan
            Amount                          :   Rs.4,10,000/­ (Rs. Four Lakh Ten Thousand   
                                                Only)
            Interest                        :  3.50% OBR with minimum of 13.50% with half  
                                                yearly rests
            Security                        :  Hypothecation of wire drawing machines worth  
                                                Rs.5,48,000/­ and other accessories.
            Margin                          :  25%
            Conditions 
1\. The payment to be paid directly to the suppliers;
2\. The repayment of the loan to be made in sixty monthly installments
commencing from three months after installation of machinery or six months
after the disbursement of the loan whichever is earlier;
CBI Vs. R.S.Sharma etc.(CC No. 34/2009) Page 76 of 97 Special Judge, CBI­01,
Central, Delhi
3\. I.D.B.I. resonance is to be obtained.
            Facility No. 3 
            Nature                          :  (CC) Book­Debts
            Amount                          :  Rs.3,00,000/­ (Rupees Three Lakh Only)
            Interest                        :  5.50% OBR with minimum of 15.50% p.a. with 
                                               quarterly rests.
            Security                        :  Hypothecation of book debts;
            Margin                          :  40%
            Conditions                      :  1. CR of the debtors to be obtained;
                                              2.   The   party   to   submit   statement   of   sundry  
                                                 debtors more than six months old;
            Facility No. 4 
            Nature :  Clean DD
            Amount                          :  Rs.2,00,000/­ (Rs. Two Lakhs Only)
            Interest /Hundi                 :   As per Bank rule
            Security                        :  Third Party cheque
            Conditions                      : 1.Only cheques reflecting true trade transactions
                                                 to be purchased;
2\. No. cheque drawn on sister / allied concern to be purchased.
General Conditions :
1\. The party to deal with us exclusively;
2\. The limits to be guaranteed by Sh. Pawan Kumar Gupta with net mean
Rs.13.00 Lacs. Equitable property of I.P. worth Rs.19.00 Lacs in name of Sh.
Pawan Kumar Gupta to be created as collateral security of limit.
3\. The funds raised from relatives and friends not to be withdrawn during the
currency of limit.
4\. All assets chargable to the Bank to be got comprehensively insured at
party's cost.
5\. The party to follow all rules and regulations as applicable to such type
of limits / loan.
6\. The limits to be renewed every year and for that the party to submit
balance sheet and other connected accounts every year.
               ­ Sd/­                                                          ­ Sd/­
            Loan Officer                                                Senior Manager  "
CBI Vs. R.S.Sharma etc.(CC No. 34/2009) Page 77 of 97 Special Judge, CBI­01,
Central, Delhi
96\. The perusal of the above recommendation also indicates that this
recommendation has been prepared on the basis of the SSIO report Ex.P/A­6,
prepared by accused Ashok Luthra and the projections of M/s. V.V.Industries,
which were prepared and submitted by co­accused Subodh Kumar Gupta, alongwith
his application, dated 17.07.1990 Ex.PW.16/5. The recommendation has not
mentioned any shortcoming in the proposal. Furthermore, the confidential
report Ex.P/A­3 (admitted document), in respect of M/s. V.V. Industries and
the confidential report Ex.P/A­4 (admitted document), in respect of M/s.
Kavita Metals, both prepared on 22.07.1990, by accused D.K.Parashar and
K.N.Zariwala, also indicate that these reports were also prepared to favour
the accused Subodh Kumar Gupta and Pawan Kumar Gupta. The report Ex.P/A­3 has
mentioned the 'reputation' and 'experience and dealings' of M/s. V.V.
Industries, as good and satisfactory, respectively. But M/s. V.V. Industries
was a new firm and was floated by accused Subodh Kumar Gupta, who was reported
to be a young entrepreneur. How the verification of 'Reputation' and
'experience dealings' was done is not clear. There is no bank record or report
in this regard. The report Ex.P/A­4, in respect of M/s. Kavita Metals, is also
on the similar lines, despite of the fact that accused Pawan Kumar CBI Vs.
R.S.Sharma etc.(CC No. 34/2009) Page 78 of 97 Special Judge, CBI­01, Central,
Delhi Gupta, proprietor of M/s. Kavita Metals had availed the similar loan
facilities worth Rs.18.00 Lacs and was a defaulter of the bank. The said loan
amount was also not being paid regularly and the fictitious account No. 5011
of M/s. Gupta Engineering Works was also used by accused Pawan Kumar Gupta for
misappropriating the bank funds. The case FIR No. 47/95 was also registered
against him, lateron, at P.S. Gandhi Nagar.
97\. On the same day on 25.7.90, accused R.S.Sharma, Chief Manager had
approved the proposal and recommendation and sanctioned the loan facilities to
M/s. V.V. Industries by making endorsement on the recommendation Ex.PW.16/11,
as under :
"As proposed and recommended the facilities are sanctioned and may be released
after completing all bank's formalities". Sd/­ R.S.Sharma, C.M.
25.07.1990 "
But, all the bank formalities, as mentioned in SSIO report, Ex.P/A­6, were
never completed.
98\. On the same day, co­accused Pawan Kumar Gupta, the brother of accused
Subodh Kumar Gupta stood guarantor for M/s.
CBI Vs. R.S.Sharma etc.(CC No. 34/2009) Page 79 of 97 Special Judge, CBI­01,
Central, Delhi V.V. Industries and executed the agreement of guarantee
Ex.PW.16/6. Thereafter, on the same day i.e. on 25.07.1990, cash order,
bearing No. 405478, dated 25.07.90 worth Rs. 4.23 Lacs was prepared in the
name of M/s. Gupta Engineering Works and was released to accused Subodh Kumar
Gupta and was duly credited in the fictitious bank account of M/s Gupta
Engineering Works, bearing account No. 5011 at Punjab National Bank, Vishwas
Nagar, Shahdra, Delhi. This pay order has been admitted by the accused persons
and therefore, has been proved on record as Ex.P­5. The statement of
fictitious account No. 5011, in the name of M/s. Gupta Engineering Works has
been proved on record as Ex.PW.11/B. The same reflects that the aforesaid cash
order has been duly deposited and cleared in the fictitious account on
27.07.90.
99\. Perusal of the record further shows that the fictitious bank accounts of
the aforesaid M/s. Rajiv Metals (A/c No. 1236) and M/s. Gupta Engineering
Works (A/c No. 5011) were used by accused Subodh Kumar Gupta (since deceased)
to misappropriate and divert the funds received from the bank, on behalf of
M/s. Gupta Engineering Works and M/s. V.V. Industries. The cash order / pay
order Ex.P.5, bearing No. 405478, dated CBI Vs. R.S.Sharma etc.(CC No.
34/2009) Page 80 of 97 Special Judge, CBI­01, Central, Delhi 25.07.1990, for
an amount of Rs.4,23,000/­, in favour of M/s. Gupta Engineering Works for
purchase of machinery by M/s. V.V. Industries from M/s. Gupta Engineering
Works, was duly received by accused Subodh Kumar Gupta (since deceased) vide
letter dated 25.07.1990, Ex.PW.16/10 (Ex.P­10/A) and he duly signed the said
letter, on its' back side, in acknowledgment of having received the cash
order. The said cash order was duly deposited by accused Subodh Kumar Gupta
(since deceased) in the aforesaid fictitious account of M/s. Gupta Engineering
Works. Another amount of Rs.7,83,925/­ was transferred from the bank account
of M/s. V.V. Industries to the fictitious account of Rajiv Metals, vide three
cheques for Rs.3,20,000/­, Rs.2,28,925/­ and Rs.2,35,000/­ respectively.
Another amount of Rs.6,45,000/­ has been transferred from the account of M/s.
V.V. Industries to another bank account of M/s. Kavita Metals, in which
co­accused Pawan Kumar Gupta was the proprietor, vide two cheques, worth
Rs.5,20,000/­ and Rs.1,25,000/­, Ex.PW.12/B and Ex.PW.12/C, respectively. The
statement of account of account No. 5011 in the name of Gupta Engg. Works has
been proved on record as Ex.PW11/B. The statement of account of the term loan
No. 46/2 in the name of M/s. V.V. Industries has been proved on record as
Ex.PW.16/2. The CC account No. 153 with a limit of rupees ten CBI Vs.
R.S.Sharma etc.(CC No. 34/2009) Page 81 of 97 Special Judge, CBI­01, Central,
Delhi lacs, in the name of M/s. V.V. Industries has been proved on record as
Ex.PW.16/3. The statement of account of fictitious account No. 1236 in the
name of Rajiv Metals has been proved on record as Ex.PW.5/F. The statement of
account of account number C/C 125 in the name of M/s. Kavita Metals, at Punjab
National Bank, Jwala Nagar, Shahdara, Delhi is also on record, but the same
could not be proved in accordance with law, during the trial.
100\. The self cheque dated 10.08.1990 for Rs.45,000/­ bearing No. 085304,
issued on behalf of Rajiv Metals has been proved on record as Ex.P/B­2
(admitted document). This cheque also bears the signatures of accused Suresh
Chand Gupta at point 'Q­80' & 'Q­81'. Accused Suresh Chand Gupta (A­8) has
himself admitted these signatures. This cheque also bears the signature done
by accused Subodh Kumar Gupta (since deceased), as "R. Kumar" at point 'Q­40'
& 'Q­41'. The questioned writings of accused Subodh Kumar Gupta (since
deceased) are at point 'Q­73'.
101\. The cheque No. 528930 for Rs.3,20,000/­, issued by accused Subodh Kumar
Gupta (since deceased), as proprietor of M/s. V.V. Industries, was deposited
in current account No.1236 of CBI Vs. R.S.Sharma etc.(CC No. 34/2009) Page 82
of 97 Special Judge, CBI­01, Central, Delhi Rajiv Metals, vide current account
pay­in­slip Ex.PW5/C­1. This pay­in­slip bears the questioned writings of
accused Subodh Kumar Gupta (since deceased) at point 'Q­75'.
102\. The cheque No. 177178 dated 03.08.90 for Rs.2,35,000/­ and cheque No.
177180 dated 08.08.90 for Rs.2,28,925/­, issued by accused Subodh Kumar Gupta
(since deceased), as proprietor of M/s. V.V. Industries, in favour of Rajiv
Metals have been proved on record as Ex.PW5/D­1 & Ex.PW5/D­2 respectively. The
cheque No. 177180 for Rs.2,28,925/­ was deposited in fictitious current
account No. 1236 of Rajiv Metals, vide current account pay­in­slip dated
08.08.90 Ex.PW5/C­2. This pay­in­slip also bears the questioned writings of
accused Subodh Kumar Gupta (since deceased) at point 'Q­76'.
103\. The self cheques (10 in number), issued by accused Subodh Kumar Gupta
(since deceased), as proprietor of Rajiv Metals, for various amounts on
various dates have been proved on record as Ex.PW5/E­1 to Ex.PW5/E­10. All
these ten self cheques also bear the questioned writings of accused Subodh
Kumar Gupta (since deceased), at points 'Q­83 to Q­73' & 'Q­74', respectively.
These self cheques also bear his questioned signatures as "R.
CBI Vs. R.S.Sharma etc.(CC No. 34/2009) Page 83 of 97 Special Judge, CBI­01,
Central, Delhi Kumar" at points 'Q­11 to Q14', 'Q­17 to Q­20', 'Q­23' Q­24',
'Q­27 to Q­32', Q­35, Q­36, Q­42, Q­43 . These cheques also bear his
signatures as Subodh Kumar Gupta at points Q­54, Q­55, Q­57, Q­58, Q­59 &
Q­60.
104\. The two self cheques issued by accused Subodh Kumar Gupta (since
deceased), as proprietor of Rajiv Metals on 25.06.90 & 06.08.90, for
Rs.80,000/­ & Rs.55,000 respectively, have been proved on record as Ex.PW5/G­1
& Ex.PW5/G­2. These two cheques also bear the questioned signatures of accused
Subodh Kumar Gupta (since deceased), as "R.Kumar" at points Q­15, Q­16, Q­21 &
Q­22. The cheque Ex.PW5/G­2 also bears his signatures as Subodh Kumar Gupta at
Q­56. It also bears his questioned writings at Q­67.
105\. The cheques dated 27.07.90 & 11.09.90 for Rs.5,20,000/­ & Rs.1,25,000/­,
respectively, bearing No. 177176 & 177181 respectively, issued by accused
Subodh Kumar Gupta (since deceased), as proprietor of M/s. V.V. Industries in
favour of M/s Kavita Metals have been proved on record as Ex.PW12/B &
Ex.PW12/C respectively.
CBI Vs. R.S.Sharma etc.(CC No. 34/2009) Page 84 of 97 Special Judge, CBI­01,
Central, Delhi
106\. The cheque dated 27.07.90 bearing No. 217370,issued by accused Pawan
Kumar Gupta, as proprietor of M/s Kavita Metals, for a sum of Rs. 2 Lacs, in
favour of his brother, co­accused Subodh Kumar Gupta (since deceased), has
been proved on record as Ex.P/B­1 (admitted document). The statement of
account of fictitious account No. 1236 in the name of Rajiv Metals, Ex.PW5/F
and the statements of account of M/s. V.V. Industries, Ex.PW16/2 & Ex.PW16/3,
have proved the bank transactions, regarding above cheques and have
established on record, beyond a shadow of doubt that accused Subodh Kumar
Gupta (since deceased), in connivance with co­accused Pawan Kumar Gupta, his
brother, had utilized and misappropriated the various amounts of money
received by him from Punjab National Bank, Gandhi Nagar, against his
sanctioned loan facilities.
107\. These cheques and pay­in­slips, bearing questioned signatures and
handwritings of accused Suresh Chand Gupta (A­
8), Subodh Kumar Gupta (since deceased) and Pawan Kumar Gupta (A­3), were also
sent to CFSL for comparison and expert opinion, along with the other
documents. The CFSL report Ex.PW19/1 has proved that the questioned Hindi
signatures marked 'Q­77 to Q­81', had matched with specimen signatures of CBI
Vs. R.S.Sharma etc.(CC No. 34/2009) Page 85 of 97 Special Judge, CBI­01,
Central, Delhi accused Suresh Chand Gupta (A­8), marked S­62 to S­68. It has
also proved that the questioned writing marked 'Q­4' had matched with specimen
writings of accused Pawan Kumar Gupta, marked S­10 to S­14 & S­19 to S­26. The
CFSL report Ex.PW19/2 has also proved that the questioned writings marked
'Q­82' & 'Q­83' had matched with the specimen writings of accused Pawan Kumar
Gupta, marked S­10 to S­14 & S­19 to S­26. The CFSL report Ex.PW19/1, has
further proved that the questioned writings and signatures marked 'Q­50 to
Q­76' had matched with the specimen English writings and signatures of accused
Subodh Kumar Gupta (A­2) (since deceased), marked S­45 to S­61.
108\. The deposition of the prosecution witnesses and the documentary evidence
on record, as discussed above, has clearly established on record, beyond a
shadow of doubt, that accused Subodh Kumar Gupta (since deceased), had
connived with his father co­accused Suresh Chand Gupta (A­8), his brother
co­accused Pawan Kumar Gupta (A­3) and the bank officials, namely, Chief
Manager R.S. Sharma (A­1), Ashok Luthra, SSIO (A­4) & D.K. Parashar (A­5), to
cheat the Punjab National Bank. However, due to insufficient evidence and the
fact that accused Manoj Kumar Sharma (A­6) and Arvind Kumar Sharma (A­7) CBI
Vs. R.S.Sharma etc.(CC No. 34/2009) Page 86 of 97 Special Judge, CBI­01,
Central, Delhi could not be identified by the prosecution witnesses during the
trial, it could not be established on record, beyond a shadow of doubt, that
these two accused were also a part of the conspiracy.
SANCTION FOR PROSECUTION
109\. During the course of arguments, The Ld. Defence counsels have relied
upon the judgment of Hon'ble Supreme Court, in case titled as, 'Prof N.K.
Ganguly vs. CBI' (Supra), to argue that a separate sanction under Section 197
Cr.P.C., besides the sanction for prosecution under Section 19 of the P.C.
Act, was needed for prosecution of the bank officials, namely, accused Radhey
Shayma Sharma (A­1), Ashok Luthra (A­4) and D.K Parashar (A­5). But, I do not
find any merit in the above submissions of the Ld. Defence counsels.
110\. It has been held by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in "Prof.
N.K. Ganguly's" case (Supra), as under: ­
25\. From a perusal of the case law referred to supra, it becomes clear that
for the purpose of obtaining previous sanction from the appropriate government
under Section 197 of CrPC, it is imperative that the alleged offence is
committed in discharge of official duty by the accused. It is also important
for the Court to examine the allegations contained in the final report against
the Appellants, to decide whether previous sanction is required to be obtained
by the respondent from the appropriate government before taking cognizance of
the alleged offence by CBI Vs. R.S.Sharma etc.(CC No. 34/2009) Page 87 of 97
Special Judge, CBI­01, Central, Delhi the learned Special Judge against the
accused. In the instant case, since the allegations made against the
Appellants in the final report filed by the respondent that the alleged
offences were committed by them in discharge of their official duty,
therefore, it was essential for the learned Special Judge to correctly decide
as to whether the previous sanction from the Central Government under Section
197 of CrPC was required to be taken by the respondent, before taking
cognizance and passing an order issuing summons to the appellants for their
presence.
(emphasis supplied by me)
111\. Reading of the aforesaid judgment shows that the Hon'ble Supreme Court,
had distinguished the case of "Prakash Singh Badal vs. Union of India, as
reported in 16 (2007) 1 SCC 1", from N.K. Ganguly's case. It has been held by
the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Prakash Singh Badal (Supra), as under
:­ "50. The offence of cheating under Section 420 or for that matter offences
relatable to Sections 467, 468, 471 and 120B can by no stretch of imagination
by their very nature be regarded as having been committed by any public
servant while acting or purporting to act in discharge of official duty. In
such cases, official status only provides an opportunity for commission of the
offence."
(emphasis supplied by me)
112\. It was also held by the Hon'ble High Court of Allahabad, in the case of
"Neera Yadav vs. CBI (Bharat Sangh)" (Supra), as relied by the Ld. Sr. PP for
the CBI, as under :­ CBI Vs. R.S.Sharma etc.(CC No. 34/2009) Page 88 of 97
Special Judge, CBI­01, Central, Delhi
127\. In view of the aforesaid, answers to the aforesaid three questions are
as follows :
(I) For prosecution under Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988, once sanction
under Section 19 of the said Act is granted, there is no necessity for
obtaining further sanction under Section 197 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure.
(II) Where a public servant is sought to be prosecuted under the provisions of
Prevention of Corruption Act read with Section 120­B IPC and sanction under
Section 19 of Act of 1988 has been granted, it is not at all required to
obtain sanction under Section 197 Cr.P.C. from the State Government or any
other authority merely because the public servant is also charged under
Section 120­B IPC.
(III) The offences under the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 as well as
charge of criminal conspiracy, cannot be said to constitute "acts in discharge
of official duty." (emphasis supplied by me).
113\. During the arguments, the Ld. Sr. PP for the CBI as well as the Ld.
Defence counsels have admitted that the above judgment of the Hon'ble High
Court of Allahabad, has not been set aside, altered or modified, till date.
114\. Furthermore, it has been held by the Hon'ble Supreme Court, in the case
of "Mohd. Hadi Raja" (Supra), as relied by the Ld. Sr. PP for the CBI, as
under :­
21\. It is to be noted though through the contrivance or mechanism of
corporate structure, some of the public undertakings are performing the
functions which are intended to be performed by the State, ex facie, such
instrumentality or CBI Vs. R.S.Sharma etc.(CC No. 34/2009) Page 89 of 97
Special Judge, CBI­01, Central, Delhi agency being a juridical person has an
independent status and the action taken by them, however important the same
may be in the interest of the State cannot be held to be an action taken by or
on behalf of the Government as such within the meaning of Section 197 CrPC.
XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX
23\. The importance of the public undertaking should not be minimised. The
Government's concern for the smooth functioning of such instrumentality or
agency can be well appreciated but on the plain language of Section 197 of
the Code of Criminal Procedure, the protection by way of sanction is not
available to the officers of the public undertaking because being a juridical
person and a distinct legal entity, such instrumentality stands on a different
footing than the government departments.
24\. It is also to be indicated here that in 1973, the concept of
instrumentality or agency of State was quite distinct. The interest of the
State in such instrumentality or agency was well known. Even then, the
legislature in its wisdom did not think it necessary to expressly include the
officers of such instrumentality or the government company for affording
protection by way of sanction under Section 197 CrPC.
25\. It will be appropriate to notice that whenever there was a felt need to
include other functionaries within the definition of "public servant", they
have been declared to be "public servants" under several special and local
acts. If the legislature had intended to include officers of an
instrumentality or agency for bringing such officers under the protective
umbrella of Section 197 CrPC, it would have done so expressly.
26\. Therefore, it will not be just and proper to bring such persons within
the ambit of Section 197 by liberally construing the provisions of Section
197. Such exercise of liberal construction will not be confined to the
permissible limit of interpretation of a statute by a court of law but will
amount to legislation by court.
27\. Therefore, in our considered opinion, the protection by way of sanction
under Section 197 of the Code of Criminal CBI Vs. R.S.Sharma etc.(CC No.
34/2009) Page 90 of 97 Special Judge, CBI­01, Central, Delhi Procedure is not
applicable to the officers of government companies or the public undertakings
even when such public undertakings are "State" within the meaning of Article
12 of the Constitution on account of deep and pervasive control of the
Government. The appeals are disposed of accordingly. It is, however, made
clear that we have not taken consideration various other grounds raised in
these appeals challenging the maintainability of the criminal proceedings
initiated against the officers concerned of the public undertakings or the
government companies. It will be open to the accused concerned to challenge
the validity of the criminal cases initiated against them on other grounds, if
such challenge is available in law. Such questions, if raised, in these
appeals are kept open to be considered in accordance with law by the
appropriate authority. (emphasis supplied by me)
115\. In view of above pronouncements, I am of the considered opinion that the
judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court, in "N.K. Ganguly's" case (Supra) is not
applicable to the facts and circumstances of the present case. The case of the
public servants in the present case, who are the bank officials, is squarely
covered by the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in "Mohd. Hadi Raja's"
case (Supra). Therefore, a separate sanction under Section 197 Cr.P.C., in
addition to the sanction for their prosecution under Section 19 of the P.C.
Act, is not required.
116\. Perusal of the record further shows that the competent authority, vide
sanction order Ex.PW1/A, has granted the CBI Vs. R.S.Sharma etc.(CC No.
34/2009) Page 91 of 97 Special Judge, CBI­01, Central, Delhi sanction under
Section 19 of the P.C. Act, for prosecution of accused D.K. Parashar, Loan
Officer, Punjab National Bank, Gandhi Nagar Branch, Delhi. The competent
authority has also granted sanction for prosecution of accused Ashok Kumar
Luthra, SSIO, under Section 19 of the P.C. Act, vide sanction order Ex.PW2/A.
The sanction for prosecution of accused R.S. Sharma, the then Chief Manager,
Punjab National Bank, Gandhi Nagar Branch, Delhi, is not required as the
accused R.S. Sharma, had already retired from service, on the date when the
chargesheet was filed before the concerned court.
117\. Perusal of the record further shows that PW­1 Sh. Brij Mohan Mittal,
Chief General Manager, Punjab National Bank, who was posted as Dy. General
Manager, Zonal Manager, at Central UP Zone, Agra, has categorically stated
that he received a request from CBI for grant of sanction for prosecution of
the accused and he went through the documents and found it a fit case to
accord sanction for prosecution of accused D.K. Parashar. He has proved his
sanction order as Ex.PW1/A. In his cross­examination, he has also stated that
he accorded the sanction on the basis of the contents and material placed
before him. He has further stated that the CBI had provided him the CBI Vs.
R.S.Sharma etc.(CC No. 34/2009) Page 92 of 97 Special Judge, CBI­01, Central,
Delhi investigation report and the statement of witnesses and after perusal of
the record, he accorded sanction for prosecution of accused D.K Parashar.
118\. Perusal of the sanction order Ex.PW1/A also indicates that the same is a
detailed order, wherein, the entire facts and circumstances of the case have
been disclosed. It has been specifically mentioned that he being the competent
authority to remove accused D.K. Parashar, after fully and carefully examining
the statement of witnesses recorded during the investigation and the concerned
documents placed before him, with regard to the allegations and circumstances
of the case and after fully applying his mind and consideration, the
implications, consider that accused D.K. Parashar should be prosecuted in the
court of law for the said offences. The details mentioned in the sanction
order Ex.PW1/A clearly indicate that this witness has carefully gone through
the entire documents and has applied his mind to the facts and circumstances
of the case, before granting sanction for prosecution of accused D.K.
Parashar.
119\. Perusal of the record also shows that PW­2 Sh. Vijay Narayan Saxena, who
was posted as Zonal Manager Punjab CBI Vs. R.S.Sharma etc.(CC No. 34/2009)
Page 93 of 97 Special Judge, CBI­01, Central, Delhi National Bank has also
stated that he was competent to remove Ashok Luthra SSIO from services being
the Zonal Manager and he had gone through the documents and applied his mind
to the facts of the case. He has proved the sanction order Ex.PW2/A. Perusal
of the sanction order Ex.PW2/A also indicates that a detailed exhaustive order
has been passed by PW­2 V.N. Saxena for grant of sanction under Section 19 of
the P.C. Act, for prosecution of accused Ashok Luthra. The said sanction order
also indicates that the competent authority has also gone through the entire
record and has applied his mind to the facts and circumstances of this case,
while granting sanction for prosecution of accused Ashok Luthra.
120\. Furthermore, it has been held by the Hon'ble Supreme Court, in case
titled as "State of Maharashtra Through C.B.I. vs. Mahesh G. Jain", reported
as, (2013) 8 SCC 119, as under :
13\. From the aforesaid authorities the following principles can be culled
out:­
(a) It is incumbent on the prosecution to prove that the valid sanction has
been granted by the sanctioning authority after being satisfied that a case
for sanction has been made out.
(b) The sanction order may expressly show that the sanctioning authority has
perused the material placed before him and, after consideration of the
circumstances, has granted sanction for prosecution.
(c) The prosecution may prove by adducing the evidence that CBI Vs. R.S.Sharma
etc.(CC No. 34/2009) Page 94 of 97 Special Judge, CBI­01, Central, Delhi the
material was placed before the sanctioning authority and his satisfaction was
arrived at upon perusal of the material placed before him.
(d) Grant of sanction is only an administrative function and the sanctioning
authority is required to prima facie reach the satisfaction that relevant
facts would constitute the offence.
(e) The adequacy of material placed before the sanctioning authority cannot be
gone into by the court as it does not sit in appeal over the sanction order.
(f) If the sanctioning authority has perused all the materials placed before
him and some of them have not been proved that would not vitiate the order of
sanction.
(g) The order of sanction is a pre­requisite as it is intended to provide a
safeguard to public servant against frivolous and vexatious litigants, but
simultaneously an order of sanction should not be construed in a pedantic
manner and there should not be hyper­technical approach to test its validity.
(emphasis supplied by me)
121\. In view of the above pronouncements and the depositions of PW­1 Brij
Mohan Mittal and PW­2 Vijay Narayan Saxena and the contents of the sanction
orders Ex.PW1/A & Ex.PW2/A, I am of the considered opinion that in both the
cases the competent authorities have applied their mind, before granting
sanction for prosecution of the accused persons and therefore, the sanction
orders Ex.PW1/A & Ex.PW2/A, are perfectly legal and sustainable orders.
CBI Vs. R.S.Sharma etc.(CC No. 34/2009) Page 95 of 97 Special Judge, CBI­01,
Central, Delhi RESULT
122\. In view of the above discussion, I am of the considered opinion that the
prosecution / CBI has successfully proved its case, beyond a shadow of doubt,
for the offence punishable under Section 120­B read with Section
467/468/471/420 IPC & Section 13(2) read with Section 13 (1)(d)(iii) of The
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988, against accused R.S.Sharma (A­1); Pawan
Kumar Gupta (A­3); Ashok Luthra (A­4); D.K.Parashar (A­5) and Suresh Chand
Gupta (A­8). The prosecution has also successfully proved its case against
accused Pawan Kumar Gupta (A­3), beyond a shadow of doubt, for the substantive
offences punishable under Section 467/468/420 IPC. The prosecution has also
successfully proved its case, beyond a shadow of doubt, against accused
R.S.Sharma (A­1); Ashok Luthra (A­4) and D.K.Parashar (A­5) for the
substantive offence punishable under Section 13(2) read with Section
13(1)(d)(iii) of The Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988. They are,
accordingly, held guilty and convicted for the said offences. However, the
prosecution has failed to prove any case against accused Manoj Kumar Sharma
(A­6) and Arvind Kumar Sharma (A­7) and therefore, both of them are hereby
acquitted of the charges for all the offences, as framed against them, in the
present case.
CBI Vs. R.S.Sharma etc.(CC No. 34/2009) Page 96 of 97 Special Judge, CBI­01,
Central, Delhi Let the convicts be heard on the point of sentence, on the next
date of hearing.
It is ordered accordingly.
Announced in open Court on this 29th day of August, 2016 BRIJESH KUMAR GARG
Special Judge:CBI­01 Central District. Delhi CBI Vs. R.S.Sharma etc.(CC No.
34/2009) Page 97 of 97 Special Judge, CBI­01, Central, Delhi
Kumar Gupta (A­3); Ashok Luthra (A­4); D.K.Parashar (A­5) and Suresh Chand
Gupta (A­8). The prosecution has also successfully proved its case against
accused Pawan Kumar Gupta (A­3), beyond a shadow of doubt, for the substantive
offences punishable under Section 467/468/420 IPC. The prosecution has also
successfully proved its case, beyond a shadow of doubt, against accused
R.S.Sharma (A­1); Ashok Luthra (A­4) and D.K.Parashar (A­5) for the
substantive offence punishable under Section 13(2) read with Section
13(1)(d)(iii) of The Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988. They are,
accordingly, held guilty and convicted for the said offences. However, the
prosecution has failed to prove any case against accused Manoj Kumar Sharma
(A­6) and Arvind Kumar Sharma (A­7) and therefore, both of them are hereby
acquitted of the charges for all the offences, as framed against them, in the
present case.
CBI Vs. R.S.Sharma etc.(CC No. 34/2009) Page 96 of 97 Special Judge, CBI­01,
Central, Delhi Let the convicts be heard on the point of sentence, on the next
date of hearing.
                   Delhi.
               3) Pawan Kumar Gupta
                   S/o Sh. Suresh Chand Gupta,
                   R/o 6/233, Mohalla Dungar,
                   Farsh Bazar, Shahdara,
                   Delhi.
               4) Ashok Luthra
                   S/o Sh. Suraj Prakash,
                   R/o 13/87, Subhadra Colony,
                   Sarai Rohilla,
                   Delhi­110 035.
               5) D.K. Parashar
                   S/o Late Sh.Kali Charan Sharma,
                   R/o 1449/16. Gali No.10,
                   Durgapuri, Delhi­110 093.
    CBI  Vs. R.S.Sharma etc.(CC No. 34/2009)      Page  1   of  97                         Special Judge, CBI­01, Central, Delhi 
                        6) Manoj Kumar Sharma
                          S/o Sh. Bhagwan Sahai Sharma,
                          R/o 27/91, Gali No. 7,
                          Viswash Nagar, Shahdara,
Kumar Gupta (A­3); Ashok Luthra (A­4); D.K.Parashar (A­5) and Suresh Chand
Gupta (A­8). The prosecution has also successfully proved its case against
accused Pawan Kumar Gupta (A­3), beyond a shadow of doubt, for the substantive
offences punishable under Section 467/468/420 IPC. The prosecution has also
successfully proved its case, beyond a shadow of doubt, against accused
R.S.Sharma (A­1); Ashok Luthra (A­4) and D.K.Parashar (A­5) for the
substantive offence punishable under Section 13(2) read with Section
13(1)(d)(iii) of The Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988. They are,
accordingly, held guilty and convicted for the said offences. However, the
prosecution has failed to prove any case against accused Manoj Kumar Sharma
(A­6) and Arvind Kumar Sharma (A­7) and therefore, both of them are hereby
acquitted of the charges for all the offences, as framed against them, in the
present case.
CBI Vs. R.S.Sharma etc.(CC No. 34/2009) Page 96 of 97 Special Judge, CBI­01,
Central, Delhi Let the convicts be heard on the point of sentence, on the next
date of hearing.
                   Delhi.
               3) Pawan Kumar Gupta
                   S/o Sh. Suresh Chand Gupta,
                   R/o 6/233, Mohalla Dungar,
                   Farsh Bazar, Shahdara,
                   Delhi.
               4) Ashok Luthra
                   S/o Sh. Suraj Prakash,
                   R/o 13/87, Subhadra Colony,
                   Sarai Rohilla,
                   Delhi­110 035.
               5) D.K. Parashar
                   S/o Late Sh.Kali Charan Sharma,
                   R/o 1449/16. Gali No.10,
                   Durgapuri, Delhi­110 093.
    CBI  Vs. R.S.Sharma etc.(CC No. 34/2009)      Page  1   of  97                         Special Judge, CBI­01, Central, Delhi 
                        6) Manoj Kumar Sharma
                          S/o Sh. Bhagwan Sahai Sharma,
                          R/o 27/91, Gali No. 7,
                          Viswash Nagar, Shahdara,
Kumar Gupta (A­3); Ashok Luthra (A­4); D.K.Parashar (A­5) and Suresh Chand
Gupta (A­8). The prosecution has also successfully proved its case against
accused Pawan Kumar Gupta (A­3), beyond a shadow of doubt, for the substantive
offences punishable under Section 467/468/420 IPC. The prosecution has also
successfully proved its case, beyond a shadow of doubt, against accused
R.S.Sharma (A­1); Ashok Luthra (A­4) and D.K.Parashar (A­5) for the
substantive offence punishable under Section 13(2) read with Section
13(1)(d)(iii) of The Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988. They are,
accordingly, held guilty and convicted for the said offences. However, the
prosecution has failed to prove any case against accused Manoj Kumar Sharma
(A­6) and Arvind Kumar Sharma (A­7) and therefore, both of them are hereby
acquitted of the charges for all the offences, as framed against them, in the
present case.
CBI Vs. R.S.Sharma etc.(CC No. 34/2009) Page 96 of 97 Special Judge, CBI­01,
Central, Delhi Let the convicts be heard on the point of sentence, on the next
date of hearing.
                   Delhi.
               3) Pawan Kumar Gupta
                   S/o Sh. Suresh Chand Gupta,
                   R/o 6/233, Mohalla Dungar,
                   Farsh Bazar, Shahdara,
                   Delhi.
               4) Ashok Luthra
                   S/o Sh. Suraj Prakash,
                   R/o 13/87, Subhadra Colony,
                   Sarai Rohilla,
                   Delhi­110 035.
               5) D.K. Parashar
                   S/o Late Sh.Kali Charan Sharma,
                   R/o 1449/16. Gali No.10,
                   Durgapuri, Delhi­110 093.
    CBI  Vs. R.S.Sharma etc.(CC No. 34/2009)      Page  1   of  97                         Special Judge, CBI­01, Central, Delhi 
                        6) Manoj Kumar Sharma
                          S/o Sh. Bhagwan Sahai Sharma,
                          R/o 27/91, Gali No. 7,
                          Viswash Nagar, Shahdara,
                          Delhi­110 032.
                       7) Arvind Kumar Sharma
                          S/o Sh. K.S. Sharma,
                          R/o 4/39, Subhash Gali,
                          Viswash Nagar, Shahdara,
                          Delhi.
                       8) Suresh Chand Gupta
                          R/o 6/233, Mohalla Dungar,
                          Farsh Bazar, Shahdara,
                          Delhi.
    Date of Institution                                      :   24.11.1998
Kumar Gupta (A­3); Ashok Luthra (A­4); D.K.Parashar (A­5) and Suresh Chand
Gupta (A­8). The prosecution has also successfully proved its case against
accused Pawan Kumar Gupta (A­3), beyond a shadow of doubt, for the substantive
offences punishable under Section 467/468/420 IPC. The prosecution has also
successfully proved its case, beyond a shadow of doubt, against accused
R.S.Sharma (A­1); Ashok Luthra (A­4) and D.K.Parashar (A­5) for the
substantive offence punishable under Section 13(2) read with Section
13(1)(d)(iii) of The Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988. They are,
accordingly, held guilty and convicted for the said offences. However, the
prosecution has failed to prove any case against accused Manoj Kumar Sharma
(A­6) and Arvind Kumar Sharma (A­7) and therefore, both of them are hereby
acquitted of the charges for all the offences, as framed against them, in the
present case.
CBI Vs. R.S.Sharma etc.(CC No. 34/2009) Page 96 of 97 Special Judge, CBI­01,
Central, Delhi Let the convicts be heard on the point of sentence, on the next
date of hearing.
                   Delhi.
               3) Pawan Kumar Gupta
                   S/o Sh. Suresh Chand Gupta,
                   R/o 6/233, Mohalla Dungar,
                   Farsh Bazar, Shahdara,
                   Delhi.
               4) Ashok Luthra
                   S/o Sh. Suraj Prakash,
                   R/o 13/87, Subhadra Colony,
                   Sarai Rohilla,
                   Delhi­110 035.
               5) D.K. Parashar
                   S/o Late Sh.Kali Charan Sharma,
                   R/o 1449/16. Gali No.10,
                   Durgapuri, Delhi­110 093.
    CBI  Vs. R.S.Sharma etc.(CC No. 34/2009)      Page  1   of  97                         Special Judge, CBI­01, Central, Delhi 
                        6) Manoj Kumar Sharma
                          S/o Sh. Bhagwan Sahai Sharma,
                          R/o 27/91, Gali No. 7,
                          Viswash Nagar, Shahdara,
                          Delhi­110 032.
                       7) Arvind Kumar Sharma
                          S/o Sh. K.S. Sharma,
                          R/o 4/39, Subhash Gali,
                          Viswash Nagar, Shahdara,
                          Delhi.
                       8) Suresh Chand Gupta
                          R/o 6/233, Mohalla Dungar,
                          Farsh Bazar, Shahdara,
                          Delhi.
    Date of Institution                                      :   24.11.1998
Kumar Gupta (A­3); Ashok Luthra (A­4); D.K.Parashar (A­5) and Suresh Chand
Gupta (A­8). The prosecution has also successfully proved its case against
accused Pawan Kumar Gupta (A­3), beyond a shadow of doubt, for the substantive
offences punishable under Section 467/468/420 IPC. The prosecution has also
successfully proved its case, beyond a shadow of doubt, against accused
R.S.Sharma (A­1); Ashok Luthra (A­4) and D.K.Parashar (A­5) for the
substantive offence punishable under Section 13(2) read with Section
13(1)(d)(iii) of The Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988. They are,
accordingly, held guilty and convicted for the said offences. However, the
prosecution has failed to prove any case against accused Manoj Kumar Sharma
(A­6) and Arvind Kumar Sharma (A­7) and therefore, both of them are hereby
acquitted of the charges for all the offences, as framed against them, in the
present case.
CBI Vs. R.S.Sharma etc.(CC No. 34/2009) Page 96 of 97 Special Judge, CBI­01,
Central, Delhi Let the convicts be heard on the point of sentence, on the next
date of hearing.
