Madras High Court
Hemalatha Ramesh vs State By Inspector Of Police ... on 10 January, 2007
Author: K Basha
Bench: K Basha
ORDER K.N. Basha, J.
1\. Mr. M. Vijayakumar, learned Counsel for the petitioner submits that the
petitioner has come forward with this petition seeking for the relief of
quashing the proceedings initiated against the petitioner for the alleged
offence under Sections 406 and 420 I.P.C.
2\. Learned Counsel for the petitioner submits that originally a private
complaint was preferred by the defacto complainant against the petitioner and
the same was pending under Section 156(3) of Cr.P.C., by the learned Judicial
Magistrate No. IV, Coimbatore for a direction to the respondent police to
register a case and investigate the same and file a final report. It is
submitted by the learned Counsel for the petitioner that final report was
filed by the respondent police on 3.11.2003 for the offence under Sections 406
and 420 I.P.C. and the learned Counsel also submits that the allegation
against the petitioner is that the petitioner and her husband one Ramesh were
running a company in the name and style of " Ansa Consmachems P. Ltd " and the
petitioner is a Director. It is also submitted by the learned Counsel for the
placed reliance on two decisions namely one decision of the Honourable Supreme
Court in Devender Kumar Singla v. Baldev Krishan Singla . In that decision,
the Honourable Supreme Court has held that mens rea dishonest intention on the
part of the accused could be proved from the circumstances and there need not
be any direct evidence. That case was decided by the Apex Court after full
fledged trial. The another decision in Meena R. Sampath v. The State reported
in 2005 (5) CTC 533 relied by the learned Counsel for the second respondent-
defacto complainant is relating to mens rea for the offence of cheating cannot
be considered at the initial stage. Those two decisions are not applicable to
the facts of the instant case, in view of the findings of this Court as stated
above.
15\. Therefore, as already stated that there is absolutely no specific
allegations levelled against the petitioner for constituting the offence of
cheating, criminal breach of trust and there is also absolutely no materials
available on record through statements recorded under Section 161 of Cr.P.C.
from the witnesses and as such allowing the proceedings to continue against
petitioner is a Director. It is also submitted by the learned Counsel for the
petitioner that the further allegation against the petitioner is that the
defacto complainant was appointed as Stockist for Tamil Nadu and an agreement
was entered into between them on 7.8.1999 and a sum of Rs. 5 lakhs was paid by
the defacto complainant as security deposit and it was also represented that
the said defacto complainant would get 5% commission for the goods sold and a
sum of Rs. 15,000/- could be earned per month. It is further submitted that
the said Ramesh issued a receipt for the sum of Rs. 5 lakhs and he asked
another Rs. 5 lakhs for making the defacto complainant as a Super Stockist and
giving entire business through the defacto complainant. The defacto
complainant was not able to pay another amount of Rs. 5 lakhs and further from
7.8.1999 to January, 2000 i.e. for a period of six months the turnover was
only to the tune of Rs. 3 lakhs and there was no income. It is also mentioned
in the complaint that the defacto complainant has sent a notice dated
31.1.2000 to the complainant to cancel the agreement dated 7.8.1999 and to
withdraw herself from the capacity of stockist and also to give back the
security amount to her. A reply notice dated 22.2.2000 was sent by the accused
company. In the notice, it was stated that the security amount would be paid
back to her with with one percent interest but no money was paid and hence the
defacto complainant sent another notice dated 23.2.2000 through her lawyer for
which the defacto complainant received a reply dated 19.4.2002 from the
petitioner-accused. Meanwhile, the husband of the petitioner fell ill and the
defacto complainant resorted to give a complaint against the petitioner and
subsequently, the husband of the petitioner died, pending investigation. It is
brought to the notice of this Court by the learned Counsel that the respondent
police after completion of the investigation filed the final report.
3\. Learned Counsel for the petitioner submits that the entire allegations
contained in the complaint and other materials available on record constitutes
only a civil dispute and there is no offence of cheating or criminal breach of
trust made out. It is also submitted by the learned Counsel for the petitioner
that the averments and the allegations contained in the complaint and the
materials available on record may amount only to a breach of contract and
cannot give rise to criminal prosecution for cheating as there is absolutely
no material that the accused had dishonest intention at the inception of the
transaction. Therefore, it is contended by the learned Counsel for the
petitioner that no offence is made out either against the petitioner or
against her husband. Even the entire materials available on record clearly
shows that there was transaction only between the husband of the petitioner
and the defacto complainant and the petitioner herein is no way in the
picture. Therefore, it is contended by the learned Counsel for the petitioner
that the proceedings initiated against the petitioner for the alleged offence
under Sections 406 and 420 I.P.C is liable to be quashed.
4\. Learned Counsel for the petitioner also placed reliance on the decision of
the Honourable Supreme Court in Hridaya Ranjan Pd. Verma v. State of Bihar
reported in 2000 CRI. L.J. 2983 to the proposition that mere breach of
contract would not amount to an offence of cheating and further the
allegations contained in the complaint should make out the ingredient to the
effect that the dishonest intention was even at the beginning of negotiations.
5\. Learned Counsel for the petitioner further placed reliance on an yet
another decision of the Honourable Supreme Court in Ajay Mitra v. State of
M.P. reported in 2003 CRI. L.J. 1249 to the proposition that the allegation
made in the complaint do not prima facie disclose commission of the offence of
cheating, the proceedings are liable to be quashed and further it is pointed
out by the learned Counsel for the petitioner that in that case, the
Honourable Supreme Court has observed that the accused in the case were not in
picture at time when complainant alleged to have spent money in improving
bottling plant pursuant to agreement. Learned Counsel for the petitioner
submits that in the instant case also, admittedly there was an agreement only
between the husband of the petitioner and the defacto complainant and the
petitioner is nowhere in picture and therefore, the proceedings initiated
against the petitioner is liable to be quashed.
6\. Mr.N. Manoharan learned Counsel appearing for the defacto complainant
contended that there are allegations levelled against the petitioner even in
the complaint. It is also submitted by the learned Counsel for the petitioner
that mens rea of committing offence of cheating cannot be considered at the
initial stage before the commencement of trial.
7\. Learned Counsel for the second respondent-defacto complainant has placed
reliance on the decision of this Court in Meena R. Sampath v. The State
reported in 2005 (5) CTC 533 to the above said proposition of law.
8\. Learned Counsel for the second respondent-defacto complainant has also
placed reliance on the decision of the Honourable Supreme Court in Devender
Kumar Singla v. Baldev Krishan Singla , to the proposition that the essential
ingredients for cheating namely, making of a false representation, held, is
one of the ingredients and such allegation need not be made in express words
and the same may be inferred from all the circumstances including the conduct
of the accused in obtaining the property.
9\. Heard the learned Additional Public Prosecutor on the submissions made by
the learned Counsel for the petitioner.
10\. I have carefully considered the rival contentions put forward by either
side and also perused the quash petition and the entire materials available on
record including the statement of witnesses recorded under Section 161 of
Cr.P.C.
11\. At the outset, it is to be stated that there are only vague and general
allegations levelled against the petitioner including her husband but the
undisputed fact remains that even in the complaint there is a specific
allegation to the effect that there was an agreement entered into between the
petitioner's husband and the defacto complainant and such agreement only gives
rise to cause of action and it is nowhere stated even in the complaint about
the presence of the petitioner herein during the time when the transaction
took place between the petitioner's husband and the company. It is also
pertinent to note that apart from such vague and general allegations in the
complaint there is absolutely no corresponding materials available on record
through the statements recorded under Section 161 of Cr.P.C. from the
witnesses implicating the petitioner herein.
12\. Learned Counsel for the petitioner placed reliance on the two decisions
namely;
1\. Hridaya Ranjan Pd. Verma v. State of Bihar reported in 2000 CRI. L.J. 2983
to that effect that mere breach of contract do not constitute the offence of
cheating; and
2\. Ajay Mitra v. State of M.P. reported in 2003 Cri.L.J. 1249 for the
proposition that when the accused is shown to be nowhere in picture during the
course of transaction by the defacto complainant when the particular
transaction took place, the accused cannot be mulcted with the criminal
liability of the offence of cheating. As already pointed out, even the
allegations contained in the complaint do not disclose any offence of cheating
or criminal breach of trust against the petitioner herein. As it is
subsequently mentioned even in the complaint that there was an agreement only
between the petitioner's husband and the breach of such agreement only gives
rise to the criminal liabilities lodged by the defacto complainant, the
decision of the Apex Court as cited supra is squarely applicable to the facts
of this case and in this case also, the petitioner is nowhere in picture
during the course of transaction took place between the petitioner's husband
and the defacto complainant.
13\. Learned Counsel for the respondents though contended that there are
specific allegations levelled against the petitioner, the perusal of the
complaint as already pointed out shows that there are only vague and general
allegations against the petitioner. The undisputed fact remains that there is
specific allegation levelled only against the husband of the petitioner as
there was an agreement only between the husband of the petitioner the defacto
complainant. Therefore, the contention of the counsel for the second
respondent-defacto complainant cannot be accepted.
14\. Learned Counsel for the second respondent-defacto complainant has also
placed reliance on two decisions namely one decision of the Honourable Supreme
Court in Devender Kumar Singla v. Baldev Krishan Singla . In that decision,
the Honourable Supreme Court has held that mens rea dishonest intention on the
part of the accused could be proved from the circumstances and there need not
be any direct evidence. That case was decided by the Apex Court after full
fledged trial. The another decision in Meena R. Sampath v. The State reported
in 2005 (5) CTC 533 relied by the learned Counsel for the second respondent-
defacto complainant is relating to mens rea for the offence of cheating cannot
be considered at the initial stage. Those two decisions are not applicable to
the facts of the instant case, in view of the findings of this Court as stated
above.
15\. Therefore, as already stated that there is absolutely no specific
allegations levelled against the petitioner for constituting the offence of
cheating, criminal breach of trust and there is also absolutely no materials
available on record through statements recorded under Section 161 of Cr.P.C.
from the witnesses and as such allowing the proceedings to continue against
the petitioner would amount to a clear case of abuse of process of Court and
as such the proceedings is liable to quashed against the petitioner.
Accordingly, the criminal original petition is allowed. Consequently,
connected criminal miscellaneous petitions are closed.
placed reliance on two decisions namely one decision of the Honourable Supreme
Court in Devender Kumar Singla v. Baldev Krishan Singla . In that decision,
the Honourable Supreme Court has held that mens rea dishonest intention on the
part of the accused could be proved from the circumstances and there need not
be any direct evidence. That case was decided by the Apex Court after full
fledged trial. The another decision in Meena R. Sampath v. The State reported
in 2005 (5) CTC 533 relied by the learned Counsel for the second respondent-
defacto complainant is relating to mens rea for the offence of cheating cannot
be considered at the initial stage. Those two decisions are not applicable to
the facts of the instant case, in view of the findings of this Court as stated
above.
15\. Therefore, as already stated that there is absolutely no specific
allegations levelled against the petitioner for constituting the offence of
cheating, criminal breach of trust and there is also absolutely no materials
available on record through statements recorded under Section 161 of Cr.P.C.
from the witnesses and as such allowing the proceedings to continue against
petitioner is a Director. It is also submitted by the learned Counsel for the
petitioner that the further allegation against the petitioner is that the
defacto complainant was appointed as Stockist for Tamil Nadu and an agreement
was entered into between them on 7.8.1999 and a sum of Rs. 5 lakhs was paid by
the defacto complainant as security deposit and it was also represented that
the said defacto complainant would get 5% commission for the goods sold and a
sum of Rs. 15,000/- could be earned per month. It is further submitted that
the said Ramesh issued a receipt for the sum of Rs. 5 lakhs and he asked
another Rs. 5 lakhs for making the defacto complainant as a Super Stockist and
giving entire business through the defacto complainant. The defacto
complainant was not able to pay another amount of Rs. 5 lakhs and further from
7.8.1999 to January, 2000 i.e. for a period of six months the turnover was
only to the tune of Rs. 3 lakhs and there was no income. It is also mentioned
in the complaint that the defacto complainant has sent a notice dated
31.1.2000 to the complainant to cancel the agreement dated 7.8.1999 and to
withdraw herself from the capacity of stockist and also to give back the
security amount to her. A reply notice dated 22.2.2000 was sent by the accused
company. In the notice, it was stated that the security amount would be paid
back to her with with one percent interest but no money was paid and hence the
defacto complainant sent another notice dated 23.2.2000 through her lawyer for
placed reliance on two decisions namely one decision of the Honourable Supreme
Court in Devender Kumar Singla v. Baldev Krishan Singla . In that decision,
the Honourable Supreme Court has held that mens rea dishonest intention on the
part of the accused could be proved from the circumstances and there need not
be any direct evidence. That case was decided by the Apex Court after full
fledged trial. The another decision in Meena R. Sampath v. The State reported
in 2005 (5) CTC 533 relied by the learned Counsel for the second respondent-
defacto complainant is relating to mens rea for the offence of cheating cannot
be considered at the initial stage. Those two decisions are not applicable to
the facts of the instant case, in view of the findings of this Court as stated
above.
15\. Therefore, as already stated that there is absolutely no specific
allegations levelled against the petitioner for constituting the offence of
cheating, criminal breach of trust and there is also absolutely no materials
available on record through statements recorded under Section 161 of Cr.P.C.
from the witnesses and as such allowing the proceedings to continue against
petitioner is a Director. It is also submitted by the learned Counsel for the
petitioner that the further allegation against the petitioner is that the
defacto complainant was appointed as Stockist for Tamil Nadu and an agreement
was entered into between them on 7.8.1999 and a sum of Rs. 5 lakhs was paid by
the defacto complainant as security deposit and it was also represented that
the said defacto complainant would get 5% commission for the goods sold and a
sum of Rs. 15,000/- could be earned per month. It is further submitted that
the said Ramesh issued a receipt for the sum of Rs. 5 lakhs and he asked
another Rs. 5 lakhs for making the defacto complainant as a Super Stockist and
giving entire business through the defacto complainant. The defacto
complainant was not able to pay another amount of Rs. 5 lakhs and further from
7.8.1999 to January, 2000 i.e. for a period of six months the turnover was
only to the tune of Rs. 3 lakhs and there was no income. It is also mentioned
in the complaint that the defacto complainant has sent a notice dated
31.1.2000 to the complainant to cancel the agreement dated 7.8.1999 and to
withdraw herself from the capacity of stockist and also to give back the
security amount to her. A reply notice dated 22.2.2000 was sent by the accused
company. In the notice, it was stated that the security amount would be paid
back to her with with one percent interest but no money was paid and hence the
defacto complainant sent another notice dated 23.2.2000 through her lawyer for
placed reliance on two decisions namely one decision of the Honourable Supreme
Court in Devender Kumar Singla v. Baldev Krishan Singla . In that decision,
the Honourable Supreme Court has held that mens rea dishonest intention on the
part of the accused could be proved from the circumstances and there need not
be any direct evidence. That case was decided by the Apex Court after full
fledged trial. The another decision in Meena R. Sampath v. The State reported
in 2005 (5) CTC 533 relied by the learned Counsel for the second respondent-
defacto complainant is relating to mens rea for the offence of cheating cannot
be considered at the initial stage. Those two decisions are not applicable to
the facts of the instant case, in view of the findings of this Court as stated
above.
15\. Therefore, as already stated that there is absolutely no specific
allegations levelled against the petitioner for constituting the offence of
cheating, criminal breach of trust and there is also absolutely no materials
available on record through statements recorded under Section 161 of Cr.P.C.
from the witnesses and as such allowing the proceedings to continue against
petitioner is a Director. It is also submitted by the learned Counsel for the
petitioner that the further allegation against the petitioner is that the
defacto complainant was appointed as Stockist for Tamil Nadu and an agreement
was entered into between them on 7.8.1999 and a sum of Rs. 5 lakhs was paid by
the defacto complainant as security deposit and it was also represented that
the said defacto complainant would get 5% commission for the goods sold and a
sum of Rs. 15,000/- could be earned per month. It is further submitted that
the said Ramesh issued a receipt for the sum of Rs. 5 lakhs and he asked
another Rs. 5 lakhs for making the defacto complainant as a Super Stockist and
giving entire business through the defacto complainant. The defacto
complainant was not able to pay another amount of Rs. 5 lakhs and further from
7.8.1999 to January, 2000 i.e. for a period of six months the turnover was
only to the tune of Rs. 3 lakhs and there was no income. It is also mentioned
in the complaint that the defacto complainant has sent a notice dated
31.1.2000 to the complainant to cancel the agreement dated 7.8.1999 and to
withdraw herself from the capacity of stockist and also to give back the
security amount to her. A reply notice dated 22.2.2000 was sent by the accused
company. In the notice, it was stated that the security amount would be paid
back to her with with one percent interest but no money was paid and hence the
defacto complainant sent another notice dated 23.2.2000 through her lawyer for
which the defacto complainant received a reply dated 19.4.2002 from the
petitioner-accused. Meanwhile, the husband of the petitioner fell ill and the
defacto complainant resorted to give a complaint against the petitioner and
subsequently, the husband of the petitioner died, pending investigation. It is
brought to the notice of this Court by the learned Counsel that the respondent
police after completion of the investigation filed the final report.
3\. Learned Counsel for the petitioner submits that the entire allegations
contained in the complaint and other materials available on record constitutes
only a civil dispute and there is no offence of cheating or criminal breach of
trust made out. It is also submitted by the learned Counsel for the petitioner
that the averments and the allegations contained in the complaint and the
placed reliance on two decisions namely one decision of the Honourable Supreme
Court in Devender Kumar Singla v. Baldev Krishan Singla . In that decision,
the Honourable Supreme Court has held that mens rea dishonest intention on the
part of the accused could be proved from the circumstances and there need not
be any direct evidence. That case was decided by the Apex Court after full
fledged trial. The another decision in Meena R. Sampath v. The State reported
in 2005 (5) CTC 533 relied by the learned Counsel for the second respondent-
defacto complainant is relating to mens rea for the offence of cheating cannot
be considered at the initial stage. Those two decisions are not applicable to
the facts of the instant case, in view of the findings of this Court as stated
above.
15\. Therefore, as already stated that there is absolutely no specific
allegations levelled against the petitioner for constituting the offence of
cheating, criminal breach of trust and there is also absolutely no materials
available on record through statements recorded under Section 161 of Cr.P.C.
from the witnesses and as such allowing the proceedings to continue against
petitioner is a Director. It is also submitted by the learned Counsel for the
petitioner that the further allegation against the petitioner is that the
defacto complainant was appointed as Stockist for Tamil Nadu and an agreement
was entered into between them on 7.8.1999 and a sum of Rs. 5 lakhs was paid by
the defacto complainant as security deposit and it was also represented that
the said defacto complainant would get 5% commission for the goods sold and a
sum of Rs. 15,000/- could be earned per month. It is further submitted that
the said Ramesh issued a receipt for the sum of Rs. 5 lakhs and he asked
another Rs. 5 lakhs for making the defacto complainant as a Super Stockist and
giving entire business through the defacto complainant. The defacto
complainant was not able to pay another amount of Rs. 5 lakhs and further from
7.8.1999 to January, 2000 i.e. for a period of six months the turnover was
only to the tune of Rs. 3 lakhs and there was no income. It is also mentioned
in the complaint that the defacto complainant has sent a notice dated
31.1.2000 to the complainant to cancel the agreement dated 7.8.1999 and to
withdraw herself from the capacity of stockist and also to give back the
security amount to her. A reply notice dated 22.2.2000 was sent by the accused
company. In the notice, it was stated that the security amount would be paid
back to her with with one percent interest but no money was paid and hence the
defacto complainant sent another notice dated 23.2.2000 through her lawyer for
which the defacto complainant received a reply dated 19.4.2002 from the
petitioner-accused. Meanwhile, the husband of the petitioner fell ill and the
defacto complainant resorted to give a complaint against the petitioner and
subsequently, the husband of the petitioner died, pending investigation. It is
brought to the notice of this Court by the learned Counsel that the respondent
police after completion of the investigation filed the final report.
3\. Learned Counsel for the petitioner submits that the entire allegations
contained in the complaint and other materials available on record constitutes
only a civil dispute and there is no offence of cheating or criminal breach of
trust made out. It is also submitted by the learned Counsel for the petitioner
that the averments and the allegations contained in the complaint and the
placed reliance on two decisions namely one decision of the Honourable Supreme
Court in Devender Kumar Singla v. Baldev Krishan Singla . In that decision,
the Honourable Supreme Court has held that mens rea dishonest intention on the
part of the accused could be proved from the circumstances and there need not
be any direct evidence. That case was decided by the Apex Court after full
fledged trial. The another decision in Meena R. Sampath v. The State reported
in 2005 (5) CTC 533 relied by the learned Counsel for the second respondent-
defacto complainant is relating to mens rea for the offence of cheating cannot
be considered at the initial stage. Those two decisions are not applicable to
the facts of the instant case, in view of the findings of this Court as stated
above.
15\. Therefore, as already stated that there is absolutely no specific
allegations levelled against the petitioner for constituting the offence of
cheating, criminal breach of trust and there is also absolutely no materials
available on record through statements recorded under Section 161 of Cr.P.C.
from the witnesses and as such allowing the proceedings to continue against
