Karnataka High Court
Poojappa S/O Huchappa Since Dead ... vs Annapoornamma on 2 May, 2012
Author: Anand Byrareddy
    IN THE HIGH COURT OF KARNATAKA AT
    BANGALORE 
    V11    
    DATED THIS THE 0.: DAY OF MAY 20.1.; _  A  _ " 
    BEFORE:
    THE HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE ANAISIDASIEAYRAR I: 
    REGULAR FIRST APE_}_3__AL N'e.._'1'24V1   E
    BETWEEN :
    Sri.P00jappa,
    S/0. Huchappa,
    Major,   1  .  .  »
    Since dead by  E       
    Legal represeIIIa'ti__ve--s.-,5;7_ " Q  V" 
    1.
    Smt.   E'  - 
    W/0ivD0ddapG0j;1PP& @_P0.Qjappa,
    Aged"'abOut 89 ye.a.rsV,  -3  E < 4' 
defendantiio;:_1V,'a1'"l3xhibit D.5 was the permission to sell the land Stand
2 Eitiiibit D.6, was a Notiﬁcation, under the 1976 Act, ":S:Vendo'r's3ing that
the land in Survey No.377/4 stood in the name of H first defendant. Ex.D.8
disclosed that the property had been 5 20 acquired and there was a clear
admission that the land had been ac uired measurin 24 untas, standin in the Cl
g g g _ __ _ Chikkamuniyappa. Insofar as the allegation Development Authority
had not substantially subsequent to acquisition etc., were i1ot"addresse_--d
by '.the_ic--ou1'tu below, in the absence of Bangalore:Develop:Iient being
made a party to the suit. . p_
7\. On dismissed, the elaborate :ithe.V_leiarned counsel for the
appellanvts,"'vvithj;igrel;e:fi3nCei.ito:Vthei'_"'p'articulars, which may not
be wholly :relev.ant court fully agrees with the reasoning of the V_co~urt.--
bel.ovv'; the involved and elaborate reasoning V. ileai'ne"d.counseilmfor the
appellants does not appeal to this it court andtherefore', the same is
negated. The ' learned Counsel has placed reliance on several
.r,decis_.ions"of the apex court. The same are decisions rendered with
    Aged"'abOut 89 ye.a.rsV,  -3  E < 4' 
    S/Q'.D0ddap0Dja,ppa @ Poojappa,
      A Aged:,,ab0'u:A50 years}
    " .S/0'. Ddddjapjoojappa @ Poojappa,
    Aged,__ab0u'c 41 years,
    . Sri. 1\/iurlipoojaplzga,
    _ ' , Doddapoojappa @ Poojappa,
     Aged about 39 years,
    5
    5. Sri. Nagarathna,
    S/o.Doddapoojappa @ Poojappa,
    Aged about 45 years,
    All are residing at
    No.45, 4"' 'A' Main,
    Govindarajanagar,
    Bangalore -- 560 040.
    (By Shri. G. Vedavyasachar, Advocate)   V
    AND:
    1.
    Smt. Annapoornamma,"=  _   is
    W/o.T.S.Chandrasekhar,  _  '
    No.41, 9"'        
    West     »
    Barlgalore.-.     *
    Sri.V17eerappa,7'v_'vV  
    Major-,_ ' _ ' _    
    S/o. Late. Chikka M'11niyVa'ppa,
    Sj deceased 
    ' V'  _ Lega1i,repI*esentatiVes','
    ' 2(:Q,sti. M.1_1.nisVw.an1y,
    A S/Bo. Late-:Verappa,
    "-Aged' about 55 years,
    Residing at No.43,
     . _2"d Main Road,
    _ Marenahalli,
    W/'Aijayanagar Post,
    Bangalore -- 560 040.
     st. ;..r"ﬁrPI513I;I;;Ar1'»lffS_: B 7
    3. Sri. Appayyanna,
    Major,
    S/o. Late Chikka Muniyappa,
    Since deceased by his
    legal representatives   
    3(a) Smt. Yellamrna,
    W/o. Late Appayyanna,
    Aged about 65 years,
    3(b) Sri. Krishna, .   
    W/o. Late Appayyannaf' _   _
    Aged about 45 years,    '
    No.80, 'di'Cro1--si.s-;;i--_ A A
    Vysala Nagan ii
    Naga1l'abhaV'5i,  1  
    Bangalorei¥v5V6Q O72'.a,_ . '
    Both are residi'i;F1gtat  =i    
    [cause title aine  .  hi  A 
    as per the order dated A 'A
    7p.04.2011]'n ~  g A
     4' . _3lIali.l:<a«Val.:Hot1se Building,
    1' Co--operat'iVee~Society Limited,
    = No.7, 1'<3-'icrjoss,
    Malleswaram,
    , Bangalore,
     .. By its*Secretary. ...RESPONDENTS
_ Sjhri. N.S.Suresha, Advocate for Respondent No.2(a), Respondent No.3 (a and
b) ) 5 Respondent Nos. 1 and 4 are served) >l<>l<>l<>l<>|< This Regular First
Appeal is filed under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, against the judgement
andlhcidecree dated 21.8.2002 passed in O.S.No.1897/1985
on..t.h_effile..of4the Additional City Civil and Sessions
Ju.dge,.4Bar1galolr'e,i."dismissing ' the suit for declaration and
permanentinjuinctijonibg ' This Regular First Appeal' having" been heard on
O9.04.20112 and coming on 'for"*pgronouncemeji:t of Judgment this day, the
Court delivered the fo_l_low_i11g:-- Heard the" ieﬁgciied Counsel foﬁtiiesw
appellants. The learned Counsel for the respondentsiiremaiiis absent. the
trial court died during the pendency oi thegproc'eedi_ngs':iand is now
represented by his legal 2' ''vreprese'nt,atives, who znethe appellants. lit
iiiit'he:b}~case of the plaintiffs that the property as 2
desc'ri_bed'v'in_vCitil1e plaint schedule measuring about 24 guntas in
JSurvgey iNO.;377/4 was part of a larger extent of land measuring 4 la'c_re's
"purchased by Chikkamuniyappa, the father of the second 3 and third
defendants, from one Kariyarnrna, in the year 1939. It is claimed that since
there was some doubt about the of Kariyamma to the property that was sold, a
salegdeed obtained in respect of the very sameapropeiity o'nei_j;Pa'tel
Jalleel Saheb, in the name of V claimed that Chikkamuniyappa-tiand third'
defendants were membersppgof land' property purchased was in favour of in the
name of Veerappa. The;"'larrd, V When Miscellaneous) Inams Abolition to as '
the Inams AbolitioniiAct'»for"wbrey'ityi)"'----ijcairie into force,
Chikkamuniyappa had ppnladeaan application: to the competent authority for
grant of 0ccuapanciy«.rights__ and obtained a certiﬁcate to that effect in his
aa--nae;.l' we yea 1963, there was a partition in the family of
'.V.Chikl<famiuniyappa. Of the 4 acres possessed by the family, 10
":ifgunta's_,were kharab, 25 guntas was left for grazing of cattle by all
members of the family, including the paternal uncle of the Z second and third
defendants and the second defendant acquired about 2 acres and 5 guntas at the
partition and the thirdvde'"fer1d.ant acquired about 1 acre. The third
defendant is said suit property to one Kempaiah under a~r~e.gigtered sale.
'deed.datc.d 10.10.1963. Chikkamuniyappa and de'fend.an.t to have endorsed the
sale deed. the suit property from Kernpaiah diatedj 27.6.1969 and that he had
been in aliirgilivi-é~.\I:»13.:i~Q\;\"'(\Ij1ent of the suit property ever
defendant, who had got 2 acres share at the partition, had sold 30 and another
30 guntas to the plaintif17._onl.3. again sold yet another 25 guntas to one
Agrneeer under registered sale deed, dated 18.5.1966, who in turn,--. _had:
soid,,:"'the same to the plaintiff under a sale deed dated iii--
i'.The1=.pilaintiff had again purchased 25 guntas of land, ',which was; set
aside for grazing of cattle, from the second and ,,.iithird"defendants and
their paternal uncle, under a registered sale ii deed dated 19.5.1966. Thus,
the second defendant no longer had 3 any interest in the joint family
properties. The plaintiff and one Abdul Subhan, who purchased a total extent
of about 2vacre,s'~.and 30 guntas from the second defendant, jointly sold
first defendant. Originally, all thesettttlands "id,esiclrih_ed'i'as Survey
No.l78.
It was the plaintiffs' that...aftei'_i A Inani" Commissioner's order, the~.__
ofthe"se"lands were changed to 171 and 173. a new Survey No.377/4. The hat}
lost interest in the suit property? the sale deed 10.10.1963
executetl_'defendant, is said to have sold the same tothe first defendanit'
'under a registered sale deed dated 15.4,,1§;9'75it.. Neithernthe first
defendant nor the second defendant
-.any_,vi1rt,ere:s't.in the suit property, but the first defendant was tryingiitov 'interfere with the same and therefore, the suit for i . V declaration. 
1' _ V was further contended that the fourth defendant, in turn, who was
relying on certain acquisition proceedings in laying 3 claim to the suit
property was also not entitled to do so since acquisition proceedings were
quashed and that hadv~._iattiained ﬁnality. In any event, the sale of land by
the first fourth defendant is bad in law, as.:the--.fourthi_Vdel5e'ndiaIif.
admittedly a non-agriculturist.
3\. The first defendant and ﬁled written statement, to contend to state that
Chikl<amuniyappa_:" and lconstituted a joint family and property. The
property.rvbe*lo.niged to3fon.e Chikkamuniyappa and it was notljoint It was
jodi inam land and one Chikkapmunitiappxa .ha~d ifileidian application before
the Additional 'ii*Specivial Deputy Commissioner for Inams Abolition,
Bangalore, occupancy rights in respect of 1 acre in Survey No.l~7_. 3 and lid
in Survey no.l7l of Jodi Kempapura village of Ll3an,galor'e' North Taluk. The
competent authority considered the .i rival' claims and granted occupancy
rights in respect of the above 3 in favour of Chikkamuniyappa. The claim in
the plaint without reference to the land by its Survey Number is,
thereforeﬁvague and mischievous.
The first defendant contends that he any partition between
Chikkamuniyapp'a_a:ii.d idefer1d,ant.s 2 2 respect of the joint family
propertyﬁr;-or the exhtentfofiiilaindiiallottedV to defendants 2 and 3 at The
said defendantAV:_haid__also subsequent sale transactions. that the said
defendant of the suit property till it was Vfyalikaval House Building Co-
operative iSociety.i claimed that defendant no.3 had got ,,1%;iacIre of land
at apartition and it is that which is the suit schedule. :property__,_ is not
substantiated by producing the partition bother hand, the suit property
measures only 24 guntas not 1 acre. Even assuming that Chikkamuniyappa was
fitiie :father of defendants 2 and 3, Chikkamuniappa had acquired if title to
the suit land only after he was granted occupancy rights as 6 10 per an order
of the year 1965. The plaint had not even disclosed the survey numbers of the
alleged lands said to have "allotted to the share of defendant no.2 and
subsequently sold . It was claimed that after th.e~~c.0'ndu'ctHivoififlhei'
gcnerﬁtlii' if resurvey and settlement, old Survey Agrahara was given Re-
Survey and. pliodi, was given Sub--survey SS7?/'5"and 377/6. The first
defendant,' sale deed dated 15.4.1975, purchased 24 of es mi Re--Survey
No._377/4, (Old son of Chikkamuniyappa and enjoyment till it was transferreid-
in favour "of the'--aforesaid Society under a registered salegdﬁeedtsdated
i'Z6.._i5:.i1983 and since then, it was the Society which was. in possession
of the said land. Pursuant to an order issued by tfrei.Goverrirrient;= of
Karnataka under Section 20 of the Urban Land '.V.g(Ceilirigiiiandi Regulation)
Act, l976,(hereinafter referred to as ' the A for brevity) since the defendant
had transferred his 5 11 ownership in favour of the Society, he had no claim
over the same and the question of interference with the land did not It was
contended that the plaintiffs had document to show that the land purchased
land. The land was granted in after Chikkamuniyappa, his Eranppal to the
property and mutation entries thevliandj were also made in the nameof by the
first defendant, her it was sold in favour of the for acquisition under the
Land (hereinafter referred to as ' the 1961 Actlifor bre'vVi'ty)"'..lby
':tl1e4]§angalore Development Authority. A Fin_{a'l'VNotiﬁca'ti'o.n under
Section 6(1) of the 1961 Act was also issued and«.an.,_a"ward had been passed.
But however, possession of the land with the Society. On the above
contentions, the ';_f1rst defendant sought for dismissal of the suit. , he
fourth defendant also filed written statement to deny plaint allegations. The
fourth defendant was the Society, to S 12 whom land had been sold according to
the first defendant and it reiterated the contentions put--forward by the
first defenda:nt...¢_4ii~.._
4\. On the basis of the said pleadings, framed the following issues:--
" 1. Whether the prohveis 'theijowner' V and in possession of
suiyt..prpope'rty?
2\. Whether theplaintiff ipr(i)xVeiS'thatl" defendant No.1 is interfering
}Jvith=.hisa p--o'sse'ss:io:n*? ._ i ____ H i"Wl_}e_ther_"~the' " bad for non
--joinder of neCéS$9r.v.aP'0~rty?vtc'*. r ' defendant No.1 proves that she has
sold theusuit property in favour of Vyalikaval House éoyoperative Society
Limited, and hence the * V'soic.iety is the owner and in possession of the
suit _l.an'cll.'.'};
5\. Whether the defendant No.1 proves that the suit land is acquired by
Bangalore Development Authority? 3 written argurnents.
13
6\. Whether the first defendant is not a necessary party to the suit?
7\. Whether the plaintiff is entitled to permanent injunction?
Additional Issue dated L if
1\. Whether the fourtph_defendant provpesﬁthat thiei-.suit.iis». _ liable to
be dismissed forrthe reatsons 'sta_"t_edi";in"p'ara 9(a)' of its written
statement?t.'--'---
The court below has answered i'si's':.1es'f1",iZ, 6 and 7 in the negative and
issuesitll and "5 in_pithe_ ..afﬁri1nati\?e. It is that which is under
challenge_i"n present 'app._eal._
5\. The"lear'ne_d' for the appellants has supported the Memorandum.' of Appeal
with an elaborate synopsis and also ._ pIt"i's:iiL0nte'nded that it would have
to be seen whether the . ﬁnding of ptheiscourt as to the ownership of the
plaintiff of the suit iufproperty vis--a--vis the ownership of the ﬁrst
defendant and the ' defendant and the contention whether the land had been 5
14 acquired, can be sustained. The learned Counsel would point out that these
points are considered with reference to issue and
5\. The learned counsel would submit that court below that there was no
materialwproducedto'-ttemonjstrate ' that the land in Survey No.l78, was This
is explained by the circumstaiice thatin 'all"'_:theri>4s'ale'deedsV produced
by the plaintiff, the land to have been granted at the inams abolition number
of the proceedings is date. This is not disputed by Commissioner, in those
proceedi_:ngs_! that property was a portion of Survey No.~l7l~. The
"subslequent transactions are all sufﬁcient to establish that the ..properties
originally purchased were held by and his family and the suit property was a
portion of the--saine.
if learned Counsel would draw attention to Exhibit P.7, ":i_unA.der"'«which,
the land was sold to one Kempaiah by his brother Appayyanna, which was prior
to the order passed by the Deputy S 15 Commissioner, wherein the land was
assigned Survey No.l78 and attention is also drawn to Exhibit D.3, under
which,'~.thei'~first defendant has purchased the property, which has as Survey
No.377/6 and the measurement is mentioned in terms of feet. Hence,
t1icVine_o'rrect"survey. nu_rr1be1's_V indicated by scribes of those
deed:s"'xvould also'vVaffectathe' title of the first defendant, and, he
wasi'in" no better osition than the plaintiff. Insofar as the ﬁnd_ir1g"ic:f
t-hehcfolirt below that the proceedings unclerithe
InamsLAbolitionActsireferred to 1 acre of land whereas thei__suit
land..yme_asured 24 untas, the learned counsel seeks. toi'iaddre's.s
the"s~a_me as follows:-- That land in No.l71 actually measures more
thany,._vvhat is indicated: in the order of the Inams Deputy
Comrrussgionerii"Secondly, it is contended that 1 acre mentioned in liXhi'bits
is ambiguous since Erappa and Appayyanna brand other' members of the family
had sold 3 acres and 341/2 guntas ":i.un.der""p_various sale deeds, in land in
Survey No.l7l, which is now identiﬁed as land in Survey No.377 by various sub-
numbers. If 3 16 all those sale deeds are taken into account, the case of the
plaintiff ought to be accepted.
Insofar as the absence of the plaintiffs nameih land, Ex.P.l7, is concerned,
the lear.ned».coun'_selv;wouldVi'CC>11tein.d i' that the name of
Chikkamuniyappa and .sinceA. had not taken place by the time theiridex land
his name had continued. Insofayr as the 'lands by the Bangalore Development
:co::1cern'eVd.\'..the same was not developed by and hence the purpose for
rendered redundant and con:;Veque_nt'ly; the iacquiisition lapsed. The the
appellants would also seek to prodyllceii additionalddocuments. The documents
sought to be produced a«re'«s_a"id__to be mentioned in Exhibit D.3 and the
copies of the hdocumeirljtsifwere obtained. But, the learned counsel, who %i
'vv_representie'd the plaintiff before the trial court had opined that it
«flidinot have a direct bearing on the suit property and hence, they were not
necessary to be ﬁled. The said documents produced 5 17 would clearly indicate
the extent of land held by the family and it is also claimed that the suit
property was assigned Surve'y.iN.o'.~~lsVv78 and after the abolition of the
mains, the land wasgiven' No.377/4 and the actual measureme11ts.gwere
_indi'c3.ted.i'.»orily ' thereafter. In the opinion of this courtlthese
iadditional».documents.pp may only have the effect of ~.,_ﬁﬁther totallyii
confusing state of affairs." ~.__The:'iapplicparit"-seeing to 'produce the
documents does not merit c'onsid_eratio'nv..'Tlieelaborate written arguments
subrniiiiéifﬁisi lacks; is difficult to comprehendd .iCourt answering issues
1,4 and 5 has expressed that the .plaintiff".had not produced any evidence to
'i if "s.ubs"teantiate 'that theland in Survey No.l78 was assigned a new 7 has
also addressed the boundaries for land _ sold'unde__r P.7, which did not tally
with the boundaries of if M if suit schedule property. Similarly, the evidence
of the plaintiff thatiilthe suit property was sold by Appayyanna in favour of
5 18 Kempaiah under Exhibit P.7 and that Kempaiah in turn had sold the
property to the father of the plaintiff under Exhibit,P..l8'«.is'~avlso
disbelieved, since on a perusal of Exhibit P.8, it ispfound'. property in
Survey No.l78, to an extent' sé>1d Kempaiah in favour of the father of the in
deed also, the extent sold was 1 'acrepand not 'Which the extent of the suit
sche'd.uple again, the western boundary is shown as land which is not in
accordance' by the plaintiff in the plaint and indicated that on the
western*_side,l.iretained the property belonging to him. Therefore.
tll1lé':l)l('3.1:JlI1dl:2.lli'I'.'lrCiiSl.lSl1OWn in Exhibits P.7 and P.8 did
not with thnesuiit property and there was no evidence placed before
the«.yco:u1t_'_to demonstrate that old Survey No.l78 was
ass.i.g1iedv.Vne~i§v*:_ No.l7l. Apart from Exhibits P.7 and P8, lino other
document was placed before the court to prove his title. P.2 did not disclose
survey numbers and the extent sold. P.3 also disclosed Survey No.l78 and in
the absence of 5 19 any material evidence to show that Survey No.l78 was given
new No.l7l, it was difficult of acceptance. Exhibits P.15 ~ahdfP,16 also were
in respect of Survey No.l78 and WOu1d_.§'L:iff;€'a_IE same inﬁrmity, when it
could not be accepted :hatVV'4S'urv'ey ' became 171 at a later point of timeij
insofar_ as Survey No.377/4 as per Exhibit concehriied; the name of
Chikkamuniyapipapp father.
Similarly, Exhibit R18 of the plaintiff or his father. produced by the
defendant was given new Survey No.377':and_v that Survey No.377 was sub-
divided la'Sp:S11rvveyV i%1ie.37*7/1;iS 377/2, 377/3, 377/4, 377/5 and
377/63:' and Exhibtit.Vlvv)v_.3,'::a copy of the sale deed was produced to
showypthat'«the:property was purchased by defendant no.4 from
defendantiio;:_1V,'a1'"l3xhibit D.5 was the permission to sell the land Stand
2 Eitiiibit D.6, was a Notiﬁcation, under the 1976 Act, ":S:Vendo'r's3ing that
the land in Survey No.377/4 stood in the name of H first defendant. Ex.D.8
disclosed that the property had been 5 20 acquired and there was a clear
admission that the land had been ac uired measurin 24 untas, standin in the Cl
g g g _ __ _ Chikkamuniyappa. Insofar as the allegation Development Authority
had not substantially subsequent to acquisition etc., were i1ot"addresse_--d
by '.the_ic--ou1'tu below, in the absence of Bangalore:Develop:Iient being
made a party to the suit. . p_
7\. On dismissed, the elaborate :ithe.V_leiarned counsel for the
appellanvts,"'vvithj;igrel;e:fi3nCei.ito:Vthei'_"'p'articulars, which may not
be wholly :relev.ant court fully agrees with the reasoning of the V_co~urt.--
bel.ovv'; the involved and elaborate reasoning V. ileai'ne"d.counseilmfor the
appellants does not appeal to this it court andtherefore', the same is
negated. The ' learned Counsel has placed reliance on several
.r,decis_.ions"of the apex court. The same are decisions rendered with
reference to compulsory acquisition proceedings. Since the 6 IIV 21 Validity
or otherwise of the acquisition proceedings in the case on hand was not really
the subject matter of the suit, the'safrne"'rnay not be relevant and do not
warrant any discussion. _
defendantiio;:_1V,'a1'"l3xhibit D.5 was the permission to sell the land Stand
2 Eitiiibit D.6, was a Notiﬁcation, under the 1976 Act, ":S:Vendo'r's3ing that
the land in Survey No.377/4 stood in the name of H first defendant. Ex.D.8
disclosed that the property had been 5 20 acquired and there was a clear
admission that the land had been ac uired measurin 24 untas, standin in the Cl
g g g _ __ _ Chikkamuniyappa. Insofar as the allegation Development Authority
had not substantially subsequent to acquisition etc., were i1ot"addresse_--d
by '.the_ic--ou1'tu below, in the absence of Bangalore:Develop:Iient being
made a party to the suit. . p_
7\. On dismissed, the elaborate :ithe.V_leiarned counsel for the
appellanvts,"'vvithj;igrel;e:fi3nCei.ito:Vthei'_"'p'articulars, which may not
be wholly :relev.ant court fully agrees with the reasoning of the V_co~urt.--
bel.ovv'; the involved and elaborate reasoning V. ileai'ne"d.counseilmfor the
appellants does not appeal to this it court andtherefore', the same is
negated. The ' learned Counsel has placed reliance on several
.r,decis_.ions"of the apex court. The same are decisions rendered with
    Aged"'abOut 89 ye.a.rsV,  -3  E < 4' 
    S/Q'.D0ddap0Dja,ppa @ Poojappa,
      A Aged:,,ab0'u:A50 years}
    " .S/0'. Ddddjapjoojappa @ Poojappa,
    Aged,__ab0u'c 41 years,
    . Sri. 1\/iurlipoojaplzga,
    _ ' , Doddapoojappa @ Poojappa,
     Aged about 39 years,
    5
    5. Sri. Nagarathna,
    S/o.Doddapoojappa @ Poojappa,
    Aged about 45 years,
    All are residing at
    No.45, 4"' 'A' Main,
    Govindarajanagar,
    Bangalore -- 560 040.
    (By Shri. G. Vedavyasachar, Advocate)   V
    AND:
    1.
    Smt. Annapoornamma,"=  _   is
defendantiio;:_1V,'a1'"l3xhibit D.5 was the permission to sell the land Stand
2 Eitiiibit D.6, was a Notiﬁcation, under the 1976 Act, ":S:Vendo'r's3ing that
the land in Survey No.377/4 stood in the name of H first defendant. Ex.D.8
disclosed that the property had been 5 20 acquired and there was a clear
admission that the land had been ac uired measurin 24 untas, standin in the Cl
g g g _ __ _ Chikkamuniyappa. Insofar as the allegation Development Authority
had not substantially subsequent to acquisition etc., were i1ot"addresse_--d
by '.the_ic--ou1'tu below, in the absence of Bangalore:Develop:Iient being
made a party to the suit. . p_
7\. On dismissed, the elaborate :ithe.V_leiarned counsel for the
appellanvts,"'vvithj;igrel;e:fi3nCei.ito:Vthei'_"'p'articulars, which may not
be wholly :relev.ant court fully agrees with the reasoning of the V_co~urt.--
bel.ovv'; the involved and elaborate reasoning V. ileai'ne"d.counseilmfor the
appellants does not appeal to this it court andtherefore', the same is
negated. The ' learned Counsel has placed reliance on several
.r,decis_.ions"of the apex court. The same are decisions rendered with
    Aged"'abOut 89 ye.a.rsV,  -3  E < 4' 
    S/Q'.D0ddap0Dja,ppa @ Poojappa,
      A Aged:,,ab0'u:A50 years}
    " .S/0'. Ddddjapjoojappa @ Poojappa,
    Aged,__ab0u'c 41 years,
    . Sri. 1\/iurlipoojaplzga,
    _ ' , Doddapoojappa @ Poojappa,
     Aged about 39 years,
    5
    5. Sri. Nagarathna,
    S/o.Doddapoojappa @ Poojappa,
    Aged about 45 years,
    All are residing at
    No.45, 4"' 'A' Main,
    Govindarajanagar,
    Bangalore -- 560 040.
    (By Shri. G. Vedavyasachar, Advocate)   V
    AND:
    1.
    Smt. Annapoornamma,"=  _   is
defendantiio;:_1V,'a1'"l3xhibit D.5 was the permission to sell the land Stand
2 Eitiiibit D.6, was a Notiﬁcation, under the 1976 Act, ":S:Vendo'r's3ing that
the land in Survey No.377/4 stood in the name of H first defendant. Ex.D.8
disclosed that the property had been 5 20 acquired and there was a clear
admission that the land had been ac uired measurin 24 untas, standin in the Cl
g g g _ __ _ Chikkamuniyappa. Insofar as the allegation Development Authority
had not substantially subsequent to acquisition etc., were i1ot"addresse_--d
by '.the_ic--ou1'tu below, in the absence of Bangalore:Develop:Iient being
made a party to the suit. . p_
7\. On dismissed, the elaborate :ithe.V_leiarned counsel for the
appellanvts,"'vvithj;igrel;e:fi3nCei.ito:Vthei'_"'p'articulars, which may not
be wholly :relev.ant court fully agrees with the reasoning of the V_co~urt.--
bel.ovv'; the involved and elaborate reasoning V. ileai'ne"d.counseilmfor the
appellants does not appeal to this it court andtherefore', the same is
negated. The ' learned Counsel has placed reliance on several
.r,decis_.ions"of the apex court. The same are decisions rendered with
    Aged"'abOut 89 ye.a.rsV,  -3  E < 4' 
    S/Q'.D0ddap0Dja,ppa @ Poojappa,
      A Aged:,,ab0'u:A50 years}
    " .S/0'. Ddddjapjoojappa @ Poojappa,
    Aged,__ab0u'c 41 years,
    . Sri. 1\/iurlipoojaplzga,
    _ ' , Doddapoojappa @ Poojappa,
     Aged about 39 years,
    5
    5. Sri. Nagarathna,
    S/o.Doddapoojappa @ Poojappa,
    Aged about 45 years,
    All are residing at
    No.45, 4"' 'A' Main,
    Govindarajanagar,
    Bangalore -- 560 040.
    (By Shri. G. Vedavyasachar, Advocate)   V
    AND:
    1.
    Smt. Annapoornamma,"=  _   is
    W/o.T.S.Chandrasekhar,  _  '
    No.41, 9"'        
    West     »
    Barlgalore.-.     *
    Sri.V17eerappa,7'v_'vV  
    Major-,_ ' _ ' _    
    S/o. Late. Chikka M'11niyVa'ppa,
    Sj deceased 
    ' V'  _ Lega1i,repI*esentatiVes','
    ' 2(:Q,sti. M.1_1.nisVw.an1y,
    A S/Bo. Late-:Verappa,
defendantiio;:_1V,'a1'"l3xhibit D.5 was the permission to sell the land Stand
2 Eitiiibit D.6, was a Notiﬁcation, under the 1976 Act, ":S:Vendo'r's3ing that
the land in Survey No.377/4 stood in the name of H first defendant. Ex.D.8
disclosed that the property had been 5 20 acquired and there was a clear
admission that the land had been ac uired measurin 24 untas, standin in the Cl
g g g _ __ _ Chikkamuniyappa. Insofar as the allegation Development Authority
had not substantially subsequent to acquisition etc., were i1ot"addresse_--d
by '.the_ic--ou1'tu below, in the absence of Bangalore:Develop:Iient being
made a party to the suit. . p_
7\. On dismissed, the elaborate :ithe.V_leiarned counsel for the
appellanvts,"'vvithj;igrel;e:fi3nCei.ito:Vthei'_"'p'articulars, which may not
be wholly :relev.ant court fully agrees with the reasoning of the V_co~urt.--
bel.ovv'; the involved and elaborate reasoning V. ileai'ne"d.counseilmfor the
appellants does not appeal to this it court andtherefore', the same is
negated. The ' learned Counsel has placed reliance on several
.r,decis_.ions"of the apex court. The same are decisions rendered with
    Aged"'abOut 89 ye.a.rsV,  -3  E < 4' 
    S/Q'.D0ddap0Dja,ppa @ Poojappa,
      A Aged:,,ab0'u:A50 years}
    " .S/0'. Ddddjapjoojappa @ Poojappa,
    Aged,__ab0u'c 41 years,
    . Sri. 1\/iurlipoojaplzga,
    _ ' , Doddapoojappa @ Poojappa,
     Aged about 39 years,
    5
    5. Sri. Nagarathna,
    S/o.Doddapoojappa @ Poojappa,
    Aged about 45 years,
    All are residing at
    No.45, 4"' 'A' Main,
    Govindarajanagar,
    Bangalore -- 560 040.
    (By Shri. G. Vedavyasachar, Advocate)   V
    AND:
    1.
    Smt. Annapoornamma,"=  _   is
    W/o.T.S.Chandrasekhar,  _  '
    No.41, 9"'        
    West     »
    Barlgalore.-.     *
    Sri.V17eerappa,7'v_'vV  
    Major-,_ ' _ ' _    
    S/o. Late. Chikka M'11niyVa'ppa,
    Sj deceased 
    ' V'  _ Lega1i,repI*esentatiVes','
    ' 2(:Q,sti. M.1_1.nisVw.an1y,
    A S/Bo. Late-:Verappa,
defendantiio;:_1V,'a1'"l3xhibit D.5 was the permission to sell the land Stand
2 Eitiiibit D.6, was a Notiﬁcation, under the 1976 Act, ":S:Vendo'r's3ing that
the land in Survey No.377/4 stood in the name of H first defendant. Ex.D.8
disclosed that the property had been 5 20 acquired and there was a clear
admission that the land had been ac uired measurin 24 untas, standin in the Cl
g g g _ __ _ Chikkamuniyappa. Insofar as the allegation Development Authority
had not substantially subsequent to acquisition etc., were i1ot"addresse_--d
by '.the_ic--ou1'tu below, in the absence of Bangalore:Develop:Iient being
made a party to the suit. . p_
7\. On dismissed, the elaborate :ithe.V_leiarned counsel for the
appellanvts,"'vvithj;igrel;e:fi3nCei.ito:Vthei'_"'p'articulars, which may not
be wholly :relev.ant court fully agrees with the reasoning of the V_co~urt.--
bel.ovv'; the involved and elaborate reasoning V. ileai'ne"d.counseilmfor the
appellants does not appeal to this it court andtherefore', the same is
negated. The ' learned Counsel has placed reliance on several
.r,decis_.ions"of the apex court. The same are decisions rendered with
