Income Tax Appellate Tribunal - Delhi
The Asst. Commissioner Of ... vs Shri Hiromi Hirose, Japan ... on 31 August,
2006
Equivalent citations: 2008 111 ITD 9 Delhi, 2008 298 ITR 269 Delhi
Bench: N Vasudevan, K Bansal
ORDER K.G. Bansal, Accountant Member
1\. These two appeals of the revenue in the case of the aforesaid assessees
were argued in a consolidated manner by the learned DR and the learned Counsel
for the assessees. Therefore, we find it convenient to pass a consolidated
order.
Appeal No. 4506(Del.)/2003 - in the case of Shri Hiromi Hirose
2\. In this appeal, the revenue has taken only one ground to the effect that
on the facts of the case and in law, the learned CIT(A) erred in holding that
salary and bonus received by the assessee outside India is not taxable in
India Under Section 5(1)(c) of the IT Act, specially when as per terms of
employment, his office was based in New Delhi and he was responsible to Delhi
office even though, he rendered services outside India.
3.1 On perusal of the order of the DCIT, Circle-46(1), New Delhi (herein after
called the AO), passed on 6-01-2003, it is seen that the assessee's status
during the relevant previous year was not ordinarily resident (NOR). The
pagel3 of the paper book-I furnishing job functions etc., In this case, it was
pointed out that the terms and conditions of job functions and taxes are
identical with that case. Reference was also made to page-76 of the paper
book-I, which furnishes the details of stay abroad for 182 days. The stay in
Nepal was in connection with the assassination of King Birendera of Nepal,
visit to Pakistan, UAE & Afghanistan were in connection with the post
September 11, 2001 developments. There were other stays in Vietnam, Thailand
and Bangkok for a total of 12 days, in connection with ASIAN ministerial
meeting, reporting to Bureau Chief of South Asia and meeting with Bureau
Chief. His case was that all this travels were in connection with the
functions that were assigned to him in New Delhi and reporting his work to the
NHK - As against the aforesaid the learned Counsel pointed out that control
over the activities of the assessee was exercised from Japan.
9.1 We have considered the facts of the case and find them to be in pari-
materia with the facts of the case of Shri Hiromi Hirose. The language of
Section 5(2)(b) is also identical with the language of Section 5(1)(b) and
during the relevant previous year was not ordinarily resident (NOR). The
assessee received salary amounting to Rs. 45,29,212/- and bonus amounting to
Rs. 9,83,246/- totaling to Rs. 55,12,458/- in the relevant previous year. He
also was given rent free accommodation and the perquisite value was determined
at Rs. 9,23,558/-. The assessee spent 124 days outside India. Therefore, in
the return of income, salary for 124 days , computed on proportionate basis,
was excluded from the total income. In the course of assessment proceedings,
it was pointed out that the assessee was employed as a news correspondent of
NHK, Japan Broadcasting Corporation (NHK). As per terms of employment, between
the assessee and the NHK, he was appointed bureau chief of Delhi office with
effect from 18-07-1998. His main job was to gather news and reports and convey
them to NHK. The employment terms also provided that NHK may assign him other
duties from time to time. Therefore, it was argued that the income of the
assessee for the period of his stay outside India was not taxable in India.
However, the AO did not accept this position. Her view was that his employment
terms obligated him to look after the activities assigned to him from his base
at Delhi. Therefore, he was responsible to Delhi office even though, he may
have rendered services outside India. In another words, his activities were
controlled by Delhi office. Accordingly, it was held that the salary received
by him outside India was also taxable in India.
3.2 Aggrieved by this order, the assessee filed appeal before the learned
CIT(A). It was represented before him that the assessee received salary from
NHK for his assignment to South Asia region. The provision of Section 5(1)(c)
of the Act were not applicable because his status was NOR and the salary was
not received from a business or a profession controlled or set up in India.
The provision of Section 9(1)(ii) were also not applicable because overseas
employment for gathering news outside India was independent of the gathering
of news in India. There was no territorial nexus with India when the services
were rendered outside India. The learned CIT(A) considered the aforesaid
arguments. He pointed out that assignment terms clearly mention that the
employee may be required by NHK to go on other assignments from time to time
to any part of the world depending upon the exigencies. The certificate from
the NHK showed that the assessee visited Nepal, Vietnam, Thailand, Pakistan,
Afghanistan, UAE etc., for 124 days for news gathering activities. He also
referred to the finding of the AO that the assessee rendered services outside
India. It was pointed out by him that although the employment contract showed
that he was deputed to South Asia region, Station New Delhi, but he continued
to work under the direct control and supervision of NHK, Japan. In view
thereof, he held that the assessee did not receive salary in India when he
worked outside India for 124 days. Accordingly, he directed the AO to exclude
salary, bonus etc, for this period from the total income of the assessee.
Aggrieved by this order, the revenue is in appeal before us.
4.1 While opening the case, the learned DR pointed out that the question to be
decided is whether the provisions contained in Section 9(1)(ii) or Section
5(1)(b) of the Act are applicable in the instant case or not. This is a mixed
question of law and facts. Therefore, it will have to be carefully examined
whether the decisions rendered in the decided cases have facts more or less
identical to the facts of this case.
4.2 He referred to pages 12 & 13 of paper book-1 filed by the assessee,
containing Assignment Terms, which describe the job functions of the assessee.
These functions are reproduced below for the sake of ready reference;
1\. In connection with the news gathering of operations of NHK-Japan
Braodcasting Corporation's News Bureau Office at New Delhi, the employee's
duties may include, without limitation, the investigating, writing, preparing
and reporting of news of the Southern Asia, including India and the
neighboring countries, for delivery on air, the direction and supervision of
such newsgathering, ensuring the effective and efficient operation of the
Bureau; and such other services as NHK -Japan Boradcasting Corporation may
expect from time to time in the ordinary course of duties.
2\. However, the employee may be required by NHK - Japan Broadcasting
Corporation to go on other assignments from time to time to any part of the
world depending on exigencies and that further the employee may be reassigned
to other News Bureaus of NHK - Japan Broadcasting Corporation at NHK - Japan
Broadcasting Corporation's sole discretion.
3\. Further the employee will be governed by the limitations prescribed in the
authority delegated to him, and should exercise his powers to the best of his
judgment keeping in mind the role of NHK -Japan Broadcasting Corporation as a
National Public Broadcasting nonprofit organization of Japan.
4\. The employee is also responsible for ensuring compliance with legal
requirements on behalf of NHK - Japan Broadcasting Corporation New Delhi News
Bureau Office, and shall act the legal representative in all matters on behalf
of NHK - Japan Broadcasting Corporation through a firm of solicitors appointed
for the purpose.
4.2 It was pointed out that the assessee was appointed Bureau Chief of New
Delhi office. Paragraph-1 of the job functions shows that his duties included,
without limitation, the investigating, writing, preparing and reporting of
news of the Southern Asia including India and the neighboring countries and
such other services as NHK may expect from time to time in the ordinary course
of duties. Paragraph-2 of the job functions mentions that the assessee may be
required by NHK to go on other assignment from time to time to any part of the
world depending on exigencies (emphasis supplied by the learned DR) and that
further he may be assigned to other news bureaus. On the basis of this
paragraph, the learned DR pointed out that the main job of the assessee was to
gather news for NHK, from its office at New Delhi regarding South Asia. Thus,
his job functions were not limited to gathering of news in India but to the
whole of South Asia, which included India and its neighboring countries.
Paragraph-2 contained the option available to NHK to assign him from time to
time to any other part of the world depending on exigencies. His case was that
paragraph-2 came into operation when some exigencies arose because of which he
may be assigned from New Delhi to any other part of the world. In his view,
such assignment will also lead to revision of salary and bonus depending upon
cost of living in the other regions.
4.3 The learned DR further drew our attention towards the heading "taxes" in
the assignment terms in which it is mentioned that the employee's emoluments
shall be subject to deduction of taxes as per laws applicable in the host
country (India) and such taxes shall be borne by NHK. On the basis of these
terms of assignment, the contention of the learned DR was that the primary
place of duty of the assessee was New Delhi and he was governed by fiscal laws
of India. Therefore, in absence of any assignment to any other part of the
world arising on any exigencies, the assessee continued to be employed in the
Delhi office and his visits to other countries were incidental to his
employment in New Delhi.
4.4 The learned DR referred to page-6 of the paper book which furnishes the
details of the visits of the assessee outside India. For ready reference, the
details are reproduced below:
     Summary of Number of days spent outside India for official purpose
     Travel dates               Number of days      Place
    Form              To       outside India
    2-05-2001       7-05-2001        4             Nepal
    2-06-2001      17-06-2001       14             Nepal
    12-09-2001     12-11-2001       60             Pakistan,
                                                   US, UK
    23-11-2002     30-12-2001       36             Pakistani
                                                   & Afghan
    2-01-2002       7-01-2002        4             Nepal
    28-02-2002      7-03-2002        6             Bangkok
    Total stay outside India        124
    Total no. of days for which
    services rendered in India      241
4.5. His case was that the visits to Nepal between 2-05-2001 to 7-05-2001 and
2-06-2001 to 17-06-2001 were in connection with the murder of the Nepalese
King, which was undertaken with a view to examine the impact of these
momentous events on relation between Nepal and India. The assessee also
visited Pakistan, US, UK and Afghanistan between 2-09-2001 to 12-11-2001 and
23-11-2001 to 30-12-2001. The case of the learned DR was that these visits
were undertaken to study the impact of 9-11-2001 events on the muslim world
and a sizable population of muslims reside in India. Therefore, after he
visited Nepal for four days and Bangkok for six days in January & February,
2002, which was part and parcel of his activity of gathering news in South
Asia. Therefore, his contention was that all the visits abroad were undertaken
in connection with news gathering in India. Coming to the issue whether the
assessee was working for the business controlled or profession set up in
India, the learned DR pointed out that there is no evidence on record that his
activities were controlled from outside India. The only evidence on record is
that he was outside India for 124 days. In any case, the NHK was registered
with Press Bureau of India and the activities in South Asia were controlled
from Delhi office.
4.6 Coming to the legal issues, the learned DR relied on the decision of the
Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Moosa S Madha and Azam S Madha v. CIT
West Bengal . In that case, the assessee was in India for 365 days during four
years preceding 1947, and the assessee was in India during 1947 for a period
of two months. The Hon'ble court pointed out that the onus was on the assessee
to prove that his visit in 1947 was occasional or casual. That onus was not
discharged by the mere fact that the assessee had no business in India during
the period of stay of two months. The case of the learned DR on the basis of
this decision was that the assessee was NOR during the year, all his
activities were in relation to news gathering about South Asia from Delhi
office. Therefore, the onus was on him to prove that visits outside India were
independent of his duties in India. This onus has not been discharged.
4.7 The learned DR referred to the provision contained in Section 9(1)(ii),
under which salary, if earned in India, is taxable in India. Explanation below
this Section Clarifies that salary for rest period or leave period which is
preceded & succeeded by services rendered in India is also taxable in India.
In this connection, the learned DR relied on the decision of the Hon'ble
Uttaranchal High Court in the case of Reading and Bates Drilling Co. v. CIT .
The Explanation to Section 9(1)(ii) of the Act was a matter of interpretation
by the Hon'ble High Court in that case. The facts were that after 35 days of
hard work on the oil rigs, which was a hazardous job, a technician had to go
back to a country of his residence. The off period followed the on period and
both formed part of an integral scheme. The case of the assessee was that
salary for the off period was paid outside India and therefore, it was not
taxable in India. The Tribunal held that the off period salary paid was also
taxable in India. At page 256, the Hon'ble court pointed out that in certain
cases, even if services were rendered outside India, the income can still
accrue or arise in India. It would depend upon the facts of each case.
Assuming that there was no rest period as alleged by the assessee and that the
payment was for stand-by, the training abroad during this period was connected
with the work on rigs in India. It made the assessee mentally and physically
fit. Therefore, it was held that the salary for the off period was earned in
India for the services rendered in India Under Section 9(1)(ii). The case of
the learned DR was that the facts of that case and the facts of the instant
case are in pari-materia because the assessee had to go abroad to countries
neighboring India, Dubai, UK and USA for gauging the impact of certain events
such as the assassination of the Nepalese King and the 9/11 catastrophe on
Hindu and Muslim population of India. This was not re-location of the assessee
to countries for any independent job. Thus, the whole of the income was
taxable in India.
4.8 The learned DR relied on the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the
case of Performing Right Society Ltd and Anr. v. CIT and Ors. . The facts of
that case are that under an agreement executed in England, the assessee co.,
incorporated in England, received royalties from Government of India for
broadcasting western music from the stations of All India Radio. The Society
received royalties and, after deducting expenses, distributed it to the
members in proportion to their work publicly performed. It was claimed that
the royalties received were not taxable in India. The Hon'ble court pointed
out that the royalties were received from the Government of India, under the
agreement for broadcasting western music from stations of All India Radio.
Therefore, royalties payable to society constituted its income. The question
is whether such income accrued or arosed in India. The case of the assessee
was that the source of income was the agreement executed in England. However,
the Hon'ble court pointed out that that was not material for deciding the
issue of accrual etc., or the reasons that for this purpose source is not
material, because Section 5(2) uses the expression "from whatever source
derived". The question whether the income accrued or arose in India is a
question of fact, which has to be decided in the light of the common sense and
plain thinking. The authorities below and the High Court considered it a hard
matter of fact that the income derived from broadcast of copyright music from
stations of All India Radio, arose in India. Putting its seal of approval, the
Hon'ble court mentioned that in our opinion, this was a correct view to take
and we find no reason to differ from it. The question was also raised whether
income can be deemed to have accrued in India, however, the Court refused to
go to the mater for the reasons that the income, in fact, accrued in India and
no question arises whether it should be deemed to accrue or arise in India.
The case of the learned DR was that the assessee was stationed at New Delhi
for getting news from South Asia for NHK. The visits in the neighboring and
far off countries were for the purpose of work assigned to the assessee in
India and, therefore, the income accrued or arose in India as per decision of
performing right society (supra). In the alternative, it was pointed out that
the assessee had not shown any contingency which required relocation of the
assessee from New Delhi to any other region. There was no evidence on record
of the relocation. There was no change in the salary structure of the
assessee. Therefore, the work performed in the neighboring countries and also
far off countries was in connection with his employment in India, and
therefore, the whole of the salary was taxable in India.
5.1 The learned Counsel of the assessee opened her arguments by briefly
stating the facts of the case. It was pointed out that the status of the
assessee in the relevant previous year was NOR. In this year, the assessee
stayed for 124 days outside India. Therefore, salary and bonus for this
period, calculated on pro-rata basis, was excluded from the total salary
received by him. The assessee was deputed by NHK - Japan to NHK, Bureau
office, New Delhi, as its Chief to gather news from South Asia. However,
during the period of stay outside India, the services were not rendered in
India. Therefore, the salary attributed to services rendered outside India was
not considered for tax purposes in India. The learned Counsel further referred
to the job functions, finding place in page nos. 12 &. 13 of the paper book-I,
which we have already discussed. She also referred to the pages-68,69 & 70 of
the paper book which inter-alia contain the detailed dates on which the
assessee remained outside India. Page-68 contains a certificate from the
employer, showing that he was paid salary amounting to Japanese Yens
1,44,68,115/- and bonus amounting to Japanese Yens 25,58,538/-. Pgae-70
contains a certificate from the employer to the effect that due to unfortunate
bomb attacks in the USA on the September 11, 2001, the assessee was required
to travel to USA and other parts of the world for news gathering and reporting
in connection with the attacks and developments thereafter during the period
September 11,2001 to March 2002. In this connection, we wish to point out
here, that the assessee visited Pakistan, US, UK from 12-09-2001 to
12-11-2001. However, due to inadequate evidence, the number of days for which
he stayed in Pakistan is not ascertainable. The learned Counsel also referred
to page-56 of the paper book-I, being a letter dated 10-12-2001, addressed to
the AO. She also referred to page-60 of the paper book, being a letter dated
16-12-2002 addressed to the AO in which it was inter-alia pointed out that
provisions contained in Section 5(1)(c) were not applicable to a NOR, the
activities of the employer do not amount to any trade or business activity in
India and, therefore, the entire salary received in respect of services
rendered overseas is not liable to be taxed in India, since the assessee was
required to render services outside India, as per terms of his assignment.
5.2 Coming to the legal issue, the learned Counsel relied on the decision of
the Hon'ble ITAT, Delhi Benches in the case of DCIT v. Vivek Paul (2004) 2 SOT
799. In that case, the assessee, being foreign national and having the status
of the NOR, contended that in terms of his employment he had to under take
journeys outside India and that that part of the salary accrued outside India.
Therefore, the same was not liable to be taxed in India. The Hon'ble Tribunal
held that the facts of the case were qualitatively different from the facts of
the case of the Sedco Forex International Drilling and Anr. v. CIT and Anr. In
that case, the question was regarding the taxability of salaries paid for the
off period. However, in the instant case, the assessee has been working
outside India and such salaries could not be equated with off period salary.
Thus, it was held that salaries earned for services rendered outside India did
not accrue to the assessee in India. She also pointed out that the decision of
the Hon'ble Uttaranchal High Court in the aforesaid M/S Sedco Forex
International, Drilling & Another was reversed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court of
India , in which it was inter-alia pointed out that the new Explanation was
not applicable being enacted prospectively and the case of the assessee was
not caught within the mischief of the existing Explanation. It was also
pointed out that the interpretation of the Hon'ble High Court placed on off
period salary was incorrect as in that period the assessee could be deployed
by the employer at any other place outside India.
5.3 The arguments of the learned Counsel stopped at this stage for lack of
time on 10-08-2006 and the hearing was resumed on 18-08-2006. On that day, the
learned Counsel filed synopsis, which included a certificate from the
employer, territorial structure of the offices of the employer and
clarification from the employer regarding the job functions of the assessee.
It was requested that this evidence may be admitted, the reason being that the
job function furnished in paper book-I, was not happily translated and,
therefore, it tended to give a distorted picture of the assessee's job
functions. She also promised to file a copy of the original Japanese version
of the assignment terms. This evidence was objected to by the learned DR and
it was pointed out that such evidence was not there before the lower
authorities or even before the Tribunal, till the arguments of the revenue
were completed.
5.4 We have considered the rival submissions. Rule-29 of the Appellate
Tribunal Rules, 1963, provides that the parties to the appeal shall be not
entitled to produce additional evidence either oral or documentary before the
Tribunal. However, if the Tribunal requires any document to be produced or
witness to be examined or any affidavit to be filed to enable it to pass
orders etc., it may, for the reasons to be recorded, allow such documents to
be produced or witness to be examined or affidavit to be filed. Rule -29
places embargo on production of any fresh evidence before the Tribunal.
However, it empowers the Tribunal to call for additional evidence in case such
evidence is required by it for deciding the case or for substantive justice.
We find that the assessee had produced requisite evidence before the lower
authorities which has been placed before us. The learned Counsel wanted to
place the Japanese version of the terms of assignment on record, but the
language of the Tribunal is English. The English version has already been
furnished to lower authorities and to us. Therefore, the plea of the learned
Counsel that the terms of assignment are not happily translated cannot be
taken to be correct. Further, it also cannot be said that the certificate of
the employer enclosed with the synopsis is a correct translation of the terms
of assignment. In view thereof, we refuse to admit the additional evidence at
this stage.
5.5 The case of the learned Counsel was that overall control over the assessee
was in Japan, where the NHK was located. As per the policies of the employer,
the world was divided into different territories and New Delhi office was
placed under NHK, Bangkok Bureau. Therefore, the control over the assessee was
exercised from Japan through Bangkok office. We find no such argument existed
before the lower authorities and no evidence to that effect was on record of
the authorities below and the Tribunal. It was also the case of the learned
Counsel that the Delhi office was merely a liaison office and not an office
from where the business of NHK was conducted. As per terms of assignment, the
assessee was sent abroad at the instruction of the head office in Japan and,
therefore, the income of the assessee relatable to such services was not
taxable in India.
6.1 We have considered the facts of the case and the rival submissions. As
there is a dispute about the facts, it will be necessary for us to settle the
facts. The facts are that the assessee was an employee of NHK, Japan, which
had set-up News Bureau office at New Delhi. The assessees' duties without
limitation, included the investigation, writing, preparing and reporting of
news of South Asia, including India and the neighboring countries for delivery
on air; and such other services as the employer may expect from time to time.
Since the assessee was the employee of NHK, Japan, incase of exigencies, his
services could be assigned from time to time to any part of the world
(page-66, paper book-I). Thus, the main function was to report news from South
Asia. It was also provided that the emoluments will be subject to tax, as per
laws applicable in the host country, India (page 67 of paper book-I). This
clause further strengthens the view that the main functions of the assessee
was to gather news from South Asia and transmit the same to NHK, Japan. As
pointed out by the learned DR, this function will also include gathering of
news in the neighboring countries as well as far off countries which will have
direct impact on South Asia. Thus, gathering of news in Nepal at the time of
assassination of Nepalese King and gathering of news in US, UK and Pakistan
after September 11, 2001 catastrophe were incidental to the main function of
gathering news in South Asia, as this events had substantive impact on Hindu
and Muslim population respectively of India. The assessee was provided rent
free accommodation of which he continued to have possession for the whole of
the year.
6.2 The assessee, being a NOR, is subject to provision to Clauses (a) & (b) Of
Sub-section 13 of Section 5. Therefore, the question is whether the whole of
the income accrued or arose in India or not ? It may be pointed out here, that
this section does not lay down any rule regarding the situs of accrual of the
income. This issue was examined by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of
Performing Right Society Ltd and Anr. (supra) and it was pointed out that the
situs had to be determined on the basis of common sense and plain thinking. In
that case, the income of the assessee arising out of a contract executed
outside India was held to accrue in India for the reason that its copy right
music was broadcast from the stations of the All India Radio. Looking at the
terms of assignment, the functions performed by the assessee in India and
outside India were for the purpose of gathering news in South Asia and the
impact of the events happening abroad on socio-political scenario in South
Asia. The assignment terms obviously contained provision for gathering news
from neighboring countries which include Nepal, Pakistan and Afghanistan. The
events in these countries have a direct bearing on India. However, events in
USA and some other part of South East Asia also likely to have impact on
India. The September 11, event had a very direct impact or India in terms of
its relations with the USA in combating terrorism. Therefore, we are of the
view that the travel abroad was inextricably linked in this case with the
functions of the assessee as Chief of News Bureau Office, New Delhi. In the
context of the arguments made by the learned DR, we are of the view that
traveling abroad was not for any distinct assignment, separate and apart from
his functions as Chief, News Bureau Office, New Delhi. The learned CIT(A)
mentioned that the AO had accepted that the assessee rendered services outside
India. It is further mentioned that he was deputed to South Asian region and
stationed at New Delhi, but he continue to work under the direct control and
supervision of NHK; Japan, because of which he was required to get periodical
news outside India. We are of the view that the learned CIT(A), failed to
appreciate the over all context of the visits outside India and, thus, came to
erroneous conclusion that he was required to gather news outside India
periodically de hors his functions as Chief, News Bureau Officer, New Delhi.
If we look at the whole situation from common sense and plain thinking, it
becomes clear that thesalary for the whole year accrued to him because of his
assignment as Chief of News Bureau Office, New Delhi. It would be obvious to
any one that NHK-Japan would have offices at least in Bangkok, US and UK and
as such there would have been no need for him to travel to these places to
gather news independently. The purpose obviously was to gather stories which
were relevant to and had impact on the South Asia region. There is nothing on
record that his salary structure was changed when he visited US and UK so as
to amount to relocation. The assessee continued to occupy the rent free
(accommodation throughout the year. Therefore, we are of the considered view
that the whole of the salary, income and bonus accrued to the assessee in
India. In view thereof, it is not necessary for us to go into the issue on
deemed accrual Under Section 9, as pointed out by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in
the case of Performing Right Society Ltd and Anr. (supra) 6.2 In the result,
the order of the learned CIT(A) is reversed and the order of the AO is
restored. Thus, the appeal of the revenue is allowed.
ITA No. 45O7(Del.)/2003 - in the case of Shri Hamada Haryuki
7\. In this appeal, the revenue has taken up two grounds to the effect that on
the facts of the case and in law, the learned CIT(A), erred - i) in treating
the status of the assessee as Non-Resident (NR) and ii) in holding that the
salary and bonus received by him outside India is not taxable in India.
8\. The learned DR fairly conceded that the correct residential status of the
assessee is NR and therefore, ground no. 1 of the revenue's appeal does not
survive. However, he pointed out that the provisions contained in Section
5(2)(b) in case of a NR is identical with the provision contained in Section
5(1)(b) in case of a resident or a NOR. It was further pointed out that the
facts of this case are identical with the facts in the case of Shri Hiromi
Hirose in ITA No. 4506(Del.)/2003(supra). In this connection, he referred to
pagel3 of the paper book-I furnishing job functions etc., In this case, it was
pointed out that the terms and conditions of job functions and taxes are
identical with that case. Reference was also made to page-76 of the paper
book-I, which furnishes the details of stay abroad for 182 days. The stay in
Nepal was in connection with the assassination of King Birendera of Nepal,
visit to Pakistan, UAE & Afghanistan were in connection with the post
September 11, 2001 developments. There were other stays in Vietnam, Thailand
and Bangkok for a total of 12 days, in connection with ASIAN ministerial
meeting, reporting to Bureau Chief of South Asia and meeting with Bureau
Chief. His case was that all this travels were in connection with the
functions that were assigned to him in New Delhi and reporting his work to the
NHK - As against the aforesaid the learned Counsel pointed out that control
over the activities of the assessee was exercised from Japan.
9.1 We have considered the facts of the case and find them to be in pari-
materia with the facts of the case of Shri Hiromi Hirose. The language of
Section 5(2)(b) is also identical with the language of Section 5(1)(b) and
therefore, the issue discussed in that case and the conclusion drawn 3 are
equally applicable to this case. Relying on that order, ground no. 2 of the
appeal of the revenue is allowed.
9.2 In the result, the appeal of the revenue is partly allowed.
pagel3 of the paper book-I furnishing job functions etc., In this case, it was
pointed out that the terms and conditions of job functions and taxes are
identical with that case. Reference was also made to page-76 of the paper
book-I, which furnishes the details of stay abroad for 182 days. The stay in
Nepal was in connection with the assassination of King Birendera of Nepal,
visit to Pakistan, UAE & Afghanistan were in connection with the post
September 11, 2001 developments. There were other stays in Vietnam, Thailand
and Bangkok for a total of 12 days, in connection with ASIAN ministerial
meeting, reporting to Bureau Chief of South Asia and meeting with Bureau
Chief. His case was that all this travels were in connection with the
functions that were assigned to him in New Delhi and reporting his work to the
NHK - As against the aforesaid the learned Counsel pointed out that control
over the activities of the assessee was exercised from Japan.
9.1 We have considered the facts of the case and find them to be in pari-
materia with the facts of the case of Shri Hiromi Hirose. The language of
Section 5(2)(b) is also identical with the language of Section 5(1)(b) and
during the relevant previous year was not ordinarily resident (NOR). The
assessee received salary amounting to Rs. 45,29,212/- and bonus amounting to
Rs. 9,83,246/- totaling to Rs. 55,12,458/- in the relevant previous year. He
also was given rent free accommodation and the perquisite value was determined
at Rs. 9,23,558/-. The assessee spent 124 days outside India. Therefore, in
the return of income, salary for 124 days , computed on proportionate basis,
was excluded from the total income. In the course of assessment proceedings,
it was pointed out that the assessee was employed as a news correspondent of
NHK, Japan Broadcasting Corporation (NHK). As per terms of employment, between
the assessee and the NHK, he was appointed bureau chief of Delhi office with
effect from 18-07-1998. His main job was to gather news and reports and convey
them to NHK. The employment terms also provided that NHK may assign him other
duties from time to time. Therefore, it was argued that the income of the
assessee for the period of his stay outside India was not taxable in India.
However, the AO did not accept this position. Her view was that his employment
terms obligated him to look after the activities assigned to him from his base
at Delhi. Therefore, he was responsible to Delhi office even though, he may
have rendered services outside India. In another words, his activities were
controlled by Delhi office. Accordingly, it was held that the salary received
by him outside India was also taxable in India.
pagel3 of the paper book-I furnishing job functions etc., In this case, it was
pointed out that the terms and conditions of job functions and taxes are
identical with that case. Reference was also made to page-76 of the paper
book-I, which furnishes the details of stay abroad for 182 days. The stay in
Nepal was in connection with the assassination of King Birendera of Nepal,
visit to Pakistan, UAE & Afghanistan were in connection with the post
September 11, 2001 developments. There were other stays in Vietnam, Thailand
and Bangkok for a total of 12 days, in connection with ASIAN ministerial
meeting, reporting to Bureau Chief of South Asia and meeting with Bureau
Chief. His case was that all this travels were in connection with the
functions that were assigned to him in New Delhi and reporting his work to the
NHK - As against the aforesaid the learned Counsel pointed out that control
over the activities of the assessee was exercised from Japan.
9.1 We have considered the facts of the case and find them to be in pari-
materia with the facts of the case of Shri Hiromi Hirose. The language of
Section 5(2)(b) is also identical with the language of Section 5(1)(b) and
during the relevant previous year was not ordinarily resident (NOR). The
assessee received salary amounting to Rs. 45,29,212/- and bonus amounting to
Rs. 9,83,246/- totaling to Rs. 55,12,458/- in the relevant previous year. He
also was given rent free accommodation and the perquisite value was determined
at Rs. 9,23,558/-. The assessee spent 124 days outside India. Therefore, in
the return of income, salary for 124 days , computed on proportionate basis,
was excluded from the total income. In the course of assessment proceedings,
it was pointed out that the assessee was employed as a news correspondent of
NHK, Japan Broadcasting Corporation (NHK). As per terms of employment, between
the assessee and the NHK, he was appointed bureau chief of Delhi office with
effect from 18-07-1998. His main job was to gather news and reports and convey
them to NHK. The employment terms also provided that NHK may assign him other
duties from time to time. Therefore, it was argued that the income of the
assessee for the period of his stay outside India was not taxable in India.
However, the AO did not accept this position. Her view was that his employment
terms obligated him to look after the activities assigned to him from his base
at Delhi. Therefore, he was responsible to Delhi office even though, he may
have rendered services outside India. In another words, his activities were
controlled by Delhi office. Accordingly, it was held that the salary received
by him outside India was also taxable in India.
pagel3 of the paper book-I furnishing job functions etc., In this case, it was
pointed out that the terms and conditions of job functions and taxes are
identical with that case. Reference was also made to page-76 of the paper
book-I, which furnishes the details of stay abroad for 182 days. The stay in
Nepal was in connection with the assassination of King Birendera of Nepal,
visit to Pakistan, UAE & Afghanistan were in connection with the post
September 11, 2001 developments. There were other stays in Vietnam, Thailand
and Bangkok for a total of 12 days, in connection with ASIAN ministerial
meeting, reporting to Bureau Chief of South Asia and meeting with Bureau
Chief. His case was that all this travels were in connection with the
functions that were assigned to him in New Delhi and reporting his work to the
NHK - As against the aforesaid the learned Counsel pointed out that control
over the activities of the assessee was exercised from Japan.
9.1 We have considered the facts of the case and find them to be in pari-
materia with the facts of the case of Shri Hiromi Hirose. The language of
Section 5(2)(b) is also identical with the language of Section 5(1)(b) and
during the relevant previous year was not ordinarily resident (NOR). The
assessee received salary amounting to Rs. 45,29,212/- and bonus amounting to
Rs. 9,83,246/- totaling to Rs. 55,12,458/- in the relevant previous year. He
also was given rent free accommodation and the perquisite value was determined
at Rs. 9,23,558/-. The assessee spent 124 days outside India. Therefore, in
the return of income, salary for 124 days , computed on proportionate basis,
was excluded from the total income. In the course of assessment proceedings,
it was pointed out that the assessee was employed as a news correspondent of
NHK, Japan Broadcasting Corporation (NHK). As per terms of employment, between
the assessee and the NHK, he was appointed bureau chief of Delhi office with
effect from 18-07-1998. His main job was to gather news and reports and convey
them to NHK. The employment terms also provided that NHK may assign him other
duties from time to time. Therefore, it was argued that the income of the
assessee for the period of his stay outside India was not taxable in India.
However, the AO did not accept this position. Her view was that his employment
terms obligated him to look after the activities assigned to him from his base
at Delhi. Therefore, he was responsible to Delhi office even though, he may
have rendered services outside India. In another words, his activities were
controlled by Delhi office. Accordingly, it was held that the salary received
by him outside India was also taxable in India.
3.2 Aggrieved by this order, the assessee filed appeal before the learned
CIT(A). It was represented before him that the assessee received salary from
NHK for his assignment to South Asia region. The provision of Section 5(1)(c)
of the Act were not applicable because his status was NOR and the salary was
not received from a business or a profession controlled or set up in India.
The provision of Section 9(1)(ii) were also not applicable because overseas
employment for gathering news outside India was independent of the gathering
of news in India. There was no territorial nexus with India when the services
were rendered outside India. The learned CIT(A) considered the aforesaid
arguments. He pointed out that assignment terms clearly mention that the
employee may be required by NHK to go on other assignments from time to time
pagel3 of the paper book-I furnishing job functions etc., In this case, it was
pointed out that the terms and conditions of job functions and taxes are
identical with that case. Reference was also made to page-76 of the paper
book-I, which furnishes the details of stay abroad for 182 days. The stay in
Nepal was in connection with the assassination of King Birendera of Nepal,
visit to Pakistan, UAE & Afghanistan were in connection with the post
September 11, 2001 developments. There were other stays in Vietnam, Thailand
and Bangkok for a total of 12 days, in connection with ASIAN ministerial
meeting, reporting to Bureau Chief of South Asia and meeting with Bureau
Chief. His case was that all this travels were in connection with the
functions that were assigned to him in New Delhi and reporting his work to the
NHK - As against the aforesaid the learned Counsel pointed out that control
over the activities of the assessee was exercised from Japan.
9.1 We have considered the facts of the case and find them to be in pari-
materia with the facts of the case of Shri Hiromi Hirose. The language of
Section 5(2)(b) is also identical with the language of Section 5(1)(b) and
during the relevant previous year was not ordinarily resident (NOR). The
assessee received salary amounting to Rs. 45,29,212/- and bonus amounting to
Rs. 9,83,246/- totaling to Rs. 55,12,458/- in the relevant previous year. He
also was given rent free accommodation and the perquisite value was determined
at Rs. 9,23,558/-. The assessee spent 124 days outside India. Therefore, in
the return of income, salary for 124 days , computed on proportionate basis,
was excluded from the total income. In the course of assessment proceedings,
it was pointed out that the assessee was employed as a news correspondent of
NHK, Japan Broadcasting Corporation (NHK). As per terms of employment, between
the assessee and the NHK, he was appointed bureau chief of Delhi office with
effect from 18-07-1998. His main job was to gather news and reports and convey
them to NHK. The employment terms also provided that NHK may assign him other
duties from time to time. Therefore, it was argued that the income of the
assessee for the period of his stay outside India was not taxable in India.
However, the AO did not accept this position. Her view was that his employment
terms obligated him to look after the activities assigned to him from his base
at Delhi. Therefore, he was responsible to Delhi office even though, he may
have rendered services outside India. In another words, his activities were
controlled by Delhi office. Accordingly, it was held that the salary received
by him outside India was also taxable in India.
3.2 Aggrieved by this order, the assessee filed appeal before the learned
CIT(A). It was represented before him that the assessee received salary from
NHK for his assignment to South Asia region. The provision of Section 5(1)(c)
of the Act were not applicable because his status was NOR and the salary was
not received from a business or a profession controlled or set up in India.
The provision of Section 9(1)(ii) were also not applicable because overseas
employment for gathering news outside India was independent of the gathering
of news in India. There was no territorial nexus with India when the services
were rendered outside India. The learned CIT(A) considered the aforesaid
arguments. He pointed out that assignment terms clearly mention that the
employee may be required by NHK to go on other assignments from time to time
pagel3 of the paper book-I furnishing job functions etc., In this case, it was
pointed out that the terms and conditions of job functions and taxes are
identical with that case. Reference was also made to page-76 of the paper
book-I, which furnishes the details of stay abroad for 182 days. The stay in
Nepal was in connection with the assassination of King Birendera of Nepal,
visit to Pakistan, UAE & Afghanistan were in connection with the post
September 11, 2001 developments. There were other stays in Vietnam, Thailand
and Bangkok for a total of 12 days, in connection with ASIAN ministerial
meeting, reporting to Bureau Chief of South Asia and meeting with Bureau
Chief. His case was that all this travels were in connection with the
functions that were assigned to him in New Delhi and reporting his work to the
NHK - As against the aforesaid the learned Counsel pointed out that control
over the activities of the assessee was exercised from Japan.
9.1 We have considered the facts of the case and find them to be in pari-
materia with the facts of the case of Shri Hiromi Hirose. The language of
Section 5(2)(b) is also identical with the language of Section 5(1)(b) and
