Calcutta High Court
Chatter Singh Baid And Ors. vs Corporation Of Calcutta And Ors. on 1 June,
1983
Equivalent citations: AIR 1984 Cal 283, 1983 (2) CHN 330, (1983) 2 CompLJ 205
Cal, 88 CWN 89
Author: C Mookerjee
Bench: C Mookerjee
ORDER Chittatosh Mookerjee, J.
1\. The petitioners are owners of Premises No. 11, Indra Kumar Karnani Street
(formerly known as Premises No. 11, Jackson Lane), with effect from 4th
quarter, 1978-79 the Corporation of Calcutta had determined the annual value
of the said premises at Rs. 4,30,606/-. On 9th Nov., 1981 a Special Officer of
the Corporation of Calcutta had disposed of their objection against the said
increase in valuation made under Section 181 of the Calcutta Municipal Act,
1951 by fixing the annual value at Rupees 3,61,135/-. Being dissatisfied with
the said order passed under Section 182 of the said Act the petitioners have
presented under Section 183 of the Calcutta Municipal Act, 1951, Municipal
Appeal No. 141 of 1982 in the Court of Small Causes, Calcutta. The said appeal
is pending.
2\. The Calcutta Municipal (3rd Amendment) Act, 1976, which came into effect
citizen to acquire, hold and dispose of property. According to Mr. Dipankar
Ghosh, by reason of the omission of Sub-clause (f) of Clause (1) of Article 39
of the Constitution (44th Amendment) Act, 1978, the Sub-section (3A) of
Section 183 of the Calcutta Municipal Act did not revive and again become
void. As I am of the view that the restrictions on the right of appeal imposed
by Section 183 (3A) of the Calcutta Municipal Act did not unreasonably
infringe the right to acquire, hold and dispose of property, it is not
necessary for me to examine the further question whether omission of Sub-
clause (f) of Clause (1) of Article 19 of the Constitution (44th Amendment)
Act, 1978, would result in reviving any post-constitutional law which at the
date of its enactment was repugnant to Article 19(1)(c) of the Constitution.
26\. For the foregoing reasons, I conclude that Section 183 (3A) of the
Calcutta Municipal Act, 1951 is not arbitrary or unfair and therefore does not
infringe Article 14 of the Constitution. The said provision is also not
repugnant to or inconsistent with other provisions for payment and recovery of
consolidated rates contained in the Calcutta Municipal Act The Sub-section
2\. The Calcutta Municipal (3rd Amendment) Act, 1976, which came into effect
on 22nd June, 1976, has inserted the following Sub-section (3-A) in Section
183 of the Calcutta Municipal Act, 1951 :--
"No appeal under, this section shall be entertained unless the consolidated
rate payable up to the date of presentation of the appeal on the valuation
determined-
(a) by an order under Section 182, in the case of an appeal to the Court of
Small Causes,
(b) by the decision of the Court of Small Causes, in the case of an appeal to
the High Court, has been deposited in the municipal office and such
consolidated rate is continued to be deposited until the appeal is finally
decided."
The petitioners have obtained the present Rule, inter alia, challenging the
vires of said Sub-section (3-A) of Section 183 of the Calcutta Municipal Act,
1951 and also contending that the learned Chief Judge of the Small Causes
Court, Calcutta has no jurisdiction to call upon the petitioners to deposit
consolidated rates payable up to the date of the presentation of the appeal on
the valuation determined by the impugned order under Section 182 of the
Calcutta Municipal Act and also to continue to deposit the consolidated rate
on the said valuation so determined until the appeal presented by the
petitioners is finally decided
3\. On January 28, 1983, I had rejected four writ applications filed by M/s.
Jajodia Estates Pvt. Ltd. and others, who had, inter alia, contended that the
learned Chief Judge of the Small Causes Court at Calcutta had committed error
of jurisdiction by applying Sub-section (3-A) of Section 183 of the Calcutta
Municipal Act, 1951 in respect of the appeals presented by them against the
orders passed under Section 182 of the said Act My said decision has been
since reposed at page 391 of the 87 Cal WN. Having given my anxious
consideration to the various submissions urged on behalf of the petitioners of
the instant Rule, I find no reason to revise my views regarding the scope and
effect of Sub-section (3-A) of Section 183 of the Calcutta Municipal Act,
1951. I may, however, note that Ms. Dipankar Ghosb, learned advocate appearing
on behalf of the petitioners in the instant Rule, has urged several points
which were not raised at the time of the disposal of the case of Jajodia
Estates Pvt. Ltd. v. Corporation of Calcutta (1983-87 Cal WN 391) (supra).
4\. Mr. Ghosh, learned advocate for the petitioners, has not disputed the
well-settled principle that right of appeal is a creature of statute and the
legislature may regulate the said right. But according to Mr. Ghosh tha said
right is not an unfettered one and the legislative action in this behalf must
satisfy the test of reasonableness enshrined in Article 14 of the
Constitution. Mr. Ghosb has submitted that when conditions imposed are so
onerous as to deprive the right of appeal, the restrictive provision ought to
be struck down as unreasonable. The contention of Mr. Ghosh is that the
cumulative effect of Sub-section (3-A) of Section 183 of the Calcutta
Municipal Act, 1951 is to make the right of appeal under Section 183 of the
said Act nugatory and to deny the right of appeal to those who cannot pay
consolidated rate determined on the basis of the valuation which is under
challenge in the appeal. Mr. Ghosh has further submitted that Sub-section
(3-A) of Section 183 of the said Act is also repugnant to and inconsistent
with other provisions contained in the Calcutta Municipal Act, 1951 relating
to liability to pay the owner's and occupier's shares of consolidated rates
and Sub-section (3-A) of Section 183 also amounts to an illegal exaction.
After the disposal of the appeal under Section 183 the right to obtain,
retain, refund or adjustment of the excess amounts deposited under Section 183
(3-A) of the Act is practically illusory. Mr. Ghosh has also submitted that
the right of effecity approach to Court is a Basic Right implies for enjoyment
of the Fundamental Rights guaranteed by the Constitution. By depriving, in
effect, such right to obtain ad-dress by way of appeal against determination
of annual value, Sub-section (3-A) of Section 181 of the Calcutta Municipal
Act, 1951 violates the Basic Structure of the Constitution.
5\. It is now settled law that taxation laws are not beyond the pale of
constitutional limitations prescribed by Articles 14 and 19 of the
Constitution. Tax Laws are also subject to Fundamental Rights (See East India
Tobacco Co. v. State of Andhra Pradesh, , Rai Ramakrishna v. State of Bihar,
6\. Sub-section (3-A) of Section 183 of the Calcutta Municipal Act, 1951,
according to the petitioner, is invalid not on the ground that the said sub-
section denies equal protection and is therefore discriminatory but because
the said provision of Calcutta Municipal Act, 1951, is a piece of arbitrary
and unreasonable legislation.
7\. Mr. Dipankar Ghosh, learned advocate for the petitioner, has relied upon
the Supreme Court decisions in the case of E. P. Royappa v State of Tamil
Nadu, , Smt. Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India, and Mithu v. State of Punjab,
and has submitted that "the content and reach of Article 14 of the
Constitution have been now extended and where a legislative or executive
action is arbitrary, it is unequal and, therefore, violative of Article 14.
Further natural justice has assumed greater importance in the fields of
administrative law and executive action."
8\. Since the Supreme Court in the case of R. C. Cooper v. Union of India,
(commonly called Bank Nationalisation case) disagreed with tha majority
decision in A. K. Gopalan v. State of Madras, and held as correct the minority
view in A. K. Gopalan v. State of Madras (supra) that a law infringing
personal liberty must also satisfy the tests laid down in Article 19(2), Right
to Equality has acquired new dimensions. Articles 14, 19 and 31 are no longer
considered mutually exclusive. Procedure of reasonableness is to be projected
in considering vires of laws restricting rights under Articles 19 and 21 (vide
the decision of Bhagwati, J. in Smt. Maneka Gandhi v. Union of Inchia (supra).
When any of the fundamental rights is abridged or interfered with by
legislative or executive action, the Court has to decide whether or not the
impugned action is fair, just and reasonable and not fanciful, oppressive and
arbitrary.
9\. The considerations about the extended ambit of Article 14 would not be
relevant when we examine the constitutional validity of Sub-section (3-A) of
Section 183 of the Calcutta Municipal Act because the said provision has no
impact on enjoyment of fundamental rights. The petitioners do not question the
legislative competence of the West Bengal Legislature to enact Calcutta
Municipal 3rd Amendment Act, 1976 which inserted aforesaid Sub-section (3-A)
in Section 183 of the principal Act. The petitioners have impugned the
validity of the aforesaid sub-section on the ground that it is repugnant to
Article 14. But validity of a taxing or rating law cannot be challenged merely
on the ground that it imposes an unreasonably high burden or that the
provision is harsh (vide Jagannath Baksh Singh v. State of Uttar Pradesh, . It
is for the legislature to decide on what objects to levy what rate of tax. The
said Sub-section (3-A) of Section 183 of the Calcutta Municipal Act neither
gives uncanalised discretionary powers to the authorities nor the Act seeks to
make any differentiation or classification. Persons who may feel aggrieved by
orders passed under Section 182 (2) of the Act, prefer appeals under Section
183, from one class and they have been equally treated. All appellants under
Section 183 (1) of the Act required to fulfil the condition imposed by Section
183 (3-A) of the Act in order to avail of the opportunity of hearing before
the Small Causes Court.
10\. In deciding the reasonableness of taxing statutes the Court is also bound
to give due consideration to the principle that power of taxing people and
property is an essential attribute of the Government. The quantum of tax
levied by the taxing statute, the conditions subject to which it is taxed, the
manner in which it is sought to be recovered are all within the legislative
competence and in dealing with those questions the Court is always circumspect
and cautious (vide Rai Ramkrishna v. State of Bihar ) (supra), Jagannath Baksh
Singh v. State of Uttar Pradesh (supra), Venkataraman v. State of Madras, . A
statute ought to be read so as to make it valid and if possible an
interpretation leading to the contrary position should be avoided. In these
matters the needs of the taxing body for carrying out its functions under the
Statute for which the taxing power is given may afford sufficient guidance
(vide Corporation of Calcutta v. Liberty Cinema, .
11\. The petitioners themselves do not claim the above sub-section to be a
colourable piece of legislation and as such a fraud on the legislative power.
The provision for deposit of consolidated rate contained in Sub-section (3-A)
of Section 183 of the Calcutta Municipal Act is subject to obtaining refund or
adjustment in the manner and to the extent specified in Section 207 (2) of the
said Act. Therefore, the said Sub-section (3-A) could not be pronounced as a
device or cloak to confiscate the amount required to be deposited under the
said Section 183 (3-A) of the Calcutta Municipal Act, 1981.
12\. The said Sub-section (3-A) of Section 183 of the Calcutta Municipal Act
was inserted by the Calcutta Municipal 3rd Amendment Act, 1976. Undisputedly,
the said sub-section by imposing the condition for deposit of consolidated
rate affected substantive right of appeal under Section 183 of the principal
Act. Such impairment of the right of appeal by putting restrictions thereon or
imposing more onerous condition has not been expressly or impliedly given
retrospective effect. The impugned valuation of the petitioner's holding was
revised after the commencement of the aforesaid amendment Act of 1976 and,
therefore, unless the said Sub-section (3-A) of Section 183 of the Calcutta
Municipal Act, 1931 is declared ultra vires, the petitioners are bound to
comply with the said condition for deposit mainly because the Sub-section
(3-A) of Section 18? of the Act imposes such onerous condition and thereby
restricts the right of appeal under Section 183 (1) of the Act. But merely
because the said Sub-section (3-A) of Section 183 of the said Act impairs the
right of appeal by imposing an onerous condition. I am also unable to hold
that the said Sub-section (3-A) of Section 183 of the Act is unfair, fanciful,
oppressive and arbitrary.
13\. I find no substance in the petitioner's submission that Section 183 (3-A)
of the Calcutta Municipal Act, 1951 in any way affects the basic structure of
the Constitution. Decisions in the cases of Sm. Indira Gandhi v. Rajnarayan, ,
Minerva Mills Ltd. v. Union of India, and Fertilizer Corporation, Kamgar Union
v. Union of India, AIR 1981 SC 344, inter alia considered the extent of the
Parliament's power to amend the Constitution affecting its basic structure.
These reported cases do not at all warrant the view that the right to file an
appeal under a municipal law is a part of the basic structure of the
Constitution. Krishna Iyer, J. in his separate judgment in the case of
Fertilizer Corporation, Kamgar Union v. Union of India (supra), had referred
to the right of effective access to justice in the context of the question
whether or not a registered union of workers of a factory can maintain a writ
application under Article 32 of the Constitution challenging the sale of a
plant and its equipment In Fertilizar Corporation's case (AIR 1981 SC 344)
(supra), the Court upheld the maintainability of the writ petition but
discharged the petition on other grounds. I may point out that right to
constitutional remedy under Article 32 itself is a Fundamental Right. Every
High Court has power under Article 226 of the Constitution to issue writs for
enforcement of any of the rights conferred by Part III and for any other
purposes subject to territorial limitations as regards the location of the
authorities and place of accrual of the cause of action. I accept the
submission made on behalf of the respondents that the Courts which are
subordinate to the High Court are not constituted under the Constitution and
therefore access to such subordinate Courts may be lawfully abridged or made
subject to the fulfilment of conditions imposed by law. Therefore, I cannot
subscribe to the view that the right to file an appeal under Section 183 (1)
of the Calcutta Municipal Act, 1951 ought to be treated as an un-articulated
right implicit for enjoyment of the Fundamental Rights.
14\. A right of appeal is not a natural or inherent right attaching to every
litigation and the right of appeal does not exist and cannot be assumed unless
expressly given by statute (see Rangoon Botatung Co. Ltd, v. Collector.
Rangoon, (1903) 30 Ind App 197 : ILR 40 Cal 21, Soorajmull Nagarmull v. State
of West Bengal, , Sm. Ganga Bai v. Vijay Kumar, . Therefore, the provision,
viz., Section 183 which conferred upon the petitioners right to prefer appeal
against the Order disposing of their objection under Section 181 of the
Calcutta Municipal Act, could be lawfully amended by inserting a provision
imposing the above condition for deposit for entertaining their appeal.
15\. The condition laid down by Sub-section (3-A) of Section 183 of the
Calcutta Municipal Act is not something which is without any parallel. Both
Mr. Dipankar Ghosh, learned advocate for the petitioner, and Mr. Pradip Kumar
Ghosh, learned advocate for the respondents, has drawn my attention to nearly
similar provisions for deposit of disputed tax duty and rates contained in
various other taxing, municipal and fiscal laws. Mr. Dipankar Ghosh, however,
submitted that unless the appellate authority is given discretionary powers to
relax or modify such condition for deposit of the disputed amount, the
condition precedent ought to be pronounced as unreasonable. In my view, the
observations made in para 40 of the Supreme Court decision in Anant Mills v.
State of Gujarat. , are directly against the above submission of the
petitioners. With reference to Section 406 (2) of the Bombay Provincial
Municipal Act, the Supreme Court upheld the power of the legislature to impose
similar condition for deposit while granting right of appeal. According to the
Supreme Court, there was no legal or constitutional impediment to imposition
of such a condition. I respectfully agree and apply the aforesaid observations
in upholding the validity of Section 183 (3-A) of the Calcutta Municipal Act.
I am unable to accept Mr. Dipankar Gbosh's submission, that, the Court's power
under Section 406 (2) of the Bombay Provincial Municipal Act to relax the
condition for deposit the tax due had at all weighed with the Supreme Court in
making the aforesaid observations in Anant Mills v. State of Gujarat (supra).
The ratio of the said decision is that the right of appeal is a creature of
statute and while granting the right of appeal the legislature can impose
conditions for exercise of such right and there is no constitutional or legal
impediment to imposition of such a condition for deposit of tax. The Supreme
Court in their subsequent decision in the case of Nandalal v. State of
Haryana, , had followed their earlier decision in Anant Mills v. State of
Gujarat (supra). The Supreme Court in Nandlal v. State of Haryana (supra), had
rejected similar argument that conditions imposed on right of appeal were
onerous because no discretion had been given to the appellate or revisional
authority to relax or waive the said condition in view of subjects for
imposing such a condition.
16\. The Sub-section (3-A) of Section 183 of the Act does not make the
appellate provision under Section 183 (1) nugatory or illusory but by his own
default to comply with the condition for deposit the appellant himself may
fail to avail of the remedy by way of appeal under Section 183 (1) of the Act.
A law cannot be declared unconstitutional because an alleged possibility which
may occur in future. Therefore, I find no substance in the petitioner's
apprehension that in a given case the consolidated rate determined according
to the new valuation may be so high that it might be impossible for the
appellant under Section 183 (1) to deposit the consolidated rate according to
the said new valuation is not a relevant point for deciding the validity of
the statute. It is presumed that the power to determine valuation and to
assess consolidated rate would be reasonably exercised and in case said powers
arbitrarily or capriciously exercised, the person aggrieved without availing
of the remedy under Section 183 (i) of the Act, may seek redress in other
appropriate forum.
17\. It is also well settled that an appeal shall not operate as stay of the
operation of the order appealed against, but in the absence of any provision
to the contrary, the appellate Court may grant stay of the execution of the
decree or order appealed against. Section 183 (3-A) clearly manifests such
contrary intention and therefore unless the appellant deposits up to date
consolidated rate payable by him according to new valuation, his appeal under
Section 183 cannot be entertained. I may also refer to the following
observations of Sir Lawrence Jenkins, J. in Juscurn Boid v. Pirthichand Lal,
(1919) 46 Ind App 52 : ILR 46 Cal 670 (678-679) : (AIR 1918 PC 151), whatever
be the theory, under the system of law under the Indian Law and procedure, an
original decree or order is not suspended by presentation of an appeal. I may
point out that only when the appellate decision is given, the trial Court's
judgment or decree merges in the appellate judgment and decree. This theory of
merger further does not override the concept that the filing of the appeal or
revision may put the decree or order in jeopardy but until it is reversed or
modified, it remains effective. The person who makes an objection under
Section 181 of the Calcutta Municipal Act has been given right to pay
according to the previous valuation pending disposal of the said objection
(vide Sub-section (1) of Section 207 of the Act). I find nothing unreasonable
when Sub-section (3-A) of Section 183 of the Calcutta Municipal Act, 1951
enjoins that during pending of all appeals against an order disposing of an
objection under Section 181 of the Act, no further stay shall be granted of
realization of consolidated rate payable on the valuation determined under
Section 182 (2) of the Calcutta Municipal Act. As a condition for entertaining
his appeal, the appellant must deposit such consolidated rate according to the
valuation determined, subject to his right to obtain refund or adjustment
under Section 207 (2) of the Calcutta Municipal Act.
18\. I also find no substance to the petitioners contention that Sub-section
(3A) of Section 183 of the Calcutta Municipal Act, 1951 is repugnant to and
inconsistent with the provisions of Section 191 or any other provision of the
Calcutta Municipal Act, 1951. Section 191 of the said Act, inter alia,
provides that one-half of the consolidated rate shall be payable by the owner
of the lands and buildings and the other half by the occupier thereof. The
payment shall be made in quarterly instalments. The Commissioner under Section
200 of the said Act has power to levy the entire consolidated rate from the
owner of a land or building which is ordinarily occupied by more than one
person holding in severally or is valued at less than Rs. 500/-. The
provisions contained in Chap. XVII of the Calcutta Municipal Act prescribe the
different methods of recovery of consolidated rate and other taxes from the
persons liable. Subject to the special provisions, the owner of a land or
building is liable for the owner's share of consolidated rate and the balance
half of the consolidated rate is payable by the occupier.
19\. Sub-section (3A) of Section 183 of the Calcutta Municipal Act, 1951
requires the "consolidated rate payable" ft, be deposited by the person who
prefers an appeal under Section 183 of the Act. Mr. Pradip Kumar Ghosh.
learned advocate for the respondents, has rightly submitted that the Court
should see to avoid any conflict in the provisions of the statute by
endeavouring to harmonise and reconcile every part so that each shall be
effective. Often by considering the enactment in its entirety what appears to
be on its face a conflict may be cleared up and the provisions reconciled
(vide Crawfords' Statutory Construction, 1940, para 116, pages 262-263). After
examining the relevant provisions of the Calcutta Municipal Act, 1951 I find
no inconsistency between them. The term "payable" has two meanings: (1) owing,
and (2) payable at a particular point of time. In the context of Section 183
of the Calcutta Municipal Act, the expression "payable" obviously means the
share of the consolidated rate payable by the person who prefers an appeal, i.
e., owing and due from him. The expression "any person dissatisfied" in
Section 183 (1) of the Act obviously includes both owner and the occupier of
the land or building in respect Of which an order under Section 182 of the Act
has been passed. According to Section 183 (3A), pre-condition for entertaining
an appeal is that the appellant must deposit his share of the consolidated
rate payable up to the date of the presentation on the valuation determined
under Section 182 or by the Court of Small Causes as the case might be and the
appellant must also continue to deposit his share of the consolidated rate
until his appeal is finally decided. In other words, Sub-section (3A) of
Section 183 does not create any new or additional liability for payment of
consolidated rate by a person who prefers an appeal under Section 183 of the
Act, but requires the appellant to deposit up-to-date consolidated rate which
he is liable to pay under Section 191 or which might be otherwise lawfully
recoverable from him under the provisions contained in Chap. XVII of the Act.
Thus, I conclude the expression "consolidated rate payable" in Sub-section
(3A) of Section 183 of the Act is identical with the amount which the
appellant would be lawfully liable to pay under the other relevant provisions
of the Calcutta Municipal Act, 1951.
20\. There is also no repugnancy between Section 183 (3A) and Section 207 of
the Calcutta Municipal Act, 1951. Sub-section (1) of Section 207 clearly
indicates how the payment of consolidated rate shall be affected when an
objection to a valuation has been made under Section 181 of the Act In view of
the opening words of Sub-section (1) of Section 207 \--"when an objection to a
valuation has been made under Section 181", Mr. Pradip Kumar Ghosh, learned
advocate for the respondents, with some force has submitted that the other
expression "pending final determination of the objection" means that up to the
date of the disposal of such objection by an order passed under Section 182,
the objector would pay according to the consolidated rate according to the
previous valuation. Sub-section (1) of Section 207 does not further indicate
how payment of consolidated rate would be affected by filing an appeal under
Section 183 (1) of the Act. Subsection (3A) of Section 183, as already stated,
makes specific provisions in this behalf. It may be noted that Calcutta
Municipal (3rd Amendment) Act, 1976 had inserted the words "or deposited" in
Clause (a) of Sub-section (2) of Section 207 of the Calcutta Municipal Act.
Thus, Clause (a) or (b) of Section 207 (2) of the Calcutta Municipal Act as
may be appropriate, would be attracted after the challenge to the new
valuation is finally disposed of either under Section 182 or Section 183 of
the Act. When any sum has been, paid in excess, the same may be refunded or
allowed to be set off against present or future demand of the Corporation. In
case, pending disposal of objection under Section 181 of the Act, the entire
consolidated rate or a part thereof had not been paid, sum due shall be
payable and recoverable according to the provisions of the Calcutta Municipal
Act. On the other hand, if pending disposal of an appeal under Section 183 (1)
of the Act the appellant had deposited consolidated rate at the figure
determined under Section 182 of the Act and by the appellate order, the
valuation is reduced, any sum paid or deposited as consolidated rate in excess
up to the date of the disposal of the appeal shall be liable to be refunded or
set off against present or future demand of the Corporation. There is no basis
for the petitioner's contention that such excess sums deposited under Section
183 (3A) might become irrecoverable and the Corporation has been given an
arbitrary power to decide whether the excess sum paid would be refunded or
adjusted against its present or future demands. Section 207 (2) imposes a duty
upon the Corporation and Mr. Pradip Ghosh himself has conceded that the person
who has paid the excess sum has the choice whether he would claim refund or
allow the excess sum to be adjusted against demands of the Corporation. The
expression "demand" in Sub-section (2) of Section 207 obviously means demand
of consolidated rate which could be lawfully made upon the person who has paid
or deposits is entitled to refund or may allow the excess sum paid or
deposited by him to be set off and adjusted against his liability for past or
future demands by the Corporation. The expressions "presented"
and "presentation" used respectively in Sub-sections 12) and (3A) of Section
183 of the Calcutta Municipal Act, 1951 have been obviously used in their
ordinary meaning of "filing" or "instituting". The other expression
"entertained" in the context of Sub-section (3A) of Section 183 of the Act
clearly carries a meaning different from that of the word "presented". In the
context, the word "entertained" means "to admit for consideration". In other
words, the said expression "entertained" in Section 183 (3) means to decide or
to dispose of on merits. Unless an appellant complies with the conditions of
Section 183 (3A) of the Act, his appeal against an order under Section 182 (2)
of the Act would not be decided on merits.
21\. I find no substance in the contention that Section 183 (3A) of the
Calcutta Municipal Act, 1951 is unworkable and the person who intends to
prefer an appeal under Section 183 (1) of the Act would be unable to comply
with the condition mentioned in said Sub-section (3A) of Section 183 of the
Act because the Corporation itself may not calculate and enter into the record
the consolidated rates payable according to the valuation fixed by an order
disposing of an objection under Section 181 of the Calcutta Municipal Act,
1951.
22\. The Corporation under Section 165 of the Calcutta Municipal Act imposes
graduated consolidated rate on the annual valuation of all lands and buildings
determined in the manner laid down in Chap. XI of the Calcutta Municipal Act,
1951. The Clauses (1) to (v) of the Section 165 of the said Act specify the
maximum limits of such graduated consolidated rate. Such percentages under
Section 166 of the Act are fitted annually. For assessment of lands and
buildings to the consolidated rates, their annual values are determined in the
prescribed manner. A general revision of valuation is made for successive
periods of six years (vide Section 172 (2) of the Calcutta Municipal Act,
1951). The Sub-section (3) of Section 173 of the Act also specifies the cases
in which intermediate revaluation can be made. Section 181 of the Act confers
a right to prefer objection within the prescribed time against valuation made
under Section 172 of the Act. Any person dissatisfied with an order disposing
of his said objection filed under Section 181 of the Act may appeal under
Section 183 of the Act to the Court of Small Causes having jurisdiction over
the land on which the building is situated. Appeal from the decision of the
Court of Small Causes lies to the High Court.
23\. The annual valuations fixed arc entered in the Assessment Books kept
under Section 185 of the Act at the municipal office. The said Assessment
Books under Section 185, inter alia, also record the amount payable quarterly
on account of the consolidated rate. The said Assessment Books are public
documents and certified copies of the entries made in the said Books may be
obtained by a person who intends to prefer an appeal under Section 183 of the
Act. Secondly, Sub-section (3) of Section 182, inter alia, provides that a
copy of the order together with a copy of the reasons for the Order shall be
sent by registered post to the person who gave the notice of objection under
Section 181 of the Act within a fortnight from the date of the order and the
order shall also be supplied on an application made in this behalf accompanied
by a fee of Re. 1/- to every owner and occupier of the building who is
affected by the order. I have perused the original records of Municipal Appeal
No. 141 of 1982 presented by the petitioners in the Presidency Small Causes
Act, Calcutta. I find that the petitioners have annexed to their said
Memorandum of Appeal a copy of the said order under Section 182 of the Act
served upon them. The said order is in Form No. 1 37A, para 137 of the
Assessment Manual which is, however, not statutory. On the reverse side of the
postcard quarterly rate in each share on the decided valuation has been
mentioned. A copy of the said same has been kept with the records of this
Rule.
24\. Mr. Pradip Kumar Ghosh, learned advocate for the respondent, has pointed
out that the appellant had paid on his Memorandum of Appeal an ad valorem,
court-fees on the difference between the previous valuation and the valuation
fixed under Section 182 of the Act. In this connection, Mr. Ghosh has drawn
our attention to the decision of Dasgupta and Debabrata Mookerjee, JJ., in N.
Dutta Majumdar v. Corporation of Calcutta, (1956) 60 Cal WN 214, which held
that the notification published under Section 529 of the Calcutta Municipal
Act, 1923, according to Section 25 of the Bengal General Clauses Act shall
have been made under Section 577 of the Calcutta Municipal Act, 1951.
Therefore, an appellant under Section 183 of the Act has to pay court-fees on
the amount of what would be payable as consolidated rate on the excess of
valuation against which the appeal is preferred over the valuation which the
appellant seeks to have substituted therefor Therefore, on the basis of the
relevant law and also upon the facts of this case, J conclude that quarterly
consolidated rate payable according to the valuation made under Section 182 of
the Act was known to the petitioners who have prima facie paid court-fees on
their memo on the said basis. There is no substance in the submission that
right of appeal under Section 183 has been made dependent on the occurrence of
an event which may take place in future or may not take place at all.
25\. At one stage of his submission, Mr. Dipankar Ghosh also submitted that
when the West Bengal Legislature had enacted the Calcutta Municipal (3rd
Amendment) Act, 1976, Sub-clause (f) of Clause (1) of Article 19 was still in
force and Section 183 (3A) of the Calcutta Municipal Act, 1951 was void ab
initio because the same unreasonably infringed the Fundamental Right of
citizen to acquire, hold and dispose of property. According to Mr. Dipankar
Ghosh, by reason of the omission of Sub-clause (f) of Clause (1) of Article 39
of the Constitution (44th Amendment) Act, 1978, the Sub-section (3A) of
Section 183 of the Calcutta Municipal Act did not revive and again become
void. As I am of the view that the restrictions on the right of appeal imposed
by Section 183 (3A) of the Calcutta Municipal Act did not unreasonably
infringe the right to acquire, hold and dispose of property, it is not
necessary for me to examine the further question whether omission of Sub-
clause (f) of Clause (1) of Article 19 of the Constitution (44th Amendment)
Act, 1978, would result in reviving any post-constitutional law which at the
date of its enactment was repugnant to Article 19(1)(c) of the Constitution.
26\. For the foregoing reasons, I conclude that Section 183 (3A) of the
Calcutta Municipal Act, 1951 is not arbitrary or unfair and therefore does not
infringe Article 14 of the Constitution. The said provision is also not
repugnant to or inconsistent with other provisions for payment and recovery of
consolidated rates contained in the Calcutta Municipal Act The Sub-section
(3A) of Section 183 of the Calcutta Municipal Act does not make right of
appeal under Section 183 (1) of the Act nugatory or illusory.
     27.   I accordingly    discharge    this    Rule without any order as to costs. 
     28.   Let the operation of this    order    be stayed for four weeks from date. 
citizen to acquire, hold and dispose of property. According to Mr. Dipankar
Ghosh, by reason of the omission of Sub-clause (f) of Clause (1) of Article 39
of the Constitution (44th Amendment) Act, 1978, the Sub-section (3A) of
Section 183 of the Calcutta Municipal Act did not revive and again become
void. As I am of the view that the restrictions on the right of appeal imposed
by Section 183 (3A) of the Calcutta Municipal Act did not unreasonably
infringe the right to acquire, hold and dispose of property, it is not
necessary for me to examine the further question whether omission of Sub-
clause (f) of Clause (1) of Article 19 of the Constitution (44th Amendment)
Act, 1978, would result in reviving any post-constitutional law which at the
date of its enactment was repugnant to Article 19(1)(c) of the Constitution.
26\. For the foregoing reasons, I conclude that Section 183 (3A) of the
Calcutta Municipal Act, 1951 is not arbitrary or unfair and therefore does not
infringe Article 14 of the Constitution. The said provision is also not
repugnant to or inconsistent with other provisions for payment and recovery of
consolidated rates contained in the Calcutta Municipal Act The Sub-section
2\. The Calcutta Municipal (3rd Amendment) Act, 1976, which came into effect
on 22nd June, 1976, has inserted the following Sub-section (3-A) in Section
183 of the Calcutta Municipal Act, 1951 :--
"No appeal under, this section shall be entertained unless the consolidated
rate payable up to the date of presentation of the appeal on the valuation
determined-
(a) by an order under Section 182, in the case of an appeal to the Court of
Small Causes,
(b) by the decision of the Court of Small Causes, in the case of an appeal to
the High Court, has been deposited in the municipal office and such
consolidated rate is continued to be deposited until the appeal is finally
decided."
The petitioners have obtained the present Rule, inter alia, challenging the
vires of said Sub-section (3-A) of Section 183 of the Calcutta Municipal Act,
1951 and also contending that the learned Chief Judge of the Small Causes
Court, Calcutta has no jurisdiction to call upon the petitioners to deposit
consolidated rates payable up to the date of the presentation of the appeal on
the valuation determined by the impugned order under Section 182 of the
Calcutta Municipal Act and also to continue to deposit the consolidated rate
on the said valuation so determined until the appeal presented by the
citizen to acquire, hold and dispose of property. According to Mr. Dipankar
Ghosh, by reason of the omission of Sub-clause (f) of Clause (1) of Article 39
of the Constitution (44th Amendment) Act, 1978, the Sub-section (3A) of
Section 183 of the Calcutta Municipal Act did not revive and again become
void. As I am of the view that the restrictions on the right of appeal imposed
by Section 183 (3A) of the Calcutta Municipal Act did not unreasonably
infringe the right to acquire, hold and dispose of property, it is not
necessary for me to examine the further question whether omission of Sub-
clause (f) of Clause (1) of Article 19 of the Constitution (44th Amendment)
Act, 1978, would result in reviving any post-constitutional law which at the
date of its enactment was repugnant to Article 19(1)(c) of the Constitution.
26\. For the foregoing reasons, I conclude that Section 183 (3A) of the
Calcutta Municipal Act, 1951 is not arbitrary or unfair and therefore does not
infringe Article 14 of the Constitution. The said provision is also not
repugnant to or inconsistent with other provisions for payment and recovery of
consolidated rates contained in the Calcutta Municipal Act The Sub-section
2\. The Calcutta Municipal (3rd Amendment) Act, 1976, which came into effect
on 22nd June, 1976, has inserted the following Sub-section (3-A) in Section
183 of the Calcutta Municipal Act, 1951 :--
"No appeal under, this section shall be entertained unless the consolidated
rate payable up to the date of presentation of the appeal on the valuation
determined-
(a) by an order under Section 182, in the case of an appeal to the Court of
Small Causes,
(b) by the decision of the Court of Small Causes, in the case of an appeal to
the High Court, has been deposited in the municipal office and such
consolidated rate is continued to be deposited until the appeal is finally
decided."
The petitioners have obtained the present Rule, inter alia, challenging the
vires of said Sub-section (3-A) of Section 183 of the Calcutta Municipal Act,
1951 and also contending that the learned Chief Judge of the Small Causes
Court, Calcutta has no jurisdiction to call upon the petitioners to deposit
consolidated rates payable up to the date of the presentation of the appeal on
the valuation determined by the impugned order under Section 182 of the
Calcutta Municipal Act and also to continue to deposit the consolidated rate
on the said valuation so determined until the appeal presented by the
citizen to acquire, hold and dispose of property. According to Mr. Dipankar
Ghosh, by reason of the omission of Sub-clause (f) of Clause (1) of Article 39
of the Constitution (44th Amendment) Act, 1978, the Sub-section (3A) of
Section 183 of the Calcutta Municipal Act did not revive and again become
void. As I am of the view that the restrictions on the right of appeal imposed
by Section 183 (3A) of the Calcutta Municipal Act did not unreasonably
infringe the right to acquire, hold and dispose of property, it is not
necessary for me to examine the further question whether omission of Sub-
clause (f) of Clause (1) of Article 19 of the Constitution (44th Amendment)
Act, 1978, would result in reviving any post-constitutional law which at the
date of its enactment was repugnant to Article 19(1)(c) of the Constitution.
26\. For the foregoing reasons, I conclude that Section 183 (3A) of the
Calcutta Municipal Act, 1951 is not arbitrary or unfair and therefore does not
infringe Article 14 of the Constitution. The said provision is also not
repugnant to or inconsistent with other provisions for payment and recovery of
consolidated rates contained in the Calcutta Municipal Act The Sub-section
2\. The Calcutta Municipal (3rd Amendment) Act, 1976, which came into effect
on 22nd June, 1976, has inserted the following Sub-section (3-A) in Section
183 of the Calcutta Municipal Act, 1951 :--
"No appeal under, this section shall be entertained unless the consolidated
rate payable up to the date of presentation of the appeal on the valuation
determined-
(a) by an order under Section 182, in the case of an appeal to the Court of
Small Causes,
(b) by the decision of the Court of Small Causes, in the case of an appeal to
the High Court, has been deposited in the municipal office and such
consolidated rate is continued to be deposited until the appeal is finally
decided."
The petitioners have obtained the present Rule, inter alia, challenging the
vires of said Sub-section (3-A) of Section 183 of the Calcutta Municipal Act,
1951 and also contending that the learned Chief Judge of the Small Causes
Court, Calcutta has no jurisdiction to call upon the petitioners to deposit
consolidated rates payable up to the date of the presentation of the appeal on
the valuation determined by the impugned order under Section 182 of the
Calcutta Municipal Act and also to continue to deposit the consolidated rate
on the said valuation so determined until the appeal presented by the
petitioners is finally decided
3\. On January 28, 1983, I had rejected four writ applications filed by M/s.
Jajodia Estates Pvt. Ltd. and others, who had, inter alia, contended that the
learned Chief Judge of the Small Causes Court at Calcutta had committed error
of jurisdiction by applying Sub-section (3-A) of Section 183 of the Calcutta
Municipal Act, 1951 in respect of the appeals presented by them against the
orders passed under Section 182 of the said Act My said decision has been
since reposed at page 391 of the 87 Cal WN. Having given my anxious
consideration to the various submissions urged on behalf of the petitioners of
the instant Rule, I find no reason to revise my views regarding the scope and
effect of Sub-section (3-A) of Section 183 of the Calcutta Municipal Act,
citizen to acquire, hold and dispose of property. According to Mr. Dipankar
Ghosh, by reason of the omission of Sub-clause (f) of Clause (1) of Article 39
of the Constitution (44th Amendment) Act, 1978, the Sub-section (3A) of
Section 183 of the Calcutta Municipal Act did not revive and again become
void. As I am of the view that the restrictions on the right of appeal imposed
by Section 183 (3A) of the Calcutta Municipal Act did not unreasonably
infringe the right to acquire, hold and dispose of property, it is not
necessary for me to examine the further question whether omission of Sub-
clause (f) of Clause (1) of Article 19 of the Constitution (44th Amendment)
Act, 1978, would result in reviving any post-constitutional law which at the
date of its enactment was repugnant to Article 19(1)(c) of the Constitution.
26\. For the foregoing reasons, I conclude that Section 183 (3A) of the
Calcutta Municipal Act, 1951 is not arbitrary or unfair and therefore does not
infringe Article 14 of the Constitution. The said provision is also not
repugnant to or inconsistent with other provisions for payment and recovery of
consolidated rates contained in the Calcutta Municipal Act The Sub-section
2\. The Calcutta Municipal (3rd Amendment) Act, 1976, which came into effect
on 22nd June, 1976, has inserted the following Sub-section (3-A) in Section
183 of the Calcutta Municipal Act, 1951 :--
"No appeal under, this section shall be entertained unless the consolidated
rate payable up to the date of presentation of the appeal on the valuation
determined-
(a) by an order under Section 182, in the case of an appeal to the Court of
Small Causes,
(b) by the decision of the Court of Small Causes, in the case of an appeal to
the High Court, has been deposited in the municipal office and such
consolidated rate is continued to be deposited until the appeal is finally
decided."
The petitioners have obtained the present Rule, inter alia, challenging the
vires of said Sub-section (3-A) of Section 183 of the Calcutta Municipal Act,
1951 and also contending that the learned Chief Judge of the Small Causes
Court, Calcutta has no jurisdiction to call upon the petitioners to deposit
consolidated rates payable up to the date of the presentation of the appeal on
the valuation determined by the impugned order under Section 182 of the
Calcutta Municipal Act and also to continue to deposit the consolidated rate
on the said valuation so determined until the appeal presented by the
petitioners is finally decided
3\. On January 28, 1983, I had rejected four writ applications filed by M/s.
Jajodia Estates Pvt. Ltd. and others, who had, inter alia, contended that the
learned Chief Judge of the Small Causes Court at Calcutta had committed error
of jurisdiction by applying Sub-section (3-A) of Section 183 of the Calcutta
Municipal Act, 1951 in respect of the appeals presented by them against the
orders passed under Section 182 of the said Act My said decision has been
since reposed at page 391 of the 87 Cal WN. Having given my anxious
consideration to the various submissions urged on behalf of the petitioners of
the instant Rule, I find no reason to revise my views regarding the scope and
effect of Sub-section (3-A) of Section 183 of the Calcutta Municipal Act,
citizen to acquire, hold and dispose of property. According to Mr. Dipankar
Ghosh, by reason of the omission of Sub-clause (f) of Clause (1) of Article 39
of the Constitution (44th Amendment) Act, 1978, the Sub-section (3A) of
Section 183 of the Calcutta Municipal Act did not revive and again become
void. As I am of the view that the restrictions on the right of appeal imposed
by Section 183 (3A) of the Calcutta Municipal Act did not unreasonably
infringe the right to acquire, hold and dispose of property, it is not
necessary for me to examine the further question whether omission of Sub-
clause (f) of Clause (1) of Article 19 of the Constitution (44th Amendment)
Act, 1978, would result in reviving any post-constitutional law which at the
date of its enactment was repugnant to Article 19(1)(c) of the Constitution.
26\. For the foregoing reasons, I conclude that Section 183 (3A) of the
Calcutta Municipal Act, 1951 is not arbitrary or unfair and therefore does not
infringe Article 14 of the Constitution. The said provision is also not
repugnant to or inconsistent with other provisions for payment and recovery of
consolidated rates contained in the Calcutta Municipal Act The Sub-section
