Custom, Excise & Service Tax Tribunal
M/S.Saint-Gobain Gyproc India ... vs Cce, Rohtak on 21 January, 2014
    IN THE CUSTOMS, EXCISE AND SERVICE TAX APPELLATE TRIBUNAL, NEW DELHI, PRINCIPAL BENCH NEW DELHI
                     	               			Date of Hearing/Decision:21.01.2014 		
    			Service Tax Misc. 894 of 2009 in 
    			Appeal No.24/2009-CU(DB)
    (Arising out of Order-in-Original No.33/Commr./SU/08/ST dated 01.10.2008  passed by the  Commissioner of  Central Excise, Rohtak (Haryana).
     M/s.Saint-Gobain Gyproc India Limited 				Appellant				
    						Vs.						            
    CCE, Rohtak							         Respondent
For approval and signature:
Honble Shri Justice G. Raghuram, President Honble Shri Rakesh Kumar, Member
(Technical) 1 Whether Press Reporters may be allowed to see the Order for
publication as per Rule 27 of the CESTAT (Procedure) Rules, 1982?
2
Whether it should be released under Rule 27 of the CESTAT (Procedure) Rules,
1982 for publication in any authoritative report or not?
3
Whether Their Lordships wish to see the fair copy of the Order?
4
products and jointing compounds and joint filler including occasional
supervision and problem solving, expert assistance in marketing of the final
products etc. None of these services can be called intellectual property
service. It is only the amount paid in terms of the Article 8.1 of the
agreement, which can be said to be for intellectual property tax as this
amount was for the use by the Appellant of the technical know how developed by
M/s. BPB Industries, U.K. However, show cause notice seeks to charge service
tax on the amount paid by the appellant to M/s.BPB in terms of the Article
8.2.of the agreement, which, as is clear from this clause, is for technical
assistance as specified in Annexure-II to the agreement and not for royalty
charge and as such, the same would not attract service tax under IPR service.
The plea of the ld. Joint CDR that the amount being paid by the appellant to
their technical collaboration, M/s. BPB, UK is the royalty charge for use of
their technology is not acceptable at all. Moreover, we also find that the
demand for the period prior to 18.4.2006 is not sustainable in view of the
judgement of Honble Bombay High Court in the case of Indian National
4
Whether Order is to be circulated to the Departmental authorities?
Appearance: Shri J.K. Mittal, Advocate for the appellant.
Ms. Ranjana Jha, Joint CDR for the respondent.
     CORAM:Honble Shri Justice G. Raghuram, President 
                    Honble  Shri Rakesh Kumar, Member (Technical)
                       Final    Order No.50670/2014 Dated:31.01.2014
    Per  Rakesh Kumar:
The appellant are manufacturers of Gypsum Board jointing compound, Bonding
Adhesive, Gypsum Plasters falling under Chapter 68 and 25 of the Central
Excise Tariff. In March, 1985, they entered into an agreement with M/s. BPB
Industries Public Ltd., England, a company registered in UK for manufacture of
Gypsum Board Jointing Compound, etc. in collaboration with them by using their
technology and technical assistance. In terms of Article 8.1, the appellant
were to pay a lump sum amount of #400000/- outside India to a bank as
specified by M/s.BPB in three instalments - one third amount after the date of
the agreement, next one third within 30 days of M/s.BPB certifying that all
the written information contained in the 1st schedule to the agreement has
been supplied to the appellant and the remaining one third instalment within
30 days of the commencement of the commercial production or 4 years from the
date of the agreement, whichever is earlier. The amount #400000 period
sterlings for the technical knowhow has been paid by the appellant to M/s.BPB.
In terms of the Article 8.2 of the agreement, in addition to the amount of
#400000/- for technical knowhow, the appellant were also required to pay to
M/s.BPB an amount @ 3% of the annual sales in consideration for the technical
services as specified in Schedule II to the agreement, provide by M/s.BPB to
the appellant. The technical services were about technical advice and
assistance with identification specification and preparation of linerboard
(paper) Gypsum and other indigenous raw materials to be used by the appellant
in India, expert advice and assistance during installation, erection and
commissioning and modifications or additions to the existing equipment
required to manufacture the products, expert advice and assistance in respect
of manufacture of the products, including and problem solving, expert advice
and assistance in respect of marketing of the products etc. The department was
of the view that the appellant were required to pay service tax as service
recipient under Rule 2(1) (d)(iv) of the Service Tax Rules, 1994 on the amount
being paid at the rate 3% of the annual sales, to M/s.BPB, as according to the
Department, this was import of services, which was taxable in India. The
service tax was demanded by classifying the service being received in terms of
the Article 8.2 of the agreement as intellectual property service.
Accordingly, a show cause notice dated 22.5.2008 was issued to the appellant
for demand of allegedly non-paid service tax amounting to Rs.63,22,985/- for
the period from 10.09.2004 to 30.11.2007 along with interest thereon and also
for imposition of penalty on the appellant under Section 76, 77 and 78 of the
Finance Act, 1994. The show cause notice was adjudicated by the Commissioner
vide order-in-original dated 1.10.2008 by which the above mentioned service
tax demand was confirmed along with interest and besides this, while penalty
of Rs.65,00,000/- was imposed on the appellant under Section 76 and 78 of the
Finance Act, 1994 for non-payment of service tax and for suppressing the value
of the taxable service from the department, a penalty of Rs.5,000/- was
imposed under Section 77 of the Finance Act, 1994 for non-submission of the
ST-3 returns. Against this order of the Commissioner, this appeal has been
filed.
2\. Heard both the sides.
3\. Shri J.K. Mittal, Advocate, ld. Counsel for the appellant, pleaded that
the show cause notice seeks recovery of service tax on the amount being paid
by the appellant to M/s. BPB Private Limited Company, UK, England @ 3% of the
annual sales turnover by treating this amount as royalty and the service tax
is sought to be charged on this amount as intellectual property right service
, that as is clear from the Article 8.2. of the appellants agreement with
M/s. BPB Industries, England, the amount being paid by the appellant is for
technical services, as specified in Annexure-II to the agreement, that the
royalty amount for use of the technology developed by M/s.BPB had been paid by
the Appellant to M/s.BPB in lumpsum in the year 1985 in terms of the
provisions of Article 8.1 and no service tax can be charged on the same, that
amount on which service tax is sought to be charged is not for IPR service,
that in any case, the service tax demand for the period prior to 18.04.2006
would not survive, as the provisions under which the service tax could be
charged by a service recipient in India on the services being received by him
from an offshore service provider was introduced w.e.f. 18.04.2006 by
inserting Section 66A and during the period prior to 18.04.2006
notwithstanding the provisions of Rule 2(1)(d)(iv) of the Service Tax Rules,
service tax on the services could not be charged from the service recipient in
India in respect of the taxable services received by him from an offshore
service provider, that in this regard, he relies upon the judgement of the
Honble Bombay High Court in the case of Indian National Shipowners
Association Vs. Union of India reported 2009 (13) STR 235 (Bombay), that in
any case the Commissioner of Central Excise, Rohtak had no jurisdiction to
issue the show cause notice and confirm service tax demand against the
appellant, as their registered office is located at Mumbai and they have
plants at three locations Thane (Maharastra), Thiruvalli (Tamil Nadu) and
Jind, (Haryana) and just because one of the plants of the appellant company is
located in Haryana, the Commissioner of Central Excise & Service Tax, Rohtak
could not issue the show cause notice to them and confirm service tax demand
in respect of the some services alleged to have been received by the appellant
company from offshore service provider, that in any case, when the amount on
which the service tax is sought to be recovered as intellectual property
services is not for the IPR services but is for some other services, no
service tax can be demanded in respect of that amount and that in view of the
above submissions, the impugned order is not sustainable.
4\. Ms. Ranjana Jha, ld. Joint CDR, defended the impugned order by reiterating
the findings of the Commissioner and pleaded that the amount being paid by the
appellant in terms of Article 8.2 of their agreement with M/s. BPB Industries,
U.K. is also for use of the technology and has to be treated as royalty
payment and accordingly the same would be taxable as consideration for IPR
service, which become taxable w.e.f. 10.09.2004. She also pleaded that the
Commissioner of Central Excise & Service Tax, Rohtak had jurisdiction to issue
show cause notice and confirm the service tax demand against the appellant, as
one of their plants is located at Jind within the jurisdiction of the
Commissioner, Rohtak. She also pleaded that in respect of the period prior to
18.04.2006, notwithstanding the fact that section 66A was not there, service
tax could be demanded from the appellant as service recipient in terms of the
provisions of Rule 2(1)(d)(iv) of the Service Tax Rules, 1994. She, therefore,
pleaded that there is no infirmity in the impugned order.
5\. We have considered the submissions from both the sides and perused the
records. The service tax is sought to be demanded on the amount being paid by
the appellant to BPB, UK in terms of Article 8.2 of their agreement with them.
While in terms of the Article 8.1 of the Agreement, the appellant were
required to pay a lump sum amount of #400000 as consideration for technical
knowhow provided, within a specified period and the same amount has already
been paid, Article 8.2. provides for recurring annual payment @3% of the
annual sales turnover for technical services provided by M/s. BPB to the
appellant. The technical services being provided are those mentioned in
Annexure-II to the agreement, which are expert advice and assistance with
identification specification and preparation of linerboard (paper) gypsum and
other indigenous raw materials to be used by the appellant in India, the
expert advice and assistance during installation, erection and commissioning
of the plant and also in the subsequent modifications or addition to the
manufacturing plant, expert advice and assistance with the manufacture of the
products and jointing compounds and joint filler including occasional
supervision and problem solving, expert assistance in marketing of the final
products etc. None of these services can be called intellectual property
service. It is only the amount paid in terms of the Article 8.1 of the
agreement, which can be said to be for intellectual property tax as this
amount was for the use by the Appellant of the technical know how developed by
M/s. BPB Industries, U.K. However, show cause notice seeks to charge service
tax on the amount paid by the appellant to M/s.BPB in terms of the Article
8.2.of the agreement, which, as is clear from this clause, is for technical
assistance as specified in Annexure-II to the agreement and not for royalty
charge and as such, the same would not attract service tax under IPR service.
The plea of the ld. Joint CDR that the amount being paid by the appellant to
their technical collaboration, M/s. BPB, UK is the royalty charge for use of
their technology is not acceptable at all. Moreover, we also find that the
demand for the period prior to 18.4.2006 is not sustainable in view of the
judgement of Honble Bombay High Court in the case of Indian National
Shipowners Association (supra). We, therefore, hold that the impugned order is
not sustainable. The same is set aside. The appeal is allowed.
( Justice G. Raghuram ) President (Rakesh Kumar ) Member (Technical) Ckp.
1
products and jointing compounds and joint filler including occasional
supervision and problem solving, expert assistance in marketing of the final
products etc. None of these services can be called intellectual property
service. It is only the amount paid in terms of the Article 8.1 of the
agreement, which can be said to be for intellectual property tax as this
amount was for the use by the Appellant of the technical know how developed by
M/s. BPB Industries, U.K. However, show cause notice seeks to charge service
tax on the amount paid by the appellant to M/s.BPB in terms of the Article
8.2.of the agreement, which, as is clear from this clause, is for technical
assistance as specified in Annexure-II to the agreement and not for royalty
charge and as such, the same would not attract service tax under IPR service.
The plea of the ld. Joint CDR that the amount being paid by the appellant to
their technical collaboration, M/s. BPB, UK is the royalty charge for use of
their technology is not acceptable at all. Moreover, we also find that the
demand for the period prior to 18.4.2006 is not sustainable in view of the
judgement of Honble Bombay High Court in the case of Indian National
4
Whether Order is to be circulated to the Departmental authorities?
Appearance: Shri J.K. Mittal, Advocate for the appellant.
Ms. Ranjana Jha, Joint CDR for the respondent.
     CORAM:Honble Shri Justice G. Raghuram, President 
                    Honble  Shri Rakesh Kumar, Member (Technical)
                       Final    Order No.50670/2014 Dated:31.01.2014
    Per  Rakesh Kumar:
The appellant are manufacturers of Gypsum Board jointing compound, Bonding
Adhesive, Gypsum Plasters falling under Chapter 68 and 25 of the Central
Excise Tariff. In March, 1985, they entered into an agreement with M/s. BPB
Industries Public Ltd., England, a company registered in UK for manufacture of
Gypsum Board Jointing Compound, etc. in collaboration with them by using their
technology and technical assistance. In terms of Article 8.1, the appellant
were to pay a lump sum amount of #400000/- outside India to a bank as
specified by M/s.BPB in three instalments - one third amount after the date of
the agreement, next one third within 30 days of M/s.BPB certifying that all
the written information contained in the 1st schedule to the agreement has
been supplied to the appellant and the remaining one third instalment within
30 days of the commencement of the commercial production or 4 years from the
products and jointing compounds and joint filler including occasional
supervision and problem solving, expert assistance in marketing of the final
products etc. None of these services can be called intellectual property
service. It is only the amount paid in terms of the Article 8.1 of the
agreement, which can be said to be for intellectual property tax as this
amount was for the use by the Appellant of the technical know how developed by
M/s. BPB Industries, U.K. However, show cause notice seeks to charge service
tax on the amount paid by the appellant to M/s.BPB in terms of the Article
8.2.of the agreement, which, as is clear from this clause, is for technical
assistance as specified in Annexure-II to the agreement and not for royalty
charge and as such, the same would not attract service tax under IPR service.
The plea of the ld. Joint CDR that the amount being paid by the appellant to
their technical collaboration, M/s. BPB, UK is the royalty charge for use of
their technology is not acceptable at all. Moreover, we also find that the
demand for the period prior to 18.4.2006 is not sustainable in view of the
judgement of Honble Bombay High Court in the case of Indian National
4
Whether Order is to be circulated to the Departmental authorities?
Appearance: Shri J.K. Mittal, Advocate for the appellant.
Ms. Ranjana Jha, Joint CDR for the respondent.
     CORAM:Honble Shri Justice G. Raghuram, President 
                    Honble  Shri Rakesh Kumar, Member (Technical)
                       Final    Order No.50670/2014 Dated:31.01.2014
    Per  Rakesh Kumar:
The appellant are manufacturers of Gypsum Board jointing compound, Bonding
Adhesive, Gypsum Plasters falling under Chapter 68 and 25 of the Central
Excise Tariff. In March, 1985, they entered into an agreement with M/s. BPB
Industries Public Ltd., England, a company registered in UK for manufacture of
Gypsum Board Jointing Compound, etc. in collaboration with them by using their
technology and technical assistance. In terms of Article 8.1, the appellant
were to pay a lump sum amount of #400000/- outside India to a bank as
specified by M/s.BPB in three instalments - one third amount after the date of
the agreement, next one third within 30 days of M/s.BPB certifying that all
the written information contained in the 1st schedule to the agreement has
been supplied to the appellant and the remaining one third instalment within
30 days of the commencement of the commercial production or 4 years from the
products and jointing compounds and joint filler including occasional
supervision and problem solving, expert assistance in marketing of the final
products etc. None of these services can be called intellectual property
service. It is only the amount paid in terms of the Article 8.1 of the
agreement, which can be said to be for intellectual property tax as this
amount was for the use by the Appellant of the technical know how developed by
M/s. BPB Industries, U.K. However, show cause notice seeks to charge service
tax on the amount paid by the appellant to M/s.BPB in terms of the Article
8.2.of the agreement, which, as is clear from this clause, is for technical
assistance as specified in Annexure-II to the agreement and not for royalty
charge and as such, the same would not attract service tax under IPR service.
The plea of the ld. Joint CDR that the amount being paid by the appellant to
their technical collaboration, M/s. BPB, UK is the royalty charge for use of
their technology is not acceptable at all. Moreover, we also find that the
demand for the period prior to 18.4.2006 is not sustainable in view of the
judgement of Honble Bombay High Court in the case of Indian National
4
Whether Order is to be circulated to the Departmental authorities?
Appearance: Shri J.K. Mittal, Advocate for the appellant.
Ms. Ranjana Jha, Joint CDR for the respondent.
     CORAM:Honble Shri Justice G. Raghuram, President 
                    Honble  Shri Rakesh Kumar, Member (Technical)
                       Final    Order No.50670/2014 Dated:31.01.2014
    Per  Rakesh Kumar:
The appellant are manufacturers of Gypsum Board jointing compound, Bonding
Adhesive, Gypsum Plasters falling under Chapter 68 and 25 of the Central
Excise Tariff. In March, 1985, they entered into an agreement with M/s. BPB
Industries Public Ltd., England, a company registered in UK for manufacture of
Gypsum Board Jointing Compound, etc. in collaboration with them by using their
technology and technical assistance. In terms of Article 8.1, the appellant
were to pay a lump sum amount of #400000/- outside India to a bank as
specified by M/s.BPB in three instalments - one third amount after the date of
the agreement, next one third within 30 days of M/s.BPB certifying that all
the written information contained in the 1st schedule to the agreement has
been supplied to the appellant and the remaining one third instalment within
30 days of the commencement of the commercial production or 4 years from the
date of the agreement, whichever is earlier. The amount #400000 period
sterlings for the technical knowhow has been paid by the appellant to M/s.BPB.
In terms of the Article 8.2 of the agreement, in addition to the amount of
#400000/- for technical knowhow, the appellant were also required to pay to
M/s.BPB an amount @ 3% of the annual sales in consideration for the technical
services as specified in Schedule II to the agreement, provide by M/s.BPB to
the appellant. The technical services were about technical advice and
assistance with identification specification and preparation of linerboard
(paper) Gypsum and other indigenous raw materials to be used by the appellant
in India, expert advice and assistance during installation, erection and
commissioning and modifications or additions to the existing equipment
products and jointing compounds and joint filler including occasional
supervision and problem solving, expert assistance in marketing of the final
products etc. None of these services can be called intellectual property
service. It is only the amount paid in terms of the Article 8.1 of the
agreement, which can be said to be for intellectual property tax as this
amount was for the use by the Appellant of the technical know how developed by
M/s. BPB Industries, U.K. However, show cause notice seeks to charge service
tax on the amount paid by the appellant to M/s.BPB in terms of the Article
8.2.of the agreement, which, as is clear from this clause, is for technical
assistance as specified in Annexure-II to the agreement and not for royalty
charge and as such, the same would not attract service tax under IPR service.
The plea of the ld. Joint CDR that the amount being paid by the appellant to
their technical collaboration, M/s. BPB, UK is the royalty charge for use of
their technology is not acceptable at all. Moreover, we also find that the
demand for the period prior to 18.4.2006 is not sustainable in view of the
judgement of Honble Bombay High Court in the case of Indian National
4
Whether Order is to be circulated to the Departmental authorities?
Appearance: Shri J.K. Mittal, Advocate for the appellant.
Ms. Ranjana Jha, Joint CDR for the respondent.
     CORAM:Honble Shri Justice G. Raghuram, President 
                    Honble  Shri Rakesh Kumar, Member (Technical)
                       Final    Order No.50670/2014 Dated:31.01.2014
    Per  Rakesh Kumar:
The appellant are manufacturers of Gypsum Board jointing compound, Bonding
Adhesive, Gypsum Plasters falling under Chapter 68 and 25 of the Central
Excise Tariff. In March, 1985, they entered into an agreement with M/s. BPB
Industries Public Ltd., England, a company registered in UK for manufacture of
Gypsum Board Jointing Compound, etc. in collaboration with them by using their
technology and technical assistance. In terms of Article 8.1, the appellant
were to pay a lump sum amount of #400000/- outside India to a bank as
specified by M/s.BPB in three instalments - one third amount after the date of
the agreement, next one third within 30 days of M/s.BPB certifying that all
the written information contained in the 1st schedule to the agreement has
been supplied to the appellant and the remaining one third instalment within
30 days of the commencement of the commercial production or 4 years from the
date of the agreement, whichever is earlier. The amount #400000 period
sterlings for the technical knowhow has been paid by the appellant to M/s.BPB.
In terms of the Article 8.2 of the agreement, in addition to the amount of
#400000/- for technical knowhow, the appellant were also required to pay to
M/s.BPB an amount @ 3% of the annual sales in consideration for the technical
services as specified in Schedule II to the agreement, provide by M/s.BPB to
the appellant. The technical services were about technical advice and
assistance with identification specification and preparation of linerboard
(paper) Gypsum and other indigenous raw materials to be used by the appellant
in India, expert advice and assistance during installation, erection and
commissioning and modifications or additions to the existing equipment
products and jointing compounds and joint filler including occasional
supervision and problem solving, expert assistance in marketing of the final
products etc. None of these services can be called intellectual property
service. It is only the amount paid in terms of the Article 8.1 of the
agreement, which can be said to be for intellectual property tax as this
amount was for the use by the Appellant of the technical know how developed by
M/s. BPB Industries, U.K. However, show cause notice seeks to charge service
tax on the amount paid by the appellant to M/s.BPB in terms of the Article
8.2.of the agreement, which, as is clear from this clause, is for technical
assistance as specified in Annexure-II to the agreement and not for royalty
charge and as such, the same would not attract service tax under IPR service.
The plea of the ld. Joint CDR that the amount being paid by the appellant to
their technical collaboration, M/s. BPB, UK is the royalty charge for use of
their technology is not acceptable at all. Moreover, we also find that the
demand for the period prior to 18.4.2006 is not sustainable in view of the
judgement of Honble Bombay High Court in the case of Indian National
