Delhi District Court
State vs . Sunil Chaudhary on 21 May, 2009
Author: Sh. Dig Singh
         IN THE COURT OF SH. DIG VINAY SINGH, LD. ACMM­03 (IPR) ROHINI 
         COURT COMPLEX, DELHI
                                                         STATE VS. SUNIL CHAUDHARY                                             
                                                       FIR no. 169/01
                                                       U/S: 63/65 CR Act & 78/79 TMM Act
                                                       PS : Keshav Puram (IPR)
         21/05/2009 
         ORDER ON CHARGE  
         Pre:    Ld. APP for State Sh. Pradeep Gangwar 
                 IO Inspector Vinod Gandhi in person. 
                 Both accused namely Sunil Chaudhary and Rajeev Arora are present on 
                 bail with counsel Sh. Pradeep Huda, Adv. 
                 Clarifications sought from the IO.  Matter is fixed for order on charge.  
                 Arguments on the same has already been heard.  
    1.
Ld. Counsel for accused conceded to framing of charge so far as accused Sunil
Chaudhary is concerned but he argued that against accused no. 2 Rajeev Arora,
conviction. What is required to be seen is whether there is strong suspicion
which may lead to the court to think that there is ground for presuming that
the accused has committed an offence. Reliance placed on the cases of Union of
India vs. Prafulla Kumar AI R 1979 Supreme Court 366 : State of Maharashtra
and others vs. Som Nath Thapa and others JT 1996 (4) SC 615 ; State of Bihar
v. Ramesh Singh, AI R 1977 S C. 2018: (1 977 CRI LJ 1606) ; Umar Abdula Sakoor
Sorathia vs. Intelligence officer narcotic control bureau JT 1999 (5) SC 394 ;
Kallu Mal Gupta vs. State 2000 I AD Delhi 107.
9\. In view of the above discussion, there are prima facie sufficient material
to frame charges against both the accused for the offence u/s 78/79 TMM Act,
1958 and u/s 63 Copyright Act, 1957. In addition to above charges, charge u/s
65 Copyright Act, 1957 is also made out against accused Sunil Chaudhary. Let
charges be framed against both the accused for the above said offences.
Charges framed separately to which both accused claim trial. Put up for PE on
01/02/03­ 09­2009 for entire PE.
               Announced in the open court                                                (DIG VINAY SINGH)
Chaudhary is concerned but he argued that against accused no. 2 Rajeev Arora,
no charge is made out as there is no evidence against him except disclosure
statement and he also claimed that no recovery was effected from accused no. 2
Rajeev Arora.
2\. Brief facts of this case are that Mr Krishan Kumar, AR of M/s Heinz India
Ltd filed a complaint alleging that M/s Heinz India Ltd is a company dealing
in consumer products and one prickly heat powder under the trade name "Nycil"
is also being sold and distributed by the Company. The complainant company has
registered trademark of this trade name "Nycil" and the Company came to know
Order on Charge /State Vs. Sunil Chaudhary/ FIR no. 169/01 PS: KeshavPuram(
IPR) page 1 of 6 dtd. 21­05­09/DK that certain persons are falsifying this
trademark. The Complainant company also claimed that complainant company has
copyright in the product logo and label which consists of artistic work in the
said article. On this complaint, a raiding party was organized on 17­05­2001
and premises of the accused Sunil Chaudhary at H. No. 1571, Jor Bagh, Gali No.
39, Chattar Singh Marg, Tri Nagar, Delhi was raided from where following
articles were recovered:­
(a) 27 cardboard boxes containing (Nycil Prickly Heat Powder) 60 plastic boxes
of powder of 150 gm in each plastic box (Total 1620 plastic powder boxes) from
the 2nd floor.
(b) 2090 empty plastic powder boxes bearing the falsified trademark, trade
logo and infringed artistic work "Nycil" from 3rd floor.
(c) 1750 empty plastic powder boxes bearing the blue colour square printing to
be used for further printing trademark, trade logo and artistic work "Nycil"
from the 3rd floor.
(d) 1225 empty plastic powder boxes to be used for printing the falsified
trade name, tradename/ logo and artistic work "Nycil" from the 3rd floor.
(e) (A) One hand screen printing machine (B) four screen (Plates) being used
for printing trade name/mark/logo and artistic work "Nycil" out of which three
containing square and one trademark "Nycil" (C) one electric press being used
for packing the plastic powder boxes from the 3rd floor;
(f) One electric screen printing machine being used for printing trade name/
mark/logo and artistic work "Nycil". This machine was having ½ horse power
electric motor bearing the label of make National at the 3rd floor.
Order on Charge /State Vs. Sunil Chaudhary/ FIR no. 169/01 PS: KeshavPuram(
IPR) page 2 of 6 dtd. 21­05­09/DK
3\. These articles were infringed, therefore, they were seized and accused was
arrested after registration of case. Thereafter, accused Sunil Chaudhary
disclosed that he supplied the same products to accused Rajeev Arora and
accordingly premises at First floor, H. NO 122, Gali Jatwara, Pul Mithai,
Sadar Bazar, Delhi was raided also from where also following articles were
recovered:­
(a) Total 19080 pieces of Nycil powder of 150 gm each put into 83 gunny bags
(b) Total 16224 pieces of Nycil powder of 75 gm each put into 54 gunny bags
(c) Total 1440 Pieces of Nycil powder of 150 gm each put into 8 gunny bags.
4\. Ld. APP for State has pointed out that although at the time of recovery
from premises of Rajeev Arora he was not present but the prosecution has
statement of Mr Jitender Nath, son of owner of premises in question that on
the relevant date of recovery, the premises was occupied on rent by accused
Rajeev Arora. Statement u/s 161 Cr. P. C. dated 19­05­2001 of Jitender Nath
specifically stated that Rajeev Arora was tenant of this portion on the date
of recovery. Besides this, prosecution also has the copy of rent agreement
dated 16­07­2000 executed between the accused Rajeev Arora and the landlord
i.e. mother of Jitender Nath regarding this premises and the said rent
agreement commenced on 16­07­2000 upto 15­06­2001 i.e., on the date of alleged
recovery the premises in question was in possession of Rajeev Arora.
5\. Counsel for accused Rajeev Arora tried to rely on one rent agreement dated
16­03­ 2001 between the landlord of the premises and one Tushar Day and also
one possession letter dated 28­02­2001 and on the basis of these documents it
is claimed Order on Charge /State Vs. Sunil Chaudhary/ FIR no. 169/01 PS:
KeshavPuram( IPR) page 3 of 6 dtd. 21­05­09/DK that Rajeev Arora was not in
possession of the premises on the date of recovery. These two documents relied
upon by the counsel for accused Rajeev Arora are not part of chargesheet and
Ld. APP for State submits that these documents are filed by the accused in his
defence.
6\. Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of State of Orissa vs. Debender Nath
Padhi 2005 (1) JCC 109 specifically held that at the stage of arguments on
charge documents and material placed on record by the prosecution only can be
looked into and documents of accused cannot be looked into.
7\. Ld. Counsel for accused Rajeev Arora relied upon the case of Dilwar Balu
Kurane Vs. State of Maharashtra (2002) 2 Supreme Court cases 135; L. K. Advani
& ors Vs. CBI 1997 JCC 294 and Satish Mehra Vs. Delhi Administration & Anr
(1996) 9 Supreme Court Cases 766. The case of Satish Mehra has been overruled
by Hon'ble Supreme court in the case of Debender Nath Padhi as mentioned
above. The remaining two judgements are not of any help to the case of accused
as distinguishable on facts.
8\. Law regarding considerations at the stage of charge is well­settled now.
The court has power to sift and weigh the evidence for the limited purpose of
finding out whether or not a prima facie case against accused has been made
out. It is held that when the material placed before the court discloses great
suspicion against the accused which has not been properly explained the court
will be justified in framing charge. The judge should not make a roving
inquiry into the pros and cons of the matter and weigh the evidence is if he
was Order on Charge /State Vs. Sunil Chaudhary/ FIR no. 169/01 PS:
KeshavPuram( IPR) page 4 of 6 dtd. 21­05­09/DK conducting a trial. If on the
basis of materials on record a court could come to the conclusion that
commission of the offence is a provable consequence, a case of framing of
charge exists. To put it differently, if the courts were to think that the
accused might have committed the offence it can frame a charge , though for
conviction the conclusion is required to be that the accused has committed the
offence. At the stage of framing of a charge probative value of the materials
on record cannot be gone into, the material brought on record by the
prosecution has to be accepted as true at that stage. The truth, veracity and
effect of the evidence which the prosecutor proposes to adduce are not to be
meticulously judged. Nor is any weight to be attached to the probable defence
of the accused. It is not obligatory for the Judge at that stage of the trial
to consider in any detail and weigh in a sensitive balance whether the facts,
if proved, would be incompatible with the innocence of the accused or not. The
standard of test and judgment which is to be finally applied before recording
a finding regarding the guilt or otherwise of the accused is not exactly to be
applied at this stage of deciding the matter under S. 227 or S. 228 of the
code. At that stage the Court is not to see whether there is sufficient ground
for conviction of the accused or whether the trial is sure to end in his
conviction. But at the initial stage if their is a strong suspicion which
leads the Court to think that there is ground for presuming that the accused
has committed an offence then it is not open to the Court to say that there is
no sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused. While deciding the
question of framing of charge in a criminal case, the court is not to apply
exactly the standard and test which it finally Order on Charge /State Vs.
Sunil Chaudhary/ FIR no. 169/01 PS: KeshavPuram( IPR) page 5 of 6 dtd.
21­05­09/DK applies for determining the Guilt or otherwise. This being the
initial stage of the trial, the court is not supposed to decide whether the
materials collected by the investigating agency provides sufficient ground for
conviction of the accused or whether the trial is sure to culminate in his
conviction. What is required to be seen is whether there is strong suspicion
which may lead to the court to think that there is ground for presuming that
the accused has committed an offence. Reliance placed on the cases of Union of
India vs. Prafulla Kumar AI R 1979 Supreme Court 366 : State of Maharashtra
and others vs. Som Nath Thapa and others JT 1996 (4) SC 615 ; State of Bihar
v. Ramesh Singh, AI R 1977 S C. 2018: (1 977 CRI LJ 1606) ; Umar Abdula Sakoor
Sorathia vs. Intelligence officer narcotic control bureau JT 1999 (5) SC 394 ;
Kallu Mal Gupta vs. State 2000 I AD Delhi 107.
9\. In view of the above discussion, there are prima facie sufficient material
to frame charges against both the accused for the offence u/s 78/79 TMM Act,
1958 and u/s 63 Copyright Act, 1957. In addition to above charges, charge u/s
65 Copyright Act, 1957 is also made out against accused Sunil Chaudhary. Let
charges be framed against both the accused for the above said offences.
Charges framed separately to which both accused claim trial. Put up for PE on
01/02/03­ 09­2009 for entire PE.
               Announced in the open court                                                (DIG VINAY SINGH)
               on 21­05­2009                                                              ACMM­03 (IPR)
                                                                                          ROHINI / DELHI 
Order on Charge /State Vs. Sunil Chaudhary/ FIR no. 169/01 PS: KeshavPuram(
IPR) page 6 of 6 dtd. 21­05­09/DK
conviction. What is required to be seen is whether there is strong suspicion
which may lead to the court to think that there is ground for presuming that
the accused has committed an offence. Reliance placed on the cases of Union of
India vs. Prafulla Kumar AI R 1979 Supreme Court 366 : State of Maharashtra
and others vs. Som Nath Thapa and others JT 1996 (4) SC 615 ; State of Bihar
v. Ramesh Singh, AI R 1977 S C. 2018: (1 977 CRI LJ 1606) ; Umar Abdula Sakoor
Sorathia vs. Intelligence officer narcotic control bureau JT 1999 (5) SC 394 ;
Kallu Mal Gupta vs. State 2000 I AD Delhi 107.
9\. In view of the above discussion, there are prima facie sufficient material
to frame charges against both the accused for the offence u/s 78/79 TMM Act,
1958 and u/s 63 Copyright Act, 1957. In addition to above charges, charge u/s
65 Copyright Act, 1957 is also made out against accused Sunil Chaudhary. Let
charges be framed against both the accused for the above said offences.
Charges framed separately to which both accused claim trial. Put up for PE on
01/02/03­ 09­2009 for entire PE.
               Announced in the open court                                                (DIG VINAY SINGH)
Chaudhary is concerned but he argued that against accused no. 2 Rajeev Arora,
no charge is made out as there is no evidence against him except disclosure
statement and he also claimed that no recovery was effected from accused no. 2
Rajeev Arora.
2\. Brief facts of this case are that Mr Krishan Kumar, AR of M/s Heinz India
Ltd filed a complaint alleging that M/s Heinz India Ltd is a company dealing
in consumer products and one prickly heat powder under the trade name "Nycil"
is also being sold and distributed by the Company. The complainant company has
registered trademark of this trade name "Nycil" and the Company came to know
Order on Charge /State Vs. Sunil Chaudhary/ FIR no. 169/01 PS: KeshavPuram(
IPR) page 1 of 6 dtd. 21­05­09/DK that certain persons are falsifying this
trademark. The Complainant company also claimed that complainant company has
copyright in the product logo and label which consists of artistic work in the
said article. On this complaint, a raiding party was organized on 17­05­2001
and premises of the accused Sunil Chaudhary at H. No. 1571, Jor Bagh, Gali No.
39, Chattar Singh Marg, Tri Nagar, Delhi was raided from where following
articles were recovered:­
(a) 27 cardboard boxes containing (Nycil Prickly Heat Powder) 60 plastic boxes
of powder of 150 gm in each plastic box (Total 1620 plastic powder boxes) from
the 2nd floor.
conviction. What is required to be seen is whether there is strong suspicion
which may lead to the court to think that there is ground for presuming that
the accused has committed an offence. Reliance placed on the cases of Union of
India vs. Prafulla Kumar AI R 1979 Supreme Court 366 : State of Maharashtra
and others vs. Som Nath Thapa and others JT 1996 (4) SC 615 ; State of Bihar
v. Ramesh Singh, AI R 1977 S C. 2018: (1 977 CRI LJ 1606) ; Umar Abdula Sakoor
Sorathia vs. Intelligence officer narcotic control bureau JT 1999 (5) SC 394 ;
Kallu Mal Gupta vs. State 2000 I AD Delhi 107.
9\. In view of the above discussion, there are prima facie sufficient material
to frame charges against both the accused for the offence u/s 78/79 TMM Act,
1958 and u/s 63 Copyright Act, 1957. In addition to above charges, charge u/s
65 Copyright Act, 1957 is also made out against accused Sunil Chaudhary. Let
charges be framed against both the accused for the above said offences.
Charges framed separately to which both accused claim trial. Put up for PE on
01/02/03­ 09­2009 for entire PE.
               Announced in the open court                                                (DIG VINAY SINGH)
Chaudhary is concerned but he argued that against accused no. 2 Rajeev Arora,
no charge is made out as there is no evidence against him except disclosure
statement and he also claimed that no recovery was effected from accused no. 2
Rajeev Arora.
2\. Brief facts of this case are that Mr Krishan Kumar, AR of M/s Heinz India
Ltd filed a complaint alleging that M/s Heinz India Ltd is a company dealing
in consumer products and one prickly heat powder under the trade name "Nycil"
is also being sold and distributed by the Company. The complainant company has
registered trademark of this trade name "Nycil" and the Company came to know
Order on Charge /State Vs. Sunil Chaudhary/ FIR no. 169/01 PS: KeshavPuram(
IPR) page 1 of 6 dtd. 21­05­09/DK that certain persons are falsifying this
trademark. The Complainant company also claimed that complainant company has
copyright in the product logo and label which consists of artistic work in the
said article. On this complaint, a raiding party was organized on 17­05­2001
and premises of the accused Sunil Chaudhary at H. No. 1571, Jor Bagh, Gali No.
39, Chattar Singh Marg, Tri Nagar, Delhi was raided from where following
articles were recovered:­
(a) 27 cardboard boxes containing (Nycil Prickly Heat Powder) 60 plastic boxes
of powder of 150 gm in each plastic box (Total 1620 plastic powder boxes) from
the 2nd floor.
conviction. What is required to be seen is whether there is strong suspicion
which may lead to the court to think that there is ground for presuming that
the accused has committed an offence. Reliance placed on the cases of Union of
India vs. Prafulla Kumar AI R 1979 Supreme Court 366 : State of Maharashtra
and others vs. Som Nath Thapa and others JT 1996 (4) SC 615 ; State of Bihar
v. Ramesh Singh, AI R 1977 S C. 2018: (1 977 CRI LJ 1606) ; Umar Abdula Sakoor
Sorathia vs. Intelligence officer narcotic control bureau JT 1999 (5) SC 394 ;
Kallu Mal Gupta vs. State 2000 I AD Delhi 107.
9\. In view of the above discussion, there are prima facie sufficient material
to frame charges against both the accused for the offence u/s 78/79 TMM Act,
1958 and u/s 63 Copyright Act, 1957. In addition to above charges, charge u/s
65 Copyright Act, 1957 is also made out against accused Sunil Chaudhary. Let
charges be framed against both the accused for the above said offences.
Charges framed separately to which both accused claim trial. Put up for PE on
01/02/03­ 09­2009 for entire PE.
               Announced in the open court                                                (DIG VINAY SINGH)
Chaudhary is concerned but he argued that against accused no. 2 Rajeev Arora,
no charge is made out as there is no evidence against him except disclosure
statement and he also claimed that no recovery was effected from accused no. 2
Rajeev Arora.
2\. Brief facts of this case are that Mr Krishan Kumar, AR of M/s Heinz India
Ltd filed a complaint alleging that M/s Heinz India Ltd is a company dealing
in consumer products and one prickly heat powder under the trade name "Nycil"
is also being sold and distributed by the Company. The complainant company has
registered trademark of this trade name "Nycil" and the Company came to know
Order on Charge /State Vs. Sunil Chaudhary/ FIR no. 169/01 PS: KeshavPuram(
IPR) page 1 of 6 dtd. 21­05­09/DK that certain persons are falsifying this
trademark. The Complainant company also claimed that complainant company has
copyright in the product logo and label which consists of artistic work in the
said article. On this complaint, a raiding party was organized on 17­05­2001
and premises of the accused Sunil Chaudhary at H. No. 1571, Jor Bagh, Gali No.
39, Chattar Singh Marg, Tri Nagar, Delhi was raided from where following
articles were recovered:­
(a) 27 cardboard boxes containing (Nycil Prickly Heat Powder) 60 plastic boxes
of powder of 150 gm in each plastic box (Total 1620 plastic powder boxes) from
the 2nd floor.
(b) 2090 empty plastic powder boxes bearing the falsified trademark, trade
logo and infringed artistic work "Nycil" from 3rd floor.
(c) 1750 empty plastic powder boxes bearing the blue colour square printing to
be used for further printing trademark, trade logo and artistic work "Nycil"
from the 3rd floor.
(d) 1225 empty plastic powder boxes to be used for printing the falsified
trade name, tradename/ logo and artistic work "Nycil" from the 3rd floor.
(e) (A) One hand screen printing machine (B) four screen (Plates) being used
for printing trade name/mark/logo and artistic work "Nycil" out of which three
containing square and one trademark "Nycil" (C) one electric press being used
for packing the plastic powder boxes from the 3rd floor;
conviction. What is required to be seen is whether there is strong suspicion
which may lead to the court to think that there is ground for presuming that
the accused has committed an offence. Reliance placed on the cases of Union of
India vs. Prafulla Kumar AI R 1979 Supreme Court 366 : State of Maharashtra
and others vs. Som Nath Thapa and others JT 1996 (4) SC 615 ; State of Bihar
v. Ramesh Singh, AI R 1977 S C. 2018: (1 977 CRI LJ 1606) ; Umar Abdula Sakoor
Sorathia vs. Intelligence officer narcotic control bureau JT 1999 (5) SC 394 ;
Kallu Mal Gupta vs. State 2000 I AD Delhi 107.
9\. In view of the above discussion, there are prima facie sufficient material
to frame charges against both the accused for the offence u/s 78/79 TMM Act,
1958 and u/s 63 Copyright Act, 1957. In addition to above charges, charge u/s
65 Copyright Act, 1957 is also made out against accused Sunil Chaudhary. Let
charges be framed against both the accused for the above said offences.
Charges framed separately to which both accused claim trial. Put up for PE on
01/02/03­ 09­2009 for entire PE.
               Announced in the open court                                                (DIG VINAY SINGH)
Chaudhary is concerned but he argued that against accused no. 2 Rajeev Arora,
no charge is made out as there is no evidence against him except disclosure
statement and he also claimed that no recovery was effected from accused no. 2
Rajeev Arora.
2\. Brief facts of this case are that Mr Krishan Kumar, AR of M/s Heinz India
Ltd filed a complaint alleging that M/s Heinz India Ltd is a company dealing
in consumer products and one prickly heat powder under the trade name "Nycil"
is also being sold and distributed by the Company. The complainant company has
registered trademark of this trade name "Nycil" and the Company came to know
Order on Charge /State Vs. Sunil Chaudhary/ FIR no. 169/01 PS: KeshavPuram(
IPR) page 1 of 6 dtd. 21­05­09/DK that certain persons are falsifying this
trademark. The Complainant company also claimed that complainant company has
copyright in the product logo and label which consists of artistic work in the
said article. On this complaint, a raiding party was organized on 17­05­2001
and premises of the accused Sunil Chaudhary at H. No. 1571, Jor Bagh, Gali No.
39, Chattar Singh Marg, Tri Nagar, Delhi was raided from where following
articles were recovered:­
(a) 27 cardboard boxes containing (Nycil Prickly Heat Powder) 60 plastic boxes
of powder of 150 gm in each plastic box (Total 1620 plastic powder boxes) from
the 2nd floor.
(b) 2090 empty plastic powder boxes bearing the falsified trademark, trade
logo and infringed artistic work "Nycil" from 3rd floor.
(c) 1750 empty plastic powder boxes bearing the blue colour square printing to
be used for further printing trademark, trade logo and artistic work "Nycil"
from the 3rd floor.
(d) 1225 empty plastic powder boxes to be used for printing the falsified
trade name, tradename/ logo and artistic work "Nycil" from the 3rd floor.
(e) (A) One hand screen printing machine (B) four screen (Plates) being used
for printing trade name/mark/logo and artistic work "Nycil" out of which three
containing square and one trademark "Nycil" (C) one electric press being used
for packing the plastic powder boxes from the 3rd floor;
conviction. What is required to be seen is whether there is strong suspicion
which may lead to the court to think that there is ground for presuming that
the accused has committed an offence. Reliance placed on the cases of Union of
India vs. Prafulla Kumar AI R 1979 Supreme Court 366 : State of Maharashtra
and others vs. Som Nath Thapa and others JT 1996 (4) SC 615 ; State of Bihar
v. Ramesh Singh, AI R 1977 S C. 2018: (1 977 CRI LJ 1606) ; Umar Abdula Sakoor
Sorathia vs. Intelligence officer narcotic control bureau JT 1999 (5) SC 394 ;
Kallu Mal Gupta vs. State 2000 I AD Delhi 107.
9\. In view of the above discussion, there are prima facie sufficient material
to frame charges against both the accused for the offence u/s 78/79 TMM Act,
1958 and u/s 63 Copyright Act, 1957. In addition to above charges, charge u/s
65 Copyright Act, 1957 is also made out against accused Sunil Chaudhary. Let
charges be framed against both the accused for the above said offences.
Charges framed separately to which both accused claim trial. Put up for PE on
01/02/03­ 09­2009 for entire PE.
               Announced in the open court                                                (DIG VINAY SINGH)
