Central Government Act
Section 10 in The Indian Evidence Act, 1872
10\. Things said or done by conspirator in reference to common design.—Where
there is reasonable ground to believe that two or more persons have conspired
together to commit an offence or an actionable wrong, anything said, done or
written by any one of such persons in reference to their common intention,
after the time when such intention was first entertained by any one of them,
is a relevant fact as against each of the persons believed to so conspiring,
as well for the purpose of proving the existence of the conspiracy as for the
purpose of showing that any such person was a party to it. Illustration
Reasonable ground exists for believing that A has joined in a conspiracy to
wage war against the 1[Government of India]. The facts that B procured arms in
Europe for the purpose of the conspiracy, C collected money in Calcutta for a
like object, D persuaded persons to join the conspiracy in Bombay, E published
writings advocating the object in view at Agra, and F transmitted from Delhi
to G at Kabul the money which C had collected at Calcutta, and the contents of
a letter written by H giving an account of the conspiracy, are each relevant,
both to prove the existence of the conspiracy, and to prove A’s complicity in
it, although he may have been ignorant of all of them, and although the
persons by whom they were done were strangers to him, and although they may
Europe for the purpose of the conspiracy, C collected money in Calcutta for a
like object, D persuaded persons to join the conspiracy in Bombay, E published
writings advocating the object in view at Agra, and F transmitted from Delhi
to G at Kabul the money which C had collected at Calcutta, and the contents of
a letter written by H giving an account of the conspiracy, are each relevant,
both to prove the existence of the conspiracy, and to prove A’s complicity in
it, although he may have been ignorant of all of them, and although the
persons by whom they were done were strangers to him, and although they may
have taken place before he joined the conspiracy or after he left it. Comments
Existence of conspiracy If prima facie evidence of existence of a conspiracy
is given and accepted, the evidence of acts and statements made by anyone of
the conspirators in furtherance of the common object is admissible against
all; Jayendra Saraswati Swamigal v. State of Tamil Nadu, AIR 2005 SC 716.
Object Section 10 has been deliberately enacted in order to make acts and
statements of a co-conspirator admissible against the whole body of
conspirators, because of the nature of crime; Badri Rai v. State of Bihar, AIR
persons by whom they were done were strangers to him, and although they may
have taken place before he joined the conspiracy or after he left it. Comments
Existence of conspiracy If prima facie evidence of existence of a conspiracy
is given and accepted, the evidence of acts and statements made by anyone of
the conspirators in furtherance of the common object is admissible against
all; Jayendra Saraswati Swamigal v. State of Tamil Nadu, AIR 2005 SC 716.
Object Section 10 has been deliberately enacted in order to make acts and
statements of a co-conspirator admissible against the whole body of
conspirators, because of the nature of crime; Badri Rai v. State of Bihar, AIR
1958 SC 953. Significance of “common intention” The words “common intention”
signify a common intention existing at the time when the thing was said, done
or written by the one of them. It had noting to do with carrying the
conspiracy into effect; Mirza Akbar v. Emperor, AIR 1940 PC 176.
Europe for the purpose of the conspiracy, C collected money in Calcutta for a
like object, D persuaded persons to join the conspiracy in Bombay, E published
writings advocating the object in view at Agra, and F transmitted from Delhi
to G at Kabul the money which C had collected at Calcutta, and the contents of
a letter written by H giving an account of the conspiracy, are each relevant,
both to prove the existence of the conspiracy, and to prove A’s complicity in
it, although he may have been ignorant of all of them, and although the
persons by whom they were done were strangers to him, and although they may
have taken place before he joined the conspiracy or after he left it. Comments
Existence of conspiracy If prima facie evidence of existence of a conspiracy
is given and accepted, the evidence of acts and statements made by anyone of
the conspirators in furtherance of the common object is admissible against
all; Jayendra Saraswati Swamigal v. State of Tamil Nadu, AIR 2005 SC 716.
Object Section 10 has been deliberately enacted in order to make acts and
statements of a co-conspirator admissible against the whole body of
conspirators, because of the nature of crime; Badri Rai v. State of Bihar, AIR
persons by whom they were done were strangers to him, and although they may
have taken place before he joined the conspiracy or after he left it. Comments
Existence of conspiracy If prima facie evidence of existence of a conspiracy
is given and accepted, the evidence of acts and statements made by anyone of
the conspirators in furtherance of the common object is admissible against
all; Jayendra Saraswati Swamigal v. State of Tamil Nadu, AIR 2005 SC 716.
Object Section 10 has been deliberately enacted in order to make acts and
statements of a co-conspirator admissible against the whole body of
conspirators, because of the nature of crime; Badri Rai v. State of Bihar, AIR
1958 SC 953. Significance of “common intention” The words “common intention”
signify a common intention existing at the time when the thing was said, done
or written by the one of them. It had noting to do with carrying the
conspiracy into effect; Mirza Akbar v. Emperor, AIR 1940 PC 176.
Europe for the purpose of the conspiracy, C collected money in Calcutta for a
like object, D persuaded persons to join the conspiracy in Bombay, E published
writings advocating the object in view at Agra, and F transmitted from Delhi
to G at Kabul the money which C had collected at Calcutta, and the contents of
a letter written by H giving an account of the conspiracy, are each relevant,
both to prove the existence of the conspiracy, and to prove A’s complicity in
it, although he may have been ignorant of all of them, and although the
persons by whom they were done were strangers to him, and although they may
have taken place before he joined the conspiracy or after he left it. Comments
Existence of conspiracy If prima facie evidence of existence of a conspiracy
is given and accepted, the evidence of acts and statements made by anyone of
the conspirators in furtherance of the common object is admissible against
all; Jayendra Saraswati Swamigal v. State of Tamil Nadu, AIR 2005 SC 716.
Object Section 10 has been deliberately enacted in order to make acts and
statements of a co-conspirator admissible against the whole body of
conspirators, because of the nature of crime; Badri Rai v. State of Bihar, AIR
persons by whom they were done were strangers to him, and although they may
have taken place before he joined the conspiracy or after he left it. Comments
Existence of conspiracy If prima facie evidence of existence of a conspiracy
is given and accepted, the evidence of acts and statements made by anyone of
the conspirators in furtherance of the common object is admissible against
all; Jayendra Saraswati Swamigal v. State of Tamil Nadu, AIR 2005 SC 716.
Object Section 10 has been deliberately enacted in order to make acts and
statements of a co-conspirator admissible against the whole body of
conspirators, because of the nature of crime; Badri Rai v. State of Bihar, AIR
1958 SC 953. Significance of “common intention” The words “common intention”
signify a common intention existing at the time when the thing was said, done
or written by the one of them. It had noting to do with carrying the
conspiracy into effect; Mirza Akbar v. Emperor, AIR 1940 PC 176.
Europe for the purpose of the conspiracy, C collected money in Calcutta for a
like object, D persuaded persons to join the conspiracy in Bombay, E published
writings advocating the object in view at Agra, and F transmitted from Delhi
to G at Kabul the money which C had collected at Calcutta, and the contents of
a letter written by H giving an account of the conspiracy, are each relevant,
both to prove the existence of the conspiracy, and to prove A’s complicity in
it, although he may have been ignorant of all of them, and although the
persons by whom they were done were strangers to him, and although they may
have taken place before he joined the conspiracy or after he left it. Comments
Existence of conspiracy If prima facie evidence of existence of a conspiracy
is given and accepted, the evidence of acts and statements made by anyone of
the conspirators in furtherance of the common object is admissible against
all; Jayendra Saraswati Swamigal v. State of Tamil Nadu, AIR 2005 SC 716.
Object Section 10 has been deliberately enacted in order to make acts and
statements of a co-conspirator admissible against the whole body of
conspirators, because of the nature of crime; Badri Rai v. State of Bihar, AIR
persons by whom they were done were strangers to him, and although they may
have taken place before he joined the conspiracy or after he left it. Comments
Existence of conspiracy If prima facie evidence of existence of a conspiracy
is given and accepted, the evidence of acts and statements made by anyone of
the conspirators in furtherance of the common object is admissible against
all; Jayendra Saraswati Swamigal v. State of Tamil Nadu, AIR 2005 SC 716.
Object Section 10 has been deliberately enacted in order to make acts and
statements of a co-conspirator admissible against the whole body of
conspirators, because of the nature of crime; Badri Rai v. State of Bihar, AIR
1958 SC 953. Significance of “common intention” The words “common intention”
signify a common intention existing at the time when the thing was said, done
or written by the one of them. It had noting to do with carrying the
conspiracy into effect; Mirza Akbar v. Emperor, AIR 1940 PC 176.
Europe for the purpose of the conspiracy, C collected money in Calcutta for a
like object, D persuaded persons to join the conspiracy in Bombay, E published
writings advocating the object in view at Agra, and F transmitted from Delhi
to G at Kabul the money which C had collected at Calcutta, and the contents of
a letter written by H giving an account of the conspiracy, are each relevant,
both to prove the existence of the conspiracy, and to prove A’s complicity in
it, although he may have been ignorant of all of them, and although the
persons by whom they were done were strangers to him, and although they may
have taken place before he joined the conspiracy or after he left it. Comments
Existence of conspiracy If prima facie evidence of existence of a conspiracy
is given and accepted, the evidence of acts and statements made by anyone of
the conspirators in furtherance of the common object is admissible against
all; Jayendra Saraswati Swamigal v. State of Tamil Nadu, AIR 2005 SC 716.
Object Section 10 has been deliberately enacted in order to make acts and
statements of a co-conspirator admissible against the whole body of
conspirators, because of the nature of crime; Badri Rai v. State of Bihar, AIR
persons by whom they were done were strangers to him, and although they may
have taken place before he joined the conspiracy or after he left it. Comments
Existence of conspiracy If prima facie evidence of existence of a conspiracy
is given and accepted, the evidence of acts and statements made by anyone of
the conspirators in furtherance of the common object is admissible against
all; Jayendra Saraswati Swamigal v. State of Tamil Nadu, AIR 2005 SC 716.
Object Section 10 has been deliberately enacted in order to make acts and
statements of a co-conspirator admissible against the whole body of
conspirators, because of the nature of crime; Badri Rai v. State of Bihar, AIR
1958 SC 953. Significance of “common intention” The words “common intention”
signify a common intention existing at the time when the thing was said, done
or written by the one of them. It had noting to do with carrying the
conspiracy into effect; Mirza Akbar v. Emperor, AIR 1940 PC 176.
Europe for the purpose of the conspiracy, C collected money in Calcutta for a
like object, D persuaded persons to join the conspiracy in Bombay, E published
writings advocating the object in view at Agra, and F transmitted from Delhi
to G at Kabul the money which C had collected at Calcutta, and the contents of
a letter written by H giving an account of the conspiracy, are each relevant,
both to prove the existence of the conspiracy, and to prove A’s complicity in
it, although he may have been ignorant of all of them, and although the
persons by whom they were done were strangers to him, and although they may
have taken place before he joined the conspiracy or after he left it. Comments
Existence of conspiracy If prima facie evidence of existence of a conspiracy
is given and accepted, the evidence of acts and statements made by anyone of
the conspirators in furtherance of the common object is admissible against
all; Jayendra Saraswati Swamigal v. State of Tamil Nadu, AIR 2005 SC 716.
Object Section 10 has been deliberately enacted in order to make acts and
statements of a co-conspirator admissible against the whole body of
conspirators, because of the nature of crime; Badri Rai v. State of Bihar, AIR
