Income Tax Appellate Tribunal - Delhi
Additional Commissioner Of ... vs Hughes Services (Far East) (P.) ... on 24
February, 2003
Equivalent citations: 2003 87 ITD 137 Delhi
Bench: K Singhal, K Prasad
ORDER K.C. Singhal, Judicial Member
1\. The only issue which is common to all the appeals relates to the
interpretation of the provisions of Section 9(1)(11) of Income-tax Act, 1961
(in short Act).
2\. Briefly stated, the facts are these: The assessee is a non-resident
company which has been assessed as an agent of various foreign technicians,
who are non-residents. The assessee-company entered into an agreement with Oil
& Natural Gas Commission (ONGC) for cementing services of off-shore rigs. For
executing such contract, the assessee-company employed expatriate personnel of
various nationalities under the terms of agreements, specimen copy of which is
placed on record. Such technicians were required to work on off-shore rigs
continuously for 28 days period and thereafter they were allowed leave for 28
days during which such employees were required to go back to their respective
countries (place of origin). The salary for leave period was to be paid
outside India in foreign currency. The claim of the assessee was that off-
of Clause (iii) simply declared the meaning of the word "owner" which was
always there even before the amendment. But in the present case before us, the
meaning of the words "earned in India" was quite different in view of the
judicial pronouncements as is given by Supreme Court in the case of E.D.
Sassoon & Co. Ltd. (supra), by Gujarat High Court in the case of S.G. Pgnatale
(supra) as well as judicial cognizance by Corpus Juris Seccundum. Therefore,
the present case is a case where Explanation has not declared the existing
meaning but has enlarged the scope of he main Section and, therefore,
retrospective effect cannot be given to the amendment made to the Finance Act,
1999.
13\. In view of the above discussion it is held that prior to amendment by the
Finance Act, 1999, the words 'earned in India' never included the remuneration
payable for the rest period or the leave period and, therefore, such salary,
if paid outside India were not taxable under Section 9(1)(ii). Hence,
alternate contention of ld. DR is also without force. However, it is clarified
that if such salary is paid in India then the same would become taxable under
outside India in foreign currency. The claim of the assessee was that off-
period salary paid outside India was not taxable in India. This contention of
assessee did not find favour with the Assessing Officer and accordingly the
same was taxed under Section 9(1)(ii). However, on appeal, the claim of the
assessee was allowed by the CIT(A). Aggrieved by the same, the revenue is in
appeal in all these cases.
3\. The learned DR. Mr. Salil Gupta has vehemently assailed the order of
CIT(A) by contending that off-period salary is taxable in view of the
provisions of Explanationto Section 9(1)(ii) as substituted by Finance Act,
1999 which, according to him, is retrospective in operation, being
clarificatory/declaratory in nature. It was emphasized by him that the words
"for removal of doubts, it is hereby declared" used by the legislature show
that the amendment was made to clarify the legal position and the amendment
was declaratory in nature and, therefore, the same is applicable to earlier
years also. In support of this contention, reliance has been placed on the
Supreme Court judgment in the case of CIT v. Podar Cement (P.) Ltd. [1997] 226
ITR 625 : 92 Taxman 541. Alternatively, it was contended by him that even the
old provisions, prior to above amendment, included the off-period salary
within its ambit. Reliance was placed on certain decisions of the Tribunal.
4\. The above contentions of the learned DR have been strongly opposed by the
learned Sr. Counsel of the assessee Shri Ganeshan by contending that the
Explanation as substituted by the Finance Act, 1999 has actually expended the
scope of Section 9(1)(ii) by including new item of income i.e., the off-period
salary and consequently, it cannot be considered either as declaratory or
clarificatory. He also drew our attention to the judgment of Hon'ble Gujarat
High Court reported as CIT v. S.G. Pgnatale [1980] 124 ITR 391 : 4 Taxman 79
to illustrate the meaning of the words ' earned in India used in Section
9(1)(ii). He also relied on number of decisions of the Tribunal wherein it has
been held that off-period salary paid outside India was outside the scope of
Section 9(1)(ii). Reliance was also placed on the Board's Circular No. 779
dated 14-9-1999 which vide paras 5.1 to 5.3 has clearly stated that the
amendment shall be effective from 1-4-2000 and, therefore, apply to assessment
year 2000-01 and subsequent assessment years.
5\. Rival submissions of the parties have been considered carefully. The
question for consideration is whether the remuneration for the off-period
received by the non-resident foreign expatriate employees outside India is
taxable under Section 9(1)(ii)of the Act. The income of the non-resident is
taxable under Section 5(2) of the Act which provides that income of non-
resident is taxable in India if (a) it is received or is due to be received in
India; or (b) it accrues or arise or is deemed to accrue or arise to him in
India. There is no dispute that condition (a) mentioned above is not attracted
to the present cases since payments were made outside India. It is also not
the case of the revenue that such income accrue or arise in India. The only
case of revenue is that such salary is taxable under the deeming provisions of
Section 9(1)(ii). It is the settled legal position that deeming provisions are
to be construed very strictly and nobody can be taxed unless his case squarely
falls within four concerns of the taxing provisions.
6\. Before coming to the contention of ld. DR regarding retrospective
operation of Explanation substituted by Finance Act, 1999, let us first
consider the scope of Section 9(1)(ii) as originally enacted and amended from
time to time in the light of judicial interpretation. Such provisions as
originally enacted read as under:
Section 9(1): The following incomes shall be deemed to accrue or arise in
India-
     (1)**        **            **
    (ii) income which falls under the head "salaries", if it is earned in India.
The interpretation of this Section came up for consideration before the
Hon'ble Gujarat High Court in the case of S.G. Pgnatale (supra). Since the
words "earned in India" were not defined in the Act, their Lordships referred
to Corpus Juris Seccundum Volume 28 page 69 where the word "earned" has been
construed as "entitled to a sum of money under the terms of contract, implies
that wages are owing and may carry the meaning of unpaid but does not
necessarily imply that they are due and payable." They further referred to the
judgment of Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of E.D. Sassoon & Co. Ltd. v.
CIT [1954] 26 ITR 27 wherein their Lordships observed at page 51 as under:
The word 'earned' even though it does not appear in Section 4 of the Act has
been very often used in the course of the judgments by learned judges both in
the High Courts as well as the Supreme Court (vide CIT v. Ahmedbhai Umarbhai &
Co. [1950] 18 ITR 472 (SC) and CIT v. K.R.M.T.T. Thiagaraja Chetty & Co.
[1953] 24 ITR 525 (SC). It has also been used by the Judicial Committee of the
Privy Council in Commissioner of Taxation v. Kirk (1900) AC 588. The concept,
however, cannot be divorced from that of income accruing to the assessee. If
income has accrued to the assessee it is certainly earned by him in the sense
that he has contributed to its production or the parenthood of the income can
be traced to him. But in order that the income can be said to have accrued to
or earned by the assessee it is not only necessary that the assessee must have
contributed to its accruing or arising by rendering services or otherwise but
he must have created a debt in his favour. A debt must have come into
existence and he must have acquired a right to receive the payment. Unless and
until his contribution or parenthood is effective in bringing into existence a
debt or right to receive the payment or in other words a debitum in praesenti,
solvendum in futuro it cannot be said that any income has accrued to him. The
mere expression 'earned' in the sense of rendering the services etc., by
itself is of no avail.
In view of the above judicial interpretation of the word "earned", their
Lordships of Gujarat High Court held that the words "earned in India" in
Section 9(1)(ii) included only that income in respect of which debt has been
created in India for the services rendered in India and mere rendering of
service in India by itself was of no avail. If the liability to pay arises
outside India and the payment is also made outside India then the provisions
of Section 9(1)(ii) could not be invoked. Hence, the salary payable and paid
outside India by his foreign employer for the services rendered in India was
held not to be taxable under Section 9(1)(ii).
7\. To nullify the application of the above judgment of Gujarat High Court,
the legislature inserted Explanation to Section 9(1)(ii) by Finance Act, 1983
w.e.f. 1-4-1979. The Section after amendment reads as under:
Section 9(1): The following incomes shall be deemed to accrue or arise in
India-
(ii) income which falls under the head "salaries", if it is earned in India.
Explanation : For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that income of
the nature referred to in this clause payable for service rendered in India
shall be regarded as income earned in India.
8\. By insertion of the Explanation, the scope of Section 9(1)(ii) was
enlarged so as to include remuneration payable for services rendered in India
which otherwise was not includible. Such income became taxable even though it
was paid outside India. However, another dispute arose as to whether the
salary payable and paid outside India to non-resident for the period for which
no services were rendered in India and during which such non-resident was away
from India to avail leave period could be taxed under Section 9(1)(ii). Some
benches of the Tribunal took the view that remuneration payable for the off-
period could not be equated with salary payable for services rendered in India
and, therefore, non-resident could not be taxed under Section 9(1)(ii).
However, contrary view has also been expressed by some benches. This dispute
no more exists now in view of the amendment made by the legislature by
substituting the Explanation to Section 9(1)(ii) by Finance Act, 1999 w.e.f
1-4-2000. Section 9(1)(ii) effective from 1-4-2000 reads as under:
Section 9(1): The following incomes shall be deemed to accrue or arise in
India:-
(ii) income which falls under the head "Salaries", if it is earned in India.
Explanation - For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the income
of the nature referred to in this clause payable for-
(a) service rendered in India; and
(b) the rest period or leave period which is preceded and succeeded by
services rendered in India and forms part of the service contract of
employment, shall be regarded as income earned in India.
The perusal of the above Explanation shows that income of non-resident which
is to be included in Section 9(1)(ii) has now been divided into two categories
- (i) services rendered in India; and (ii) rest period or leave period, which
is preceded and succeeded by services rendered in India. That clearly shows
that one more item of income has been included in deeming provisions i.e.,
off-period salary w.e.f. 1-4-2000. At this stage, it would be useful to refer
para 5.3 of CBDT Circular No. 779 dated 14-9-1999 reported as 240 ITR page 3
(Statute) wherein it has been clarified that the amendment by Finance Act,
1999 in Section 9(1)(ii) would apply to assessment year 2000-01 and subsequent
assessment years. The legislature has not said that salary for services
rendered in India would include salary for the off-period. On the contrary it
has added a fresh item of income. That means that both types of incomes are
different and independent and consequently, it cannot be said that the salary
payable for services rendered in India would include salary for off-period. In
our considered opinion, the legislature has clearly enlarged the scope of
Section 9(1)(ii) by including a new item of income which was not includi-ble
earlier. One could possibly interpret the amended provisions otherwise if the
legislature had clarified the meaning of the words "services rendered in
India" but the legislature in its wisdom has used the word "and" after the
words "services rendered in India" and added another item of income in a
separate Clause (b). That, in our opinion, only means that both types of
income are separate and independent income and the legislature has intended to
tax, w.e.f. 1-4-2000, the new item of income i.e., salary for the rest period
or the leave period payable outside India which was not includible prior to
this amendment.
9\. Now let us examine the contention of the learned DR whether the amendment
by Finance Act, 1999 was clarificatory/declaratory and, therefore,
retrospective in operation. Such contention cannot be accepted for the reason
that the said amendment, in our opinion, cannot be considered either as
declaratory or clarificatory since it has enlarged the scope of the main
Section by including new item of income. Normally, the Explanation is inserted
either to explain the meaning of the words in the main Section or to clarify
the confusion regarding the meaning of such words. In such cases, no doubt,
the Explanation can be said to be declaratory or clarificatory having
retrospective effect. In principle, to that extent, we are in agreement with
the learned DR. But where the amendment seeks to expand the scope of the main
Section and affects the rights and obligation of the parties, then such
amendment cannot be given retrospective effect unless specifically so
provided. Reference can be made to the decision of Delhi High Court in the
case of Engineers Impex (P.) Ltd. v. D.D. Sharma [2000] 244 ITR 247 wherein it
has been held as under:
An Explanation is appended to a Section to explain the meaning of the words
contained in the Section and normally it is to be read to harmonize with and
to clear up any ambiguity in the main Section. However, the Explanation to
Sub-section (1) of Section 194A of the Income-tax Act, 1961, was inserted by
the Finance Act, 1987, with effect from June 1, 1987 and had widened the scope
of the main Section and had created an obligation, breach of which entailed
penalty and criminal prosecution. The Explanation obviously is prospective and
not retrospective.
At this stage, we may usefully refer to the observations of their Lordships of
Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Aphali Pharmaceuticals Ltd. v. State of
Maharashtra AIR 1989 SC 2227 wherein in para 32 they have summarized the
nature and scope of any Explanation. The said para reads as under:
32\. An Explanation, as was found in Bihta Marketing Union v. Bank of Bihar
AIR 1967 SC 389 : (1967) SCR 848, may only explain and may not expand or add
to the scope of the original Section. In State of Bombay v. United Motors, AIR
1953 SC 252 : (1953) SCR 1069, it was found that an Explanation could
introduce, a fiction or settle a matter of controversy. Explanation may not be
made to operate as "exception" or "proviso". The construction of an
Explanation, as was held in Collector of Customs v. G. Dass & Co. AIR 1966 SC
1577, must depend upon its terms and no theory of its purpose can be
entertained unless it is to be inferred from the language used. It was said in
Burmah Shell Oil Ltd. v. Commercial Tax Officer, AIR 1961 SC 315 : (1961) 1
902, that the Explanation was meant to explain the Article and must be
interpreted according to its own tenor and it was an error to explain the
Explanation with the aid of the Article to which it was annexed. We have to
remember what was held in Dattatraya Govind Mahajan v. State of Maharashtra,
AIR 1977 SC 915 (928): (1977) 2 SCR 790, that mere description of certain
provision, such as "Explanation" is not decisive of its true meaning. It is
true that the orthodox function of an explanation is to explain the meaning
and effect of the main provision to which it is an explanation and to clear up
any doubt or ambiguity in it, but ultimately it is the intention of the
legislature which is paramount and mere use of a lebel cannot control or
deflect such intention. State of Bombay v. United Motors (supra) laid down
that the interpretation must obviously depend upon the words used therein, but
this must be borne in mind that when the provision is capable of two
interpretations, that should be adopted which fits the description. An
explanation is different in nature from a proviso for a proviso excepts,
excludes or restricts while an explanation explains or clarifies. Such
explanation or clarification may be in respects of matters whose meaning is
implicit and not explicit in the main Section itself. In Hiralal Ratanlal v.
State of UP. [1973] 1 SCC 216 (225) : AIR 1973 SC 1034 (1040), it was ruled
that if on a true reading of an Explanation it appears that it has widened the
scope of the main Section, effect be given to legislative intent
notwithstanding the fact that the Legislature named the provision as an
Explanation. In D.G. Mahajan v. State of Maharashtra (supra) this Court said
that legislature has different ways of expressing itself and in the last
analysis the words used alone are repository of legislative intent and that if
necessary an Explanation must be construed according to its plain language and
'not on any a priority consideration.
The legal position as summarized above clearly shows that label given to a
statute is not relevant but it is the intent of the legislature which is
relevant. So, depending upon the intent of the legislature, an Explanation may
or may not be declaratory or clarificatory. It may sometimes expand or
restrict the scope of the main Sections. Therefore, the contention of the
learned DR that the Explanation of Section 9(1)(ii) should be construed as
declaration or clarificatory merely because the legislature has used the words
"For removal of doubts, it is declared", cannot be accepted.
10\. Let us now examine the scope of the Explanation to Section 9(1)(ii). At
this stage, we may directly refer to the judgment of Hon'ble Kerala High Court
in the case of CIT v. S.R. Patton [1992] 193 ITR 49 : 65 Taxman 472 where the
Explanation as originally inserted by Finance Act, 1983 was considered and it
was held that such Explanation was neither declaratory nor clarificatory as it
had widened the scope of Section 9(1)(ii) since the nature of income included
was never within the ambit of main Section. Accordingly, retrospective effect
could not be given to such Explanation. Since the legislature had given
retrospective effect only from 1-4-1979, it could not be given prior to
1-4-1979. Hence, such Explanation could not be applied to Assessment year
1978-79 or any earlier years. The relevant portion of the above judgment is
reproduced as under:
We shall proceed to consider the larger question argued before us regarding
the scope and impact of an Explanation. The mere use of the label
"Explanation" is not decisive of the true meaning and scope of the provision.
Ordinarily, the purpose of an Explanation in a statute is to clarify or
explain or settle any doubt or ambiguity or controversy. It may even widen the
scope of the main provision in rare cases. The words used along can reflect
the true intent and they should be construed on their own terms. In this
regard the context, background and history of the legislation may be looked
into - See Aphali Pharmaceuticals Ltd. v. State of Maharashtra, AIR 1989 SC
2227; 4 SCC 378; p. 393, paragraph 33 - wherein the Supreme Court has analysed
the entire law on the point.
Proceeding further, it was observed as under:
It is evident that the Gujarat High Court did not accept the views of text
book writers regarding the scope of Section 9(1)(ii) of the Act as it stood,
before the addition of the Explanation. It was, perhaps, due to the above
controversy regarding the scope of Section 9(1)(ii) of the Act that the
Legislature intervened and added the Explanation to Section 9(1)(ii) of the
Act w.e.f April 1, 1979. In the circumstances, the purchase behind the
addition of the Explanation was only to clarify and settle the controversy.
The Explanation was to have effect only from April 1, 1979. We are, therefore,
of the view that the Explanation to Section 9(1)(ii) of the Act cannot be
considered to be declaratory nor can it apply to any period anterior to April
1, 1979.
Similarly, the Explanation as substituted by Finance Act, 1999 cannot be
considered as declaratory or clarificatory. The Explanation, originally
enacted remains the same and one more item of income, i.e., off-period salary
has been added. This clearly shows that scope of main Section has been further
widened. Further, any statute which saddles any person with liability to pay
tax cannot be considered as declaratory statute. Therefore, in our considered
opinion, the Explanation to Section 9(1)(ii) cannot be considered as
declaratory or clarificatory. This view is also fortified by the fact that
even the Board Circular (supra) says that amendment is to expand the scope of
Section 9(1)(ii). That is why the circular specifically says that such
amendment would apply to assessment year 2000-2001 and subsequent years.
11\. It is the settled legal position that there is legal presumption that
retrospective effect cannot be given to a statute unless specifically provided
by the Statute itself. However, this presumption is not applicable to
declaratory or clarificatory statutes as held by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in
the case of Podar Cements (P.) Ltd. 's case (supra). So, where the Explanation
is not declaratory/clarificatory but expands the scope of main Section,
retrospective effect cannot be given to such Explanation unless specifically
provided. The Hon'ble Delhi High Court judgment in the case of Engineers Impex
(P.) Ltd. (supra) supports its proposition. We have already noted that
legislature itself given retrospective effect to the original Explanation from
a particular date because it was not declaratory. Otherwise there was no need
to give retrospective effect. Had the legislature intended to give
retrospective effect to the Explanation substituted by Finance Act, 1999, it
could do so. Therefore, it has to be given prospective effect. The Board
circular rather fortifies this conclusion. Even otherwise, if construction of
a provision is susceptible of two possible views, the view favourable to
assessee should be adopted as held by Supreme Court in the case of CIT v.
Vegetable Products Ltd. [1973] 88 ITR 192 and in case of Union of India v.
Onkar S. Kanwar [2002] 258 ITR 761 : 125 Taxman 121 (SC).
12\. The judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Podar Cement
(P.) Ltd. (supra) relied upon by the learned DR does not help the revenue. In
that case the Apex Court ruled that the amendment of Section 27 by insertion
of Clause (iii) simply declared the meaning of the word "owner" which was
always there even before the amendment. But in the present case before us, the
meaning of the words "earned in India" was quite different in view of the
judicial pronouncements as is given by Supreme Court in the case of E.D.
Sassoon & Co. Ltd. (supra), by Gujarat High Court in the case of S.G. Pgnatale
(supra) as well as judicial cognizance by Corpus Juris Seccundum. Therefore,
the present case is a case where Explanation has not declared the existing
meaning but has enlarged the scope of he main Section and, therefore,
retrospective effect cannot be given to the amendment made to the Finance Act,
1999.
13\. In view of the above discussion it is held that prior to amendment by the
Finance Act, 1999, the words 'earned in India' never included the remuneration
payable for the rest period or the leave period and, therefore, such salary,
if paid outside India were not taxable under Section 9(1)(ii). Hence,
alternate contention of ld. DR is also without force. However, it is clarified
that if such salary is paid in India then the same would become taxable under
Section 5(2)(a). In the present case, undis-putedly such salary was payable
and paid outside India. Accordingly, the same are not taxable in India. The
orders of the CIT(A) are, therefore, upheld.
14\. In the result, the appeals of the revenue are dismissed.
of Clause (iii) simply declared the meaning of the word "owner" which was
always there even before the amendment. But in the present case before us, the
meaning of the words "earned in India" was quite different in view of the
judicial pronouncements as is given by Supreme Court in the case of E.D.
Sassoon & Co. Ltd. (supra), by Gujarat High Court in the case of S.G. Pgnatale
(supra) as well as judicial cognizance by Corpus Juris Seccundum. Therefore,
the present case is a case where Explanation has not declared the existing
meaning but has enlarged the scope of he main Section and, therefore,
retrospective effect cannot be given to the amendment made to the Finance Act,
1999.
13\. In view of the above discussion it is held that prior to amendment by the
Finance Act, 1999, the words 'earned in India' never included the remuneration
payable for the rest period or the leave period and, therefore, such salary,
if paid outside India were not taxable under Section 9(1)(ii). Hence,
alternate contention of ld. DR is also without force. However, it is clarified
that if such salary is paid in India then the same would become taxable under
outside India in foreign currency. The claim of the assessee was that off-
period salary paid outside India was not taxable in India. This contention of
assessee did not find favour with the Assessing Officer and accordingly the
same was taxed under Section 9(1)(ii). However, on appeal, the claim of the
assessee was allowed by the CIT(A). Aggrieved by the same, the revenue is in
appeal in all these cases.
3\. The learned DR. Mr. Salil Gupta has vehemently assailed the order of
CIT(A) by contending that off-period salary is taxable in view of the
provisions of Explanationto Section 9(1)(ii) as substituted by Finance Act,
1999 which, according to him, is retrospective in operation, being
clarificatory/declaratory in nature. It was emphasized by him that the words
"for removal of doubts, it is hereby declared" used by the legislature show
that the amendment was made to clarify the legal position and the amendment
was declaratory in nature and, therefore, the same is applicable to earlier
years also. In support of this contention, reliance has been placed on the
Supreme Court judgment in the case of CIT v. Podar Cement (P.) Ltd. [1997] 226
ITR 625 : 92 Taxman 541. Alternatively, it was contended by him that even the
old provisions, prior to above amendment, included the off-period salary
within its ambit. Reliance was placed on certain decisions of the Tribunal.
4\. The above contentions of the learned DR have been strongly opposed by the
of Clause (iii) simply declared the meaning of the word "owner" which was
always there even before the amendment. But in the present case before us, the
meaning of the words "earned in India" was quite different in view of the
judicial pronouncements as is given by Supreme Court in the case of E.D.
Sassoon & Co. Ltd. (supra), by Gujarat High Court in the case of S.G. Pgnatale
(supra) as well as judicial cognizance by Corpus Juris Seccundum. Therefore,
the present case is a case where Explanation has not declared the existing
meaning but has enlarged the scope of he main Section and, therefore,
retrospective effect cannot be given to the amendment made to the Finance Act,
1999.
13\. In view of the above discussion it is held that prior to amendment by the
Finance Act, 1999, the words 'earned in India' never included the remuneration
payable for the rest period or the leave period and, therefore, such salary,
if paid outside India were not taxable under Section 9(1)(ii). Hence,
alternate contention of ld. DR is also without force. However, it is clarified
that if such salary is paid in India then the same would become taxable under
outside India in foreign currency. The claim of the assessee was that off-
period salary paid outside India was not taxable in India. This contention of
assessee did not find favour with the Assessing Officer and accordingly the
same was taxed under Section 9(1)(ii). However, on appeal, the claim of the
assessee was allowed by the CIT(A). Aggrieved by the same, the revenue is in
appeal in all these cases.
3\. The learned DR. Mr. Salil Gupta has vehemently assailed the order of
CIT(A) by contending that off-period salary is taxable in view of the
provisions of Explanationto Section 9(1)(ii) as substituted by Finance Act,
1999 which, according to him, is retrospective in operation, being
clarificatory/declaratory in nature. It was emphasized by him that the words
"for removal of doubts, it is hereby declared" used by the legislature show
that the amendment was made to clarify the legal position and the amendment
was declaratory in nature and, therefore, the same is applicable to earlier
years also. In support of this contention, reliance has been placed on the
Supreme Court judgment in the case of CIT v. Podar Cement (P.) Ltd. [1997] 226
ITR 625 : 92 Taxman 541. Alternatively, it was contended by him that even the
old provisions, prior to above amendment, included the off-period salary
within its ambit. Reliance was placed on certain decisions of the Tribunal.
4\. The above contentions of the learned DR have been strongly opposed by the
of Clause (iii) simply declared the meaning of the word "owner" which was
always there even before the amendment. But in the present case before us, the
meaning of the words "earned in India" was quite different in view of the
judicial pronouncements as is given by Supreme Court in the case of E.D.
Sassoon & Co. Ltd. (supra), by Gujarat High Court in the case of S.G. Pgnatale
(supra) as well as judicial cognizance by Corpus Juris Seccundum. Therefore,
the present case is a case where Explanation has not declared the existing
meaning but has enlarged the scope of he main Section and, therefore,
retrospective effect cannot be given to the amendment made to the Finance Act,
1999.
13\. In view of the above discussion it is held that prior to amendment by the
Finance Act, 1999, the words 'earned in India' never included the remuneration
payable for the rest period or the leave period and, therefore, such salary,
if paid outside India were not taxable under Section 9(1)(ii). Hence,
alternate contention of ld. DR is also without force. However, it is clarified
that if such salary is paid in India then the same would become taxable under
outside India in foreign currency. The claim of the assessee was that off-
period salary paid outside India was not taxable in India. This contention of
assessee did not find favour with the Assessing Officer and accordingly the
same was taxed under Section 9(1)(ii). However, on appeal, the claim of the
assessee was allowed by the CIT(A). Aggrieved by the same, the revenue is in
appeal in all these cases.
3\. The learned DR. Mr. Salil Gupta has vehemently assailed the order of
CIT(A) by contending that off-period salary is taxable in view of the
provisions of Explanationto Section 9(1)(ii) as substituted by Finance Act,
1999 which, according to him, is retrospective in operation, being
clarificatory/declaratory in nature. It was emphasized by him that the words
"for removal of doubts, it is hereby declared" used by the legislature show
that the amendment was made to clarify the legal position and the amendment
was declaratory in nature and, therefore, the same is applicable to earlier
years also. In support of this contention, reliance has been placed on the
Supreme Court judgment in the case of CIT v. Podar Cement (P.) Ltd. [1997] 226
ITR 625 : 92 Taxman 541. Alternatively, it was contended by him that even the
old provisions, prior to above amendment, included the off-period salary
within its ambit. Reliance was placed on certain decisions of the Tribunal.
4\. The above contentions of the learned DR have been strongly opposed by the
learned Sr. Counsel of the assessee Shri Ganeshan by contending that the
Explanation as substituted by the Finance Act, 1999 has actually expended the
scope of Section 9(1)(ii) by including new item of income i.e., the off-period
salary and consequently, it cannot be considered either as declaratory or
clarificatory. He also drew our attention to the judgment of Hon'ble Gujarat
High Court reported as CIT v. S.G. Pgnatale [1980] 124 ITR 391 : 4 Taxman 79
to illustrate the meaning of the words ' earned in India used in Section
9(1)(ii). He also relied on number of decisions of the Tribunal wherein it has
been held that off-period salary paid outside India was outside the scope of
Section 9(1)(ii). Reliance was also placed on the Board's Circular No. 779
dated 14-9-1999 which vide paras 5.1 to 5.3 has clearly stated that the
of Clause (iii) simply declared the meaning of the word "owner" which was
always there even before the amendment. But in the present case before us, the
meaning of the words "earned in India" was quite different in view of the
judicial pronouncements as is given by Supreme Court in the case of E.D.
Sassoon & Co. Ltd. (supra), by Gujarat High Court in the case of S.G. Pgnatale
(supra) as well as judicial cognizance by Corpus Juris Seccundum. Therefore,
the present case is a case where Explanation has not declared the existing
meaning but has enlarged the scope of he main Section and, therefore,
retrospective effect cannot be given to the amendment made to the Finance Act,
1999.
13\. In view of the above discussion it is held that prior to amendment by the
Finance Act, 1999, the words 'earned in India' never included the remuneration
payable for the rest period or the leave period and, therefore, such salary,
if paid outside India were not taxable under Section 9(1)(ii). Hence,
alternate contention of ld. DR is also without force. However, it is clarified
that if such salary is paid in India then the same would become taxable under
outside India in foreign currency. The claim of the assessee was that off-
period salary paid outside India was not taxable in India. This contention of
assessee did not find favour with the Assessing Officer and accordingly the
same was taxed under Section 9(1)(ii). However, on appeal, the claim of the
assessee was allowed by the CIT(A). Aggrieved by the same, the revenue is in
appeal in all these cases.
3\. The learned DR. Mr. Salil Gupta has vehemently assailed the order of
CIT(A) by contending that off-period salary is taxable in view of the
provisions of Explanationto Section 9(1)(ii) as substituted by Finance Act,
1999 which, according to him, is retrospective in operation, being
clarificatory/declaratory in nature. It was emphasized by him that the words
"for removal of doubts, it is hereby declared" used by the legislature show
that the amendment was made to clarify the legal position and the amendment
was declaratory in nature and, therefore, the same is applicable to earlier
years also. In support of this contention, reliance has been placed on the
Supreme Court judgment in the case of CIT v. Podar Cement (P.) Ltd. [1997] 226
ITR 625 : 92 Taxman 541. Alternatively, it was contended by him that even the
old provisions, prior to above amendment, included the off-period salary
within its ambit. Reliance was placed on certain decisions of the Tribunal.
4\. The above contentions of the learned DR have been strongly opposed by the
learned Sr. Counsel of the assessee Shri Ganeshan by contending that the
Explanation as substituted by the Finance Act, 1999 has actually expended the
scope of Section 9(1)(ii) by including new item of income i.e., the off-period
salary and consequently, it cannot be considered either as declaratory or
clarificatory. He also drew our attention to the judgment of Hon'ble Gujarat
High Court reported as CIT v. S.G. Pgnatale [1980] 124 ITR 391 : 4 Taxman 79
to illustrate the meaning of the words ' earned in India used in Section
9(1)(ii). He also relied on number of decisions of the Tribunal wherein it has
been held that off-period salary paid outside India was outside the scope of
Section 9(1)(ii). Reliance was also placed on the Board's Circular No. 779
dated 14-9-1999 which vide paras 5.1 to 5.3 has clearly stated that the
of Clause (iii) simply declared the meaning of the word "owner" which was
always there even before the amendment. But in the present case before us, the
meaning of the words "earned in India" was quite different in view of the
judicial pronouncements as is given by Supreme Court in the case of E.D.
Sassoon & Co. Ltd. (supra), by Gujarat High Court in the case of S.G. Pgnatale
(supra) as well as judicial cognizance by Corpus Juris Seccundum. Therefore,
the present case is a case where Explanation has not declared the existing
meaning but has enlarged the scope of he main Section and, therefore,
retrospective effect cannot be given to the amendment made to the Finance Act,
1999.
13\. In view of the above discussion it is held that prior to amendment by the
Finance Act, 1999, the words 'earned in India' never included the remuneration
payable for the rest period or the leave period and, therefore, such salary,
if paid outside India were not taxable under Section 9(1)(ii). Hence,
alternate contention of ld. DR is also without force. However, it is clarified
that if such salary is paid in India then the same would become taxable under
