Madras High Court
Madurai Kaithari Javuli ... vs State Of Tamil Nadu on 24 October, 1979
Equivalent citations: 1980 45 STC 473 Mad
Author: Sethuraman
Bench: Sethuraman, Balasubrahmanyan
JUDGMENT Sethuraman, J.
1\. T.C. No. 84 of 1976 has been filed by the assessee against the order of
the Board of Revenue (Commercial Taxes) dated 29th November. 1975. The
assessee had registered itself as a dealer under the Tamil Nadu General Sales
Tax Act, 1959, and the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956. For the year 1969-70 the
assessee reported a total turnover of Rs. 4,34,283.92 and claimed exemption on
the entire turnover on the ground that it acted only as an agent in dealing
with the goods. The assessing officer did not accept this plea and finally
determined the total and taxable turnovers at Rs. 4,34,283.92 and Rs.
1,28,767.53 respectively. The assessee appealed to the Appellate Assistant
Commissioner and contended that it acted only as an agent of its members
collectively, procuring their respective quota of allotment of dyes and art
silk yarn required by them and that its transactions are not liable to tax. In
this connection, it relied on a decision of this Court in National Chamber of
Commerce v. State of Madras [1970] 25 S.T.C. 185. The Appellate Assistant
ratio of the judgment is not dependent upon the existence of the actual users'
licences among all the members. The facts of the said case and the case before
us are so similar that we think that the principle laid down therein applies
in full force here. We hold that the assessee-association is not a dealer and
is not, therefore, liable to sales tax.
7\. Another aspect on which the Board did not think it proper to apply the
above decision to the facts here was that the assessee here had furnished C
forms. This Court has ruled in K.P. Sitaram & Co. v. State of Madras [1965] 16
S.T.C. 436, that C forms could be given even in respect of agency
transactions. Therefore, the fact that the assessee gave the C forms would not
stand in the way of its being a mere intermediary or a go-between so as not to
be a dealer.
8\. On the facts here, we are satisfied that the assessee's claim was rightly
accepted by the Appellate Assistant Commissioner and the order of the Board is
erroneous. The appeal is accordingly allowed with costs. Counsel's fee Rs.
250.
Commerce v. State of Madras [1970] 25 S.T.C. 185. The Appellate Assistant
Commissioner accepted these contentions and allowed the appeal. The Board
considered that the order of the Appellate Assistant Commissioner was
erroneous and that the assessment should be restored. The assessee's
objections were called for and, after hearing the assessee, it was held that
the assessee's contentions had no force and that the sales were liable to tax
under the Act. It set aside the order of the Appellate Assistant Commissioner
and restored the order of the assessing authority. It is this order of the
Board that has given rise to the present appeal.
2\. It is necessary, to appreciate the contentions, to set out a few more
facts based on a sample set of transactions. In May, 1969, the Textile Control
Officer, Madurai, sent out a letter to the assessee regarding the intimation
of the requirements of hydrosulphite of soda by the assessee's members. The
Director of Handlooms had decided to reassess the requirements of the said
chemical by handloom associations in each district. The Textile Control
Officer was ordered to verify the accounts of the members of the association
and find out the actual consumption of this chemical for the year 1968. The
secretary of the association was requested to furnish the particulars in pro
forma No. I enclosed in duplicate in respect of the members of the association
who were actually in need of hydros for their bona fide consumption. The
secretary was to send the particulars called for in regard to the members of
the association alone within a week so that the consolidated report to the
Director of Handlooms could be submitted urgently. On 27th May, 1969, the
assessee sent a list of the members and their requirements on the basis of
actual consumption. 30.8 metric tonnes of hydros was released in or about
September, 1969, for distribution to the handloom industry in Tamil Nadu. Out
of the said quantity the assessee-association was allotted 350 kg. of hydros
packed in 50 kg. drums. The value was Rs. 12 per kilogram plus 3 per cent
Central sales tax with C form ex godown, Bombay. The State Trading Corporation
was to intimate the amounts to be paid by the association towards the
allotment. The allotment was made subject to the condition that it Should be
distributed only to the members in the presence of the Textile Control Officer
concerned, in accordance with his instructions. Any violation of the condition
was to be viewed very seriously and action taken.
3\. On 24th September, 1969, the assessee wrote to the Deputy Marketing
Manager of the State Trading Corporation, Bombay, accepting the allotment of
350 kg. of hydros. The goods were requested to be despatched through lorry and
the documents were to be presented through bank. The State Trading Corporation
wanted the price to be paid only by demand draft and wanted also an
undertaking from the allottees that the goods delivered to them would be used
for manufacture in their own units and that no portion of the goods allotted
to them would be sold or diverted to other parties. It may be seen that in
this communication the State Trading Corporation proceeds as if the consumers
are the allottees and the assurance is to be procured from them.
4\. The assessee sent a demand draft on 21st October, 1969, and asked for the
despatch of the goods in proper condition through lorry. The undertaking
required was also furnished. The assessee thereafter distributed the quantity
obtained among the members in accordance with their requirements and collected
the amounts due from them. It appears that vouchers were alone given and that
no invoices were made in favour of the members by the association. There was
also an inspection of the assessee-association by the Textile Control Officer,
Madurai, and he was satisfied about the assessee having complied with all the
requirements in the matter of the allotment of the chemical mentioned above.
It is on the basis of these facts that we have to consider the liability of
the assessee to sales tax.
5\. There are three aspects to be examined in this connection. The first is
that the assessee has been incorporated as a limited company. The question is
whether, as a consequence of incorporation, it is a separate entity
independent of its members, so that it could be taxed on its dealings with the
members. It has been held in cases arising under the parallel legislation,
namely, the Income-tax Act, that, as a general rule, the fact that a mutual
association is incorporated as a company would not affect its mutual character
or does not destroy the complete identity between the association and its
participants: see Kanga & Palkhivala's Income Tax, 7th Edn., page 87, and also
Commissioner of Income-tax v. Madras Race Club [1976] 105 I.T.R. 433. In the
present case, having regard to the correspondence that has gone on between the
Textile Control Officer and the assessee and also between the State Trading
Corporation and the assessee, it would be clear that the assessee was acting
as a kind of a mutual concern rendering some kind of help to its members. It
is in the nature of an association for self-help. Its role in the scheme of
the distribution of the dyes and other substances obtained from the State
Trading Corporation was only that of an intermediary or, to use a less
elegant, but perhaps a more telling description, a go-between, between the
handloom textile manufacturers on the one hand and the textile control
authorities and the State Trading Corporation on the other. The State Trading
Corporation actually imported the goods, but those goods had to reach the
actual consumers. The State Trading Corporation or the Directorate of Textiles
would have to deal with a large number of individual consumers if the
distribution had to be directly taken up with them. It was, therefore,
apparently, considered necessary to have in each district an association of
this kind, and for the sake of convenience, and to avoid dealing with a large
number of individual consumers, the matter was dealt with through such
associations. The assessee-association was only acting as a go-between for its
members in the sense it was concerned only with the distribution of the goods
allotted to the members. It did not have, in the real sense, any property in
the goods which it transferred in favour of the members.
6\. Before the Board, the assessee placed reliance on a decision of this Court
in National Chamber of Commerce v. State of Madras [1970] 25 S.T.C. 185. In
that case, the assessee was registered under the Societies Registration Act
and it was also a dealer under the Madras General Sales Tax Act. It impored
art silk, dyes and chemicals from abroad on the strength of the actual users'
licences held by its members, and distributed them to the respective members
and collected the sales tax thereon. The department assessed these
transactions to sales tax, not only on the basis of the above facts, but also
on the view that the explanation to the definition of "dealer" in Section 2(g)
as also explanation (1) to the defintion of "sale" in Section 2(n) would
apply. The petitioner filed writ petitions in the High Court to quash the
assessments. It was held that the real purchaser was the relative licensee who
had the quota and the petitioner acted only as an intermediary to import and
distribute, without having any property in the goods. As the transaction of
import and distribution involved no transfer of property, it was held that it
could not be said that the petitioner effected sales in the course of business
attracting sales tax. This decision was distinguished by the Board on the
ground that in that case all the members held actual users' licences. Though
this circumstance is referred to in one portion of the judgment, still the
ratio of the judgment is not dependent upon the existence of the actual users'
licences among all the members. The facts of the said case and the case before
us are so similar that we think that the principle laid down therein applies
in full force here. We hold that the assessee-association is not a dealer and
is not, therefore, liable to sales tax.
7\. Another aspect on which the Board did not think it proper to apply the
above decision to the facts here was that the assessee here had furnished C
forms. This Court has ruled in K.P. Sitaram & Co. v. State of Madras [1965] 16
S.T.C. 436, that C forms could be given even in respect of agency
transactions. Therefore, the fact that the assessee gave the C forms would not
stand in the way of its being a mere intermediary or a go-between so as not to
be a dealer.
8\. On the facts here, we are satisfied that the assessee's claim was rightly
accepted by the Appellate Assistant Commissioner and the order of the Board is
erroneous. The appeal is accordingly allowed with costs. Counsel's fee Rs.
250.
9\. In T.C. No. 324 of 1976, the facts are identical with those discussed in
T.C. No. 84 of 1976. We do not think it necessary to discuss the facts over
again here. For the reasons given in T.C. No. 84 of 1976, this appeal is also
allowed with costs. Counsel's fee Rs. 250.
ratio of the judgment is not dependent upon the existence of the actual users'
licences among all the members. The facts of the said case and the case before
us are so similar that we think that the principle laid down therein applies
in full force here. We hold that the assessee-association is not a dealer and
is not, therefore, liable to sales tax.
7\. Another aspect on which the Board did not think it proper to apply the
above decision to the facts here was that the assessee here had furnished C
forms. This Court has ruled in K.P. Sitaram & Co. v. State of Madras [1965] 16
S.T.C. 436, that C forms could be given even in respect of agency
transactions. Therefore, the fact that the assessee gave the C forms would not
stand in the way of its being a mere intermediary or a go-between so as not to
be a dealer.
8\. On the facts here, we are satisfied that the assessee's claim was rightly
accepted by the Appellate Assistant Commissioner and the order of the Board is
erroneous. The appeal is accordingly allowed with costs. Counsel's fee Rs.
250.
Commerce v. State of Madras [1970] 25 S.T.C. 185. The Appellate Assistant
Commissioner accepted these contentions and allowed the appeal. The Board
considered that the order of the Appellate Assistant Commissioner was
erroneous and that the assessment should be restored. The assessee's
objections were called for and, after hearing the assessee, it was held that
the assessee's contentions had no force and that the sales were liable to tax
under the Act. It set aside the order of the Appellate Assistant Commissioner
and restored the order of the assessing authority. It is this order of the
Board that has given rise to the present appeal.
2\. It is necessary, to appreciate the contentions, to set out a few more
facts based on a sample set of transactions. In May, 1969, the Textile Control
Officer, Madurai, sent out a letter to the assessee regarding the intimation
of the requirements of hydrosulphite of soda by the assessee's members. The
Director of Handlooms had decided to reassess the requirements of the said
chemical by handloom associations in each district. The Textile Control
Officer was ordered to verify the accounts of the members of the association
and find out the actual consumption of this chemical for the year 1968. The
secretary of the association was requested to furnish the particulars in pro
forma No. I enclosed in duplicate in respect of the members of the association
who were actually in need of hydros for their bona fide consumption. The
ratio of the judgment is not dependent upon the existence of the actual users'
licences among all the members. The facts of the said case and the case before
us are so similar that we think that the principle laid down therein applies
in full force here. We hold that the assessee-association is not a dealer and
is not, therefore, liable to sales tax.
7\. Another aspect on which the Board did not think it proper to apply the
above decision to the facts here was that the assessee here had furnished C
forms. This Court has ruled in K.P. Sitaram & Co. v. State of Madras [1965] 16
S.T.C. 436, that C forms could be given even in respect of agency
transactions. Therefore, the fact that the assessee gave the C forms would not
stand in the way of its being a mere intermediary or a go-between so as not to
be a dealer.
8\. On the facts here, we are satisfied that the assessee's claim was rightly
accepted by the Appellate Assistant Commissioner and the order of the Board is
erroneous. The appeal is accordingly allowed with costs. Counsel's fee Rs.
250.
Commerce v. State of Madras [1970] 25 S.T.C. 185. The Appellate Assistant
Commissioner accepted these contentions and allowed the appeal. The Board
considered that the order of the Appellate Assistant Commissioner was
erroneous and that the assessment should be restored. The assessee's
objections were called for and, after hearing the assessee, it was held that
the assessee's contentions had no force and that the sales were liable to tax
under the Act. It set aside the order of the Appellate Assistant Commissioner
and restored the order of the assessing authority. It is this order of the
Board that has given rise to the present appeal.
2\. It is necessary, to appreciate the contentions, to set out a few more
facts based on a sample set of transactions. In May, 1969, the Textile Control
Officer, Madurai, sent out a letter to the assessee regarding the intimation
of the requirements of hydrosulphite of soda by the assessee's members. The
Director of Handlooms had decided to reassess the requirements of the said
chemical by handloom associations in each district. The Textile Control
Officer was ordered to verify the accounts of the members of the association
and find out the actual consumption of this chemical for the year 1968. The
secretary of the association was requested to furnish the particulars in pro
forma No. I enclosed in duplicate in respect of the members of the association
who were actually in need of hydros for their bona fide consumption. The
ratio of the judgment is not dependent upon the existence of the actual users'
licences among all the members. The facts of the said case and the case before
us are so similar that we think that the principle laid down therein applies
in full force here. We hold that the assessee-association is not a dealer and
is not, therefore, liable to sales tax.
7\. Another aspect on which the Board did not think it proper to apply the
above decision to the facts here was that the assessee here had furnished C
forms. This Court has ruled in K.P. Sitaram & Co. v. State of Madras [1965] 16
S.T.C. 436, that C forms could be given even in respect of agency
transactions. Therefore, the fact that the assessee gave the C forms would not
stand in the way of its being a mere intermediary or a go-between so as not to
be a dealer.
8\. On the facts here, we are satisfied that the assessee's claim was rightly
accepted by the Appellate Assistant Commissioner and the order of the Board is
erroneous. The appeal is accordingly allowed with costs. Counsel's fee Rs.
250.
Commerce v. State of Madras [1970] 25 S.T.C. 185. The Appellate Assistant
Commissioner accepted these contentions and allowed the appeal. The Board
considered that the order of the Appellate Assistant Commissioner was
erroneous and that the assessment should be restored. The assessee's
objections were called for and, after hearing the assessee, it was held that
the assessee's contentions had no force and that the sales were liable to tax
under the Act. It set aside the order of the Appellate Assistant Commissioner
and restored the order of the assessing authority. It is this order of the
Board that has given rise to the present appeal.
2\. It is necessary, to appreciate the contentions, to set out a few more
facts based on a sample set of transactions. In May, 1969, the Textile Control
Officer, Madurai, sent out a letter to the assessee regarding the intimation
of the requirements of hydrosulphite of soda by the assessee's members. The
Director of Handlooms had decided to reassess the requirements of the said
chemical by handloom associations in each district. The Textile Control
Officer was ordered to verify the accounts of the members of the association
and find out the actual consumption of this chemical for the year 1968. The
secretary of the association was requested to furnish the particulars in pro
forma No. I enclosed in duplicate in respect of the members of the association
who were actually in need of hydros for their bona fide consumption. The
secretary was to send the particulars called for in regard to the members of
the association alone within a week so that the consolidated report to the
Director of Handlooms could be submitted urgently. On 27th May, 1969, the
assessee sent a list of the members and their requirements on the basis of
actual consumption. 30.8 metric tonnes of hydros was released in or about
September, 1969, for distribution to the handloom industry in Tamil Nadu. Out
of the said quantity the assessee-association was allotted 350 kg. of hydros
packed in 50 kg. drums. The value was Rs. 12 per kilogram plus 3 per cent
Central sales tax with C form ex godown, Bombay. The State Trading Corporation
was to intimate the amounts to be paid by the association towards the
allotment. The allotment was made subject to the condition that it Should be
ratio of the judgment is not dependent upon the existence of the actual users'
licences among all the members. The facts of the said case and the case before
us are so similar that we think that the principle laid down therein applies
in full force here. We hold that the assessee-association is not a dealer and
is not, therefore, liable to sales tax.
7\. Another aspect on which the Board did not think it proper to apply the
above decision to the facts here was that the assessee here had furnished C
forms. This Court has ruled in K.P. Sitaram & Co. v. State of Madras [1965] 16
S.T.C. 436, that C forms could be given even in respect of agency
transactions. Therefore, the fact that the assessee gave the C forms would not
stand in the way of its being a mere intermediary or a go-between so as not to
be a dealer.
8\. On the facts here, we are satisfied that the assessee's claim was rightly
accepted by the Appellate Assistant Commissioner and the order of the Board is
erroneous. The appeal is accordingly allowed with costs. Counsel's fee Rs.
250.
Commerce v. State of Madras [1970] 25 S.T.C. 185. The Appellate Assistant
Commissioner accepted these contentions and allowed the appeal. The Board
considered that the order of the Appellate Assistant Commissioner was
erroneous and that the assessment should be restored. The assessee's
objections were called for and, after hearing the assessee, it was held that
the assessee's contentions had no force and that the sales were liable to tax
under the Act. It set aside the order of the Appellate Assistant Commissioner
and restored the order of the assessing authority. It is this order of the
Board that has given rise to the present appeal.
2\. It is necessary, to appreciate the contentions, to set out a few more
facts based on a sample set of transactions. In May, 1969, the Textile Control
Officer, Madurai, sent out a letter to the assessee regarding the intimation
of the requirements of hydrosulphite of soda by the assessee's members. The
Director of Handlooms had decided to reassess the requirements of the said
chemical by handloom associations in each district. The Textile Control
Officer was ordered to verify the accounts of the members of the association
and find out the actual consumption of this chemical for the year 1968. The
secretary of the association was requested to furnish the particulars in pro
forma No. I enclosed in duplicate in respect of the members of the association
who were actually in need of hydros for their bona fide consumption. The
secretary was to send the particulars called for in regard to the members of
the association alone within a week so that the consolidated report to the
Director of Handlooms could be submitted urgently. On 27th May, 1969, the
assessee sent a list of the members and their requirements on the basis of
actual consumption. 30.8 metric tonnes of hydros was released in or about
September, 1969, for distribution to the handloom industry in Tamil Nadu. Out
of the said quantity the assessee-association was allotted 350 kg. of hydros
packed in 50 kg. drums. The value was Rs. 12 per kilogram plus 3 per cent
Central sales tax with C form ex godown, Bombay. The State Trading Corporation
was to intimate the amounts to be paid by the association towards the
allotment. The allotment was made subject to the condition that it Should be
ratio of the judgment is not dependent upon the existence of the actual users'
licences among all the members. The facts of the said case and the case before
us are so similar that we think that the principle laid down therein applies
in full force here. We hold that the assessee-association is not a dealer and
is not, therefore, liable to sales tax.
7\. Another aspect on which the Board did not think it proper to apply the
above decision to the facts here was that the assessee here had furnished C
forms. This Court has ruled in K.P. Sitaram & Co. v. State of Madras [1965] 16
S.T.C. 436, that C forms could be given even in respect of agency
transactions. Therefore, the fact that the assessee gave the C forms would not
stand in the way of its being a mere intermediary or a go-between so as not to
be a dealer.
8\. On the facts here, we are satisfied that the assessee's claim was rightly
accepted by the Appellate Assistant Commissioner and the order of the Board is
erroneous. The appeal is accordingly allowed with costs. Counsel's fee Rs.
250.
