Delhi District Court
Judgment/Rajender vs . Manju Rani/Cc No. 35/01/Us:138 ... on 3 July, 2009
Author: Sh. Dig Singh
              IN THE COURT OF SH. DIG VINAY SINGH, ADDITIONAL CHIEF METROPOLITAN 
                                       MAGISTRATE­03 (IPR), ROHINI, DELHI
    In re: 
    Sh. RAJENDER
    VS.
    Smt. MANJU RANI
    CC NO. 35/01 
    U/s. 138 Negotiable Instruments Act
    P.S. Jahangir Puri 
    DATE OF RESERVATION OF JUDGMENT:                             03.07.2009
    DATE OF PRONOUNCEMENT OF JUDGMENT:  03.07.2009
    J U D G E M E N T
    (a) The name of complainant :                                Sh. Rajender
    (b) The name, parentage, residence of accused:               Smt. Manju Rani w/o Sh. Shiv Shankar Pandey 
                                                                 r/o 2/14, Gali no. 2, Tukmeer Pur Road, Khajoori 
                                                                 Khas, Delhi­94
    (c) The offence complained of/ proved :                      U/s. 138 N. I. Act. Act
Electronics Ltd. & Anr. Vs. National Panasonic India Ltd., 2009 (1) LRC 82
(SC). In the said case, it was held that issuance of notice would not by
itself is a cause of action but communication thereof does. The said judgement
is distinguishable since in the present case it is in an admitted position by
the accused that the notice was received by the accused on 28.10.2008 and
evidence has come on record that within fifteen days from the said date, the
cheque amount was not paid.
21\. Ld. counsel for the accused also placed reliance upon the case of K.S.
Bakshi Vs. State, Crl. M.C. No.4802/03 decided on 02.11.2007 by Hon'ble Delhi
High Court, to argue that where the cheque is given as a security, provisions
u/s.138 are not attracted. Again this judgement is distinguishable as in the
present case, the evidence has come that the cheque was not for security.
22\. In view of the above discussion, the case of the complainant stands
proved beyond reasonable doubt and the accused is found guilty and convicted
for the offence u/s 138 Negotiable Instrument Act for dishonour of the two
cheques in question and for not paying the cheque amount to the complainant
    (c) The offence complained of/ proved :                      U/s. 138 N. I. Act. Act
    (d) The plea of accused :                                    Pleaded not guilty
    (e) The final order :                                        Convicted
    (f) The date of such order :                                 03.07.2009.
    (g) Brief statement of the reasons for the decision:­
JUDGMENT/Rajender Vs. Manju Rani/CC NO. 35/01/US:138 N.I. Act
/Convicted/03.07.09/Page 1 of 14/DK
1\. This is a complaint case filed by the complainant against the accused,
under section 138 of The Negotiable Instruments Act, claiming that the accused
issued two cheques bearing no. 154973 and 154974, dated 10­06­2008 and
14­06­2008, to the complainant, for a sum of Rs. 20,000/­ each, drawn on State
Bank of India, Karawal Nagar, Delhi, towards discharge of legally enforceable
liability, but both these cheques were dishonoured due to "insufficient funds"
in the account of accused on 16­ 10­2008 and, the accused failed to make
payment of the cheque amount even after receipt of legal notice dated
24­10­2008, within stipulated period of 15 days.
2\. The accused was summoned by this Court and a notice u/s 138 N. I. Act was
framed against the accused to which accused claimed trial.
3\. To prove its case, the complainant examined himself as PW1, and after the
prosecution evidence, statement of accused was recorded on 13­01­2009. Accused
examined herself as DW1 and also examined three more witnesses namely DW2 Shiv
Shankar (husband of complainant), DW3 Anil Tiwari and DW4 Mahender Kumar
Verma. Arguments have been heard from both sides and record perused.
4\. Admittedly in this case two cheques Ex. CW1/1 and CW1/2 as mentioned above
were issued by the accused to the complainant. It is also an admitted position
in this case that both these cheques were dishonoured due to "insufficient
funds" on 16­10­2008. Complainant sent a legal notice Ex. CW1/5 to the accused
dated 24­10­2008 through Registered AD and UPC Ex. CW1/6 and 7 respectively.
It is also admitted position in this case that legal notice was received by
the accused. JUDGMENT/Rajender Vs. Manju Rani/CC NO. 35/01/US:138 N.I. Act
/Convicted/03.07.09/Page 2 of 14/DK Perusal of the evidence and the statement
of accused reveals that above facts are not in dispute and admitted. Accused
admitted that she received the legal notice on 28­10­2008.
5\. The dispute between the parties was on two points. The first contention
raised by the accused was that the two cheques in question issued by the
accused to the complainant were not towards discharge of legally enforceable
liability. The accused claimed that two cheques were given to the complainant
as security, since there were certain articles supplied by the complainant to
DW4 Mahender Kumar Verma, through the husband of the accused, and against the
outstanding amount which was to be paid by Mahender to the complainant, on the
asking of complainant, these two cheques were given as security.
6\. The second argument raised by the accused is that after receipt of legal
notice on 28­10­2008, the accused deposited a sum of Rs. 41,875/­ in the
account of complainant with Bank of Baroda, vide pay­in­slip Ex. DW1/1.
7\. It is not in dispute that on 19­11­2008, vide Ex. DW1/1, a cheque for Rs.
41,875/­ has been deposited in the account of complainant and, the said cheque
was encashed in the account of the complainant.
8\. The complainant claimed that the said cheque, deposited vide Ex. DW1/1,
was not towards repayment of the cheque amount by the accused but it was
regarding another liability of DW4 Mahender Kumar Verma towards complainant.
The complainant also claims that this cheque, deposited vide Ex DW1/1, has not
been deposited in the account of complainant within 15 days of
JUDGMENT/Rajender Vs. Manju Rani/CC NO. 35/01/US:138 N.I. Act
/Convicted/03.07.09/Page 3 of 14/DK receipt of notice by the accused and
secondly that even otherwise the said cheque had nothing to do with cheques
involved in this case, but they were deposited by the third party DW4 in
discharge of liability of DW4 towards complainant.
9\. Therefore, the entire controversy in this case stands on two points as
above. Let us see whether the two cheques were issued by the accused in
discharge of her liability or whether they were merely security as claimed by
the accused.
10\. U/s. 139 r/w section 118 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, there is a
presumption in favour of the complainant that the cheque in question was
issued in discharge of legally enforceable liability of the accused and it was
for consideration. There is a legal presumption in favour of complainant and
against the accused, that the cheque in question was received by the
complainant in discharge of any debt or other liability from the accused
either in whole or in part. As per this section, the burden to rebut the
presumption was on the accused which the accused failed to rebut in the
present case. A mere oral allegation by the accused that the cheques were for
security is insufficient to discharge this burden. To rebut the presumption
u/s.138 N.I. Act, there has to be some more evidence from the accused besides
making of bare oral denial. If such a defence without any document is to be
taken as sufficient rebuttal, in every case u/s.138 N.I. Act, the accused can
escape his liability by mere oral claim that the cheque was not in discharge
of his liability.
11\. Under section 118 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, there is a legal
presumption in favour of the complainant that every negotiable instrument
(which includes a cheque) was made or drawn for JUDGMENT/Rajender Vs. Manju
Rani/CC NO. 35/01/US:138 N.I. Act /Convicted/03.07.09/Page 4 of 14/DK
consideration. The legal presumption is also regarding date of cheque, time of
its acceptance, time of transfer, order of endorsement and also as to stamps.
Reading section 118 and 139 of Negotiable Instruments Act, a presumption
arises in favour of the complainant and not in favour of accused that, when
this cheque was received by the complainant, it was against consideration and
also towards discharge of liability by the accused.
12\. In the case of M/s. Kumar Exports v. M/s. Sharma Carpets , 2009(1)
R.C.R.(Criminal) 478 : 2009(1) R.C.R.(Civil) 453 : 2009(1) R.A.J. 154 hon'ble
Supreme court of India held as follows;
"9. In order to determine the question whether offence punishable under
Section 138 of the Act is made out against the appellant, it will be necessary
to examine the scope and ambit of presumptions to be raised as envisaged by
the provisions of Sections 118 and 139 of the Act. In a suit to enforce a
simple contract, the plaintiff has to aver in his pleading that it was made
for good consideration and must substantiate it by evidence. But to this rule,
the negotiable instruments are an exception. In a significant departure from
the general rule applicable to contracts, Section 118 of the Act provides
certain presumptions to be raised. This Section lays down some special rules
of evidence relating to presumptions. The reason for these presumptions is
that, negotiable instrument passes from hand to hand on endorsement and it
would make trading very difficult and negotiability of the instrument
impossible, unless certain presumptions are made. The presumption, therefore,
is a matter of principle to facilitate negotiability as well as trade. Section
118 of the Act provides presumptions to be raised until the contrary is proved
(i) as to consideration, (ii) as to date of instrument, (iii) as to time of
acceptance, (iv) as to time of transfer, (v) as to order of endorsements, (vi)
as to appropriate stamp and (vii) as to holder being a holder in due course.
Section 139 of the Act provides that it shall be presumed, unless the contrary
is proved, that the holder of a cheque received the cheque of the nature
referred to in Section 138 for the discharge, in whole or in part, of any debt
or other liability. JUDGMENT/Rajender Vs. Manju Rani/CC NO. 35/01/US:138 N.I.
Act /Convicted/03.07.09/Page 5 of 14/DK Presumptions are devices by use of
which the courts are enabled and entitled to pronounce on an issue
notwithstanding that there is no evidence or insufficient evidence. Under the
Indian Evidence Act all presumptions must come under one or the other class of
the three classes mentioned in the Act, namely, (1) "may presume"
(rebuttable), (2) "shall presume" (rebuttable) and (3) "conclusive
presumptions" (irrebuttable). The term `presumption' is used to designate an
inference, affirmative or dis affirmative of the existence a fact,
conveniently called the "presumed fact" drawn by a judicial tribunal, by a
process of probable reasoning from some matter of fact, either judicially
noticed or admitted or established by legal evidence to the satisfaction of
the tribunal. Presumption literally means "taking as true without examination
or proof". Section 4 of the Evidence Act inter­alia defines the words `may
presume' and `shall presume as follows: ­ "(a) `may presume' ­ Whenever it is
provided by this Act that the Court may presume a fact, it may either regard
such fact as proved, unless and until it is disproved or may call for proof of
it.
(b) `shall presume' ­ Whenever it is directed by this Act that the Court shall
presume a fact, it shall regard such fact as proved, unless and until it is
disproved."
In the former case the Court has an option to raise the presumption or not,
but in the latter case, the Court must necessarily raise the presumption. If
in a case the Court has an option to raise the presumption and raises the
presumption, the distinction between the two categories of presumptions ceases
and the fact is presumed, unless and until it is disproved."
"10. Section 118 of the Act inter alia directs that it shall be presumed,
until the contrary is proved, that every negotiable instrument was made or
drawn for consideration. Section 139 of the Act stipulates that unless the
contrary is proved, it shall be presumed, that the holder of the cheque
received the JUDGMENT/Rajender Vs. Manju Rani/CC NO. 35/01/US:138 N.I. Act
/Convicted/03.07.09/Page 6 of 14/DK cheque, for the discharge of, whole or
part of any debt or liability. "
"Applying the definition of the word `proved' in Section 3 of the Evidence Act
to the provisions of Sections 118 and 139 of the Act, it becomes evident that
in a trial under Section 138 of the Act a presumption will have to be made
that every negotiable instrument was made or drawn for consideration and that
it was executed for discharge of debt or liability once the execution of
negotiable instrument is either proved or admitted. As soon as the complainant
discharges the burden to prove that the instrument, say a note, was executed
by the accused, the rules of presumptions under Sections 118 and 139 of the
Act help him shift the burden on the accused. The presumptions will live,
exist and survive and shall end only when the contrary is proved by the
accused, that is, the cheque was not issued for consideration and in discharge
of any debt or liability. A presumption is not in itself evidence, but only
makes a prima facie case for a party for whose benefit it exists." " 11. The
use of the phrase "until the contrary is proved" in Section 118 of the Act and
use of the words "unless the contrary is proved" in Section 139 of the Act
read with definitions of "may presume" and "shall presume" as given in Section
4 of the Evidence Act, makes it at once clear that presumptions to be raised
under both the provisions are rebuttable. When a presumption is rebuttable, it
only points out that the party on whom lies the duty of going forward with
evidence, on the fact presumed and when that party has produced evidence
fairly and reasonably tending to show that the real fact is not as presumed,
the purpose of the presumption is over. The accused in a trial under Section
138 of the Act has two options. He can either show that consideration and debt
did not exist or that under the particular circumstances of the case the
non­existence of consideration and debt is so probable that a prudent man
ought to suppose that no consideration and debt existed. To rebut the
statutory presumptions an accused is not expected to prove his defence beyond
reasonable doubt as is expected of the complainant in a criminal trial. The
accused may adduce direct evidence to prove that the note in question was not
supported by consideration and that there was no debt or JUDGMENT/Rajender Vs.
Manju Rani/CC NO. 35/01/US:138 N.I. Act /Convicted/03.07.09/Page 7 of 14/DK
liability to be discharged by him. However, the court need not insist in every
case that the accused should disprove the non­existence of consideration and
debt by leading direct evidence because the existence of negative evidence is
neither possible nor contemplated. At the same time, it is clear that bare
denial of the passing of the consideration and existence of debt, apparently
would not serve the purpose of the accused. Something which is probable has to
be brought on record for getting the burden of proof shifted to the
complainant. To disprove the presumptions, the accused should bring on record
such facts and circumstances, upon consideration of which, the court may
either believe that the consideration and debt did not exist or their non­
existence was so probable that a prudent man would under the circumstances of
the case, act upon the plea that they did not exist. Apart from adducing
direct evidence to prove that the note in question was not supported by
consideration or that he had not incurred any debt or liability, the accused
may also rely upon circumstantial evidence and if the circumstances so relied
upon are compelling, the burden may likewise shift again on to the
complainant. The accused may also rely upon presumptions of fact, for
instance, those mentioned in Section 114 of the Evidence Act to rebut the
presumptions arising under Sections 118 and 139 of the Act. The accused has
also an option to prove the non­ existence of consideration and debt or
liability either by letting in evidence or in some clear and exceptional
cases, from the case set out by the complainant, that is, the averments in the
complaint, the case set out in the statutory notice and evidence adduced by
the complainant during the trial. Once such rebuttal evidence is adduced and
accepted by the court, having regard to all the circumstances of the case and
the preponderance of probabilities, the evidential burden shifts back to the
complainant and, thereafter, the presumptions under Sections 118 and 139 of
the Act will not again come to the complainant's rescue. "
13\. The complainant in his evidence deposed that accused was a regular
customer of the complainant from year 2006 and she used to purchase raw
material from the complainant regarding which a sum of Rs. 80,000/­ was due to
be paid by the accused to the complainant and in discharge JUDGMENT/Rajender
Vs. Manju Rani/CC NO. 35/01/US:138 N.I. Act /Convicted/03.07.09/Page 8 of
14/DK of that liability, accused issued the two cheques in question which were
dishonoured. The complainant has not proved any statement of account between
the parties or any other invoice or any other document to show as to such
amount of Rs. 80,000/­ was payable by the accused to the complainant. The
complainant in the cross­examination claimed that account between the parties
was running account but no balance sheet or statement of account maintained in
the course of business was proved on record.
14\. Before proceeding further to find out whether the accused has been able
to discharge the burden placed on her u/s 139 and 118 Negotiable Instruments
Act, let it be mentioned here that in the statement of accused when
incriminating evidence was put to her, she admitted categorically that she was
dealing in the business of silicon sheets cutting with the complainant and
also that she used to buy raw material from the complainant but she denied
that she had an outstanding amount of Rs. 80,000/­. She also admitted in the
statement that she received goods from the complainant and issued two cheques,
but she claimed that after receipt of legal notice, she repaid the amount and
therefore she has no liability.
15\. However, as DW1, accused Manju Rani deposed that she had no business
connection with the complainant and in fact it was her husband who was dealing
with the complainant. Now, this stand of the accused as DW1 is in absolute
contradiction to the stand taken by her in her statement u/s 313 Cr. P. C. She
deposed that her husband obtained some articles from the complainant and
supplied the same to Mahender Kumar Verma, DW4 and on the asking of
complainant through her husband, JUDGMENT/Rajender Vs. Manju Rani/CC NO.
35/01/US:138 N.I. Act /Convicted/03.07.09/Page 9 of 14/DK she issued the two
cheques as security. Again, this stand of the accused as DW1 is in absolute
contradiction to her statement recorded u/s 313 Cr. P. C wherein no such stand
was taken. This defence of accused that two cheques were issued to the
complainant as security was never put to the complainant during his
cross­examination and therefore this stand of the accused is nothing but an
afterthought. There is an admission of the accused in statement that she
received the goods and she issued the two cheques in question, therefore,
there is no doubt that it stands proved that the cheques in question were
given to the complainant in discharge of liability and not as security.
16\. Coming to the stand taken by the accused that after receipt of notice she
deposited Rs. 41,875/­ on 19­11­2008. To prove this defence, she examined her
husband Sh. Shiv Shankar as DW2, Sh. Anil Tiwari as DW3 and Sh. Mahender Kumar
Verma as DW4. DW3 Anil Tiwari in his affidavit deposed that he deposited the
cheque on 19­11­2008 vide Ex. DW1/1 on the asking of husband of complainant
and the cheque was deposited in the account of complainant. In the cross­
examination, this witness stated that neither he was not aware as to what are
the contents of affidavit, nor he ever came to the court for attestation of
affidavit and he signed the affidavit of evidence at his residence on the
asking of husband of accused. On this ground, the complainant claims that no
reliance can be placed upon the testimony of this witness. Once the
complainant admits that on 19­ 11­2008 Rs. 41,875/­ has been deposited in his
account vide Ex. DW1/1, the testimony of this witness DW3 is more or less of
formal nature. There is no denial of fact that vide Ex. DW1/1 the said cheque
JUDGMENT/Rajender Vs. Manju Rani/CC NO. 35/01/US:138 N.I. Act
/Convicted/03.07.09/Page 10 of 14/DK was deposited Rather the stand of
complainant is that the said cheque was of third party towards discharge of
another liability and it was not deposited in discharge of liability of
accused. Therefore, testimony of DW3 is not of much importance to either of
the parties.
17\. Testimony of DW4 Mahender Kumar Verma is of importance. It is this
witness DW4 from whose account the cheque no. 629172 was drawn which was
deposited in the account of complainant on 19­11­2008 vide Ex DW1/1. Now, DW4
claimed that in March 2002, an agreement for supply of lamination material was
entered into between complainant firm and his firm through the husband of
accused and the total cost of supplied material was Rs. 61,875/­ including the
Vat. He claimed that after supply of material, entire amount of Rs. 61,875/­
was paid to the complainant through two cheques, one for Rs. 20,000/­ dated
26­03­2008 bearing cheque no. 085562 and second cheque no. 629172 deposited
vide Ex. DW1/1. In the cross­examination, this witness categorically stated
that he did not purchase any lamination material from the complainant directly
and rather he purchased the articles through husband of complainant. The bill
was proved as Ex. DW4/A through which this witness allegedly purchased the
articles. He also admitted that he issued the cheque directly in the name of
complainant firm which was deposited vide Ex. DW1/1. Now therefore in the
present case it stands proved that certain articles were purchased by DW4
Mahender Kumar Verma from the firm of complainant and he paid the amount for
the said transaction. Although between the complainant and accused it is the
point of dispute whether those articles were sent to DW4 directly by the
complainant or it was sent through husband of complainant. The said point is
not of much importance for the JUDGMENT/Rajender Vs. Manju Rani/CC NO.
35/01/US:138 N.I. Act /Convicted/03.07.09/Page 11 of 14/DK simple reason that
as mentioned above it is established that two cheques in question which were
dishonoured in this case were issued by the accused to complainant in
discharge of liability and not as security towards this transaction. Also
there was no reason for the complainant to have deposited Rs. 41,875/­ when
the cheque amount involved in this case was only Rs. 40,000/­. Therefore, even
if Rs. 41,875/­ stands deposited, the said amount cannot be claimed to be in
discharge of her liability and because that amount was in discharge of
liability of Mahender Kumar Verma.
18\. Even otherwise, the said amount of RS. 41,875/­ was not deposited by the
accused within stipulated period of 15 days from the date of receipt of legal
notice. Ld. Counsel for accused argued that although the notice was received
on 28­10­2008 but the deposition of this amount with bankers of complainant
would be within 15 days since national holidays and Sundays are to be
excluded. I am afraid this contention is absolutely misplaced. The time frame
within which the accused was to pay the cheque amount to the complainant was
15 days from the receipt of notice which commenced from 29­ 10­2008. There is
no law that from the time of 15 days, within which accused was to pay cheque
amount to the complainant, national holidays or Sundays are to be excluded.
The Legislature has fixed 15 days time to the accused to make payment of
cheque amount it has to be inclusive of holidays, unless otherwise provided..
There is no exception to his rule. Therefore, the deposition of money on
19­11­2008 was in any case not within the stipulated period of 15 days and it
is settled law that an offence u/s 138 Negotiable Instruments Act stands
committed when 15 days expire from the date of receipt of notice by an accused
and when accused fails to pay amount of the cheque within JUDGMENT/Rajender
Vs. Manju Rani/CC NO. 35/01/US:138 N.I. Act /Convicted/03.07.09/Page 12 of
14/DK those 15 days. Therefore in this case even if for the sake of arguments
it is believed that accused paid the cheque amount, it was after the
commission of offence u/s 138 Negotiable Instruments Act and therefore accused
would be liable.
19\. Ld. Counsel for accused also raised the contention that present case is
not within period of limitation and in order to support this contention he
stated that as per document mark DA which is statement of account of accused,
the cheque were dishonoured on 13­06­2008, 17­06­2008 and 03­ 07­2008. First
of all, mark DA is not a proved document since only its photocopy was placed
on record and even otherwise perusal of the said statement would reveal that
on the above dates claimed by the accused the cheque number is not mentioned
in the statement therefore I fail to understand as to how it is claimed by the
accused that on these dates the two cheques involved in this case were
dishonoured. It may be mentioned here that there are two returning memos of
the two cheques Ex. CW1/3 and 4 vide which the cheques were returned due to
"insufficient funds" and which were admitted by the accused in this case and
which were not disputed. Even otherwise, it is not the case of accused that
these two cheques were earlier dishonoured and that legal notice was sent to
the accused before the last dishonour from which the limitation is computed in
this case. It is settled that the cheques can be presented any number of times
within its life span of six months and unless a legal notice is sent to the
accused regarding dishonour, the cheque can be presented again. In this case
admittedly only one legal notice is sent to the accused which is Ex. CW1/5 and
which was received by the accused on 28­10­2008. Accused has not placed on
record any other legal notice JUDGMENT/Rajender Vs. Manju Rani/CC NO.
35/01/US:138 N.I. Act /Convicted/03.07.09/Page 13 of 14/DK received by her
prior to this notice and , therefore, this contention is absolutely misplaced.
20\. Ld. Counsel for the accused placed reliance on the case of Harman
Electronics Ltd. & Anr. Vs. National Panasonic India Ltd., 2009 (1) LRC 82
(SC). In the said case, it was held that issuance of notice would not by
itself is a cause of action but communication thereof does. The said judgement
is distinguishable since in the present case it is in an admitted position by
the accused that the notice was received by the accused on 28.10.2008 and
evidence has come on record that within fifteen days from the said date, the
cheque amount was not paid.
21\. Ld. counsel for the accused also placed reliance upon the case of K.S.
Bakshi Vs. State, Crl. M.C. No.4802/03 decided on 02.11.2007 by Hon'ble Delhi
High Court, to argue that where the cheque is given as a security, provisions
u/s.138 are not attracted. Again this judgement is distinguishable as in the
present case, the evidence has come that the cheque was not for security.
22\. In view of the above discussion, the case of the complainant stands
proved beyond reasonable doubt and the accused is found guilty and convicted
for the offence u/s 138 Negotiable Instrument Act for dishonour of the two
cheques in question and for not paying the cheque amount to the complainant
within stipulated period of 15 days from the date of receipt of notice.
ANNOUNCED IN OPEN COURT ON 03rd July 2009 (DIGVINAY SINGH) ADDITIONAL CHIEF
METROPOLITAN MAGISTRATE­03 IPR, ROHINI, DELHI JUDGMENT/Rajender Vs. Manju
Rani/CC NO. 35/01/US:138 N.I. Act /Convicted/03.07.09/Page 14 of 14/DK
Electronics Ltd. & Anr. Vs. National Panasonic India Ltd., 2009 (1) LRC 82
(SC). In the said case, it was held that issuance of notice would not by
itself is a cause of action but communication thereof does. The said judgement
is distinguishable since in the present case it is in an admitted position by
the accused that the notice was received by the accused on 28.10.2008 and
evidence has come on record that within fifteen days from the said date, the
cheque amount was not paid.
21\. Ld. counsel for the accused also placed reliance upon the case of K.S.
Bakshi Vs. State, Crl. M.C. No.4802/03 decided on 02.11.2007 by Hon'ble Delhi
High Court, to argue that where the cheque is given as a security, provisions
u/s.138 are not attracted. Again this judgement is distinguishable as in the
present case, the evidence has come that the cheque was not for security.
22\. In view of the above discussion, the case of the complainant stands
proved beyond reasonable doubt and the accused is found guilty and convicted
for the offence u/s 138 Negotiable Instrument Act for dishonour of the two
cheques in question and for not paying the cheque amount to the complainant
    (c) The offence complained of/ proved :                      U/s. 138 N. I. Act. Act
    (d) The plea of accused :                                    Pleaded not guilty
    (e) The final order :                                        Convicted
    (f) The date of such order :                                 03.07.2009.
    (g) Brief statement of the reasons for the decision:­
JUDGMENT/Rajender Vs. Manju Rani/CC NO. 35/01/US:138 N.I. Act
/Convicted/03.07.09/Page 1 of 14/DK
1\. This is a complaint case filed by the complainant against the accused,
under section 138 of The Negotiable Instruments Act, claiming that the accused
issued two cheques bearing no. 154973 and 154974, dated 10­06­2008 and
14­06­2008, to the complainant, for a sum of Rs. 20,000/­ each, drawn on State
Bank of India, Karawal Nagar, Delhi, towards discharge of legally enforceable
liability, but both these cheques were dishonoured due to "insufficient funds"
in the account of accused on 16­ 10­2008 and, the accused failed to make
payment of the cheque amount even after receipt of legal notice dated
24­10­2008, within stipulated period of 15 days.
2\. The accused was summoned by this Court and a notice u/s 138 N. I. Act was
framed against the accused to which accused claimed trial.
3\. To prove its case, the complainant examined himself as PW1, and after the
prosecution evidence, statement of accused was recorded on 13­01­2009. Accused
Electronics Ltd. & Anr. Vs. National Panasonic India Ltd., 2009 (1) LRC 82
(SC). In the said case, it was held that issuance of notice would not by
itself is a cause of action but communication thereof does. The said judgement
is distinguishable since in the present case it is in an admitted position by
the accused that the notice was received by the accused on 28.10.2008 and
evidence has come on record that within fifteen days from the said date, the
cheque amount was not paid.
21\. Ld. counsel for the accused also placed reliance upon the case of K.S.
Bakshi Vs. State, Crl. M.C. No.4802/03 decided on 02.11.2007 by Hon'ble Delhi
High Court, to argue that where the cheque is given as a security, provisions
u/s.138 are not attracted. Again this judgement is distinguishable as in the
present case, the evidence has come that the cheque was not for security.
22\. In view of the above discussion, the case of the complainant stands
proved beyond reasonable doubt and the accused is found guilty and convicted
for the offence u/s 138 Negotiable Instrument Act for dishonour of the two
cheques in question and for not paying the cheque amount to the complainant
    (c) The offence complained of/ proved :                      U/s. 138 N. I. Act. Act
    (d) The plea of accused :                                    Pleaded not guilty
    (e) The final order :                                        Convicted
    (f) The date of such order :                                 03.07.2009.
    (g) Brief statement of the reasons for the decision:­
JUDGMENT/Rajender Vs. Manju Rani/CC NO. 35/01/US:138 N.I. Act
/Convicted/03.07.09/Page 1 of 14/DK
1\. This is a complaint case filed by the complainant against the accused,
under section 138 of The Negotiable Instruments Act, claiming that the accused
issued two cheques bearing no. 154973 and 154974, dated 10­06­2008 and
14­06­2008, to the complainant, for a sum of Rs. 20,000/­ each, drawn on State
Bank of India, Karawal Nagar, Delhi, towards discharge of legally enforceable
liability, but both these cheques were dishonoured due to "insufficient funds"
in the account of accused on 16­ 10­2008 and, the accused failed to make
payment of the cheque amount even after receipt of legal notice dated
24­10­2008, within stipulated period of 15 days.
2\. The accused was summoned by this Court and a notice u/s 138 N. I. Act was
framed against the accused to which accused claimed trial.
3\. To prove its case, the complainant examined himself as PW1, and after the
prosecution evidence, statement of accused was recorded on 13­01­2009. Accused
Electronics Ltd. & Anr. Vs. National Panasonic India Ltd., 2009 (1) LRC 82
(SC). In the said case, it was held that issuance of notice would not by
itself is a cause of action but communication thereof does. The said judgement
is distinguishable since in the present case it is in an admitted position by
the accused that the notice was received by the accused on 28.10.2008 and
evidence has come on record that within fifteen days from the said date, the
cheque amount was not paid.
21\. Ld. counsel for the accused also placed reliance upon the case of K.S.
Bakshi Vs. State, Crl. M.C. No.4802/03 decided on 02.11.2007 by Hon'ble Delhi
High Court, to argue that where the cheque is given as a security, provisions
u/s.138 are not attracted. Again this judgement is distinguishable as in the
present case, the evidence has come that the cheque was not for security.
22\. In view of the above discussion, the case of the complainant stands
proved beyond reasonable doubt and the accused is found guilty and convicted
for the offence u/s 138 Negotiable Instrument Act for dishonour of the two
cheques in question and for not paying the cheque amount to the complainant
    (c) The offence complained of/ proved :                      U/s. 138 N. I. Act. Act
    (d) The plea of accused :                                    Pleaded not guilty
    (e) The final order :                                        Convicted
    (f) The date of such order :                                 03.07.2009.
    (g) Brief statement of the reasons for the decision:­
JUDGMENT/Rajender Vs. Manju Rani/CC NO. 35/01/US:138 N.I. Act
/Convicted/03.07.09/Page 1 of 14/DK
1\. This is a complaint case filed by the complainant against the accused,
under section 138 of The Negotiable Instruments Act, claiming that the accused
issued two cheques bearing no. 154973 and 154974, dated 10­06­2008 and
14­06­2008, to the complainant, for a sum of Rs. 20,000/­ each, drawn on State
Bank of India, Karawal Nagar, Delhi, towards discharge of legally enforceable
liability, but both these cheques were dishonoured due to "insufficient funds"
in the account of accused on 16­ 10­2008 and, the accused failed to make
payment of the cheque amount even after receipt of legal notice dated
24­10­2008, within stipulated period of 15 days.
2\. The accused was summoned by this Court and a notice u/s 138 N. I. Act was
framed against the accused to which accused claimed trial.
3\. To prove its case, the complainant examined himself as PW1, and after the
prosecution evidence, statement of accused was recorded on 13­01­2009. Accused
examined herself as DW1 and also examined three more witnesses namely DW2 Shiv
Shankar (husband of complainant), DW3 Anil Tiwari and DW4 Mahender Kumar
Verma. Arguments have been heard from both sides and record perused.
4\. Admittedly in this case two cheques Ex. CW1/1 and CW1/2 as mentioned above
were issued by the accused to the complainant. It is also an admitted position
in this case that both these cheques were dishonoured due to "insufficient
funds" on 16­10­2008. Complainant sent a legal notice Ex. CW1/5 to the accused
dated 24­10­2008 through Registered AD and UPC Ex. CW1/6 and 7 respectively.
It is also admitted position in this case that legal notice was received by
the accused. JUDGMENT/Rajender Vs. Manju Rani/CC NO. 35/01/US:138 N.I. Act
/Convicted/03.07.09/Page 2 of 14/DK Perusal of the evidence and the statement
Electronics Ltd. & Anr. Vs. National Panasonic India Ltd., 2009 (1) LRC 82
(SC). In the said case, it was held that issuance of notice would not by
itself is a cause of action but communication thereof does. The said judgement
is distinguishable since in the present case it is in an admitted position by
the accused that the notice was received by the accused on 28.10.2008 and
evidence has come on record that within fifteen days from the said date, the
cheque amount was not paid.
21\. Ld. counsel for the accused also placed reliance upon the case of K.S.
Bakshi Vs. State, Crl. M.C. No.4802/03 decided on 02.11.2007 by Hon'ble Delhi
High Court, to argue that where the cheque is given as a security, provisions
u/s.138 are not attracted. Again this judgement is distinguishable as in the
present case, the evidence has come that the cheque was not for security.
22\. In view of the above discussion, the case of the complainant stands
proved beyond reasonable doubt and the accused is found guilty and convicted
for the offence u/s 138 Negotiable Instrument Act for dishonour of the two
cheques in question and for not paying the cheque amount to the complainant
    (c) The offence complained of/ proved :                      U/s. 138 N. I. Act. Act
    (d) The plea of accused :                                    Pleaded not guilty
    (e) The final order :                                        Convicted
    (f) The date of such order :                                 03.07.2009.
    (g) Brief statement of the reasons for the decision:­
JUDGMENT/Rajender Vs. Manju Rani/CC NO. 35/01/US:138 N.I. Act
/Convicted/03.07.09/Page 1 of 14/DK
1\. This is a complaint case filed by the complainant against the accused,
under section 138 of The Negotiable Instruments Act, claiming that the accused
issued two cheques bearing no. 154973 and 154974, dated 10­06­2008 and
14­06­2008, to the complainant, for a sum of Rs. 20,000/­ each, drawn on State
Bank of India, Karawal Nagar, Delhi, towards discharge of legally enforceable
liability, but both these cheques were dishonoured due to "insufficient funds"
in the account of accused on 16­ 10­2008 and, the accused failed to make
payment of the cheque amount even after receipt of legal notice dated
24­10­2008, within stipulated period of 15 days.
2\. The accused was summoned by this Court and a notice u/s 138 N. I. Act was
framed against the accused to which accused claimed trial.
3\. To prove its case, the complainant examined himself as PW1, and after the
prosecution evidence, statement of accused was recorded on 13­01­2009. Accused
examined herself as DW1 and also examined three more witnesses namely DW2 Shiv
Shankar (husband of complainant), DW3 Anil Tiwari and DW4 Mahender Kumar
Verma. Arguments have been heard from both sides and record perused.
4\. Admittedly in this case two cheques Ex. CW1/1 and CW1/2 as mentioned above
were issued by the accused to the complainant. It is also an admitted position
in this case that both these cheques were dishonoured due to "insufficient
funds" on 16­10­2008. Complainant sent a legal notice Ex. CW1/5 to the accused
dated 24­10­2008 through Registered AD and UPC Ex. CW1/6 and 7 respectively.
It is also admitted position in this case that legal notice was received by
the accused. JUDGMENT/Rajender Vs. Manju Rani/CC NO. 35/01/US:138 N.I. Act
/Convicted/03.07.09/Page 2 of 14/DK Perusal of the evidence and the statement
Electronics Ltd. & Anr. Vs. National Panasonic India Ltd., 2009 (1) LRC 82
(SC). In the said case, it was held that issuance of notice would not by
itself is a cause of action but communication thereof does. The said judgement
is distinguishable since in the present case it is in an admitted position by
the accused that the notice was received by the accused on 28.10.2008 and
evidence has come on record that within fifteen days from the said date, the
cheque amount was not paid.
21\. Ld. counsel for the accused also placed reliance upon the case of K.S.
Bakshi Vs. State, Crl. M.C. No.4802/03 decided on 02.11.2007 by Hon'ble Delhi
High Court, to argue that where the cheque is given as a security, provisions
u/s.138 are not attracted. Again this judgement is distinguishable as in the
present case, the evidence has come that the cheque was not for security.
22\. In view of the above discussion, the case of the complainant stands
proved beyond reasonable doubt and the accused is found guilty and convicted
for the offence u/s 138 Negotiable Instrument Act for dishonour of the two
cheques in question and for not paying the cheque amount to the complainant
