Kerala High Court
K.D.Devarajan vs The Director General on 22 January, 2020
        WA.768 & 784/18               1
                   IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM
                                   PRESENT
                THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE K.VINOD CHANDRAN
                                      &
                      THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE V.G.ARUN
       WEDNESDAY, THE 22ND DAY OF JANUARY 2020 / 2ND MAGHA, 1941
                              WA.No.768 OF 2018
      AGAINST THE ORDER/JUDGMENT IN WPC 1086/2018 OF HIGH COURT OF
                                 KERALA
    APPELLANT/S:
          1         K.D.DEVARAJAN
                    S/O. LATE K.K DANDAPANI, AGED 55 YEARS,
                    PALLATHUPARAMBIL HOUSE, PANJIKKARA, MULAVUKADU P.O,
                    COCHIN 682 504(WORKING AS SARANG LASCAR)HEAD
                    QUARTERS, COAST GUARD DISTRICT NO. 4,KOCHI 4
          2         D.WINSTON
                    S/O. LATE DENNISON, AGED 55 YEARS,MALIKKAL HOUSE,
the employer is liable to compensate the employee or his legal
representatives, as the case may be, for the loss/injury sustained during the
course of employment.
18\. Having answered the contentions as above, we notice the directions in the
impugned judgment for ensuring the safety measures as well as the mandatory
requirements in the convention are observed as far as possible, as required in
Exhibit P12 notice. The respondents are also required to ensure that the
appellants are not in any way assigned duties to take control of the
ship/barge and that they shall be assigned the duty of only  WA.768 & 784/18
21 assisting the qualified and competent persons on board ICGS AB Urja Shrota
and not compelled to operate the Barge or do anything for which they are not
qualified or competent. The fact that the submission of both Counsel that, the
appellants were not compelled to be onboard the Urja Shrota during its voyage
from Kochi to Kavatatti and instead, were permitted to travel on passenger
ships is another relevant fact. The interest of the appellants having thus
been safe guarded, we see no reason to interfere with the impugned judgment.
                    S/O. LATE DENNISON, AGED 55 YEARS,MALIKKAL HOUSE,
                    MUNDAMVELI P.O, COCHIN 682 507(WORKING AS LASCAR I
                    CLASS)HEAD QUARTERS, COAST GUARD DISTRICT NO.
                    4,KOCHI 4
          3         VIJESH K
                    S/O. SHRI.KESAVAN, CHETTIKKATHU, KIZHAKKETHIL,
                    VALLIKUNNAM -P.O,ALEPPY-690 501(WORING AS LASCAR I
                    CLASS)HEAD QUARTERS, COAST GUARD DISTRICT NO. 4,
                    KOCHI-4
          4         SHASHI KUMAR OJHA
                    S/O. BAYAJI OJHA, C/O. PRADEEP P. RAJAN,XII/569/C
                    UPSTAIRIIND FLOOR, KOCHIN BAKEERY & CHIPS,NEAR
                    PANDIKUDY BUS STOP[,COCHIN 682 002(WORKING AS
                    LASCAR I CLASS)HEAD QUARTERS,COAST GUARD DISTRICT
                    NO. 4,KOCHI 4
                    BY ADV. SRI.T.SANJAY
    RESPONDENT/S:
          1         THE DIRECTOR GENERAL
                    COAST GUARD HEADQUARTERS, NATIONAL STADIUM COMPLEX,
                    NEW DELHI 100 001
        WA.768 & 784/18             2
          2      DISTRICT COMMANDER
                 HEADQUARTERS, COAST GUARD DISTRICT NO.4C/O. FLEET
                 MAIL OFFICE, KOCHI 682 004
          3      THE COMMANDANT
                 HEADQUARTERS, COAST GUARD DISTRICT NO. 4C/O. FLEET
                 MAIL OFFICE, KOCHI 682 004
          4      UNION OF INDIA
                 REPRESENTED BY ITS SECRETARY,MINISTRY OF DEFENCE,
                 SOUTH BLOCK,NEW DELHI 100 001
                 R1 BY ASSISTANT SOLICITOR GENERAL
                 R1-4 BY SRI.SUVIN R.MENON, CGC
         THIS WRIT APPEAL HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD ON 06-11-2019,
    ALONG WITH WA.784/2018, THE COURT ON 22-01-2020 DELIVERED THE
    FOLLOWING:
         WA.768 & 784/18                3
                   IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM
                                   PRESENT
                THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE K.VINOD CHANDRAN
                                       &
                      THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE V.G.ARUN
       WEDNESDAY, THE 22ND DAY OF JANUARY 2020 / 2ND MAGHA, 1941
                              WA.No.784 OF 2018
    AGAINST THE ORDER/JUDGMENT IN WPC 1085/2018 DATED 02-03-2018 OF
                         HIGH COURT OF KERALA
    APPELLANT/S:
          1         T.J. JOSEPH
                    WORKING AS ENGINE DRIVER, COAST GUARD DIST.NO.4,
                    KOCHI - 4, RESIDING AT THYPADATHU HOUSE, 18/1890,
                    PALLURUTHY P.O., COCHIN - 682 006.
          2         P.M. VALSAN
                    WORKING AS ENGINE DRIVER, COAST GUARD DIST.NO.4,
                    KOCHI - 4, RESIDING AT PATTATHIL HOUSE, KADAVANTHRA
                    P.O., COCHIN - 682 020.
                    BY ADVS.
                    SRI.T.SANJAY
                    SRI.R.REJI KUMAR
    RESPONDENT/S:
          1         THE DIRECTOR GENERAL, COAST GUARD HEADQUARTERS
                    NATIONAL STADIUM COMPLEX, NEW DELHI - 100 001.
          2         DISTRICT COMMANDER
                    HEADQUARTERS, COAST GUARD DISTRICT NO. 4, C/O.FLEET
                    MAIL OFFICE, KOCHI - 682 004.
          3         THE COMMANDANT
                    HEADQUARTERS, COAST GUARD DISTRICT NO. 4, C/O.FLEET
                    MAIL OFFICE, KOCHI - 682 004.
          4         UNION OF INDIA
                    REPRESENTED BY ITS SECRETARY, MINISTRY OF DEFENCE,
                    SOUTH BLOCK, NEW DELHI - 100 001.
        WA.768 & 784/18             4
                 R1-4 BY SRI.SUVIN R.MENON, CGC
         THIS WRIT APPEAL HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD ON 06-11-2019,
    ALONG WITH WA.768/2018, THE COURT ON 22-01-2020 DELIVERED THE
    FOLLOWING:
         WA.768 & 784/18               5
                K.VINOD CHANDRAN & V.G.ARUN, JJ.
                -----------------------------------------------
                       W.A.No.768 and 784 of 2018
                -----------------------------------------------
                    Dated this the 22nd day of January, 2020
                                  JUDGMENT
Arun, J.
The writ appeals are filed against a common judgment. W.A No.784 of 2018 is
against the judgment in W.P(C).No.1085 of 2018\. W.A.No.768 of 2018 is from
W.P.(C).No.1086 of 2018. The appellants/writ petitioners were/are working as
Engine Drivers and Sarang Lascar in the Indian Coast Guard. Under movement
order dated 9.1.2018, impugned in the writ petitions, the appellants were
deployed for temporary duty to Kavaratti Island, Union Territory of
Lakshadweep, on-board the Barge ICG AB Urja Shrota. The challenge was mainly
on the ground that the appellants were deployed without considering the fact
that they were not qualified or competent to work on-board ICG AB Urja Shrota,
an auxiliary barge weighing more than 325 tonnes and having engines of 850
BHP. According to the appellants, they  WA.768 & 784/18 6 were trained and
equipped to work in much smaller vessels and the compulsion to work on board a
huge Barge, would put their life to peril. Yet another contention was
regarding violation of the international covenants, which mandated deployment
of only qualified personnel on-board seagoing vessels.
2\. In elaboration of their contentions, the appellants had submitted that
after a brief training at the Shoft Shipyard in Baroch, Gujarat, where the ICG
AB Urja Shrota was built and commissioned, the appellants along with Coast
Guard officers had brought the Barge from Gujarat to Kochi. Thereafter, when
decision was taken to rebase ICG AB Urja Shrota to Kavaratti and to deploy the
appellants on-board the vessel for temporary duties during the voyage from
Kochi to Kavaratti and while the Barge was on for re-fuelling duties in and
around Kavaratti port, representations were submitted requesting to desist
from such illegal action. The representations having evoked no response, the
writ petitions were filed, contending that, competency of the appellants as
Engine Driver and Lascar was only in respect of small vessels plying within
the port area and not to navigate a huge Barge to Kavaratti, covering a
distance of 208 nautical miles  WA.768 & 784/18 7 through the high seas.
Reliance was placed on the provisions of the Merchant Shipping Act and the
International Convention on Standards of Training, Certification and
Watchkeeping for Seafarers, 1978 (for short, 'STCWC'), to contend that,
personnel without the requisite qualifications and certificate of competency
shall not be engaged to work on-board a seagoing vessel.
3\. The respondents opposed the contentions and submitted that the Indian
Coast Guard is entrusted with the task of ensuring the security of the
Maritime Zones of India and protecting national interest. The ICG AB Urja
Shrota was being rebased to Kavaratti in order to meet the fuelling
requirements of FPVs/IBS, patrolling the waters around the Lakshadweep
Islands. It was hence contended that the impugned movement order was issued in
public interest and does not warrant interference in exercise of jurisdiction
under Article 226 of the Constitution of India. It was submitted that there
would be a qualified team comprising of two officers, two subordinate officers
and four enrolled personnel with technical background and know how in the
respective field to navigate the Barge and that, in order to ensure safety of
the Barge and its crew, a Coast Guard  WA.768 & 784/18 8 Ship, ICGS Samarth,
was slotted to escort ICG AB Urja Shrota from Kochi to Kavaratti. That, the
work of the appellants and other civilian crew was only to assist the
qualified team. That, the appellants had been given training at the Shoft
Shipyard from 14.2.2017 to 6.5.2017, for adequately familiarising them with
the working of the Barge, so as equip them to assist the qualified crew on
board the Urja Shrota. It was contended that the provisions of the Merchant
Shipping Act or the conditions mentioned in the International Covenants are
not applicable for the Coast Guard, in view of the specific exemptions.
4\. The learned Single Judge, after elaborate consideration of the relevant
provisions of the Merchant shipping Act and the contention of the respondents
that the Barge would be in the independent charge of an Assistant Commandant
having full Coast Guard Watch keeping Certificate and that the covenants of
STCWC do not apply to seafarers serving on warships, naval auxiliaries or
other Government operated ships engaged in non- commercial service, set at
naught the challenge against being sent on-board, on the ground of want of
competency/training as provided in the STCW Convention. The respondents were
WA.768 & 784/18 9 however directed to ensure that safety measures as well as
the mandatory requirements of the STCW Convention are observed as far as
possible and that the appellants assigned with the duty of only assisting the
qualified and competent persons on-board the Urja Shrota and not compelled to
operate the Barge or to do anything for which they are not qualified and
competent. Based on the said findings and observations, the writ petition was
disposed of.
5\. The challenge against the impugned judgment is against the finding that
the STCW Convention is not applicable to ICG AB Urja Shrota, the vessel being
an auxiliary vessel of the Coast Guard. It is contended that the Maritime Zone
around the Lakshadweep Islands being the high seas, the respondents are bound
to comply with the mandate of STCW Convention. In support of the contention,
reliance is placed on Ext. P12 notice (the exhibits are referred to herein as
described in W.P(C).No.1085 of 2018) issued by the Ministry of Shipping,
prescribing the procedure for obtaining Certificate of Competency(Limited)
under Regulation II/2 STCW Convention, for Indian Naval Officers who have
served in the Executive  WA.768 & 784/18 10 Branch of Defence. Yet another
ground is that the appellants, who are civilian employees, are not insured for
voyage on sea or working in a seagoing ship, whereas the uniformed officers
and sailors are insured for amounts of Rs.75 lakhs and Rs.37.5 lakhs
respectively. It is pointed out that the insurance coverage of the appellants
under the Central Government Group Insurance Scheme is only for a paltry
amount of Rs.30,000/-.
6\. The issue emerging for consideration in the appeals is as to whether the
provisions of the Merchant Shipping Act and the STCW Convention are stricto
senso applicable to the auxiliary vessels of the Indian Coast Guard and if so,
whether the appellants would fall within the definition of 'seamen' or
'seafarers', as defined under the Merchant Shipping Act.
7\. For considering the issue, we have to first look at the relevant
provisions of the Merchant Shipping Act. Section 2 of the Act makes its
provisions applicable to any vessel which is registered in India or any vessel
which is required by the Act to be so registered. 'Seaman' is defined under
Section 3 (42) as any person (except the master, pilot or apprentice) employed
or  WA.768 & 784/18 11 engaged as a member of the crew of a ship under the
Act. As per Section 3 (41) 'Seagoing' in relation to a vessel, means a vessel
proceeding to sea, beyond inland waters or beyond waters declared to be smooth
or partially smooth by the Central Government by notification in the official
gazette. Vessel has been defined under Section 3 (55) to include any ship,
boat, sailing vessel, or other description of vessel used in navigation.
Section 73 dealing with the registration of Government ships stipulates that
the Government may, by notification in the official gazette, direct
registration of ships belonging to the Government, other than ships of the
Indian Navy to be registered as Indian Ships, subject to such rules as may be
made in this behalf. Section 75 A falling in Part VI dealing with certificate
of officers defines "convention" to mean the International Convention on
Standards of Training, Certification and Watchkeeping for Seafarers, 1978, as
amended from time to time. Under Section 76 of the Merchant Shipping Act,
every Indian ship, when going to sea from any port or place, shall be provided
with officers duly certified under the Act. Section 78 provides for
certificate of competency in accordance with the provisions of the Act to be
WA.768 & 784/18 12 granted to Masters, first and second mates, Engineers etc.
of different kinds of ships. Under Section 88 A (d) 'seafarer' means any
person who is employed or engaged or works in any capacity on board a sea
going ship, but does not include-
> (i) the employment or engagement or work on board in any capacity of any
> person in a ship of war;
> or
> (ii) any Government ship used for military or non- commercial purposes.
8\. Part VII of the Act contain provisions dealing with classification of
seaman, seafarer, maritime labour standards and prescription of minimum
manning scale.
9\. From the provisions aforementioned, it is clear that the ships/vessels
belonging to the Indian Coast Guard are liable to be registered under the Act
and consequently, the provisions of the Act would apply to all activities of
the ship, including the terms and conditions of employment of its crew and
officers.
10\. The first question is as to whether the ICG AB Urja Shrota is a 'seagoing
vessel' or not. Seagoing vessel is defined under Section 34(1) to be a vessel
proceeding to sea beyond inland waters or beyond waters declared to be smooth
or partially  WA.768 & 784/18 13 smooth waters by the Central Government by
notification in the official gazette. The term 'inland waters' is not defined
in the Merchant Shipping Act. In the Territorial Waters, Continental Shelf,
Exclusive Economic Zone And other Maritime Zones Act, 1976 (the Act of 1976),
the territorial waters, the continental shelf and the exclusive economic zone
are defined. The limit of the territorial waters being the line, every point
of which is at a distance of 12 nautical miles from the nearest point of the
appropriate baseline. The contiguous zone stretches up to a distance of 24
nautical mile from the baseline and the continental shelf up to a distance of
200 miles. The term 'inland waters' not being defined under the Act of 1976,
meaning of the term as available from the United Nations Convention on the Law
of the Sea is taken for guidance. Under Article 8 of Part II of the
Convention, 'internal waters' is described as the waters on the landward side
of the baseline of the territorial sea. As per Article 6, in the case of
islands situated on atolls or islands having fringing reefs, the baseline for
measuring the breadth of the territorial sea is the seaward low-water line of
the reef. As such, 'inland waters' as far as the Lakshadweep islands is
concerned,  WA.768 & 784/18 14 would be the waters from the landward side of
the baseline, the baseline being the fringing reefs. In that view of the
matter the lagoon in Lakshadweep would fall within the meaning of 'inland
waters'. Therefore, if the ICG AB Urja Shrota is anchored inside the
Lakshadweep lagoon at all times and used for re-fuelling inside the port, it
cannot be termed as a seagoing vessel. But, even according to the respondents,
the vessel supplies fuel/water to ships at anchorage outside the port, at
least on certain occasions. Therefore, the contention that the provisions of
the Merchant Shipping Act is not applicable to the ICG AB Urja Shrota on the
premise that it is not a seagoing vessel, cannot be accepted.
11\. The next contention to be addressed is regarding the requirement of
Certificate of competency to be obtained by all personnel on board a seagoing
vessel. Under Section 78, the requirement of obtaining certificates of
competency is limited to the officers, viz, masters, mates, engineers etc.
Exhibit P12 also deal with the procedure for obtaining certificate of
competency as 'Master of a Home-Trade Ship (below 3000 gross tonnage) limited
to service on the coast of India and its surrounding exclusive  WA.768 &
784/18 15 economic zone on offshore support vessel' under STCW 95 for
serving/retired Indian Naval Officers. Obviously, the appellants do not fall
within the category of Master of Home-Trade Ship. Therefore, Exhibit P12
cannot be pressed into service in support of the contention that the
deployment of the petitioners on board the Urja Shrota is in violation of the
Standard Operating Procedure.
12\. The next question is as to whether the appellants can be termed as either
'seamen' or 'seafarers'. To be termed as 'seamen', the appellants should be
employed or engaged as a member of the crew of the ICGS Urja Shrota. Such
engagement can only be on the basis of an agreement between the 'Master of the
ship' and the 'Seaman', as provided under Section 100 of the Act. The
appellants do not have a case that they had entered into any such agreement.
On the contrary, the specific contention is that they were sent on board the
Urja Shrota based on the impugned movement order. Hence, it can unhesitatingly
be held that the appellants do not fall within the definition of 'seamen'.
Going by the meaning of the term 'seafarer', any person employed or engaged or
working in any capacity on board  WA.768 & 784/18 16 a seagoing would be a
seafarer. But, there is a specific exclusion of persons employed or engaged or
working on board in any capacity in a ship of war or any Government ship used
for military or non-commercial purpose, from the definition. The ICG AB Urja
Shrota being a Government vessel used for the purpose of re-fuelling of
boats/ships/vessels of the Coast Guard, which is a non-commercial purpose, the
appellants stand excluded from the definition of 'seafarer' under the Act.
13\. The other contention urged is regarding the binding nature of the STCW
contention and other international treatises. The learned counsel for the
appellants contended that Article 51(c) of the Constitution of India, makes it
obligatory for the State to endeavour to foster respect for international law
and treaty obligations in the dealings of organised people with one another.
It is submitted that STCW Convention being an international treaty, the
Government of India is under a constitutional obligation to give effect to the
resolutions of the Convention. Reliance is placed on the decisions of the Apex
Court in Aban Loyd Chiles Off Shore Limited v. Union of India [(2008) 11 SCC
439], T.M.Godavarman Thirumulpad v.  WA.768 & 784/18 17 Union of India [(2012)
4 SCC 362], Commissioner of Customs v. G.M.Exports [(2016) 1 SCC 91] and
International Confederation of Societies of Authors and Composers v. Aditya
Pandey [(2017) 11 SCC 437], in support of this contention. Per contra, the
learned CGC would submit that international treaties would not have the force
of law unless and until they are enacted in the form of municipal laws. In
support of this contention, reliance is placed on the decision of the
Honourable Apex Court in State of Gujarat v. Vora Fiddali Badruddin
Mithibarwala and others [AIR 1964 SC 1043]. The conspectus of judicial opinion
emerging from the aforesaid decisions is that the international
treaties/conventions can be looked into and enforced if they are not in
conflict with the municipal law and can also be used to interpret municipal
laws so as to bring them in consonance with the international law.
14\. The STCW Convention of 1978 was convened with the desire to promote
safety of life and property at sea and the protection of the marine
environment by establishing a common agreement on the international standards
of training, certification and watchkeeping for seafarers. Admittedly, India
is a signatory  WA.768 & 784/18 18 to the convention. Article III of the STCW
Convention makes the resolutions of the Convention applicable to 'seafarers'
serving on
-board seagoing ships entitled to fly the flag of a party, except to those serving on board specified categories of ships/fishing vessels/yachts etc. Category A among the exceptions under Article III takes in warships, naval auxiliaries or other ships owned or operated by a State and engaged only on Governmental non-commercial services. Thus, even going by the STCW Convention, the appellants who are engaged in a non- commercial vessel, cannot be equated with seafarers. Of course, even in spite of the exemption, parties to the convention are required to ensure that the persons serving on board such ships meet the requirement of the convention, so far as is reasonable and practicable, by the adoption of appropriate measures not impairing the operations or operational capabilities of the exempted ships/vessels. 
15\. The learned counsel for the appellants put forward a contention that the
Lakshadweep Islands is situated in the high seas. The learned CGC countered
the argument with the submission that the ICG AB Urja Shrota is in the
category of an  WA.768 & 784/18 19 axillary support vessel and like any work
boat in the Coast Guard, is used only for supporting the operations of a
commissioned coast guard ship in the coastal waters and areas close to the
coast and therefore, engagement of the appellants on-board the Barge does not
violate the Standard Operating Procedures. It was also submitted that the
primary purpose of the Barge is to supply fuel and water to coast guard ships
berthed exclusively within the harbour and in exceptional cases to ships at
anchorage. A further submission was made that ICG AB Urja Shrota is berthed
inside the lagoon at Kavaratti Port and is expected to operate only within the
close proximities to the coast and inside the lagoon.
16\. The segregation of the seas surrounding the Indian subcontinent is
provided as per the Territorial Waters, Continental Shelf, Exclusive Economic
Zone And other Maritime Zones Act, 1976. Section 2 of the Maritime Zones Act
describes the limit in relation to the territorial waters, continental shelf,
the exclusive economic zone or and other maritime zones of India to be the
limit of such waters, shelf, or zone with reference to the mainland of India
as well as the individual or composite groups or  WA.768 & 784/18 20 groups of
islands constituting part of the territory of India. Therefore, like the
mainland, the waters around the Lakshadweep islands also fall under different
maritime zones like territorial waters, continental shelf, exclusive economic
zone etc. and hence the contention to the contrary raised by the learned
counsel for the appellants is rejected.
17\. The contention regarding absence of adequate insurance coverage is liable
to be rejected for the reason that the indemnification under a contract of
insurance is for the employer and even in the absence of such indemnification
the employer is liable to compensate the employee or his legal
representatives, as the case may be, for the loss/injury sustained during the
course of employment.
18\. Having answered the contentions as above, we notice the directions in the
impugned judgment for ensuring the safety measures as well as the mandatory
requirements in the convention are observed as far as possible, as required in
Exhibit P12 notice. The respondents are also required to ensure that the
appellants are not in any way assigned duties to take control of the
ship/barge and that they shall be assigned the duty of only  WA.768 & 784/18
21 assisting the qualified and competent persons on board ICGS AB Urja Shrota
and not compelled to operate the Barge or do anything for which they are not
qualified or competent. The fact that the submission of both Counsel that, the
appellants were not compelled to be onboard the Urja Shrota during its voyage
from Kochi to Kavatatti and instead, were permitted to travel on passenger
ships is another relevant fact. The interest of the appellants having thus
been safe guarded, we see no reason to interfere with the impugned judgment.
In the result the writ appeals are dismissed. No order as to costs.
Sd/-
K.VINOD CHANDRAN JUDGE Sd/-
V.G.ARUN JUDGE vgsx
the employer is liable to compensate the employee or his legal
representatives, as the case may be, for the loss/injury sustained during the
course of employment.
18\. Having answered the contentions as above, we notice the directions in the
impugned judgment for ensuring the safety measures as well as the mandatory
requirements in the convention are observed as far as possible, as required in
Exhibit P12 notice. The respondents are also required to ensure that the
appellants are not in any way assigned duties to take control of the
ship/barge and that they shall be assigned the duty of only  WA.768 & 784/18
21 assisting the qualified and competent persons on board ICGS AB Urja Shrota
and not compelled to operate the Barge or do anything for which they are not
qualified or competent. The fact that the submission of both Counsel that, the
appellants were not compelled to be onboard the Urja Shrota during its voyage
from Kochi to Kavatatti and instead, were permitted to travel on passenger
ships is another relevant fact. The interest of the appellants having thus
been safe guarded, we see no reason to interfere with the impugned judgment.
                    S/O. LATE DENNISON, AGED 55 YEARS,MALIKKAL HOUSE,
                    MUNDAMVELI P.O, COCHIN 682 507(WORKING AS LASCAR I
                    CLASS)HEAD QUARTERS, COAST GUARD DISTRICT NO.
                    4,KOCHI 4
          3         VIJESH K
                    S/O. SHRI.KESAVAN, CHETTIKKATHU, KIZHAKKETHIL,
                    VALLIKUNNAM -P.O,ALEPPY-690 501(WORING AS LASCAR I
                    CLASS)HEAD QUARTERS, COAST GUARD DISTRICT NO. 4,
                    KOCHI-4
          4         SHASHI KUMAR OJHA
                    S/O. BAYAJI OJHA, C/O. PRADEEP P. RAJAN,XII/569/C
                    UPSTAIRIIND FLOOR, KOCHIN BAKEERY & CHIPS,NEAR
                    PANDIKUDY BUS STOP[,COCHIN 682 002(WORKING AS
                    LASCAR I CLASS)HEAD QUARTERS,COAST GUARD DISTRICT
                    NO. 4,KOCHI 4
                    BY ADV. SRI.T.SANJAY
    RESPONDENT/S:
          1         THE DIRECTOR GENERAL
                    COAST GUARD HEADQUARTERS, NATIONAL STADIUM COMPLEX,
                    NEW DELHI 100 001
the employer is liable to compensate the employee or his legal
representatives, as the case may be, for the loss/injury sustained during the
course of employment.
18\. Having answered the contentions as above, we notice the directions in the
impugned judgment for ensuring the safety measures as well as the mandatory
requirements in the convention are observed as far as possible, as required in
Exhibit P12 notice. The respondents are also required to ensure that the
appellants are not in any way assigned duties to take control of the
ship/barge and that they shall be assigned the duty of only  WA.768 & 784/18
21 assisting the qualified and competent persons on board ICGS AB Urja Shrota
and not compelled to operate the Barge or do anything for which they are not
qualified or competent. The fact that the submission of both Counsel that, the
appellants were not compelled to be onboard the Urja Shrota during its voyage
from Kochi to Kavatatti and instead, were permitted to travel on passenger
ships is another relevant fact. The interest of the appellants having thus
been safe guarded, we see no reason to interfere with the impugned judgment.
                    S/O. LATE DENNISON, AGED 55 YEARS,MALIKKAL HOUSE,
                    MUNDAMVELI P.O, COCHIN 682 507(WORKING AS LASCAR I
                    CLASS)HEAD QUARTERS, COAST GUARD DISTRICT NO.
                    4,KOCHI 4
          3         VIJESH K
                    S/O. SHRI.KESAVAN, CHETTIKKATHU, KIZHAKKETHIL,
                    VALLIKUNNAM -P.O,ALEPPY-690 501(WORING AS LASCAR I
                    CLASS)HEAD QUARTERS, COAST GUARD DISTRICT NO. 4,
                    KOCHI-4
          4         SHASHI KUMAR OJHA
                    S/O. BAYAJI OJHA, C/O. PRADEEP P. RAJAN,XII/569/C
                    UPSTAIRIIND FLOOR, KOCHIN BAKEERY & CHIPS,NEAR
                    PANDIKUDY BUS STOP[,COCHIN 682 002(WORKING AS
                    LASCAR I CLASS)HEAD QUARTERS,COAST GUARD DISTRICT
                    NO. 4,KOCHI 4
                    BY ADV. SRI.T.SANJAY
    RESPONDENT/S:
          1         THE DIRECTOR GENERAL
                    COAST GUARD HEADQUARTERS, NATIONAL STADIUM COMPLEX,
                    NEW DELHI 100 001
the employer is liable to compensate the employee or his legal
representatives, as the case may be, for the loss/injury sustained during the
course of employment.
18\. Having answered the contentions as above, we notice the directions in the
impugned judgment for ensuring the safety measures as well as the mandatory
requirements in the convention are observed as far as possible, as required in
Exhibit P12 notice. The respondents are also required to ensure that the
appellants are not in any way assigned duties to take control of the
ship/barge and that they shall be assigned the duty of only  WA.768 & 784/18
21 assisting the qualified and competent persons on board ICGS AB Urja Shrota
and not compelled to operate the Barge or do anything for which they are not
qualified or competent. The fact that the submission of both Counsel that, the
appellants were not compelled to be onboard the Urja Shrota during its voyage
from Kochi to Kavatatti and instead, were permitted to travel on passenger
ships is another relevant fact. The interest of the appellants having thus
been safe guarded, we see no reason to interfere with the impugned judgment.
                    S/O. LATE DENNISON, AGED 55 YEARS,MALIKKAL HOUSE,
                    MUNDAMVELI P.O, COCHIN 682 507(WORKING AS LASCAR I
                    CLASS)HEAD QUARTERS, COAST GUARD DISTRICT NO.
                    4,KOCHI 4
          3         VIJESH K
                    S/O. SHRI.KESAVAN, CHETTIKKATHU, KIZHAKKETHIL,
                    VALLIKUNNAM -P.O,ALEPPY-690 501(WORING AS LASCAR I
                    CLASS)HEAD QUARTERS, COAST GUARD DISTRICT NO. 4,
                    KOCHI-4
          4         SHASHI KUMAR OJHA
                    S/O. BAYAJI OJHA, C/O. PRADEEP P. RAJAN,XII/569/C
                    UPSTAIRIIND FLOOR, KOCHIN BAKEERY & CHIPS,NEAR
                    PANDIKUDY BUS STOP[,COCHIN 682 002(WORKING AS
                    LASCAR I CLASS)HEAD QUARTERS,COAST GUARD DISTRICT
                    NO. 4,KOCHI 4
                    BY ADV. SRI.T.SANJAY
    RESPONDENT/S:
          1         THE DIRECTOR GENERAL
                    COAST GUARD HEADQUARTERS, NATIONAL STADIUM COMPLEX,
                    NEW DELHI 100 001
        WA.768 & 784/18             2
          2      DISTRICT COMMANDER
                 HEADQUARTERS, COAST GUARD DISTRICT NO.4C/O. FLEET
                 MAIL OFFICE, KOCHI 682 004
          3      THE COMMANDANT
                 HEADQUARTERS, COAST GUARD DISTRICT NO. 4C/O. FLEET
                 MAIL OFFICE, KOCHI 682 004
          4      UNION OF INDIA
                 REPRESENTED BY ITS SECRETARY,MINISTRY OF DEFENCE,
                 SOUTH BLOCK,NEW DELHI 100 001
                 R1 BY ASSISTANT SOLICITOR GENERAL
the employer is liable to compensate the employee or his legal
representatives, as the case may be, for the loss/injury sustained during the
course of employment.
18\. Having answered the contentions as above, we notice the directions in the
impugned judgment for ensuring the safety measures as well as the mandatory
requirements in the convention are observed as far as possible, as required in
Exhibit P12 notice. The respondents are also required to ensure that the
appellants are not in any way assigned duties to take control of the
ship/barge and that they shall be assigned the duty of only  WA.768 & 784/18
21 assisting the qualified and competent persons on board ICGS AB Urja Shrota
and not compelled to operate the Barge or do anything for which they are not
qualified or competent. The fact that the submission of both Counsel that, the
appellants were not compelled to be onboard the Urja Shrota during its voyage
from Kochi to Kavatatti and instead, were permitted to travel on passenger
ships is another relevant fact. The interest of the appellants having thus
been safe guarded, we see no reason to interfere with the impugned judgment.
                    S/O. LATE DENNISON, AGED 55 YEARS,MALIKKAL HOUSE,
                    MUNDAMVELI P.O, COCHIN 682 507(WORKING AS LASCAR I
                    CLASS)HEAD QUARTERS, COAST GUARD DISTRICT NO.
                    4,KOCHI 4
          3         VIJESH K
                    S/O. SHRI.KESAVAN, CHETTIKKATHU, KIZHAKKETHIL,
                    VALLIKUNNAM -P.O,ALEPPY-690 501(WORING AS LASCAR I
                    CLASS)HEAD QUARTERS, COAST GUARD DISTRICT NO. 4,
                    KOCHI-4
          4         SHASHI KUMAR OJHA
                    S/O. BAYAJI OJHA, C/O. PRADEEP P. RAJAN,XII/569/C
                    UPSTAIRIIND FLOOR, KOCHIN BAKEERY & CHIPS,NEAR
                    PANDIKUDY BUS STOP[,COCHIN 682 002(WORKING AS
                    LASCAR I CLASS)HEAD QUARTERS,COAST GUARD DISTRICT
                    NO. 4,KOCHI 4
                    BY ADV. SRI.T.SANJAY
    RESPONDENT/S:
          1         THE DIRECTOR GENERAL
                    COAST GUARD HEADQUARTERS, NATIONAL STADIUM COMPLEX,
                    NEW DELHI 100 001
        WA.768 & 784/18             2
          2      DISTRICT COMMANDER
                 HEADQUARTERS, COAST GUARD DISTRICT NO.4C/O. FLEET
                 MAIL OFFICE, KOCHI 682 004
          3      THE COMMANDANT
                 HEADQUARTERS, COAST GUARD DISTRICT NO. 4C/O. FLEET
                 MAIL OFFICE, KOCHI 682 004
          4      UNION OF INDIA
                 REPRESENTED BY ITS SECRETARY,MINISTRY OF DEFENCE,
                 SOUTH BLOCK,NEW DELHI 100 001
                 R1 BY ASSISTANT SOLICITOR GENERAL
the employer is liable to compensate the employee or his legal
representatives, as the case may be, for the loss/injury sustained during the
course of employment.
18\. Having answered the contentions as above, we notice the directions in the
impugned judgment for ensuring the safety measures as well as the mandatory
requirements in the convention are observed as far as possible, as required in
Exhibit P12 notice. The respondents are also required to ensure that the
appellants are not in any way assigned duties to take control of the
ship/barge and that they shall be assigned the duty of only  WA.768 & 784/18
21 assisting the qualified and competent persons on board ICGS AB Urja Shrota
and not compelled to operate the Barge or do anything for which they are not
qualified or competent. The fact that the submission of both Counsel that, the
appellants were not compelled to be onboard the Urja Shrota during its voyage
from Kochi to Kavatatti and instead, were permitted to travel on passenger
ships is another relevant fact. The interest of the appellants having thus
been safe guarded, we see no reason to interfere with the impugned judgment.
