Delhi District Court
State vs . Sucha Nand Bajaj on 14 August, 2013
Author: Sh. Devender Jangala
                                                   1
       IN THE COURT OF SH. D.K. JANGALA: ACMM/NW/ROHINI COURT/DELHI
    State Vs. Sucha Nand Bajaj 
    FIR No.  320/02
    PS:  Keshav Puram 
    U/s 63/68A Copyright Act 
    Case ID No. 02404R1002692003
                                       JUDGEMENT
    A) Sl. No. of the case                :        142/3
    B) The date of commission             :            06.09.2002
        of offence   
    C) The name of the complainant   :        SI Vinod Gandhi 
                                              IPR Section, EOW, 
                                              Crime Branch, New Delhi 
    D) The name & address of accused :       Sucha Nand Bajaj s/o Sh. Hari Ram 
                                              Bajaj
                                             R/o 67­C, Ayodhya Enclave, Sector 13, 
hand, the prosecution has claimed that the said premises was being used by the
accused for running the cable TV network.
12\. The accused was not found present at the spot at the time of raid. The
prosecution has not produced any evidence to connect the accused with the
commission of the alleged offences. The prosecution has not placed on record
any documentary or oral evidence to show that the accused was running cable TV
network from the said premises. The prosecution has also failed to produce on
record any material to show that in movie "Aankhen" was displayed on cable TV
network.
13\. Therefore, in view of the above discussion, I am of the considered
opinion that prosecution has miserably failed to prove its charge for
commission of the alleged offence punishable u/s 63/68A Copyright Act.
Accordingly, accused Sucha Nand Bajaj is acquitted for the charge framed FIR
No. 320/02 State Vs. Sucha Nand Bajaj Page No. 9/10  10 for the commission of
the offence punishable u/s 63/68A Copyright Act. His personal bond and surety
bond are extended for the period of six months u/s 437(A) Cr.P.C. File be
                                             R/o 67­C, Ayodhya Enclave, Sector 13, 
                                              Rohini, Delhi 
    E) Offences complained of             :            U/s 63/68A Copyright Act 
    F) The plea of accused                :            Pleaded not guilty
    G) Final order                        :            Acquitted
    H) The date of such order             :            14.08.2013
                 Date of Institution      :             31.10.03
                 Judgment reserved on :                23.07.13
                 Judgment announced on:                14.08.13
    FIR No. 320/02                 State Vs. Sucha Nand Bajaj                      Page No. 1/10
                                                       2
    THE BRIEF REASONS FOR THE JUDGEMENT:
1\. The present FIR was registered on the statement of SI Vinod Gandhi from
IPR Section, EOW, Crime Branch, New Delhi. The complainant alleged that on
06.09.02 on receipt of the secret information, the ACP IPR directed him to
conduct the raid. The complainant further alleged that thereafter a raiding
party was prepared under the supervision of Inspector D.P.Joshi and reached
near MCD Adarsh Vidhyalya, C­8 Block, Keshav Puram, Delhi. The complainant
further alleged that the information was shared to all the members of raiding
party and 4­5 public persons were requested to join the raiding party but none
agreed. The complainant alleged that they reached at one room in site no. S­1,
C­8, Shri Ram Market, Flyover Road, Keshav Puram Delhi at about 8.45 pm where
one Sh. Amit Sharma was found present. It is alleged that Sh. Amit Sharma
disclosed that room is used by Sucha Nand Bajaj owner of Bajaj Cables for
broadcasting the TV signals to the cable customers. The complainant further
alleged that in the said room electronics equipments used for
broadcast/receiving the TV signals were found alongwith television & VCD
players, one Hindi movie staring Amitabh Bachhan was found running on the
television in the room. The complainant further alleged that Sh. Amit Sharma
stated that Sucha Nand Bajaj had played this Hindi movie "Aankhen" through the
VCD player to the cable subscribers and left the room. It is alleged that
Hindi Movie 'Aankhen' was being telecasted through the cable network by
infringing the copyright Act. It is alleged that all the equipments were
seized and FIR No. 320/02 State Vs. Sucha Nand Bajaj Page No. 2/10  3 rukka
was prepared and FIR was got registered. It is alleged that offence punishable
u/s 63/68A Copyright Act is committed. It is stated that accused Sucha Nand
Bajaj was interrogated and arrested in this case. It is further reported that
the reel was taken for developing to the photographer but due to some
technical reason the same could not be developed.
2\. On completion of investigation charge sheet was filed and after completion
of necessary formalities the charge for the commission of the offence
punishable u/s 63/68A Copyright Act was framed upon the accused on 09.08.05 to
which accused pleaded not guilty and claimed trial.
3\. The provision to prove its case examined six witnesses. The relevant and
material extract of the evidence produced by the prosecution are as under:­
PW­1 Sh. Sh. Manoj Bakshi deposed that he was having four rooms at S­1/C­8,
Shri Ram Market, Keshav Puram, Delhi. He deposed that out of said four rooms,
one room was given on rent to accused Sucha Nand Bajaj. He deposed that there
was no written agreement between him and accused regarding tenancy.
During cross examination, PW­1 admitted that premises in question was used as
store room by the accused.
PW­2 ASI Jai Prakash is formal witness who recorded the FIR on the basis of
rukka. Copy of the FIR is proved as Ex.PW2/A.
PW­3 Sh. G.D.Mehta Proprietor of M/s Boby Arts produced power of attorney
executed on 23.03.02 by Mr. Vinod Doshi Producer of feature film Aankhey. Copy
of FIR No. 320/02 State Vs. Sucha Nand Bajaj Page No. 3/10  4 the same is
proved as Ex.PW3/A.
During cross examination, PW­3 admitted that police never met him in
connection of this case.
PW­4 Sh. Atul Kumar Public Relation Inspector Ashok Vihar Post Office deposed
that he has not brought the original certificate of registration of Sucha Nand
Bajaj bearing registration no. AVCVTC registered in the year 2002 from
06.06.02 to 05.06.03. It is further deposed that the said record has been
destroyed at the time of cleaning of the post office. The report of Senior
Post Master is proved as Ex.PW4/A.
PW­5 ASI Vinod Kumar deposed that on 06.09.02 he joined the raiding party with
SI Vinod Gandhi. He deposed that SI Vinod Gandhi stopped the taxi near MCD
Adarsh School in C­8 Block, Keshav Puram and requested 4­5 public persons to
join the raiding party but none agreed. He further deposed that without
wasting the time they proceeded for the spot and reached there at about 8.30
or 8.35 pm. PW­5 further deposed that the control room was situated at the
ground floor of the premises no. C­8, Keshav Puram. He further deposed that
when they entered into the said control room one person namely Amit Sharma was
found present there and he told that he was working as servant since 15 days
with Sucha Nand Bajaj. He further deposed that Sh. Amit Sharma disclosed that
Sucha Nand Bajaj is the owner of this control room and he was merely a
servant. It is stated that one cover of VCD with an inlay card of film
"Aankhen" and one CD of film "Aankhen" was FIR No. 320/02 State Vs. Sucha Nand
Bajaj Page No. 4/10  5 found. It is stated that CD of film "Aankhen" was being
played and Sh. Amit Sharma disclosed that CD was started by Sucha Nand Bajaj
about half an hour ago. PW­5 further deposed that all the equipments were
seized and taken into police possession vide seizure memo Ex.PW5/A. PW­5
further deposed that search for the accused was made but he could not be
traced out. PW­5 further deposed that rukka was prepared and the FIR was got
registered. PW­5 correctly identified the case property. It is pertinent to
mention that articles were produced in the Court in unsealed condition.
During cross examination, PW­5 admitted that the members of the raiding party
were briefed on the road near MCD School. PW­5 stated that he can not tell
about the procedure/working/technicalities to broadcast the cable network for
displaying the movie. It is stated that sign board was reflecting the name as
Bajaj Cable.
PW­6 Inspector Vinod Gandhi deposed that on 06.09.02 he was posted as SI in
IPR Section EOW. He deposed that on receipt of secret information a raiding
party was prepared and they went to the spot. He deposed that they requested
7­8 public persons to join the investigation but none agreed. PW­6 deposed
that they reached the premises of Bajaj Cable at about 8.30 pm where one boy
namely Amit Sharma met them. He deposed that they saw one TV, VCD and other
equipments necessary for broadcasting the movie were lying there and one movie
namely "Aankhen" was found played in TV. It is further deposed that said
person Amit FIR No. 320/02 State Vs. Sucha Nand Bajaj Page No. 5/10  6 Sharma
informed that the owner of M/s Bajaj Cables was Sucha Nand Bajaj who had
started the movie and went away prior to just half an hour. PW­6 deposed that
all the articles lying there were seized. PW­6 correctly identified the case
property.
During cross examination, PW­6 admitted that he had no expertise in
technicalities of the functioning of equipments connected with VCD. It is
stated that he can not tell frequency on which cable network is displayed. It
is denied that accused is falsely implicated in the present case.
4\. The statement of accused recorded u/s 313 Cr.P.C whereby the accused
denied the story of prosecution and stated that he is falsely implicated in
the present case.
5\. I have carefully perused the material on record and have gone through the
submissions of Ld. APP for the state and Ld. Counsel for the accused.
6\. It is submitted by Ld. APP for the state that in the present case, PW­5
and PW­6 are the recovery witnesses. It is submitted that both the PWs have
correctly identified by the accused and case property, therefore, it is prayed
that accused may kindly be convicted for the commission of the alleged
offences.
7\. On the other hand it is submitted by Ld. Counsel for the accused that
accused is falsely implicated in the present case and there is no material on
record against the accused. It is stated that PW­3 Sh. G.D.Mehta owner of the
copyright has admitted that he never made any complaint against the accused
for telecasting of movie. It is stated that PW­5 ASI Vinod Kumar and PW­6
Inspector Vinod Gandhi FIR No. 320/02 State Vs. Sucha Nand Bajaj Page No. 6/10
7 are the members of raiding party but there appears material contradiction in
their testimonies. It is stated that both the witness have admitted that they
are not the technical expert and they are not aware about the instruments. It
is stated that prosecution witnesses have deposed that the alleged raid was
conducted at the control room of cable network owned by accused Sucha Nand
Bajaj but the PW­1 Sh. Manoj Bakshi owner of the said premises has deposed
that the accused was using the same for store room purpose. It is further
stated that the alleged employee Sh. Amit Sharma was not examined by the
police. It is stated that confessional statement made by Sh. Amit Sharma is
not admissible.
8\. In the present case it is alleged against the accused Sucha Nand Bajaj
that on 06.09.2002 at about 8.30 or 8.30 pm he was found running and
telecasting pirated Hindi movie namely "Aankhen" on his cable TV and he was
found in illegal possession of VCD which did not have the details as required
u/s 52A of Copyright Act. It is alleged that the accused has committed the
offence punishable u/s 63/68A of Copyright Act.
9\. The prosecution has examined six PWs to prove the charge. PW­1 Sh. Manoj
Bakshi is the owner of said premises where the raid was conducted. PW­2 ASI
Jai Prakash is formal witness who recorded the FIR. PW­3 Sh. G.D.Mehta is the
proprietor of M/s Body Art International and attorney of the owner of the
Copyright. PW­4 Sh. Atal Kumar is also formal witness. In the present case,
the prosecution has also examined two witnesses namely PW­5 ASI Vinod Kumar
and PW­6 FIR No. 320/02 State Vs. Sucha Nand Bajaj Page No. 7/10  8 Inspector
Vinod Gandhi who are the recovery witnesses. PW­5 and PW­6 in their
testimonies have deposed that they conducted the raid at the premises S­1/C­8,
Keshav Puram at about 8.30 pm. Both the witnesses have deposed that they have
conducted the raid and one person namely Sh. Amit Sharma was found in
possession of 'VCD' and film "Aankhen" was being displayed on cable TV
network. The present accused was arrested and was being charge sheeted on the
disclosure statement of Sh. Amit Sharma. The testimony of PW Sh. Amit Sharma
was essential to connect the accused with the commission of the alleged
offence. It is admitted case of the prosecution that accused was not found
present at the spot at the time of raid. The prosecution has not placed on
record any other evidence to connect the accused Sucha Nand Bajaj for
commission of the alleged offence. The prosecution has failed to bring
anything on record to show the actual possession of the accused. The relevant
witness i.e Sh. Amit Sharma who disclosed the name of accused has not been
examined by the prosecution. The accused was arrested in the present case only
on disclosure of Sh. Amit Sharma who disclosed to the raiding party that the
premises being owned and operated by the present accused. The non­examination
of Sh. Amit Sharma by the prosecution is fatal for the case of the
prosecution.
10\. It is also pertinent to mention that the prosecution has not produced any
evidence to show that the movie "Aankhen" was being displayed in cable TV
network. No witness to this effect has been examined or cited by the
prosecution FIR No. 320/02 State Vs. Sucha Nand Bajaj Page No. 8/10  9 that
movie was being displayed on cable TV network. The PW­5 and PW­6 in their
cross examination have admitted that they have no knowledge regarding working
of cable TV network/system. Neither any expert witness is examined by the
prosecution nor any witness is produced by the prosecution to show that film
"Aankhen" was being displayed on cable TV network.
11\. The PW­1 Sh. Manoj Bakshi owner of the premises has also deposed contrary
to the story of the prosecution. PW­1 in his cross examination has deposed
that premises was being used by the accused for store purpose. On the other
hand, the prosecution has claimed that the said premises was being used by the
accused for running the cable TV network.
12\. The accused was not found present at the spot at the time of raid. The
prosecution has not produced any evidence to connect the accused with the
commission of the alleged offences. The prosecution has not placed on record
any documentary or oral evidence to show that the accused was running cable TV
network from the said premises. The prosecution has also failed to produce on
record any material to show that in movie "Aankhen" was displayed on cable TV
network.
13\. Therefore, in view of the above discussion, I am of the considered
opinion that prosecution has miserably failed to prove its charge for
commission of the alleged offence punishable u/s 63/68A Copyright Act.
Accordingly, accused Sucha Nand Bajaj is acquitted for the charge framed FIR
No. 320/02 State Vs. Sucha Nand Bajaj Page No. 9/10  10 for the commission of
the offence punishable u/s 63/68A Copyright Act. His personal bond and surety
bond are extended for the period of six months u/s 437(A) Cr.P.C. File be
consigned to record room after completion of necessary formalities.
    Announced in the open Court                    (DEVENDER KR. JANGALA)
    today on 14.08.2013                            ACMM (N/W), ROHINI, DELHI
    FIR No. 320/02                 State Vs. Sucha Nand Bajaj                Page No. 10/10
hand, the prosecution has claimed that the said premises was being used by the
accused for running the cable TV network.
12\. The accused was not found present at the spot at the time of raid. The
prosecution has not produced any evidence to connect the accused with the
commission of the alleged offences. The prosecution has not placed on record
any documentary or oral evidence to show that the accused was running cable TV
network from the said premises. The prosecution has also failed to produce on
record any material to show that in movie "Aankhen" was displayed on cable TV
network.
13\. Therefore, in view of the above discussion, I am of the considered
opinion that prosecution has miserably failed to prove its charge for
commission of the alleged offence punishable u/s 63/68A Copyright Act.
Accordingly, accused Sucha Nand Bajaj is acquitted for the charge framed FIR
No. 320/02 State Vs. Sucha Nand Bajaj Page No. 9/10  10 for the commission of
the offence punishable u/s 63/68A Copyright Act. His personal bond and surety
bond are extended for the period of six months u/s 437(A) Cr.P.C. File be
                                             R/o 67­C, Ayodhya Enclave, Sector 13, 
                                              Rohini, Delhi 
    E) Offences complained of             :            U/s 63/68A Copyright Act 
    F) The plea of accused                :            Pleaded not guilty
    G) Final order                        :            Acquitted
    H) The date of such order             :            14.08.2013
                 Date of Institution      :             31.10.03
                 Judgment reserved on :                23.07.13
                 Judgment announced on:                14.08.13
    FIR No. 320/02                 State Vs. Sucha Nand Bajaj                      Page No. 1/10
                                                       2
    THE BRIEF REASONS FOR THE JUDGEMENT:
1\. The present FIR was registered on the statement of SI Vinod Gandhi from
IPR Section, EOW, Crime Branch, New Delhi. The complainant alleged that on
06.09.02 on receipt of the secret information, the ACP IPR directed him to
conduct the raid. The complainant further alleged that thereafter a raiding
party was prepared under the supervision of Inspector D.P.Joshi and reached
near MCD Adarsh Vidhyalya, C­8 Block, Keshav Puram, Delhi. The complainant
further alleged that the information was shared to all the members of raiding
party and 4­5 public persons were requested to join the raiding party but none
hand, the prosecution has claimed that the said premises was being used by the
accused for running the cable TV network.
12\. The accused was not found present at the spot at the time of raid. The
prosecution has not produced any evidence to connect the accused with the
commission of the alleged offences. The prosecution has not placed on record
any documentary or oral evidence to show that the accused was running cable TV
network from the said premises. The prosecution has also failed to produce on
record any material to show that in movie "Aankhen" was displayed on cable TV
network.
13\. Therefore, in view of the above discussion, I am of the considered
opinion that prosecution has miserably failed to prove its charge for
commission of the alleged offence punishable u/s 63/68A Copyright Act.
Accordingly, accused Sucha Nand Bajaj is acquitted for the charge framed FIR
No. 320/02 State Vs. Sucha Nand Bajaj Page No. 9/10  10 for the commission of
the offence punishable u/s 63/68A Copyright Act. His personal bond and surety
bond are extended for the period of six months u/s 437(A) Cr.P.C. File be
                                             R/o 67­C, Ayodhya Enclave, Sector 13, 
                                              Rohini, Delhi 
    E) Offences complained of             :            U/s 63/68A Copyright Act 
    F) The plea of accused                :            Pleaded not guilty
    G) Final order                        :            Acquitted
    H) The date of such order             :            14.08.2013
                 Date of Institution      :             31.10.03
                 Judgment reserved on :                23.07.13
                 Judgment announced on:                14.08.13
    FIR No. 320/02                 State Vs. Sucha Nand Bajaj                      Page No. 1/10
                                                       2
    THE BRIEF REASONS FOR THE JUDGEMENT:
1\. The present FIR was registered on the statement of SI Vinod Gandhi from
IPR Section, EOW, Crime Branch, New Delhi. The complainant alleged that on
06.09.02 on receipt of the secret information, the ACP IPR directed him to
conduct the raid. The complainant further alleged that thereafter a raiding
party was prepared under the supervision of Inspector D.P.Joshi and reached
near MCD Adarsh Vidhyalya, C­8 Block, Keshav Puram, Delhi. The complainant
further alleged that the information was shared to all the members of raiding
party and 4­5 public persons were requested to join the raiding party but none
hand, the prosecution has claimed that the said premises was being used by the
accused for running the cable TV network.
12\. The accused was not found present at the spot at the time of raid. The
prosecution has not produced any evidence to connect the accused with the
commission of the alleged offences. The prosecution has not placed on record
any documentary or oral evidence to show that the accused was running cable TV
network from the said premises. The prosecution has also failed to produce on
record any material to show that in movie "Aankhen" was displayed on cable TV
network.
13\. Therefore, in view of the above discussion, I am of the considered
opinion that prosecution has miserably failed to prove its charge for
commission of the alleged offence punishable u/s 63/68A Copyright Act.
Accordingly, accused Sucha Nand Bajaj is acquitted for the charge framed FIR
No. 320/02 State Vs. Sucha Nand Bajaj Page No. 9/10  10 for the commission of
the offence punishable u/s 63/68A Copyright Act. His personal bond and surety
bond are extended for the period of six months u/s 437(A) Cr.P.C. File be
                                             R/o 67­C, Ayodhya Enclave, Sector 13, 
                                              Rohini, Delhi 
    E) Offences complained of             :            U/s 63/68A Copyright Act 
    F) The plea of accused                :            Pleaded not guilty
    G) Final order                        :            Acquitted
    H) The date of such order             :            14.08.2013
                 Date of Institution      :             31.10.03
                 Judgment reserved on :                23.07.13
                 Judgment announced on:                14.08.13
    FIR No. 320/02                 State Vs. Sucha Nand Bajaj                      Page No. 1/10
                                                       2
    THE BRIEF REASONS FOR THE JUDGEMENT:
1\. The present FIR was registered on the statement of SI Vinod Gandhi from
IPR Section, EOW, Crime Branch, New Delhi. The complainant alleged that on
06.09.02 on receipt of the secret information, the ACP IPR directed him to
conduct the raid. The complainant further alleged that thereafter a raiding
party was prepared under the supervision of Inspector D.P.Joshi and reached
near MCD Adarsh Vidhyalya, C­8 Block, Keshav Puram, Delhi. The complainant
further alleged that the information was shared to all the members of raiding
party and 4­5 public persons were requested to join the raiding party but none
agreed. The complainant alleged that they reached at one room in site no. S­1,
C­8, Shri Ram Market, Flyover Road, Keshav Puram Delhi at about 8.45 pm where
one Sh. Amit Sharma was found present. It is alleged that Sh. Amit Sharma
disclosed that room is used by Sucha Nand Bajaj owner of Bajaj Cables for
broadcasting the TV signals to the cable customers. The complainant further
alleged that in the said room electronics equipments used for
broadcast/receiving the TV signals were found alongwith television & VCD
players, one Hindi movie staring Amitabh Bachhan was found running on the
television in the room. The complainant further alleged that Sh. Amit Sharma
stated that Sucha Nand Bajaj had played this Hindi movie "Aankhen" through the
VCD player to the cable subscribers and left the room. It is alleged that
hand, the prosecution has claimed that the said premises was being used by the
accused for running the cable TV network.
12\. The accused was not found present at the spot at the time of raid. The
prosecution has not produced any evidence to connect the accused with the
commission of the alleged offences. The prosecution has not placed on record
any documentary or oral evidence to show that the accused was running cable TV
network from the said premises. The prosecution has also failed to produce on
record any material to show that in movie "Aankhen" was displayed on cable TV
network.
13\. Therefore, in view of the above discussion, I am of the considered
opinion that prosecution has miserably failed to prove its charge for
commission of the alleged offence punishable u/s 63/68A Copyright Act.
Accordingly, accused Sucha Nand Bajaj is acquitted for the charge framed FIR
No. 320/02 State Vs. Sucha Nand Bajaj Page No. 9/10  10 for the commission of
the offence punishable u/s 63/68A Copyright Act. His personal bond and surety
bond are extended for the period of six months u/s 437(A) Cr.P.C. File be
                                             R/o 67­C, Ayodhya Enclave, Sector 13, 
                                              Rohini, Delhi 
    E) Offences complained of             :            U/s 63/68A Copyright Act 
    F) The plea of accused                :            Pleaded not guilty
    G) Final order                        :            Acquitted
    H) The date of such order             :            14.08.2013
                 Date of Institution      :             31.10.03
                 Judgment reserved on :                23.07.13
                 Judgment announced on:                14.08.13
    FIR No. 320/02                 State Vs. Sucha Nand Bajaj                      Page No. 1/10
                                                       2
    THE BRIEF REASONS FOR THE JUDGEMENT:
1\. The present FIR was registered on the statement of SI Vinod Gandhi from
IPR Section, EOW, Crime Branch, New Delhi. The complainant alleged that on
06.09.02 on receipt of the secret information, the ACP IPR directed him to
conduct the raid. The complainant further alleged that thereafter a raiding
party was prepared under the supervision of Inspector D.P.Joshi and reached
near MCD Adarsh Vidhyalya, C­8 Block, Keshav Puram, Delhi. The complainant
further alleged that the information was shared to all the members of raiding
party and 4­5 public persons were requested to join the raiding party but none
agreed. The complainant alleged that they reached at one room in site no. S­1,
C­8, Shri Ram Market, Flyover Road, Keshav Puram Delhi at about 8.45 pm where
one Sh. Amit Sharma was found present. It is alleged that Sh. Amit Sharma
disclosed that room is used by Sucha Nand Bajaj owner of Bajaj Cables for
broadcasting the TV signals to the cable customers. The complainant further
alleged that in the said room electronics equipments used for
broadcast/receiving the TV signals were found alongwith television & VCD
players, one Hindi movie staring Amitabh Bachhan was found running on the
television in the room. The complainant further alleged that Sh. Amit Sharma
stated that Sucha Nand Bajaj had played this Hindi movie "Aankhen" through the
VCD player to the cable subscribers and left the room. It is alleged that
hand, the prosecution has claimed that the said premises was being used by the
accused for running the cable TV network.
12\. The accused was not found present at the spot at the time of raid. The
prosecution has not produced any evidence to connect the accused with the
commission of the alleged offences. The prosecution has not placed on record
any documentary or oral evidence to show that the accused was running cable TV
network from the said premises. The prosecution has also failed to produce on
record any material to show that in movie "Aankhen" was displayed on cable TV
network.
13\. Therefore, in view of the above discussion, I am of the considered
opinion that prosecution has miserably failed to prove its charge for
commission of the alleged offence punishable u/s 63/68A Copyright Act.
Accordingly, accused Sucha Nand Bajaj is acquitted for the charge framed FIR
No. 320/02 State Vs. Sucha Nand Bajaj Page No. 9/10  10 for the commission of
the offence punishable u/s 63/68A Copyright Act. His personal bond and surety
bond are extended for the period of six months u/s 437(A) Cr.P.C. File be
