Delhi High Court
George V. Records, Sarl vs Kiran Jogani And Anr. on 11 March, 2004
Equivalent citations: 2004 (28) PTC 347 Del
Author: C Mahajan
Bench: C Mahajan
JUDGMENT C.K. Mahajan, J.
1\. By this order I propose to dispose of plaintiff application being IA
3812/2003 under Order 39 Rule 1 and 2 CPC and defendants' application being IA
4665/2003 under Order 39 Rule 4 CPC for vacation for exparte ad-interim
injunction granted by this Court 1st April, 2003.
2\. This Court on consideration of documents and material on record, granted
an ad-interim ex-parte injunction restraining the defendants from reproducing,
replicating, distributing, manufacturing, selling offering for sale,
advertising, directly or indirectly dealing in any manner in music albums
under the trade mark 'BUDDHA-BAR'.
3\. The defendant is aggrieved by the said order and hence his application
under Order 39 Rule 4 CPC
4\. It is the plaintiff's case that the plaintiff is proprietor of the
trademark BUDDHA-BAR being used in relation to music albums in several
countries around the world since the year 1999. The mark was registered in
law. It is indeed a sad reality that the trial of the case does not reach
hearing for several years. Therefore, at the interim stage itself if the court
is prima facie satisfied that the plaintiff is the prior adopter/user and
registered proprietor of the trademark and the defendant's adoption is
dishonest, not granting an injunction would amount to encouraging the tainted
and dishonest to seek benefit of the delay in the disposal of the suit.
Refusal of injunction shall result in irreparable injury to the plaintiff as
already observed that the defendant's adoption of the trademark is not honest.
Plaintiff in these circumstances would be entitled to injunction.
29\. In view of the aforesaid discussion, I am satisfied that there is
sufficient material on record to prima facie establish the reputation,
goodwill and distinctive-ness of the plaintiff in relation to the music albums
under the mark BUDDHA BAR internationally and spill over the reputation into
India. The plaintiff must succeed in the present application. The plaintiff's
application under Order 39 Rules 1 and 2 CPC is allowed. The injunction is
confirmed. The application of the defendant under Order 39 Rule 4 CPC is
countries around the world since the year 1999. The mark was registered in
many countries in Class 9 and 41. The mark was first adopted and used in the
year 1996 by Plaintiff's affiliate company George V. Restauration. In the said
restaurant music was played by well-known disc jockeys, which was compiled
into CDs. These discs were sold by the plaintiff under the trade mark BUDDHA-
BAR since 1999 pursuant to agreements entered into between the plaintiff and
Chall'O Music International granting license to the Chall'O Music to produce a
double compilation of world music under the brand name BUDDHA-BAR. The
trademark BUDDHA-BAR in respect of music albums was registered under number
00/3005110 on 3rd February, 2000 in France and was also registered in all the
EEC countries. The plaintiff claims that it's reputation generated across the
world spilled over to India and the plaintiff's mark became distinctive of the
plaintiff's goods and the same were identified as goods of the plaintiff's.
Rights were given to Wagrain for distribution of the albums, who in turn
appointed Worldwide Music in India as sub-distributor for making CD
compilation in India under the mark BUDDHA-BAR. Third series of BUDDHA-BAR was
released in France in March 2001 and in India on 11th December, 2001. The
reputation of the plaintiff spilled over on account of news items in TIME
Magazine, New York Times, The Times, Evening Standard, ES Magazine, Detroit
News and Free Press, Daily Herald, Las Vegas Review Journal. Several Indian
newspapers and magazines in India also wrote in their columns of the
reputation and goodwill generated by the mark BUDDHA-BAR in relation to music
albums. Indian celebrities and the media also publicized the popularity of
mark BUDDHA-BAR in relation to music albums. Television coverage received on
satellite channels banned into India in June, July, 2001 of the fashion show
of the designer Ritu Beri brought awareness of the mark BUDDHA-BAR in India.
The plaintiff contends that the adoption of the identical trademark by the
defendants is patently dishonest and is likely to create confusion and
deception in the minds of the public causing the defendant's goods to be
associated or identified as the goods of the plaintiff.
5\. Reliance was placed on the decisions reported as Chennamsetty Rama Murthy
v. Gattu Venkateswarlu and Anr., 2001 (2) CCC 439 (A.P.), The Fleischmann
Distilling Corporation v. Maier Brewing Company, 136 USPQ 508, M/s, Midas
Hygiene Industries P. Ltd. v. Sudhir Bhatia, CA No, 107, 2002 order of the
Supreme Court dated 22.1.2004, Balram Prasad Agarwal v. State of Bihar, , Haw
Par Bros, International Ltd. v. Tiger Balm Co. (P) Ltd. and Ors. (DB) and
Indian Shaving Products v. Giff Pack, 1998 PTC (18) 698.
6\. The defendant contends that plaintiff is not entitled to continuation of
adinterim injunction as he has failed to establish proprietary rights in the
mark BUDDHA-BAR because restaurant business was owned by its affiliate
company, who is not a party in the present suit. The plaintiff failed to prove
user for the years 1999 and 2000 since such user is by Claude Challe of
Ghall'O Music. The plaintiff has failed to establish user rights in India and
the first invoice on record is of 21st February, 2002 and this is after
releasing of defendants' album in January, 2002. Reliance placed on newspaper
reports and magazines etc. do not further the case of the plaintiff as the
material relied upon by the plaintiff is not admissible in evidence and is
hearsay evidence, BUDDHA-BAR has been used by third party both in relation to
the restaurant and music business. The plaintiff is not entitled to the
discretionary remedy of injunction as there is a delay in instituting the suit
in as much as 14 months. It is further contended that CDs of the plaintiff do
not bear the Plaintiff's name for the earlier albums BUDDHA-BAR and BUDDHA-BAR
II, therefore, consumers are unable to associate the product with the
plaintiff. The mark cannot be distinctive of the plaintiff. The plaintiff has
failed to establish that adoption and use is prior to mark of the defendant.
Trade activity of restaurant business is completely different from business of
music albums. There is no trade connections between two trading activities.
The first album was released by Chall'O Music in 1999 and 2000 and not by the
plaintiff. The plaintiff has failed to produce any evidence showing the use of
the mark in the country of its origin, internationally or in India. Newspapers
reports cannot be relied upon. The most of the documents filed by the
plaintiff are of ^ no assistance to the plaintiff.
7\. I have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the documents on
record.
8\. It is settled law that passing off is an action of deceit where the
defendant attempts to pass of his goods as those of the Plaintiff's. In
Advocate's case Lord Diplock laid down the characteristics for a valid cause
of action in passing off namely there must be a mis-representation made in the
course of trade to prospective customers of his or ultimate consumers of goods
or services supplied by him which is calculated to injure the business of
goodwill of another trader and which causes actual damage to the business or
goodwill of the trader by whom the action is brought.
9\. In order to succeed the plaintiff must establish prior adoption and use of
the mark and on account of user the mark has acquired a reputation and
goodwill and become and distinctive of the plaintiff's goods in the country of
origin. The mark on account of use has acquired the status of well-
known/famous trade mark internationally and the reputation spilled over to
India prior to the adoption of the mark by the defendant. The plaintiff must
show a connection in the course of trade between the goods and the plaintiff
and that use of identical or deceptively similar mark by the defendant is
calculated to deceive or cause confusion leading the purchaser to buy the
goods of the defendant considering them to those of the plaintiff.
10\. The reputation claimed by the plaintiff is on account of news items in
several international newspapers such as Time Magazines, New York Times, The
Times, Evening Standard, PS Magazine, Detroit News and Fees Press, Daily
Heralds, Las Vegas Review Journal, who devoted their column to BUDDHA BAR
restaurant and BUDDHA BAR music albums and both were linked to high fashion
and to celebrities. These publications have wide circulation abroad and in
India and moreover the circulation of these news items were prior to February,
2002. Several Indian Newspapers and magazines such as Times of India, Mid Day,
The Hindustan Times, Indian Express, The Hindu etc. spoke of the international
renown of mark BUDDHA BAR. In connection with the restaurant and music albums
and praised their high quality of music linking it with well-known
celebrities. The Indian Press/Media coverage of the mark BUDDHA BAR and the
music associated therewith suggest spill-over transborder reputation into
India. The contribution by Indian artists of renown like Anaida to BUDDHA-BAR
albums prior to February, 2002 as well as interviews of these artists in local
newspapers extolling the virtue of the opportunity to participate in the
BUDDHA-BAR experience and music and the television coverage received on
satellite television channels such as FTV, beamed into Indian in June-July,
2001 of the fashion show held by designer Ritu Beri in the BUDDHA BAR
restaurant in Paris, which brought awareness of the mark BUDDHA BAR. In India
as well as in relation to music albums. The plaintiff placed on record a large
number of documents by way of articles, pictures, interviews and write up to
establish spill over reputation extending right up to the date of the suit. It
does not make any difference in case the said items are downloaded from the
internet when actual excerpts of news items appeared in original publications.
The plaintiff's case is that in an action for passing off and trans-border
reputation, it is not necessary for the plaintiff to show that he was trading
within, the country. The admission of the reputation of the owner of the brand
names in its advertisements amounts to user of the same. The plaintiff has
been selling CD's since 1999 in abroad and these music albums are in demand
abroad. Circulation of the music albums as internationally recognised as would
be evidence from the various articles in the journals and newspapers,
magazines copies whereof have been placed on record. There is spate of Indian
publications and foreign publications on record where the mark BUDDHA BAR and
music albums recognising the reputation and goodwill of the plaintiff in the
mark BUDDHA-BAR and music albums and its popularity in foreign country, which
spilled over into India. The music albums have also been sold through
internet.
11\. What is sought to be contended by the defendant is that the plaintiff has
failed to establish proprietary rights over the trademark BUDDHA-BAR as the
restaurant business is own by its affiliate, who is not party to the present
suit and therefore user of 1996 cannot be taken into account. The plaintiff
has not produced sufficient evidence form the year 1999-2000 as the said user
is not of the plaintiff but by Claude Challe of Chall'O Music. The plaintiff
is violating the provisions of Section 52(a) of the Copyright Act by not
disclosing the name, address of manufacture, copyright owners and year of
publication. The plaintiff has produced first invoice dated 21st February,
2002, which is after the defendant's release of album in January, 2002. The
documents filed by the plaintiff being in the nature of newspapers reports are
not admissible in evidence and cannot therefore be relied upon. The present
suit has been filed after 14 months of delay and as such the plaintiff is not
entitled for discretionary relief of injunction.
12\. The contention of the defendant that the plaintiff has not established
proprietary rights to the mark BUDDHA BAR as the restaurant business was owned
by its affiliate, who was not a party to the suit is without force. There is
sufficient evidence produced on record to show that the plaintiff was the user
of the mark BUDDHA BAR in relation to music albums. The mark BUDDHA-BAR in
relation to music albums was registered under number 00/3005110 on 3rd
February, 2000 in France. It is not disputed that the music album business is
owned by the affiliate or the sister companies. The plaintiff and its sister
concern constitute one economic entities and it a well-known international
practice for companies trading in multiple jurisdiction to work with affiliate
organisation which have been treated as one economic entity for purposes of
proprietary rights by Courts. The decisions in the matter of Revlon v. Cripps
and Lee, 1980 FSR 85 and Food Distributors v. London Borough of Tower Hamlets,
(1976) AH ER 462 supports the case of the plaintiff wherein the Court held as
under:-
"there is evidence of general tendency to ignore the separate tendency to
ignore the separate legal entities of the various companies within a group,
and to look instead at the economic entity of the whole group"
13\. Thus, the Plaintiff's proprietary rights in the mark BUDDHA BAR stand
prima facie established from the reading of the plaint and documents inasmuch
as there is a pleading to the effect that plaintiff company is a affiliate of
restaurant business of George V. Restauration and the mark was registered in
favor of the plaintiff in 2000 in Paris. The restaurant business and the
plaintiff constitute one economic entity for the purpose of proprietary
rights.
14\. The next contention of the defendant that plaintiff has failed to produce
sufficient evidence from the year 1999-2000 as the said user is not the
plaintiff but by clause Challe of Chall'O Music does not inspire confidence in
light of the trademark licensing agreement dated 13th June, 2000 executed
between the plaintiff and Chall'-O Music International, which also carried on
business involving musical production, to produce a double compilation of
world music under the brand name BUDDHA BAR. Translated copy of the agreement
is on record. The original document was brought in Court at the time of
hearing. It is apparent from the reading of the agreement that license was
earlier granted to the Chall'O Music by George V. Record for production of
first double compilation of music under the trademark BUDDHA BAR free of cost.
Article 7 of the agreement provides that any proceedings pertaining to
infringement of trademark against any third party will be instituted by the
Licensor to the plaintiff in his name and (sic) own expenses with the
technical help of the Licensee. The licensee acknowledges the proprietary
rights of the plaintiff over the mark. The music album under the mark BUDDHA
BAR was first released in 1999 and thereafter in 2000 by the Claude
Challe/Chall'O Music on the force of the aforesaid trademark license
agreement. The user of the mark in relation to music albums stand established
from 1999-2000. So far as the contention of the defendant that plaintiff are
violating the provisions of Copyright Act is concerned, the same shall be
considered at the time of trial. The further contention of the defendant that
in order to succeed in an action of passing off, the plaintiff has produced
first invoice dated 21st February, 2002 which is after the defendant's release
of its album in January, 2002 is without force. The matter is at the
interlocutory stage. The plaintiff can filed the documents/additional
documents prior to settlement of issues. This Court at this stage has to see
whether the plaintiff is the prior adopter and user of the mark and whether
the mark has acquired a reputation and goodwill and become distinctive of the
plaintiff's goods in the country of origin and whether such reputation has
spilled over into India.
15\. The next contention of the defendant that the documents filed by the
plaintiff in the nature of newspaper reports are not admissible in evidence
and cannot be relied upon cannot be considered at this stage. This can be if
at all considered at later stage as it may require evidence to be led by the
parties to determine this contention. The Court at this stage is to see
whether a prima facie case is made out to grant an interim relief to the
plaintiff at the interlocutory stage. The Privy Council in the case of
Subramaniam v. Public Prosecution, 1 WLR 965 observed:
"Evidence of a statement made to a witness who is not himself called as a
witness may or may not be hearsay. It is hearsay arid inadmissible when the
object of the evidence is to establish the truth of what is contained in the
statement. It is not hearsay and is admissible when it is proposed to
establish by the evidence, not the truth of the statement but the fact that it
was made. The fact that it was made quite part from its truth, is frequently
relevant in considering the mental state and conduct thereafter of the witness
or some other persons in whose presence these statements are made."
16\. A Division Bench of the Madras High Court in the matter of Haw Par Bros.
International Ltd. v. Tiger Balm Co. (P) Ltd. and Ors., 1996 PTC (16) (DB) 311
inter alia observed that "There is nothing on record at present to reject the
correctness of the reports found in standard newspapers which have a
reputation of correct reporting. ..."
17\. Reliance placed by the defendant on Smithkline Beecham Pic. and Ors. v.
Hindustan Lever Limited and Ors., 2000 PTC 83, Clutte Peabody and Co. Inc. v.
Arrow Apparals, 1998 PTC (18) 156, Veerumal Praveen Kumur v. Needle Industries
(India) Ltd. and Anr., 2001 PTC 889 (Del) (DB), Balram Prasad Aggarwal v.
State of Bihar, , State of Haryana and Ors. v. Ch. Bhajan Lal and Anr., ,
Ravinder Kumar Sharma v. State of Assam and Ors., , Samant N, Balakrishna etc.
v. George Fernandez and Ors. etc., , Laxmi Ram Shetty and Anr. v. State of
Tamil Nadu, are of no help to the defendant in the present case. They are
distinguishable on facts. In some of the decisions referred to there were no
write up or publication which went out to the public like in the present case
wherein large amount of publicity material in local and overseas publication
have been produced on record. Reliance on 1998 PTC (18) 156 is also misplaced.
In that case, the Court did not grant injunction on account of long delay
coupled with the fact that during the relevant period the magazine was banned
in India.
18\. The next contention of the defendant the trademark BUDDHA-BAR has been
used by third party in relation to the restaurant and music business, which
are not parties of the present suit is without force. In light of the
aforesaid discussion it is prima facie established that the restaurant
business is owned by the affiliate or the sister companies. The plaintiff and
its sister concern constitute one economic entities and it is well-known
international practice for companies trading in multiple jurisdictions to work
with affiliate organisation, which have been treated as one economic entity
for the purpose of proprietary rights by the Courts. The mark BUDDHA BAR was
used by the Claude Challe on the strength of the trademark license agreement
between the plaintiff and Claude Challe. Claude Challe acknowledged the
plaintiff to be the proprietor of the mark BUDDHA BAR in relation to music
business.
19\. The last contention of the defendant that the plaintiff is not entitled
to discretionary relief of injunction is also without force in light of the
decision of the Supreme Court in the matter of Midas Hygiene Industries P.
Ltd. and Anr. v. Sudhir Bhatia and Ors. (C.A. No. 107/2002) reported in 2004
(28) PTC 121 (SC) dated 22nd January, 2004. The Supreme Court inter alia
observed as under:-
"... In case of infringement either of Trade Mark or of Copyright normally an
injunction must follow. Mere delay in bringing action is not sufficient to
defeat grant of injunction in such cases. The grant of injunction also becomes
necessary if it prima facie appears that the adoption of the Mark was itself
dishonest."
20\. The defendant failed to given any satisfactory explanation/justification
in relation to adoption and use of the mark BUDDHA BAR. It appears that name
was picked up from the spill over reputation of the said mark in India by the
plaintiff and the defendants must be aware at the time of user. The adoption
of the mark by the defendant cannot prima facie be recorded as honest
21\. It is well settled law that in action of passing off and transborder
reputation, it is not necessary to insist that the plaintiff must be trading
within the country. The admission of the reputation of the owner of the brand
names in its advertisements amounts to user of the same.
22\. The Calcutta High Court in the matter of J.N. Nicholas (Vimto) v. Rose
and Thistle and Anr, held:-
"The user of the mark does not postulate actual sale of the goods bearing such
mark, user can be in any form or way and does not necessarily mean and imply
actual physical sale and even mere advertisement without having even the
existence of the goods can be said to be an user of the mark."
23\. In the matter of Goldstar Co. Ltd. v. Goldstar Industries, 1995 PTC 18
the court observed as under:-
"It has been the case of the plaintiff herein that he had been advertising
goods under the trademark GOLD STAR in journals and in newspapers which are
being circulated in India. This shows that the plaintiff had been advertising
the goods, which according to the observation of the Calcutta High Court would
amount to use. If that be so, then prima facie, it cannot be said that there
was not users of the trademark for the long period."
24\. In 2001 PTC 353 the Court held as under:-
"Thus a product and its trademark transcends the physical boundaries of a
geographical region and acquires a transborder or overseas or extra
territorial reputation not only through import of goods but also by its
advertisement. The knowledge and the awareness of the goods of the foreign
trader and its trademark can be available at a place where goods are not being
marketed and consequently not being used. The manner in which or the source
from which the knowledge has been acquired is immaterial."
25\. This Court in the matter of N.R. Dongre v. Whirlpool Corporation observed
as under:-
"Having regard to the above discussion, the following position emerges. The
courts to not approve of any attempt by one trader to appropriate the mark of
the another trader, even though that trader may be a foreign trader and mostly
uses his mark in respect of the goods available abroad i.e. outside the
country where the appropriation of the mark has taken place. As mentioned
earlier, awareness and knowledge of the mark in the latter counter may be
because of the small trickle of the goods in that country or through
advertisement. The manner and method by which the knowledge of the mark is
acquired by the public is of no consequence and will not matter."
26\. In light of the aforesaid, it is prima facie established that plaintiff
is the prior adopter and user of the mark BUDDHA BAR in abroad. The plaintiff
prima facie established proprietary rights for the mark BUDDHA BAR in relation
to music albums. The mark enjoys reputation and goodwill in the country of its
origin and several other countries by way of advertisements/news reports in
reputed newspapers and reputed magazines and spill over the same to India,
which is also evident from the newspaper reports and magazines, amounts to
user of the trademark in relation to the music albums. In the case of goods,
which have acquired a name and reputation either through publicity in journals
or newspapers, such publicity itself creates a demand for the product and it
is necessary to protect the person, who is owner of the mark/goods to prevent
another person from taking benefit of his goodwill and reputation with
reference to the same goods. The adoption and use of the name BUDDHA BAR by
the defendant appears to be dishonest as the same is without any explanation
and justification and moreover the spill over reputation in India appears to
have motivated the defendant to manufacture and market the music albums under
the mark BUDDHA BAR with the intention to encash the goodwill and reputation
of plaintiff. The two marks in dispute are almost similar. The defendant
failed to explain as to how the said name is hit upon it. There is also
possibility of confusion between the plaintiff's goods and defendant's goods
and there is likelihood of confusion in the minds of the purchasing the
defendant's goods, which are deceptively similar and identical to the goods,
which are manufactured and marketed by the plaintiff. The purchaser public
identifies the music albums as those of the plaintiff and any attempt on the
part of the defendant to pass over their goods as those of the plaintiff would
determine passing of their goods as those of the plaintiff. The matter is only
at an interlocutory stage for confirmation/vacation of the injunction. Trial
has yet to take place. The objections raised by the defendant shall be
considered at the time of trial as they may require evidence to be led by the
parties to determine the objections. The plaintiff cannot be declined interim
protection at this stage.
27\. It is not possible to say how long a mark should be used to establish
goodwill and reputation. It depends on the facts and circumstances of each
case. In a given case, six weeks was held sufficient to establish reputation
and goodwill. It depends on the nature of the goods or business, quantum of
sales of the product, extent of advertisement and publicity launched the area
over which user of the mark is made and so on. In the present case, the user
of the mark in Paris and other countries is prima facie established since
1999. The music albums under the mark BUDDHA BAR were and are in demand
abroad. The Indian publications and foreign publications on record
acknowledged the reputation and goodwill of the mark BUDDHA BAR and music
albums and its popularity in foreign country, which spilled over into India.
The albums have also been sold through internet. The mark BUDDHA BAR is
distinctive of the music albums. Singularity and exclusiveness of the album
would be eroded by the use of the word BUDDHA BAR on the albums by defendants.
28\. Grant of an injunction is a discretionary relief. Three guiding factors
have to be kept in mind while refusing or allowing the relief of ad-interim
injunction namely whether there exists a prima facie case; balance of
convenience between the parties and if injunction is not granted, it will
cause irreparable loss to the plaintiff. In the present case the plaintiff is
the owner of the trademark/name BUDDHA BAR. He is prior adopter and user of
the same. Prima facie case is made out in favor of the plaintiff. Balance of
convenience is clearly in favor of the plaintiff from the facts found from the
pleadings and documents. There can be no dispute with regard to proposition of
law. It is indeed a sad reality that the trial of the case does not reach
hearing for several years. Therefore, at the interim stage itself if the court
is prima facie satisfied that the plaintiff is the prior adopter/user and
registered proprietor of the trademark and the defendant's adoption is
dishonest, not granting an injunction would amount to encouraging the tainted
and dishonest to seek benefit of the delay in the disposal of the suit.
Refusal of injunction shall result in irreparable injury to the plaintiff as
already observed that the defendant's adoption of the trademark is not honest.
Plaintiff in these circumstances would be entitled to injunction.
29\. In view of the aforesaid discussion, I am satisfied that there is
sufficient material on record to prima facie establish the reputation,
goodwill and distinctive-ness of the plaintiff in relation to the music albums
under the mark BUDDHA BAR internationally and spill over the reputation into
India. The plaintiff must succeed in the present application. The plaintiff's
application under Order 39 Rules 1 and 2 CPC is allowed. The injunction is
confirmed. The application of the defendant under Order 39 Rule 4 CPC is
dismissed. No order as to costs.
30\. The observations made by me herein are only for the dealing with this
interim application and would in no way effect the final determination of the
controversy after the trial of the suit.
law. It is indeed a sad reality that the trial of the case does not reach
hearing for several years. Therefore, at the interim stage itself if the court
is prima facie satisfied that the plaintiff is the prior adopter/user and
registered proprietor of the trademark and the defendant's adoption is
dishonest, not granting an injunction would amount to encouraging the tainted
and dishonest to seek benefit of the delay in the disposal of the suit.
Refusal of injunction shall result in irreparable injury to the plaintiff as
already observed that the defendant's adoption of the trademark is not honest.
Plaintiff in these circumstances would be entitled to injunction.
29\. In view of the aforesaid discussion, I am satisfied that there is
sufficient material on record to prima facie establish the reputation,
goodwill and distinctive-ness of the plaintiff in relation to the music albums
under the mark BUDDHA BAR internationally and spill over the reputation into
India. The plaintiff must succeed in the present application. The plaintiff's
application under Order 39 Rules 1 and 2 CPC is allowed. The injunction is
confirmed. The application of the defendant under Order 39 Rule 4 CPC is
countries around the world since the year 1999. The mark was registered in
many countries in Class 9 and 41. The mark was first adopted and used in the
year 1996 by Plaintiff's affiliate company George V. Restauration. In the said
restaurant music was played by well-known disc jockeys, which was compiled
into CDs. These discs were sold by the plaintiff under the trade mark BUDDHA-
BAR since 1999 pursuant to agreements entered into between the plaintiff and
Chall'O Music International granting license to the Chall'O Music to produce a
double compilation of world music under the brand name BUDDHA-BAR. The
trademark BUDDHA-BAR in respect of music albums was registered under number
00/3005110 on 3rd February, 2000 in France and was also registered in all the
EEC countries. The plaintiff claims that it's reputation generated across the
world spilled over to India and the plaintiff's mark became distinctive of the
plaintiff's goods and the same were identified as goods of the plaintiff's.
Rights were given to Wagrain for distribution of the albums, who in turn
appointed Worldwide Music in India as sub-distributor for making CD
compilation in India under the mark BUDDHA-BAR. Third series of BUDDHA-BAR was
released in France in March 2001 and in India on 11th December, 2001. The
reputation of the plaintiff spilled over on account of news items in TIME
Magazine, New York Times, The Times, Evening Standard, ES Magazine, Detroit
News and Free Press, Daily Herald, Las Vegas Review Journal. Several Indian
law. It is indeed a sad reality that the trial of the case does not reach
hearing for several years. Therefore, at the interim stage itself if the court
is prima facie satisfied that the plaintiff is the prior adopter/user and
registered proprietor of the trademark and the defendant's adoption is
dishonest, not granting an injunction would amount to encouraging the tainted
and dishonest to seek benefit of the delay in the disposal of the suit.
Refusal of injunction shall result in irreparable injury to the plaintiff as
already observed that the defendant's adoption of the trademark is not honest.
Plaintiff in these circumstances would be entitled to injunction.
29\. In view of the aforesaid discussion, I am satisfied that there is
sufficient material on record to prima facie establish the reputation,
goodwill and distinctive-ness of the plaintiff in relation to the music albums
under the mark BUDDHA BAR internationally and spill over the reputation into
India. The plaintiff must succeed in the present application. The plaintiff's
application under Order 39 Rules 1 and 2 CPC is allowed. The injunction is
confirmed. The application of the defendant under Order 39 Rule 4 CPC is
countries around the world since the year 1999. The mark was registered in
many countries in Class 9 and 41. The mark was first adopted and used in the
year 1996 by Plaintiff's affiliate company George V. Restauration. In the said
restaurant music was played by well-known disc jockeys, which was compiled
into CDs. These discs were sold by the plaintiff under the trade mark BUDDHA-
BAR since 1999 pursuant to agreements entered into between the plaintiff and
Chall'O Music International granting license to the Chall'O Music to produce a
double compilation of world music under the brand name BUDDHA-BAR. The
trademark BUDDHA-BAR in respect of music albums was registered under number
00/3005110 on 3rd February, 2000 in France and was also registered in all the
EEC countries. The plaintiff claims that it's reputation generated across the
world spilled over to India and the plaintiff's mark became distinctive of the
plaintiff's goods and the same were identified as goods of the plaintiff's.
Rights were given to Wagrain for distribution of the albums, who in turn
appointed Worldwide Music in India as sub-distributor for making CD
compilation in India under the mark BUDDHA-BAR. Third series of BUDDHA-BAR was
released in France in March 2001 and in India on 11th December, 2001. The
reputation of the plaintiff spilled over on account of news items in TIME
Magazine, New York Times, The Times, Evening Standard, ES Magazine, Detroit
News and Free Press, Daily Herald, Las Vegas Review Journal. Several Indian
law. It is indeed a sad reality that the trial of the case does not reach
hearing for several years. Therefore, at the interim stage itself if the court
is prima facie satisfied that the plaintiff is the prior adopter/user and
registered proprietor of the trademark and the defendant's adoption is
dishonest, not granting an injunction would amount to encouraging the tainted
and dishonest to seek benefit of the delay in the disposal of the suit.
Refusal of injunction shall result in irreparable injury to the plaintiff as
already observed that the defendant's adoption of the trademark is not honest.
Plaintiff in these circumstances would be entitled to injunction.
29\. In view of the aforesaid discussion, I am satisfied that there is
sufficient material on record to prima facie establish the reputation,
goodwill and distinctive-ness of the plaintiff in relation to the music albums
under the mark BUDDHA BAR internationally and spill over the reputation into
India. The plaintiff must succeed in the present application. The plaintiff's
application under Order 39 Rules 1 and 2 CPC is allowed. The injunction is
confirmed. The application of the defendant under Order 39 Rule 4 CPC is
countries around the world since the year 1999. The mark was registered in
many countries in Class 9 and 41. The mark was first adopted and used in the
year 1996 by Plaintiff's affiliate company George V. Restauration. In the said
restaurant music was played by well-known disc jockeys, which was compiled
into CDs. These discs were sold by the plaintiff under the trade mark BUDDHA-
BAR since 1999 pursuant to agreements entered into between the plaintiff and
Chall'O Music International granting license to the Chall'O Music to produce a
double compilation of world music under the brand name BUDDHA-BAR. The
trademark BUDDHA-BAR in respect of music albums was registered under number
00/3005110 on 3rd February, 2000 in France and was also registered in all the
EEC countries. The plaintiff claims that it's reputation generated across the
world spilled over to India and the plaintiff's mark became distinctive of the
plaintiff's goods and the same were identified as goods of the plaintiff's.
Rights were given to Wagrain for distribution of the albums, who in turn
appointed Worldwide Music in India as sub-distributor for making CD
compilation in India under the mark BUDDHA-BAR. Third series of BUDDHA-BAR was
released in France in March 2001 and in India on 11th December, 2001. The
reputation of the plaintiff spilled over on account of news items in TIME
Magazine, New York Times, The Times, Evening Standard, ES Magazine, Detroit
News and Free Press, Daily Herald, Las Vegas Review Journal. Several Indian
newspapers and magazines in India also wrote in their columns of the
reputation and goodwill generated by the mark BUDDHA-BAR in relation to music
albums. Indian celebrities and the media also publicized the popularity of
mark BUDDHA-BAR in relation to music albums. Television coverage received on
satellite channels banned into India in June, July, 2001 of the fashion show
of the designer Ritu Beri brought awareness of the mark BUDDHA-BAR in India.
The plaintiff contends that the adoption of the identical trademark by the
defendants is patently dishonest and is likely to create confusion and
deception in the minds of the public causing the defendant's goods to be
associated or identified as the goods of the plaintiff.
5\. Reliance was placed on the decisions reported as Chennamsetty Rama Murthy
law. It is indeed a sad reality that the trial of the case does not reach
hearing for several years. Therefore, at the interim stage itself if the court
is prima facie satisfied that the plaintiff is the prior adopter/user and
registered proprietor of the trademark and the defendant's adoption is
dishonest, not granting an injunction would amount to encouraging the tainted
and dishonest to seek benefit of the delay in the disposal of the suit.
Refusal of injunction shall result in irreparable injury to the plaintiff as
already observed that the defendant's adoption of the trademark is not honest.
Plaintiff in these circumstances would be entitled to injunction.
29\. In view of the aforesaid discussion, I am satisfied that there is
sufficient material on record to prima facie establish the reputation,
goodwill and distinctive-ness of the plaintiff in relation to the music albums
under the mark BUDDHA BAR internationally and spill over the reputation into
India. The plaintiff must succeed in the present application. The plaintiff's
application under Order 39 Rules 1 and 2 CPC is allowed. The injunction is
confirmed. The application of the defendant under Order 39 Rule 4 CPC is
countries around the world since the year 1999. The mark was registered in
many countries in Class 9 and 41. The mark was first adopted and used in the
year 1996 by Plaintiff's affiliate company George V. Restauration. In the said
restaurant music was played by well-known disc jockeys, which was compiled
into CDs. These discs were sold by the plaintiff under the trade mark BUDDHA-
BAR since 1999 pursuant to agreements entered into between the plaintiff and
Chall'O Music International granting license to the Chall'O Music to produce a
double compilation of world music under the brand name BUDDHA-BAR. The
trademark BUDDHA-BAR in respect of music albums was registered under number
00/3005110 on 3rd February, 2000 in France and was also registered in all the
EEC countries. The plaintiff claims that it's reputation generated across the
world spilled over to India and the plaintiff's mark became distinctive of the
plaintiff's goods and the same were identified as goods of the plaintiff's.
Rights were given to Wagrain for distribution of the albums, who in turn
appointed Worldwide Music in India as sub-distributor for making CD
compilation in India under the mark BUDDHA-BAR. Third series of BUDDHA-BAR was
released in France in March 2001 and in India on 11th December, 2001. The
reputation of the plaintiff spilled over on account of news items in TIME
Magazine, New York Times, The Times, Evening Standard, ES Magazine, Detroit
News and Free Press, Daily Herald, Las Vegas Review Journal. Several Indian
newspapers and magazines in India also wrote in their columns of the
reputation and goodwill generated by the mark BUDDHA-BAR in relation to music
albums. Indian celebrities and the media also publicized the popularity of
mark BUDDHA-BAR in relation to music albums. Television coverage received on
satellite channels banned into India in June, July, 2001 of the fashion show
of the designer Ritu Beri brought awareness of the mark BUDDHA-BAR in India.
The plaintiff contends that the adoption of the identical trademark by the
defendants is patently dishonest and is likely to create confusion and
deception in the minds of the public causing the defendant's goods to be
associated or identified as the goods of the plaintiff.
5\. Reliance was placed on the decisions reported as Chennamsetty Rama Murthy
law. It is indeed a sad reality that the trial of the case does not reach
hearing for several years. Therefore, at the interim stage itself if the court
is prima facie satisfied that the plaintiff is the prior adopter/user and
registered proprietor of the trademark and the defendant's adoption is
dishonest, not granting an injunction would amount to encouraging the tainted
and dishonest to seek benefit of the delay in the disposal of the suit.
Refusal of injunction shall result in irreparable injury to the plaintiff as
already observed that the defendant's adoption of the trademark is not honest.
Plaintiff in these circumstances would be entitled to injunction.
29\. In view of the aforesaid discussion, I am satisfied that there is
sufficient material on record to prima facie establish the reputation,
goodwill and distinctive-ness of the plaintiff in relation to the music albums
under the mark BUDDHA BAR internationally and spill over the reputation into
India. The plaintiff must succeed in the present application. The plaintiff's
application under Order 39 Rules 1 and 2 CPC is allowed. The injunction is
confirmed. The application of the defendant under Order 39 Rule 4 CPC is
