Central Government Act
Section 11AB in the Central Excise Act, 1944
1[11AB. Interest on delayed payment of duty.—2[
(1) Where any duty of excise has not been levied or paid or has been short-
levied or short-paid or erroneously refunded, the person who is liable to pay
duty as determined under sub-section (2), or has paid the duty under sub-
section 2(B), of section 11A, shall, in addition to the duty, be liable to pay
interest at such rate not below 3[ten per cent.] and not exceeding thirty-six
per cent. per annum, as is for the time being fixed by the Central Government,
by notification in the Official Gazette, from the first date of the month
succeeding the month in which the duty ought to have been paid under this Act,
or from the date of such erroneous refund, as the case may be, but for the
provisions contained in sub-section (2), or sub-section (2B), of section 11A
till the date of payment of such duty: Provided that in such cases where the
duty becomes payable consequent to issue of an order, instruction or direction
by the Board under section 37B, and such amount of duty payable is voluntarily
paid in full, without reserving any right to appeal against such payment at
any subsequent stage, within forty-five days from the date of issue of such
order, instruction or direction as the case may be, no interest shall be
payable and in other cases the interest shall be payable on the whole of the
or from the date of such erroneous refund, as the case may be, but for the
provisions contained in sub-section (2), or sub-section (2B), of section 11A
till the date of payment of such duty: Provided that in such cases where the
duty becomes payable consequent to issue of an order, instruction or direction
by the Board under section 37B, and such amount of duty payable is voluntarily
paid in full, without reserving any right to appeal against such payment at
any subsequent stage, within forty-five days from the date of issue of such
order, instruction or direction as the case may be, no interest shall be
payable and in other cases the interest shall be payable on the whole of the
amount, including the amount already paid.] 4[(2) The provisions of sub-
section (1) shall not apply to cases where the duty had become payable or
ought to have been paid before the date on which the Finance Bill, 2001
receives the assent of the President.] Explanation 1.— Where the duty
determined to be payable is reduced by the Commissioner (Appeals), the
Appellate Tribunal 5[, National Tax Tribunal] or, as the case may be, the
Court, the interest shall be payable on such reduced amount of duty.
payable and in other cases the interest shall be payable on the whole of the
amount, including the amount already paid.] 4[(2) The provisions of sub-
section (1) shall not apply to cases where the duty had become payable or
ought to have been paid before the date on which the Finance Bill, 2001
receives the assent of the President.] Explanation 1.— Where the duty
determined to be payable is reduced by the Commissioner (Appeals), the
Appellate Tribunal 5[, National Tax Tribunal] or, as the case may be, the
Court, the interest shall be payable on such reduced amount of duty.
Explanation 2.—Where the duty determined to be payable is increased or further
increased by the Commissioner (Appeals), the Appellate Tribunal 5[, National
Tax Tribunal] or, as the case may be, the Court, the interest shall be payable
on such increased or further increased amount of duty.]
or from the date of such erroneous refund, as the case may be, but for the
provisions contained in sub-section (2), or sub-section (2B), of section 11A
till the date of payment of such duty: Provided that in such cases where the
duty becomes payable consequent to issue of an order, instruction or direction
by the Board under section 37B, and such amount of duty payable is voluntarily
paid in full, without reserving any right to appeal against such payment at
any subsequent stage, within forty-five days from the date of issue of such
order, instruction or direction as the case may be, no interest shall be
payable and in other cases the interest shall be payable on the whole of the
amount, including the amount already paid.] 4[(2) The provisions of sub-
section (1) shall not apply to cases where the duty had become payable or
ought to have been paid before the date on which the Finance Bill, 2001
receives the assent of the President.] Explanation 1.— Where the duty
determined to be payable is reduced by the Commissioner (Appeals), the
Appellate Tribunal 5[, National Tax Tribunal] or, as the case may be, the
Court, the interest shall be payable on such reduced amount of duty.
payable and in other cases the interest shall be payable on the whole of the
amount, including the amount already paid.] 4[(2) The provisions of sub-
section (1) shall not apply to cases where the duty had become payable or
ought to have been paid before the date on which the Finance Bill, 2001
receives the assent of the President.] Explanation 1.— Where the duty
determined to be payable is reduced by the Commissioner (Appeals), the
Appellate Tribunal 5[, National Tax Tribunal] or, as the case may be, the
Court, the interest shall be payable on such reduced amount of duty.
Explanation 2.—Where the duty determined to be payable is increased or further
increased by the Commissioner (Appeals), the Appellate Tribunal 5[, National
Tax Tribunal] or, as the case may be, the Court, the interest shall be payable
on such increased or further increased amount of duty.]
or from the date of such erroneous refund, as the case may be, but for the
provisions contained in sub-section (2), or sub-section (2B), of section 11A
till the date of payment of such duty: Provided that in such cases where the
duty becomes payable consequent to issue of an order, instruction or direction
by the Board under section 37B, and such amount of duty payable is voluntarily
paid in full, without reserving any right to appeal against such payment at
any subsequent stage, within forty-five days from the date of issue of such
order, instruction or direction as the case may be, no interest shall be
payable and in other cases the interest shall be payable on the whole of the
amount, including the amount already paid.] 4[(2) The provisions of sub-
section (1) shall not apply to cases where the duty had become payable or
ought to have been paid before the date on which the Finance Bill, 2001
receives the assent of the President.] Explanation 1.— Where the duty
determined to be payable is reduced by the Commissioner (Appeals), the
Appellate Tribunal 5[, National Tax Tribunal] or, as the case may be, the
Court, the interest shall be payable on such reduced amount of duty.
payable and in other cases the interest shall be payable on the whole of the
amount, including the amount already paid.] 4[(2) The provisions of sub-
section (1) shall not apply to cases where the duty had become payable or
ought to have been paid before the date on which the Finance Bill, 2001
receives the assent of the President.] Explanation 1.— Where the duty
determined to be payable is reduced by the Commissioner (Appeals), the
Appellate Tribunal 5[, National Tax Tribunal] or, as the case may be, the
Court, the interest shall be payable on such reduced amount of duty.
Explanation 2.—Where the duty determined to be payable is increased or further
increased by the Commissioner (Appeals), the Appellate Tribunal 5[, National
Tax Tribunal] or, as the case may be, the Court, the interest shall be payable
on such increased or further increased amount of duty.]
or from the date of such erroneous refund, as the case may be, but for the
provisions contained in sub-section (2), or sub-section (2B), of section 11A
till the date of payment of such duty: Provided that in such cases where the
duty becomes payable consequent to issue of an order, instruction or direction
by the Board under section 37B, and such amount of duty payable is voluntarily
paid in full, without reserving any right to appeal against such payment at
any subsequent stage, within forty-five days from the date of issue of such
order, instruction or direction as the case may be, no interest shall be
payable and in other cases the interest shall be payable on the whole of the
amount, including the amount already paid.] 4[(2) The provisions of sub-
section (1) shall not apply to cases where the duty had become payable or
ought to have been paid before the date on which the Finance Bill, 2001
receives the assent of the President.] Explanation 1.— Where the duty
determined to be payable is reduced by the Commissioner (Appeals), the
Appellate Tribunal 5[, National Tax Tribunal] or, as the case may be, the
Court, the interest shall be payable on such reduced amount of duty.
payable and in other cases the interest shall be payable on the whole of the
amount, including the amount already paid.] 4[(2) The provisions of sub-
section (1) shall not apply to cases where the duty had become payable or
ought to have been paid before the date on which the Finance Bill, 2001
receives the assent of the President.] Explanation 1.— Where the duty
determined to be payable is reduced by the Commissioner (Appeals), the
Appellate Tribunal 5[, National Tax Tribunal] or, as the case may be, the
Court, the interest shall be payable on such reduced amount of duty.
Explanation 2.—Where the duty determined to be payable is increased or further
increased by the Commissioner (Appeals), the Appellate Tribunal 5[, National
Tax Tribunal] or, as the case may be, the Court, the interest shall be payable
on such increased or further increased amount of duty.]
or from the date of such erroneous refund, as the case may be, but for the
provisions contained in sub-section (2), or sub-section (2B), of section 11A
till the date of payment of such duty: Provided that in such cases where the
duty becomes payable consequent to issue of an order, instruction or direction
by the Board under section 37B, and such amount of duty payable is voluntarily
paid in full, without reserving any right to appeal against such payment at
any subsequent stage, within forty-five days from the date of issue of such
order, instruction or direction as the case may be, no interest shall be
payable and in other cases the interest shall be payable on the whole of the
amount, including the amount already paid.] 4[(2) The provisions of sub-
section (1) shall not apply to cases where the duty had become payable or
ought to have been paid before the date on which the Finance Bill, 2001
receives the assent of the President.] Explanation 1.— Where the duty
determined to be payable is reduced by the Commissioner (Appeals), the
Appellate Tribunal 5[, National Tax Tribunal] or, as the case may be, the
Court, the interest shall be payable on such reduced amount of duty.
payable and in other cases the interest shall be payable on the whole of the
amount, including the amount already paid.] 4[(2) The provisions of sub-
section (1) shall not apply to cases where the duty had become payable or
ought to have been paid before the date on which the Finance Bill, 2001
receives the assent of the President.] Explanation 1.— Where the duty
determined to be payable is reduced by the Commissioner (Appeals), the
Appellate Tribunal 5[, National Tax Tribunal] or, as the case may be, the
Court, the interest shall be payable on such reduced amount of duty.
Explanation 2.—Where the duty determined to be payable is increased or further
increased by the Commissioner (Appeals), the Appellate Tribunal 5[, National
Tax Tribunal] or, as the case may be, the Court, the interest shall be payable
on such increased or further increased amount of duty.]
or from the date of such erroneous refund, as the case may be, but for the
provisions contained in sub-section (2), or sub-section (2B), of section 11A
till the date of payment of such duty: Provided that in such cases where the
duty becomes payable consequent to issue of an order, instruction or direction
by the Board under section 37B, and such amount of duty payable is voluntarily
paid in full, without reserving any right to appeal against such payment at
any subsequent stage, within forty-five days from the date of issue of such
order, instruction or direction as the case may be, no interest shall be
payable and in other cases the interest shall be payable on the whole of the
amount, including the amount already paid.] 4[(2) The provisions of sub-
section (1) shall not apply to cases where the duty had become payable or
ought to have been paid before the date on which the Finance Bill, 2001
receives the assent of the President.] Explanation 1.— Where the duty
determined to be payable is reduced by the Commissioner (Appeals), the
Appellate Tribunal 5[, National Tax Tribunal] or, as the case may be, the
Court, the interest shall be payable on such reduced amount of duty.
