Customs, Excise and Gold Tribunal - Tamil Nadu
Tamil Trading Corporation vs Commissioner Of Central Excise on 19 December,
2005
Equivalent citations: 2006 (104) ECC 583, 2006 ECR 583 Tri Chennai, 2006 (198)
ELT 539 Tri Chennai
Bench: P Chacko, J T T.K.
ORDER T.K. Jayaraman, Member (T) Page 0585
1\. This appeal has been filed against Order-in-Appeal No. 209/2005 dated
20.10.2005 passed by the Commissioner of Central Excise (Appeals), Madurai.
Page 0586
2\. The facts of the case are as follows:
The appellants imported crude palm oil with intention to avail the benefit of
Notification No. 21/2002-Cus. dated 1.3.2002. Further, the appellants wanted
to refine the imported crude palm oil by utilizing the facility available at
the refinery owned by the M/s. K.T.V. Oil Mills on job work basis. They
applied to the jurisdictional Assistant Commissioner for issue of registration
certificate for availing the concessional rate of customs duty. The lower
authority rejected the application on the ground that the registration
certificate under Rule 3(1) of the Customs (Imported Goods Concessional Rate
of Duty for Manufacture of Excisable Goods) Rules, 1996 can be issued to a
factory" should be interpreted to mean the factory where the importer wants to
utilize the imported goods in terms of the Notification. The Department can
not insist on ownership of the factory and deny registration for the purposes
of the Notification. The Tribunal, in the case of Commissioner of Central
Excise, Bangalore v. Electronic Research Ltd. cited by the ld. Advocate, has
held that literal meaning of statute should be abandoned if it leads to
unjustified results, In that case, goods imported under Concessional rate of
duty for Use in one factory were transferred to the factory of the importer at
another place under certain circumstances. The Commissioner (Appeals) decided
in favour of the importer. Revenue came in appeal before the Tribunal. The
Tribunal held that the importer was entitled to exemption as neither the Rules
nor the Notifications itself prohibited such transfer. The above decision was
held in the context of the Customs (Import of Goods at Concessional Rate of
Duty for Manufacture of Excisable Goods) Rules, 1996. The ratio of the above
decision is applicable to the present case also. The fact that Chennai
Commissionerate has permitted Registration in respect of the importer who does
of Duty for Manufacture of Excisable Goods) Rules, 1996 can be issued to a
Manufacturer whose factory is under the jurisdiction of the office and the
appellants do not have a factory of their own and as there is already another
factory in the above premises. The appellants approached the first appellate
authority. The first appellate authority decided the issue against the
appellants. Hence they have come before this Tribunal for relief.
3\. Shri N. Venkatraman, ld. Counsel appeared for the appellants and Shri
Meena, ld. SDR for the Revenue.
4\. The ld. Advocate adduced the following arguments.
i) The Commissioner (Appeals) has interpreted the expression "his factory" has
used in the Customs (Import of Goods at Concessional Rate of Duty for
Manufacture of Excisable Goods) Rules, 1996 and held that in the absence of
any factory of the appellants the Registration cannot be granted.
ii) In the Exim Policy actual user is defined to mean "a person who utilizes
the imported goods for manufacturing in his industrial unit or manufacturing
for his own use in another unit including a jobbing unit". Hence the
expression "importer" and "his factory" employed in Rule 3 and 4 of the said
Rules should have been interpreted by the Commissioner with reference to the
meaning attached to the expression "Actual User (Industrial)" in the import
policy.
iii) CBEC in its circular dated 6.2.2002 has clarified that goods received
duty free could be removed to another unit without payment of duty in the
context of implementing Central Excise (Removal of Goods at Concessional Rate
Duty for Manufacture of Excisable Goods) Rules, 2001. These instructions could
be applied on the Customs side also because the Rules on the excise side are
pari material with those on the customs side.
iv) The exemption under the Notification is dependent upon the use of the
imported goods and the use is with reference to the manufacture of any
excisable commodity. Hence the instructions that are applicable for such
manufacture in the parallel excise Rules would be equally applicable to the
imported goods. Under the Excise Law and Rules, if a person does not have a
factory of his own, he is permitted to send the goods procured duty free
outside for completion of manufacture. It would be illogical to say that an
importer under the parallel rules in the Customs side should Page 0587 be
having his own factory and is not permitted to send the goods outside for any
manufacture.
v) The Tribunal in the case of CCE Bangalore v. Electronic Research Limited
while interpreting identical Rules under the Customs Act held that neither the
Notification nor the Rules prohibit use of goods in another factory and in the
absence of any communication that the goods have not been used for any other
purpose the benefit under the Notification could not be denied. The Tribunal
has also observed in the context of subject rules the spirit of the same
should be looked into rather than literal meaning of the words.
vi) In the impugned order the Commissioner relied on Tribunal's decision in
the case of Panacea Biotech Ltd. v. Commissioner of Customs, New Delhi . It is
seen that the decision of the Gujarat High Court in the case of India Lab P.
Ltd. and subsequent decision in Sarabhai Chemicals , the decision in Truechem
Pharma were not cited before the Tribunal. Further Board's clarification dated
6.2.2002 was also not cited. Again the definition of actual user under the
Exim Policy followed by the Customs while interpreting the Notification where
the actual user condition is invoked has not been cited.
vii) The Hon'ble Gujarat High Court in the case of India Lab P. Ltd (supra)
has held that for the purpose of the Excise Act and Rules there could be
manufacturer who gets his goods manufactured on his own account from other
persons meaning thereby utilizing the infrastructure of others.
viii) Though it was brought to the notice of the Commissioner (Appeals) that
in identical cases Registration has been given by the Chennai Commissionerate,
he has ignored the same. The Chennai Commissionerate after taking the decision
informed CBEC who appear to have accepted the Chennai practice.
ix) The fact that the factory at which the appellants is going to use the
imported oil is already registered or not is not relevant to the granting of
another fresh registration.
5\. The ld. SDR reiterated the Order-in-Appeal. He also relied on the
Tribunal's decision in the case of Panacea Bio-tech mentioned supra.
6\. We have gone through the records of the case carefully. The Customs
Notification No. 21/2002-Cus provides concessional rate of duty for imported
Page 0588 Crude Palm oil for the manufacture of refined oil. Condition 5 of
the Notification stipulates that the importer follows the procedure set out in
the Customs (Import of Goods at Concessional Rate of Duty for Manufacture of
Excisabled Goods) Rules, 1996. Before the introduction of the above Rules in
1996, each Notification was having end use condition and the importer was
normally required to produce the end use certificate. However, the above rules
were framed as an improvement over the earlier procedure. The above Rules are
applicable to an importer who intends to avail of the benefit of an exemption
Notification and where the benefit of such exemption is dependent upon the use
of imported goods covered by the Notification for the manufactured of any
excisable commodity. As per Rule 3 a manufacturer intending to avail the
benefit of the exemption notification shall obtain a Registration from the
Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise having jurisdiction over his factory.
Lower authorities have done their job by a very literal interpretation of Rule
3. Their argument is that the Rule 3 uses the expression "his factory". In
other words the lower authorities interpret that the importer should own a
factory and he has to use the imported material only in his factory.
Otherwise, the importer would not be entitled for the concessional assessment
under the above Notification. If the importer uses the imported goods in a
factory belonging to some other person he would not be entitled for the
concessional assessment. The Tribunal's decision in the Panacea Bio-tech Ltd.
case relied on by the Commissioner has broadly followed the above line of
argument. In our view, the above approach is not at all in consonance with the
philosophy of liberalization and globalisation embraced by the Government of
India in all its policies relating to Customs, Excise and Foreign Trade as
revealed in a plethora of policy documents, legislation, and procedures. In
the Exim Policy actual user includes a person who utilizes the imported goods
for his own use in another unit including a jobbing unit. Gujarat High Court
in the case law cited by the ld. Advocate has clearly spelt out that for
excise purposes manufacturer includes a person who gets his goods manufactured
from the facilities owned by another person. The Board's Circular dated
6.2.2002 enables a manufacturer to send duty free goods received to another
manufacturer having registration for carrying of repairs/reconditioning etc.
In the above said Circular the Board has clarified that the goods received
duty free can be removed to another eligible manufacturer under the Central
Excise (Removal of Goods under the Concessional Rate of Duty for Manufacture
of Excisable Goods) Rules, 2001. However, the recipient manufacturer would
require Registration under Rule 3 of the said Rules. In our view, denial of
Registration under Rule 3 of the Customs (Import of Goods at Concessional Rate
of Duty for Manufacturer of Excisable Goods) Rules, 1996 to the importer on
the ground that he does not have own a factory in which the imported goods are
to be used is very much against the Exim Policy, Board's Circular and the
Hon'ble Gujarat High Court interpretation of manufacturer under Section 2(f)
of the Central Excise Act, 1944. Page 0589 There is nothing strange or illegal
in a person utilizing the manufacturing facilities of another. In order to be
a manufacturer one need not own a factory. The practice of more than one
manufacturer using a factory is recognized as can be seen in the SSI
Notification with regard to clubbing of clearances. The expression "his
factory" should be interpreted to mean the factory where the importer wants to
utilize the imported goods in terms of the Notification. The Department can
not insist on ownership of the factory and deny registration for the purposes
of the Notification. The Tribunal, in the case of Commissioner of Central
Excise, Bangalore v. Electronic Research Ltd. cited by the ld. Advocate, has
held that literal meaning of statute should be abandoned if it leads to
unjustified results, In that case, goods imported under Concessional rate of
duty for Use in one factory were transferred to the factory of the importer at
another place under certain circumstances. The Commissioner (Appeals) decided
in favour of the importer. Revenue came in appeal before the Tribunal. The
Tribunal held that the importer was entitled to exemption as neither the Rules
nor the Notifications itself prohibited such transfer. The above decision was
held in the context of the Customs (Import of Goods at Concessional Rate of
Duty for Manufacture of Excisable Goods) Rules, 1996. The ratio of the above
decision is applicable to the present case also. The fact that Chennai
Commissionerate has permitted Registration in respect of the importer who does
not own the factory where the imported Crude Palm Oil is utilized is also
supporting the appellants' case. Hence we allow the appeal with consequential
relief, if any.
(Order dictated and pronounced in open Court)
factory" should be interpreted to mean the factory where the importer wants to
utilize the imported goods in terms of the Notification. The Department can
not insist on ownership of the factory and deny registration for the purposes
of the Notification. The Tribunal, in the case of Commissioner of Central
Excise, Bangalore v. Electronic Research Ltd. cited by the ld. Advocate, has
held that literal meaning of statute should be abandoned if it leads to
unjustified results, In that case, goods imported under Concessional rate of
duty for Use in one factory were transferred to the factory of the importer at
another place under certain circumstances. The Commissioner (Appeals) decided
in favour of the importer. Revenue came in appeal before the Tribunal. The
Tribunal held that the importer was entitled to exemption as neither the Rules
nor the Notifications itself prohibited such transfer. The above decision was
held in the context of the Customs (Import of Goods at Concessional Rate of
Duty for Manufacture of Excisable Goods) Rules, 1996. The ratio of the above
decision is applicable to the present case also. The fact that Chennai
Commissionerate has permitted Registration in respect of the importer who does
of Duty for Manufacture of Excisable Goods) Rules, 1996 can be issued to a
Manufacturer whose factory is under the jurisdiction of the office and the
appellants do not have a factory of their own and as there is already another
factory in the above premises. The appellants approached the first appellate
authority. The first appellate authority decided the issue against the
appellants. Hence they have come before this Tribunal for relief.
3\. Shri N. Venkatraman, ld. Counsel appeared for the appellants and Shri
Meena, ld. SDR for the Revenue.
4\. The ld. Advocate adduced the following arguments.
i) The Commissioner (Appeals) has interpreted the expression "his factory" has
used in the Customs (Import of Goods at Concessional Rate of Duty for
Manufacture of Excisable Goods) Rules, 1996 and held that in the absence of
any factory of the appellants the Registration cannot be granted.
ii) In the Exim Policy actual user is defined to mean "a person who utilizes
the imported goods for manufacturing in his industrial unit or manufacturing
for his own use in another unit including a jobbing unit". Hence the
expression "importer" and "his factory" employed in Rule 3 and 4 of the said
Rules should have been interpreted by the Commissioner with reference to the
meaning attached to the expression "Actual User (Industrial)" in the import
policy.
factory" should be interpreted to mean the factory where the importer wants to
utilize the imported goods in terms of the Notification. The Department can
not insist on ownership of the factory and deny registration for the purposes
of the Notification. The Tribunal, in the case of Commissioner of Central
Excise, Bangalore v. Electronic Research Ltd. cited by the ld. Advocate, has
held that literal meaning of statute should be abandoned if it leads to
unjustified results, In that case, goods imported under Concessional rate of
duty for Use in one factory were transferred to the factory of the importer at
another place under certain circumstances. The Commissioner (Appeals) decided
in favour of the importer. Revenue came in appeal before the Tribunal. The
Tribunal held that the importer was entitled to exemption as neither the Rules
nor the Notifications itself prohibited such transfer. The above decision was
held in the context of the Customs (Import of Goods at Concessional Rate of
Duty for Manufacture of Excisable Goods) Rules, 1996. The ratio of the above
decision is applicable to the present case also. The fact that Chennai
Commissionerate has permitted Registration in respect of the importer who does
of Duty for Manufacture of Excisable Goods) Rules, 1996 can be issued to a
Manufacturer whose factory is under the jurisdiction of the office and the
appellants do not have a factory of their own and as there is already another
factory in the above premises. The appellants approached the first appellate
authority. The first appellate authority decided the issue against the
appellants. Hence they have come before this Tribunal for relief.
3\. Shri N. Venkatraman, ld. Counsel appeared for the appellants and Shri
Meena, ld. SDR for the Revenue.
4\. The ld. Advocate adduced the following arguments.
i) The Commissioner (Appeals) has interpreted the expression "his factory" has
used in the Customs (Import of Goods at Concessional Rate of Duty for
Manufacture of Excisable Goods) Rules, 1996 and held that in the absence of
any factory of the appellants the Registration cannot be granted.
ii) In the Exim Policy actual user is defined to mean "a person who utilizes
the imported goods for manufacturing in his industrial unit or manufacturing
for his own use in another unit including a jobbing unit". Hence the
expression "importer" and "his factory" employed in Rule 3 and 4 of the said
Rules should have been interpreted by the Commissioner with reference to the
meaning attached to the expression "Actual User (Industrial)" in the import
policy.
factory" should be interpreted to mean the factory where the importer wants to
utilize the imported goods in terms of the Notification. The Department can
not insist on ownership of the factory and deny registration for the purposes
of the Notification. The Tribunal, in the case of Commissioner of Central
Excise, Bangalore v. Electronic Research Ltd. cited by the ld. Advocate, has
held that literal meaning of statute should be abandoned if it leads to
unjustified results, In that case, goods imported under Concessional rate of
duty for Use in one factory were transferred to the factory of the importer at
another place under certain circumstances. The Commissioner (Appeals) decided
in favour of the importer. Revenue came in appeal before the Tribunal. The
Tribunal held that the importer was entitled to exemption as neither the Rules
nor the Notifications itself prohibited such transfer. The above decision was
held in the context of the Customs (Import of Goods at Concessional Rate of
Duty for Manufacture of Excisable Goods) Rules, 1996. The ratio of the above
decision is applicable to the present case also. The fact that Chennai
Commissionerate has permitted Registration in respect of the importer who does
of Duty for Manufacture of Excisable Goods) Rules, 1996 can be issued to a
Manufacturer whose factory is under the jurisdiction of the office and the
appellants do not have a factory of their own and as there is already another
factory in the above premises. The appellants approached the first appellate
authority. The first appellate authority decided the issue against the
appellants. Hence they have come before this Tribunal for relief.
3\. Shri N. Venkatraman, ld. Counsel appeared for the appellants and Shri
Meena, ld. SDR for the Revenue.
4\. The ld. Advocate adduced the following arguments.
i) The Commissioner (Appeals) has interpreted the expression "his factory" has
used in the Customs (Import of Goods at Concessional Rate of Duty for
Manufacture of Excisable Goods) Rules, 1996 and held that in the absence of
any factory of the appellants the Registration cannot be granted.
ii) In the Exim Policy actual user is defined to mean "a person who utilizes
the imported goods for manufacturing in his industrial unit or manufacturing
for his own use in another unit including a jobbing unit". Hence the
expression "importer" and "his factory" employed in Rule 3 and 4 of the said
Rules should have been interpreted by the Commissioner with reference to the
meaning attached to the expression "Actual User (Industrial)" in the import
policy.
iii) CBEC in its circular dated 6.2.2002 has clarified that goods received
duty free could be removed to another unit without payment of duty in the
context of implementing Central Excise (Removal of Goods at Concessional Rate
Duty for Manufacture of Excisable Goods) Rules, 2001. These instructions could
be applied on the Customs side also because the Rules on the excise side are
pari material with those on the customs side.
iv) The exemption under the Notification is dependent upon the use of the
imported goods and the use is with reference to the manufacture of any
excisable commodity. Hence the instructions that are applicable for such
manufacture in the parallel excise Rules would be equally applicable to the
imported goods. Under the Excise Law and Rules, if a person does not have a
factory" should be interpreted to mean the factory where the importer wants to
utilize the imported goods in terms of the Notification. The Department can
not insist on ownership of the factory and deny registration for the purposes
of the Notification. The Tribunal, in the case of Commissioner of Central
Excise, Bangalore v. Electronic Research Ltd. cited by the ld. Advocate, has
held that literal meaning of statute should be abandoned if it leads to
unjustified results, In that case, goods imported under Concessional rate of
duty for Use in one factory were transferred to the factory of the importer at
another place under certain circumstances. The Commissioner (Appeals) decided
in favour of the importer. Revenue came in appeal before the Tribunal. The
Tribunal held that the importer was entitled to exemption as neither the Rules
nor the Notifications itself prohibited such transfer. The above decision was
held in the context of the Customs (Import of Goods at Concessional Rate of
Duty for Manufacture of Excisable Goods) Rules, 1996. The ratio of the above
decision is applicable to the present case also. The fact that Chennai
Commissionerate has permitted Registration in respect of the importer who does
of Duty for Manufacture of Excisable Goods) Rules, 1996 can be issued to a
Manufacturer whose factory is under the jurisdiction of the office and the
appellants do not have a factory of their own and as there is already another
factory in the above premises. The appellants approached the first appellate
authority. The first appellate authority decided the issue against the
appellants. Hence they have come before this Tribunal for relief.
3\. Shri N. Venkatraman, ld. Counsel appeared for the appellants and Shri
Meena, ld. SDR for the Revenue.
4\. The ld. Advocate adduced the following arguments.
i) The Commissioner (Appeals) has interpreted the expression "his factory" has
used in the Customs (Import of Goods at Concessional Rate of Duty for
Manufacture of Excisable Goods) Rules, 1996 and held that in the absence of
any factory of the appellants the Registration cannot be granted.
ii) In the Exim Policy actual user is defined to mean "a person who utilizes
the imported goods for manufacturing in his industrial unit or manufacturing
for his own use in another unit including a jobbing unit". Hence the
expression "importer" and "his factory" employed in Rule 3 and 4 of the said
Rules should have been interpreted by the Commissioner with reference to the
meaning attached to the expression "Actual User (Industrial)" in the import
policy.
iii) CBEC in its circular dated 6.2.2002 has clarified that goods received
duty free could be removed to another unit without payment of duty in the
context of implementing Central Excise (Removal of Goods at Concessional Rate
Duty for Manufacture of Excisable Goods) Rules, 2001. These instructions could
be applied on the Customs side also because the Rules on the excise side are
pari material with those on the customs side.
iv) The exemption under the Notification is dependent upon the use of the
imported goods and the use is with reference to the manufacture of any
excisable commodity. Hence the instructions that are applicable for such
manufacture in the parallel excise Rules would be equally applicable to the
imported goods. Under the Excise Law and Rules, if a person does not have a
factory" should be interpreted to mean the factory where the importer wants to
utilize the imported goods in terms of the Notification. The Department can
not insist on ownership of the factory and deny registration for the purposes
of the Notification. The Tribunal, in the case of Commissioner of Central
Excise, Bangalore v. Electronic Research Ltd. cited by the ld. Advocate, has
held that literal meaning of statute should be abandoned if it leads to
unjustified results, In that case, goods imported under Concessional rate of
duty for Use in one factory were transferred to the factory of the importer at
another place under certain circumstances. The Commissioner (Appeals) decided
in favour of the importer. Revenue came in appeal before the Tribunal. The
Tribunal held that the importer was entitled to exemption as neither the Rules
nor the Notifications itself prohibited such transfer. The above decision was
held in the context of the Customs (Import of Goods at Concessional Rate of
Duty for Manufacture of Excisable Goods) Rules, 1996. The ratio of the above
decision is applicable to the present case also. The fact that Chennai
Commissionerate has permitted Registration in respect of the importer who does
