Delhi District Court
State ...Complainant vs . on 21 May, 2009
Author: Sh. Dig Singh
    IN THE COURT OF SH. DIG VINAY SINGH, ADDITIONAL CHIEF METROPOLITAN MAGISTRATE­03 
                                                           (IPR), ROHINI, DELHI
                In re:                                 
               State                                      ...COMPLAINANT
               VS.
               Arab Shah                                  ...ACCUSED
                FIR NO.205/91
               PS CHANDNI MAHAL
               U/S. 63 COPYRIGHT ACT, 1957
    DATE OF RESERVATION OF JUDGMENT: 18.5.2009
    DATE OF PRONOUNCEMENT OF JUDGMENT: 21.5.2009
                                                               JUDGEMENT
    (a) The serial no. of the case                                     :246/3.
    (b) The date of commission of offence                              :14.9.1991.
    (c) The name of complainant                                        :Zaheer Ahmed s/o. Aftab Ahmed
    (d) The name, parentage, residence of accused                      :Arab   Shah   s/o.   Saykad   Ahmad   Shah   r/o.1094,  
                                                                        Ganj Meer Khan, Chandni Mahal, Delhi.
20\. In the present matter, the case property was not produced before a
Magistrate in compliance of section 64 of the Copyright Act, 1957, and which
again creates suspicion on the alleged recovery.
21\. Law is well setteled that suspicion however strong cannot take place of
proof. However strong suspicion may be it cannot take the place of proof. It
cannot be the basis for conviction of an accused. ( so held in Parkash Chander
vs. State 1994 JCC Delhi: State (N. C. T. of Delhi) v. Navjot Sandhu AIR 2005
SUPREME COURT 3820 : R. Sai Bharathi v. J. Jayalalitha AIR 2004 SUPREME COURT
692).
22\. In view of the above discussion, the prosecution has failed to prove its
case beyond reasonable JUDGMENT/STATE VS. ARAB SHAH/ FIR NO.205/91/U.S.63
COPYRIGHT ACT, 1957/ ACQUITTED/21.5.2009 /Page 8 of 9 k doubt and benefit of
the same ought to go to the accused. Accordingly, the accused is acquitted of
the charges. His surety bond and personal bond, if any stands cancelled.
Surety is discharged. Endorsement, if any on the documents of surety stand
cancelled. File be consigned to Record Room.
                                                                        Ganj Meer Khan, Chandni Mahal, Delhi.
    (e) The offence complained of/ proved                              :U/s.63 Copyright Act, 1957.
    (f) The plea of accused                                            :Pleaded not guilty
    (g) The final order                                                :Acquitted.
    (h) The date of such order                                         : 21.5.2009.
    (i) Brief statement of the reasons for the decision:­
1\. In this case, two accused namely Arab Shah and Radhey Shyam were sent up
tor trial. During pendency of the case, accused Radhey Shyam expired and
proceedings against him were declared abated on 30.11.2007. Therefore, the
present judgment is directed against accused Arab Shah only.
2\. Brief facts of the case are that complainant M/s. Weston Components Ltd.,
through its authorised representative Zaheer Ahmed, filed a complaint before
DCP/Crime and Railways alleging that the complainant company is engaged in
music recordings and various audio cassettes of number of films were being
recorded and sold by the complainant company and, the complainant company
JUDGMENT/STATE VS. ARAB SHAH/ FIR NO.205/91/U.S.63 COPYRIGHT ACT, 1957/
ACQUITTED/21.5.2009 /Page 1 of 9 k also had a copyright in the said work under
the name Weston Components Ltd. The company suspected that certain persons,
who at that time were unknown, were indulging in infringement of its copyright
by recording and selling audio cassettes of those film songs, the copyright of
which were in favour of complainant. This complaint is dated 05.9.1991 and on
this complaint allegedly secret inquiries were made during which a secret
information was received by the police that accused Arab Shah was indulging in
infringement. A raiding party was organised, comprising of Suresh Sati, Raees
Ahmed alongwith few police officials on 14.9.1991 and from premises no.1094,
Ist Floor, Ganj Meer Khan, PS Chandni Mahal, Delhi, from where 634 infringed
audio cassettes; 700 infringed sheets ; 62000 infringed inlay cards; 2
cassette copier and one rewinding machine were allegedly recovered. At that
time accused Arab Shah was stated to be present in the premises recording the
cassettes. The recovered case property was kept in seven gunny bags, which
were given sl. no.1 to 7 and the same were sealed. The machines and rewinding
machine were separately sealed and the case property was taken into police
possession. Thereafter, the case was registered and the accused was arrested.
It is further the case of prosecution that subsequently from second accused,
certain other case property was recovered, with which, were not concerned
since accused Radhey Shyam has already expired.
3\. Accordingly, a charge u/s.63 of Copyright Act, 1957, was framed by my Ld.
Predecessor on 09.12.2000 against accused Arab Shah. It may be mentioned here
that charges for the offence u/s.65 and 68­A of the Copyright Act, 1957, were
not framed against the accused. My Ld. Predecessor Court on 09.12.2000 passed
specific order on charge directing that charge u/s.63 of Copyright Act, 1957,
only be framed against the accused.
4\. In support of its case, prosecution examined total seven witnesses namely
PW1 HC Mukhtiar Singh, PW2 HC Charan Singh, PW3 HC Joginder Singh, PW4 Zaheer
Ahmed, PW5 HC Avdhesh Kumar, PW6 HC Bimal Singh & PW7 SI Ranbir Singh,
(retired).
5\. Entire incriminating evidence against the accused was put to him to which
accused denied that anything was recovered from his possession. The accused
stated that he has been falsely implicated and arrested in this case and that
he did not make any disclosure and nothing was recovered from his possession.
Accused did not opt to lead any evidence in his favour.
6\. I have heard the Ld. Counsel for accused and Ld. APP for the State. Ld.
Counsel for the accused argued that total ten witnesses were cited by the
prosecution and only seven were examined; two eye witnesses who were allegedly
claimed to be independent witnesses namely Raees Ahmed and JUDGMENT/STATE VS.
ARAB SHAH/ FIR NO.205/91/U.S.63 COPYRIGHT ACT, 1957/ ACQUITTED/21.5.2009 /Page
2 of 9 k Suresh Sati, who allegedly witnessed the recovery have not been
examined; PW4 Zaheer, the complainant of case turned hostile when he was
examined as PW4; none of the cassettes allegedly recovered belonged to or
consist infringement of Weston Components Ltd. i.e. complainant; the IO did
not explain as to the delay in registration of FIR between 10.9.1991 to
14.9.1991, although, the complaint is dated 05.9.1991. It is also argued that
one Inspector Ved Prabhakar was a necessary witness who has not been joined
nor cited as a witness; no independent witness of locality has been joined and
there are large number of contradictions in the statement of prosecution
witnesses. It is lastly argued that allegedly 19 days after the disclosure of
accused Arab Shah, raid was conducted on the alleged printing press where
allegedly printing was done. It is claimed that on the above grounds, the
prosecution has failed to prove its case beyond reasonable doubts and,
therefore, the accused should be acquitted.
7\. Perusal of the testimony of prosecution witnesses reveals that PW1 HC
Mukhtiar Singh, is a witness against the deceased accused and does not pertain
to the present accused as he was witness to the seizure of case property from
the recovery of accused Radhey Shyam. Therefore, testimony of witness PW1 is
of no help to the case of prosecution, so far as present accused is concerned.
8\. PW2 HC Charan Singh was a Duty officer, who registered FIR and he is a
formal witness. He proved the FIR Ex. PW2/A.
9\. Similarly, PW5 HC Avdhesh Kumar is a formal witness, who deposed that on
16.4.1992, the complainant Zaheer Ahmed produced two authority letters and one
certificate to the IO which were seized by the IO vide seizure memo Ex. PW5/A
bearing signatures of this witness and those documents were proved as Ex.
PW4/B1, PW4/B2 and Mark A.
10\. Similarly, PW6 Bimal Singh, from Weston Components Ltd., deposed that
M/s. Weston Components Ltd., was owning copyrights of films "Ghar Ka Chirag,
Afsaana Pyaar Ka, Sanam Bewafaa", which were purchased from the producers and
in April, 1999, copyrights of these films were sold to M/s. Tips Industries
Pvt. Ltd. He deposed that prior to the sale of copyright, M/s. Weston
Components Ltd., were exclusively and sole copyright owners. He deposed that
original deeds were handed over to the purchasers of copyright i.e. Tips
Industries Pvt. Ltd. Therefore, the same cannot be produced. However, he
proved the copies of agreement regarding sale of copyright of films "Ghar Ka
Chirag, Afsaana Pyaar Ka, Sanam Bewafaa". However, he produced sale documents
of films "Ghar Ka Chirag, Afsaana Pyaar Ka, Sanam Bewafaa" as mark PW6/A,
JUDGMENT/STATE VS. ARAB SHAH/ FIR NO.205/91/U.S.63 COPYRIGHT ACT, 1957/
ACQUITTED/21.5.2009 /Page 3 of 9 k PW6/B and PW6/C respectively. He identified
the signatures of the officials of his company on these three documents. He
also proved the documents vide which the copyright was sold as Ex. PW6/E. The
testimony of this witness is also of no help to the case of prosecution.
11\. PW4 Zaheer Ahmed was the complainant on whose signed complaint, this case
was registered, but when this witness appeared in the witness box, he deposed
that he did not make any complaint to the police regarding piracy, although he
signed the complaint as an authorised signatory. Thus this witness turned
absolute hostile to the case of prosecution and he was cross examined by Ld.
Prosecutor for the State after obtaining permission from the Court. In the
cross examination by Ld. APP, the witness admitted that he gave a complaint
dated 05.9.1991 to the DCP Ex. PW4/A as authorised signatory of M/s. Weston
Components Ltd. The witness further admitted that the two letters dated
02.9.1991 authorising Suresh Sati and Raees Ahmed Khan to participate in the
raid were also forwarded by him as Ex. PW4/B1 & PW4/B2. The witness however
had shown his ignorance whether on the basis of his complaint an FIR was
registered or not. This witness was subjected to cross examination by accused
Arab Shah through his counsel and in the cross examination by the accused, the
witness categorically stated that neither the complaint was typed nor it was
drafted on his instructions. He deposed that he does not know as to on whose
instructions, it was typed. Similarly, he replied to the two letters dated
02.9.1991. the witness deposed that since he was authorised signatory of the
company, therefore, he used to sign various documents in routine. He also
deposed that he simply put his signatures on the complaint Ex. PW4/A and he
does not know who submitted the complaint and, to whom. He also deposed that
he does not know as to what action has been taken on the complaint, if any.
Thus, the testimony of of this witness also is of no help to the case of
prosecution since this witness did not support the case of prosecution rather
he stated that he routinely signed the complaint and he does not know its
contents nor it was drafted on his instructions. Therefore, the complaint Ex.
PW4/A and the letter dated 02.9.1991 Ex. PW4/B1 & PW4/B2 are not proved. It
may also be mentioned here that this witness is not a witness of recovery of
the above infringed articles from the accused.
12\. PW3 HC Joginder Singh and PW7 SI Ranbir Singh are both the witnesses of
recovery. PW7 SI Ranbir Singh deposed that on 11.9.1991, complaint Ex. PW4/A
was marked to him for action and he made inquiries regarding complaint after
which he received a secret information on 14.9.1991 upon which a raiding party
was constituted which included HC Joginder Singh. Both these witnesses deposed
that raiding party comprising of both of them alongwith, Suresh Sati and Raees
JUDGMENT/STATE VS. ARAB SHAH/ FIR NO.205/91/U.S.63 COPYRIGHT ACT, 1957/
ACQUITTED/21.5.2009 /Page 4 of 9 k Ahmed under the supervision of Inspector
Ved Prabhakar raided the house of the accused Arab Shah on 14.9.1991 at 5.15
pm where the accused was physically present preparing infringed audio
cassettes. On search of house, 634 infringed audio cassettes , 62000 infringed
inlay cards, two recording machines and one rewinding machine were recovered
which were taken into police possession vide memo Ex. PW3/A. Thereafter, ruqqa
was prepared and PW3 was sent to PS for registration of case. The case
property was sealed with the seal of SK and the seal after use was handed over
to Suresh Sati. Thereafter, the accused was arrested vide arrest memo and
personal search memo Ex. PW3/B. PW7 further deposed that the accused made a
disclosure statement pursuant to which premises of J.K. Printers was raided on
28.9.1991 and from the possession of deceased accused Radhey Shyam, infringed
material/printing machine etc. were recovered which were also taken into
police possession. The case property was shown to the witness PW7, who
identified the same except the two recording machines and one rewinding
machine which were on Superdari of the accused which were also subsequently
brought by the accused and proved in the evidence as Ex.P3. Both these
witnesses were subjected to cross examination by the accused through his
counsel.
13\. Ld. Counsel for the accused has laid much emphasises on certain
contradictions appearing in the testimony of these two witnesses. However, in
my considered view, those contradictions are trivial in nature and do not
really affect the decision of case. Those contradictions are very trivial,
such as, with which vehicle the police party reached the spot, till what time
the proceedings were conducted, at what time the ruqqa was sent for
registration of case, at what time the Constable returned to the spot after
registration of FIR etc. etc. No undue weightage can be given to those minor
contradictions. In my considered view none of the contradictions as appearing
in the statement of the witnesses and as pointed out are material enough to
create doubt about the truthfulness of the case of the prosecution. The nature
of contradictions pointed out in the present case are minor and are infact
simple errors of observation which occurs in human nature. Simply because
there occurs some minor variations in their powers of observation and
retention would not Yadav & ors. Vs State make the case of the prosecution
unbelievable. In the case of Sukhdev of Bihar (2001) 8 SCC 86 it was held by
Hon Supreme Court relying upon an earlier decision in Leela Ram vs. State of
Haryana (1999) 9 SCC 525 was observed that there are bound to be some
discrepancies between the narrations of different witnesses when they speak on
details, and unless the contradictions are of a material dimension, the same
should not JUDGMENT/STATE VS. ARAB SHAH/ FIR NO.205/91/U.S.63 COPYRIGHT ACT,
1957/ ACQUITTED/21.5.2009 /Page 5 of 9 k be used to jettison the evidence in
its entirety. Incidentally, corroboration of evidence with mathematical
niceties cannot be expected in criminal cases. Minor embellishments, there may
be, but variations by reason therefore should not render the evidence of
eyewitnesses unbelievable. Trivial discrepancies ought not to obliterate an
otherwise (1999) 8 acceptable evidence. Relying upon an earlier decision in
Ramani vs. State of M.P. SCC 649 it was also observed that when an eye witness
is examined at length it is quite possible for him to make some discrepancies.
No true witness can possibly escape from making some discrepant details.
Perhaps an untrue witness who is well tutored can successfully make his
testimony totally non­discrepant. But courts should bear in mind that it is
only when discrepancies in the evidence of a witness are so incompatible with
the credibility of his version that the court is justified in jettisoning his
evidence. But too serious a view to be adopted on mere variations falling in
the narration of an incident either as between the evidence of two witnesses
or as between two statements of the same witnesses is an unrealistic approach
for judicial scrutiny.
14\. But, the question which still remains whether in view of the above
evidence led by the prosecution, the prosecution can be said to have proved
its case beyond reasonable doubt. We may remind ourselves here that in a
criminal trial, it is the prosecution which has to prove its case beyond
reasonable doubt and it is not the accused to prove its defence. The case of
prosecution should stand on its own legs and the prosecution cannot take
advantage of non explanation of the accused regarding motive for false
implication. Ld. APP for the State argued that the accused has not come up
with any reason as to why he has been falsely implicated but then on this
ground, a conviction cannot be based if the prosecution is otherwise not able
to prove its case beyond reasonable doubt.
15\. In Sharad Birdhichand Sarda v. State of Maharashtra, 1984 (4) SCC 116 at
184: (AIR 1984 SC 1622) (at pages 1655­56) it was observed that the
prosecution must stand or fall on its own legs and it cannot derive any
strength from the weakness of the defence and that it is not the law that
where there is any infirmity or lacuna in the prosecution case, the same could
be cured or supplied by a faIse defence or a plea which is not accepted by a
Court.
16\. PW3 in the cross examination stated that all 634 audio cassettes which
were recovered from the accused were belonging to Weston Co. Whereas the case
property which was produced was shown to the witness in the cross examination
and the witness admitted that none of the audio JUDGMENT/STATE VS. ARAB SHAH/
FIR NO.205/91/U.S.63 COPYRIGHT ACT, 1957/ ACQUITTED/21.5.2009 /Page 6 of 9 k
cassettes produced in the Court was of Weston Company. This means that either
the case property which was produced in the Court was not the same which was
allegedly seized or that there is something wrong with the case of
prosecution. This fact is very material and important fact which affects the
root of this case. PW3 also admitted that he is not aware as to of which
companies, the inlay cards recovered belonged to or, how many such inlay cards
were of Weston Company.
17\. Besides this, it is the case of prosecution that in the case property,
the seal which was affixed was of Suresh Kumar Sati. The said Satish Kumar
Sati is not a police official, but he was a public witness. It is very strange
that a seal of a public witness Satish Kumar Sati was affixed by the
investigating team on the recovered case property and the police did not affix
their own seal. No plausible explanation has been put forth for this. It is a
highly unnatural that a public person was carrying his seal to be affixed on
the case property. This fact coupled with the fact that the said Satish Kumar
Sati has not been examined in this case, is fatal to the case of prosecution.
PW3 contradicted himself by saying that seal was of Satish Kumar Sati and
again said that seal was of IO. Whereas, IO PW7 SI Ranbir Singh categorically
admitted that seal was of Satish Kumar Sati.
18\. Neither Satish Kumar Sati nor another public witness, who allegedly
witnessed the raid namely Raees Ahmed have been examined. Non examination of
these two witnesses is again fatal to the case of prosecution. PW3 admitted
that near the premises from where recovery was effected, there are other
houses also. It is the admitted case of prosecution that no witness from the
locality was joined in this raid. Section 100(4) of Cr.P.C specifically state
that before making a search, the officer about to make search shall call upon
two or more independent and respective inhabitant of the locality in which,
the place is to be searched, is situated or, of any other locality, if no such
inhabitant of the locality to be searched is available or willing to be a
witness to the search. This section also provides that officer making search
may issue an order in writing to such persons. In the present case admittedly
there is no respectable independent witness of the locality of search is
joined by the investigating agency. No name or address of those persons, from
the same locality, who were so requested but they refused to join, is even
mentioned. Although, PW7 in the cross examination stated that he requested
occupants of one such house but even the name of that person is not mentioned
anywhere in the judicial record prior to cross examination. Name is not even
mentioned in the cross examination. Witness Raees Ahmed and Satish Kumar Sati
cannot be called independent witnesses as they were associated with the
complainant company. Even JUDGMENT/STATE VS. ARAB SHAH/ FIR NO.205/91/U.S.63
COPYRIGHT ACT, 1957/ ACQUITTED/21.5.2009 /Page 7 of 9 k otherwise, they have
not been examined during evidence by the prosecution. Non joining of witnesses
from same locality particularly in view of above discussion is again a serious
lapse by the prosecution. Besides this, the fact that police claims that on
the complaint dated 05.9.1991, which was given on 10.9.1991, secret
information was being gathered but no such fact is mentioned by the
investigating officials in police diaries, which also creates doubt about the
case of prosecution. Allegedly, accused Arab Shah made a disclosure statement
against the deceased accused but the premises of deceased accused was raided
and, alleged recovery affected, after as many as fourteen days of the
disclosure. This again creates serious suspicion on the case of prosecution.
It is admitted case of the prosecution that none of the cassettes were played
either at the place of recovery or at the police headquarter to check its
contents. Inspector Ved Prabhakar, who was also present in the raid and was
vital to the case of prosecution has not been even cited as a witness nor
examined. No departure entry or arrival entry by the police to the place of
recovery has been proved which could have lend some credence to the case of
prosecution particularly when the investigating agency claims that they had
prior secret information about accused and that the raiding party on the date
of recovery specifically departed to the premises of accused from the Crime
Branch office. In such circumstances, DD entry register which records the
departure and arrival of police officials on duty ought to have been proved,
which is not proved.
19\. Lastly, the provisions of section 64 of the Copyright Act, 1957 have not
been complied with. Section 64 of the Copyright Act, 1957 provides that any
police official, if he is satisfied that an offence u/s.63 of Copyright Act in
any work has been, is being or is likely to be committed, seize without want
of such copies of infringed work and plates used in making the infringed
copies of the work wherever found. It further provides that all such copies
and plates so seized shall, as soon as possible, be produced before a
Magistrate.
20\. In the present matter, the case property was not produced before a
Magistrate in compliance of section 64 of the Copyright Act, 1957, and which
again creates suspicion on the alleged recovery.
21\. Law is well setteled that suspicion however strong cannot take place of
proof. However strong suspicion may be it cannot take the place of proof. It
cannot be the basis for conviction of an accused. ( so held in Parkash Chander
vs. State 1994 JCC Delhi: State (N. C. T. of Delhi) v. Navjot Sandhu AIR 2005
SUPREME COURT 3820 : R. Sai Bharathi v. J. Jayalalitha AIR 2004 SUPREME COURT
692).
22\. In view of the above discussion, the prosecution has failed to prove its
case beyond reasonable JUDGMENT/STATE VS. ARAB SHAH/ FIR NO.205/91/U.S.63
COPYRIGHT ACT, 1957/ ACQUITTED/21.5.2009 /Page 8 of 9 k doubt and benefit of
the same ought to go to the accused. Accordingly, the accused is acquitted of
the charges. His surety bond and personal bond, if any stands cancelled.
Surety is discharged. Endorsement, if any on the documents of surety stand
cancelled. File be consigned to Record Room.
th ANNOUNCED IN OPEN COURT ON 21 May, 2009.
DIGVINAY SINGH ADDITIONAL CHIEF METROPOLITAN MAGISTRATE­03 IPR, ROHINI, DELHI
JUDGMENT/STATE VS. ARAB SHAH/ FIR NO.205/91/U.S.63 COPYRIGHT ACT, 1957/
ACQUITTED/21.5.2009 /Page 9 of 9 k
20\. In the present matter, the case property was not produced before a
Magistrate in compliance of section 64 of the Copyright Act, 1957, and which
again creates suspicion on the alleged recovery.
21\. Law is well setteled that suspicion however strong cannot take place of
proof. However strong suspicion may be it cannot take the place of proof. It
cannot be the basis for conviction of an accused. ( so held in Parkash Chander
vs. State 1994 JCC Delhi: State (N. C. T. of Delhi) v. Navjot Sandhu AIR 2005
SUPREME COURT 3820 : R. Sai Bharathi v. J. Jayalalitha AIR 2004 SUPREME COURT
692).
22\. In view of the above discussion, the prosecution has failed to prove its
case beyond reasonable JUDGMENT/STATE VS. ARAB SHAH/ FIR NO.205/91/U.S.63
COPYRIGHT ACT, 1957/ ACQUITTED/21.5.2009 /Page 8 of 9 k doubt and benefit of
the same ought to go to the accused. Accordingly, the accused is acquitted of
the charges. His surety bond and personal bond, if any stands cancelled.
Surety is discharged. Endorsement, if any on the documents of surety stand
cancelled. File be consigned to Record Room.
                                                                        Ganj Meer Khan, Chandni Mahal, Delhi.
    (e) The offence complained of/ proved                              :U/s.63 Copyright Act, 1957.
    (f) The plea of accused                                            :Pleaded not guilty
    (g) The final order                                                :Acquitted.
    (h) The date of such order                                         : 21.5.2009.
    (i) Brief statement of the reasons for the decision:­
1\. In this case, two accused namely Arab Shah and Radhey Shyam were sent up
tor trial. During pendency of the case, accused Radhey Shyam expired and
proceedings against him were declared abated on 30.11.2007. Therefore, the
present judgment is directed against accused Arab Shah only.
2\. Brief facts of the case are that complainant M/s. Weston Components Ltd.,
through its authorised representative Zaheer Ahmed, filed a complaint before
DCP/Crime and Railways alleging that the complainant company is engaged in
music recordings and various audio cassettes of number of films were being
recorded and sold by the complainant company and, the complainant company
JUDGMENT/STATE VS. ARAB SHAH/ FIR NO.205/91/U.S.63 COPYRIGHT ACT, 1957/
ACQUITTED/21.5.2009 /Page 1 of 9 k also had a copyright in the said work under
the name Weston Components Ltd. The company suspected that certain persons,
who at that time were unknown, were indulging in infringement of its copyright
by recording and selling audio cassettes of those film songs, the copyright of
20\. In the present matter, the case property was not produced before a
Magistrate in compliance of section 64 of the Copyright Act, 1957, and which
again creates suspicion on the alleged recovery.
21\. Law is well setteled that suspicion however strong cannot take place of
proof. However strong suspicion may be it cannot take the place of proof. It
cannot be the basis for conviction of an accused. ( so held in Parkash Chander
vs. State 1994 JCC Delhi: State (N. C. T. of Delhi) v. Navjot Sandhu AIR 2005
SUPREME COURT 3820 : R. Sai Bharathi v. J. Jayalalitha AIR 2004 SUPREME COURT
692).
22\. In view of the above discussion, the prosecution has failed to prove its
case beyond reasonable JUDGMENT/STATE VS. ARAB SHAH/ FIR NO.205/91/U.S.63
COPYRIGHT ACT, 1957/ ACQUITTED/21.5.2009 /Page 8 of 9 k doubt and benefit of
the same ought to go to the accused. Accordingly, the accused is acquitted of
the charges. His surety bond and personal bond, if any stands cancelled.
Surety is discharged. Endorsement, if any on the documents of surety stand
cancelled. File be consigned to Record Room.
                                                                        Ganj Meer Khan, Chandni Mahal, Delhi.
    (e) The offence complained of/ proved                              :U/s.63 Copyright Act, 1957.
    (f) The plea of accused                                            :Pleaded not guilty
    (g) The final order                                                :Acquitted.
    (h) The date of such order                                         : 21.5.2009.
    (i) Brief statement of the reasons for the decision:­
1\. In this case, two accused namely Arab Shah and Radhey Shyam were sent up
tor trial. During pendency of the case, accused Radhey Shyam expired and
proceedings against him were declared abated on 30.11.2007. Therefore, the
present judgment is directed against accused Arab Shah only.
2\. Brief facts of the case are that complainant M/s. Weston Components Ltd.,
through its authorised representative Zaheer Ahmed, filed a complaint before
DCP/Crime and Railways alleging that the complainant company is engaged in
music recordings and various audio cassettes of number of films were being
recorded and sold by the complainant company and, the complainant company
JUDGMENT/STATE VS. ARAB SHAH/ FIR NO.205/91/U.S.63 COPYRIGHT ACT, 1957/
ACQUITTED/21.5.2009 /Page 1 of 9 k also had a copyright in the said work under
the name Weston Components Ltd. The company suspected that certain persons,
who at that time were unknown, were indulging in infringement of its copyright
by recording and selling audio cassettes of those film songs, the copyright of
20\. In the present matter, the case property was not produced before a
Magistrate in compliance of section 64 of the Copyright Act, 1957, and which
again creates suspicion on the alleged recovery.
21\. Law is well setteled that suspicion however strong cannot take place of
proof. However strong suspicion may be it cannot take the place of proof. It
cannot be the basis for conviction of an accused. ( so held in Parkash Chander
vs. State 1994 JCC Delhi: State (N. C. T. of Delhi) v. Navjot Sandhu AIR 2005
SUPREME COURT 3820 : R. Sai Bharathi v. J. Jayalalitha AIR 2004 SUPREME COURT
692).
22\. In view of the above discussion, the prosecution has failed to prove its
case beyond reasonable JUDGMENT/STATE VS. ARAB SHAH/ FIR NO.205/91/U.S.63
COPYRIGHT ACT, 1957/ ACQUITTED/21.5.2009 /Page 8 of 9 k doubt and benefit of
the same ought to go to the accused. Accordingly, the accused is acquitted of
the charges. His surety bond and personal bond, if any stands cancelled.
Surety is discharged. Endorsement, if any on the documents of surety stand
cancelled. File be consigned to Record Room.
                                                                        Ganj Meer Khan, Chandni Mahal, Delhi.
    (e) The offence complained of/ proved                              :U/s.63 Copyright Act, 1957.
    (f) The plea of accused                                            :Pleaded not guilty
    (g) The final order                                                :Acquitted.
    (h) The date of such order                                         : 21.5.2009.
    (i) Brief statement of the reasons for the decision:­
1\. In this case, two accused namely Arab Shah and Radhey Shyam were sent up
tor trial. During pendency of the case, accused Radhey Shyam expired and
proceedings against him were declared abated on 30.11.2007. Therefore, the
present judgment is directed against accused Arab Shah only.
2\. Brief facts of the case are that complainant M/s. Weston Components Ltd.,
through its authorised representative Zaheer Ahmed, filed a complaint before
DCP/Crime and Railways alleging that the complainant company is engaged in
music recordings and various audio cassettes of number of films were being
recorded and sold by the complainant company and, the complainant company
JUDGMENT/STATE VS. ARAB SHAH/ FIR NO.205/91/U.S.63 COPYRIGHT ACT, 1957/
ACQUITTED/21.5.2009 /Page 1 of 9 k also had a copyright in the said work under
the name Weston Components Ltd. The company suspected that certain persons,
who at that time were unknown, were indulging in infringement of its copyright
by recording and selling audio cassettes of those film songs, the copyright of
which were in favour of complainant. This complaint is dated 05.9.1991 and on
this complaint allegedly secret inquiries were made during which a secret
information was received by the police that accused Arab Shah was indulging in
infringement. A raiding party was organised, comprising of Suresh Sati, Raees
Ahmed alongwith few police officials on 14.9.1991 and from premises no.1094,
Ist Floor, Ganj Meer Khan, PS Chandni Mahal, Delhi, from where 634 infringed
audio cassettes; 700 infringed sheets ; 62000 infringed inlay cards; 2
cassette copier and one rewinding machine were allegedly recovered. At that
time accused Arab Shah was stated to be present in the premises recording the
cassettes. The recovered case property was kept in seven gunny bags, which
were given sl. no.1 to 7 and the same were sealed. The machines and rewinding
20\. In the present matter, the case property was not produced before a
Magistrate in compliance of section 64 of the Copyright Act, 1957, and which
again creates suspicion on the alleged recovery.
21\. Law is well setteled that suspicion however strong cannot take place of
proof. However strong suspicion may be it cannot take the place of proof. It
cannot be the basis for conviction of an accused. ( so held in Parkash Chander
vs. State 1994 JCC Delhi: State (N. C. T. of Delhi) v. Navjot Sandhu AIR 2005
SUPREME COURT 3820 : R. Sai Bharathi v. J. Jayalalitha AIR 2004 SUPREME COURT
692).
22\. In view of the above discussion, the prosecution has failed to prove its
case beyond reasonable JUDGMENT/STATE VS. ARAB SHAH/ FIR NO.205/91/U.S.63
COPYRIGHT ACT, 1957/ ACQUITTED/21.5.2009 /Page 8 of 9 k doubt and benefit of
the same ought to go to the accused. Accordingly, the accused is acquitted of
the charges. His surety bond and personal bond, if any stands cancelled.
Surety is discharged. Endorsement, if any on the documents of surety stand
cancelled. File be consigned to Record Room.
                                                                        Ganj Meer Khan, Chandni Mahal, Delhi.
    (e) The offence complained of/ proved                              :U/s.63 Copyright Act, 1957.
    (f) The plea of accused                                            :Pleaded not guilty
    (g) The final order                                                :Acquitted.
    (h) The date of such order                                         : 21.5.2009.
    (i) Brief statement of the reasons for the decision:­
1\. In this case, two accused namely Arab Shah and Radhey Shyam were sent up
tor trial. During pendency of the case, accused Radhey Shyam expired and
proceedings against him were declared abated on 30.11.2007. Therefore, the
present judgment is directed against accused Arab Shah only.
2\. Brief facts of the case are that complainant M/s. Weston Components Ltd.,
through its authorised representative Zaheer Ahmed, filed a complaint before
DCP/Crime and Railways alleging that the complainant company is engaged in
music recordings and various audio cassettes of number of films were being
recorded and sold by the complainant company and, the complainant company
JUDGMENT/STATE VS. ARAB SHAH/ FIR NO.205/91/U.S.63 COPYRIGHT ACT, 1957/
ACQUITTED/21.5.2009 /Page 1 of 9 k also had a copyright in the said work under
the name Weston Components Ltd. The company suspected that certain persons,
who at that time were unknown, were indulging in infringement of its copyright
by recording and selling audio cassettes of those film songs, the copyright of
which were in favour of complainant. This complaint is dated 05.9.1991 and on
this complaint allegedly secret inquiries were made during which a secret
information was received by the police that accused Arab Shah was indulging in
infringement. A raiding party was organised, comprising of Suresh Sati, Raees
Ahmed alongwith few police officials on 14.9.1991 and from premises no.1094,
Ist Floor, Ganj Meer Khan, PS Chandni Mahal, Delhi, from where 634 infringed
audio cassettes; 700 infringed sheets ; 62000 infringed inlay cards; 2
cassette copier and one rewinding machine were allegedly recovered. At that
time accused Arab Shah was stated to be present in the premises recording the
cassettes. The recovered case property was kept in seven gunny bags, which
were given sl. no.1 to 7 and the same were sealed. The machines and rewinding
20\. In the present matter, the case property was not produced before a
Magistrate in compliance of section 64 of the Copyright Act, 1957, and which
again creates suspicion on the alleged recovery.
21\. Law is well setteled that suspicion however strong cannot take place of
proof. However strong suspicion may be it cannot take the place of proof. It
cannot be the basis for conviction of an accused. ( so held in Parkash Chander
vs. State 1994 JCC Delhi: State (N. C. T. of Delhi) v. Navjot Sandhu AIR 2005
SUPREME COURT 3820 : R. Sai Bharathi v. J. Jayalalitha AIR 2004 SUPREME COURT
692).
22\. In view of the above discussion, the prosecution has failed to prove its
case beyond reasonable JUDGMENT/STATE VS. ARAB SHAH/ FIR NO.205/91/U.S.63
COPYRIGHT ACT, 1957/ ACQUITTED/21.5.2009 /Page 8 of 9 k doubt and benefit of
the same ought to go to the accused. Accordingly, the accused is acquitted of
the charges. His surety bond and personal bond, if any stands cancelled.
Surety is discharged. Endorsement, if any on the documents of surety stand
cancelled. File be consigned to Record Room.
