Delhi District Court
Sole Accused Tilak Raj Satija Was ... vs . on 28 May, 2009
Author: Sh. Dig Singh
     IN THE COURT OF SH. DIG VINAY SINGH, ADDITIONAL CHIEF
            METROPOLITAN MAGISTRATE-03 (IPR), ROHINI, DELHI
                In re:
                State                                         ...COMPLAINANT
                VS.
                Tilak Raj Satija                              ...ACCUSED
                FIR No.99/94
                U/s.63, 65, 68-A of Copyright Act, 1957.
                STATE VS. TILAK RAJ SATIJA
                PS PASCHIM VIHAR
       DATE OF RESERVATION OF JUDGMENT: 11.5.2009
       DATE OF PRONOUNCEMENT OF JUDGMENT: 23.5.2009
                                               JUDGEMENT
       (a) The serial no. of the case                                   : 15/3.
       (b) The date of commission of offence                            :25.2.1994.
       (c) The name of complainant                                      :SATISH KAPOOR,
                                                                         PARTNER,
> to be used for printing or reproducing copies of any work and any matrix or
> other appliance by which sound recording for the acoustic presentation of
> the work are intend- ed to be made on are made.
33\. Section 2(hh) of the Copyright Act defines a 'duplicating equipment'
means any mechanical contrivance or device used are intended to be used for
making copies of any work.
34.In the present case from the possession of the accused a recording machines
which falls within the definition of a dupli- cating equipment was recovered
which is used for reproducing copies of the audio cassettes and therefore the
accused is also liable to be punished for the offence under section 65 of The
Copyright Act 1957.
35\. The accused also infringed the copyright of the audio cassettes as
discussed above. Accordingly the prosecution is also succeeded in proving its
case against the accused u/s.63 of the Copyright Act, 1957. In view of the
above, the accused is found guilty and convicted for the offences u/s.63,65 &
68A of the Copyright Act, 1957.
                                                                         PARTNER,
                                                                         SUPER MEDIA
                                                                         NETWORK,
                                                                         F-39, KAPOOR
                                                                         BUILDING,
                                                                         EAST OF KAILASH,
                                                                         NEW DELHI.
       (d) The name,parentage,residence                                 :TILAK RAJ SATIJA @
       of accused                                                        RAJU S/O.SH.V.R.
                                                                         SATIJA    R/O. BG-
                                                                         7/10, PASCHIM VIHAR,
                                                                         NEW DELHI.
       (e) The offence complained of/ proved                            :63/65 and 68-A of
                                                                         Copyright Act, 1957.
       (f) The plea of accused                                          :Pleaded not guilty
       (g) The final order                                              :Convicted.
       (h) The date of such order                                       :23.5.2009.
       (i) Brief statement of the reasons for the decision                                         :-
1\. Sole accused Tilak Raj Satija was sent up for trial in this case
JUDGMENT/ST.VS.TILAK RAJ/FIR NO.99/94/U/S.63,65,68足A of Copyright Act, 1957
/CONVICTED/23.5.2009/Pg 1 of 22/K with the case of prosecution that on
25.2.1994, a complaint was given by Mr. Satish Kapoor, one of the partners of
M/s. Super Media Network. The complaint was given on behalf of Indian
Phonographic Industries(IPI for short). It is mentioned in the complaint that
M/s. Super Media Network was authorised by IPI, which is a trade association
of 41 phonogram producers in India and amongst them are, Gramophone Company of
India, Weston, Tips, Venus, Magnasound, Music Indian Ltd. & others. It was
alleged in the complaint that several persons were indulging in infringement
in the music work of these companies.
2\. On receipt of this complaint, a raiding party comprising of SI Anil
Kapoor, Inspector D.V. Dutt, SI Satbir Singh, HC Satbir Singh, Ct. Sunder, Ct.
Rajesh Kumar, Ct. Kamal Singh, Ct. Anand Singh and other staff was formed.
Complainant Satish Kapoor also accompanied the raiding party. At about 11.10
pm, at the instance of complainant Satish Kapoor, premises no. BG-7/117,
Paschim Vihar, New Delhi, was searched where accused Tilak Raj Satija was
present occupying that premises. From the premises, total 1960 infringed audio
cassettes of various movies such as Baazigar, Vijaypath, Kabhi Haan Kabhi Na,
Dilwale, Elaan etc. were recovered, out of which 1110 audio cassettes were
with inlay cards and remaining 850 were without inlay cards. 200 blank audio
cassettes were also recovered. Three recording units/audio cassettes of make
Sony having capacity of 1 X 3 were also recovered. 2253 inlay cards of various
movies such as Khuddar, Kabhi Haan Kabhi Na, Sholey, Elaan etc. were also
recovered. Some of the audio cassettes were played on the player which was
containing movies songs as mentioned on the inlay cards. The entire case
property was kept in seven gunny bags and was sealed with the seal of AK and
was taken into police possession. The present case was got registered. The
accused was arrested and thereafter pursuant to the disclosure of accused, one
more JUDGMENT/ST.VS.TILAK RAJ/FIR NO.99/94/U/S.63,65,68足A of Copyright Act,
1957 /CONVICTED/23.5.2009/Pg 2 of 22/K premises no.64/B, Pandav Nagar Janta
Flat, Delhi, was searched on that very night and from there 7900 infringed
audio cassettes of different movies were recovered alongwith 60000 inlay cards
of different movies, which were also kept separately in twelve gunny bags and
was taken into police possession. On the completion of investigation,
chargeheet was filed.
3\. Accordingly, my Ld. Predecessor framed charge against the accused on
07.10.1998 for the offences u/s.63,65, and 68-A of Copyright Act, 1957, to
which the accused claimed trial. In support of its case, prosecution examined
following six witnesses namely :
> a. PW1 - S. Sidhorai, Secretary General of Indian Music Industries.
> b. PW2 - Naresh Kumar.
> c. PW3 - Inspector Satyaveer Singh.
> d. PW4 - Ramesh, Partner of Tips Cassettes. e. PW5 - Satish Kapoor,
> complainant/Partner Super Media Network.
> f. PW6 - Inspector Anil Kapoor, IO.
4\. All the incriminating evidence was put to the accused in his statement
u/s. 313 Cr.P.C. to which the accused claimed that nothing was recovered from
his possession and that he has been falsely implicated and also that his
signatures were obtained on blank papers by the police in the Police Station
on which the police prepared false documents. Therefore, the defence of the
accused was of absolute denial. I have heard the arguments from both sides.
5\. PW1 S. Sidhori, Secretary General of Indian Music Industries deposed, that
Indian Music Industries which was formerly known as Indian Phonographic
Industries is a trade association of various music companies who are members
of this association and the association was assigned the job to protect
JUDGMENT/ST.VS.TILAK RAJ/FIR NO.99/94/U/S.63,65,68足A of Copyright Act, 1957
/CONVICTED/23.5.2009/Pg 3 of 22/K copyright of its member music companies. In
1994, he authorised M/s. Super Media Network to take such necessary actions
against infringement and, in this case after raid was conducted he furnished
documents to the police. The witness proved the authorisation by one of music
company, Gramophone Music Company Ltd., authorising Indian Phonographic
Industries to take action of protection of copyright of this company as Ex.
PW1/A. Similar authorisation by M/s. Venus Record & Tapes was proved as Ex.
PW1/B; the witness also proved the documents assignment of copyright of movie
"Roza" in favour of M/s. Megnasound by the producers of the film as mark
PW1/A; the assignment of copyright of move "Raja Babu" as mark PW1/B;
copyright of movie "Dilwale" as Ex. PW1/C; assignment deed regarding movie
"Elaan" as Ex. PW1/C; assignment deed of movie "Saajan" as mark PW1/D;
copyright of movie "Dalaal" as Ex. PW1/D; copyright of movie Baazigar" as Ex.
PW1/E; assignment of movie regarding copyright of songs of Baba Sehgal, M/s.
Megnasound as Ex. PW1/F; copyright certificate of movie "Roza" as Ex. PW1/G.
The witness also proved his letter Ex. PW1/F vide which the documents as above
were handed over to the investigating officer of the present case. Nothing
material could be brought out from the cross-examination of this witness in
order to impeach the creditworthiness or trust worthiness of this witness.
6\. PW4 Ramesh, partner of M/s. Tips Cassettes & Records Co. is a formal
witness, who proved original authority letter issued by his company in favour
of Indian Phonographic Industries to protect the music work of M/s. Tips
cassettes as Ex. PW4/A, which was signed by this witness as a partner. The
witness also proved the agreement of the copyright regarding movie "Khuddaar"
with the producer of the film as Ex. PW4/B1.
7\. PW2 Naresh Kumar, PW3 Inspector Satyavir Singh, PW5 JUDGMENT/ST.VS.TILAK
RAJ/FIR NO.99/94/U/S.63,65,68足A of Copyright Act, 1957 /CONVICTED/23.5.2009/Pg
4 of 22/K Satish Kapoor & PW6 Inspector Anil Kapoor are all recovery witnesses
and it is deposed by the witnesses that on 25.2.1994, Satish Kapoor gave a
complaint Ex. PW5/A which was marked to PW6 for investigation and on which a
raiding party consisting of these witnesses alongwith Inspector D.B. Dutt, Ct.
Rajesh, Ct. Kamal Singh and other police officials was organised and the
premises no. BG-7/177, Paschim Vihar, New Delhi, was raided at 11.10 pm. In
the premises, accused was present and total 1960 infringed audio cassettes of
different titles, 200 blank cassettes, 2253 inlay cards of movies "Kabhi Haan
Kabhi Naa, Elaan, Dilwale, Khuddar" were recovered. It is deposed that out of
1960 audio cassettes, 1110 cassettes were with inlay cards and remaining 850
were without inlay cards. Three recording units having capacity of 1 X 3
copies were also recovered. All these case property was kept in seven gunny
bags and were sealed with the seal of AK which belonged to PW6 Inspector Anil
Kapoor, who was the IO of this case. The case property was seized vide seizure
memo Ex. PW2/A and thereafter ruqqa was prepared and the case was got
registered through Constable and thereafter the accused was arrested vide
arrest memo Ex. PW5/B. It is further deposed that the accused made a
disclosure statement Ex. PW5/C upon which premises at 66B, Pandav Nagar, New
Delhi, was also raided on that very night and from where 7900 infringed audio
cassettes and 60000 infringed inlay cards were also recovered. This case
property was kept in another 12 gunny bags and was sealed with the seal of AK
and taken into police possession vide memo Ex. PW2/G. In the testimony of PW2
Naresh Kumar, the case property was produced who identified the case property
as the same which was recovered from the possession of accused. All 19 gunny
bags were produced in the Court on 05.9.2000, it is not mentioned that any of
those gunny bags were without seal or torned gunny bags or there was any other
problem with the case property JUDGMENT/ST.VS.TILAK RAJ/FIR
NO.99/94/U/S.63,65,68足A of Copyright Act, 1957 /CONVICTED/23.5.2009/Pg 5 of
22/K produced, thereby meaning, that when the case property was first produced
in the Court in the testimony of PW2, the gunny bags were intact with all
intact seals. PW6 Inspector Anil Kapoor also deposed that during
investigation, he seized various documents and on completion of investigation,
he filed the chargesheet. The case property was proved in the testimony of
witnesses as Ex. PW1 to P19. PW5 Satish Kapoor could not depose regarding
recovery from the accused at Pandav Nagar premises upon which he was declared
hostile by Ld. APP and he was cross examined, but in the cross examination,
the witness recollected and deposed that on that very night from Pandav Nagar
premises infringed audio cassettes and inlay cards which were total 7900 and
60000 respectively of different Hindi Movies were recovered and which were
properly sealed by the IO and taken into police possession. PW2 Naresh Kumar,
PW3 Inspector Satyavir Singh, PW5 Satish Kapoor & PW6 Inspector Anil Kapoor
all categorically deposed about raiding the two premises of the accused and
recovery of large quantity of infringed articles. These witnesses were
subjected to cross examination by the accused but despite lengthy cross
examination nothing material could be brought out on record from the cross
examination of these witnesses in order to impeach the creditworthiness or
trustworthiness of these witnesses. Although, in the cross examination, some
minor discrepancies regarding the time when ruqqa was sent, the time when the
Constable returned after registration of FIR, the time spent by the raiding
time in completing the proceedings at two premises, the time when they finally
left the spot were brought out, but all these contradictions are trivial in
nature particularly in view of the fact that evidence of the witnesses in this
case was recorded after more than six years after the recovery and even some
of the witnesses were examined more than ten years after the incident. In such
circumstances, no JUDGMENT/ST.VS.TILAK RAJ/FIR NO.99/94/U/S.63,65,68足A of
Copyright Act, 1957 /CONVICTED/23.5.2009/Pg 6 of 22/K undue weightage can be
given to these trivial contradictions. Whenever witnesses are examined in the
Court after such long gap of time, minor discrepancies are bound to occur.
8\. Ld. counsel for the accused argued that there is non compliance of section
64 of the Copyright Act, 1957, which provides that any infringed
articles/plates which are seized by the police officer shall be brought and
produced before the Magistrate immediately and as soon as possible. It is
argued that in the present case, the case property was never so produced. In
my considered view, this lapse on the part of IO is not fatal to the case of
prosecution. No doubt, the word used in section 64 of the Copyright, 1957 is
"Shall", but the question is that in a case if the recovery is otherwise
established beyond reasonable doubt by the prosecution in evidence, merely
because the IO failed to bring the same before magistrate and comply with
provision of law, benefit cannot go to the accused. The lapse on the part of
IO may be due to ignorance or may be deliberate but it is settled law that
such lapses of Investigating Officer should not give any undue benefit to the
accused.
9\. Defective investigation by itself cannot be made a ground for acquitting
the accused. Reliance may be placed upon the cases of Prithvi vs. Mam Raj AIR
2004 SC 2729; state of U.P. vs. Hari Mohan AIR 2001 SC 142; in the case of
state of W.B. vs. Mir Mohd. Omar AIR 2000 SC 2988 it was observed in para no
41 as" 41. Learned Judges of the Division Bench did not make any reference to
any particular omission or lacuna in the investigation. Castigation of
investigation unfortunately seems to be a regular practice when the trial
Courts acquit accused in criminal cases. In our perception it is almost
impossible to come across a single case wherein the investigation was
conducted completely flawless or absolutely foolproof. The function of the
criminal Courts should not be wasted in picking out the lapses in
investigation and JUDGMENT/ST.VS.TILAK RAJ/FIR NO.99/94/U/S.63,65,68足A of
Copyright Act, 1957 /CONVICTED/23.5.2009/Pg 7 of 22/K by expressing unsavory
criticism against investigating officers. If offenders are acquitted only on
account of flaws or defects in investigation, the cause of criminal justice
becomes the victim. Effort should be made by Courts to see that criminal
justice is salvaged despite such defects in investigation. Courts should bear
in mind the time constraints of the police officers in the present system, the
ill-equipped machinery they have to cope with, and the traditional apathy of
respectable persons to come forward for giving evidence in criminal cases
which are realities the police force have to confront with while conducting
investigation in almost every case. ................".
Similarly in the case of AIR 2003 SUPREME COURT 2612 "Union of India v.
Prakash P. Hinduja" = 2003 AIR SCW 3258: AIR 2001 SUPREME COURT 142 "State of
U.P. v. Hari Mohan" = 2000 AIR SCW 4012: AIR 2003 SUPREME COURT 660 "State of
U.P. v. Jagdeo" AIR 2003 SUPREME COURT 1164 "Amar Singh v. Balwinder Singh"=
2003 AIR SCW 717 it was held that Error or illegality in investigation would
have no impact on trial unless miscarriage of justice is brought out.
Defective investigation Cannot be made a basis for acquitting accused - More
so when a case is made out against all or any one of the accused persons.
Accused cannot be acquitted only on ground that investigation was faulty. For
fault of prosecution, perpetrators of such a ghastly crime cannot be allowed
to go seat free. Where Prosecution case is fully established by direct
testimony of eye-witnesses and Corroborated by other evidence then any failure
or omission of investigating officer, cannot render prosecution case doubtful
or unworthy of belief.
It may not be out of place to reiterate what was said in H. N. Rishbud and
Inder Singh v. State of Delhi, (1955) 1 SCR 1150=(AIR 1955 SC 196), that a
defect or JUDGMENT/ST.VS.TILAK RAJ/FIR NO.99/94/U/S.63,65,68足A of Copyright
Act, 1957 /CONVICTED/23.5.2009/Pg 8 of 22/K an illegality in the
investigation, however serious, has no direct bearing on the competency or the
procedure relating to cognizance or trial of an offence and that whenever such
a situation arises, Section 537 of the Code of Criminal Procedure is attracted
and unless the irregularity or the illegality in the investigation or trial
can be shown to have brought about a miscarriage of justice, the result is not
affected."
10.It is next contended by the counsel for accused that ownership of the
properties from where recovery was affected is not proved. Again, this
argument is also of no help to the prosecution and the witnesses categorically
deposed that the accused was physically present when the raid was conducted
and recovery of infringed articles was affected. Non procuring of ownership
documents of property cannot be called fatal , particularly when the accused
was apprehended from the spot red handed.
11\. It is next argued that independent witnesses of the recovery have not
been joined by the IO nor family members of the ac- cused was joined. Again on
this ground alone acquittal of the accused cannot be claimed for the simple
reason that non join- ing of the independent witnesses from the same locality
by the IO may be either due to deliberate lapse or may be due to ig- norance.
It may be mentioned that the prosecution witnesses claimed that witnesses were
so requested, but they did not join. It is not uncommon that independent
public witnesses are reluctant to join criminal proceedings. Even otherwise
po- lice joined PW2 Naresh and PW5 Satish Kapoor, both of whom are non police
officials and representatives of IMI/IPI. Both these witnesses and other
police officials have no reason to falsely implicate the accused. No such
reason has been put forward by the accused for his false implication.
Therefore, non joining of independent responsible witnesses of the locali- ty
is not fatal. PW-2 and 6 are public persons and not police
JUDGMENT/ST.VS.TILAK RAJ/FIR NO.99/94/U/S.63,65,68足A of Copyright Act, 1957
/CONVICTED/23.5.2009/Pg 9 of 22/K officials. There is no reason for them to
falsely implicate the accused in the present case. Even there is no reason for
the other police officials to falsely depose against the accused or implicate
the accused. The case of prostitution is that few in- dependent witnesses were
indeed requested to become wit- ness but they did not agree. It is not
uncommon these days that people are reluctant to become witness in criminal
trial cases. In such circumstances no benefit can be given to the ac- cused
for not joining independent public witnesses. It is a mat- ter of common
knowledge that public persons are reluctant to become witnesses of criminal
trial. It has been held in a num- ber of judgments by Hon'ble Supreme court
and High Courts that merely because public witnesses are not joined in a case,
prosecution case cannot be thrown out.
12\. In AIR 1970 SUPREME COURT 1396 "Bai Radha v. State of Gujarat" The sole
point which arose before Supreme court for decision was whether the trial
became illegal by reason of the search not having been conducted strictly in
accordance with the provisions of Section 15 of the Suppression of Im- moral
Traffic in Women and Girls Act, 1956 which provision was akin to the present
sec 15 of the Act . The facts need not be stated in detail. The appellant and
two other persons were tried for various offences under the provisions of the
Act, the charge substantially against her being that she was keeping a brothel
in her house and knowingly lived on the earnings of the prostitution of women
and girls. What was stressed great- ly by learned counsel for the appellant
was that the Act being a special Act its provisions should have been strictly
followed. It was pointed out that the panch witness was not an inhabitant of
the locality in which the place to be searched was situate. Hon'ble S.C. held
that, we are of the opinion that non-compliance with the di- rections
contained in Section 15 (2) in the matter of search would only be an
irregularity and not such an ille- JUDGMENT/ST.VS.TILAK RAJ/FIR
NO.99/94/U/S.63,65,68足A of Copyright Act, 1957 /CONVICTED/23.5.2009/Pg 10 of
22/K gality which will vitiate the trial. In that sense it would be legitimate
to say that a search which is to be conduct- ed under the Act much comply with
the provisions con- tained in Section 15; but it cannot be held that if a
search is not carried out strictly in accordance with the provisions of that
section the trial is rendered illegal. There is hardly any parallel between an
officer conduct- ing a search who has no authority under the law and a search
having been made which does not strictly con- form to the provisions of
Section 15 of the Act. The prin- ciples which have been settled with regard to
the effect of an irregular search made in exercise of the powers un- der
Section 165 of the Code of Criminal Procedure would be fully applicable even
to a case under the Act where the search has not been made in strict
compliance with its provisions. It is significant that there is no provision
in the Act according to which any search carried out in contravention of
Section 15 would render the trial ille- gal. In the absence of such a
provision we must apply the law which has been laid down with regard to
searches made under the provisions of the Criminal Procedure code. In para 8
it was held that "In conclusion it may be observed that the investigating
agencies cannot and ought not to show complete disregard of such provisions as
are contained in sub-sections (1) and (2) of Section 15 of the Act. The
legislature in its wisdom provided special safeguards owing to the nature of
the premises which have to be searched involving inroads on the privacy of
citizens and handling of delicate situations in respect of females. But the
entire proceedings and the trial do not become illegal and vitiated owing to
the non-observance of or non-compliance with the directions contained in the
aforesaid provisions. The Court, however, has to be JUDGMENT/ST.VS.TILAK
RAJ/FIR NO.99/94/U/S.63,65,68足A of Copyright Act, 1957 /CONVICTED/23.5.2009/Pg
11 of 22/K very careful and circumspect in weighing the evidence where there
has been such a failure on the part of the in- vestigating agency but unless
and until some prejudice is shown to have been caused to the accused person or
persons the conviction and the sentence cannot be set aside.
Hon'ble Supreme court in the case Ambika Prasad & anr vs. State 2002 (2)
CRIMES 63 (SC) held that it is known fact that independent persons are
reluctant to be a witness or to assist the investigation. Reasons are not far
to seek. Firstly, in cases where injured witnesses of the close relative of
the deceased are under constant threat and they dare not depose the truth
before the Court, independent wit- nesses believe that their safety is not
guaranteed. That belief cannot be said to be without any substance. Other
reason may be the delay in recording the evidence of independent witness- es
and repeated adjournments in the Court. In any case if in- dependent persons
are not willing to cooperate with the inves- tigation, prosecution cannot be
blamed at and it cannot be a ground for rejecting the evidence of injured
witnesses. It was also held that non examination of investigating officer of
the case is no ground to discard the evidence of eye witnesses. Similarly in
the case of State of U.P. vs. Anil Singh AIR 1988 Sc 1998 ; Dr Krishna Pal and
another vs. State of U. P.1996 (7) SCC 194 and in the case of Appabhai Vs.
State Of Gujrat AIR 1988 SC 696 it was held that These days people in the
vicinity where the incident took place avoid to come forward to give evidence
and civilized people are in-sensitive when crime is committed even in their
pres- ence and they withdraw both from the victim and vigi- lante.
13\. Law is not that testimony of police officers is absolutely un-
trustworthy or that it can never be acted upon. Rather, the law
JUDGMENT/ST.VS.TILAK RAJ/FIR NO.99/94/U/S.63,65,68足A of Copyright Act, 1957
/CONVICTED/23.5.2009/Pg 12 of 22/K is that even the testimony of a police
officer can be acted upon and a conviction can be based on such testimony if
the testimo- ny is unimpeached and found to be trustworthy.
Hon'ble Supreme Court in Anil @ Andya Sadashiv Nan- dorkar Vs. State J. T.
1996 (3) SC 120 has held that testi- mony of the police officials cannot be
discredited merely be- cause they are police officials if otherwise, their
testimony is found to be cogent, trustworthy and reliable.
Hon'ble Supreme Court in Akmal Ahmad Vs. State of Delhi J. T 1999 (2) SC 388
held that ''it is now well settled that evidence of search and seizure made by
police will not be- come vitiated only for the reasons that the evidence is
not sup- ported by independent witnesses.''
14\. Learned Counsel for the accused pointed out to the contradictions in the
testimony of witnesses as to the time when the ruqqa was sent for registration
of FIR, who sent to register FIR, time when the official returned to the spot
after registration of FIR, time when the police left Paschim Vihar from Pandav
Nagar, time of reach and leaving Pandav Nagar, how many persons requested to
become witness, whether there were other persons available on the other
portion of the premises, where the written work was conducted etc.etc., But I
have already mentioned above that these are minor contradictions which cannot
be turned as fatal.
In the case of Sukhdev Yadav & ors. Vs State of Bihar (2001) 8 SCC 86 it was
held by Hon Supreme Court that that once the trustworthiness of evidence
stated in a case stands satisfied, the court should not hesitate in accepting
the same . If the evidence in its entirety appears to be trustworthy, it
cannot be discarded merely on the ground of presence of minor variations in
evidence. Relying upon an earlier decision in Leela Ram vs. State of Haryana
(1999) 9 SCC 525 it was observed that JUDGMENT/ST.VS.TILAK RAJ/FIR
NO.99/94/U/S.63,65,68足A of Copyright Act, 1957 /CONVICTED/23.5.2009/Pg 13 of
22/K there are bound to be some discrepancies between the narrations of
different witnesses when they speak on details, and unless the contradictions
are of a material dimension, the same should not be used to jettison the
evidence in its entirety. Incidentally, corroboration of evidence with
mathematical niceties cannot be expected in criminal cases. Minor
embellishments, there may be, but variations by reason therefore should not
render the evidence of eyewitnesses unbelievable. Trivial discrepancies ought
not to obliterate an otherwise acceptable evidence. Relying upon an earlier
decision in Ramani vs. State of M.P. (1999) 8 SCC 649 it was also observed
that when an eye witness is examined at length it is quite possible for him to
make some discrepancies. No true witness can possibly escape from making some
discrepant details. Perhaps an untrue witness who is well tutored can
successfully make his testimony totally non-discrepant. But courts should bear
in mind that it is only when discrepancies in the evidence of a witness are so
incompatible with the credibility of his version that the court is justified
in jettisoning his evidence. But too serious a view to be adopted on mere
variations falling in the narration of an incident either as between the
evidence of two witnesses or as between two statements of the same witnesses
is an unrealistic approach for judicial scrutiny. It was also held that it is
a common practice in trial courts to make out contradictions from the previous
statement of a witness for confronting him during cross-examination. Merely
because there is inconsistency in evidence it is not sufficient to impair the
credit of the witness. No doubt section 155 of the Evidence Act provides scope
for impeachment the credit of a witness by proof of an JUDGMENT/ST.VS.TILAK
RAJ/FIR NO.99/94/U/S.63,65,68足A of Copyright Act, 1957 /CONVICTED/23.5.2009/Pg
14 of 22/K inconsistent former statement. But a reading of the section would
indicate that all inconsistent statements are not sufficient to impeach the
credit of the witness.
In Krishna Mochi and Others Vs. State of Bihar, (2002) 6 SCC 81, it was held
that it is the quality of evidence that matters and not the number of
witnesses. It was further held that credible evidence of even a solitary
witness can form the basis of conviction. That contradictions,
inconsistencies, exaggerations or embellishments are inevitable. It was
further held that a discrepancy existing in a prosecution case should not
weigh with the Court so long it does not materially affect the case. It was
further held that the duty of the Court is not only to see that no innocent
man should be punished but also to ensure that no person committing an offence
should get scot-free. It was also held that even if a major portion of
evidence is found to be deficient, in case residue is sufficient to prove the
guilt of an accused, notwithstanding acquittal of number of other co- accused
persons, his conviction could be maintained.
15\. It is next argued that other witnesses to the recovery are not examined
in this case and that PW 2 Naresh Kumar and PW-6 Satish Kapoor are interested
witness being representative of IPI. This arguments is also without force as
it is not the quanti- ty of evidence which matters in a criminal case but it
is the quality of evidence which matters. What is to be seen is whether the
witness examined by prosecution were trustwor- thy and the number of witnesses
are not to be counted. Sec- tion 134 of the Indian Evidence Act clearly
provides that no particular number of witnesses in any case be required for
the proof of any fact. Thus a conviction can be based on soli- tary witness
which is trust worthy and what matters is quality of evidence and not
quantity.
In AIR 2005 SUPREME COURT 2503 Seeman alias Veer-
JUDGMENT/ST.VS.TILAK RAJ/FIR NO.99/94/U/S.63,65,68足A of Copyright Act, 1957
/CONVICTED/23.5.2009/Pg 15 of 22/K anam, Vs. State by Inspector of Police, It
was observed in Para 4 "It is now well settled that the evidence of witness
can- not be discarded merely on the ground that he is a relat- ed witness or
the sole witness, or both, if otherwise the same is found credible. The
witness could be a relative but that does not mean to reject his statement in
totali- ty. In such a case, it is the paramount duty of the court to be more
careful in the matter of scrutiny of evidence of the inter- ested witness, and
if, on such scrutiny it is found that the evidence on record of such
interested sole witness is worth credence, the same would not be discarded
merely on the ground that the witness is an interested witness. Caution is to
be applied by the court while scrutinizing the evi- dence of the interested
sole witness. The prosecution's non- production of one independent witness who
has been named in the FIR by itself cannot be taken to be a circumstance to
dis- credit the evidence of the interested witness and disbelieve the
prosecution case. It is well settled that it is the quality of the evidence
and not the quantity of the evidence which is required to be judged by the
court to place credence on the statement."
Similarly in the case of State of U.P. vs. Anil Singh AIR 1988 Sc 1998 it was
held that in some cases the entire prosecution case is doubted for not
examining all wit- nesses to the occurrence. We have recently pointed out to
the indifferent attitude of the public in the investigation of crimes. The
public are generally reluctant to come forward to depose before the Court. It
is, therefore, not correct to re- ject the prosecution version only on the
ground that all wit- nesses to the occurrence have not been examined. Nor it
is proper to reject the case for want of corroboration by indepen- dent
witnesses if the case made out is otherwise true and ac- ceptable.
JUDGMENT/ST.VS.TILAK RAJ/FIR NO.99/94/U/S.63,65,68足A of Copyright Act, 1957
/CONVICTED/23.5.2009/Pg 16 of 22/K
16.In the present case, I have already mentioned above that there is nothing
on record to suggest untrustworthiness of the wit- nesses including police
officials. Although the accused in his statement claimed that he is innocent
and that case property was planted upon him by the police but the defence
taken by the accused does not inspire any confidence whatsoever. It would be
anybody guess as to why police officials would do this. If the accused want
this court to believe that he has been implicated falsely, the least which was
expected from the ac- cused was to at least come out as to what could have
been the motive for the police for his false implication and as to what was
that reason for which police official could have done so. But no such reason
is even mentioned or suggested to the wit- nesses. The accused cannot expect
this court to believe his version by simple bare allegation that he is falsely
implicated. At least some reason should have been put forth by the ac- cused
to suggest as to what could have been motive of the po- lice in implicating
them. In the absence of this, I do not find any reason to throw out the
testimony of witnesses.
17.In view of my above discussion, I am satisfied that the prosecution has
been able to prove its case against the accused beyond reasonable doubt.
Prosecution has been successful in proving its case that above mentioned
infringed articles were recovered from the possession of accused from his
Paschim Vihar address and also from Pandav Nagar premises.
18.The case of prosecution is that the accused infringed the copy-
> right by reproducing the audio cassettes for sale or hire and the copyright
> in the music work of those movies existed with various member music
> companies of IPI who had received the copyright from the author of the music
> work by virtue of as- signment deeds. The case of prosecution against the
> accused is that the accused sale or hire reproduced the copies of music
> audio cassettes which were infringed and which were not re-
JUDGMENT/ST.VS.TILAK RAJ/FIR NO.99/94/U/S.63,65,68足A of Copyright Act, 1957
/CONVICTED/23.5.2009/Pg 17 of 22/K produced or copied by the copyright holder
or licensee of the copyright holder of the music work.
19\. Section 13 of The Copyright Act 1957 provides, that a copyright shall
subsist throughout India in music work besides literary , dramatic, artistic
work and the cinematography films. It also provides that copyright shall
subsist throughout India in the sound recording. Sub section (3) of section 13
further pro- vides, that copyright shall not subsist in sound recording made
in respect of a literary , dramatic or musical Work if in the making of sound
recording copyright in such work has been in- fringed. In the present case
there is no such evidence on record that in making of the sound recording by
the original copyright holder, the copyright in any literary dramatic on mu-
sical Work in respect of which the sound recording is made was infringed by
the composer/author of the work.
20\. Section 14 of The Copyright Act 1957 further provides, that copyright
means the exclusive right to do or authorise the doing of any of the acts
specified in that section in respect of work or any substantial part thereof.
Clause (c) of section 14 specifically provides that in case of a sound
recording copyright means exclusive right to make any other sound recording
embodying it; and also exclusive right to sell or give on hire or, offer for
sale or hire any copy of the sound recording, regardless of whether such copy
has been sold on given on hire on earlier occasions. It further provides that
copyright means the exclusive right of communicating the sound recording to
the public.
21\. Section 2 (m) of the Act provides, that an infringing copy in relation to
a sound recording means, any other recording embodying the same sound
recording, made by any means.
22.Thus when the accused in the present case reproduced sound recording in the
music work in the audio cassettes and had in JUDGMENT/ST.VS.TILAK RAJ/FIR
NO.99/94/U/S.63,65,68足A of Copyright Act, 1957 /CONVICTED/23.5.2009/Pg 18 of
22/K his possession for sale or hire the copies of such sound record- ing the
same amounts to infringement and it is regardless of the fact whether the
accused had possession of those audio cassettes which contained the
particulars of the member music companies of IMI.
23\. Section 51 of The Copyright Act 1957 provides, that copy-
> right in a work shall be deemed to be infringed when any person by way of
> trade exhibits in public or makes for sale or hire, or sells or lets for
> hire, or by way of trade displays or offers for sale or hire any infringing
> copies of the work.
24.Section 63 of The Copyright Act 1957 makes punishable of-
> fence of infringement defined in section 51 of the said Act and it provides
> that when any person knowingly infringes or abets the infringement of the
> copyright in a work he shall be pun- ished with imprisonment for a term
> which shall not be less than six months but which may extend to three years
> and with fine which shall not be less than fifty thousand rupees but which
> may extend to two Lakhs Rs on first conviction.
25.The arguments of Ld. Counsel for accused that there is no complainant of
copyright holder in the present matter and therefore the case could not have
been investigated is without any force. The offences u/s 63 and 68-A Copyright
Act are both cognizable offences and, in a cognizable offence there is no le-
gal requirement that police cannot investigate without proper complaint or
without orders of the court. A police officer who receives information
regarding commission of a cognizable of- fence can investigate the matter
directly. In the present case, the information which was received by police
was regarding infringement of audio recordings of various movies and infor-
mation was not regarding infringement of any particular copy- right owner. In
such circumstances, this argument is absolute- ly without any force.
JUDGMENT/ST.VS.TILAK RAJ/FIR NO.99/94/U/S.63,65,68足A of Copyright Act, 1957
/CONVICTED/23.5.2009/Pg 19 of 22/K
26\. The next contention raised is that there is no decoy customer sent to the
shop or that there was no customer present in the shop therefore there is no
material with the prosecution that articles were meant for sale, is also
without any force. Section 51 of the Copyright Act, 1957 defines as to what
infringement is and when copyright is deemed to be infringed. It provides that
copyright in a work shall be deemed to be infringed when any person makes for
sale or hire, or sells or lets for hire, or by way of trade displays or offers
for sale or hire any infringing copies of the work. Therefore under clause (b)
of section 51 of Copyright Act, 1957, mere making of , and mere displaying by
way of trade or offering for sale or hiring infringing copies is deemed to be
infringement. In the present case, it is specifical- ly deposed by the
prosecution witnesses that recording ma- chine was also recovered which shows
that the accused was in the business of making copies of audio cassettes. Even
other- wise, there is no justification by the accused regarding posses- sion
of such huge quantity of audio cassettes various songs of Hindi movies.
Recovery of such huge quantity of these articles gives rise to a legitimate
presumption that it were meant for sale/ hire and nothing else. In all
probability, these articles were meant for sale/hire only and nothing else.
Therefore there is deemed infringement u/s 51 of the Act
27\. The audio cassettes which were recovered were not containing mandatory
particulars as required u/s.52-A of Copyright Act, 1957, which provides that
in the case of audio/sound recording, the work ought to contain the
particulars which should be displayed on the sound recording and on the
container thereof i.e. name and address of the person who made sound
recording; name and address of owner of copyright; year of its fist
publication. But these particulars were lacking on the audio cassettes
recovered from the accused. Section 52A of The Copyright Act provides, that
JUDGMENT/ST.VS.TILAK RAJ/FIR NO.99/94/U/S.63,65,68足A of Copyright Act, 1957
/CONVICTED/23.5.2009/Pg 20 of 22/K in respect of sound recording no person
shall publish a sound recording in respect of any work unless it displays the
name and address of the person who made the sound recording, the name and
address of the owner of the copyright in such work, and the year of its first
publication.
28.In the present case the audio cassettes which are recovered are sound
recording and it does not contain the mandatory particulars as described above
and therefore the accused is also liable for punishment under section 68A of
the Copyright Act which makes punishable the offence described in section 52A
of The Copyright Act 1957. Section 68 A provides, that any person who
publishes a sound recording in contravention of the provisions of section 52A
shall be punishable with im- prisonment which may extend to three years and
shall also be liable to fine.
29\. It may be mentioned here that in the case of State of Andhra Pradesh Vs.
Nagoti Venkataramana IV(1996) CCR 42 (SC) the following observations were made
by Hon'ble Supreme Court:- ownership by the author of the pirated arti- cles
are not required for the purpose of trial for offence u/s 68A Copyright Act.
30.Besides this, from the possession of accused recording instruments which
falls within the definition of 'duplicating equipment' as defined in section
2(hh) and, 'plate' as defined in section 2(t) of the Copyright Act, 1957, was
recovered. Therefore, the prosecution succeeded in proving its case against
the accused the offence u/s.65 of Copyright Act, 1957 also.
31.Besides this the accused was also found in possession of a recording
machine. Section 65 of The Copyright Act provides that any person who
knowingly makes, or has in his possession any plate for the purposes of making
infringing copies of any work in which copyright subsist shall be punishable
with im-
JUDGMENT/ST.VS.TILAK RAJ/FIR NO.99/94/U/S.63,65,68足A of Copyright Act, 1957
/CONVICTED/23.5.2009/Pg 21 of 22/K prisonment which may extend to two years
and shall also be li- able to fine.
32\. Section 2(t) of The Copyright Act defines 'plate' as includ-
> ing any 'duplicating equipment' or other devices which is used or intended
> to be used for printing or reproducing copies of any work and any matrix or
> other appliance by which sound recording for the acoustic presentation of
> the work are intend- ed to be made on are made.
33\. Section 2(hh) of the Copyright Act defines a 'duplicating equipment'
means any mechanical contrivance or device used are intended to be used for
making copies of any work.
34.In the present case from the possession of the accused a recording machines
which falls within the definition of a dupli- cating equipment was recovered
which is used for reproducing copies of the audio cassettes and therefore the
accused is also liable to be punished for the offence under section 65 of The
Copyright Act 1957.
35\. The accused also infringed the copyright of the audio cassettes as
discussed above. Accordingly the prosecution is also succeeded in proving its
case against the accused u/s.63 of the Copyright Act, 1957. In view of the
above, the accused is found guilty and convicted for the offences u/s.63,65 &
68A of the Copyright Act, 1957.
ANNOUNCED IN OPEN COURT ON 23rd May, 2009 DIGVINAY SINGH ADDITIONAL CHIEF
METROPOLITAN MAGISTRATE-03 (IPR),ROHINI,DELHI JUDGMENT/ST.VS.TILAK RAJ/FIR
NO.99/94/U/S.63,65,68足A of Copyright Act, 1957 /CONVICTED/23.5.2009/Pg 22 of
22/K
> to be used for printing or reproducing copies of any work and any matrix or
> other appliance by which sound recording for the acoustic presentation of
> the work are intend- ed to be made on are made.
33\. Section 2(hh) of the Copyright Act defines a 'duplicating equipment'
means any mechanical contrivance or device used are intended to be used for
making copies of any work.
34.In the present case from the possession of the accused a recording machines
which falls within the definition of a dupli- cating equipment was recovered
which is used for reproducing copies of the audio cassettes and therefore the
accused is also liable to be punished for the offence under section 65 of The
Copyright Act 1957.
35\. The accused also infringed the copyright of the audio cassettes as
discussed above. Accordingly the prosecution is also succeeded in proving its
case against the accused u/s.63 of the Copyright Act, 1957. In view of the
above, the accused is found guilty and convicted for the offences u/s.63,65 &
68A of the Copyright Act, 1957.
                                                                         PARTNER,
                                                                         SUPER MEDIA
                                                                         NETWORK,
                                                                         F-39, KAPOOR
                                                                         BUILDING,
                                                                         EAST OF KAILASH,
                                                                         NEW DELHI.
       (d) The name,parentage,residence                                 :TILAK RAJ SATIJA @
       of accused                                                        RAJU S/O.SH.V.R.
                                                                         SATIJA    R/O. BG-
                                                                         7/10, PASCHIM VIHAR,
                                                                         NEW DELHI.
       (e) The offence complained of/ proved                            :63/65 and 68-A of
                                                                         Copyright Act, 1957.
       (f) The plea of accused                                          :Pleaded not guilty
       (g) The final order                                              :Convicted.
       (h) The date of such order                                       :23.5.2009.
       (i) Brief statement of the reasons for the decision                                         :-
1\. Sole accused Tilak Raj Satija was sent up for trial in this case
JUDGMENT/ST.VS.TILAK RAJ/FIR NO.99/94/U/S.63,65,68足A of Copyright Act, 1957
> to be used for printing or reproducing copies of any work and any matrix or
> other appliance by which sound recording for the acoustic presentation of
> the work are intend- ed to be made on are made.
33\. Section 2(hh) of the Copyright Act defines a 'duplicating equipment'
means any mechanical contrivance or device used are intended to be used for
making copies of any work.
34.In the present case from the possession of the accused a recording machines
which falls within the definition of a dupli- cating equipment was recovered
which is used for reproducing copies of the audio cassettes and therefore the
accused is also liable to be punished for the offence under section 65 of The
Copyright Act 1957.
35\. The accused also infringed the copyright of the audio cassettes as
discussed above. Accordingly the prosecution is also succeeded in proving its
case against the accused u/s.63 of the Copyright Act, 1957. In view of the
above, the accused is found guilty and convicted for the offences u/s.63,65 &
68A of the Copyright Act, 1957.
                                                                         PARTNER,
                                                                         SUPER MEDIA
                                                                         NETWORK,
                                                                         F-39, KAPOOR
                                                                         BUILDING,
                                                                         EAST OF KAILASH,
                                                                         NEW DELHI.
       (d) The name,parentage,residence                                 :TILAK RAJ SATIJA @
       of accused                                                        RAJU S/O.SH.V.R.
                                                                         SATIJA    R/O. BG-
                                                                         7/10, PASCHIM VIHAR,
                                                                         NEW DELHI.
       (e) The offence complained of/ proved                            :63/65 and 68-A of
                                                                         Copyright Act, 1957.
       (f) The plea of accused                                          :Pleaded not guilty
       (g) The final order                                              :Convicted.
       (h) The date of such order                                       :23.5.2009.
       (i) Brief statement of the reasons for the decision                                         :-
1\. Sole accused Tilak Raj Satija was sent up for trial in this case
JUDGMENT/ST.VS.TILAK RAJ/FIR NO.99/94/U/S.63,65,68足A of Copyright Act, 1957
> to be used for printing or reproducing copies of any work and any matrix or
> other appliance by which sound recording for the acoustic presentation of
> the work are intend- ed to be made on are made.
33\. Section 2(hh) of the Copyright Act defines a 'duplicating equipment'
means any mechanical contrivance or device used are intended to be used for
making copies of any work.
34.In the present case from the possession of the accused a recording machines
which falls within the definition of a dupli- cating equipment was recovered
which is used for reproducing copies of the audio cassettes and therefore the
accused is also liable to be punished for the offence under section 65 of The
Copyright Act 1957.
35\. The accused also infringed the copyright of the audio cassettes as
discussed above. Accordingly the prosecution is also succeeded in proving its
case against the accused u/s.63 of the Copyright Act, 1957. In view of the
above, the accused is found guilty and convicted for the offences u/s.63,65 &
68A of the Copyright Act, 1957.
                                                                         PARTNER,
                                                                         SUPER MEDIA
                                                                         NETWORK,
                                                                         F-39, KAPOOR
                                                                         BUILDING,
                                                                         EAST OF KAILASH,
                                                                         NEW DELHI.
       (d) The name,parentage,residence                                 :TILAK RAJ SATIJA @
       of accused                                                        RAJU S/O.SH.V.R.
                                                                         SATIJA    R/O. BG-
                                                                         7/10, PASCHIM VIHAR,
                                                                         NEW DELHI.
       (e) The offence complained of/ proved                            :63/65 and 68-A of
                                                                         Copyright Act, 1957.
       (f) The plea of accused                                          :Pleaded not guilty
       (g) The final order                                              :Convicted.
       (h) The date of such order                                       :23.5.2009.
       (i) Brief statement of the reasons for the decision                                         :-
1\. Sole accused Tilak Raj Satija was sent up for trial in this case
JUDGMENT/ST.VS.TILAK RAJ/FIR NO.99/94/U/S.63,65,68足A of Copyright Act, 1957
/CONVICTED/23.5.2009/Pg 1 of 22/K with the case of prosecution that on
25.2.1994, a complaint was given by Mr. Satish Kapoor, one of the partners of
M/s. Super Media Network. The complaint was given on behalf of Indian
Phonographic Industries(IPI for short). It is mentioned in the complaint that
M/s. Super Media Network was authorised by IPI, which is a trade association
of 41 phonogram producers in India and amongst them are, Gramophone Company of
India, Weston, Tips, Venus, Magnasound, Music Indian Ltd. & others. It was
alleged in the complaint that several persons were indulging in infringement
in the music work of these companies.
2\. On receipt of this complaint, a raiding party comprising of SI Anil
Kapoor, Inspector D.V. Dutt, SI Satbir Singh, HC Satbir Singh, Ct. Sunder, Ct.
> to be used for printing or reproducing copies of any work and any matrix or
> other appliance by which sound recording for the acoustic presentation of
> the work are intend- ed to be made on are made.
33\. Section 2(hh) of the Copyright Act defines a 'duplicating equipment'
means any mechanical contrivance or device used are intended to be used for
making copies of any work.
34.In the present case from the possession of the accused a recording machines
which falls within the definition of a dupli- cating equipment was recovered
which is used for reproducing copies of the audio cassettes and therefore the
accused is also liable to be punished for the offence under section 65 of The
Copyright Act 1957.
35\. The accused also infringed the copyright of the audio cassettes as
discussed above. Accordingly the prosecution is also succeeded in proving its
case against the accused u/s.63 of the Copyright Act, 1957. In view of the
above, the accused is found guilty and convicted for the offences u/s.63,65 &
68A of the Copyright Act, 1957.
                                                                         PARTNER,
                                                                         SUPER MEDIA
                                                                         NETWORK,
                                                                         F-39, KAPOOR
                                                                         BUILDING,
                                                                         EAST OF KAILASH,
                                                                         NEW DELHI.
       (d) The name,parentage,residence                                 :TILAK RAJ SATIJA @
       of accused                                                        RAJU S/O.SH.V.R.
                                                                         SATIJA    R/O. BG-
                                                                         7/10, PASCHIM VIHAR,
                                                                         NEW DELHI.
       (e) The offence complained of/ proved                            :63/65 and 68-A of
                                                                         Copyright Act, 1957.
       (f) The plea of accused                                          :Pleaded not guilty
       (g) The final order                                              :Convicted.
       (h) The date of such order                                       :23.5.2009.
       (i) Brief statement of the reasons for the decision                                         :-
1\. Sole accused Tilak Raj Satija was sent up for trial in this case
JUDGMENT/ST.VS.TILAK RAJ/FIR NO.99/94/U/S.63,65,68足A of Copyright Act, 1957
/CONVICTED/23.5.2009/Pg 1 of 22/K with the case of prosecution that on
25.2.1994, a complaint was given by Mr. Satish Kapoor, one of the partners of
M/s. Super Media Network. The complaint was given on behalf of Indian
Phonographic Industries(IPI for short). It is mentioned in the complaint that
M/s. Super Media Network was authorised by IPI, which is a trade association
of 41 phonogram producers in India and amongst them are, Gramophone Company of
India, Weston, Tips, Venus, Magnasound, Music Indian Ltd. & others. It was
alleged in the complaint that several persons were indulging in infringement
in the music work of these companies.
2\. On receipt of this complaint, a raiding party comprising of SI Anil
Kapoor, Inspector D.V. Dutt, SI Satbir Singh, HC Satbir Singh, Ct. Sunder, Ct.
> to be used for printing or reproducing copies of any work and any matrix or
> other appliance by which sound recording for the acoustic presentation of
> the work are intend- ed to be made on are made.
33\. Section 2(hh) of the Copyright Act defines a 'duplicating equipment'
means any mechanical contrivance or device used are intended to be used for
making copies of any work.
34.In the present case from the possession of the accused a recording machines
which falls within the definition of a dupli- cating equipment was recovered
which is used for reproducing copies of the audio cassettes and therefore the
accused is also liable to be punished for the offence under section 65 of The
Copyright Act 1957.
35\. The accused also infringed the copyright of the audio cassettes as
discussed above. Accordingly the prosecution is also succeeded in proving its
case against the accused u/s.63 of the Copyright Act, 1957. In view of the
above, the accused is found guilty and convicted for the offences u/s.63,65 &
68A of the Copyright Act, 1957.
