Competition Commission of India
Antitrust - Section 27 ... vs Honda Siel Cars India Ltd. & Ors. ... on 1
October, 2014
                                           COMPETITION COMMISSION OF INDIA
                                                   Case No. 40 of 2011
                          In Re:
                          M/s HT Media Limited                                                 Informant
                          And
                          M/s Super Cassettes Industries Limited                          Opposite Party
                          CORAM
                          Mr. Ashok Chawla
                          Chairperson
                          Mr. M. L. Tayal
                          Member
                          Mr. S. L. Bunker
                          Member
                          Appearances: Ms. Pallavi S. Shroff and Mr. Naval Chopra, advocates for the
                                           informant.
                                           Mr. Amit Sibal and Mr. Anand S. Pathak, advocates for the
                                           opposite party.
221\. Considering the totality and peculiarity of facts and circumstances of
the present case, the Commission decides to impose penalty on the opposite
party at the rate of 8% of its average turnover of the last three years of the
company amounting to Rs. 2,83,28,000 (Two Crore Eighty Three Lakhs Twenty
Eight Thousand).
222\. The Commission further directs the opposite party to deposit the penalty
amount within 60 days of receipt of this order.
223\. The opposite party is further directed to file an undertaking in terms
of the directions contained in para 216 (i) within a period of 30 days from
the date of receipt of this order.
224\. It is ordered accordingly.
225\. In terms of the order passed by the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi in Writ
Petition No. 2037 of 2013, it is ordered that the operation of the present
order shall remain stayed for a period of one week from the receipt thereof by
the opposite party to enable it to approach the appropriate forum for grant of
relief, if any.
                                           opposite party.
                                      Order under Section 27 of the Competition Act, 2002
                                   The present information has been filed by M/s HT Media Limited ('the
                          informant') under section 19(1) (a) of the Competition Act, 2002 ('the Act')
                          against M/s Super Cassettes Industries Limited ('the opposite party') alleging
                          inter alia contravention of the provisions of sections 3 and 4 of the Act.
                          Facts
2\. Factual matrix, as unfolded in the information, may be briefly noted.
Case No. 40 of 2011 Page 1 of 93
3\. The informant claims to be one of the leading media companies in India. As
per the informant, apart from being engaged in the business of print media
under the aegis of 'Hindustan Times', it has diversified its ambit into
electronic media and has launched an FM radio channel called Fever 104, which
is currently operational in Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata and Bengaluru. It is stated
that Fever 104 largely plays Bollywood film music and since its coming into
operation in Delhi (October 2006), Mumbai (January 2007) and Kolkata (January
2008), it has developed a strong listenership in these metros.
4\. It is averred that the opposite party, known under the brand name of T-
Series, was founded by the late Shri Gulshan Kumar and is engaged in
manufacture, production and publication of music and videos in India and
internationally and also offers its repertoire of music to television
stations, radio stations and mobile companies for use and broadcast.
5\. The informant has alleged that the opposite party, which is the largest
private publisher of Indian music and owns/ controls over 70% of the latest
Bollywood music, is abusing its dominant position in contravention of the
provisions of section 4 of the Act by (i) charging excessive amount as license
fees/ royalty from the informant for grant of rights for the broadcast of the
opposite party's music content on Fever 104 radio station; (ii) imposing
minimum commitment charges ('MCC') to be paid to the opposite party per month
irrespective of actual needle hour (each aggregate of sixty minutes of actual
broadcast of sound recordings by FM radio station excluding commercials,
advertisements, voice over, anchor time etc.) of broadcast of the opposite
party's music content by the informant and (iii) making conclusion of
licensing arrangements with the opposite party subject to the acceptance of
license fees and MCC imposed by them. The informant has further alleged that
such imposition of exorbitant license fees and MCC by the opposite party is an
unfair condition imposed by it for granting license to broadcast its music
Case No. 40 of 2011 Page 2 of 93 content on radio under the Act which limits
and restricts the right of the informant to broadcast its music content of
other music companies/ composers thereby limiting the choice of music for the
end consumers to only the opposite party's music content and results in denial
of market access for other music companies (publishers, copyright societies
etc.) with less market share and bargaining power.
6\. The informant has also alleged that the opposite party is infringing
section 3 of the Act by requiring radio stations including Fever 104 to enter
into a license agreement to broadcast its music content, the terms whereof are
anti-competitive. As per the informant, the said agreement permits the
licensee to broadcast music subject to acceptance of onerous conditions such
as MCC obligations, which has the effect of restricting around 30-40% of the
radio stations' broadcast to the opposite party's music content. Such
conditions imposed by the opposite party have resulted in depriving consumers
of their right to listen to their choice of music and also distort competition
in favour of the opposite party as the conditions imposed force FM radio
stations to predominantly broadcast the opposite party's music content thereby
causing an appreciable adverse effect on competition in the relevant market in
India.
7\. The informant has further detailed the allegations against the opposite
party which are summarized in the succeeding paras.
License Fee
8\. The informant has stated that it was granted permission, through a bidding
process, by the Government of India to set up and operate FM radio stations in
four metro cities, and pursuant to grant of permission, the Government entered
into a Grant of Permission Agreement ('GOPA') with the Case No. 40 of 2011
Page 3 of 93 informant. Accordingly, the informant entered into license
agreements with copyright societies such as Phonographic Performance Limited
('PPL'), Indian Performing Right Society Limited ('IPRS') as well as music
companies such as the opposite party, Reliance Big Music, Yash Raj Music etc.,
to acquire rights to broadcast their music on its FM stations.
9\. The informant has averred that under the terms of such agreements, the
license was based on the license fees as determined by the Copyright Board in
its order dated 19.11.2002 in the case of Music Broadcast Pvt Ltd. v.
Phonographic Performance Limited ('First Order of the Copyright Board'), under
which compulsory licenses were granted and royalty was fixed at an average
rate of INR 660 per needle hour. This First Order of the Copyright Board was
challenged before the Bombay High Court by PPL citing the royalty rates as
excessive, wherein the Bombay High Court had remanded the matter back to the
Copyright Board for fresh fixation of rates. Aggrieved by the said order, the
radio stations and PPL filed special leave petitions before the Supreme Court
of India.
10\. The informant has further alleged that as it lacked the bargaining power
to negotiate license fees with the opposite party, the parties agreed to adopt
the then existing market standard rate as the rate of payment of license fees
i.e. an average rate of INR 660 per needle hour decided by the Copyright Board
in its First Order. In the meantime, the Supreme Court set aside the First
Order of the Copyright Board and referred the matter back to the Copyright
Board to consider the issue of rates of royalties to be charged by PPL afresh.
By way of order dated August 25, 2010 ('Second Order of the Copyright Board'),
the Copyright Board determined the royalty rates as '2 % of net advertisement
of each radio station accruing from the radio business only for that radio
station..'
11\. The informant avers that following the Second Order of the Copyright
Board, the informant and other radio stations individually approached the Case
No. 40 of 2011 Page 4 of 93 opposite party for applying the rates as fixed by
the Second Order. However, the opposite party filed a writ petition before the
Delhi High Court challenging the applicability of the rates and vide interim
order dated September 15, 2010, the Delhi High Court granted an injunction in
favour of the opposite party against the application of the Second Order of
the Copyright Board on the ground that the opposite party was not a party to
the proceedings before the Copyright Board.
12\. The informant has submitted that since the opposite party refused to
apply the rates as fixed by the Copyright Board, it filed an application
before the Copyright Board for grant of compulsory license on reasonable
royalty on September 24, 2010 which is pending adjudication.
13\. The informant has submitted that since the license granted by the
opposite party was scheduled to expire on October 25, 2010, the informant
received a legal notice dated October 15, 2010 from the opposite party for
renewal of license terms, which the informant agreed to do under the current
rate, subject to the outcome of any orders of the Copyright Board. The
informant has further submitted that in order to survive in the FM Radio
industry, the informant had no choice but to accede to the unreasonable terms
imposed by the opposite party, which has rights over premium music content.
MCC
14\. The informant has stated that the opposite party imposes an amount of INR
1,25,000 per month each as MCC for sound recording and for performance rights.
Thus, the informant is required to pay an amount of INR 2,50,000 per month
equivalent to 189 hours per station to the opposite party, irrespective of
whether or not it broadcasts the opposite party's music content and/ or the
number of needle hours consumed by the opposite party's music. Hence, it is
alleged that the informant was made to pay higher royalty rates as MCC than
the amount actually incurred by it based on the actual amount of Case No. 40
of 2011 Page 5 of 93 needle hour consumed by the opposite party's music, which
is unfair and abusive.
15\. The informant has submitted that most of the radio stations are running
into losses and therefore, in such a situation imposing exorbitant royalties
and MCC obligations makes it unviable for radio stations to sustain let alone
make profits. Furthermore, such imposition of MCC restricts the ability of
radio stations to license music content of other owners thereby adversely
affecting competition in India.
16\. It is further stated in the information that music companies may register
themselves with a copyright society entrusted with the administration of
recording rights to provide blanket licenses to users or, like the opposite
party, license the broadcasting rights of its music catalogue on its own and
earn royalties in return. It is pointed out that the music industry grants
different licenses to different users and based on such rights, earns its
revenue from five main sources, which include physical sales through audio
cassettes and CDs, mobile Value Added Services ('VAS'), radio broadcast,
online download and public performance. According to the informant, different
rights are provided to different users by music providers/ copyright
societies, which constitute separate markets.
17\. The informant has stated that the three main sources of broadcast of
music are FM radio, television and mobile VAS. One of the main distinguishing
factors of radio from other broadcasting sources is that it is free-to-air;
non-subscription based and is easily and widely available to end consumers.
Additionally, costs associated with radio are much lower. Thus, radio cannot
be substituted with broadcast of music on television or mobile VAS. The
informant has further submitted that with FM radio's superior audio quality
and stereophonic sounds, cheaper availability, wider collection of radio
channels, FM frequencies are not considered inter-changeable or substitutable
with AM frequencies.
Case No. 40 of 2011 Page 6 of 93
18\. The informant has further submitted that there is no inter-changeability
between music and non-music content as music is the essential ingredient for
the survival of FM radio stations and furthermore, Hindi Bollywood music
stands out as the most popular genre of music, and in fact 'new' Bollywood
music is the most sought-after and heavily demanded music content in India.
Hence, as per the informant, 'new' Bollywood film music broadcast on FM radio
stations constitutes a separate product market. The informant has further
submitted that as FM radio stations cater to a specific city keeping cultural
diversities, consumer preferences, and tastes in mind and therefore, relevant
geographic market should be each of the cities for which the operator has a
license, however, for ease of reference, the geographic market may be limited
to the metros.
19\. The informant, after submitting that the relevant market should be
'broadcasting rights of new Bollywood film music over FM radio in the Metros'
has further claimed that the opposite party is in a dominant position in the
said relevant market as it owns and commands a substantial share of the music
market with a catalogue of over 200,000 songs; it is considered to be the
largest non-governmental music copyright holder in India with a turnover of
over 400 crores; it has acquired music rights of all major Bollywood films
produced in the past; incomes of its competitors like Sony Music, SaReGaMa are
one-fourth or less the size of the opposite party's turnover; FM radio
stations are heavily dependent on the content owned by the opposite party and
there are huge barriers to entry in the music industry as there are high sunk
costs involved in establishing a successful music industry. Directions to the
DG
20\. The Commission after considering the entire material available on record
vide its order dated 13.10.2011 directed the Director General ('DG') to cause
an investigation to be made into the matter and to submit a report.
Case No. 40 of 2011 Page 7 of 93
Investigation by the DG
21\. The DG, upon receiving the directions from the Commission, investigated
the matter and filed an investigation report.
22\. In the report, the DG, after presenting an overview of the music
industry, determined 'sale of rights of Bollywood music to private FM radio in
the territories of India where Bollywood music is prevalent' as the relevant
market. Further, after conducting a detailed assessment, the DG concluded that
the opposite party is in a dominant position in the said relevant market.
23\. The investigations revealed that the opposite party was abusing its
dominance by imposing unfair and discriminatory conditions in supply of its
music in the relevant market. The investigation also established that the
opposite party by virtue of its dominance was charging excessive and unfair
prices from the consumers i.e. private FM channels in the relevant market.
Further, it was noted by the DG that the opposite party was abusing its
dominant position in violation of the provisions of section 4 of the Act in
the market for broadcast of Bollywood music on FM radio stations in the
geographical areas where Bollywood music is prevalently played by FM channels.
It was also found that conditions imposed on Radio operators like MCC and
mandatory payment of performance license fee by T-Series bore no relation to
the actual quantity of T-Series' music broadcast by FM channels. The conduct
of the opposite party was also found to foreclose the market at both i.e. the
upstream and downstream levels to other music providers and radio stations
respectively, as by imposing the condition of minimum committed needle hours
of its songs the opposite party was distorting the competition in the relevant
market. Lastly, it was noted by the DG that the opposite party was not able to
justify its conduct by way of any pro- competitive reasons for imposing these
conditions.
Case No. 40 of 2011 Page 8 of 93
24\. In the result, the DG concluded that the opposite party contravened the
provisions of section 4(2)(a)(i) and 4(2)(a)(ii) of the Act.
Consideration of the DG report by the Commission
25\. The Commission, after considering the investigation report submitted by
the DG, decided to forward copies thereof to the parties for filing their
replies/ objections thereto. The Commission also directed the parties to
appear for oral hearing, if so desired. Subsequently, arguments of the parties
were heard on various dates.
Replies/ Objections/ Submissions of the parties
26\. On being noticed, the parties filed their respective replies/ objections
to the report of the DG besides making oral submissions. The parties have also
filed written submissions.
Replies/ Objections/ Submissions of the opposite party
27\. Assailing the findings of the DG, the opposite party, at the outset, has
submitted that the reliance by the DG on EC's decision in Universal/ BMG Music
Publishing case is erroneous because the said case was a merger decision and
not an abuse of dominance case. A relevant market assessment for a merger is
based on the narrowest market possible because a conservative regulator would
like to assess competition concerns prospectively on the narrowest. In
Universal/ BMG Music Publishing case such a narrow market was considered to be
each of the five rights i.e. mechanical rights (for reproduction of a work in
a sound recording); performance rights (for commercial users such as
broadcasters including TV and radio stations); synchronization rights (for
commercial users such as advertising agencies or film companies); print rights
(for reproduction of work in sheet music) and online rights (combination of
mechanical and performance rights for online applications). Even in that case,
the market considered was the market for performance rights. Universal/ BMG
Music Publishing case did not find that a Case No. 40 of 2011 Page 9 of 93
market could be assessed from the point of view of different genres of music,
and the DG has gone a step further on the genre by concluding that the
relevant product market for assessment is the market for sale of rights of
Bollywood/film music to private FM channels and then relies on data relating
to a narrower market (hit Bollywood music) to determine dominance. Such an
assessment is incorrect as it is not based on sound principles of competition
law as applicable to abuse of dominance cases.
28\. The opposite party has submitted that while in most cases, relevant
market will be delineated by referring to demand side substitutability, the
fact that suppliers are able to switch production processes to produce the
relevant products can have a considerable disciplinary effect on the
competitive behaviour of the companies producing products which are demand
substitutable. The DG has, therefore, failed to consider supply side
substitutability and an absence of such assessment demonstrates the extremely
narrow and internally conflicting approach in delineating the relevant market.
Based on both demand and supply side substitution, it is evident that the
product market should be defined in a broader manner as the market for
licensing of all music content to FM radio broadcasters in India (including
AIR FM).
29\. The opposite party has submitted that the DG made a manifest error in
assessing market dynamics at the stage of radio stations broadcasting to end
consumers (the listeners) to assess competition issues at the higher level of
licensing of music content by the opposite party to radio stations. The DG
should have focused his attention on the market for the licensing of music
content to FM radio broadcasters in India including AIR and not merely 'sale
of rights of Bollywood music to private FM radio in territories of India where
Bollywood music is prevalent'. The DG has reached the conclusion on relevant
market by considering the extent to which the medium of music are
substitutable/ interchangeable for listeners/ consumers. However, this is the
wrong level to assess the relevant market. The supply of goods where the Case
No. 40 of 2011 Page 10 of 93 opposite party is alleged to be dominant is the
upstream flow of A (content owners providing licenses to radio stations) and
therefore, what is required is to test the extent of the opposite party's
market power by looking at the ability of its customers (radio stations) to
switch and the ability of its rivals (other content providers) to expand.
However, the DG analysed the substitution in respect of the downstream flow of
B (radio stations providing broadcasts to consumers). Even if the DG's
methodology is adopted, the relevant market should have been defined in a
broader manner. From an end consumer perspective, it is immaterial whether a
particular song is played over a private FM channel/ station or over AIR FM as
long as the consumer is able to listen to the song. The relevant market for
assessment should therefore, be the market for licensing of music content to
FM radio broadcasters in India, including AIR. The DG provides no relevant
evidence to justify this exclusion. The DG claims that AIR is distinct from FM
radio because (among other reasons), AIR has a wider range of content, a
greater reach and less restrictions, however, this is not evidence to support
a narrow market.
30\. The opposite party has further submitted that the DG does not justify
restricting the market to Bollywood music. The DG's conclusions are based upon
the 'strong genre of preference by Indian radio listeners'. This was stated to
be the wrong level to consider substitution. From a demand side perspective
radio stations may switch to alternative types of content. Although a given
customer may be particular about the music he listens to, a radio station is
likely to have weaker preferences. The ultimate goal of a radio station is to
attract listeners in order for it to attract advertisers and therefore, the
radio station is likely to be indifferent between types of content mixes so
long as it can attract an equal number of listeners. The evidence shows that
radio stations are prepared to substitute to alternative content. There are
many stations that are not based on Bollywood music, as the report identifies
around 20% of stations which are not based on Bollywood music. Even those
stations that have a higher content of Bollywood music still play other types
of popular music, so they could easily increase the amount of non Bollywood
music they Case No. 40 of 2011 Page 11 of 93 play. Furthermore, it was
submitted that there are examples of radio stations that have switched their
focus from Bollywood music to other types of music.
31\. The opposite party has submitted that in so far as the geographic market
is concerned, sound competition law assessment can be carried out after
delineating a clearly defined product and geographic market and then assessing
the competitive conditions present therein. In the present case the DG has
defined the geographic market as 'areas of Indian territory where the
Bollywood music is prevalently played on FM channels'. Such a definition is
extremely vague and cannot be used for any competition law assessment as there
does not exist any objectively verifiable standard of norm to determine what
is 'prevalent' form of music in any given territory of India especially
considering the fact that the same music/ content is available through
internet radio, mobile radio, TV etc., across territories of India.
32\. The opposite party has submitted that even if the DG's definition of the
relevant market is accepted, there is no evidence in the DG Report that the
opposite party holds a dominant position in the relevant market. The DG fails
to shows that the opposite party has held persistently high market share in
the relevant market over a period of time and the DG also failed to provide
any robust evidence of barriers to entry or expansion or other factors
identified in section 19(4) of the Act to support a finding of dominance.
33\. The opposite party also submitted that the DG has erred in concluding
that the opposite party holds a dominant position. The market share data
relied upon by the DG itself shows that the market share of the opposite party
in the relevant market does not exceed 27%. It has been held by the European
Court that very large market shares are in themselves, save in exceptional
circumstances, evidence of a dominant position. A share of over 50% is
generally considered as a strong evidence of a dominant position (Akzo v
Commission). But the Akzo test is rebuttable and not conclusive. Numerous
factors must be analyzed and evaluated and not merely market shares. A Case
No. 40 of 2011 Page 12 of 93 market share of around 27% in the total music
segment for all FM radio stations (i.e. FM radio stations that have been
licensed by the opposite party and FM radio stations that have not been
licensed by the opposite party) can never be considered as an indicator of
dominance. The opposite party has further submitted that dominance is more
likely when the firm has a persistently high market share which means it is
more robust to look at the market shares over a longer period (3-5 years)
based on verifiable, consistent data, which does not exist in this case.
34\. It was contended that the DG has erred in concluding that the opposite
party has the largest market share in the Bollywood film music or even for
that matter the 'hit' Hindi film music and as such is the dominant player in
the said market. The DG has further erred in not relying upon and taking into
account the data showing the market share of the opposite party on an all
India basis in respect of the private FM stations whether or not licensed by
the opposite party.
35\. The DG has erred in not taking into consideration and assessing the data
which shows that the opposite party does not have the size and resources or
economic power to be dominant. The category wise revenue generated alongwith
the percentage of FM revenue clearly shows that the opposite party's revenue
has been decreasing over the years, which information was ignored by the DG.
36\. The data on revenues of the opposite party based on the category of
cities where FM is played clearly shows that the revenues of the opposite
party from FM radio stations have been decreasing over the years. The decrease
in revenues of the opposite party despite increase in number of FM radio
stations clearly shows that the FM radio stations are not dependent on the
opposite party and as such the opposite party is not in a dominant position.
It is further evident that the sales and revenues for the opposite party from
the physical sales of cassettes, CDs, micro cards and others have gone down.
Likewise the Case No. 40 of 2011 Page 13 of 93 revenue for the opposite party
from license fees from radio broadcasters has also been falling substantially
over the years.
SCIL (Segment wise Sales) (Rs. In 2010- 2009- 2008- 2007- 2006- 2005- 2004-
2003-
                          Lacs)        2011      2010       2009       2008       2007       2006       2005       2004
                          Physical
                          Sales
                          Consumer     7330.75   4916.84     5432.65    5527.95    6832.18    7292.30    6271.20    7784.32
                          Electronic
                          s
                          Cassettes/   6090.81   9592.53    12323.48   16252.78   17160.42   20272.92   21919.40   21552.51
                          CD/
                          VCD/
                          DVD/
                          Blueray/
                          Pendrive
                          etc.
                          Others        675.49    856.63     1023.34    1242.29    1678.24    1261.36    1177.05     921.25
                          Sub Total    14097.0   15366.0    18779.47   23023.02   25670.84   28826.58   29367.65   30258.08
                          (Physical          5         0
                          Sales (A)
37\. It was argued that the DG has focused only on the customers of the
opposite party and not on the competition faced by the opposite party. The DG
should have noted that the opposite party faces competition at two levels,
i.e. initially from the music companies at the stage of acquisition of content
and subsequently from PPL and other music companies for licensing of such
content. The DG should have realized that the opposite party is not
foreclosing competition but creating and intensifying competition in the
market. The biggest competitor of the opposite party at the stage of licensing
of the music rights is PPL which has more than 200 companies as its members.
38\. The DG has wrongly stated that the opposite party is a lifeline for the
radio stations and that no radio station can survive without obtaining license
from the opposite party. The data already before the DG showed that there were
many radio stations that have not received any license from the opposite party
and these radio stations are experiencing higher growth levels than other
radio stations that have licenses from the opposite party.
Case No. 40 of 2011 Page 14 of 93
39\. The DG has erred in observing that the conduct of the opposite party has
resulted in barriers to entry for the FM radio stations. In this regard, a
review of the annual report of Big FM and Radio Mirchi shows that Big FM's
(which does not have a license from the opposite party) growth in revenue was
nearly 16% while radio stations with the opposite party's licensed content
like Radio Mirchi and HT Media grew by only 10% and 6% respectively. The DG
provides little evidence of barriers to entry and expansion. The DG also fails
to consider the possibility of expansion by current rivals such as Sony. Many
of the opposite party's competitors are vertically integrated (such as Sony
and YRF) and have natural access to the music content of the films produced by
their affiliates. The opposite party does not possess this strategic advantage
and must vigorously compete and bid for every film's music content. The DG
also makes no analysis of buyer power. The opposite party is becoming
increasingly dependent on these radio broadcasters for revenues and that
implies a degree of buyer power, which factor has not been considered by the
DG at all.
40\. The opposite party has submitted that a perusal of publicly available
documents on the Radio Industry, annual reports of certain radio stations
etc., demonstrates that this industry is growing at a steady (if not
exponential) rate and does not reflect any indication of any anti-competitive
injury or even a remote possibility of foreclosure as a result of the anti-
competitive conduct of the opposite party. Such data itself should be
sufficient to demonstrate that there exists no case of excessive pricing. As
such, no anti-competitive harm can be found in an industry that is as robust
as the radio industry due to the alleged conduct of the opposite party.
Furthermore, the opposite party's alleged conduct does not have any impact on
the end consumer. It should also be noted that exploitative conduct like
excessive pricing, is no longer the focus area of anti-trust regulators in
mature anti-trust jurisdictions like the EU and the US, where the focus is on
exclusionary conduct.
Case No. 40 of 2011 Page 15 of 93
41\. The opposite party has submitted that under MCC clause, the licensee/
radio station is liable to pay an assured sum of royalty to the opposite
party. It may be noted that since radio companies more or less end up playing
music equal to and in most cases more than the amount that MCC accounts for,
MCC raises no competition law issues. Thus, it is incorrect to say that radio
stations are 'forced' to play the opposite party's content as a result of MCC
clause. Opposite party has denied that it has imposed MCC of 50% on any FM
radio station. Furthermore, the DG should not have relied upon the agreement
with Big FM for the reason that an agreement is not an indicator of the true
MCC charged by the opposite party. The approximate MCC charged by the opposite
party does not exceed 35% of the total needle playout hours. The DG has failed
to show how MCC is exploitative. It is based on the playout of the radio
station for the previous year and therefore, rather than forcing customers to
buy content that the broadcasters do not want, it reflects their actual
demand. The DG has failed to show that imposing MCC is exclusionary as there
is no evidence that rivals are being foreclosed.
42\. The DG has erred in failing to consider the efficiency explanations for
MCC. There are potential efficiency benefits from MCC that arise from inherent
uncertainties in the music industry. The content owners invest in new content
before knowing what value listeners will place on that content. This
uncertainty is a cost to investors and creates a disincentive to invest in new
content. The MCC reduces the uncertainty that content owners face. Knowing
that there is more certainty around the amount of airplay they can expect,
content owners can invest in new content with more confidence.
43\. The opposite party has lastly submitted that assessment of the DG is
incorrect as there are conflicting decisions of various High Courts on this
issue and the Supreme Court is presently seized of the matter. The DG has
failed to note that dominance has no causal link to the payment of performance
license fees. At present the opposite party does not charge any performance
license fees from radio broadcasters and is awaiting the Supreme Court's
decision in Case No. 40 of 2011 Page 16 of 93 the matter. There is no decision
or court order, to which the opposite party is a party which prevents or
prohibits it from charging a performance license fee and there is no court
order that makes the charging of performance license fees illegal.
Replies/ Objections/ Submissions of the informant
44\. The informant has submitted that the DG has conducted a thorough
investigation and that the DG's conclusion is correct and well founded. On the
issue of relevant market, the informant has submitted that FM radio is
distinct from other forms of music media for the following reasons:
(a) FM radio stations are free-to-air Given that radio is free, a consumer
would not consider other forms of paid for entertainment as being
substitutable with radio as a source of entertainment. If one were to conduct
a Small but Significant Non-transitory Increase in Prices ('SSNIP') test to
radio, consumers (i.e. listeners) would not switch to television or mobile
VAS. Further, if one were to conduct a SSNIP test on radio, this would not
cause advertisers to switch to advertising on television or mobile VAS. This
is because the localization and ease of access of radio is far more than the
other modes of broadcast and since consumers do not consider the two mediums
as substitutable, advertisers would not switch their advertising preferences.
(b) Broadcast restrictions imposed on radio Pursuant to GOPA entered into
between Government of India and private radio stations, the content allowed to
be broadcast on radio is severely restricted. FM radio stations are prohibited
from broadcasting news or current affairs except for music. This places
private FM stations on a different plane compared to television broadcasters,
as television has far greater liberty in Case No. 40 of 2011 Page 17 of 93
relation to the content it is permitted to broadcast. Further, mobile VAS is
an ancillary service to primary telecommunications services. Mobile VAS also
has fewer restrictions than radio and does not have the scale, content, ease
of accessibility or usage that FM Radio currently has across India.
(c) Penetration Radio broadcasting is therefore, localized and specific to a
particular city. On the other hand, TV channels transcend national boundaries
and mobile VAS is increasingly becoming available nationally and also does not
require licenses to operate in cities.
45\. Accordingly, the informant has submitted that in addition to reasons of
expenditure incurred, accessibility, broadcast restriction, licensing
requirements also indicate that music entertainment on radio and TV/ mobile
VAS are not substitutable and therefore, radio as a medium for music broadcast
is in itself an altogether different product market.
46\. The informant has also submitted that AM is a distinct market from FM.
Transmission over radio can take various forms such as Amplitude Modulation
('AM') and Frequency Modulation ('FM'). These are two different and most
popular methods of broadcasting content. Due to the inherent limitations of AM
radio (low quality, lack of clarity, susceptibility to deteriorate due to
weather conditions, interference with other channels), a new model of
transmission was introduced (FM). Further, since GOPA permits private radio
stations to only use FM frequencies and since FM license holders cannot switch
to AM, the two are very different forms of radio broadcast in India. With FM
radio's superior audio quality and stereophonic sounds, cheaper availability,
wider collection of radio channels, FM frequencies cannot be considered as
interchangeable or substitutable with AM frequencies.
Case No. 40 of 2011 Page 18 of 93
47\. The informant has submitted that AIR is distinct from private FM
channels. AIR is a nationally available radio station run by Prasar Bharti and
has been in operation for over 60 years whereas FM radio stations by
comparison have been in operation since 2001 and are granted licenses for
limited geographies. The DG has found that AIR is distinct from private FM
radio stations inter alia because of (i) no restrictions on content (ii) pan-
India presence and (iii)huge listenership and earns approx. 40% of total
advertising revenue of the FM industry. The informant has supported the
finding of the DG that private FM radio stations are not substitutable for AIR
in India.
48\. The informant has submitted that non-music content is broadcast on FM
radio for the purposes of complementing music content and therefore, is not
substitutable or interchangeable for music content. All music channels
advertise themselves as music channels or have tag lines relating to more
music content than their competitors. Thus, it can be seen that the main focus
of radio stations is on music and it is an essential branding and marketing
proposition for them to have the latest music content. As a result, music
content is an essential ingredient for the survival of FM radio stations
besides being the most popular and primary source of entertainment on free-to-
air radio. The informant has further submitted that the very demand for FM
radio stations is to broadcast music, which is not substitutable for non-music
content and therefore, music and non-music content are not inter-changeable
and cannot be said to form part of the same relevant market.
49\. The informant has submitted that Bollywood music is a distinct relevant
product market on FM channels. In the radio industry, markets can be
delineated by different genres/ categories of music. This is because a
listener's tastes i.e. consumer preferences can be strong enough to warrant
segmentation of markets. Such an approach has been followed by the EC in
Seagram/ Polygram case and Thorn EMI/ Virgin case, where the EC has identified
different relevant markets according to the genre of music concerned.
Similarly, the DG has also found Bollywood music to constitute a product Case
No. 40 of 2011 Page 19 of 93 market separate from other genres of music as (a)
80% of the 240 private FM radio stations in India play a majority of Bollywood
music (b) the most popular songs on radio are Bollywood songs and (c) a
majority of radio listeners in India are under 50 years old and therefore, the
target audience for radio who strongly prefer Bollywood music.
50\. The informant has submitted that out of the various genres of Indian
music, Hindi Bollywood film music stands out as the most popular genre of
Indian music.
51\. The informant, therefore, has submitted that in India, access to
Bollywood music is necessary for FM radio stations to be viable and operate
successfully. This is evidenced by the falling revenues of Radio City, Radio
Mantra and Big FM, during the periods that the opposite party had terminated
its licenses to these radio stations, which had resulted in Radio City having
to renew its license with the opposite party in order to operate and remain
financially viable in the radio market. The informant submits that Bollywood
music is a separate relevant market for the purposes of assessing conduct
under the Act.
52\. The informant has submitted that the DG has erred in finding that a lack
of clarity on the definition of 'new music' does not allow it to conclude that
'new' Bollywood music is a separate relevant market. It was submitted that the
popularity of Bollywood music in fact stems from 'new' music which is
broadcast on private FM radio stations and this forms the essence of a private
FM radio stations' revenue. Any radio station which wishes to carry on a
viable and successful business in a market where they provide Bollywood music
to listeners must necessarily broadcast the latest songs demanded by the youth
or 'new' music which the opposite party has admitted has a shelf-life of only
6-8 months.
Case No. 40 of 2011 Page 20 of 93
53\. The informant has also submitted that 'new' can be defined as music which
is released in the last 6-8 months as that is the normal shelf-life for
Bollywood music in India. However, a longer period of reference, say around
one year would also yield no different competition law analysis as the
opposite party owns or controls the majority of Bollywood music in India. The
vast catalogue of music allows the opposite party to control what content FM
radio stations necessarily require to stay in business. In any event, the
informant has submitted that the Commission need not come to a definite
determination of 'new' music even if the DG's product market definition were
to be adopted, the opposite party would still be found to enjoy a dominant
position.
54\. On geographic market, the informant has submitted that while it agrees
with the market definition of the DG, the relevant geographic market can be
defined even more narrowly due to the unique regulatory environment and strong
customer preferences which form an integral part of the FM industry in India.
In India, customer preferences vary from city to city and from State to State.
As radio stations are licensed to operate in particular cities and do not
broadcast on a nationwide basis, their programs and scheduling are tailor-
made to particular cities. It is for this reason that the songs played in
Chennai are different to those played in Delhi even if the same company has a
radio station in both cities. While it is the informant's position that the
geographic market to assess the opposite party's conduct in the licensing of
Bollywood music rights to private FM radios is the 'individual cities in which
FM radio stations are granted licenses to operate', the DG's geographic market
definition of areas 'where Bollywood music is prevalent' would nonetheless
demonstrate the opposite party's dominant position in such geographic market.
55\. The informant submits that the DG's findings on the opposite party's
dominance are correct and conclusive.
56\. Supporting the findings of the DG it was submitted that the opposite
party's website itself announces that the opposite party is India's dominant
Case No. 40 of 2011 Page 21 of 93 music label which represents over 70% of
upcoming Indian entertainment content including Bollywood. Publicly available
reports also state that the opposite party commands a lion's share of 80% of
the music market with a catalogue of over 200,000 songs. The informant submits
that in terms of 'relativity of market shares', it is important to look at the
largest firm's market share relative to its competitors and in this case the
opposite party's market share is a multiple of its competitors' market shares
which clearly establishes its dominant position. Evidence provided by the
opposite party itself demonstrates that the market share of total songs played
on 210 radio stations is between 32.5% and 34.1%. Evidence provided by the
opposite party also demonstrates that it owns the rights to approximately 46%
of the top 100 songs played in category 'A' cities between July 2011 to June
2012. The informant has also submitted that the opposite party's position in
the market allows it to purchase the highest percentage of films and in
relation to blockbuster of 'hit' films, the opposite party holds the rights to
the music of most of these films which cements its position in the market as a
dominant enterprise.
57\. The informant has submitted that the opposite party's size, resources and
economic power place it in a position of dominance in the relevant market. The
opposite party is considered to be the largest non-governmental music
copyright holder in India with a turnover of over 400 crores of the 750 crore
Indian music industry. Furthermore, the opposite party has acquired exclusive
music rights of all major Bollywood films produced in the recent past. The DG
has compared the turnover of the opposite party to the turnover of its
competitors and found that the opposite party's turnover is almost 3 times
that of its closest competitors SaReGaMa.
58\. It was submitted that it is evident from the investigation carried out by
the DG that private FM stations cannot survive in the relevant market without
the opposite party's music. FM radio stations play contemporary hit music to
Case No. 40 of 2011 Page 22 of 93 attract listeners which attracts advertisers
who provide their sole source of revenue. The informant has further submitted
that private FM radio stations are dependent on the opposite party in view of
its music repertoire, strong preference of their listeners and the lack of
viable alternative options. The dependence of radio stations can clearly be
demonstrated by how Radio Mantra, Big FM and Radio City's businesses have been
affected by the opposite party's refusal to license on fair and reasonable
terms to them.
59\. The informant has argued that there are significant barriers to entry in
the music industry. There are large sunk costs involved in establishing a
successful music company, including the infrastructure set up, acquisition of
music rights, marketing and promotion and above all, breaking into the tightly
knit fraternity which deters and prevents new companies from entering the
music industry. It is not easy to obtain ownership rights of music due to the
high costs involved and the vast distribution network required to exploit such
rights. In fact, the opposite party has increased acquisition costs to protect
its dominant position in the relevant market.
60\. The informant has submitted that the opposite party has abused its
dominant position by excessively and unfairly licensing its music content.
Excessive price is covered under the Act as an 'unfair price' under section
4(2)(a)(ii) of the Act. The informant has further submitted that excessive
pricing by a dominant undertaking is universally recognized as abuse of
dominant position. The European Court of Justice has explicitly recognized
that excessive prices imposed by a dominant undertaking will be an abuse of a
dominant position in cases such as General Motors, United Brands.
61\. The informant has further submitted that that in order for the copyright
license to be fair it must bear a reasonable relation to the economic value
that the license provides to the licensee and consequently it must correspond
to/ reflect a proportion of the revenue generated by the exercise of a
license. It was submitted that the broadcast license fee of INR 660 per needle
hour and Case No. 40 of 2011 Page 23 of 93 performance license fee of INR 666
per needle hour which is not payable as per the recent judgements of the
Delhi, Bombay and Kerala High Courts imposed by the opposite party is unfair
and excessive and in violation of section 4(2)(a)(ii) of the Act.
62\. The informant has argued that imposition of MCC on the informant is an
unfair condition in violation of section 4(2)(a)(ii) of the Act. An enterprise
is held to abuse its dominant position if it exploits the opportunities
arising out of its dominant position in such a way so as to reap trading
benefits which it would not have reaped had there been normal and sufficiently
effective competition. The MCC imposed by the opposite party has no relation
to the music content that is actually broadcast nor is it necessary or
indispensible for such broadcast and the opposite party is abusing its
dominant position by imposing unfair and discriminatory conditions which are
unconnected to the actual service provided by the license.
63\. It was submitted that the opposite party as a holder of the copyrights to
a majority of 'new' Bollywood music is an unavoidable trading partner for FM
radio stations. As a result of the dominance in the relevant market, the DG
has found that the opposite party is the only music company that dictates such
unfair conditions for provision of its license to FM radio stations. No other
music provider including PPL requires the payment of MCC from FM stations for
grant of a license to broadcast their music. Given this overwhelming
dependence of the informant and other private FM radio stations and the
weakness of their position vis-a-vis the opposite party, it is submitted that
the opposite party is imposing an excessive and unfair condition in violation
of section 4(2)(a)(ii) of the Act.
64\. The opposite party's insistence on payment of a performance license fees
is an abuse of its dominant position under section 4 of the Act. It is now
settled law that FM radio stations do not have to pay a performance license
fee for broadcast of music on radio stations. This position has been clarified
by the Case No. 40 of 2011 Page 24 of 93 High Courts of Kerala, Bombay and
Delhi. However, the opposite party's position has been that it is entitled to
performance license fees contrary to the rulings of the High Courts. The
opposite party's conduct leads to a foreclosure of market at the upstream
level of music providers and the downstream level of radio stations. This
foreclosure adversely affects the final consumer as it discourages entry at
both levels and has led to exit in the downstream level, causing consumer
harm.
65\. The informant has contended that the anti-competitive terms and
conditions imposed by the opposite party amount to refusal to supply its music
on fair terms in violation of the Act. The DG noted that section 31 of the
Copyright Act provides radio stations adequate safeguards to approach the
Copyright Board for a compulsory license, and the opposite party is not in a
position to refuse to supply radio stations. The informant disagrees with the
findings of the DG and submits that the informant's ability to approach the
Copyright Board under section 31 of the Copyright Act is not mutually
exclusive from the Commission being able to come to a finding that the
opposite party has abused its dominant position by constructively refusing to
supply music to radio stations. In fact, the terms and conditions of a license
agreement can be unfair or unreasonable qua the Act and separately, the
Copyright Act.
66\. The informant has further submitted that excessive royalties charged by
the opposite party, MCC and the imposition of performance license fees which
the opposite party is not entitled to in the license agreement are
unreasonable restrictions on competition and consequently the license
agreement between the parties is an anti-competitive vertical agreement in
violation of section 3(4) of the Act. Furthermore, these restrictions can
neither be considered to be 'reasonable' nor 'necessary' to protect the rights
of the copyright owners whose music are being licensed to the informant and
therefore, cannot fall under the exemption under section 3(5) of the Act.
Case No. 40 of 2011 Page 25 of 93
67\. The parties, apart from filing detailed replies, have also submitted
reports of economists in support of their respective submissions. Further, the
parties filed written submissions and a gist thereof is noted below:
Written submissions of the opposite party
68\. The opposite party filed detailed written submissions reiterating its
stand and a brief note thereof is made below.
69\. It was urged on behalf of the opposite party that the DG has defined the
relevant market in an arbitrary, vague and narrow manner. The opposite party
also challenged the submission of the informant taking relevant market for
'new' Bollywood music. It was submitted that a relevant product market for
competition law assessment cannot be defined in terms of business model of one
single consumer.
70\. It was further contended that the assessment made by Genesis, the
economist hired by the informant, which argued that 'the tastes and
preferences of listeners in the preferred demographic determine what content
the particular station is willing to purchase' and that the 'station is
further constrained by the format and content positioning it has chosen to
attract its demographic', is flawed as a radio station in India is not
constrained to a particular genre or the target demographic in the musical
content it broadcasts. Additionally, it was submitted that though the Genesis
Report observed that the opposite party engages in price discrimination while
supplying content to AIR and private FM stations, it failed to show that price
discrimination has occurred or why price discrimination would imply a narrow
market definition in this case.
71\. In so far as the relevant geographic market is concerned, the opposite
party submitted that a relevant geographic market is required to be defined in
a clear manner, delineating an area where the competitive conditions are
largely Case No. 40 of 2011 Page 26 of 93 homogeneous. The present case
involves an intangible item, the right to play certain musical content. Given
that any radio station can choose to broadcast any musical content it desires
(based on the repertoires available to it), the relevant geographic market
cannot be taken as 'areas where Bollywood music is prevalent'. The relevant
geographic should be the entire territory of India.
72\. On the issue of dominance, the opposite party reiterated the pleas taken
in the reply filed to the report of the DG and impugned the findings of the DG
on this count besides making a detailed rebuttal to the assessment done by the
DG in terms of the provisions contained in section 19(4) of the Act.
73\. On the abusive conduct also, the opposite party made detailed submission
and the same are noted below.
74\. According to the opposite party, clearly the entire focus of the DG has
been on the fact that the opposite party, by virtue of not being a part of the
Second Order of the Copyright Board has continued with rates determined over a
decade ago without adjusting for inflation and this conduct of the opposite
party has been held to be an abuse of dominant position. It may be noted that
the opposite party's agreements with radio stations contain a clause to the
effect that if there is an order of the Copyright Board then the terms of the
license agreement will be automatically replaced by those terms. There is no
contradiction in the opposite party's conduct because of the presence of the
above mentioned clause. Furthermore, given that Copyright Board has the sole
jurisdiction to set the rate for licensing of content, the Commission is not
and cannot be in a position to exercise jurisdiction or make a finding with
respect to the rate of licensing of content and therefore, cannot rely on the
Second Order of the Copyright Board as a benchmark for the market price in
connection with licensing of content. There can be no case of excessive
pricing because there is a sectoral regulator present that can set the
reasonable terms and conditions for licensing of content.
Case No. 40 of 2011 Page 27 of 93
75\. The opposite party has further submitted that the DG has erred in
observing that the opposite party has abused its position in the market by
continuing to charge 'per needle hour' and not the royalty rate fixed by the
Second Order of the Copyright Board. The DG report fails to comprehend that
the said order is against PPL and not the opposite party. Furthermore, PPL has
challenged the said order. It is also submitted that DG has failed to
demonstrate any anti-competitive harm resulting from the alleged conduct of
the opposite party. The data demonstrates that even after the license was
cancelled, Big FM saw a high growth in revenue of about 16% whereas radio
stations licensed by the opposite party like Radio Mirchi and the informant
grew only by 10% and 6%. Perusal of annual reports of certain radio stations
clearly shows that this industry is growing at a steady rate. In fact, the end
consumer is not at all affected by the alleged conduct of the opposite party
because the content is available for free to the end consumer. The conduct of
the opposite party only affects the profitability of radio companies and any
intervention by the Commission will only help to increase the profits of such
stations and adversely affect the income of composers/ lyricists who have not
been called upon for their inputs as also the income of the opposite party and
its ability to compete in the market of music content licensing.
76\. The opposite party has further submitted that exploitative conduct like
excessive pricing is no longer the focus of area of anti-trust jurisdictions
like the EU and the US where the focus is on exclusionary conduct.
77\. It was contended that there was no objective assessment by the DG. The
competition authorities in Europe have devised a two stage test to determine
whether a dominant form has abused its dominant position by charging excessive
prices as laid down in United Brands case. They are first required to assess
whether the difference between the cost incurred and the price charged is
excessive and if the answer to the question is in the affirmative, they must
assess whether a price has been imposed which is either unfair in itself or
when compared to the prices of competing products. It was Case No. 40 of 2011
Page 28 of 93 therefore submitted that the DG did no such assessment to
determine whether the rates charged were reasonable and conducted no
assessment with respect to the costs involved in promotion and acquisition of
content. Data demonstrate that the opposite party has not even recouped its
costs for the movie Rockstar and Zindagi Na Milegi Dobara which was considered
a 'hit' in terms of music.
78\. The opposite party also submitted that rate per needle hour is not a flat
rate and bears a reasonable relation to listenership and hence, advertisements
revenues, 600 being simply a weighted average.
79\. Further, MCC was neither 'imposed' nor 'unfair' and that the business
rational for imposing MCC was simply that the opposite party could now be
assured of some revenue to offset costs. The MCC was based on objective
criteria, the basis being the previous year's playout. This is itself
sufficient evidence that the same is not imposed on radio stations.
80\. The opposite party has submitted that the very fact that MCC are
negotiated annually and based on the playout of the previous year, in itself
sufficient evidence that the same is not 'imposed' on radio stations.
Furthermore, MCC have been declining over the years which further demonstrate
that they are the result of negotiation between the opposite party and radio
stations. It is critical to note that despite the fact that several radio
stations have given evidence before the DG, yet for the period 2006-2011,
there is no request on record before the Commission by any radio station to
modify or eliminate MCC, which has not been accepted by the opposite party.
81\. Dealing with the argument that the opposite party has established a
'grand scheme' to entrench its dominant position in the market by charging MCC
from radio stations so that it can artificially inflate the cost of
acquisition of content by bidding higher than rivals and thereby exclude
rivals from the market and use the content to impose higher prices on radio
stations, Case No. 40 of 2011 Page 29 of 93 it was submitted that not a single
competitor of the opposite party has stated on record that the opposite
party's conduct is exclusionary. In fact, it was submitted that the 'grand
scheme' described by the informant is in reality a failure because the
opposite party's revenues from the radio business have witnessed a sharp
decline since 2012 from approximately INR 33 crores to INR 18 crores.
Furthermore, numerous companies have entered and thrived in the market since
the introduction of MCC in 2008 and therefore, evidence of the informant does
not support its allegations.
82\. The opposite party has further submitted that MCC are only contained in
some contracts and those contracts only require around 33% or less airplay.
Thus, with whatever MCC are, the actual playout of the opposite party content
is 27% in 2011 and declining year-on-year. Therefore, the part of the market
that is actually affected by MCC is only 27%. In other words, the opposite
party's rivals can compete to supply nearly 73% of the market which percentage
is increasing year on year. Given that such a large part of the market is
fully contestable, it is highly unlikely that MCC are capable of foreclosing
rivals.
83\. The opposite party has further submitted that loyalty rebate argument of
the informant is incorrect. A loyalty rebate is typically designed to either
entrench an existing dominant position or assist the dominant enterprise in
gradually increasing market shares. In the present case, both the factors are
absent. The opposite party has further submitted that the Genesis Report fails
to provide any evidence that MCC are exclusionary. The only evidence that the
Genesis Report offers is a speculative theory that MCC might function in the
same way as a conditional or loyalty inducing rebate. As mentioned before, no
competitor has complained about exclusion, nor is there any evidence to
support exclusion of competitors.
84\. The opposite party has further submitted that the argument of the
informant that it is engaging in discriminatory conduct by imposing
discriminatory MCC on radio stations in the same city is misleading. If in a
Case No. 40 of 2011 Page 30 of 93 particular city a radio station wishes to
play more content from the opposite party's repertoire then MCC may be set at
a higher playout limit as opposed to a radio station in the same city that
wishes to use less of the opposite party's repertoire. This aspect cannot be
viewed as discriminatory conduct as discrimination requires treating like
entities in an unlike manner, not treating different entities with different
business models.
85\. The opposite party has submitted that whether a performance license fee
is chargeable or not for underlying literary and musical works is purely a
legal issue. The informant's submission on this aspect leads to the absurd
situation that the performance license fee will be held to be abusive as a
matter of competition law if the chargeability of the same is held to be not
valid by the decision of the court and at the same time performance license
fee will be held to be not abusive as a matter of competition law if the court
rules that the same is chargeable by the opposite party.
86\. The opposite party has further submitted that the informant had never
raised the issue of performance license fees in the information except for one
paragraph. The opposite party has further submitted that at present it has
stopped the practice of charging performance license fees from the radio
operators subject to the radio operators furnishing a bank guarantee to that
extent.
Written submissions of the informant
87\. The informant has submitted that defining markets on the basis of a
particular genre finds support in European competition assessment and the EC
in Seagram/ Polygram case and Thorn EMI/ Virgin case recognized that it was
possible that different music genres could constitute separate markets.
88\. The informant further submitted the following arguments in response to
the opposite party's contention that the relevant market should not be Case
No. 40 of 2011 Page 31 of 93 limited to Bollywood music because radio stations
have the ability to shift to non-Bollywood music:
(i) Radio stations' decisions are intrinsically linked to their customer
preferences Once a radio station has positioned itself to attract a certain
demographic, repositioning away from that demographic is risky and costly. The
informant's ability to substitute one genre of music for another is
constrained by its targeted listener demographic. Further, the only form of
revenue for private FM radio stations is the advertising and broadcast
decisions are based on potential listener base. Additionally, costs of
switching from Bollywood to non-Bollywood music can be significant and
therefore, they should result in defining narrower markets.
(ii) Music providers cannot easily switch to providing increased Bollywood
content Assuming that supply side substitutability could be considered, the
opposite party suggests that that all music providers offer a repertoire of
music which consists of Bollywood and non-Bollywood music and therefore, it is
easy for the informant to increase or decrease the amount of Bollywood music
purchased at the upstream level depending on market circumstances. As per the
informant this is a failed hypothesis because to 'create' songs, music
providers would have to expand into film production.
(iii) New Bollywood music The DG has erred in finding that a lack of clarity
on the definition of 'new' music leads to a conclusion that 'new' music cannot
be a separate relevant market. The opposite party itself has put on its
website that it represents 70% of upcoming Indian entertainment content
including Bollywood and therefore, Case No. 40 of 2011 Page 32 of 93 considers
it to be a separate market. The informant has shown that most popular songs on
FM Radio in India are those which are recently released.
(iv) T-Series offers its entire repertoire In response to the contention of
the opposite party that since its competitors offer their entire repertoire to
radio stations, one particular genre cannot be demarcated as a relevant market
and since the informant also plays devotional music, it cannot be said to be
playing only new Bollywood music; the informant has submitted that it does
broadcast Ghazals and Bengali music in Kolkata and Punjabi music in New Delhi;
however, the fact that radio stations play limited amounts of non-Bollywood
music on their radio stations does not take away from Bollywood music being
defined as a relevant market. It is important to note that the music relevant
for every private FM radio station is limited to a particular genre and FM
radio stations do not compete for obtaining the entire repertoire of music
companies.
89\. The informant has submitted that private FM channels constitute a
distinct relevant product market and AIR FM should be excluded because the
opposite party's ability to price discriminate justifies the delineation of a
distinct product market on the basis of different customer groups and AIR FM's
content and social motives make it distinct from private FM Radio stations.
90\. The informant has submitted that markets are regularly defined on the
basis of customer groups and if one set of customers receives a wholly
different price from others, such customer does not participate in the same
market and therefore, be excluded from competitive assessment. This is
confirmed by European Commission's position that '[a] distinct group of
customers for the relevant market may constitute a narrower, distinct market
when such a group could be subject to price discrimination'. As per the
informant, on the basis of statement of Shri Neeraj Kalyan, the opposite party
Case No. 40 of 2011 Page 33 of 93 has admitted that rates charged to the
Government. FM stations is approximately INR 400-450 per needle hour, which is
different from the rates charged to private FM stations and in fact rates
charged to private FM radio stations are at a significant premium of 47-65%
more therefore, making it clear that the opposite party price discriminates.
91\. The informant has submitted that listeners tune into AIR FM for
educational and entertainment content which cuts across society. It is for
this reason that no AIR FM station focuses on 'new' Bollywood music in the way
that private FM radio stations do. The opposite party's contention that the
private FM stations can broadcast news is misleading, as the implementing
notifications have delayed the process even further. Private FM radio stations
and listeners do not consider AIR FM to be a competitor as a lack of broadcast
restrictions and its social mandate make its content substantially different
and therefore, not substitutable/ interchangeable for that of private FM. The
opposite party also does not consider AIR to compete with private FM radio
stations as its content is provided at a significant price differential with
wholly different negotiation abilities and market dynamics at play. Thus,
according to the informant, AIR FM is a distinct product market from private
FM radio stations.
92\. On the geographic market, the informant submitted that the relevant
geographic market for assessing the opposite party's conduct in the present
case is 'individual cities in which radio stations have licenses to
broadcast'. This is because the Government of India only licenses radio
stations on a city by city basis. In addition, radio station owners are only
allowed to own one radio station per city. If a listener is not within city
limits, they cannot receive a radio broadcast.
93\. The informant has submitted that in applying SSNIP test to a geographic
market definition, the question to be asked is if the price of the opposite
party's music were to increase in New Delhi would a radio station Case No. 40
of 2011 Page 34 of 93 shift its operations to a music company in another city?
The answer is no, especially since Government grants licenses to private FM
stations on a per city basis and regulatory barriers preclude a radio
broadcaster from operating in another city. Further, if SSNIP test was applied
to advertisers in New Delhi, such advertisers would not shift their
advertisements to a radio station outside New Delhi. This is because
advertisers target local preferences. Lastly, applying SSNIP test to
listeners, if there was a price increase in the price of receivers in New
Delhi, listeners would not switch to receiving content from another city as
the regulatory and technical restrictions imposed on radio stations do not
allow them to do the same.
94\. In view of the above, the informant has submitted that the relevant
geographic market should be limited to individual cities where radio
broadcasters are licensed to operate and therefore, the relevant market to be
investigated is the 'market for the broadcast of new Bollywood music on FM
radio stations in every city in which FM radio stations are licensed to
operate'.
95\. The informant has submitted that it is important to note that the test
for dominance is contained in section 4 of the Act and that the factors listed
in section 19(4) of the Act are relevant only in as much as they aid the
application of the section 4 test. In the event that the informant can provide
direct evidence of the opposite party's ability to act independently of
competitive forces, it need not establish dominance on the basis of such
factors. The informant has also submitted that the opposite party's conduct in
the instant case satisfies the test for dominance laid out in explanation (a)
to section 4 and on the basis of factors listed in section 19(4) of the Act.
96\. The following actions of the opposite party have been shown by the
informant to demonstrate that the opposite party is unconstrained by the
conduct of its competitors:
Case No. 40 of 2011 Page 35 of 93
(i) The opposite party's royalty rates are set on a needle per hour basis,
whereas PPL and most other competitors provide licenses at a rate either
determined by or equivalent to the Second Order of the Copyright Board.
(ii) The opposite party's royalty rates are approximately 63.6% higher than
those paid by the informant to other music providers. This however, has not
led to a shift in demand from the opposite party to its competitors.
(iii) The opposite party imposes MCC ranging from 30%-50% of playout which
radio stations are required to pay irrespective of whether they play that
amount of music. No other music provider can or has imposed such MCC.
(iv) The opposite party imposes performance licensee fees whereas numerous
High Courts in India have held that companies have no right to impose
performance license fees. The opposite party is the only music provider which
imposes performance license fees despite the High Court orders holding the
contrary.
97\. The informant has further submitted the following actions show that the
opposite party is acting independently of its customers:
(i) During oral arguments, the opposite party stated that it lost contracts
with 82 of the private FM radio stations (not necessarily radio companies/
broadcasters) after the Second Order of the Copyright Board, which reduced its
market share by 15%. The informant has contended that what is important to
note is that this reduction has not led to any change in behaviour, rates or
terms and conditions offered by the opposite party. This is direct evidence
that indicates that the opposite party is unaffected by losing 1/3rd of its
customers (due to the supra normal profits derived from the other 2/3rd).
Case No. 40 of 2011 Page 36 of 93
(ii) Radio City (one of the contracts that were terminated as a result of the
opposite party's conduct) returned to the opposite party after a year on
unchanged terms. This shows that even when one of the largest radio
broadcasters in the country with 20 radio stations seeks to return after a
year of not playing the opposite party music, the terms and conditions offered
remain unchanged by the opposite party, indicating a blatant disregard for
customers including the ability to act independently.
(iii) The opposite party argued that Big FM's listener ratings increased when
it switched from new Bollywood music to retro music. The opposite party
however, failed to inform that Big FM suffered a reduction in their revenue by
a substantial margin of INR 4,38,92, 761 over the January-March quarter of
2012 compared to 2011, where Big FM was licensed with the opposite party. Big
FM stated that the major cause/ reason for the fall in revenue was on account
of its inability to play the opposite party's music and compete with other
radio channels present in the same cities on a level playing field. As per the
informant this shows that more listeners do not necessarily translate into
more revenue, if the content broadcast is not as desirable. It is also
evidence of the opposite party's ability to be unaffected by the loss of radio
stations which may gain additional listeners, but cannot monetize the same
without the opposite party content.
(iv) MCC imposed on customers range from 30-50% of playout when actual playout
of the opposite party music was lower. Radio stations are therefore, required
to play the opposite party content more than they would have in a
counterfactual without MCC. Radio stations have indicated a strong resistance
to the imposition of MCC. The fact that MCC are still imposed by the opposite
party indicates that it can act independently of its customers.
(v) The imposition of performance license fees, which are not payable to the
opposite party, forces radio stations to pay double the royalty they normally
have to pay music providers. The fact that despite such a gulf in royalty Case
No. 40 of 2011 Page 37 of 93 payments, radio stations have not been able to
effectively switch to non- opposite party music is indicative of the opposite
party's ability to act independently of its customers.
(vi) The opposite party also conveniently decides to follow the rate set by
the First Order of the Copyright Board as a 'market standard' while disputing
the rate set by the Second Order of the Copyright Board by the same authority.
The opposite party's argument that the rate set in the Second Order of the
Copyright Board does not apply to it as it was not a party to the proceedings
applies equally to the First Order of the Copyright Board, where the opposite
party again was not a party. The opposite party is the only music provider who
is charging such rates to radio stations. This is despite the fact that the
entire industry has expressed dissatisfaction with these rates and has applied
to the Copyright Board for a compulsory license.
(vii) In terms of the opposite party's business model, the opposite party
artificially increases acquisition costs of music so much that its competitors
cannot afford the same. Higher acquisition costs make the opposite party more
attractive to composers and film producers, but also distort market dynamics.
Normally, such a price increase would be fraught with risk of not being able
to recoup the same; the opposite party, however, can guarantee that radio
stations will play between 30-50% of its music through its MCC scheme,
minimizing the risk of not being able to recoup the high costs of acquisition.
In addition, by imposing both broadcast and performance license fees, the
opposite party earns double the revenue per song than any of its competitors.
(viii) The only reason why the opposite party can implement such a nefarious
scheme is its dominant position in the market. No customer can force the
opposite party to negotiate its terms and conditions as the opposite party, by
its own admission, is unaffected by 1/3rd of its customers moving away.
Case No. 40 of 2011 Page 38 of 93
98\. The informant submits that in addition to the direct evidence highlighted
above, an analysis of the factors set out in section 19(4) of the Act is also
demonstrative of the opposite party's dominance.
99\. Market share is an important factor in assessing dominance of an
enterprise. As per the DG Report, the opposite party owns more than half of
the popular content that has become the staple diet for music played by FM
stations run by the informant. There has been a considerable dispute between
the parties as to the opposite party's market shares in the relevant market.
The opposite party has questioned the veracity of the data but it has never
requested cross-examination of any radio station though such a request is
provisioned for under the Act. The opposite party should not be allowed to
question the veracity of the data provided while at the same time having given
up its right to cross-examine all the radio stations which provided evidence.
100\. Market shares in terms of playout are relevant and important basis on
which dominance can be assessed. The opposite party's own evidence shows that
its market share of total playout on 210 private FM radio stations licensed by
it is between 32.5% to 34.1%. This evidence however, includes radio stations
licensed with the opposite party but which do not play much Bollywood music,
such as stations in South India which may play a few Bollywood songs, but
focus on South Indian music. Therefore, when analyzing the opposite party's
market shares in the relevant market, all stations which broadcast non-
Bollywood music should be excluded. The informant also submits that
calculating market shares on the basis of all licensed FM stations is
inaccurate because radio stations licensed with the opposite party are a
better reflection of the opposite party's position in the market because they
are more likely to constitute the relevant market. Radio stations which play
no or minimal Bollywood music should be excluded from the relevant market.
Consequently, by reducing the number of radio stations to more accurately
account for the relevant market, the opposite party's share of the same would
consequently be higher.
Case No. 40 of 2011 Page 39 of 93
101\. Furthermore, an analysis of the opposite party's market share based on
the most popular songs may be an even better and more accurate indicator of
the opposite party's market power as this would focus on the relevant market.
Data provided by AirCheck shows that the opposite party held rights to 46% of
the top 100 songs played in 18 A category cities between July 2011 and June
2012. It is important to reiterate that broadcasting the Top 100 and Top 20
songs per week are essential for radio stations to remain viable in the
business and therefore, highlights the market power of the opposite party.
102\. The informant submitted that the opposite party acquires the rights for
the maximum number of films (almost 4 times that of its nearest competitor,
YRF) and that CBFC data is only for films certified and not released and the
number of films in a year are likely to be fewer than the number of films
certified for release. Furthermore, any discrepancy between the two is likely
to be minimal and the opposite party's market share of approximately 38% as a
result of the data submitted by private FM stations is not inconsistent with
the data provided by the opposite party itself. The opposite party focuses its
attention on films of bankable 'superstars' which maximize the possibility of
the music being a hit and minimizes the risk of losses.
103\. It was also submitted that the opposite party has a turnover of
approximately INR 400 crores in the INR 750 crore music industry. That is
approximately 700-1300% higher than that of its competitors. The Commission
has previously recognized a turnover of 300-700% higher than competitors is
indicative of dominance in Belaire Owners' Association v. DLF Limited, Huda &
Ors. (Case No. 19 of 2012). In response to the opposite party's contentions to
the DG report, the informant submits that the DG has analyzed the opposite
party's data compared to the turnover of PPL and IPRS and found that the
opposite party's turnover is still higher. Secondly, PPL represents over 200
music companies and therefore, the opposite party's actual position in the
market qua individual music providers is considerably Case No. 40 of 2011 Page
40 of 93 enhanced. Thirdly, IPRS and PPL redistribute fees to their members
whereas the opposite party provides no evidence that it redistributes its fees
for owners of the underlying works. Finally, it is the radio stations position
that the opposite party and IPRS are not entitled to performance license fees
and accordingly, the informant is not paying IPRS and the fact that the
opposite party imposes the same, makes it liable to be included in calculating
its turnover. The informant further submits that the opposite party's conduct
shows that it acts independently of such powerful and vertically integrated
competitors which are dispositive of dominance.
104\. It was argued by the informant that the opposite party has alleged that
there are no barriers to entry or expansion and competitors like Sony are
significant competitors. The opposite party has failed to explain why in an
industry with no barriers to entry or expansion and where the opposite party's
prices are considerably higher than its 'significant competitors', the market
shares of those competitors have not increased dramatically as a result of a
shift in demand. The conduct of the opposite party in increasing acquisition
costs, focus on superstar films and imposing performance license fees and MCC
on radio stations are significant barriers to entry and expansion in the
market.
105\. The informant has submitted that it agrees with DG's finding on
excessive pricing and further states that the opposite party has abused its
dominant position by charging unfair and excessive prices of INR 1260 per
needle hour as broadcast and performance license fees for the broadcast of the
opposite party's music on fever 104 radio stations in Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata
and Bangalore.
106\. Challenging the submissions of the opposite party on 'excessive price',
it was argued that the concept of excessive price has been recognized by the
European Union in United Brand, General Motors, Scadlines and British
Horseracing Board cases as well as other cases. In fact, in the music industry
Case No. 40 of 2011 Page 41 of 93 itself, there has been recognition of
excessive royalties as amounting to an unfair price and an abuse of dominance.
107\. United Brands case, which is the seminal case on excessive pricing, has
laid down the test for excessive price, first limb of which is that the price
bears no reasonable relation to the economic value of the product. This
economic value is the value of the product to both the seller and the
purchaser. An equitable royalty rate would be one that bears a correlation to
the revenue generated by the informant by exercising the license provided to
it by the opposite party. In fact a revenue share arrangement has been
expressly found to satisfy the United Brands case test as bearing a reasonable
relation to the economic value of the service provided by the licensor (Kanal
5 v. STIM). Just as the copyright board has recognized in Second Order, the
informant submits that a revenue share structure takes into account the
listener and the advertiser, two important components of the radio licensing
stream, which a flat fee fails to account for. A flat fee also fails to
account for inflation or increasing revenues.
108\. The second limb of the United Brands case test is whether the difference
between the costs actually incurred and the price actually charged is
excessive. However, this exercise is not possible because of the opposite
party's failure to provide its costs to the DG, despite being expressly asked
to do so. In response to the DG's request, the opposite party had stated that
the cost analysis for fixing up royalty rates is not possible. The situation
is similar to the MCX Stock Exchange v. National Stock Exchange of India
Limited & Ors. case where the Commission has held that 'this cavalier attitude
of not allocating cost of operation for a clearly segregated operation can
come from a position of strength'.
109\. The last limb of the United Brands case argument lays down the
benchmarks to compare an alleged excessive price i.e. the assessment of
whether a price is excessive is by comparing the excessive price to other Case
No. 40 of 2011 Page 42 of 93 competitive prices. The Genesis Report has
conducted this exercise and has compared the opposite party's broadcast
license fee of INR 661 per needle hour and has found that the opposite party
charges a premium ranging from 45-65% in comparison to (a) an industry
standard (Second Order of the Copyright Board) (based on the informant's
playout of PPL music in the year 2011-12 the license fees payable to PPL
equated to a rate of INR 404 per needle hour); (b) different customers such as
AIR FM (INR 400-450 per needle hour); and (c) competitors such as YRF (INR 450
per needle hour for the year 2011-12). Thus, it is evident that a royalty of
INR 661 per needle hour is excessive.
110\. The very fact that the opposite party can continue to charge higher
license fee per needle hour to private FM stations despite losing 82 of 245
private FM stations and which loss results in no change to its pricing model,
shows that there is no competitive pressure to drive the opposite party prices
down to competitive levels-such conduct is in itself demonstrative of
dominance and consequent abuse. The very fact the opposite party's profits are
approximately 700-1300% higher than that of its competitors is demonstrative
of the excessiveness of the opposite party's prices.
111\. It was urged that the opposite party's primary argument on why its
license fees are not excessive and should be considered as an abusive practice
is based on increasing revenues of radio stations. It would be noted that if
revenues of radio stations were indeed growing at an exponential rate, a
revenue share model would also reflect corresponding exponential royalties to
the opposite party. The opposite party's reliance on the informant's growth
rate of 62% is incorrect as the informant has incurred losses for the first 8
years of operation, which losses were caused by the excessive royalty rate of
INR 661 per needle hour.
112\. The opposite party has stated that it incurs significant acquisition
costs but has provided no evidence to justify the same with the exception of a
few Case No. 40 of 2011 Page 43 of 93 carefully selected sample albums which
it is yet to recoup costs. Furthermore, the opposite party is not a lone
artist or creative enterprise which faces uncertainty in the acquisition of
music. The portfolio licensing model in fact corrects for any uncertainty/
risk incurred by the opposite party in the acquisition of music.
113\. The loss of revenues from physical sales cannot be attributed to music
being played on the radio and more importantly cannot be used to justify why
excessive license fees are important. While the opposite party's revenues
arising from the physical sales of CDs, cassettes etc., may have been
decreased its sales through digital exploitation of music rights has also
increased multi-fold over the last 3 financial years.
114\. The argument that price set by a regulatory authority cannot be abusive
cannot be accepted as the very fact that the opposite party was not a party to
the First Order of the Copyright Board itself shows that this argument should
be rejected.
115\. According to the informant, from 2006 to October 2012, the opposite
party imposed MCC on the informant as a necessary precondition for the grant
of a license to its music repertoire. No other music provider charges MCC,
which are both exploitative and exclusionary and their imposition, an abuse of
a dominant position.
116\. Further, MCC are exploitative on customers as they are forced to play
the opposite party content for a minimum amount of playout irrespective of how
much of the opposite party's music it wishes to actually broadcast. The
opposite party has alleged that MCC is not exploitative as radio stations in
any event broadcast the pre-determined amount. This is a blatant attempt to
mislead the Commission. For example, in the year 2009-2010, the informant has,
with the exception of the month of November (for all three radio stations)
Case No. 40 of 2011 Page 44 of 93 and in December for the Kolkata radio
station and January for the Mumbai radio station, never broadcast the full MCC
target. Therefore, the informant was forced to pay the opposite party MCC
amount in excess of actual music broadcast for three radio stations and
furthermore, similar submissions have been reiterated by Big FM and Radio One.
117\. The informant has further submitted that MCC also result in significant
exclusionary effects. Since radio stations are coerced into paying the
opposite party a minimum guarantee, they would naturally broadcast the amount
of music that they are forced to pay for. Therefore, a certain amount of music
playout on private FM radio stations is already fixed for the opposite party.
This results in the opposite party competitors being other music providers not
being able to compete for and being foreclosed from broadcasting their music
on this prefixed playout of 30-50% reserved for the opposite party.
118\. The informant has further submitted that MCC is a carefully designed
loyalty rebate scheme imposed by the opposite party to perpetuate and abuse
its dominance to the detriment of competitors. As a result, a radio station
which was already paying for 40% of the opposite party's airtime would
naturally play 40% of the opposite party's music. In addition, where a radio
station achieves MCC target, it is provided an additional 20% of free airtime
of the opposite party's music. As a result of the 20% of free airtime granted,
a radio station would face the same choice between zero additional cost the
opposite party music as against the positive additional cost songs of all
other music channels. As a result, whenever possible the opposite party's song
would be substituted for a non-opposite party song. This business model or
scheme ensured that the opposite party's content is a must-have content for
radio stations.
119\. According to the informant, the opposite party has stated that it
imposed MCC to compensate for losses in physical sales. If the opposite party
was genuinely concerned about the repeated playout of its music why would it
Case No. 40 of 2011 Page 45 of 93 reserve an MCC and furthermore, offer
another 20% of free playout. Furthermore, the opposite party has sought to
justify the clearly anti- competitive MCC on the grounds that no radio station
has complained of it, which is incorrect as DG Report finds that Radio One, My
FM, Radio Mantra and Radio Mirchi had requested the opposite party to do away
with MCC.
120\. The informant has submitted that the opposite party's position is that
the issue regarding performance license fees is purely a legal issue pending
before courts and is not a competition issue at all. The informant submits
that the opposite party's insistence on the payment of performance license
fees, when it is clear that the same are not payable, is an abuse of its
dominant position for being an unfair condition in the purchase of goods and
for making the conclusion of contracts subject to acceptance of supplementary
obligations which have no connection to the subject of such contracts. The DG
has concurred with the informant that imposition of performance licensee fees
is an abuse.
121\. The informant has further submitted that all High Courts other than the
Madras High Court have held that performance license fees are not payable for
the broadcast of sound recordings on FM radio stations. The matter is
currently pending before the Supreme Court. Till the Supreme Court determines
this issue, the law in 3 out of 4 High Courts is that such fee is not payable.
122\. The informant has further submitted that being the only music provider
who is imposing performance license fees, the opposite party earns twice the
royalty than its competitors for the same type of music. This impedes
effective competition from existing competitors as the opposite party has used
this increased revenue to raise acquisition costs of music and controls most
of Bollywood music output. Furthermore, such conduct dissuades new radio
stations from entering the market, since entrants cannot maximize the expected
revenue on making an investment in the radio business due to the Case No. 40
of 2011 Page 46 of 93 imposition of an illegal requirement to pay royalties.
Therefore, the conduct of the opposite party results in foreclosure, both at
the upstream and downstream levels.
123\. The informant has submitted that that licensing Bollywood music to all
private FM radio stations are 'equivalent transactions' as the opposite party
bears no additional cost in providing a license to its music repertoire to
such stations. The opposite party also does not gain any efficiencies by
licensing its music content to multiple radio stations owned by the same radio
broadcaster. This being the case, the opposite party should offer identical
terms and conditions to radio stations in the same city. In fact during their
rejoinder on excessive pricing, the opposite party stated that it applies
identical terms to radio stations in the same city. According to the
informant, this is untrue due to many reasons including that Shri Neeraj
Kalyan has admitted that they do charge differential rates for the underlying
works for many reasons.
124\. The informant has submitted that the anti-competitive terms and
conditions imposed by the opposite party amount to refusal to supply its music
on fair terms in violation of the Act and further those terms and conditions
can be unfair qua the Act and separately unreasonable qua the Copyright Act.
Therefore, while section 31 of the Copyright Act provides for a statutory
ground to apply for a compulsory license, section 4 of the Act prohibits the
abuse of dominance including a prohibition on the denial of market access
under section 4(2)(c) of the Act.
125\. The informant has further submitted that excessive royalties charged by
the opposite party, MCC and the imposition of performance license fees which
the opposite party is not entitled to in the license agreement are
unreasonable restrictions on competition and consequently the license
agreement between the parties is an anti-competitive vertical agreement in
violation of section 3(4) of the Act. Furthermore, these restrictions can
neither be considered to be 'reasonable' nor 'necessary' to protect the rights
of the Case No. 40 of 2011 Page 47 of 93 copyright owners whose music is being
licensed to the informant and therefore, cannot fall under the exemption under
section 3(5) of the Act.
Jurisdiction
126\. Before adverting to the competition concerns projected in the present
case, the Commission deems it appropriate to deal with the jurisdictional
challenges raised by the counsel for the opposite party to the present
proceedings. It has been contended by the opposite party that the Commission
does not have the jurisdiction to entertain the present matter for the
following reasons:
(i) Under section 4(2)(a) of the Act, there is an abuse of dominant position
if the dominant enterprise imposes unfair or discriminatory conditions in the
sale of goods or service or the price of goods or services. The present case
involves a license of rights, and such a right cannot be considered to be a
'good' or a 'service', it cannot be brought under the purview of the section 4
of the Act.
(ii) The appropriate authority to address the grievances of the informant is
the Copyright Board. The present dispute is a blatant case of forum shopping
where the informant is seeking to obtain what would in effect be a compulsory
license indirectly through the Commission, and that the facts stated, issues
raised and reliefs prayed for before the Copyright Board are identical/
substantially overlapping.
(iii) The exclusive jurisdiction in the matter vests with the Copyright Board
as the Copyright Board is the only authority to decide whether the terms (not
just rates) of a license between copyright owner and a radio broadcaster are
reasonable, and set new terms if existing terms are unreasonable. The
Copyright Act is a complete self-sufficient sectoral regime and all issues
pertaining to copyright including and especially issues relating to the
reasonableness of copyright royalty as well as all other terms of licenses
Case No. 40 of 2011 Page 48 of 93 between copyright owners and users of
copyrighted works are contained within the four corners of the provisions of
the Copyright Act.
(iv) The appropriate sectoral regulator is already seized of the dispute a
year prior to instituting the present information as the informant itself had
approached the Copyright Board for a compulsory license on terms considered
reasonable by the complainant.
(v) The opposite party has further submitted that even if the Commission does
indeed have the jurisdiction to hear the matter, it should not exercise
jurisdiction for the simple reason that any finding of the Commission will
heavily prejudice the proceedings between the parties at the Copyright Board,
the Delhi High Court and the Supreme Court. For instance, the issue with the
performance license fee is presently before the Supreme Court and if the
Commission were to hold that charging of performance license fee by the
opposite party is reprehensible and should be prohibited; such finding may be
used against the opposite party before the Supreme Court.
(vi) The opposite party has further submitted that where the free play of the
forces of demand and supply do not give rise to a market price but instead the
market forces of demand and supply are suppressed by the orders of the
Copyright Board and which is then opportunistically used by the informant as a
benchmark for an abuse of dominant position, it would be a travesty of justice
to invoke the competition rules of section 4 of the Act to regulate the
opposite party's conduct. Where the market is so overwhelmingly regulated by
the Copyright Board and where the market mechanism is nearly substituted by a
regulatory body, the role of competition law is greatly diminished and in this
case completely ousted.
127\. To recapitulate the events, it may be noted that the Commission vide its
order dated 22.12.2011 dismissed the application of the opposite party for
framing and deciding the issue of jurisdiction of the Commission as a Case No.
40 of 2011 Page 49 of 93 preliminary issue. Aggrieved thereby and dissatisfied
therewith, the opposite party approached the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi by
way of Writ Petition No. 1119 of 2012, Super Cassettes Industries Limited v.
Union of Indian & Ors. The Hon'ble High Court vide its order dated 04.10.2012
directed the Commission to determine and pass an appropriate order on the
issue of jurisdiction of the Commission after hearing the parties.
Accordingly, the Commission heard detailed submissions of the parties
pertaining to the jurisdiction and vide order dated 28.01.2013 held that it
had the jurisdiction to consider the issues raised before it by the informant.
The opposite party once again approached the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi by
way of Writ Petition No. 2037 of 2013, Super Cassettes Industries Limited v.
Union of Indian & Ors., challenging the said order dated 28.01.2013 and
praying for a stay on the proceedings before the Commission. The Hon'ble High
Court, vide its order dated 01.04.2013, while dismissing the application for a
stay of the proceedings before the Commission held as follows:
> Having examined the impugned order, in my view, prima facie the CCI has
> considered the aspect of jurisdiction. In this respect, they have referred
> to their earlier order wherein after considering the scope and ambit of the
> Copyright Act and the Competition Act (see paragraphs 7 and 8 of the
> impugned order) it has opined as follows:
> '9. A reading of the above section would show that none of the areas covered
> by section 3 of the Competition Act is covered by the Copyright Act. No
> doubt under the Copyright Act, the Copyright Board has a right and
> obligation to determine licence fee and the reasonableness of the licence
> fee but apart from that none of the other issues as envisaged by section 3
> of the Competition Act can be decided by the Copyright Board. Similarly,
> Section 4 of the Competition Act casts an obligation on the Case No. 40 of
> 2011 Page 50 of 93 Commission to adjudicate the issue of dominance of an
> enterprise and to give a finding on the alleged abuses due to dominance.
> Abuse may be there due to one sided, discriminatory or unfair terms of the
> agreement or otherwise. The Copyright Board has no such jurisdiction.
> 10\. The rights of a person protected under the Copyright Act have also been
> taken care of by section 3(5) as is evident. It is true that the applicant
> has also made a prayer in the information about unreasonableness of the
> licence fee, but that was not the sole criteria for referring the matter.
> The Commission had referred the matter for observing as under:-
The Commission finds merits in the submission of the informant that the radio
stations have no choice but to accede to the arbitrary and unfair conditions
imposed by T-Series because of it being a dominant enterprise.
Considering the fact that T-series is the only music company which charges MCC
from the radio stations unlike any other licensers including PPL, IPRS, SIMCA
etc., prima facie it appears that T-series is in position to dictate such
terms only because of its position of dominance. Considering the facts and
allegations in the information and position discussed as above, the Commission
feels that an investigation in the matter by the Director General, CCI is
required.
11\. From the above initial order of the Commission, it is apparent that the
Commission had intended to exercise its jurisdiction only within the four
walls of the Competition Act and had no intention to encroach upon the area
where Case No. 40 of 2011 Page 51 of 93 the Copyright Board has sole and
exclusive jurisdiction. The Competition Commission is well within its domain
of jurisdiction while considering the issues raised before it and rightly
exercised its jurisdiction of referring the matter to Director General for
investigation.' Having regard to the above, I am of the view that no case is
made out for grant of interim stay of the proceedings before the CCI. This was
also what was agreed to by the petitioner when it had approached this court in
the earlier round; a fact which is recorded hereinabove. At this stage, Mr
Sibal says that while he does not seek a stay of the proceedings before the
CCI, all that the petitioner is seeking is that no final order be passed. This
submission of the petitioner cannot be accepted. The only protection that the
petitioner can be given is that, if CCI were to come to a conclusion, which is
adverse to the interest of the petitioner, the CCI will give at least a week's
time to the petitioner to approach the appropriate forum for grant of relief,
if any, in the matter. With the aforesaid observations, the captioned
application is disposed of.
128\. In light of the aforesaid observations of the Hon'ble High Court
noticing the order of the Commission holding jurisdiction nothing survives in
the jurisdictional plea of the opposite party.
129\. Suffice to note that as per the legislative framework, the duty of the
competition authority as envisaged in section 18 of the Act is '......to
eliminate practices having adverse effect on competition, promote and sustain
competition, protect the interests of consumers and ensure freedom of trade
carried on by other participants, in markets in India', thereby giving the
Commission a very wide mandate. It is therefore, the duty and responsibility
of the Commission to eliminate practices in the market that have an adverse
Case No. 40 of 2011 Page 52 of 93 effect on competition and to promote and
sustain the competition so as to protect the interest of consumers and ensure
freedom of trade.
130\. As observed in the earlier order, none of the areas covered under
section 3 or 4 of the Act is covered under the Copyright Act. Therefore, the
powers of the Commission and Copyright Board govern different aspects of law
and the Copyright Board cannot serve as an effective instrument for promotion
of competition. The Copyright Board is a body constituted under section 11 of
the Copyright Act for the discharge of certain functions under the Act. The
main functions of the Copyright Board as per the Copyright Act include
deciding whether a work has been published or as to the date on which the work
was published for the purposes of chapter V; deciding whether the term of
copyright for any work is shorter in any other country than that of the
Copyright Act; settling disputes related to assignment of copyright; granting
compulsory licenses in respect of Indian works withheld from the public;
granting compulsory licensing to publish unpublished works; granting
compulsory license to produce and publish translation of literary or dramatic
works; granting compulsory licenses to reproduce and publish certain
categories of literary, scientific or artistic works for certain purposes;
addressing the complaints of the aggrieved persons or the Registrar of
Copyright, for rectification of the Register of Copyright etc. A review of the
functions of the Copyright Board reveal that while the Board obviously
performs important judicial/ quasi-judicial functions, under no circumstances
can it be said that the Copyright Board is tasked with eliminating market
practices which have an adverse effect in the market of works protected by the
Copyright Act.
131\. Having said that, the Commission notes that it recognizes the role and
importance of sectoral regulators and exercises its jurisdiction keeping in
mind the role of sectoral regulators. Therefore, the allegation of the
opposite party of encroachment by the Commission on the powers of the
Copyright Board is completely without merit. The Commission is a market
regulator and has the Case No. 40 of 2011 Page 53 of 93 jurisdiction to look
at all issues affecting competition in the market. Furthermore, it must be
understood that the exercise of jurisdiction of a regulatory authority to
consider a matter and the crafting of remedies by the same authority in the
matter, after considering the impact of such remedies on various ongoing
proceedings before other sectoral regulators/ courts are two very different
and distinct issues. The concern of the opposite party therefore, as to the
nature of remedies that the Commission will prescribe and its consequences
thereof on matters before other sectoral regulators/ courts is not relevant
for the determination of the jurisdictional question.
Issues for determination
132\. The Commission has given due consideration to facts given in the
information, the investigation report of the DG, the detailed written and oral
submissions made by the concerned parties along with opinions and analysis of
experts relied upon by the informant and the opposite party. The relevant
material available on record and the facts and circumstances of the case throw
up the following issues for determination in this case:
> (i) What is the relevant market in the present case?
> (ii) Is the opposite party dominant in the above relevant market?
> (iii) If so, is there any abuse of its dominant position by the opposite
> party in violation of section 4 of the Act?
Determination of Issue No. 1
133\. The edifice of competition law rests upon dynamics of competition in one
particular market. Benefits or harm to competition has to be assessed with
respect to that market. In the Act, the term used for such a market where the
status of competition has to be evaluated is 'relevant market'. This term has
been defined in section 2(r) of the Act read with sub sections (s) and (t) of
section 2. Furthermore, 'relevant product market' is defined in section 2(t)
of Case No. 40 of 2011 Page 54 of 93 the Act as 'a market comprising of all
those products or services which are regarded as interchangeable or
substitutable by the consumer, by reason of characteristics of the products or
services, their prices and intended use'. Furthermore, the Commission shall,
as per section 19(7) of the Act while determining the 'relevant product
market', have due regard to all or any of the following factors, viz.:
(a) physical characteristics or end-use of goods;
(b) price of goods or service;
(c) consumer preferences;
(d) exclusion of in-house production;
(e) existence of specialized producers;
(f) classification of industrial products.
134\. Since the allegation of the informant pertains to certain conduct of the
opposite party in licensing its repertoire of songs to the informant, the
market for licensing of music content (protected as intellectual property) is
a good starting point for determination of the relevant market in this case.
135\. The Copyright Act is the statutory enactment dealing with copyright in
India. There are four categories of works in which copyright subsists namely
(i) original literary, dramatic and musical work (ii) original artistic works
(iii) cinematograph films and (iv) sound recordings. It may be noted that
section 14 of the Copyright Act, which lays down the exclusive rights
available to each category of work, states as follows:
> Section 14. Meaning of copyright: For the purposes of this Act, 'copyright'
> means the exclusive right subject to the provisions of this Act, to do or
> authorise the doing of any of the following acts in respect of a work or any
> substantial part thereof, namely:-
Case No. 40 of 2011 Page 55 of 93
(a) in the case of a literary, dramatic or musical work, not being a computer
programme,--(i) to reproduce the work in any material form including the
storing of it in any medium by electronic means; (ii) to issue copies of the
work to the public not being copies already in circulation; (iii) to perform
the work in public, or communicate it to the public; (iv) to make any
cinematograph film or sound recording in respect of the work; (v) to make any
translation of the work; (vi) to make any adaptation of the work; (vii) to do,
in relation to a translation or an adaptation of the work, any of the acts
specified in relation to the work in sub-clauses (i) to
(vi);
(b) in the case of a computer programme,-- (i) to do any of the acts specified
in clause (a); (ii) to sell or give on commercial rental or offer for sale or
for commercial rental any copy of the computer programme: Provided that such
commercial rental does not apply in respect of computer programmes where the
programme itself is not the essential object of the rental.
(c) in the case of an artistic work,-- (i) to reproduce the work in any
material form including depiction in three dimensions of a two-dimensional
work or in two dimensions of a three-dimensional work; (ii) to communicate the
work to the public; (iii) to issue copies of the work to the public not being
copies already in circulation; (iv) to include the work in any cinematograph
film; (v) to make any adaptation of the work; (vi) to do in relation to an
adaptation of the work Case No. 40 of 2011 Page 56 of 93 any of the acts
specified in relation to the work in sub-
clauses (i) to (iv);
(d) in the case of a cinematograph film,-- (i) to make a copy of the film,
including a photograph of any image forming part thereof;(ii) to sell or give
on hire, or offer for sale or hire, any copy of the film, regardless of
whether such copy has been sold or given on hire on earlier occasions; (iii)
to communicate the film to the public;
(e) in the case of a sound recording,--(i) to make any other sound recording
embodying it; (ii) to sell or give on hire, or offer for sale or hire, any
copy of the sound recording regardless of whether such copy has been sold or
given on hire on earlier occasions; (iii) to communicate the sound recording
to the public.
Explanation.--For the purposes of this section, a copy which has been sold
once shall be deemed to be a copy already in circulation.]' Thus, it is
evident that copyright consists of a bundle of different rights in the same
work, which can be exploited by the owner of the work collectively or
separately.
136\. The object of copyright law is to encourage authors, composers and
artists to create original works by rewarding them with the exclusive right
for a limited period to reproduce the works for the benefit of the public.
Authors/ owners commercialize these rights inter alia by licensing or
assignment. Each such right conferred upon a protected work is distinct and
cannot be interchanged or substituted with another right. For example,
exclusive rights available to the owner of a musical works include inter alia
the right to perform the work in public, to communicate the work in public, to
make any Case No. 40 of 2011 Page 57 of 93 translation of the work or any
adaption of the same. If a customer wanted to translate a song into a
different language, such a customer would have to procure a license to
translate the work from the owner; procurement of a license to communicate the
work would not be usable. From a demand-side perspective there is clearly no
substitutability between the different categories of rights. Therefore,
different types of rights may constitute different markets based on the facts
and circumstances of the case and markets involved.
137\. The issue of narrowing down the relevant market based on the medium of
broadcasting may now be considered.
138\. The Commission notes that DG has concluded in his investigation that
radio is distinct from other media of broadcasting. According to the DG the
main distinguishing factor between radio and other forms of media which
broadcast music such as TV and mobile VAS is that radio is free-to-air while
TV broadcasting and VAS are subscription based services. Furthermore, as per
the DG, radio broadcasting is more localized whereas TV broadcasting and
mobile VAS is available nationally; and costs associated with radio as a
source of entertainment is much lower than TV and/ or mobile VAS as a radio
operates by way of a receiver which is cheaper and more easily available as
opposed to TV or mobile VAS which are expensive and subscription based.
Additionally the DG has also observed that TV channels generate revenue
through advertising and subscription fees whereas radio being free-to-air is
limited to advertising revenues. On the other hand, the DG has also observed
that in case of mobile VAS, it is an ancillary service to the main service of
providing phone facilities and is subscription based where a part of revenue
generated by the telecom industry is shared with the music company.
Furthermore, as per the DG, the contents of radio stations in different cities
cater to the cultural diversities in each city.
139\. The informant has agreed with the DG in this regard and submitted that
due to the fact that FM radio stations are free-to-air as opposed to TV or
Case No. 40 of 2011 Page 58 of 93 Mobile VAS, consumers would not consider
other forms of paid for entertainment as being substitutable with radio as a
source of entertainment; furthermore, pursuant to the GOPA entered into
between Government of India and private radio stations, the content allowed to
be broadcast on radio is severely restricted which places private FM stations
on a different plane compared to television broadcasters, as television has
far greater liberty in relation to the content it is permitted to broadcast;
additionally radio broadcasting is localized and specific to a particular
city. On the other hand TV channels transcend national boundaries and mobile
VAS is increasingly becoming available nationally and also does not require
licenses to operate in cities. The opposite party has not made any specific
arguments on the issue of distinction between different media of broadcasting.
140\. In view of the distinguishing features as detailed above, the Commission
holds that radio as a medium is distinct from other media of broadcasting.
141\. The issue whether music content played on radio can be considered
substitutable/ interchangeable with non-music content, may now be examined.
The DG has also examined the content played on radio channels and observed
that since inception the radio companies, to broadcast over FM waves, have had
various restrictions imposed on them including with regard to the content
including news and current affairs on their channels as a result of which they
have no alternative but to play entertainment content in the form of music.
Furthermore, as per the DG, other than news and current affairs (which is
prohibited under the Government policy), the main non-music content is in the
nature of radio dramas, jokes, interview, weather news, games and contests.
However, majority of the listeners tune into radio stations to follow music
content.
142\. The informant has agreed with the DG and submitted that non-music
content is broadcast on FM radio for the purposes of complementing music Case
No. 40 of 2011 Page 59 of 93 content and therefore, is not substitutable or
interchangeable for music content. All music channels advertise themselves as
music channels or have tag lines relating to more music content than their
competitors. Thus, it can be seen that the main focus of radio stations is on
music and it is an essential branding and marketing proposition for them to
have the latest music content. The opposite party has not made any specific
arguments on the issue of distinction between different forms of content
broadcast on radio.
143\. After considering the rationale advanced by the DG and the informant,
the Commission is of the view that music content cannot be considered as
substitutable/ interchangeable with non-music content.
144\. The Commission now considers whether in the radio industry, a
distinction may be made between AIR and FM radio, and if further, also between
AIR FM and private FM channels. However, before dealing with the issue, it
would be apposite to notice evolution of the industry as highlighted in the
report of the DG.
145\. AIR was established in 1936 which is one of the largest radio networks
in the world. Radio broadcasting is a one way transmission over radio waves
intended to reach a wide audience. The transmission over radio takes various
forms, AM and FM. AM is the oldest of the technologies used to broadcast
music, while FM is a development over AM broadcasting. FM receivers are
cheaper than those with AM receiving capabilities. FM radio has superior audio
quality and stereophonic sounds, cheaper availability, wider collection of
radio channels in comparison to AM radio.
146\. In 1999, the Government of India launched the first phase of private
sector involvement in FM radio broadcasting with the following objectives: (i)
to open up FM broadcasting for entertainment, education and information
dissemination by commercial broadcasters; (ii) to make available quality
programmes with a localized flavour in terms of content and relevance; to Case
No. 40 of 2011 Page 60 of 93 encourage new talent and generate employment
opportunities directly and indirectly and (iii) to supplement the services of
AIR and promote rapid expansion of the broadcast network in the country for
the benefit of the Indian populace.
147\. In July 2005, the Government of India launched the second phase of the
policy on expansion of FM radio broadcasting services through private agencies
with a view to give FM radio business a boost. Phase II covered as many as 90
cities. It is seen that the FM radio stations across the country have entered
into licenses with the Government on the same terms and conditions provided
therein. Consequently out of these 337 channels, 284 were successfully bid and
after scrutiny, permission was granted for operationalization of 245 channels
spanning 87 cities. The number of operational private FM stations has
increased to 245 stations as on September 30, 2008.
148\. AIR has been in operation for over 60 years as opposed to FM channels
which have been in operation since 2002 and that AIR is not restricted in
terms of content and can broadcast news programmes etc., wherein FM channels
can broadcast only music. AIR earns about 40% of the total advertising revenue
in the radio industry and other channels share the remaining 60% and that AIR
is having a big network of broadcasting set up throughout India and thus has
huge listenership resulting into major share of advertisement income out of
the whole radio industry.
149\. Based on the documents filed by the parties, the Commission observes
that the technical distinctions between AM and FM frequencies as well as the
fact that private FM stations can only broadcast on FM and not on AM as per
Government policy coupled with the limitation on content imposed on private FM
stations makes it clear that AIR and FM radio channels are distinct. The
Commission therefore, concludes that for the purposes of determination of the
Case No. 40 of 2011 Page 61 of 93 relevant product market, AIR (AM as well as
FM) is distinct from private FM stations.
150\. The next question which arises for consideration is whether the market
needs to be further restricted in terms of the type/ genres of music that are
broadcast on the radio. The DG observed that the music business in India is
different from the rest of the world as film music has a history of more than
70 years and is part of the Indian culture. The DG further observed that India
has a vast range of music but the most popular is Bollywood music which
accounts for about 70% of music sales in India, and that it is an established
fact that out of 240 FM channels about 80% of the channels are largely based
on Bollywood music and it is also established that more than 200 channels play
the music of the opposite party. The DG also found that the maximum music
played on more than 200 channels is Bollywood music.
151\. The opposite party has alleged that the DG has assessed the wrong level
of the market. The DG has reached the conclusion by considering the extent to
which the mediums of music are substitutable and/ or interchangeable for
listeners/ consumers. However, this is the wrong level to assess the market.
The supply of goods where the opposite party is alleged to be dominant is the
upstream flow of A (content owners providing licenses to radio stations) and
therefore, what is required is to test the extent of the opposite party's
market power by looking at the ability of its customers (radio stations) to
switch and the ability of its rivals (other content providers) to expand.
However, the DG analyses the substitution in respect of the downstream flow of
B (radio stations providing broadcasts to consumers). The customer for
purposes of competition assessment is the radio stations and therefore, the
assessment should have been done at level A.
152\. Section 2(t) of the Act defines relevant market as 'a market comprising
of all those products or services which are regarded as interchangeable or
substitutable by the consumer, by reason of characteristics of the products or
Case No. 40 of 2011 Page 62 of 93 services, their prices and intended use'.
For the purposes of an effective competition law analysis, the Commission must
look at the working of the radio industry to understand the radio station-
listener-advertiser dynamic. The Commission notes that the purpose/ function
of a radio station is to provide content to its listeners and the number of
listeners that they attract has direct implication on their ability to attract
advertising, which is a radio stations main source of revenue. Therefore, in
order to attract more listeners, the radio stations will attempt to provide
content that is popular with the listeners. Since private FM channels are
restricted to certain type of content that may be broadcast due to government
policy, they are largely focused on broadcasting music. The role and tastes of
the audience in music therefore, becomes relevant. Since majority of the
listeners like to listen to Bollywood music, and given the cultural importance
of Bollywood films music in the Indian context, as has been established by the
DG, and also by the evidence of the radio stations, the radio stations as
customers of the opposite party, who are dependent on the patronage of their
listeners to attract maximum advertisers, will not consider Bollywood music
substitutable with other kinds of music. The opposite party's contention that
around 20% of the stations are not based on Bollywood music is without merit.
Simply because there is a market for content that is non-Bollywood music does
not imply that such content is substitutable with Bollywood music from the
point of view of the customer who broadcasts Bollywood music based on tastes/
listening preferences of its audience. Furthermore, the contention of the
opposite party that even those stations that play Bollywood music also play
other types of music and can therefore, increase the amount of non- Bollywood
music is also without merit for the same reason. The opposite party has
further submitted that from a demand perspective, what is considered
substitutable by radio stations are the various repertoires made available to
it by the various music companies and stated how RAM data shows that Big FM,
Radio City and Radio One switched to playing music from repertoires other than
the opposite party's repertoire without suffering any appreciable dip in the
market share. Even if this is accurate, the Commission notes that 3 radio
stations (even though Radio City Case No. 40 of 2011 Page 63 of 93 switched
back to the opposite party's repertoire and should not be counted) out of a
total of 210 stations which have a license with the opposite party do not
constitute a sufficient number of customers switching to indicate that any
attempt by the firm to increase the prices for a product becomes unprofitable,
which is an important consideration for market definition purposes.
153\. The Commission therefore, holds that Bollywood music can be
distinguished from the possible alternatives comprising of non Bollywood music
by virtue of specific characteristics as a result of which Bollywood music is
not interchangeable with non Bollywood music. Therefore, the Commission
concludes that the relevant product market in this case is the 'market for
licensing of Bollywood music to private FM radio stations for broadcast'. For
the purpose of section 4, the boundaries of relevant market freeze the moment
the products cease being interchangeable or substitutable. In the instant
case, non-Bollywood music and Bollywood music cannot be said to be
'interchangeable or substitutable'. It must be kept in mind that market
definition is not a mechanical process and is specific to the facts and
circumstances of each case.
154\. The Commission notes that one of the major objections of the opposite
party in determination of the relevant product market is that the DG has
failed to consider supply side substitutability. Supply side substitutability
considers whether other content owners in the market would switch to providing
Bollywood music. However, the opposite party's argument fails to consider the
dynamics of the industries in question. In order to provide effective
competition constraints in the downstream market of licensing of music, the
licensors would have to acquire more Bollywood music, which would require them
to either purchase more film music or produce more films. As the dynamics of
the film industry are such that sums of money involved in the acquisition of
music/ production of films are huge, with the opposite party already being the
largest buyer of film music, the opposite party's contention Case No. 40 of
2011 Page 64 of 93 of supply side substitutability is not probable in the
context of the industry in question and therefore, without merit.
155\. Insofar as the relevant geographic market is concerned, the DG concluded
that the relevant geographic market in the present case as the 'territories of
India where Bollywood music is prevalent'. As per the DG, the music played by
FM channels in each station depends upon the choices and preferences of
listeners on the basis of local language, dialect and preferences and although
the film music dominates the music played on FM channels across the country,
yet the music played on FM can be categorized on the basis of region:
(a) Region where Bollywood/ Hindi music occupies the maximum share:
Maharashtra, Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Uttar Pradesh,
Uttaranchal, Bihar, Jharkhand, West Bengal, Rajasthan, Haryana, Himachal
Pradesh, Punjab and Jammu & Kashmir
(b) Region where regional language film occupies the maximum share: Tamil
Nadu, Kerala, Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka
(c) Regions where a mix of Bollywood, English and regional language music are
played: Bangalore, Hyderabad, Odihsa and North-East States According to the
DG, the relevant geographic market cannot be taken as India, as the music
played in the southern and eastern part of the country is distinct from the
music played in the rest of the territory where Bollywood is the choice of
radio listeners. The opposite party has, however, contended that such a
definition is extremely vague and cannot be used for any competition law
assessment as there does not exist any objectively verifiable standard or norm
to determine what is 'prevalent' form of music in any given territory of India
especially considering the fact that the same music/ content is available
through internet radio, mobile radio, TV etc., across territories of India.
Case No. 40 of 2011 Page 65 of 93
156\. The Act defines 'relevant geographic market' in section 2(s) of the Act
as 'a market comprising of an area in which the conditions of competition for
supply of goods or provision of services or demand of goods or services are
distinctly homogenous and can be distinguished from the conditions prevailing
in the neighboring areas' and as per section 19(6) of the Act, the Commission
shall, while determining the 'relevant geographic market', have due regard to
all or any of the following factors, namely:
(a) regulatory trade barriers;
(b) local specification requirements;
(c) national procurement policies;
(d) adequate distribution facilities;
(e) transport costs;
(f) language;
(g) consumer preferences;
(h) need for secure or regular supplies or rapid after-sales services.
157\. The Commission notes that the 'relevant geographic market' is the area
in which conditions of competition for supply of goods or provision of
services or demand of goods or services are 'distinctly homogenous' from
prevailing areas. Geographic market definition involves the identification of
those firms, selling the products within the relevant product market, to which
customers in the area will turn in the event of a significant price increase,
and may also include firms that would enter the geographic area in response to
such an increase. Since any radio station operating in any city in India can
purchase a license from the opposite party or any of the opposite party's
competitors, the geographical area should be the entire territory of India.
The Commission therefore, conclude that the 'relevant geographic market' is
the 'territory of India'.
Case No. 40 of 2011 Page 66 of 93
158\. The Commission therefore, concludes that the 'relevant market' in this
case is the 'market for licensing of Bollywood music to private FM radio
stations for broadcast in India'.
Determination of Issue No. 2
159\. Having delineated the relevant market in consideration for the instant
case, it is now possible to examine facts to determine whether the opposite
party enjoys a 'dominant position' in such relevant market. 'Dominant
position' is defined under explanation (a) of section 4 of the Act. The same
is reproduced below for ready reference.
'Dominant position' means a position of strength, enjoyed by an enterprise, in
the relevant market, in India, which enables it to (i) operate independently
of competitive forces prevailing in the relevant market; or (ii) affect its
competitors or consumers or the relevant market in its favour.'
160\. Unlike in some international jurisdictions, in India, the evaluation of
the strength has to be ascertained not merely on the basis of the market share
of the enterprise but on the basis of a host of factors such as size and
importance of competitors, economic power of the enterprise, entry barriers
etc., as mentioned in section 19 (4) of the Act. This wide spectrum of factors
provided in the section indicates that the Commission is required to take a
very holistic and pragmatic approach while inquiring whether an enterprise
enjoys a dominant position.
161\. Thus, 'the position of strength' is not some objective attribute that
can be measured along a prescribed mathematical index or equation. Rather, it
has to be a rational consideration of relevant facts, holistic interpretation
of statistics or information and application of several aspects of the Indian
economy.
Case No. 40 of 2011 Page 67 of 93
162\. In view of the aforesaid, the Commission now examines as to whether the
opposite party has a dominant position in the relevant market.
Market share of the enterprise
163\. As per the DG, the market share of the opposite party in terms of the
relevant market is about 50% in terms of revenue. According to the DG, the
revenue of the opposite party from FM Radio when compared to its competitors
PPL, YRF, Sony and SaReGaMa shows that the opposite party has been enjoying
more than 50% market share from the relevant market over a long period.
Furthermore, the information collected during the investigation shows that
even the combined revenue of PPL and IPRS (INR 31 crores during 2010-11) from
radio license fee is less than the revenue of the opposite party (INR 33.23
crores) during the same period. The DG has found that in terms of songs played
on all the FM channels across the country varies from between 25% and 60% from
one station to other. The information submitted by the opposite party shows
that the overall percentage of the needle hours of all the songs played on 210
channels where it has granted license is about 30% during 2012-11.
164\. According to the opposite party however, the DG erred in not relying
upon and taking into account the data showing the market share of the opposite
party on an all India basis in respect of the private FM stations whether or
not licensed by the opposite party. If such data is considered, then the
market share of playout of the opposite party is 28.11 % (2008-2009); 27.34%
(2009-10) and 26.85% (2010-11) and not 34.11%, 32.84% and 32.58%. Therefore,
clearly with just an average of 25% market share on overall playout of the
music on all private FM radio stations, whether or not licensed by the
opposite party, the DG was in error in holding that the opposite party had a
dominant position by virtue of market share.
165\. As per the opposite party, the data relied upon by the DG clearly
indicates that the revenue derived by the opposite party from FM radio
stations Case No. 40 of 2011 Page 68 of 93 is almost comparable to the revenue
from the FM radio stations derived by PPL. DG does not appreciate that the
total revenue of the opposite party is higher because the opposite party
charges both for sound recording and performance license and PPL is based only
on sound recording license fee.
Size and resources of the enterprise
166\. According to the DG, as compared to the opposite party, which has a
turnover of approximately 400 crores, incomes of competitors like Sony,
SaRaGaMa and TIPS are almost one-fourth or less than the size of the opposite
party's turnover. The fact that the opposite party has acquired music rights
from the major movie production houses provided the opposite party with
sufficient market power to dictate terms to the private radio stations.
167\. The opposite party has contended that the data showing the revenue of
the opposite party for the period 2003-2011 shows that revenue from physical
sales has gone down and likewise the revenue from radio have also been falling
substantially over the years and therefore, the DG wrongly concluded that the
opposite party is dominant. The opposite party has contended that according to
the DG, in 2012 and 11, the opposite party purchased rights about 48 Bollywood
Films in each year while the closest competitors, SaRaGaMa and Sony were not
able to purchase more than 10-11 films every year during the same period.
However, it may be noted that as per the annual report of the CBFC, the total
no. of Hindi films released during 2009-11 were 656 as compared to 464 stated
by the DG. The opposite party therefore, owned music content of about 25% of
the Hindi Films released as per the data released by CFFC. It is therefore,
denied that the opposite party is dominant based on the acquisition of
Bollywood film/ music. DG report stated that the opposite party has purchased
the rights of the big budget and star cast films and the opposite party
controls 'hit' Bollywood music. The opposite party submits that there cannot
exist any segment such as hit Hindi film music and in any event, DG has not
relied upon credible data to arrive at the conclusion that the opposite party
has dominance in the 'hit' hindi film music segment. Furthermore, the Case No.
40 of 2011 Page 69 of 93 assessment made by the DG presupposes that at the
stage of the acquisition of the music rights in a film, the music is a hit.
This observation of the DG is without merit, since at the stage of the
acquisition of the music rights in a film, more often than not the songs are
not even in existence.
Size and importance of the competitors
168\. The data gathered during the investigation has revealed that none of the
competitors of the opposite party are comparable in terms of size and
importance. The revenue of the opposite party is 4-5 times of its nearest
competitors. In terms of the number of Bollywood films acquired by the
opposite party in a year, none of its competitors have been able to acquire
more than 10-11 films in year. Thus, in terms of relevant market, the opposite
party is in such a position that no competitor is able to demand the terms and
conditions for sale of its music to FM channels.
169\. As per the opposite party, the DG has erred in not analyzing the
vertical integration of the competitors of the opposite party such as YRF and
Sony. DG should also have noted that the opposite party faced competition at
two levels, from music companies at the stage of acquisition of content and
then from other licensing agencies such as PPL. The opposite party is
therefore, not foreclosing competition but creating it in the market. The
biggest competitor of the opposite party at the stage of licensing of music
rights is PPL which has more than 200 companies as its members. The royalty
income of PPL for the last 3 years as well as the turnover of PPL shows that
it is the opposite party's biggest competitor.
Dependence of consumers on the enterprise
170\. As per the DG Report, the information gathered during the investigation
has confirmed that the radio stations are dependent upon the opposite party.
The data provided by the opposite party itself shows that as per AirCheck Top
100 and Top 20 songs/ music broadcast on radio, the opposite party owns
majority of the music labels and that it has 58% share of the top Case No. 40
of 2011 Page 70 of 93 100 songs played on private FM channels. If the radio
stations were to discontinue playing the opposite party's music, there being
no demand side substitutability of latest Bollywood songs, it would cause
irreparable damage to the market share of the radio station as customers would
immediately switch to other radio stations. This aspect was confirmed by the
radio stations during the course of the investigation.
171\. According to the opposite party, there is data which shows that there
are many radio stations that have not received any license from the opposite
party and these radio stations are experiencing higher growth levels than
other radio stations that have licenses from the opposite party. DG has merely
relied upon statements made by radio stations to arrive at a finding about
over dependence of the radio stations on the opposite party. However,
responses filed by radio stations are contradictory and not supported by
verifiable data.
Barriers to entry
172\. The DG has noted that although there are no major entry barriers to
become a music company or music producer in the Indian music industry and to
grant license in the relevant market, yet in Bollywood music Industry it is
not easy to obtain the ownership rights on account of the huge cost and
distribution network is required. Every film producer want to either sell his
music at a higher price which may go up to 10 crores for a film and also wants
to take advantage of distribution network of companies like the opposite
party. According to the DG Report, the opposite party is the only independent
music company which holds a lion's share in the Bollywood film music and due
to its dominance has the ability and the bargaining power to deal with
broadcasters, independent of industry organizations and copyright societies.
173\. According to the opposite party, the DG fails to consider the
possibility of expansion by current rivals such as Sony. Many of the opposite
party's competitors are vertically integrated and have natural exclusive
access to music content produced by their affiliates. Notably, the opposite
party does Case No. 40 of 2011 Page 71 of 93 not possess this strategic
advantage and must vigorously compete and bid for every film's music content.
Furthermore, the Report only addresses the threat of entry and not the threat
of expansion
174\. As per the informant, the opposite party has failed to explain why in an
industry with no barriers to entry or expansion and where the opposite party's
prices are considerably higher than its 'significant competitors', the market
shares of those competitors have not increased dramatically as a result of a
shift in demand. The conduct of the opposite party in increasing acquisition
costs, focus on superstar films and imposing performance license fees and MCC
on radio stations are significant barriers to entry and expansion in the
market.
175\. Having heard the submissions of the parties and considering the report
of the DG and other material available on record, the Commission proceeds to
determine the issue of dominance.
Market share
176\. The market share of the opposite party in terms of revenue from FM Radio
for the last 3 years is over 50%.
Revenue from FM Radio by major music providers (Rupees in crores) Year OP PPL
YashRaj Sony Saregama 2008-9 36.75 8.19 3.29 3.52 6.6 2009-10 36.29 23.72 2.43
3.39 5.4 2010-11 33.23 21.87 1.62 1.58 2.7 The table above reveals that as
compared to its main competitor companies YRF, Sony and SaReGaMa, the market
share of the opposite party is over 50% for the last 3 years. The fact that
the revenue of PPL is close to the revenue of the opposite party in itself
does not detract from the market power Case No. 40 of 2011 Page 72 of 93 of
the opposite party because PPL is a copyright society which has over 200
members and collects royalties on behalf of their members, and then
distributes it to them. On the other hand the opposite party is a single
entity which is directly earning such revenue.
177\. The market share of the opposite party in terms of playout of Bollywood
music on FM channels across the country is disputed by the opposite party. The
Commission notes that based on the information collected by the DG, the market
share of the opposite party in terms of playout cannot be determined with any
kind of exactitude. Even if the contention of the opposite party is accepted
and the market share in terms of playout of music of 25% is accepted, this
does not detract from the fact that songs of the opposite party played on all
the FM channels across the country varies from between 25% and 60% from one
station to other, and that the opposite party has been able to maintain this
share over the last few years.
178\. It is important to consider that market shares provide information about
a firm's past market success in relation to its competitors. Market shares
provide useful first indications of the market structure and of the
competitive importance of various undertakings active on the market. In most
markets, an enterprise's absolute market share is an important factor that
allows for initial indications about its market power. However, market shares
alone do not determine whether an undertaking is dominant or has substantial
market power. Therefore, these initial indications are put in perspective by
other factors when making an overall assessment of the market power of the
firm under investigation.
Size, resources and economic power of the enterprise
179\. As compared to the opposite party, which has a turnover of approximately
400 crores, incomes of competitors like Sony, SaRaGaMa and TIPS are almost
one-fourth or less than the size of the opposite party's Case No. 40 of 2011
Page 73 of 93 turnover, which is an important indicators of the economic
strength of the opposite party.
180\. It has been established that the opposite party purchased rights about
48 Bollywood Films in each year in 2010 and 2011 while the closest
competitors, SaReGaMa and Sony were not able to purchase more than 10-11 films
every year during the same period. Even if the percentage of films that the
opposite party has purchased in the last 2-3 years cannot be determined
accurately due to the disputed fact of the number of films which have released
every year, it is clear that the opposite party managed to purchase the rights
of almost 4 times the number of films of its closest competitors. Furthermore,
the opposite party has purchased a number of films of bankable stars (as per
the DG, investigation has found that the opposite party has procured almost
all the films of Sharukh Khan, Salman Khan and Aamir Khan), and while the
Commission notes that the purchase of music rights of films which have
'bankable' stars does not guarantee that the music is a hit, it has to be
recognized that because of the presence of 'bankable' stars, the interest in
such movies is a much more than a normal film without superstars and
therefore, the likelihood of its success is more than a film which has lesser
known actors. The Commission, therefore, notes that the superior financial
strength in the market coupled with superior resources as in this case is an
important indicator of dominance of an enterprise.
Size and importance of competitors
181\. The Commission notes that when compared to its competitors in terms of
revenue, acquisition of movies, ownership of popular content, the opposite
party is definitively is a superior position as the opposite party's revenue
of the opposite party is 4-5 times of its nearest competitors. In terms of the
number of Bollywood films acquired by the opposite party in a year, none of
its competitors have been able to acquire more than 10-11 films in year. The
opposite party has also been able to purchase the movies of most of the Case
No. 40 of 2011 Page 74 of 93 superstars. These factors again indicate that the
opposite party is in a position of strength in the market.
Dependence of consumers on the enterprise
182\. As per DG, the data provided by the opposite party itself shows that as
per AirCheck Top 100 and Top 20 songs/ music broadcast on radio, the opposite
party owns majority of the music labels and that it has 58% share of the top
100 songs played on private FM channels.
Top 100 Songs Analysis in 18 Cities Analysis (Ahmadabad, Bengaluru, Chennai,
Coimbatore, Delhi, Hyderabad, Indore, Jaipur, Kanpur, Kolkata, Lucknow,
Nagpur, Pune, Surat, Thiruvanthapuram, Vadodara, Visakhapatnam) Week Total
Songs T-Series Song Percentage  04-10 July 2011 85 49 57 11-17 July 2011 79 46
58 18-24 July 2011 86 46 53 25-31 July 2011 85 45 52 01 Aug 07 August 2011 85
49 57 08-14 Aug 2011 85 49 57 15-21 Aug 2011 83 46 55 22-28 Aug 2011 76 47 61
29 Aug - 04 Sep 2011 78 44 56 05-11 Sept 2011 80 50 62 12-18 Sept 2011 78 52
66 19-25 Sept 2011 81 47 58 26 Sept - 02 Oct.2011 77 42 54 03-09 Oct 2011 79
40 50 10-16 Oct.2011 80 39 48 17-23 Oct 2011 71 43 60 Case No. 40 of 2011 Page
75 of 93 24-30 Oct.2011 78 42 53 31 Oct -06 Nov.2011 76 42 55 07-13 Nov.2011
84 44 52 14-20 Nov. 2011 77 45 58 21-27 Nov.2011 79 45 56 28 Nov.04 Dec.2011
82 43 52 05-11 Dec. 2011 74 46 62 12-18 Dec. 2011 77 47 61 19-25 Dec. 2011 78
47 60 26 Dec.01 Jan.2012 81 51 62 02-08 Jan.2012 83 42 50 09-15 Jan.2012 78 44
56 16-22 Jan.2012 84 44 52 23-29 Jan. 2012 79 43 54 30 Jan. - 05 Feb.2012 79
51 64 06-12 Feb.2012 80 53 66 13-19 Feb. 2012 77 49 63 20-26 Feb.2012 74 49 66
27 Feb -04 Mar.2012 77 49 63 05-11 Mar. 2012 80 49 61 12-18 Mar 2012 81 50 61
19-25 Mar 2012 80 46 57 26 Mar- 01 Apr 2012 80 46 57 02-08 Apr.2012 73 48 65
09-15 Apr 2012 79 48 60 16-22 Apr.2012 81 48 59 23-29 Apr.2012 80 47 58 30 Apr
- 06 May 2012 81 48 59 07-13 May 2012 79 50 63 14-20 May 2012 84 48 57 21-27
May 2012 83 48 57 Case No. 40 of 2011 Page 76 of 93 28 May - 03 Jun 2012 84 50
59 04-10 Jun 2012 82 51 62 11-17 June 2012 84 52 61 18-25 June 2012 77 56 72
TOTAL 4073 2395 58 While the Commission notes that AirCheck data changes from
day to day, and is only collected in 18 cities, the data gathered is a strong
indicator, coupled with other factors that the opposite party's repertoire
comprises of Bollywood music that is extremely popular with the listener and
resultantly popular with the advertisers and that due to such popular content,
the opposite party commands a position of a strength. Due to the ownership of
popular content, the opposite party's customers are heavily dependent on the
content of the opposite party, as is also evident from the evidence collected
from the radio operators.
Barriers to entry
183\. The Commission notes that there are significant barriers to entry in the
market. In order to be successful in the business of licensing of music,
particularly Bollywood music, a company needs to buy the music rights of
Bollywood movies which according to the evidence can go upto 10 crores. Even
after the purchase of music rights, vast investments are required in the
promotion of music as well in a distribution network. Finally, in order to
become competitive in the market, a music company needs to be able to build a
repertoire of music that takes time and more investments. There are therefore,
barriers to entry in the market and the Commission holds that in this case
there are substantial barriers to entry which make it impossible/ more
difficult for a firm to enter the market.
Case No. 40 of 2011 Page 77 of 93
184\. In addition to the above, the Commission considers certain evidence in
the relevant market which shows, that in fact, the opposite party was in a
position of strength in the relevant market.
185\. Moreover, the following factors and the conduct of the opposite party
further strengthen that the opposite party is indeed in a position of strength
in the market which is allowing it to operate independently of competitive
forces.
186\. The opposite party's royalty rates are set on a needle per hour basis,
whereas PPL and most other competitors provide licenses at a rate either
determined by or equivalent to the Second Order of the Copyright Board. The
opposite party also conveniently decides to follow the rate set by the First
Order of the Copyright Board as a 'market standard' while disputing the rate
set by the Second Order of the Copyright Board by the same authority. The
opposite party's argument that the rate set in the Second Order of the
Copyright Board does not apply to it as it was not a party to the proceedings
applies equally to the First Order of the Copyright Board, where the opposite
party again was not a party. The opposite party is the only music provider who
is charging such rates to radio stations. This is despite the fact that the
entire industry has expressed dissatisfaction with these rates and has applied
to the Copyright Board for a compulsory license.
187\. The opposite party imposes MCC ranging from 30%-50% of playout which
radio stations are required to pay irrespective of whether they play that
amount of music. No other music provider has imposed such MCC. The evidence of
the radio stations also reveals that they have showed a strong resistance to
the imposition of MCC; however, MCC continue to be imposed.
188\. During oral arguments, the opposite party submitted that it lost
contracts with 82 of the 245 private FM radio stations (not necessarily radio
companies/ broadcasters) after the Second Order of the Copyright Board, which
reduced its market share by 15%. However, the Commission notes that Case No.
40 of 2011 Page 78 of 93 the loss of contracts did not lead to a change in the
prices or imposition of MCC by the opposite party.
189\. In this connection, it is instructing to notice that Radio City (one of
the radio stations whose contract was terminated as a result of the opposite
party's conduct) returned to the opposite party after a year and that too on
unchanged terms. When asked about Radio City's license, the response of Shri
Neeraj Kalyan is telling:
'.....As regards Radio City, their license expired in December 2010 which they
refused to renew unless we agreed to apply the rates stated in the Copyright
Board Order. We refused to accept the same. However our refusal had no effect
on their profitability and RAM ratings. On their own accord they once again
approached us for a license in January 2012 which we granted on mutually
agreed upon terms which shows that we have never refused a license to anyone
provided that they are reasonable in their negotiations with us'.
190\. This shows that even after refusing to apply rates of the Second Order
of the Copyright Board, Radio City renewed their contract with the opposite
party. According to Radio City, '.......As a result of the termination/ expiry
of the MOU dated 26th December (that stood amended from time to time) our
company's business was considered hampered as we were able to broadcast a huge
repertoire of music owned by SCIL......Further, during the entire period, i.e.
2011, when we were not broadcasting the music of SCIL but the other radio
stations were, the other radio stations performed considerably better than our
radio stations in terms of revenues as we did not have the license to play the
music of SCIL, which included most of the top songs of that period and as such
was detrimental to our interests'. Radio City's response is also evidence of
the fact that the radio station could not effectively compete without playing
the opposite party's music.
Case No. 40 of 2011 Page 79 of 93
191\. Based on the above assessment, the Commission concludes that it is clear
that the opposite party is a dominant enterprise, having the strength to
operate independently of competitive forces and affect its competitors and
customers in its favour.
Determination of Issue No. 3
192\. The Commission now looks at the allegations of abuse of dominant
position by the opposite party.
Excessive Pricing
193\. The DG's investigation has revealed that post the Second Order of the
Copyright Board there are 3 rates prevailing in the market: (i) rate of PPL as
per the Second Order of the Copyright Board; (ii) rates negotiated by FM
channels with other music companies like YRF; and (ii) the rate that the
opposite party charges, which have been found to be the highest rates in the
radio industry at present.
194\. The DG has also noted that during the course of investigation it was
contended by the opposite party that one of the reasons for charging higher
price from radio operators or charging fixed or minimum charges is to
compensate the loss on account of decrease in sales of music in physical
format. It was argued that repeated airplay by radio has adversely affected
the physical sale. However, this contention has not been backed by any
evidence and during the investigation Shri Neeraj Kalyan from the opposite
party was asked to clarify whether they request the radio operators to not
repeat the same song on their channel and he confirmed that it was not so. The
DG also found that after the release of music, FM radio is used as a platform
to promote music.
195\. The DG also found that the opposite party has not reduced its rate
despite the non-renewal of licenses by some of the operators such as Radio
Case No. 40 of 2011 Page 80 of 93 City, Big FM, Radio Mantra. The DG has
further observed that the opposite party has also raised the issue of high
acquisition cost and the decrease in sales of physical form to justify its
conduct of charging prices above the benchmark or industry norms. Further, the
opposite party has itself stated that the cost of music and royalty rates for
FM channels cannot be correlated directly. Thus, it may be seen that the
opposite party has not been able to justify the reason for charging higher
price than the competitors in the market. It has conveniently chosen to stick
to the prices determined by the First Order of the Copyright Board, as
detailed earlier. Therefore, according to the DG, it is evident that the only
reason for charging the excessive price is the dependence of consumers on the
music of the opposite party and that the investigation has revealed that there
is no reasonable relation between the prices charged by the opposite party and
the economic value of the product. As per the DG, the prices charged by the
opposite party are much higher than the industry norms or the prices charged
by its competitors. The DG has thus concluded that the opposite party is
charging excessive and unfair prices in violation of section 4(2)(a)(i) of the
Act.
196\. The Commission notes pricing abuses may come under the purview of
competition law as abuse of dominance. Pricing abuses may be 'exclusionary'
i.e. pricing strategies adopted by dominant firms to foreclose competitors.
Such strategies include a wide variety of measures, such as predatory pricing,
price squeezes, loyalty rebates. Pricing abuses may also be 'exploitative'
i.e. which cover instances where a dominant firm is accused of exploiting its
customers by setting excessive prices. This case deals with the issue of
pricing abuse which is exploitative i.e. excessive prices charged by a
dominant firm to its customers.
197\. The prohibitions or the abusive conducts including both 'exclusionary'
and 'exploitative' practices are set out in section 4(2) (a), (b), (c), (d)
and (e) of the Act. Imposition of unfair price has been explicitly stated as
an abusive act under section 4(2)(a)(ii) which states that there shall be an
abuse of Case No. 40 of 2011 Page 81 of 93 dominant position, if an enterprise
or a group directly or indirectly imposes unfair or discriminatory price in
purchase or sale (including predatory price) of goods or services. Evidently,
a dominant firm, under the Act, abuses its dominance if it charges 'unfair
prices' to its customers, which may include both unfairly high or excessive
price and unfairly low or predatory price. Thus, excessive price forms a
subset of 'unfair price' in the Indian context.
198\. The Commission notes that determining whether a price is excessive is an
uncertain and difficult task. The opposite party has submitted that cost
analysis for setting the license fee is not possible as the cost of a sound
recording is reflected in the acquisition price paid as 'royalty' to the
owners, whereas if the sound recording is developed in-house, the cost is
categorized as 'recording expenses'. As against the said direct costs, the
opposite party has various avenues for commercially exploiting the same and it
is very difficult to apportion the cost of acquisition of sound recording to
different revenue streams. Moreover, certain sound recording may be expensive
to acquire but the music may turn out to be a flop, the reverse may also be
true. Therefore, the value of a particular sound recording would depend upon
its popularity and not its cost.
199\. The Commission notes that in the absence of the cost data it will be
difficult, neigh impossible, to term the price charged by the opposite party
at 661 INR per needle hour as unfair being excessive solely on the basis that
it is higher than the price charged by the competitors of the opposite party.
In view of all factors discussed in the preceding paragraphs above, the
Commission holds that a case of excessive pricing has not been made out
against the opposite party.
MCC
200\. The DG's investigation has revealed that the opposite party requires MCC
to be paid by the informant irrespective of the actual number of needle Case
No. 40 of 2011 Page 82 of 93 hours of the opposite party's music that is
broadcast. The opposite party imposes an amount of INR 2,16, 667 per month per
radio station (excluding Bangalore) as MCC for both sound recording and
performance rights and therefore, the informant is bound to pay a total of INR
6,50,000 per month for three radio stations to the opposite party,
irrespective of the actual quantity of the opposite party's music broadcast.
The statement of Shri Neeraj Kalyan from the opposite party explaining the
reasoning for imposing MCC is reproduced as under:
> '.............As far as the issue of minimum guarantee in terms of playout
> of our music is concerned, it is not mandatory on anyone to accept this
> condition and there are instances wherein we have offered our licenses
> without minimum guarantee of music playout also. Minimum guarantee is sought
> from the FM stations based on our playouts in the immediately preceding year
> by the FM station and it acts as a mere assurance to us that the losses
> suffered by us by way of ever decreasing physical sales is somehow
> compensated for which FM stations are the main reasons for such decline
> because they have been belting out music of our albums and films so much
> during the whole day that the consumer do not feel the need to buy or
> consume such music in any other manner when the same is available free of
> cost. However, it has been noticed that FM stations have been playing our
> music invariably in excess of the minimum committed needle hours which in
> itself is proof that the same is not a deterrent, exploitative or anti-
> competitive in any manner. In addition to this we have also been offering
> the FM stations some complementary needle hours in exchange of the minimum
> committed needle hours playout which also helps the FM stations to bring
> down their cost of music and it is in our mutual benefit.....' Case No. 40
> of 2011 Page 83 of 93
201\. The DG's investigation further revealed that except the opposite party,
no other music company is imposing MCC, neither is PPL imposing MCC and
furthermore, that since the opposite party has a position of strength in the
relevant market the radio operators have no choice but to accept the
conditions imposed by the opposite party. The agreements for granting licenses
to the FM channels contain the provision for MCC. On perusal of some of the
agreements, the DG found that the minimum committed needle hours for playoff
of the songs of the opposite party imposed by it are as high as 50%. According
to the DG, this reveals the modus operandi of the opposite party is to ensure
its business share in the relevant market and that if half of the total songs
played by the FM stations have been fixed by the opposite party, the other
music companies will be left with only 50% of the total market share of the
relevant market.
202\. The opposite party has contended that when they impose a condition of
minimum play out of more than 35% they also allow a complementary needle hour
upto 20%. Therefore, they are not abusing but giving a royalty discount of
extra free music for the benefit of the FM radio stations. According to the
DG, the contention of the opposite party has no merit as they by virtue of
their market power are imposing restraints on the FM stations by not allowing
the music companies to play music as per their choice. It has been found
during the course of investigation by the DG that while taking the
broadcasting rights, the private FM radio stations have to accept MCC as it is
an essential precondition before grant of broadcasting rights by the opposite
party to the radio stations.
203\. As per the DG, the investigation has further revealed that the condition
of MCC is distorting the competition in the relevant market. On one hand it
increases the cost of music for FM radio stations as they are forced to pay
extra money even if they are not playing songs of the opposite party, on the
other hand it also forces FM stations to play at least the minimum guaranteed
needle hour even though there is no demand of such songs from the listeners.
Case No. 40 of 2011 Page 84 of 93
The opposite party has argued that they decide MCC on the basis of the
percentage of songs actually played by the FM stations. Therefore, they are
not hindering the competition, as the FM stations will anyway play their song
of the same needle hour. According to the DG, the contention of the opposite
party is devoid of any merit because the investigation has indicated that the
obvious purpose behind imposing the condition of MCC is to protect its
dominance in the relevant market and to maximize its profit. In the music
industry, nobody is sure about the popularity of a song unless it is released
and played in the market. By way of ensuring the minimum play out, the
opposite party also gets advantage in procurement of music from film
producers. Thus, the opposite party due to its dominant position in the market
also gains a position or strength and bargaining edge over its competitors
while purchasing the rights of film music. According to the DG, the opposite
party has not been able to put forth any explanation to justify that the
conditions of MCC are imposed for any pro-competitive reason. It is evident
that the terms and conditions are imposed only to maintain and abuse the
dominance of the opposite party in the relevant market. Thus, the DG has
concluded that the opposite party is imposing an unfair condition in violation
of section 4(2)(a)(i) of the Act.
204\. The Commission notes that the prohibitions or the abusive conduct
including both 'exclusionary' and 'exploitative' practices set out in section
4(2) (a), (b), (c), (d) and (e) of the Act include the imposition of 'unfair'
or 'discriminatory' condition in purchase or sale of goods or service.
Therefore, imposition of unfair/ discriminatory trading condition has been
explicitly stated as an abusive act under section 4(2)(a)(i) which provides
that there shall be an abuse of dominant position, if an enterprise or a group
'directly or indirectly imposes unfair or discriminatory condition in purchase
or sale goods or services'.
205\. The opposite party has alleged that the condition of MCC is not
exploitative as radio stations in any event broadcast the pre-determined Case
No. 40 of 2011 Page 85 of 93 amount. According to the informant, this is a
blatant attempt to mislead the Commission; for example in the year 2009-2010,
the informant has, with the exception of the month of November (for all three
radio stations) and in December for the Kolkata radio station and January for
the Mumbai radio station, never broadcast the full MCC target.
206\. The Commission notes that MCC, irrespective of whether it is 30% or 50%,
is exploitative and exclusionary in nature. It is exploitative as it forces
the customers to pay for music that it may not play. Exclusionary conduct is
characterized by improper strengthening of market power by the dominant
enterprise. In this case the imposition of MCC by the opposite party has an
anti-competitive effect on the market as it forecloses other competitors from
a substantial share of the market. Since the private radio station is
contractually bound to pay the opposite party a minimum guarantee, they are
likely to broadcast the amount of music that they have already paid for.
Therefore, a certain amount of music playout on private FM radio stations is
already fixed for the opposite party. This results in the opposite party's
competitors not being able to compete for and being foreclosed from
broadcasting their music on this prefixed playout of 30-50% reserved for the
opposite party.
207\. The opposite party has raised the contention that computation of MCC is
based on the playout of the radio station for the previous year and therefore,
rather than forcing broadcasters to buy content that they do not want, it
reflects their actual demand. In view of the Commission the plea taken by the
opposite party is devoid of any merit as demand of content of opposite party
by a radio station last year does not mean similar or identical demand in the
next year also. Besides, the playout number is manipulated by opposite party
in its favour through incentive scheme.
208\. Similarly the argument taken by the opposite party that charging of MCC
is justified as the revenue from the physical sales dipped significantly due
to continuous belting of music by the FM radio stations has no substance Case
No. 40 of 2011 Page 86 of 93 and self defeating as by its own account the
opposite party was giving complementary needle hours of play along with the
minimum committed needle hours.
209\. The opposite party has urged that the DG has erred in failing to
consider the efficiency explanations for MCC. The Commission notes that the
opposite party cannot justify MCC on the grounds that MCC reduces the
uncertainty that content owners face, particularly since it is the only player
in the market that is charging MCC.
210\. Based on above discussion the Commission concludes that it is
unacceptable for a dominant enterprise to impose such unfair/ discriminatory
conditions in licensing of their content and the Commission holds that the
imposition of MCC on private FM radio stations is an abuse by the opposite
party under section 4(2)(a)(i) of the Act.
Performance license fees
211\. According to the DG, it has been submitted by the informant and other
radio operators that the opposite party is charging license fees for both
sound recordings and underlying works whereas various High Courts have held
that no license fee is required to be paid for underlying works. The opposite
party on the other hand has claimed that as per the provisions of the
Copyright Act when a sound recording is broadcast from an FM radio station,
two separate royalties, one for communicating the sound recording to the
public and one towards performance of the underlying works is payable. The
opposite party is relying on the decision of the Madras High Court in Mutooth
Finance v. Indian Performing Rights Society & Ors. to justify its stand. Radio
operators on the other hand have contended that the Division Bench of the
Delhi High Court in IPRS v. Aditya Pandey & CRI Events has taken into
consideration the above case and held that music providers are not entitled to
a performance license fee for the broadcast of music by radio stations.
Case No. 40 of 2011 Page 87 of 93
212\. The DG examined a number of music companies and radio operators. Radio
operators have submitted to the DG that they have stopped paying performance
license fees to IPRS for the broadcast of their music; the opposite party on
the other hand continues to impose the payment of performance license fees for
broadcast of its repertoire. PPL and YRF who were asked about the performance
licensee fee. According to the replies received, it was revealed that there is
a there is a separate copyright society, IPRS, which is responsible for
collecting the performance license fees on behalf of its members for
underlying works, and thus PPL has no role in the matter of performance
license fee. YRF (who is not a member of IPRS and therefore, collects
performance license fees directly) on the other hand stated that they do
charge performance royalties as the same is provided for under statute.
According to the informant YRF is not insisting on immediate payment of
performance license fees and on examination of the agreement between the
informant and YRF, the DG found that there is clause in the agreement which
states that if the final decision of the Supreme Court is pronounced in favour
of the music companies, the performance royalty shall be paid by the informant
within 30 days. Thus according to the DG, it may be seen that at present none
of the music companies except the opposite party are able to impose the
condition of performance license fee on radio operators and in view of the
various High Court decisions are awaiting the final decision of the Supreme
Court. In view of the above, according to the DG, the allegation of the
informant regarding violation of provisions of section 4(2)(a)(i) has been
found to be correct on account performance license fees imposed by the
opposite party on the radio operators.
213\. According to the opposite party, the DG has not appreciated that the
terms of the agreements entered into between the opposite party and the radio
operators contain a clause in the agreements that if in any Court/Copyright
Board proceedings to which both licensor and the licensee are parties
stipulates a 'future rate' that is different from the 'current rate' at which
the Case No. 40 of 2011 Page 88 of 93 license fee is payable, whether in any
interim or final order, then the rate payable shall be modified to equal the
'future rate' so stipulated by the Court/ Copyright Board order. The
agreement, as per the opposite party, therefore, clearly has a mutually agreed
clause that in proceedings, where both the opposite party and the informant
(or any other radio operators) are parties to the proceedings, any order
passed by the Court/ Copyright Board must be implemented. The said clause 4.2
of the License Agreement dated October 12, 2006 between the opposite party and
the informant is as follows:
> '4.2 The Licensee in consideration of the grant of the license as mentioned
> above under Clause 2.2, during the term of this Agreement agrees to pay to
> the Licensor a Performance License Fee at the end of each month starting
> from the Commencement date for the designated radio station at a rate per
> needle hour of broadcast.....For the removal of doubts it is clarified that
> the performance license fee paid in terms of this clause is separate and in
> addition to License fee payable under clause 4.1.
> Provided further that if any Court/ Copyright Board in proceedings to which
> both Licensor and the Licensee are parties, stipulates a 'rate' that is
> different from the 'License fee rate' at which the Public Performance
> License Fee is payable hereunder, whether in any interim order or final
> order, then the rate payable hereunder shall be modified to equal the
> 'future rate' so stipulated by the Court/ Copyright Board...'
214\. The Commission notes that the final determination of whether a
performance license fee is chargeable or not for underlying literary and
musical works is pending before the Supreme Court. Given that at present there
is lack of clarity on the subject as the matter is pending before the Case No.
40 of 2011 Page 89 of 93 Supreme Court, and the Supreme Court will determine
whether owners of underlying works are entitled to a performance license fee
for broadcast of music by radio stations or not, the Commission does not deem
it appropriate to deal with this issue on merits.
ORDER
215\. In view of the above discussion, the Commission holds that the opposite
party is in contravention of the provisions of section 4(2)(a)(i) of the Act
by imposing unfair condition of MCC on private FM radio stations.
216\. In view of the findings recorded by the Commission, it is ordered as
under:
(i) The opposite party is directed to cease and desist from formulating and
imposing the unfair condition of MCC in its agreements with private FM radio
stations in India;
(ii) The opposite party is further directed to suitably modify the unfair
condition of MCC imposed on private FM stations in India in its existing
agreements within 3 months of the date of receipt of this order.
217\. In terms of the provisions contained in section 27(b) of the Act, the
Commission inter alia may impose such penalty upon the contravening parties,
as it may deem fit which shall be not more than ten per cent of the average of
the turnover for the last three preceding financial years, upon each of such
person or enterprises which are parties to such agreements or abuse.
218\. It is evident that the legislature has conferred wide discretion upon
the Commission in the matter of imposition of penalty as can be noticed from
the Case No. 40 of 2011 Page 90 of 93 phraseology employed in the provision
noted above. The primary objectives behind imposition of penalties are: to
impose penalties on infringing undertakings which reflect the seriousness of
the infringement; and to ensure that the threat of penalties will deter both
the infringing undertakings and other undertakings that may be considering
anti-competitive activities from engaging in them. To quantify the penalty,
the Commission needs to prepare an inventory of aggravating and mitigating
circumstances/ factors. After weighing the aggravating and mitigating factors,
the Commission has to reach an appropriate finding on the quantum of penalty.
In relation to the imposition of penalty under section 27 of the Act, the
legislative intent seems to provide strong deterrence to the firms from
indulging into practices which are detrimental to the competitive process in
the market resulting not only harm to the consumes but also retard economic
development of the country. .
219\. The Commission has bestowed its thoughtful consideration on the issue of
quantum of penalty. The Commission has examined the financial statements
submitted by the opposite party of the years 2008-09, 2009-10 and 2010-11 and
the same may be noted below:
> Turnover for Turnover for Turnover for Average 2009-10 2010-11 Turnover for
> Name 2008-09 Three Years (in (in Crores) (in Crores) Crores) (in Crores)
> SCIL 36.74 36.29 33.22 35.41
220\. Furthermore, the Commission has also taken note of the aggravating
factor emanating from the finding recorded by the DG that the opposite party
imposed an amount of INR 2,16, 667 per month per radio station (excluding
Bangalore) as MCC for both sound recording and performance rights and
therefore, the informant is bound to pay a total of INR 6,50,000 per month for
Case No. 40 of 2011 Page 91 of 93 three radio stations to the opposite party,
irrespective of the actual quantity of the opposite party's music broadcast.
221\. Considering the totality and peculiarity of facts and circumstances of
the present case, the Commission decides to impose penalty on the opposite
party at the rate of 8% of its average turnover of the last three years of the
company amounting to Rs. 2,83,28,000 (Two Crore Eighty Three Lakhs Twenty
Eight Thousand).
222\. The Commission further directs the opposite party to deposit the penalty
amount within 60 days of receipt of this order.
223\. The opposite party is further directed to file an undertaking in terms
of the directions contained in para 216 (i) within a period of 30 days from
the date of receipt of this order.
224\. It is ordered accordingly.
225\. In terms of the order passed by the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi in Writ
Petition No. 2037 of 2013, it is ordered that the operation of the present
order shall remain stayed for a period of one week from the receipt thereof by
the opposite party to enable it to approach the appropriate forum for grant of
relief, if any.
226\. The Secretary is directed to inform the parties accordingly.
(Ashok Chawla) Chairperson (M. L. Tayal) Member Case No. 40 of 2011 Page 92 of
93 (S. L. Bunker) Member New Delhi Date: 01/10/2014 Case No. 40 of 2011 Page
93 of 93
221\. Considering the totality and peculiarity of facts and circumstances of
the present case, the Commission decides to impose penalty on the opposite
party at the rate of 8% of its average turnover of the last three years of the
company amounting to Rs. 2,83,28,000 (Two Crore Eighty Three Lakhs Twenty
Eight Thousand).
222\. The Commission further directs the opposite party to deposit the penalty
amount within 60 days of receipt of this order.
223\. The opposite party is further directed to file an undertaking in terms
of the directions contained in para 216 (i) within a period of 30 days from
the date of receipt of this order.
224\. It is ordered accordingly.
225\. In terms of the order passed by the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi in Writ
Petition No. 2037 of 2013, it is ordered that the operation of the present
order shall remain stayed for a period of one week from the receipt thereof by
the opposite party to enable it to approach the appropriate forum for grant of
relief, if any.
                                           opposite party.
                                      Order under Section 27 of the Competition Act, 2002
                                   The present information has been filed by M/s HT Media Limited ('the
                          informant') under section 19(1) (a) of the Competition Act, 2002 ('the Act')
                          against M/s Super Cassettes Industries Limited ('the opposite party') alleging
                          inter alia contravention of the provisions of sections 3 and 4 of the Act.
                          Facts
2\. Factual matrix, as unfolded in the information, may be briefly noted.
Case No. 40 of 2011 Page 1 of 93
3\. The informant claims to be one of the leading media companies in India. As
per the informant, apart from being engaged in the business of print media
under the aegis of 'Hindustan Times', it has diversified its ambit into
electronic media and has launched an FM radio channel called Fever 104, which
is currently operational in Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata and Bengaluru. It is stated
that Fever 104 largely plays Bollywood film music and since its coming into
operation in Delhi (October 2006), Mumbai (January 2007) and Kolkata (January
2008), it has developed a strong listenership in these metros.
4\. It is averred that the opposite party, known under the brand name of T-
Series, was founded by the late Shri Gulshan Kumar and is engaged in
manufacture, production and publication of music and videos in India and
221\. Considering the totality and peculiarity of facts and circumstances of
the present case, the Commission decides to impose penalty on the opposite
party at the rate of 8% of its average turnover of the last three years of the
company amounting to Rs. 2,83,28,000 (Two Crore Eighty Three Lakhs Twenty
Eight Thousand).
222\. The Commission further directs the opposite party to deposit the penalty
amount within 60 days of receipt of this order.
223\. The opposite party is further directed to file an undertaking in terms
of the directions contained in para 216 (i) within a period of 30 days from
the date of receipt of this order.
224\. It is ordered accordingly.
225\. In terms of the order passed by the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi in Writ
Petition No. 2037 of 2013, it is ordered that the operation of the present
order shall remain stayed for a period of one week from the receipt thereof by
the opposite party to enable it to approach the appropriate forum for grant of
relief, if any.
                                           opposite party.
                                      Order under Section 27 of the Competition Act, 2002
                                   The present information has been filed by M/s HT Media Limited ('the
                          informant') under section 19(1) (a) of the Competition Act, 2002 ('the Act')
                          against M/s Super Cassettes Industries Limited ('the opposite party') alleging
                          inter alia contravention of the provisions of sections 3 and 4 of the Act.
                          Facts
2\. Factual matrix, as unfolded in the information, may be briefly noted.
Case No. 40 of 2011 Page 1 of 93
3\. The informant claims to be one of the leading media companies in India. As
per the informant, apart from being engaged in the business of print media
under the aegis of 'Hindustan Times', it has diversified its ambit into
electronic media and has launched an FM radio channel called Fever 104, which
is currently operational in Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata and Bengaluru. It is stated
that Fever 104 largely plays Bollywood film music and since its coming into
operation in Delhi (October 2006), Mumbai (January 2007) and Kolkata (January
2008), it has developed a strong listenership in these metros.
4\. It is averred that the opposite party, known under the brand name of T-
Series, was founded by the late Shri Gulshan Kumar and is engaged in
manufacture, production and publication of music and videos in India and
221\. Considering the totality and peculiarity of facts and circumstances of
the present case, the Commission decides to impose penalty on the opposite
party at the rate of 8% of its average turnover of the last three years of the
company amounting to Rs. 2,83,28,000 (Two Crore Eighty Three Lakhs Twenty
Eight Thousand).
222\. The Commission further directs the opposite party to deposit the penalty
amount within 60 days of receipt of this order.
223\. The opposite party is further directed to file an undertaking in terms
of the directions contained in para 216 (i) within a period of 30 days from
the date of receipt of this order.
224\. It is ordered accordingly.
225\. In terms of the order passed by the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi in Writ
Petition No. 2037 of 2013, it is ordered that the operation of the present
order shall remain stayed for a period of one week from the receipt thereof by
the opposite party to enable it to approach the appropriate forum for grant of
relief, if any.
                                           opposite party.
                                      Order under Section 27 of the Competition Act, 2002
                                   The present information has been filed by M/s HT Media Limited ('the
                          informant') under section 19(1) (a) of the Competition Act, 2002 ('the Act')
                          against M/s Super Cassettes Industries Limited ('the opposite party') alleging
                          inter alia contravention of the provisions of sections 3 and 4 of the Act.
                          Facts
2\. Factual matrix, as unfolded in the information, may be briefly noted.
Case No. 40 of 2011 Page 1 of 93
3\. The informant claims to be one of the leading media companies in India. As
per the informant, apart from being engaged in the business of print media
under the aegis of 'Hindustan Times', it has diversified its ambit into
electronic media and has launched an FM radio channel called Fever 104, which
is currently operational in Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata and Bengaluru. It is stated
that Fever 104 largely plays Bollywood film music and since its coming into
operation in Delhi (October 2006), Mumbai (January 2007) and Kolkata (January
2008), it has developed a strong listenership in these metros.
4\. It is averred that the opposite party, known under the brand name of T-
Series, was founded by the late Shri Gulshan Kumar and is engaged in
manufacture, production and publication of music and videos in India and
internationally and also offers its repertoire of music to television
stations, radio stations and mobile companies for use and broadcast.
5\. The informant has alleged that the opposite party, which is the largest
private publisher of Indian music and owns/ controls over 70% of the latest
Bollywood music, is abusing its dominant position in contravention of the
provisions of section 4 of the Act by (i) charging excessive amount as license
fees/ royalty from the informant for grant of rights for the broadcast of the
opposite party's music content on Fever 104 radio station; (ii) imposing
minimum commitment charges ('MCC') to be paid to the opposite party per month
irrespective of actual needle hour (each aggregate of sixty minutes of actual
broadcast of sound recordings by FM radio station excluding commercials,
221\. Considering the totality and peculiarity of facts and circumstances of
the present case, the Commission decides to impose penalty on the opposite
party at the rate of 8% of its average turnover of the last three years of the
company amounting to Rs. 2,83,28,000 (Two Crore Eighty Three Lakhs Twenty
Eight Thousand).
222\. The Commission further directs the opposite party to deposit the penalty
amount within 60 days of receipt of this order.
223\. The opposite party is further directed to file an undertaking in terms
of the directions contained in para 216 (i) within a period of 30 days from
the date of receipt of this order.
224\. It is ordered accordingly.
225\. In terms of the order passed by the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi in Writ
Petition No. 2037 of 2013, it is ordered that the operation of the present
order shall remain stayed for a period of one week from the receipt thereof by
the opposite party to enable it to approach the appropriate forum for grant of
relief, if any.
                                           opposite party.
                                      Order under Section 27 of the Competition Act, 2002
                                   The present information has been filed by M/s HT Media Limited ('the
                          informant') under section 19(1) (a) of the Competition Act, 2002 ('the Act')
                          against M/s Super Cassettes Industries Limited ('the opposite party') alleging
                          inter alia contravention of the provisions of sections 3 and 4 of the Act.
                          Facts
2\. Factual matrix, as unfolded in the information, may be briefly noted.
Case No. 40 of 2011 Page 1 of 93
3\. The informant claims to be one of the leading media companies in India. As
per the informant, apart from being engaged in the business of print media
under the aegis of 'Hindustan Times', it has diversified its ambit into
electronic media and has launched an FM radio channel called Fever 104, which
is currently operational in Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata and Bengaluru. It is stated
that Fever 104 largely plays Bollywood film music and since its coming into
operation in Delhi (October 2006), Mumbai (January 2007) and Kolkata (January
2008), it has developed a strong listenership in these metros.
4\. It is averred that the opposite party, known under the brand name of T-
Series, was founded by the late Shri Gulshan Kumar and is engaged in
manufacture, production and publication of music and videos in India and
internationally and also offers its repertoire of music to television
stations, radio stations and mobile companies for use and broadcast.
5\. The informant has alleged that the opposite party, which is the largest
private publisher of Indian music and owns/ controls over 70% of the latest
Bollywood music, is abusing its dominant position in contravention of the
provisions of section 4 of the Act by (i) charging excessive amount as license
fees/ royalty from the informant for grant of rights for the broadcast of the
opposite party's music content on Fever 104 radio station; (ii) imposing
minimum commitment charges ('MCC') to be paid to the opposite party per month
irrespective of actual needle hour (each aggregate of sixty minutes of actual
broadcast of sound recordings by FM radio station excluding commercials,
221\. Considering the totality and peculiarity of facts and circumstances of
the present case, the Commission decides to impose penalty on the opposite
party at the rate of 8% of its average turnover of the last three years of the
company amounting to Rs. 2,83,28,000 (Two Crore Eighty Three Lakhs Twenty
Eight Thousand).
222\. The Commission further directs the opposite party to deposit the penalty
amount within 60 days of receipt of this order.
223\. The opposite party is further directed to file an undertaking in terms
of the directions contained in para 216 (i) within a period of 30 days from
the date of receipt of this order.
224\. It is ordered accordingly.
225\. In terms of the order passed by the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi in Writ
Petition No. 2037 of 2013, it is ordered that the operation of the present
order shall remain stayed for a period of one week from the receipt thereof by
the opposite party to enable it to approach the appropriate forum for grant of
relief, if any.
