Bombay High Court
Pratap Singh vs The Bank Of America on 28 July, 1976
Equivalent citations: (1976) 78 BOMLR 549
Author: Desai
Bench: S Desai, Gandhi
JUDGMENT Desai, J.
1\. This is an appeal from the decision of Vimadalal J. given on the
preliminary issue of jurisdiction. By his judgment and order dated February
24, 1976 he held that this Court had no jurisdiction to entertain and try the
appellant plaintiff's suit and answered the preliminary issue in the negative
and against the plaintiff and consequentially the suit was dismissed with
costs.
2\. The plaintiff had filed the suit against the Bank of America, National
Trust and Savings Association (hereinafter referred to as the "Bank of
America"), a corporation incorporated in the United States of America. The
plaint, however, goes on to describe the defendant further as having a
principal place of business in India located at 18, Bruce Street, Bombay-1.
The claim in the suit is a money claim for Rs. 5,40,000 (Rupee equivalent of
"U.S. Dollars 72,000) and for compensation and damages assessed by the
plaintiff in respect of various items specified in para. 115 of the plaint.
applying for stay which must be granted as this is a decision on a preliminary
issue. On the other hand, it has to be borne in mind that the trial has been
held up of a suit filed in 1969 and irrespective of the question whether or
not leave is required to be granted and what questions are to be indicated as
fit questions requiring determination by the Supreme Court, this does not
appear to us to be a matter in which the further trial should be held up
merely on the footing that the respondent should have an opportunity of having
the preliminary issue agitated before the Supreme Court.
46\. The appellant applies for costs. He points out that he is a resident of
Jullundur and has incurred costs of travelling to Bombay, has incurred hotel
expenses and further expenses for travelling from the hotel to the Court and
back. He has also incurred expenses for obtaining the certified copy of the
judgment and for preparing the appeal paperbook. He suggests that he should be
awarded costs in the aggregate of Rs. 2,000.
47\. Mr. Bhatt submits to the orders of the Court but says that reasonable
costs only should be awarded.
plaintiff in respect of various items specified in para. 115 of the plaint.
This claim for compensation and damages is claimed in respect of certain Time
Certificates of Deposit issued by the Bank of America, two of which had been
issued by its Banking Office at San Francisco and one by its Banking Office at
Los Angeles in the State of California, U.S.A. The plaintiff claims to have
lost these certificates in London together with a cashier's cheque for
interest. The loss was reported to the two offices. The plaintiff claims that
thereafter the defendant insisted upon various formalities being complied with
by the plaintiff, which it was not entitled in law to do and was contrary to
true legal position pertaining to the three Time Certificates of Deposit as
also contrary to certain oral talks set out in the plaintiff's pleadings which
are unnecessary to be referred to in this judgment. Although, according to the
plaintiff, these demands were illegal and improper, he was forced to comply
with the same in order to salvage his funds. The plaintiff also claims that
this improper, invalid and illegal course of action was resorted to by the
defendant on several improper considerations which are set out in para. 96 of
the plaint. In the subsequent paragraphs of the plaint various acts of
commission and omission on the part of the defendant and its several officers
concerned with the plaintiff's application for issue of fresh certificates or
for the reimbursement of the amount due under the lost three certificates have
been set out, and in consequence the plaintiff has crystalised his monetary
claim and the heads thereof in para. 115. It may be mentioned here that
ultimately before the issue of fresh Time Certificates of Deposit the
plaintiff was required to execute in favour of the defendant an Indemnity and
Hold Harmless Agreement by which he, inter alia, agreed to indemnify the
defendant Corporation against any and all loss, cost and expense by reason of
the issue of the replacement Time Certificates of deposit. This agreement
provided that it can be legally enforced in Punjab, India, as well as Los
Angeles, California, United States of America. The claim of the plaintiff
encompasses claims by way of compensation and damages for mental distress,
worry, anxiety, injury to feelings, deterioration in health, loss of income of
private practice, travelling expenses, cancellation of certain business
arrangements and other expenses.
3\. The following paragraphs in the plaint set out the plaintiff's submissions
and contentions as to why this Court would have jurisdiction to entertain and
try Ms suit:
124\. That the defendant has a full-fledged branch at Bombay, which is not
separately incorporated, and which constitutes the defendant in Bombay.
125\. That the defendant is present and found in Bombay, resides and dwells in
Bombay and carries on business in Bombay.
126\. That it is fair to require the defendant to submit to the suit in
Bombay.
127\. That the defendant's office in Bombay is its principal office in India
as well as its principal place of business in India.
128\. That, assuming although not admitting, that the defendant does not
reside, dwell or carry on business in India, the suit against it shall be
maintainable in Bombay, as in that case the Bank of America, Bombay, would
constitute the agent of the defendant in Bombay through whom it would be
carrying on business in Bombay and on whom process and notice could be served
and through whom it could be sued.
130\. That the defendant has agreed to submit to the jurisdiction of theCourts
in India and has authorised amongst others Mr. R.J. Gillis of the Defendant's
Bombay Branch to accept on behalf of the defendant service of process and
notices and other documents and the authorisation stands duly communicated to
the Registrar of Companies, New Delhi.
131\. That the defendant has ample property in Bombay and elsewhere in India
and the judgment, the decree and the orders of the Hon'ble Court can be
effectively executed against it.
A perusal of these paragraphs would clearly indicate that jurisdiction is
claimed against the defendant in tile plaint not on account of any plea of
accrual of the cause of action but by reason of the fact principally that it
has a full-fledged branch at Bombay, which is not separately incorporated,
and, therefore, according to the plaintiff, constitutes the defendant in
Bombay; according to the plaintiff, the defendant, therefore, carries on
business in Bombay. In the alternative, it is suggested that the defendant
corporation carries on business through its branch in Bombay, which may be
deemed to be its agent and on whom the processes and notices could be served
and through whom it can be sued. It has been pleaded in the further
alternative that the defendant has agreed to submit to the jurisdiction of the
Courts in India and it bus authorised one R.J. Gillis of the defendant's
Bombay branch to accept the service of processes, notices and other documents
on behalf of the defendant and such authorisation has been duly communicated
to the Registrar of Companies. This averment has to be co-related with the
provisions to be found in Section 592 of the Companies Act, 1956.
4\. These paragraphs of the plaint which are material for our purposes are
dealt with in paras. 86, 87, 88 and 90 of the written-statement. However, it
must be stated that initially in para. 2 of the written-statement the
defendant-respondent has taken the plea of want of jurisdiction in the
forefront and hence these paragraphs of the written-statement are required to
be read together with the said paragraph. Paragraph 2 and paras. 86 to 90 of
the written-statement read as follows:
2\. Without prejudice to the aforesaid submission, the defendant in any event
submits that this Hon'ble Court has no jurisdiction to entertain and try this
suit as no part of the cause of action has arisen within the jurisdiction of
this Hon'ble Court and the defendant does not carry on business in Bombay
within the meaning of Clause XII of the Letters Patent. The defendant says
that the defendant is a Corporation incorporated in the U.S.A. and has an
office in Bombay only for the purpose of carrying on its banking business. The
defendant in any event submits that the plaintiff's right to file the suit, if
any, was in the United States or in the State of Punjab in view of the
Indemnity and Hold Harmless Agreements entered into between the plaintiff and
the defendant on 26th January 1968 and 9th February 1968 at San Francisco,
California, U.S.A....
86\. With reference to paras. 124, 127 and 128 of the plaint, the defendant
denies that the branch of the defendant in Bombay constitutes the defendant in
Bombay. The defendant is a company incorporated in U.S.A. The defendant
further says that the entire transaction in suit is governed by the
Californian law.
87\. With reference to para. 125 of the plaint, the defendant denies that the
defendant is at present found in Bombay or resides or dwells in Bombay. The
defendant admits that the defendant carries on business in Bombay but denies
that the Same gives jurisdiction to this Hon'ble Court under Clause XII of the
Letters Patent. The defendant in any event submits that in respect of the
alleged cause of action the plaintiff and the defendant are governed by the
Californian laws and this Hon'ble Court has no jurisdiction to entertain and
try this suit.
88\. With reference to para. 126 of the plaint, the defendant denies that it
is fair to require the defendant to submit to the suit in Bombay. The
defendant says that on the contrary, it is highly improper for the plaintiff
to have filed this suit in this Hon'ble Court when no part of the cause of
action has arisen within the jurisdiction of this Hon'ble Court. The
transaction referred to in the plaint arises outside India, all documents,
papers, vouchers and the evidence of the parties is outside India and it would
be highly inconvenient to defend the present suit in Bombay.
89\. With reference to para. 129 of the plaint, the defendant craves leave to
refer to Section 801 of the Californian Corporation Code and referred to in
the said para. for its true interpretation. The defendant says that the said
section applies only to a corporation formed under the Californian laws, The
defendant says that the defendant is formed under the Federal laws and the
said section does not apply to the defendant. The defendant in any event
denies that the said section permits the suit being filed in any court in the
world. The same only refers to a court within the State of California.
90\. With reference to para. 130 of the plaint, the defendant denies that the
defendant agreed to submit to the jurisdiction of the Courts in India for the
reasons mentioned therein.
5\. It is in the background of these pleadings that the learned single Judge
on the Original Side framed the preliminary issue as follows: "Whether this
Court has jurisdiction to try the suit". As stated earlier, the answer to the
issue was given in the negative and against the plaintiff; and holding that
the Court had no jurisdiction to entertain and try the suit, the learned
single Judge proceeded to dismiss the same with costs. The discussion
proceeded before the learned single Judge on the admitted footing, which must
also be the tooting before us, that no part of the cause of action in the suit
had arisen within the limits of the ordinary original civil jurisdiction of
this Court. It was, however, submitted before us that the learned single Judge
was in error in dismissing the suit on the footing that this Court had no
jurisdiction; and it becomes necessary therefore to examine the rival
contentions which were raised before the learned single Judge and the
respective arguments on which the same are based, which contentions were
substantially repeated before us.
6\. From a perusal of the impugned judgment we found that it involves
construction and appreciation of Clause 12 of the Letters Patent as well as
the question of impact of the provisions therein contained as also the
principles of private international law in England as well as in India. The
appellant-plaintiff had appeared in person before the learned single Judge and
he also proposed to argue this appeal in person before us. As we felt that
this was a matter wherein both the points of view should be properly presented
by trained lawyers, we requested Mr. Andhyarujina and Miss P. Anklesaria (as
junior) to appear amicus curiae. Indeed, the matter has been very ably argued
by both sides and we must express our gratitude for the well-considered and
succinct arguments advanced at the bar on the rather complicated question that
falls for our determination. We may add here that we also allowed the
appellant to address us briefly on certain other aspects on which we did not
require assistance from Mr. Andhyarujina.
7\. The appellant claims that this Court has jurisdiction on two broad heads:
(i) that the defendant had submitted to the jurisdiction of this Court or must
be deemed to have abandoned or waived the plea as to want of jurisdiction, and
(ii) the defendant corporation was carrying on business within the limits of
the ordinary original civil jurisdiction of this Court through its branch at
Bruce Street, Bombay, which branch had also been disclosed as its principal
place of business in India as provided in Section 592(1)(e) of the Companies
Act, 1956. As the defendant had also furnished the names and addresses of
persons authorised to accept service of process on its behalf it was urged
that the defendant must be deemed to have submitted to the. jurisdiction of
this Court.
8\. We propose to deal with the first aspect of the contention as to
jurisdiction earlier as, in our opinion, it does not admit of any detailed
discussion and the conclusions of the learned single Judge appear to us to be
fully justified. It has been submitted by the appellant that one of the acts
of the defendant Bank which amounted to waiver of objection as to jurisdiction
was the inclusion of a clause to be found in the Indemnity and Hold Harmless
Agreement earlier referred to, by virtue of which clause a suit on the said
agreement could be filed in Los Angeles or in Punjab in India. In our opinion,
the presence of such a clause in the said agreement would have no relevance
and cannot be construed in the manner sought for by the appellant. The clause
would apply only to a suit by the Bank of America to enforce the indemnity,
which is not the nature of the present suit. In any case the clause provides
that such a suit may be filed in the State of Punjab and such a clause could
have no relevance to a plea as to waiver of jurisdiction in the matter of a
suit filed in Bombay. By no stretch of imagination can such a clause be held
to confer any right on the appellant to file this suit in Bombay which is not
one of the places specifically mentioned in the said agreements.
9\. The appellant then contended that by filing an appearance in the present
suit, which was not an appearance under protest, and further by filing a
written-statement in which defences had been set out on merits and by
subsequently filing various affidavits and participating in the several
interlocutory proceedings the respondent Bank had submitted to the
jurisdiction of this Court or must be deemed to have waived or abandoned its
plea of want of jurisdiction.
10\. It becomes necessary to consider whether there is any substance in these
contentions. A single Judge of the Bombay High Court had occasion to consider
the practice of filing appearance under protest in Nuruddin Abdulhusein v. Abu
Ahmed . This was, however, in connection with a notice of motion for stay of
the suit under Section 34 of the Indian Arbitration Act, 1940. It was observed
that this practice was of doubtful import and utility and need not be
followed. The observations made in the context of a motion for stay under
Section 34 would be equally apposite and apply perhaps with even greater force
to appearance which was required to be filed even to put in a written-
statement in which the plea of want of jurisdiction was required to be taken
up in order that the plea can be adjudicated upon by the Court. It may be
pointed out that there is no provision in the High Court Rules for filing an
appearance under protest and such an appearance is required to be filed under
the Civil Procedure Code only in actions, where a person is served as an
alleged partner in the defendant firm and wishes to dispute his status as a
partner. The position is different in England where there is provision for
what is described in Nuruddin's case as conditional appearance which is also
sometimes called appearance under protest.
11\. In the present suit the defendant has filed a written statement in which
the plaintiff's allegations in the plaint had been traversed on merits in
addition to the pleas as to want of jurisdiction, which pleas have been
earlier set out in this judgment earlier. It appears the position in England
is that this may amount to submission to jurisdiction of the Court. A similar
view was taken by a Division Bench of the Rajasthan High Court in Ramanlal v.
Ramgopal [1954] A.I.R. Raj. 135 where in para. 9 it was observed that when the
defendant appears not only to protest jurisdiction but also pleads to the
merits, such an appearance amounts to voluntary submission on his part and the
fact that he has in the pleadings also protested to the jurisdiction would not
detract from the principle of submission. It was held that by the conduct the
defendant who pleads as to merits must be deemed to have precluded himself
from objecting to the jurisdiction of the Court (see para. 9 of the report).
The position appears to be well-settled by the decision of the Supreme Court
in Bahrein Petroleum v. P.J. Pappu . In the said matter the Supreme Court was
dealing with an appeal from the decision of the High Court of Kerala which
had, inter alia, held that the defendants had by filing a written-statement on
merits waived objection as to the territorial jurisdiction of the trial Court.
It was held by the Supreme Court that Section 21 of Civil Procedure Code is a
statutory recognition of the principle that a defect as to place of suing may
be waived and such waiver may be independent of Section 21. The Supreme Court,
however, was unable to agree that the defendants by their conduct in pleading
on the merits while simultaneously disputing jurisdiction of the Cochin Court
could be deemed to have waived the objection as to jurisdiction of the Cochin
Court. The relevant paragraph containing the observations is to be found at p.
463 of the report where Bachawat J. speaking for the Supreme Court observed:
Counsel for the plaintiff further submitted that, as a matter of fact, the
defendants by their conduct have waived the objection. Though this submission
found favour with the High Court, we are unable to accept it. If the defendant
allows the trial Court to proceed to judgment without raising the objection as
to the place of suing and takes the chance of a verdict in his favour, he
clearly waives the objection, and will not be subsequently permitted to raise
it. It is even possible to say that long and continued participation by the
defendant in the proceedings without any protest may, in an appropriate case,
amount to a waiver of the objection. But, in this case, we find no conduct of
the defendants which amounts to a waiver, or which precludes them from raising
the objection.
In our opinion, this authority of the Supreme Court is a complete answer to
the appellant's contention that by filing a written-statement pleading to the
merits of the case simultaneously with the taking of the objection as to
jurisdiction, the respondent must be deemed to have waived its objection as to
jurisdiction or abandoned the plea of want of jurisdiction. In view of this
decision of the Supreme Court, it must be stated that the observations in
favour of the appellant in Ramanlal's case are no longer good law. The
question, however, remains of considering whether after the filing of the
written-statement there has been long and continued participation by the Bank
of America in the proceedings without any protest. It was the contention of
the appellant that in a number of interlocutory proceedings the Bank of
America had filed affidavits and it was urged that a number of proceedings had
to be taken out because of the defendant's defaults. It was urged that in fact
it was this conduct which made necessary these interlocutory proceedings and
that the defendant in the circumstances could be said to fall within the
principle of long and continued participation enunciated by Bachavat J, in
Bahrein Petroleum' case. In these circumstances it becomes necessary to
consider the various stages in the progress of the suit.
12\. The plaint was lodged on June 24, 1969 and admitted on the 26th of the,
said month; the smmons appears to have been served on July 4, 1960 and the
attorneys for the Bank of America put in their appearance on July 5, 1969. On
November 14, 1969 the plaintiff-appellant took out a notice of motion for
judgment for want of written-statement as the Bank of America failed to file
the written-statement on or before August 2, 1969 which was the due date. This
motion was taken out after correspondence addressed to the defendant's
attorneys by the plaintiff requiring them to file the written-statement. In
reply to this motion the assistant cashier of the defendant's Bombay branch
filed an affidavit. In this affidavit it was contended that the Bank of
America could not file the written-statement within the time allowed as the
plaintiff had chosen to file the suit in a forum where no part of the cause of
action had accrued. It was submitted that the plaintiff had filed the suit in
a Court which had no jurisdiction; the result of this choice of forum, it was
submitted, was that the defendant's Bombay branch had to seek instructions
from Los Angeles, California, as also to obtain necessary documents from that
place. Ultimately on this motion the learned Chamber Judge directed the Bank
of America to file the written-statement on or before January 27, 1970; it was
further ordered to pay to the plaintiff the costs of the notice of motion.
13\. It appears that the written-statement was not filed by the due date and
accordingly the plaintiff took out another notice of motion dated January 30,
1970. In the said notice of motion also an affidavit in reply was filed on
behalf of the defendant, where it was pointed out that a copy of the written-
statement had been furnished to the plaintiff before the motion was served on
the defendant, but that the original thereof had been sent to San Francisco
for approval. The said motion came up for hearing on February 6, 1970 when the
written-statement duly affirmed was tendered and taken on file. No order was
accordingly made on the motion except that the Bank of America was directed to
pay the costs of the same to the plaintiff within four weeks. Thereafter the
plaintiff took out the usual summons for directions prescribed by the rules in
long causes. This came up for hearing before the Chamber Judge on April 24,
1970 when the parties were directed to make and file their respective
affidavits of documents within eight weeks and give inspection forth-with
thereafter to the opposite party; liberty was given to the plaintiff to take
out appropriate proceedings by way of a chamber summons for issue of
commission. The plaintiff's affidavit of documents was filed on August 26,
1970 and the Bank of America filed its affidavit of documents on April 13,
1970. It may be mentioned, however, that, subsequently two supplemental
affidavits of documents were filed on behalf of the Bank dated October 31,
1974 and November 29, 1974 respectively. The plaintiff also filed a
supplemental affidavit of documents dated August 25, 1975.
14\. On February 14, 1974 the plaintiff took out a chamber summons for
amending the plaint. In this chamber summons the defendant filed an affidavit
in reply, inter alia, contending that the chamber summons was an abuse of the
process of the Court. This chamber summons was made absolute by the Chamber
Judge on February 22, 1974 and the plaintiff thereafter carried out the
amendments on February 25, 1974. The plaintiff thereafter took out another
notice of motion dated March 7, 1974 praying that the defence of the Bank of
America be struck off inasmuch as the defendant had not given inspection of
some of the original documents, but of photo copies thereof. The Bank of
America filed an affidavit in reply to the said motion in which it had been
pointed out that the original documents were with the bank's head office at
San Francisco, U.S.A., from where all the original documents except certain
items mentioned in para. 9 of the said affidavit had been received. According
to the deponent of the affidavit, originals of the fifteen items indicated in
para. 9 of the said affidavit were not sent to Bombay as the head office was
unable to locate the same. On March 19, 1974. this notice of motion was
dismissed with costs. Thereafter the plaintiff took out a chamber summons
dated August 1, 1974 for issue of commission or letter of request, for
examination on interrogatories of one Mansfield Davis, a resident of San
Francisco and for viva voce of examination of his own son and one Vishwa
Sharma, both of California. The interrogatories sought to be submitted to
Mansfield Davis pertained to Californian law which, according to the
plaintiff, would be applicable. In this chamber summons an affidavit in reply
was filed on behalf of the Bank of America and in para. 1 of this affidavit it
had been pointed out that it had already been submitted in the written-
statement that this Court had no jurisdiction to entertain and try the suit.
In the Said affidavit in reply the application for issue of commission was
opposed but in para. 4 thereof it was urged further that if a commission was
granted despite such opposition, the defendant corporation required its Vice-
President, one Dan Deichmeister, also to be examined on commission. Before
this chamber summons for issue of commission was disposed of the plaintiff had
taken out a further chamber summons dated August 16, 1974 for further
disclosure on the part of the defendant of forty-one documents indicated in
the list annexed to the said chamber summons. In this chamber summons also on
behalf of the defendant several affidavits had been filed opposing the chamber
summons. Ultimately the plaintiff's chamber summons dated August 1, 1974 was
disposed of by the order dated November 1, 1974 (although the date shown in
the minutes is incorrectly given as October 31, 1974"). Counsel appearing on
behalf of the defendant stated that he had no objection to the provisions of
such laws as were indicated in para. 3 of the affidavit in support being
proved by the two books referred to in para. 4 of the said affidavit, viz. (1)
Parker's Uniform Commercial Code of California and (2) Dearing's California
Civil Practice Codes (published by Bancroft-Whitney). This, however, was
without prejudice to the defendant's contention as to the relevance and
applicability of these statutory provisions to the dispute between the
parties. As far as the application to examine the plaintiff's son and another
person on commission to prove the plaintiff's monetary distress was concerned,
no order was made on the chamber summons, but it was indicated that the
plaintiff would be entitled to apply to the Court at the appropriate stage at
the hearing of the suit for an adjournment to produce such evidence or for
such examination and that at that time an appropriate order could be passed by
the Judge hearing the long cause. In the plaintiff's chamber summons dated
August 16, 1974, the defendant filed affidavits and tendered supplemental
affidavits making further disclosures. An affidavit was sought to be tendered
to the Court on October 31, 1974 which was found to be unacceptable and which
was described in the order (which was incidentally made by me) as one
"frivolously made without any sense of seriousness or responsibility". Certain
directions as to proper affidavits to be filed were given and the defendant
was ordered to pay the costs of the adjournment. The matter was further
adjourned on December 6, 1974 when three affidavits made on behalf of the
defendant were taken on file despite the plaintiff's objection. Ultimately on
January 10, 1975 the said chamber summons was disposed of with no order
thereon on the footing that the requirements indicated therein had been
substantially complied with by the defendant. Certain directions were also
given regarding specimen signature cards.
15\. Qn July 11, 1975 the plaintiff took out a notice of motion for fixing an
early date of hearing of the suit, inter alia, on the footing that he was
seventy years old and not keeping good health. On this notice of motion the
learned Chamber Judge on August 13, 1975 fixed the suit for hearing on
November 24, 1975 and gave various directions as to further disclosure,
inspection and particulars. Thereafter the suit came up for hearing for the
first time on November 26, 1975. From this date it was postponed on two or
three occasions and ultimately disposed of by Vimadalal J. on February 24,
1976, holding on the preliminary issue that this Court had no jurisdiction to
entertain and try the suit. The suit was accordingly dismissed.
16\. Now, the above summary indicates that the defendant has itself not
initiated any interlocutory proceedings in the matter nor has it by
application or con duct prolonged the proceedings in the sense of the
postponement of the hearing of the matter. Even in some of the affidavits in
the interlocutory proceedings taken out by the plaintiff the defendant
reiterated the plea which it had earlier taken up in the written-statement
that this Court had no jurisdiction to entertain and try the suit. The conduct
of the defendant, therefore, in resisting the various interlocutory
application by filing affidavits will not in our opinion amount to waiver of
objection to jurisdiction. The appellant-plaintiff had applied to the Court
that the suit may be placed on board for judgment for want of written-
statement or that the defences may be struck off, and the defendant was bound
to appear in Court and resist the application. If it had put in unsatisfactory
affidavits in some of the interlocutory proceedings, it is found that it has
been penalised appropriately for such conduct. The conduct of the Bank of
America in not filing proper affidavits of documents or its refusal or
inability to give inspection as ordered cannot be commended; but the
consequence of such conduct can be penalty in costs. Such conduct, howsoever
unsatisfactory, Cannot be regarded as tantamount to waiver or abandonment of
the plea of want of jurisdiction.
17\. In his judgment the learned single Judge also considered the question of
declaration and furnishing of information under Section 592 of the Companies
Act in conjunction with the plea of submission to jurisdiction. This aspect,
in our opinion, is required to be considered in the proper perspective a
little, later on in this judgment. But it must be pointed out here that what
we are concerned with in the first branch of the argument is the question of
waiver or abandonment of the plea of want of jurisdiction. The principle of
submission to jurisdiction is in our opinion a different aspect of the matter
which has been emphasised greatly in England because of the rule of common law
conferring jurisdiction in all cases in which a defendant to an action can be
served with the writ of the Court. Where such a rule exists, the aspect of
submitting to jurisdiction may assume importance. Where the principles of
assumption of jurisdiction are differently constituted, this aspect in our
opinion may not be required to be considered with that much importance as it
has been done in England. We think it appropriate to indicate briefly the
position in England as some confusion has been caused by application of
English principles of submission to jurisdiction to conditions in India.
18\. In England at common law for actions in personam "whoever is served with
the King's writ and can be compelled consequently to submit to the decree made
is a person over whom the Courts have jurisdiction". In other words,
jurisdiction depends upon the presence of the defendant in England. Once the
Court has ascertained its power by service of process upon the defendant
personally, it is not rendered incompetent by his subsequent departure from
its jurisdiction. Order 11 and Order 65 of the Rules of the Supreme Court,
1965, may be referred to for the purpose of ascertaining the statutory
principles) governing the service of process applicable in relation to all
proceedings in the Supreme Court.
19\. Even the mere transient presence of a person in England suffices to
render him amenable to the jurisdiction of the Court. For example, if a writ
is served on a Frenchman during his visit of a few hours to Brighton, an
action may then be tried against him concerning a matter totally unrelated to
anything that has occurred in England. This is the position in domestic law
because of the procedural significance of the writ of summons, however weak
may be the position of the decree passed in that action in international law.
In many cases judgments given by English Courts assuming jurisdiction based on
flimsy grounds might not be such judgments as would be recognised by foreign
Courts. Even then, as far as common law is concerned, there would be
jurisdiction to entertain and try an action provided the writ could be served
on the defendant. The principle which would govern the matter in the case of
an individual viz. that he is subject to the jurisdiction of English Courts if
he is to be found in England is also applicable in the case of a corporation.
In an 1899 decision Lord Halsbury referring to a French shipping company which
leased an office in England and employed an agent there to make contracts on
its behalf, tersely remarked "They are here, and if they are here they may he
served". The critical question, therefore, is, in the case of a foreign
corporation, that what is the analogous position to the physical presence
which is requisite for an individual. The answer given by English law is that
the only way in which an artificial entity can show its presence within the
jurisdiction is by the transaction of business within that jurisdiction. To
add precision to the above test the Courts have laid down two requirements:
(i) that the business must have been done in England and not with England; the
agent employed in England who may be a natural person or an artificial entity
must have authority to enter into transactions binding upon the corporation
and the agent's functions must not he merely to transmit offers abroad for
acceptance or rejection by the principal; and (ii) that the agent must have
operated at a fixed place of business for a definite period of time. However,
neither the impermanency of the place nor the brevity of time would be
sufficient to render the corporation immune from process.
20\. It is in the context of this position of the English common law that the
principle of submission to jurisdiction is required to he considered. In
England Section 406 of the Companies Act, 1948, provides for overseas
corporations to file with the Registrar of Companies the names and addresses
of some one or more persons authorised to accept service of process on their
behalf. This then assumes importance because in England jurisdiction depends
upon service of process. In addition to this facility, the English law also
recognises that a defendant may confer jurisdiction on the Court by submitting
thereto and that this may be done in a variety of ways such as entry of an
unconditional appearance, instructing solicitors to accept service on its
behalf, commencement of action as a plaintiff and contesting the case on its
merits. By these ways a defendant to an action can be said to have submitted
to the jurisdiction of the Court and thereby conferred jurisdiction for the
action. Further, it appearswhich is not the position in India-that in England
any person may contract either expressly or by necessary implication to submit
to the jurisdiction of a Court to which he was not otherwise subject. This is
generally done in international contracts and the party to such a contract
having consented to the jurisdiction cannot afterwards contest the binding
effect of the judgment.
21\. The foregoing discussion, somewhat elaborate, is necessary because in our
opinion there can be a misunderstanding about the nature of jurisdiction over
foreign corporations exercised by English Courts. The principles, in our
opinion, above set out, which govern the exercise of such jurisdiction in
England, are the principles of common law, the domestic law of England, and
are not principles of jurisdiction dependent upon any application by English
Courts of principles of private international law.
22\. It now becomes necessary therefore to consider the basic question
involved in this appeal, since we are unable to accept the contention of the
appellant (that the respondent-defendant can be said to have waived or
abandoned its plea of want of jurisdiction or submitted to the jurisdiction by
the facts here-inabove mentioned. In order to substantiate jurisdiction in the
Court then the appellant must show clearly that this Court had jurisdiction to
entertain and try the suit de hors the concept of waiver, abandonment or
submission. Before discussing this aspect further in depth, we think it would
be appropriate to set out fully the provisions of Clause 12 of the Letters
Patent, for this High Court which are in almost the same terms as the Letters
Patent for the High Courts of Calcutta and Madras also. The said provisions
read as under:
12\. ORIGINAL JURISDICTION AS TO SUITS. And We do further ordain, that the
said High Court of Judicature at Bombay in the exercise of its ordinary
original civil jurisdiction, shall be empowered to receive, try and determine
suits of every description, if, in the case of suits for land or other
immoveable property, such land or property shall be situated, or in all other
cases if the cause of action shall have arisen, either wholly, or, in case the
leave of the Court shall have been first obtained, in part, within the local
limits of the ordinary original jurisdiction of the said High Court, or if the
defendant at the time of the commencement of the suit shall dwell, or carry on
business, or personally work for gain within such limits; except that the said
High Court, shall not have such original jurisdiction in cases falling within
the jurisdiction of the Small Cause Court at Bombay, in which the debt or
damage, or value of the property sued for, does not exceed one hundred rupees.
An analysis of this clause would show that barring certain suits specified at
the end of this clause, the High Courts of Calcutta, Madras and Bombay are
empowered to try the following suits in the exercise of their original civil
jurisdiction, viz. (i) suits for land or other immoveable property if the land
or property is situate within the local limits of the ordinary original civil
jurisdiction of the High Court, and (ii) suits other than those for land (a)
if the cause of action has arisen wholly within the said limits, or (b) where
the cause of action has arisen in part only within the said limits, if the
leave of ;the Court shall have been first obtained; or (c) if at the time of
the commencement of the suit the defendant dwells or carries on business or
personally works for gain within the said limits.
23\. It will be appropriate also to set out the provisions of Section 20 of
the Code of Civil Procedure inasmuch as in the course of the judgment of the
learned single Judge an argument had been based on these provisions which are
substantially in pari materia but not identical with Clause 12. Section 20 of
the Code provides as under:
Section 20. Other suits to be instituted where defendants reside or cause of
action arises.
Subject to the limitations aforesaid, every suit shall be instituted in a
Court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction
(a) the defendant, or each of the defendants where there are more than one, at
the time of the commencement of the suit, actually and voluntarily resides, or
carries on business, or personally works for gain; or
(b) any of the defendants, where there are more than one, at the time of the
commencement of the suit, actually and voluntarily resides, or carries on
business, or personally works for gain, provided that in such case either the
leave of the Court is given, or the defendants who do not reside, or carry on
business, or personally work for gain, as aforesaid, acquiesce in such
institution; or
(c) the cause of action, wholly or in part, arises.
Explanation I.Where a person has a permanent dwelling at one place and also a
temporary residence at another place, he shall be deemed to reside at both
places in respect of any cause of action arising at the place where he has
such temporary residence.
Explanation II.A corporation shall be deemed to carry on business at its sole
or principal office in. India or, in respect of any cause of action arising at
any place where it has also a subordinate office, at such place.
24\. It may be noted that under Section 20 the Court would have jurisdiction
in case a part of the cause of action has arisen within its jurisdiction,
whereas under Clause 12 of the Letters Patent before such a suit is filed
leave of the Court is required to bo obtained. Further, judicial
interpretation has established that part of the cause of action within the
meaning of Clause 12 of the Letters Patent must be a material part of the
cause of action, otherwise leave should ordinarily be refused. Similarly the
further provision in Explanation II which is found in Section 20 is not found
in Clause 12 of the Letters Patent. The other difference is that' for exercise
of the jurisdiction of the Court, Clause 12 talks of the defendant dwelling
within the jurisdiction, whereas Section 20 of the Code requires the defendant
to actually and voluntarily reside.
25\. An analysis of the impugned judgment of the learned single Judge shows
that the learned Judge was of the opinion that Clause 12 of the Letters
Patent, which governs the jurisdiction of the three High Courts of Calcutta,
Madras and Bombay, and Section 20 of the Code of Civil Procedure, embody
provisions of municipal law dealing only with, domestic jurisdiction of Courts
in this country and had nothing to do with the suits against the defendant
which was a foreign (Corporation and where the cause of action had not accrued
even in part within the limits of jurisdiction of this Court and had
admittedly arisen wholly outside India. Accordingly he was of opinion that
such jurisdiction, if any, will have to be sought for in the principles of
private international law as arc properly applicable in India by the Indian
Courts. Thereafter the learned Judge, after referring to standard works on
private international law and conflict of laws such as Graveson, Cheshire and
Dicey, came to the conclusion that private international law is not the same
in all countries, there being no one system that can claim universal
recognition. The learned Judge further opined that the principles of
jurisdiction adopted in England for governing such a case were peculiar to
England and could not be applied by Indian Courts and, therefore, came to the
conclusion that he was required to evolve the proper rule to be applied in
this country as a rule of private international law in cases in which a
foreign company i.e. a company incorporated in a foreign country is sought to
be sued in respect of a cause of action that has arisen wholly outside India
as in the present case. He then considered the basis of such a rule, which,
according to him, should be a rational one and not one that might lead to
injustice, that it should be which would command recognition in foreign
countries; and keeping these approaches in mind he held that the proper rule
to be evolved and applied in the ease of the present suit would be to hold
that a foreign corporation which has merely an office within thejurisdiction
of the Court cannot be sued in that Court except in case where the cause of
action has arisen wholly or in part at the place where such office is located.
He also expressed the opinion that the fact that the office in question may
have been registered with the Registrar of Companies as the principal place of
business of such foreign corporation in India under Section 592(1) of the
Companies Act, 1956, would make no difference. It falls to us therefore
whether the steps taken by the learned single Judge in evolving the rule are
correct and ultimately whether that rule commends itself for acceptance and
application. The basic question, according to us is whether the learned single
Judge is right in holding that Clause 12 of the Letters Patent and Section 20
of the Code of Civil Procedure only embody the rules of municipal law for
regulating the internal domestic jurisdiction of the Court and would not apply
to cases involving foreign elements viz. foreigners including foreign
corporations.
26\. It appears that the learned single Judge in the view that he took found
support in the decision of a single Judge of the Madras High Court
(Venkataraman J.) in Anant Narayan v. Massey Ferguson, Ltd. [1965] I Comp.
L.J. 269 where it was observed that "the criteria prescribed in Clause 12 of
the Letters Patent governing jurisdiction of this Court are primarily intended
to demarcate the sphere of jurisdiction of this Court and the subordinate
Courts in this State or of other Courts in this country and are not directed
to the determination of the jurisdiction from the international point of
view". In the said Madras case the plaintiff brought a suit in the High Court
of Madras for damages for breach of contract of lifetime service and for
wrongful dismissal against two foreign companies; defendant No. 1 was Massey
Ferguson Ltd., Toronto, Canada, and the defendant No. 2 was Massey Ferguson
(India) Limited, 12, McLean Street, Madras 1. The defendant No. 1 company was
incorporated in Toronto and the defendant No. 2 company in the United Kingdom.
It was the admitted position that upto 1960 the plaintiff had received
training in Canada and had worked for the defendant companies at various
places in India. In 1960 the Canadian company of which the United Kingdom
Company was a 'part' evolved a plan to start a new company to be registered in
India to manufacture Massey Ferguson Products. Almost all the permanent
employees of the defendant No. 2 company excepting the plaintiff and some
others were absorbed by the newly formed company and the plaintiff's services
were terminated by a notice dated November 30, 1960 with effect from January
1, 1961. The defendant No. 2 company shifted their office to Madras with
effect from March 3, 1961, which had been only notified to the Registrar of
Companies as the principal place of business in India and they had also made a
declaration under Section 592(1)(d) of the Companies Act, 1956, naming M/s.
Fraser and Ross, at No. 12, McLean Street, Broadway, Madras-1, as persons
resident in India authorised to accept service of process and other notices or
documents on their behalf. It was held by the learned single Judge of the
Madras High Court that the furnishing of the address at Madras as the
principal place of business of defendant No. 2 company in India and the name
of M/s. Fraser and Ross in Madras as the persons authorised to accept service
of process on behalf of defendant No. 2 company under Section 592(e) and (d)
was sufficient to confer jurisdiction on the High Court of Madras according to
the Rules of Private International Law so far as defendant No. 2 was
concerned, and that by registering the principal place of business in India
and furnishing of the name of Messrs. Fraser and Ross in this manner, the
defendant No. 2 company bad in advance submitted to the Jurisdiction of the
High Court and such submission would clothe the Court with jurisdiction in the
international sense. Applying the rules of private international law and the
provisions of Sections 592 to 596 of the Companies Act, it was held that the
defendant No. 2 company was present in Madras. It was further held that
defendant No. 2 had pleaded on merits also and had accordingly submitted to
the jurisdiction. In our ease the learned single Judge appears to have
accepted the reasoning of the learned single Judge of the Madras High Court as
far as the first step is concerned viz. that in such case jurisdiction had to
be sought for in the principles of private international law and provisions of
Clause 12 of the Letters Patent (as also of Section 20 of the Civil Procedure
Code) were not available, these provisions being only concerned with the
internal regulation of domestic jurisdiction.
27\. Apart from the Madras case where the main attempt on the part of the
plaintiff's counsel was from the outset to sustain jurisdiction not so much on
the provisions of Clause 12 of the Letters Patent but on the ground of the
rules of private international law relating to foreign companies as
defendants, the learned single Judge whose decision is questioned before us in
this appeal was of the opinion that to hold that Clause 12 of the Letters
Patent and Section 20 of the Civil Procedure Code apply to foreign
corporations would lead to a curious result that there would be two different
rules of private international law on that pointone for the chartered High
Courts and the other for the remaining Courts in this country. In our opinion,
at various points the provisions of the Letters Patent diverge from the
provisions to be found contained in the Code of Civil Procedure. For example,
what is an appealable decision or order under the Civil Procedure Code is not
necessarily one under Clause 15 of the Letters Patent; and we find nothing
curious if the Legislature confers different jurisdiction for High Courts in
the Presidency Towns, which jurisdiction is different or distinct from the
jurisdiction conferred on other civil Courts. As pointed out earlier, even as
regards confernment of jurisdiction by reason of the part of the cause of
action accruing within the limits of the territorial jurisdiction of the
Court, the provisions are materially different. For the High Court part of the
cause of action which has accrued within its jurisdiction has been judicially
interpreted to mean material part of the cause of action; and further even if
a material part of the cause of action has arisen within the limits of its
territorial jurisdiction, a plaintiff does not automatically get the right of
preferring a suit in the Chartered High Courts. He has to obtain leave, which
on the plain reading of the words of Clause 12 of the Letters Patent has to be
obtained before the action is initiated. These are different provisions for
different Courts and no curious result can be said to occur by reason of such
difference whether in respect of cases concerning Indians or Indian
corporations or cases involving foreigners and foreign corporations. As
explained earlier, the principles governing jurisdiction of Courts in England
for action in personam which have been dealt with in some detail properly
regarded are principles of common law i.e. the principles of domestic law of
England and not rules of private international law. The other argument on the
basis of which the learned single Judge, whose decision is impugned in this
appeal, gives a limited or restricted application to Clause 12 is on the
footing where he considers an order for returning of the plaint which could be
made under Order VII, Rule 10 of the Code of Civil Procedure. According to
him, such an order for the return of plaint can be made under this provision
only in cases in which the proper Court to which the plaint is to be
represented is situate in this country. Now the plain words of Order VII, Rule
10 of the Code of Civil Procedure do not warrant any such conclusion. The
plaint is to be returned to the plaintiff who may then file it in the
appropriate Court or not. It is not necessary nor required by the "wording of
that rule to indicate the Court in which the plaint is required to be filed.
The return is further to the party and the Court is not required to transfer
the pleading to a Court, which, in the opinion of the Court ordering the
return, is the appropriate Court. There is good reason for the absence of such
provision. It may be that the Court passing the order may not have
jurisdiction; but there may be two or three Courts in which the plaintiff may
have the choice to refile the suit. That discretion must be left to the
plaintiff. Further, the plaintiff may choose not to refile the suit in the
appropriate Court as it would not be convenient for him to file the suit in
that Court. He may even give up a good claim on account of considerations of
inconvenience or because of lapse of time. It appears to us that the learned
single Judge was in error in holding that an order for return of the plaint
under Order VII, Rule 10 could only be made in cases where the proper Court to
which the plaint is to be presented was situate in India.
28\. In this connection it will be appropriate to refer to some authorities in
which the effect of the principles of international law has been considered
visa-vis the domestic or municipal law. The position was adverted to by the
Privy Council in Sirdar Gurdyal Singh v. Rajah of Faridkote (1894) L.R. 21
I.A. 171. The observations at p. 185 of the report would show that a decree
can be passed in the country of the forum by which it was pronounced if it is
so authorised to do by local legislation, although such a decree may be
regarded as a nullity by the Courts of every nation except that of the forum
where the decree was pronounced.
29\. The Supreme Court had occasion to consider this aspect of the matter in
Viswanathan v. Abdul Wajid . The Supreme Court in that decision was
considering Section 20 of the Mysore Code of Civil Procedure which is pari
materia with Section 20 of our Code of Civil Procedure, and Shah J. speaking-
for the Court observed as follows with reference to the rules providing for
jurisdiction of the Courts (p. 16) :
Undoubtedly, these rules deal with the territorial jurisdiction of courts in
respect of all suits other than those relating to immovable property or for
recovery of movable property under distraint or attachment. But in their
application they extend to all persons whether domiciled or not within
jurisdiction. Section 20 of the Code extends the jurisdiction of the courts to
persons or transactions beyond the territorial limits of the courts. Such
jurisdiction in personam which transcends territorial limits is conferred on
the courts by the law-making authority of many States.
30\. It was further observed (p. 16) :
..there is no general rule of private international law that a court can in no
event exercise jurisdiction in relation to persons, matters or property
outside jurisdiction. Express enactment of provisions like Section 20, Civil
Procedure Code, Act V of 1908 and Order XI, Rule 1 of the Supreme Court Rules
in England, negative such an assumption. The courts of a country generally
impose a threefold restriction upon the exercise of their jurisdiction: (1)
jurisdiction in rem (binding not only the parties but the world at large) by a
court over res outside the jurisdiction will not be exercised, because it will
not be recognised by other courts; (2) The court will not deal directly or
indirectly with title to immovable property outside the jurisdiction of the
State from which it derives its authority; and (3) Court will not assist in
the enforcement within its jurisdiction of foreign penal or revenue laws.
31\. It would appear to us that in the circumstances the question whether or
not this Court has jurisdiction to entertain and try this suit would be
required to be governed by considering whether it falls within the limits of
jurisdiction prescribed by Clause 12 of the Letters Patent, and such
jurisdiction cannot be sought with reference to any principle of private
international law, English or otherwise. It appears further that the plain
words of Clause 12 of the Letters Patent (and this observation would equally
seem to apply to Section 20 of the Code of Civil Procedure) cannot be
restricted or limited (or even their ambit enlarged) by reference to
principles of private international law or similar considerations. If the
Legislature acting within the sphere of its competence has enacted a
legislation conferring jurisdiction, then it would be improper to refuse to
exercise such jurisdiction on the supposed ground that a decree passed against
a non-resident foreigner or a foreign corporation may not be recognised or
given effect to by foreign Courts. Domestic legislation in this sense is not
subject to principles of international law. Such consideration as the
principles of international law can at the highest afford only a useful
principle of interpretation where the provisions of law are ambiguous and
uncertain, if the provisions of domestic law are clear and unambiguous, then
the Court must give effect to it and cannot moderate or bend the legislation
to render it in conformity with what the Court considers the proper rule of
international law. The question then arises for consideration viz. whether the
defendant is liable to be sued in respect of the cause of action arising
wholly outside India and for this the plaintiff would be entitled in our
opinion only to rely on the third category which we have enunciated whilst
analysing Clause 12 of the Letters Patent and that part of it viz. that the
suit may be filed on the Original (Side of this High Court since the defendant
carries on business within the limits of the ordinary original civil
jurisdiction of this High Court. It becomes necessary now to examine whether
this contention is correct or not, and we may immediately refer to two
decisions of the Bombay High Court which, in our opinion, throw considerable
light on the correct position in law.
32\. In Kessowji Damodar Jairam v. Khimji Jairam (1888) I.L.R. 12 Bom. 507 the
view was taken by the learned single Judge (Scott J.) that Clause 12 of the
Letters Patent was required to be read in the light of the general principles
of municipal jurisdiction and all legislation was prima facie territorial. In
the light of these observations the words "if the defendant... shall... carry
on business" occurring in Clause 12 were interpreted to mean "if the defendant
being a British subject... shall... carry on business". It was further
observed that where the liability of a foreigner was in question, the
"carrying on business" must include actual residence. Applying this principle
it was held that a person not a British subject residing out of the
jurisdiction but carrying on business at a branch in Bombay through an agent
was not liable to be sued in the High Court at Bombay where the cause of
action had arisen wholly outside the jurisdiction, These principles enunciated
in Kessowji's case certainly lay down the principles which could be availed of
by the defendant and had that decision stood, the defendant could have
certainly relied upon it for the support of its contention that the same
principle as was made applicable to a foreigner should be applied to a foreign
corporation and such a corporation was not liable to be sued in Bombay in
respect of the cause of action which had wholly arisen outside Bombay. It
appears, however, that subsequently a Division Bench of this High Court in
Girdhar Damodar v. Kassigar Hiragar (1893) I.L.R. 17 Bom. 662 did not find the
earlier decision as laying down good law. In Girdhar Damodar's case the
Division Bench of the Bombay High Court was considering the provisions
contained in h. 18 of the Presidency Small Cause Courts Act (15 of 1882),
which provisions are very similar to the provisions of Section 20 of our Code
of Civil Procedure with slight differences. It was observed in the said case
that although it is true that a non-British subject, who does not personally
carry on business within the territorial limits of the Court, does not make
himself personally subject to the municipal law of British India, still, by
establishing his business in British India, from which business he expects to
derive profit, lie accepts the protection of the territorial authority for his
business and his property resulting from it, and may be fully regarded as
submitting to the Courts of the country.
33\. Now it is clear from the decision that both the Judges were dealing with
Clause (b) of Section 18 of the Small Cause Courts Act and the judgment
therefore was not based on consideration of the accrual of the cause of
action. In his separate but concurring judgment Starling J. with unusual
clarity had laid down the approach, which approach has appealed to us and
which is contrary to the approach followed by the learned single Judge whose
decision is impugned in the present appeal before us, and of the learned
single Judge of the Madras High Court viz. Venkataraman J. Starling J.
observed (p. 668):
Now it seems to me that, in this case, we have nothing to do with questions of
international law. All we have to do is to determine whether the defendant is
a person against whom the Legislature has permitted a suit to be filed in the
Courts of this country, in which a decree can be passed and executed in this
country against the property of the defendant within the jurisdiction, and
against his person if he comes within the jurisdiction; and I am of opinion
that the defendant, who admittedly has a firm in Bombay in which he carries on
business through his munim, is such a person.
34\. Mr. Bhatt on behalf of the respondent-defendant referred us to
observations to be found in Annamalai Chetty v. Murugasa Chetty (1903) L.R. 30
I.A. 220 : s.c. 5 Bom. L.R. 494. At Pages 227 and 228 are to be found the
observations on which reliance was placed and these are as follows:
In both Courts in India it was apparently assumed that the question of
jurisdiction turned on Section 17 of the Code of Civil Procedure, and that
although the defendant was a foreigner, and although the cause of action arose
in a foreign country, and although the defendant did not personally reside
within the local limits of the jurisdiction of any Court in British India, and
was not even temporarily in Arcot when sued there, yet he could be sued in the
Arcot Court if he carried on business through an agent in the local limits of
that Court's jurisdiction.
This assumption appears to their Lordships to require more attention than it
has received.
As far as the case of Girdhar Damodar was concerned, it was observed that the
same was correctly decided; but, according to the Privy Council, this was
because the cause of action had arisen within the local limits of the
jurisdiction of the British Indian Court in which the action was brought.
"With respect, it may be pointed out that this aspect is not touched in the
decision of either of the Judges of the Bombay High Court in Girdhar Damodar
v. Kassigar Hiragar.
35\. Mr. Bhatt urged us to follow the observations of the Privy Council and
reconsider the case of a foreign corporation which was sought to be sued in
respect of the cause of action arising outside India. According to his
submission, these observations in Annamalai Chetty v. Murugasa Chetty clearly
establish that the decision in Girdhar Damodar v. Kassigar Hiragar had kept
the question open and had not decided it in favour of the appellant as Mr.
Andhyarujina wishes us to consider. According to Mr. Andhyarujina, the
observations made in Girdhar Damodar v. Kassigar Hiragar with respect to the
position of a foreigner, a natural person, were equally applicable to an
artificial person, a foreign corporation viz. the respondent-defendant before
us. If such a corporation chooses to carry on business within the jurisdiction
of this Court by having a branch office situated within such jurisdiction,
then, according to Mr. Andhyarujina, such fact was sufficient to bring it
within the scope of jurisdiction conferred on this Court by Clause 12 of the
Letters Patent; the factum of carrying on this business was independent of the
accrual of the cause of action and sufficient in itself, according to the
learned Counsel, to confer jurisdiction on this Court to entertain and try the
suit.
36\. It may be pointed out that the view which we have taken of Girdhar
Damodar's case is identical with the view expressed by the Division Bench of
the Madras High Court about that ease in Janoo Hassan v. Batchu Kamandu [1924]
A.I.R. Mad. 158. It is expressly observed by the Division Bench in the said
case that the case which was decided by the Division Bench of the Bombay High
Court under the Bombay Small Cause Courts Act must apply to a case concerned
with the Letters Patent since the words of the Act and of the Letters Patent
are identical. It was further observed that the decision in Girdhar Damodar's
case was correct and the earlier case of Kessowji Damodar must be considered
to be overruled by the subsequent Division Bench decision. In the above Madras
ease it is indicated that the word 'defendant' cannot be differently construed
for different parts of the clause of the Letters Patent arising for
consideration before that Court.
37\. It may be pointed out before leaving this aspect of the matter that in
Chunnilal v. Dundappa a Division Bench of this Court referred to Girdhar
Damodar's case and Annamalai Chetty's case and held that the Division Bench
decision in Girdhar Damodar v. Kassigar Hiragar was good law. There are also
observations in this latter judgment of the Bombay High Court which may be
referred to. It has been observed that the competency of a Court to try a suit
had to be determined by the municipal law and from the observations of Lord
Esher M.R. in Companhia De Mocambique v. British South Africa Co.: De Sousa v.
Same [1892] 2 Q.B. 358, at p. 394 the following words were referred to with
approval; the passage quoted at page 192 of the report in Chunnilal's case
reads as follows:
The question, whether the Courts of a nation will or will not entertain
jurisdiction of any dispute, is to be determined exclusively by the nation
itselfi.e., by its municipal law. If by express legislation the Courts are
directed to exercise jurisdiction, the Courts must obey. If there is a proper
inference to the same effect, the result is the same.' Reference was also made
to an Allahabad case in Baroda State By. v. Habib Ullah where it was observed
that if the case fell within the plain words of Section 20 of the Code of
Civil Procedure, the Court must exercise jurisdiction and whether sanctity
will attach to its decree as far as a foreign Court is concerned was a
different question. The same observation would seem to apply to the
jurisdiction conferred by Clause 12 of the Letters Patent.
38\. We may now examine the authorities which were cited at the bar. In
Guardian Assurance Co. v. Shiva Mongol Singh a Division Bench of the Allahabad
High Court had occasion to consider Clause 12 of the Letters Patent. One of
the questions arising for consideration before the Allahabad High Court was
whether the appellant before it viz. the Guardian Assurance Co. Ltd. was
carrying on business in India within the meaning of Clause 12 of the Letters
Patent of that High Court. It had rented premises in Calcutta and separate
account books were maintained in respect of the business of the company in
Calcutta. It was observed further that the company had an agent in Calcutta
who had been authorised under a duly executed power of attorney to accept
insurance proposals, issue cover notes and policies and to pay all claims.
Even on these facts it was contended on behalf of the company that the law as
regards the residence and the carrying on of business by corporations is
different from the law applicable to ordinary business people. The contention
was that a corporation could carry on business only where it dwells and that a
corporation can dwell only at the place at which its directors hold their
meetings and carry on the principal business of the corporation. It was found
by the Court that the appellant company had got itself registered under
Section 277 of the Indian Companies Act (corresponding to Section 592 of the
Companies Act, 1956). It was observed that the provisions of the Companies Act
recognised the obvious fact that foreign companies may carry on business in
India. On these considerations it was held by the Allahabad High Court that
the Guardian Assurance Company Ltd. was carrying on business at its office at
Calcutta.
39\. A somewhat similar question arose for consideration before the Punjab
High Court in The Frontier Bank, Ltd. v. Shrimati Prakash Wati Bahl [1955]
Punj. 633. The Court was considering the question of jurisdiction and observed
as under (p. 636);
Broadly speaking, the power to determine the place at which a particular class
of actions should be tried vests exclusively in the Legislature. To put in a
slightly different language, the right or privilege of resorting to the Courts
of one country for the enforcement of a cause of action arising in another
country depends upon the municipal law of the country where the suit is
brought. Sections 15 to 20 of the Code of Civil Procedure regulate the forum
for the institution of suits in this country. Sections 16 to 18 deal with
suits relating to immovable property and suits relating to mixed actions,
Section 19 deals with suits for compensation for wrongs to persons or
movables, and Section 20 with other suits. Section 20 declares in unambiguous
language that every suit shall be instituted in a Court within the local
limits of whose jurisdiction either the defendant voluntarily resides or
carries on business or works for gain or within, the jurisdiction of a Court
within the local limits of which the cause of action, wholly or in part,
arises. The legal consequences which flow from these provisions are(1) that a
Court has jurisdiction to entertain a suit if the cause of action arises
within the local limits of the jurisdiction of the Court, even if the
defendant does not reside within such limits; and (2) that a Court has
jurisdiction to entertain a suit if the defendant carries on business within
its jurisdiction even if the cause of action arises outside it.
In the ease before the Punjab High Court the cause of action had arisen in
Pakistan. In spite of this admitted position it was held that the suit was
maintainable in Delhi inasmuch as the defendants were carrying on business in
Delhi. It must be observed, however, that the New Delhi office of the Bank was
their sole office in India. Again, it is possible to distinguish this case as
Mr. Bhatt has sought to do on the footing that this was not a case of a
foreign corporation, His argument proceeded upon the footing that the
jurisdiction conferred by Clause 12 of the Letters Patent was not sought to be
applied to foreign corporations or, at any rate, to foreign corporations where
the cause of action had also accrued outside India.
40\. A single Judge of the Calcutta High Court, Bijayesh Mukherji J., had
occasion to consider a similar question in Babulall Choukhani v. Caltex
(India) Ltd . After considering the provisions of Section 20 of the Code of
Civil Procedure and Clause 12 of the Letters Patent, it was observed that the
deeming provisions to be found in Explanation II to Section 20 of the Code
were not relevant to consideration of exercise of jurisdiction under Clause 12
of the Letters Patent inasmuch as these provisions were excluded from
application to the High Court in the exercise of its original civil
jurisdiction by reason of Section 20 of the Code of Civil Procedure. The
learned single Judge of the Calcutta High Court was considering a suit for
money claim filed in that High Court against Caltex (India) Ltd., which was
admittedly a foreign corporation. The third category of Clause 12 of the
Letters Patent as we have analysed earlier was the only category for
consideration before the learned single Judge of the Calcutta High Court. He
found that the defendant corporation did carry on business in Calcutta when
the suit was instituted. He further observed that although the general
supervision was from the head office at Bombay, it did not mean that the head
office alone carried on business at Bombay and the Calcutta office did not. He
further observed that as there was no provision such as Explanation II to be
found in Clause 12 of the Letters Patent, Caltex carried on business in
Bombay, Calcutta or in as many places as their business enterprise takes them
to. According to the learned single Judge, "Not to hold so would be to shut
one's eyes to the plain reality to be seen". The learned single Judge also
referred in this connection to the earlier Division Bench judgment of the
Calcutta High Court in Peoples Insurance Co, v. Benoy Bhusan . It was observed
in this decision that once it was established that the corporation had got a
branch office at any place, it must be deemed in the eye of law to carry on
its business at that place irrespective of the nature of the work that was
actually carried on there. These observations although uttered in connection
with a case arising under the Code of Civil Procedure would seem to be equally
apposite to a case under Clause 12 of the Letters Patent. It may be mentioned
that Babulall Choukhani's case was cited before the learned single Judge below
and, according to him, since in that ease the whole cause of action had arisen
in Calcutta itself, the case could be distinguished and had no application to
the question arising for consideration before him. With respect, it must be
stated that if it had been found by the learned single Judge of the Calcutta
High Court that the entire cause of action had arisen within the limits of the
ordinary original civil jurisdiction of the Calcutta High Court, then the
entire discussion to be found in paras. 15 to 28 of the report would be obiter
and unnecessary. It appears to us that the learned single Judge was directly
considering this aspect of the matter only and the argument which had been
advanced before him was that the suit ought to have been filed in Bombay. He
was also required to consider directly the question whether the defendant
corporation carried on business in Calcutta, since jurisdiction was sought to
be conferred on the Court only by reason of that consideration. It appears to
us that jurisdiction was required to be considered on this footing because it
could not be said that the whole cause of action had arisen and that if it was
held that only a part of the cause of action had arisen, then the leave of the
Court had not been taken, so that the Court was required to consider
jurisdiction only on the footing whether the defendant corporation carried on
business at Calcutta or not.
41\. Mr. Bhatt during the course of the arguments referred us to observations
in a recent decision of the Supreme Court in Satya v. Teja Singh . These
observations, which need not be set out in full, would appear to suggest to us
that once we accept the first step taken by the learned single Judge that the
matter is outside the purview of Clause 12 of the Letters Patent, then perhaps
it must be held that the subsequent steps taken by him were correct and he was
right in departing from the learned single Judge of the Madras High Court who
applied the English principles of jurisdiction which were obviously not
applicable to India. As observed by the Supreme Court in Satya's case, private
international law is not the same in all countries and there is obviously no
system of private international law which can claim universal recognition. As
indicated by Chandrachud J. speaking for the Court, our country must have its
own system of conflict of laws; that the Indian Courts could not therefore
adopt mechanically each rule of private international law followed by other
countries; and that in an appropriate ease, therefore, the step taken by the
Court of law in rejecting the principles of private international law as
recognised and applied in England and evolving a proper principle of private
international law would be required to be upheld. We are also in agreement
with Mr. Bhatt's argument that if this is required to be done, the appellate
Court should not easily set aside the principle evolved by the learned single
Judge unless it is able to evolve a better principle, a more reasonable and
more just principle. In all these aspects of the matter we are inclined to
agree with the submissions of Mr. Bhatt. It has not been demonstrated to us,
if principles of private international law were required to be applied, that
there is a well-settled principle of Indian private international law which
would govern the case, nor are we satisfied that the learned single Judge has
evolved a principle of private international law which is improper in the
sense that a more reasonable, more rational and a more just principle commends
itself for acceptance. However, we find difficulty only in agreeing with the
first step of reasoning which commended itself to Vimadalal J. In our opinion,
the problem arising for consideration before us is principally the problem of
application of municipal law enacting provisions regulating the jurisdiction
of this Court and not the problem of application of any principle or provision
of conflict of laws. This case which has come up for consideration and the
question of jurisdiction which is directly involved is required to be decided
only in accordance with Indian law i.e. in accordance with the provisions
contained in Clause 12 of the Letters Patent.
42\. What then is the result of the foregoing discussion ? In our opinion, the
correct legal position may be stated as follows:
1\. The jurisdiction of a Court taking cognizance of a civil case in India is
to be found in Clause 12 of the Letters Patent for the High Court of Bombay
(and in similar provisions for the other High Courts having their respective
charters) and in Sections 15 to 20 of the Code of Civil Procedure and nowhere
else. It is not possible to accept the view that Clause 12 and Sections 15 to
20 merely demarcate the sphere of jurisdiction of this Court and the
subordinate Courts within the country and are not directed to the
determination of the jurisdiction from the international point of view. In
this view of the matter we differ from the view taken by the learned single
Judge of the Madras High Court in Anant Narayan's case, which approach also
commended itself to the learned single Judge below.
2\. The plain words of Section 20 of the Code of Civil Procedure or Clause 12
of the Letters Patent cannot be restricted or limited (and perhaps also given
an enlarged ambit) by recourse to principles of private international law or
similar considerations. If these povisions confer jurisdiction expressly or by
necessary implication, then it would not be proper for a Court of law not to
exercise the same on the ground that the decree passed pursuant to the
jurisdiction may not be recognised or given effect to by foreign Courts or
even on the ground that such a decree would be a nullity by reason of some
principle of private international law. In other words, if the Legislature
acting within its admitted sphere of competence and without any conflict with
the fundamental law i.e. the constitutional law, enacts legislation, the
Courts are bound to give effect to the same and cannot refuse to follow the
same on the basis that such legislation is in contravention of the generally
accepted principles of private international law. Such considerations can at
the highest afford only a useful principle of interpretation when the law
enacted by the Legislature, which law the Courts are bound to obey, is
ambiguous or capable of more than one interpretation. Judges when attempting
to ascertaining the meaning to be given to a legislative enactment will
ordinarily presume that the Legislature did not intend to violate the doctrine
of international law, public or private, and will therefore wherever possible
give such interpretation as to make the enactment consistent with such
doctrine. Where, however, the language of the statute is clear and does not
admit of any ambiguity or more than one interpretation, the Court must give
effect to the statutory provision as it stands notwithstanding the fact that
these provisions will run against the commonly accepted doctrines of
international law.
3\. The word 'defendant' occurring in Clause 12 of the Letters Patent or in
Section 20 of the Code of Civil Procedure must be given its proper meaning and
would include within its compass both natural and artificial persons i.e.
living beings as well as corporations and no distinction is made in law
between corporations as are incorporated in India and corporations as are
incorporated outside India i.e. foreign corporations.
4\. Under the last part of Clause 12 of the Letters Patent a suit can be
brought on the Original Side of this Court if the defendant at the time of
institution of the suit dwells or carries on business or personally works for
gain within the limits of such original jurisdiction of this High Court. For
consideration of jurisdiction Under this head, the consideration whether the
cause of action has accrued wholly or in part within or without the limits of
the said jurisdiction is wholly irrelevant.
5\. In this part of Clause 12 of the Letters Patent a clear distinction has
been made between carrying on of business and working for gain. In the latter
case the legislative requirement is that the defendant should personally work
for gain, whereas no such requirement is postulated for the carrying on of
business. It means therefore that the defendant may carry on business himself
or through an agent or agents.
6\. We are concerned here with a defendant having a branch office within the
limits of the jurisdiction of this High Court. It was submitted that the
defendant could carry on business only at its principal office i.e. the Head
Office at San Francisco, U.S.A., where there exists their Board of Directors
which can take final decisions. It was submitted that it was only this place
that the defendant could be said to be carrying on business. It is impossible
to accept this restrictive meaning which has not found favour with either the
High Court of Allahabad or the High Court of Calcutta.
7\. Whether the defendant carries on business within the limits of the
jurisdiction of a Court is a question of fact. Where an allegation to this
effect is made in the plaint and properly traversed by the defendant in the
written statement, the onus of proving such allegation would be on the
plaintiff, though the defendant would be required to prove the facts as may be
deemed to be within his special knowledge. If there is a proper denial of such
allegation, then the answer to the issue of jurisdiction may b required to be
given after necessary evidence is taken. However, for the purpose at
considering this question it is not required that at the place which is within
the jurisdiction of the Court there must be some person or agency not subject
to supervision or regulation from outside. All that is required is whether
within the limits of jurisdiction of this Court is the defendant by itself or
through its agent carrying on all or some of the business which it does? In
the instant case the defendant has a full-fledged branch within such
jurisdiction, at which branch banking business is carried on. The defendant
has not chosen to indicate in its pleadings or led any evidence, apart from
the general argument indicated above, why such branch should not be regarded
as the defendant itself carrying on business within the limits of the
jurisdiction of this Court. This branch may be subject to supervision and
control from the regional office or even from the Head Office. This branch
cannot control the defendant corporation in the sense that the Board of
Directors or the Head Office does; but that in our opinion is not required to
bring the case within the third part of Clause 12 of the Letters Patent i.e.
in order to answer the question whether the defendant carries on business. The
branch obviously is not a forwarding agency in the sense that it collects
proposals or questions for consideration of some outside agency, which outside
authority takes the decision. It carries on banking business within the limits
of the jurisdiction of this Court, and normally this is sufficient; whether it
does so in two rooms or an entire flat or an entire building would seem to
make no difference.
8\. In the view that we have taken, the proceedings taken under Section 582 of
the Companies Act by registering certain details with the Registrar would at
the highest have merely an evidenciary value. As indicated earlier, the
principle of submission to jurisdiction and the common law principle that the
Court would have jurisdiction to entertain an action where a writ can be
served on the defendant cannot be accepted and applied in India. It is
possible to hold, however, that where a foreign corporation has made the
necessary registration under Section 592 of the Companies Act with all
attendant formalities, it would be easy to answer affirmatively the question
whether it does carry on business at the place in respect of which the
necessary registration has been made under Section 592(1)(e). As far as the
requirement of Explanation II to Section 20 of the Code of Civil Procedure is
concerned, such a declaration would appear to be conclusive of the question
and normally no question would arise of any evidence being allowed to be led
on the question whether the place indicated in the registration as the
principal place of business in India is in fact such principal place or not.
9\. As a necessary corollary to what is stated above, in our opinion, apart
from this evidenciary value, registration under Section 592 of the Companies
Act and in particular the furnishing of the names and addresses of the persons
on whom the process may be served, would not confer jurisdiction and cannot be
deemed to restrict or enlarge the ambit of jurisdiction of civil Courts either
under Clause 12 of the Letters Patent or under Section 20 of the Code of Civil
Procedure. This is because of the view that has found favour with us that the
principle of submission to jurisdiction enunciated by English Courts is not
the proper principle to be followed in this country. In our opinion, we have
to seek jurisdiction in Clause 12 of the Letters Patent or in Section 20 of
the Code of Civil Procedure and apart from these provisions the only other
aspect required to be considered is whether the defendant can be considered to
have waived or abandoned its plea of want of jurisdiction. The latter aspect
of the argument would substantially be an aspect of the principle of estoppel.
10\. Explanation II to Section 20 of the Code of Civil Procedure must in these
circumstances be construed as plain words of limitation designating one place
out of many where a corporation which may be carrying on business at several
places may be sued irrespective of the accrual of the cause of action. Under
Section 20 read together with Explanation II, a corporation can be sued only
at its principal place of business in India or at all other places of business
i.e. where it carries on business provided the cause of action has arisen at
such place.
The application of the principles above enunciated causes no difficulty in the
instant case. In the paragraphs of the plaint and in the title it has been
averred that the defendant has a branch in Bombay. It has been admitted in the
written-statement that this branch office in Bombay carries on its banking
business. If the defendant then carries on its banking business within the
limits of the jurisdiction of this Court and no other special fact has been
pleaded in the written statement or sought to be proved before the learned
single Judge, it would appear to us that the question whether the defendant
carries on business in Bombay must be answered in the affirmative. The fact
that this branch office which is within the limits of the jurisdiction of this
Court has been designated as its principal place of business in Bombay would
put the issue beyond any controversy. It must be held by reason of the
pleadings, by reason of the failure of the defendant to prove any further fact
and by reason of the registration under Section 592(1)(e) of the Companies Apt
that the defendant carries on business within the limits of the original
jurisdiction of this Court. If that is so, then in our view there is no
warrant for restricting the word 'defendant' in Clause 12 of the Letters
Patent to Indian citizens or natural persons who reside within the limits of
this jurisdiction or Indian corporations. In the facts and circumstances of
the case, the express words of Clause 12 of the Letters Patent confer
jurisdiction on this Court and this jurisdiction cannot be refused to be
exercised on the basis that any decree passed pursuant to this jurisdiction
may not be given effect to or recognised as valid by foreign Courts.
43\. In the result the decision of the learned single Judge answering the
preliminary issue in the negative and against the plaintiff-appellant is
required to be set aside. In our view the said preliminary issue has to be
answered in the affirmative. It is accordingly so answered and it is held that
this Court has jurisdiction to entertain and try the suit. In the view that we
have taken, the further trial of the suit will have to be proceeded with. The
matter was expedited by Madon J. on the plaintiff's notice of motion and in
view of that order the suit will have to be given precedence over earlier
suits matters. We accordingly direct that the suit be placed on the board of
the learned Judge taking long causes on August 23, 1976 for fixing such date
of further hearing as may appear to be appropriate in the circumstances of the
case.
44\. The appellant has submitted that by reason of the provisions contained in
Section 15 of the Bombay Court-fees Act, 1959 (Act 36 of 1959), the appellant
is entitled to an appropriate order authorising him to receive back the full
amount of fees paid on the memorandum of appeal. Section 15 of the said Act
talks of rejection of the plaint. Rejection of plaints is dealt with in Order
VII, Rule 11 of the Code of Civil Procedure, whereas Order VII, Rule 10 of the
said Code talks of return of plaints. It is pertinent, however, to note that
Section 15 of the Bombay Court-fees Act does not restrict the eases of
rejection of plaints only to cases falling within the provisions of Order VII,
Rule 11 of the Code. It has been held even under Order VTI, Rule 11 that the
grounds of rejection given in Rule 11 are not exhaustive. It would appear to
us that the word 'rejected' in Section 15 of the Bombay Court-fees Act must be
given a natural and wide meaning and not an. artificial meaning as may lie
indicated by the provisions contained in Order VII, Rule 11. This is
particularly because the suit in the appeal before us was dismissed on the
preliminary ground viz. one of jurisdiction from which the plaintiff had to
file this appeal on payment of full Court-fees which are over Rs. 7,000. It
would not be fair to the appellant or to the respondent, who otherwise may
have to reimburse the amount of Court-fees to the successful appellant, not to
make an order for refund of this Court-fee if justified by the words of
Section 15 of the Bombay Court-fees Act. Accordingly we think this is a fit
case falling within Section 15 of the said Act. Mr. Andhyarujina points out
that this would also be covered by Order XLI, Rule 23 of the Code of Civil
Procedure, as our order for continuation of trial of the suit would amount to
a remand within the meaning of that provision and that provision of the Code
is referred to in the second part of Section 15 of the Bombay Court-fees Act.
Bearing all these considerations in mind, we think that the proper order to be
made would be to direct the full Court-fees to be refunded to the appellant.
There will be an order accordingly.
45\. Mr. Bhatt at this stage says that he will be making the necessary
application for leave to appeal to the Supreme Court of India and will be
applying for stay of further hearing of the suit. He submits that in the
application for leave, which we require him to make in writing, he will be
applying for stay which must be granted as this is a decision on a preliminary
issue. On the other hand, it has to be borne in mind that the trial has been
held up of a suit filed in 1969 and irrespective of the question whether or
not leave is required to be granted and what questions are to be indicated as
fit questions requiring determination by the Supreme Court, this does not
appear to us to be a matter in which the further trial should be held up
merely on the footing that the respondent should have an opportunity of having
the preliminary issue agitated before the Supreme Court.
46\. The appellant applies for costs. He points out that he is a resident of
Jullundur and has incurred costs of travelling to Bombay, has incurred hotel
expenses and further expenses for travelling from the hotel to the Court and
back. He has also incurred expenses for obtaining the certified copy of the
judgment and for preparing the appeal paperbook. He suggests that he should be
awarded costs in the aggregate of Rs. 2,000.
47\. Mr. Bhatt submits to the orders of the Court but says that reasonable
costs only should be awarded.
48\. Bearing all the circumstances in mind and the fact that this appeal has
been heard for nearly four days, we direct the respondent to pay to the
appellant the costs of this appeal quantified at Rs. 1,000 (Rupees one
thousand).
applying for stay which must be granted as this is a decision on a preliminary
issue. On the other hand, it has to be borne in mind that the trial has been
held up of a suit filed in 1969 and irrespective of the question whether or
not leave is required to be granted and what questions are to be indicated as
fit questions requiring determination by the Supreme Court, this does not
appear to us to be a matter in which the further trial should be held up
merely on the footing that the respondent should have an opportunity of having
the preliminary issue agitated before the Supreme Court.
46\. The appellant applies for costs. He points out that he is a resident of
Jullundur and has incurred costs of travelling to Bombay, has incurred hotel
expenses and further expenses for travelling from the hotel to the Court and
back. He has also incurred expenses for obtaining the certified copy of the
judgment and for preparing the appeal paperbook. He suggests that he should be
awarded costs in the aggregate of Rs. 2,000.
47\. Mr. Bhatt submits to the orders of the Court but says that reasonable
costs only should be awarded.
plaintiff in respect of various items specified in para. 115 of the plaint.
This claim for compensation and damages is claimed in respect of certain Time
Certificates of Deposit issued by the Bank of America, two of which had been
issued by its Banking Office at San Francisco and one by its Banking Office at
Los Angeles in the State of California, U.S.A. The plaintiff claims to have
lost these certificates in London together with a cashier's cheque for
interest. The loss was reported to the two offices. The plaintiff claims that
thereafter the defendant insisted upon various formalities being complied with
by the plaintiff, which it was not entitled in law to do and was contrary to
true legal position pertaining to the three Time Certificates of Deposit as
also contrary to certain oral talks set out in the plaintiff's pleadings which
are unnecessary to be referred to in this judgment. Although, according to the
plaintiff, these demands were illegal and improper, he was forced to comply
with the same in order to salvage his funds. The plaintiff also claims that
this improper, invalid and illegal course of action was resorted to by the
defendant on several improper considerations which are set out in para. 96 of
the plaint. In the subsequent paragraphs of the plaint various acts of
commission and omission on the part of the defendant and its several officers
concerned with the plaintiff's application for issue of fresh certificates or
for the reimbursement of the amount due under the lost three certificates have
applying for stay which must be granted as this is a decision on a preliminary
issue. On the other hand, it has to be borne in mind that the trial has been
held up of a suit filed in 1969 and irrespective of the question whether or
not leave is required to be granted and what questions are to be indicated as
fit questions requiring determination by the Supreme Court, this does not
appear to us to be a matter in which the further trial should be held up
merely on the footing that the respondent should have an opportunity of having
the preliminary issue agitated before the Supreme Court.
46\. The appellant applies for costs. He points out that he is a resident of
Jullundur and has incurred costs of travelling to Bombay, has incurred hotel
expenses and further expenses for travelling from the hotel to the Court and
back. He has also incurred expenses for obtaining the certified copy of the
judgment and for preparing the appeal paperbook. He suggests that he should be
awarded costs in the aggregate of Rs. 2,000.
47\. Mr. Bhatt submits to the orders of the Court but says that reasonable
costs only should be awarded.
plaintiff in respect of various items specified in para. 115 of the plaint.
This claim for compensation and damages is claimed in respect of certain Time
Certificates of Deposit issued by the Bank of America, two of which had been
issued by its Banking Office at San Francisco and one by its Banking Office at
Los Angeles in the State of California, U.S.A. The plaintiff claims to have
lost these certificates in London together with a cashier's cheque for
interest. The loss was reported to the two offices. The plaintiff claims that
thereafter the defendant insisted upon various formalities being complied with
by the plaintiff, which it was not entitled in law to do and was contrary to
true legal position pertaining to the three Time Certificates of Deposit as
also contrary to certain oral talks set out in the plaintiff's pleadings which
are unnecessary to be referred to in this judgment. Although, according to the
plaintiff, these demands were illegal and improper, he was forced to comply
with the same in order to salvage his funds. The plaintiff also claims that
this improper, invalid and illegal course of action was resorted to by the
defendant on several improper considerations which are set out in para. 96 of
the plaint. In the subsequent paragraphs of the plaint various acts of
commission and omission on the part of the defendant and its several officers
concerned with the plaintiff's application for issue of fresh certificates or
for the reimbursement of the amount due under the lost three certificates have
applying for stay which must be granted as this is a decision on a preliminary
issue. On the other hand, it has to be borne in mind that the trial has been
held up of a suit filed in 1969 and irrespective of the question whether or
not leave is required to be granted and what questions are to be indicated as
fit questions requiring determination by the Supreme Court, this does not
appear to us to be a matter in which the further trial should be held up
merely on the footing that the respondent should have an opportunity of having
the preliminary issue agitated before the Supreme Court.
46\. The appellant applies for costs. He points out that he is a resident of
Jullundur and has incurred costs of travelling to Bombay, has incurred hotel
expenses and further expenses for travelling from the hotel to the Court and
back. He has also incurred expenses for obtaining the certified copy of the
judgment and for preparing the appeal paperbook. He suggests that he should be
awarded costs in the aggregate of Rs. 2,000.
47\. Mr. Bhatt submits to the orders of the Court but says that reasonable
costs only should be awarded.
plaintiff in respect of various items specified in para. 115 of the plaint.
This claim for compensation and damages is claimed in respect of certain Time
Certificates of Deposit issued by the Bank of America, two of which had been
issued by its Banking Office at San Francisco and one by its Banking Office at
Los Angeles in the State of California, U.S.A. The plaintiff claims to have
lost these certificates in London together with a cashier's cheque for
interest. The loss was reported to the two offices. The plaintiff claims that
thereafter the defendant insisted upon various formalities being complied with
by the plaintiff, which it was not entitled in law to do and was contrary to
true legal position pertaining to the three Time Certificates of Deposit as
also contrary to certain oral talks set out in the plaintiff's pleadings which
are unnecessary to be referred to in this judgment. Although, according to the
plaintiff, these demands were illegal and improper, he was forced to comply
with the same in order to salvage his funds. The plaintiff also claims that
this improper, invalid and illegal course of action was resorted to by the
defendant on several improper considerations which are set out in para. 96 of
the plaint. In the subsequent paragraphs of the plaint various acts of
commission and omission on the part of the defendant and its several officers
concerned with the plaintiff's application for issue of fresh certificates or
for the reimbursement of the amount due under the lost three certificates have
been set out, and in consequence the plaintiff has crystalised his monetary
claim and the heads thereof in para. 115. It may be mentioned here that
ultimately before the issue of fresh Time Certificates of Deposit the
plaintiff was required to execute in favour of the defendant an Indemnity and
Hold Harmless Agreement by which he, inter alia, agreed to indemnify the
defendant Corporation against any and all loss, cost and expense by reason of
the issue of the replacement Time Certificates of deposit. This agreement
provided that it can be legally enforced in Punjab, India, as well as Los
Angeles, California, United States of America. The claim of the plaintiff
encompasses claims by way of compensation and damages for mental distress,
worry, anxiety, injury to feelings, deterioration in health, loss of income of
applying for stay which must be granted as this is a decision on a preliminary
issue. On the other hand, it has to be borne in mind that the trial has been
held up of a suit filed in 1969 and irrespective of the question whether or
not leave is required to be granted and what questions are to be indicated as
fit questions requiring determination by the Supreme Court, this does not
appear to us to be a matter in which the further trial should be held up
merely on the footing that the respondent should have an opportunity of having
the preliminary issue agitated before the Supreme Court.
46\. The appellant applies for costs. He points out that he is a resident of
Jullundur and has incurred costs of travelling to Bombay, has incurred hotel
expenses and further expenses for travelling from the hotel to the Court and
back. He has also incurred expenses for obtaining the certified copy of the
judgment and for preparing the appeal paperbook. He suggests that he should be
awarded costs in the aggregate of Rs. 2,000.
47\. Mr. Bhatt submits to the orders of the Court but says that reasonable
costs only should be awarded.
plaintiff in respect of various items specified in para. 115 of the plaint.
This claim for compensation and damages is claimed in respect of certain Time
Certificates of Deposit issued by the Bank of America, two of which had been
issued by its Banking Office at San Francisco and one by its Banking Office at
Los Angeles in the State of California, U.S.A. The plaintiff claims to have
lost these certificates in London together with a cashier's cheque for
interest. The loss was reported to the two offices. The plaintiff claims that
thereafter the defendant insisted upon various formalities being complied with
by the plaintiff, which it was not entitled in law to do and was contrary to
true legal position pertaining to the three Time Certificates of Deposit as
also contrary to certain oral talks set out in the plaintiff's pleadings which
are unnecessary to be referred to in this judgment. Although, according to the
plaintiff, these demands were illegal and improper, he was forced to comply
with the same in order to salvage his funds. The plaintiff also claims that
this improper, invalid and illegal course of action was resorted to by the
defendant on several improper considerations which are set out in para. 96 of
the plaint. In the subsequent paragraphs of the plaint various acts of
commission and omission on the part of the defendant and its several officers
concerned with the plaintiff's application for issue of fresh certificates or
for the reimbursement of the amount due under the lost three certificates have
been set out, and in consequence the plaintiff has crystalised his monetary
claim and the heads thereof in para. 115. It may be mentioned here that
ultimately before the issue of fresh Time Certificates of Deposit the
plaintiff was required to execute in favour of the defendant an Indemnity and
Hold Harmless Agreement by which he, inter alia, agreed to indemnify the
defendant Corporation against any and all loss, cost and expense by reason of
the issue of the replacement Time Certificates of deposit. This agreement
provided that it can be legally enforced in Punjab, India, as well as Los
Angeles, California, United States of America. The claim of the plaintiff
encompasses claims by way of compensation and damages for mental distress,
worry, anxiety, injury to feelings, deterioration in health, loss of income of
applying for stay which must be granted as this is a decision on a preliminary
issue. On the other hand, it has to be borne in mind that the trial has been
held up of a suit filed in 1969 and irrespective of the question whether or
not leave is required to be granted and what questions are to be indicated as
fit questions requiring determination by the Supreme Court, this does not
appear to us to be a matter in which the further trial should be held up
merely on the footing that the respondent should have an opportunity of having
the preliminary issue agitated before the Supreme Court.
46\. The appellant applies for costs. He points out that he is a resident of
Jullundur and has incurred costs of travelling to Bombay, has incurred hotel
expenses and further expenses for travelling from the hotel to the Court and
back. He has also incurred expenses for obtaining the certified copy of the
judgment and for preparing the appeal paperbook. He suggests that he should be
awarded costs in the aggregate of Rs. 2,000.
47\. Mr. Bhatt submits to the orders of the Court but says that reasonable
costs only should be awarded.
