Supreme Court of India
M. Venkata Krishna Rao vs B. Trinatha Reddy on 17 March, 1993
Equivalent citations: 1993 (2) ALT 41
Bench: Ahmadi, Y Dayal
ORDER
1\. The election to the Andhra Pradesh legislative Assembly was sched(sic)d to
take place on November 22, 1989. The counting of the votes to (sic)ce on
November 26, 1989 and the present appellant original respondent was
(sic)clared elected by the Returning Officer of No. 1. Ichapuram Assembly
Constituency of Andhra Pradesh. Bie-election was challenged by the respondent
here in original petitioner on certain grounds including corrupt practice as
found in the election petition was as under:
A huge public meeting organised by the respondent was held on 12-11- 89 at
Ichapuram. A rostrum was specially erected and the election posters of the
respondent were displayed on the front and right side of the rostrum.
Annexures 25 and 26 clearly show that posters containing photos of Mr. N.T.
Rama Rao in the garb of Lord Sri Krishna blowing the conch and they were
prominently displayed on the front of dias. Mr. N.T. Rama Rao, the respondent,
and Mr. H. Appaiah Dora, former Member of Parliament and candidate on behalf
of the Telugu Desam Party for Lok Sabha were found. The meeting was addressed
evasive and halting. R.W. 1 being the party Secretary and R.W. 2 being the
appellant himself the learned Trial Judge was disinclined to attach importance
to their evidence having regard to its poor quality and preferred the evidence
of P.Ws. 2, 4 and 6 particularly P.W. 6, an independent witness. As their
evidence found support from the posters and the message conveyed by them the
High Court though it safe to rely on their evidence in preference to that of
R.Ws. 1 and 2. We are, therefore, of the view that the allegation made by the
respondent-petitioner that the appellant respondent had addressed the meeting
at which he exhorted the voters in the name of religion to vote for him is
rightly accepted by the learned Trial Judge. It is also difficult for us to
believe, as was submitted by the learned Senior Counsel that there was no
reliable evidence to show that the appellant had addressed the meeting and
introduced the party leader as an incarnation of Lord Krishna. It would sound
unnatural that the respondent would not address the meeting arranged for
canvassing votes for him and would not introduce the party leader in glowing
terms.
of the Telugu Desam Party for Lok Sabha were found. The meeting was addressed
by Mr. N.T. Rama Rao and the respondent. The respondent did not disown
Annexures 25 and 26 put on front side of rostrum. On the other hand, the
respondent described N.T. Rama Rao as an incarnation of Lord Krishna and a
vote in favour of Telugu Desam Party would appease Lord Sri Krishna who would
shower prosperity for electors voting in favour of Telugu Desam Party.
Respondent further pleaded and exhorted electors in the name of religious
symbol and religion of the electors pointing out to Annexures 25 and 26.
Thereafter, the names of witnesses have been mentioned who had attended the
meeting and heard the speeches made thereat. These include P.W. 2 A.
Satyanarayana, P.W. 4, R. Narasimha Murhty Patnaik and P.W. 6, D. Rami Reddy.
Of these three witnesses, P.W. 2 and P:W. 4 were admittedly the counting
agents of the petitioner whereas P.W. 6 was a practicing Advocate of
Ichapuram. The above allegations were denied by the appellant respondent in
paragraph 6 of his written statement. The factum of existence of the posters
in front of the rostrum was not specifically denied but what was denied was
that the returned candidate or his agent had affixed those posters. The
photographs of the said public meeting of November 12, 1989 have been produced
at Exhs. A-23, A-24 and A-25. Exh. A-23 shows the Telugu Desam Leader N.T.
Rama Rao addressing the public meeting with the respondent standing by his
side. Exh. A-24 is also a photograph showing the entire rostrum with the said
leader and the appellant standing thereon. The posters showing N.T. Rama Rao
attired as Lord Krishna blowing a conch are visible in the front of the dias.
2\. The learned Judge in the High Court raised three issues for consideration.
The first was on the question whether the appellant herein caused through his
agents, men and party workers exhibition of Annexures 2 to 28 at various
places in No. 1 Ichapuram Assembly Constituency. So far as this question is
concerned, the learned Judge came to the conclusion that the evidence
tend(sic)d on behalf of the petitioner was not satisfactory to show that it
was the appellant and/or his party workers who had pasted the posters at
different places in the constituency. The learned Judge came to this
conclusion because he could not rule out the possibility of the parliamentary
candidate Dora and/or his workers having pasted the posters since the election
to Parliament was also simultaneous. Issue No. 2, which is relevant for our
purpose was in regard to the public meeting held at Ichapuram on November 12,
1989 for which the rostrum was erected with the posters referred to earlier.
It was at this meeting that the appellant introduced the Telugu Desam leader
N.T. Rama Rao as an incarnation of Lord Krishna and/exhorted the voters in the
name of religion to vote for the Telugu Desam party if they desired
prosperity. To support this allegation besides P.W. I. P.Ws. 2, 4 and 6 gave
ocular evidence, their evidence was controverted by the appellant (R.W. 2) and
the Secretary of the Telugu Desam Party (R.W. 1) who had accompanied N.T. Rama
Rao to the election meeting. The learned Judge who had the benefit of watching
these witnesses give evidence in Court undertook a critical scrutiny of their
evidence and saw no reason to disbelieve the evidence tendered on behalf of
the respondent-original petitioner through P.Ws.2, 4 and 6. Insofar as P.W. 6
is concerned the Court noted that he was an independent witness, a member of
the Bar of Ichapuram, who had absolutely no reason to give evidence in favour
of the defeated candidate or against the appellant or his party. In this view
of the matter, the learned Judge concluded that it was safe to place reliance
on the oral testimony of these three witnesses even though he noticed streaks
of minor exaggeration here and there, which, in his view, did not affect the
substratum of the story put forward by the respondent-petitioner. He,
therefore, held issue No. 2 proved in favour of the respondent-petitioner and
consequently invalidated the election of the appellant. It is against this
order of the learned Judge dated September 3, 1991 that the present appeal has
been preferred.
3\. We have carefully examined the evidence of P.Ws. 2, 4 and 6 on whose
evidence the learned Judge in the High Court has placed considerable reliance.
The learned Senior Counsel, Shri K. Madhava Reddy, for the appellant took us
through the evidence of these three witnesses as well as the analysis of their
evidence undertaken by the Trial Judge. He cautioned us against accepting such
evidence by inviting our attention to the observations found in paragraph 21
of Rahim Khan v. Khurshid Ahmed and Ors. . In that paragraph this Court
emphasised the danger of believing oral evidence in an election case without
the backing of sure circumstances or indubitable documents. This Court pointed
out that it would be easy to bring forward a witness to depose to a short
story in regard to utterances in the election meeting and it would be unsafe
to place implicit reliance on their partisan evidence. It emphasised that the
Court must look for a serious assurance before acting on such oral evidence.
We are conscious of the fact that in an election case normally the evidence
may be of partisan witnesses and it may, in a large body of cases, be unsafe
to place implicit reliance on such partisan witnesses belonging to one
political party or the other. Besides, a charge of corrupt practice being
quasi-criminal in nature, the degree of proof required must be stricter than
in a civil case. But in the present case we find that besides the evidence of
the two election agents of the respondent-petitioner there is the evidence of
P.W. 6, a wholly independent witness, who has no axe to grind and no reason to
take sides. The evidence of P.W. 2 and P.W. 4 is corroborated by the
independent evidence of P.W. 6. But that is not all. In addition to that there
is the evidence of the fact that posters were prepared and distributed showing
the Telugu Desam Party leader N.T. Rama Rao attired as Lord Krishna blowing a
conch with a Shloka from the Bhagwad Geeta to the effect that the Lord Krishna
will be born 'yuga yuga' to restore Dharma. At the bottom of the poster there
is a caption in Telugu exhorting the people to defeat the deceitful congress
which has sold the country. These posters belonging to the Telugu Desam Party
are also to be round in Exh. A-24 although the writing in Telugu which we find
in the enlarged posters, is not discernible. It must be appreciated that these
posters of the party reader attired as Lord Krishna were intended to convey a
definite message. If religion was not intended to be used for the purpose of
capturing votes, it is difficult to see why a leader of a political party
should be shown attired as Lord krishna blowing a conch at an election
meeting. The existence of such posters lends credence to the evidence tendered
through P.Ws. 2, 4 and 6. Therefore, besides the fact that P.W. 6 is an
independent witness who has no reason to take sides his evidence finds support
from the message intended to be conveyed through such posters. What that
message is, is clear from the testimony of these three witnesses. The learned
Trial Judge, who had the benefit of recording evidence of these witnesses and
seeing their demeanour has for reasons stated, accepted their evidence and we
see no serious infirmity in the appreciation of their evidence by the learned
Judge. Their evidence clearly is that the appellant who addressed the
gathering mostly of Hindus said that they were all Hindus and worshippers of
Lord Krishna whose Avatar Rama Rao was and a vote for the Telugu Desam Party
would bring prosperity. Thus the appeal was to the religious sentiments of the
Hindus. This was buttressed by the posters showing the party leader as an
Avatar of Lord Krishna. The purpose of such posters was obviously to gain
votes by arousing the religious sentiments of the people. Why else should a
leader of a political party indulge in such gimmickry, because admittedly it
is not out of any of his movies. Such appeals to the religious sentiments of
the people if allowed would destroy the purity of elections. So far as the
evidence of R.Ws. l and 2 is concerned, it is clearly partisan evidence. On
the question of the existence of the posters on the rostrum their evidence is
evasive and halting. R.W. 1 being the party Secretary and R.W. 2 being the
appellant himself the learned Trial Judge was disinclined to attach importance
to their evidence having regard to its poor quality and preferred the evidence
of P.Ws. 2, 4 and 6 particularly P.W. 6, an independent witness. As their
evidence found support from the posters and the message conveyed by them the
High Court though it safe to rely on their evidence in preference to that of
R.Ws. 1 and 2. We are, therefore, of the view that the allegation made by the
respondent-petitioner that the appellant respondent had addressed the meeting
at which he exhorted the voters in the name of religion to vote for him is
rightly accepted by the learned Trial Judge. It is also difficult for us to
believe, as was submitted by the learned Senior Counsel that there was no
reliable evidence to show that the appellant had addressed the meeting and
introduced the party leader as an incarnation of Lord Krishna. It would sound
unnatural that the respondent would not address the meeting arranged for
canvassing votes for him and would not introduce the party leader in glowing
terms.
4\. On an overall view of the matter, we think that the decision of the
learned Trial judge on issue No. 2 is correct and does not demand interference
in appeal. The appeal is dismissed with costs. The interim order will stand
vacated.
evasive and halting. R.W. 1 being the party Secretary and R.W. 2 being the
appellant himself the learned Trial Judge was disinclined to attach importance
to their evidence having regard to its poor quality and preferred the evidence
of P.Ws. 2, 4 and 6 particularly P.W. 6, an independent witness. As their
evidence found support from the posters and the message conveyed by them the
High Court though it safe to rely on their evidence in preference to that of
R.Ws. 1 and 2. We are, therefore, of the view that the allegation made by the
respondent-petitioner that the appellant respondent had addressed the meeting
at which he exhorted the voters in the name of religion to vote for him is
rightly accepted by the learned Trial Judge. It is also difficult for us to
believe, as was submitted by the learned Senior Counsel that there was no
reliable evidence to show that the appellant had addressed the meeting and
introduced the party leader as an incarnation of Lord Krishna. It would sound
unnatural that the respondent would not address the meeting arranged for
canvassing votes for him and would not introduce the party leader in glowing
terms.
of the Telugu Desam Party for Lok Sabha were found. The meeting was addressed
by Mr. N.T. Rama Rao and the respondent. The respondent did not disown
Annexures 25 and 26 put on front side of rostrum. On the other hand, the
respondent described N.T. Rama Rao as an incarnation of Lord Krishna and a
vote in favour of Telugu Desam Party would appease Lord Sri Krishna who would
shower prosperity for electors voting in favour of Telugu Desam Party.
Respondent further pleaded and exhorted electors in the name of religious
symbol and religion of the electors pointing out to Annexures 25 and 26.
Thereafter, the names of witnesses have been mentioned who had attended the
meeting and heard the speeches made thereat. These include P.W. 2 A.
Satyanarayana, P.W. 4, R. Narasimha Murhty Patnaik and P.W. 6, D. Rami Reddy.
Of these three witnesses, P.W. 2 and P:W. 4 were admittedly the counting
agents of the petitioner whereas P.W. 6 was a practicing Advocate of
Ichapuram. The above allegations were denied by the appellant respondent in
paragraph 6 of his written statement. The factum of existence of the posters
in front of the rostrum was not specifically denied but what was denied was
that the returned candidate or his agent had affixed those posters. The
photographs of the said public meeting of November 12, 1989 have been produced
at Exhs. A-23, A-24 and A-25. Exh. A-23 shows the Telugu Desam Leader N.T.
Rama Rao addressing the public meeting with the respondent standing by his
evasive and halting. R.W. 1 being the party Secretary and R.W. 2 being the
appellant himself the learned Trial Judge was disinclined to attach importance
to their evidence having regard to its poor quality and preferred the evidence
of P.Ws. 2, 4 and 6 particularly P.W. 6, an independent witness. As their
evidence found support from the posters and the message conveyed by them the
High Court though it safe to rely on their evidence in preference to that of
R.Ws. 1 and 2. We are, therefore, of the view that the allegation made by the
respondent-petitioner that the appellant respondent had addressed the meeting
at which he exhorted the voters in the name of religion to vote for him is
rightly accepted by the learned Trial Judge. It is also difficult for us to
believe, as was submitted by the learned Senior Counsel that there was no
reliable evidence to show that the appellant had addressed the meeting and
introduced the party leader as an incarnation of Lord Krishna. It would sound
unnatural that the respondent would not address the meeting arranged for
canvassing votes for him and would not introduce the party leader in glowing
terms.
of the Telugu Desam Party for Lok Sabha were found. The meeting was addressed
by Mr. N.T. Rama Rao and the respondent. The respondent did not disown
Annexures 25 and 26 put on front side of rostrum. On the other hand, the
respondent described N.T. Rama Rao as an incarnation of Lord Krishna and a
vote in favour of Telugu Desam Party would appease Lord Sri Krishna who would
shower prosperity for electors voting in favour of Telugu Desam Party.
Respondent further pleaded and exhorted electors in the name of religious
symbol and religion of the electors pointing out to Annexures 25 and 26.
Thereafter, the names of witnesses have been mentioned who had attended the
meeting and heard the speeches made thereat. These include P.W. 2 A.
Satyanarayana, P.W. 4, R. Narasimha Murhty Patnaik and P.W. 6, D. Rami Reddy.
Of these three witnesses, P.W. 2 and P:W. 4 were admittedly the counting
agents of the petitioner whereas P.W. 6 was a practicing Advocate of
Ichapuram. The above allegations were denied by the appellant respondent in
paragraph 6 of his written statement. The factum of existence of the posters
in front of the rostrum was not specifically denied but what was denied was
that the returned candidate or his agent had affixed those posters. The
photographs of the said public meeting of November 12, 1989 have been produced
at Exhs. A-23, A-24 and A-25. Exh. A-23 shows the Telugu Desam Leader N.T.
Rama Rao addressing the public meeting with the respondent standing by his
evasive and halting. R.W. 1 being the party Secretary and R.W. 2 being the
appellant himself the learned Trial Judge was disinclined to attach importance
to their evidence having regard to its poor quality and preferred the evidence
of P.Ws. 2, 4 and 6 particularly P.W. 6, an independent witness. As their
evidence found support from the posters and the message conveyed by them the
High Court though it safe to rely on their evidence in preference to that of
R.Ws. 1 and 2. We are, therefore, of the view that the allegation made by the
respondent-petitioner that the appellant respondent had addressed the meeting
at which he exhorted the voters in the name of religion to vote for him is
rightly accepted by the learned Trial Judge. It is also difficult for us to
believe, as was submitted by the learned Senior Counsel that there was no
reliable evidence to show that the appellant had addressed the meeting and
introduced the party leader as an incarnation of Lord Krishna. It would sound
unnatural that the respondent would not address the meeting arranged for
canvassing votes for him and would not introduce the party leader in glowing
terms.
of the Telugu Desam Party for Lok Sabha were found. The meeting was addressed
by Mr. N.T. Rama Rao and the respondent. The respondent did not disown
Annexures 25 and 26 put on front side of rostrum. On the other hand, the
respondent described N.T. Rama Rao as an incarnation of Lord Krishna and a
vote in favour of Telugu Desam Party would appease Lord Sri Krishna who would
shower prosperity for electors voting in favour of Telugu Desam Party.
Respondent further pleaded and exhorted electors in the name of religious
symbol and religion of the electors pointing out to Annexures 25 and 26.
Thereafter, the names of witnesses have been mentioned who had attended the
meeting and heard the speeches made thereat. These include P.W. 2 A.
Satyanarayana, P.W. 4, R. Narasimha Murhty Patnaik and P.W. 6, D. Rami Reddy.
Of these three witnesses, P.W. 2 and P:W. 4 were admittedly the counting
agents of the petitioner whereas P.W. 6 was a practicing Advocate of
Ichapuram. The above allegations were denied by the appellant respondent in
paragraph 6 of his written statement. The factum of existence of the posters
in front of the rostrum was not specifically denied but what was denied was
that the returned candidate or his agent had affixed those posters. The
photographs of the said public meeting of November 12, 1989 have been produced
at Exhs. A-23, A-24 and A-25. Exh. A-23 shows the Telugu Desam Leader N.T.
Rama Rao addressing the public meeting with the respondent standing by his
side. Exh. A-24 is also a photograph showing the entire rostrum with the said
leader and the appellant standing thereon. The posters showing N.T. Rama Rao
attired as Lord Krishna blowing a conch are visible in the front of the dias.
2\. The learned Judge in the High Court raised three issues for consideration.
The first was on the question whether the appellant herein caused through his
agents, men and party workers exhibition of Annexures 2 to 28 at various
places in No. 1 Ichapuram Assembly Constituency. So far as this question is
concerned, the learned Judge came to the conclusion that the evidence
tend(sic)d on behalf of the petitioner was not satisfactory to show that it
was the appellant and/or his party workers who had pasted the posters at
different places in the constituency. The learned Judge came to this
evasive and halting. R.W. 1 being the party Secretary and R.W. 2 being the
appellant himself the learned Trial Judge was disinclined to attach importance
to their evidence having regard to its poor quality and preferred the evidence
of P.Ws. 2, 4 and 6 particularly P.W. 6, an independent witness. As their
evidence found support from the posters and the message conveyed by them the
High Court though it safe to rely on their evidence in preference to that of
R.Ws. 1 and 2. We are, therefore, of the view that the allegation made by the
respondent-petitioner that the appellant respondent had addressed the meeting
at which he exhorted the voters in the name of religion to vote for him is
rightly accepted by the learned Trial Judge. It is also difficult for us to
believe, as was submitted by the learned Senior Counsel that there was no
reliable evidence to show that the appellant had addressed the meeting and
introduced the party leader as an incarnation of Lord Krishna. It would sound
unnatural that the respondent would not address the meeting arranged for
canvassing votes for him and would not introduce the party leader in glowing
terms.
of the Telugu Desam Party for Lok Sabha were found. The meeting was addressed
by Mr. N.T. Rama Rao and the respondent. The respondent did not disown
Annexures 25 and 26 put on front side of rostrum. On the other hand, the
respondent described N.T. Rama Rao as an incarnation of Lord Krishna and a
vote in favour of Telugu Desam Party would appease Lord Sri Krishna who would
shower prosperity for electors voting in favour of Telugu Desam Party.
Respondent further pleaded and exhorted electors in the name of religious
symbol and religion of the electors pointing out to Annexures 25 and 26.
Thereafter, the names of witnesses have been mentioned who had attended the
meeting and heard the speeches made thereat. These include P.W. 2 A.
Satyanarayana, P.W. 4, R. Narasimha Murhty Patnaik and P.W. 6, D. Rami Reddy.
Of these three witnesses, P.W. 2 and P:W. 4 were admittedly the counting
agents of the petitioner whereas P.W. 6 was a practicing Advocate of
Ichapuram. The above allegations were denied by the appellant respondent in
paragraph 6 of his written statement. The factum of existence of the posters
in front of the rostrum was not specifically denied but what was denied was
that the returned candidate or his agent had affixed those posters. The
photographs of the said public meeting of November 12, 1989 have been produced
at Exhs. A-23, A-24 and A-25. Exh. A-23 shows the Telugu Desam Leader N.T.
Rama Rao addressing the public meeting with the respondent standing by his
side. Exh. A-24 is also a photograph showing the entire rostrum with the said
leader and the appellant standing thereon. The posters showing N.T. Rama Rao
attired as Lord Krishna blowing a conch are visible in the front of the dias.
2\. The learned Judge in the High Court raised three issues for consideration.
The first was on the question whether the appellant herein caused through his
agents, men and party workers exhibition of Annexures 2 to 28 at various
places in No. 1 Ichapuram Assembly Constituency. So far as this question is
concerned, the learned Judge came to the conclusion that the evidence
tend(sic)d on behalf of the petitioner was not satisfactory to show that it
was the appellant and/or his party workers who had pasted the posters at
different places in the constituency. The learned Judge came to this
evasive and halting. R.W. 1 being the party Secretary and R.W. 2 being the
appellant himself the learned Trial Judge was disinclined to attach importance
to their evidence having regard to its poor quality and preferred the evidence
of P.Ws. 2, 4 and 6 particularly P.W. 6, an independent witness. As their
evidence found support from the posters and the message conveyed by them the
High Court though it safe to rely on their evidence in preference to that of
R.Ws. 1 and 2. We are, therefore, of the view that the allegation made by the
respondent-petitioner that the appellant respondent had addressed the meeting
at which he exhorted the voters in the name of religion to vote for him is
rightly accepted by the learned Trial Judge. It is also difficult for us to
believe, as was submitted by the learned Senior Counsel that there was no
reliable evidence to show that the appellant had addressed the meeting and
introduced the party leader as an incarnation of Lord Krishna. It would sound
unnatural that the respondent would not address the meeting arranged for
canvassing votes for him and would not introduce the party leader in glowing
terms.
