Gauhati High Court
Dhiraj Saikia vs The State Of Assam And 4 Ors on 1 November, 2019
                                                                       Page No.# 1/13
    GAHC010224532019
                           THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
      (HIGH COURT OF ASSAM, NAGALAND, MIZORAM AND ARUNACHAL PRADESH)
                              Case No. : WP(C) 6878/2019
             1:DHIRAJ SAIKIA
             S/O- SRI BHABA TARANI SAIKIA, R/O- H NO. 1, CHITRABON PATH,
             KALYANI NAGAR, KAHILIPARA- 19,
             DIST- KAMRUP (M),
             ASSAM
             VERSUS
             1:THE STATE OF ASSAM AND 4 ORS
             REP. BY THE CHIEF SECRETARY TO THE GOVT OF ASSAM,
             SECRETARIAT,
             DISPUR, GHY- 6
             2:THE SECRETARY TO THE GOVT OF ASSAM
              IRRIGATION DEPTT
              SECRETARIAT
the interest of administrative exigencies of the service concerned. It is also
settled position of law that the Court should not interfere with the order of
transfer considering the fact that in a transferable post an order of transfer
is a normal consequence.
43) On the facts and circumstances of the case noted above it is found that
the impugned Notification of transfer of the petitioner to Nalbari under No.
IGN(E)65/98/229-A dated 06.09.2019 (Annexure-4) and its partial modification
vide notification No. IGN(E)65/98/231 dated 09.09.2019 (Annexure-5), have been
issued by the competent authority and the Court is of the view that those
Notifications does not violate any mandatory and/or statutory rule nor suffer
from any arbitrariness. Moreover, the petitioner has also failed to establish
any element of malafide in issuing those Notifications transferring the
petitioner from Guwahati to Nalbari in the same cadre of Superintending
Engineer (Civil) in the Irrigation Department.
44) For the reasons above, this writ petition, being devoid of merit, stands
dismissed.
              SECRETARIAT
              DISPUR
              GHY- 6
             3:THE DEPUTY SECRETARY(E)
             TO THE GOVT OF ASSAM
              IRRIGATION DEPTT
              SECRETARIAT
              DISPUR
              GHY- 6
             4:SANJAY KUMAR MAHANTA
              SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER
             TEZPUR CIRCLE
              IRRIGATION DEPTT
              DIST- SONITPUR
             5:JOGEN BAISHYA
              S/O- LATE ADIT BAISHYA
                                                                                            Page No.# 2/13
                  R/O- SOBANCHAN
                  P.O- KHETRIHARDIA
                  P.S- HAZO
                  GHY- 78110
    Advocate for the Petitioner : MR P BORAH
    Advocate for the Respondent : SC, IRRIGATION
                                        BEFORE
                      HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE MANASH RANJAN PATHAK
                                                   ORDER
Date : 01-11-2019 Heard Mr. Pran Bora, learned counsel for the petitioner and
Mr. Dipankar Nath, learned Additional Senior Government Advocate, Assam for
the respondent No. 1. Also heard Mr. Narayan Upadhyay, learned Standing
Counsel, Irrigation Department, Assam for the respondent Nos. 2 and 3 and Mr.
Subhajit Banik, learned counsel for the respondent No. 4.
2) The question involved in this writ petition is whether the impugned order
of transfer of the petitioner issued vide Notification dated 06.09.2019
(Annexure-4 to the writ petition) is bad in law or not and whether it requires
any interference by the Writ Court or not.
3) The petitioner Sri Dhiraj Saikia belongs to the cadre of Superintending
Engineer in the Irrigation Department of the State and has been serving as
Director Design (Minor Irrigation) at Chandmari, Guwahati.
4) The State Government in the Irrigation Department, Establishment Branch
vide Notification No. IGN(E)65/98/229-A dated 06.09.2019 (Annexure-4) in the
interest of public service transferred the petitioner and posted him as
Superintending Engineer, North Kamrup Circle (Irrigation), Nalbari vice Sri
Jogen Baishya, Superintending Engineer, North Kamrup Circle (Irrigation),
respondent No.5, who has been transferred by the said notification dated
06.09.2019 as Deputy Chief Engineer (Minor Irrigation), Chandmari, Guwahati.
5) The respondents in the Irrigation Department, Establishment Branch by the
said Notification dated 06.09.2019 (Annexure-4) transferred the respondent No.
4, Sanjay Kumar Mahanta, Superintending Engineer, Tezpur Circle (Irrigation),
Tezpur and posted him as Director Design (Minor Irrigation) at Chandmari,
Guwahati in place of the petitioner.
Page No.# 3/13
6) The respondents in the Irrigation Department, Establishment Branch on
09.09.2019 issued another Notification under No. IGN(E)65/98/231 (Annexure-5)
partially modifying its earlier promotion/transfer notification dated
06.09.2019 (Annexure-4) and directed all the concerned officers, including the
officers involved in the said notification (Annexure-4), to hand over their
all present charges to their immediate Senior/Junior on local arrangement and
to proceed for joining in their new places of postings with immediate effect,
with the observation that other terms and conditions of the earlier
notification (Annexure-4) will remain same.
7) Being aggrieved with the said Notification dated 06.09.2019 (Annexure-4) of
the respondents in the Irrigation Department whereby he has been transferred
as Superintending Engineer, North Kamrup Circle (Irrigation), Nalbari vice Sri
Jogen Baishya, the respondent No. 5 and transferring Sri Sanjay Kumar Mahanta,
Superintending Engineer, Tezpur Circle (Irrigation), Tezpur, the respondent
No. 4 and posting him as Director Design (Minor Irrigation) at Chandmari,
Guwahati, in his place, the petitioner has preferred this writ petition.
8) The petitioner is also aggrieved with the Notification dated 09.09.2019
(Annexure-5) of the respondents in the Irrigation Department whereby the
earlier Notification dated 06.09.2019 (Annexure-4) of promotion/transfer was
partially modified by which all the concerned officers involved in the said
Notification (Annexure-4) have been directed to hand over their all present
charges to their immediate Senior/Junior on local arrangement and to proceed
for joining in their new places of postings.
9) Petitioner's prayers herein are for issuance of Writ of Certiorari and to
set aside and quash both the Notifications No. IGN(E)65/98/229-A dated
06.09.2019 (Annexure-4) and No. IGN(E)65/98/231 dated 09.09.2019 (Annexure-5),
declaring them to be void and illegal and for issuance of Writ of Mandamus
directing the State respondents not to act on those two notifications in terms
of the recent seniority list in their cadre and by following the mandate of
law as provided under the Constitution of India as well as service
jurisprudence.
10) In the interim petitioner has prayed for stay/suspension of the operation
of both the impugned notifications dated 06.09.2019 and 09.09.2019 (Annexures
- 4 and 5) respectively.
11) On submission of the petitioner that the Departmental Promotion Committee
has already held necessary consideration for his promotion to the post of
Additional Chief Engineer in the Irrigation Department of the State and that
because of the order of restraint passed by the Court in WP(C) No. 5870/2016
not to declare the final result without the leave of the Court, for which the
Page No.# 4/13 result of such recommendation of the DPC to the said post of
Additional Chief Engineer could not be declared, therefore, at that stage the
impugned notification of his transfer dated 06.09.2019 as Superintending
Engineer to Nalbari is not warranted; the Court by order dated 13.09.2019 in
this proceeding while allowing the Standing counsel, Irrigation Department to
place the necessary instructions, in the interim stayed the impugned order of
transfer of the petitioner as Superintending Engineer, North Kamrup Circle
(Irrigation), Nalbari and the said interim order is in force till date.
12) The State respondent Nos. 1, 2 and 3 have filed a common affidavit-in-
opposition in the matter to which the petitioner has filed his reply.
Respondent Irrigation department has placed the relevant record.
13) The respondent No. 4 entered appearance in the matter through his engaged
counsel and through him, said respondent made his oral submission, where the
petitioner replied orally.
14) The contention of the petitioner is that he belongs to reserve category
(Schedule Caste) and since his 1st promotion in the year 2001, he is all along
placed above the respondent No. 4 in seniority. He stated that in the
provisional seniority list of Superintending Engineers (Civil), Irrigation
Department, he is much senior to the respondent No. 4. It is submitted by him
that the State respondents committed illegality by issuing the impugned
Notification dated 06.09.2019 as by the same the respondents in the Irrigation
Department want to accommodate the respondent No. 4, for which the petitioner
has been transferred to Nalbari and in his place, posted the respondent No. 4
as Director Design (Minor Irrigation) at Chandmari, Guwahati transferring the
said respondent from Tezpur.
15) Another contention of the petitioner is that said respondent No. 4 has
been promoted to the cadre of Superintending Engineer in the Irrigation
Department of the State only on 07.09.2018 in terms of a Notification issued
by the respondents in the Irrigation Department on the said date (Annexure-6)
by which he was posted in the said capacity at Tezpur Circle (I), Tezpur
against an existing vacancy. Petitioner submitted that as per Government
Guideline on transfer in the State, officials holding transferable post shall
not be transferred from one station to another before completion of three
years, apart from exceptional circumstances, without the prior approval of the
Chief Minister, whereas in the present case the respondent No. 4 has been
transferred from Tezpur to Guwahati on completion of one year only, though his
such transfer was not on any exceptional circumstances. Therefore, the
petitioner submitted that the impugned transfer of the petitioner in terms of
said Notification dated 06.09.2019 to accommodate respondent No. 4 is bad in
law.
Page No.# 5/13
16) It is also contended by the petitioner that by Notification dated
29.01.2014 (Annexure-1) respondents in the Irrigation Department promoted him
as Superintending Engineer (Civil) and posted him as Director Design (Minor
Irrigation) at Guwahati against existing vacancy. It is submitted that after
retirement of one Sri Tarini Kumar Sarma, Additional Chief Engineer
(Monitoring and Investigation) from service on 30.06.2016 on attaining the age
of superannuation, the petitioner is holding the charge of the Additional
Chief Engineer (Monitoring and Investigation) in the Irrigation Department in
terms of its communication dated 17.06.2016 (Annexure-2) for more than 3
(three) years and the impugned notification dated 06.09.2019 pertaining to his
transfer to Nalbari as Superintending Engineer (Civil) of the respondent
Department is not in the same capacity and that he is still holding the post
of Additional Chief Engineer (Monitoring and Investigation) in the respondent
Department. As such, according to the petitioner both the impugned
Notifications dated 06.09.2019 and 09.09.2019 are in direct contravention to
the rights conferred upon him under Article 16 of the Constitution and that
during pendency of the present proceeding, if junior to the petitioner in the
cadre, i.e., the respondent No. 3 is allowed to take his place pursuant to
those notifications dated 06.09.2019, he shall suffer irreparable loss and
injury.
17) The petitioner's further contention is that in the meanwhile duly
constituted Departmental Promotion Committee of the respondent Irrigation
Department in its meeting held on 23.07.2019 have already recommended the
petitioner for his promotion to the vacant post of Additional Chief Engineer
(Civil) from the rank of Superintending Engineer (Civil) and therefore, as he
has a fair chance for his promotion to the next higher post of Additional
Chief Engineer, there is no reason for his transfer as Superintending Engineer
(Civil) to Nalbari in the Irrigation Department of the State.
18) It is stated that the respondent No. 4 with two others preferred WP(C) No.
5575/2014 wherein the present petitioner and the respondent No. 5 with other
private parties and the concerned official authorities are party respondents
and that the Court by order dated 04.08.2016 passed in said WP(C) No.
5575/2014 granted liberty to the State respondents to proceed with the
departmental promotion committee for promotion to the post of Additional Chief
Engineer, Monitoring and Investigation, Irrigation Department of the State but
restraint them from publication of the final result without the leave of the
Court. Therefore, though the concerned departmental promotion committee in its
meeting held on 23.07.2019 recommended the petitioner for his promotion to the
post of Additional Chief Engineer, Monitoring and Investigation, Irrigation
Department but because of said order of restraint dated 04.08.2016 passed in
WP(C) No. 5575/2014 final result for said promotion has not been published. As
the publication of the result of his promotion to the post of Additional Chief
Page No.# 6/13 Engineer, Monitoring and Investigation, Irrigation Department
is awaited on being recommended by the DPC, therefore, the petitioner
submitted that respondents committed illegality in transferring him to Nalbari
by the impugned Notifications dated 06.09.2019 and 09.09.2019.
19) It is also stated by the petitioner that the respondent No. 4 with two
others filed Writ Petition being WP(C) No. 5419/2019 against the petitioner
and other Superintending Engineers (Civil) of the Irrigation Department
relating to fixation of their inter se seniority and consequential promotion
to the post of Additional Chief Engineer (Civil) in the Irrigation Department,
which is pending for disposal. But as he has filed this petition directly
challenging the impugned Notifications dated 06.09.2019 and 09.09.2019,
without raising grievances at Departmental level, the respondent Irrigation
Department on 26.09.2019 issued Show Cause Notice to the petitioner
(Annexure-2 to the affidavit in reply of the petitioner), whereas no such
action has been initiated by the said authority against the respondent No. 4
and others.
20) From the affidavit of the State respondents filed on 24.09.2019, wherein
the official respondents stated that the respondent No. 4 with two others
filed WP(C) No. 5419/2019 challenging the recommendation of the DPC held on
23.07.2019 including the recommendation for promotion of the petitioner to the
post of Additional Chief Engineer (Civil) Irrigation, but as stated in it, the
petitioner denied the fact that the Court interfered with the recommendations
of the said DPC dated 23.07.2019 and also rebutted that the apprehension of
the official respondents regarding requirement of considerable period for
final disposal of said writ petition. Petitioner stated that in WP(C) No.
5870/2016 the Court granted liberty to the State to proceed with the promotion
exercise but restrained it to declare the final result without the leave of
the Court. The petitioner also stated that the State respondents in its
affidavit made wrong and false statement that one Hemanta Kumar Mili, has also
been recommended for promotion to the next higher post by the said DPC dated
23.07.2019, who has also been transferred by the impugned Notification dated
06.09.2019 from Guwahati to Jorhat has already joined his post. In this regard
petitioner placed that as the IPR of said Hemanta Kumar Mili was not placed,
he was not recommended for promotion.
21) According to the petitioner all these actions of the official respondents
transferring him to Nalbari by the impugned notifications establish malafide
against him for which he submitted that those two notifications should be set
aside and quashed.
22) The contention of the official respondents are that the petitioner has
been posted at Guwahati for last more than six and half years with regard to
which the petitioner is silent. It is also Page No.# 7/13 contended by them
that the respondent No. 4 challenged the promotion of the petitioner as well
as that of respondent No. 5 and in WP(C) No. 5419/2019 said respondent No. 4
challenged the recommendation of the DPC dated 23.07.2019 and adjudication of
all these matters might require considerable period as the subject matter of
those petitions relate to reservation in promotion involving question of law.
23) Mr. Banik learned counsel appearing for respondent No. 4 with regard to
the Guideline pertaining to transfer of Government officials in the State,
holding transferable post from one station to another without completion of 3
(three) years in one station, without the prior approval of the Chief
Minister, apart from exceptional circumstances, mentioned by the petitioner,
relying on a Division Bench judgement of this court in the case of Nirrhandra
Thaosen -Vs- State of Assam and Another, reported in 2007 (3) GLT 934
submitted that such Guideline do not confer any legally enforceable right on
the person against whom such an order is passed.
24) Mr. Banik, learned counsel submitted that in pursuance to the impugned
Notification dated 06.09.2019, Annexure-4 to the petition, respondent No.4 on
07.09.2019 submitted his Joining Report before the Director Design (MI),
Office of the Chief Engineer, Irrigation, Assam, Guwahati-781003 intimating
the authorities concerned.
25) It is also stated by him that as the petitioner did not hand over charge
to him and preferred this writ petition for stay of the Government Orders
(impugned notifications), as such said respondent No.4 on 24.09.2019 informed
the Secretary to the Government of Assam in the Irrigation Department,
Guwahat-6 about the same, requesting the said authority to instruct him
accordingly, as in terms of said Notifications dated 06.09.2019 and 09.09.2019
he has to hand over his charge of Superintending Engineer, Tezpur Circle
(Irrigation), Tezpur to the Engineer Sri Jyoti Prasad Khataniar on his
promotion and also informed the Chief Engineer, Irrigation, Assam, Guwahati in
that regard. Accordingly, the State Government in the Irrigation Department,
Establishment Branch by its Notification No. IGN(E)67/2014/109 dated
30.09.2019 partially modified its earlier Notification No. IGN(E)65/98/229
dated 06.09.2019 (Annexure-4) and posted said Jyoti Prasad Khataniar,
Executive Engineer, Kaliabar CAD Division (Irrigation), Jakhalabandha, Nagaon
as Superintending Engineer, Nagaon Circle (Irrigation), Nagaon on his
promotion with immediate effect and until further order, directing him to take
over charge of said post from Sri Pradip Kumar Nath, Superintending Engineer,
on his retirement.
26) The respondent No. 4 placed his said joining report dated 07.09.2019, his
said communication dated 24.09.2019 and the Notification of the State
Government in the Irrigation Page No.# 8/13 Department, Establishment Branch
dated 30.09.2019 before the Court.
27) Both Mr. N. Upadhyay, learned Standing Counsel, Irrigation Department, for
the respondent Nos. 1 to 3 and Mr. S. Banik, learned counsel for the
respondent No. 4 submitted that as the petitioner failed to establish that the
impugned Notifications dated 06.09.2019 (Annexure-4) and 09.09.2019
(Annexure-5) transferring him from Guwahati to Nalbari is vitiated by malafide
or that those are in violation of statutory rules, this writ petition should
be dismissed in limine and the interim order passed earlier on 13.09.2019
should be vacated forthwith.
28) From the Notification dated 29.01.2014 (Annexure-1 to the writ petition)
it is seen that while the petitioner was serving as an Executive Engineer in
the Office of the Director Design (MI), Chandmari, Guwahati the State
respondents in the Irrigation Department promoted him to the cadre of
Superintending Engineer and posted him as Director Design (MI), Chandmari,
Guwahati. Thereafter, vide communication dated 17.06.2016, the respondents in
the Irrigation Department directed the petitioner to takeover the charge of
Office of the Additional Chief Engineer (Monitoring & Investigation) as an
additional charge from Tarini Kumar Sarma, Addl. C.E. (M&I) on his retirement
on 30.06.2016. From the Provisional Seniority of the Superintending Engineer
(Civil), Irrigation Department of the State, issued by the said Department
vide Notifications dated 13.12.2018 (Annexure-7 to the writ petition) and
dated 12.03.2019 (placed before the Court by the petitioner) it is seen that
in the same petitioner is placed above the respondent No.4, where the
respondent No. 5 is senior to the petitioner.
29) From the copy of the Order dated 02.08.2019 passed by the Court in WP(C)
No. 5419/2019 annexed by the petitioner in his petition (Annexure-8 to the
petition) it is seen that, the same is preferred by one Sri Pradip Kumar
Baruah with Debajyoti Choudhury and the present respondent No. 4 pertaining to
the promotion to the cadre of Additional Chief Engineer in the Irrigation
Department of the State wherein the present petitioner and the present
respondent No. 5 are respondents along with others. From the perusal of said
Order dated 02.08.2019 it is also seen that the Court found that said matter
relates to fixation of inter se seniority in the cadre of Superintendent
(Civil) in the Irrigation Department of the State and consequential promotion
to the post of Additional Chief Engineer (Civil) in the said Department,
wherein two other Writ petitions, being WP(C) Nos. 5575/2014 and 5870/2016
have been mentioned.
30) In WP(C) No. 5575/2014, present respondent No. 4 challenged the Gradation
List dated 19.08.2014 of Executive Engineers (Civil) in the Irrigation
Department, wherein the Court on Page No.# 9/13 07.11.2014 observed that
subsequent promotion to the rank of Superintending Engineer shall be subject
to the outcome of said writ petition.
31) In WP(C) No. 5870/2016, present petitioner and respondent No. 5 with
another challenged the legality and validity of the Office Memorandum dated
03.08.2016 of the Department of Welfare of Plains, Tribes and Backward Classes
of the State.
32) It is to be noted herein that the present petitioner and respondent No. 5
with another in their WP(C) No. 5870/2016 filed an Interlocutory Application
on 03.10.2016 being I.A. (Civil) No. 1634/2016 praying before the Court for a
direction to the respondents therein not to hold the Departmental Promotion
Committee with regard to promotion for the post of Additional Chief Engineer,
Irrigation Department till disposal of said WP(C) No. 5870/2016 and the Court
on 04.10.2016 in said I.A. (Civil) No. 1634/2016, in the interim directed that
it will be open for the respondent authority to proceed with the Departmental
Promotion Committee, but shall not issue the final result without the leave of
the Court and the said order dated 04.10.2016 is still in force.
33) Perused the record of File No. IGN(E)65/98 of the Irrigation Department,
Establishment Branch of the State wherein the impugned Notification Nos.
IGN(E)65/98/229-A dated 06.09.2019 (Annexure-4) and IGN(E)65/98/231 dated
09.09.2019 (Annexure-5) were issued.
Page No.# 10/13
34) It is seen that a meeting of the Selection Board (DPC) of the Irrigation
Department for promotion of officers from the rank of Executive Engineer
(Civil) to Superintending Engineer (Civil) was held on 21.08.2019 wherein
seven such Executive Engineers (Civil) were selected for promotion. While
considering their promotional posting the said Department also considered the
cases of those Superintending Engineers (Civil) who have completed more than
three years in their present place of posting along with transfer of other
Superintending Engineers (Civil) of said department. In that process
Irrigation Department in the Establishment Branch by common Notification under
Nos. IGN(E)65/98/229 and IGN(E)65/98/229-A, both dated 06.09.2019 (Annexure-4)
promoted seven Executive Engineers (Civil) to Superintending Engineers (Civil)
and transferred nine Superintending Engineers (Civil) respectively, indicating
place of posting of all those 16 (Sixteen) (7+9) Superintending Engineers
(Civil). Record reveals that the respondent No. 5 has been serving as
Superintending Engineer, in North Kamrup Circle (Irrigation) at Nalbari since
August 2014 whereas the petitioner since much before his promotion to the
cadre of Superintending Engineer (Civil) in January 2014, i.e. from the days
he rendered service in the cadre of Executive Engineer (Civil), he has been
posted in the Office of the Director Design (MI) at Chandmari, Guwahati.
However, the petitioner is totally silent since how long he has been posted at
Guwahati.
35) The three writ petitions noted above, i.e., WP(C) No. 5575/2014, WP(C) No.
5870/2016 and WP(C) No. 5419/2019 are presently pending for disposal and those
matters relate to inter-se seniority and consequential promotion of the
parties involved therein, including promotion of reserved category personnel.
36) The Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Union of India -Vs- S.L. Abbas,
reported in (1993) 4 SCC 357 have settled that executive instructions or
office memorandums or standing orders issued by the Government pertaining to
transfer are in the nature of guidelines and such guidelines however, does not
confer upon the Government employee a legally enforceable right and that those
guidelines does not have any statutory force. A Division Bench of this court
in the case of Nirrhandra Thaosen
-Vs- State of Assam and Another, reported in 2007 (3) GLT 934 have held that such guideline do not confer any legally enforceable right on the person against whom such an order is passed. As such the claim of the petitioner that guideline of transfer placed by him contending that it was not followed in transferring the respondent No. 4, is not sustainable. 
37) The petitioner, the respondent Nos. 4 and 5 belong to the same cadre of
Superintending Engineer (Civil) in the Irrigation Department of the State
holding transferable post and therefore, they are liable to be transferred
from one place to the other. It is not the case of the petitioner that he Page
No.# 11/13 does not belongs to the cadre of Superintending Engineer (Civil) in
the Irrigation Department of the State. On his promotion to the cadre of
Superintending Engineer (Civil) in the Irrigation Department, he was posted on
promotion as Director of Design (Minor Irrigation) at Guwahati against an
existing vacancy. Moreover, on retirement of Additional Chief Engineer
(Monitoring and Investigation) on 30.06.2016, by Annexure-2, communication
dated 17.06.2016 respondents in the Irrigation Department allowed the
petitioner to take over the additional charge of Office of the Additional
Chief Engineer (M & I), which is in addition to his posting of Director of
Design (Minor Irrigation). The petitioner has been posted at Guwahati much
prior to his promotion to the cadre of Superintending Engineer (Civil) in
January, 2014; whereas the respondent No.5 was posted at Nalbari after his
promotion to the cadre of Superintending Engineer (Civil) since August, 2014.
As such both the petitioner and the respondent No. 5 have continued to be
posted at their respective places for the last several years and therefore
they have no vested right to remain posted at one place. Since they hold
transferable posts they are liable to be transferred from one place to the
other.
38) For those employees holding transferable posts, it is a matter for the
appropriate authority to decide who should be transferred where and it is
settled that unless the order of transfer is vitiated by mala fide or is made
in violation of any statutory provisions, the Court cannot interfere with it.
In Shilpi Bose (Mrs) -Vs- State of Bihar, reported in 1991 Supp (2) SCC 659,
the Hon'ble Supreme Court held that the Courts should not interfere with a
transfer order which is made in public interest and for administrative reasons
unless the transfer orders are made in violation of any mandatory statutory
rule or on the ground of mala fide. A government servant holding a
transferable post has no vested right to remain posted at one place or the
other, he is liable to be transferred from one place to the other. Transfer
orders issued by the competent authority do not violate any of his legal
rights. Even if a transfer order is passed in violation of executive
instructions or orders, the courts ordinarily should not interfere with the
order instead the affected party should approach the higher authorities in the
department. If the courts continue to interfere with day-to-day transfer
orders issued by the government and its subordinate authorities, there will be
complete chaos in the administration which would not be conducive to public
interest.
39) The petitioner contended that official respondents issued the impugned
notification dated 06.09.2019 transferring him to Nalbari so as to accommodate
the respondent No. 4, who has filed case challenging the gradation list and
consequent promotion to the post of Executive Engineer/Superintending Engineer
and recommendation to the post of Additional Chief Engineer made Page No.#
12/13 by the Departmental Promotion Committee and for which the impugned order
of the petitioner has been issued malafide. Petitioner also contended that the
impugned notification of transfer is arbitrary, considering the fact that said
respondent No. 4 is junior to him. From the perusal of the relevant
departmental record it is seen that by the impugned Notification dated
06.09.2019, the respondents in the Irrigation Department of the State
transferred all together 16 (sixteen) of its Superintending Engineers (Civil)
posting them at differrent places of the State, including 7 (seven) SE's on
promotion and 9 (nine) SE's on transfer who have completed more than 3 (three)
years in the same place of posting, which includes the petitioner and the
respondent No. 5 and others. The petitioner cannot reasonably say that he
should have been spared allowing him to be posted at Guwahati and some other
officer should have been transferred. Considering the entire aspect, this
Court is of the view that the petitioner failed to place any firm basis to
substantiate the case of malice or malafide against the respondents in passing
the impugned notification of transfer dated 06.09.2019. Moreover, it also does
not appear to the Court that the petitioner has been moved out just to get rid
of him and the impugned notification of transfer was passed malafide by taking
the opportunity to transfer the respondent No. 4 from Tezpur to Guwahati.
Considering the respective contentions of the parties and on perusing the
record, it appears to this Court that the petitioner could not substantiate
that the impugned notification of transfer was passed malafide against him for
an oblique purpose so as to accommodate the respondent No. 4. Therefore, the
challenge to transfer by the petitioner on such vague allegations of malafide
is not sustainable.
40) Though the petitioner contended that he has been replaced by a junior
officer, i.e. respondent No.4, but the Gradation List placed by the petitioner
goes to show that the date of appointment and date of joining of the
respondent No. 4 in the Irrigation Department is of 04.07.1985 and 18.07.1985
respectively, whereas the petitioner was appointed in the Irrigation
Department on 29.03.1989 and he joined his service on 31.03.1989. However,
petitioner was promoted earlier than the respondent No. 4 against the reserved
vacancy. The petitioner, the respondent No.4 and the respondent No.5 belong to
the same cadre of Superintending Engineer (Civil) in the Irrigation Department
of the State, which is one cadre and for better administration and in
exigencies of service, the authority can always transfer the incumbents from
the same cadre from one place to another, one district to another and by the
impugned transfer, neither the petitioner is going to lose his seniority
position in the cadre of Superintending Engineer (Civil) in the Irrigation
Department nor seniority position of the private respondent Nos. 4 and 5 in
the said cadre of Superintending Engineer (Civil) in the respondent Department
are going to be altered.
Page No.# 13/13
41) It is well settled and most often reiterated by the Hon'ble Apex Court
that no government servant or employee of a public undertaking has any legal
right to be posted forever at any one particular place since transfer of a
particular employee appointed to the class or category of transferable posts
from one place to other is not only an incident, but a condition of service,
necessary too in public interest and efficiency in the public administration.
42) Unless an order of transfer is shown to be an outcome of malafide exercise
of power or stated to be in violation of statutory provisions prohibiting any
such transfer, it is settled that the Court cannot interfere with such orders
as a matter of routine, as though it is an appellate authority substituting
its own decision for that of the management, as against such orders passed in
the interest of administrative exigencies of the service concerned. It is also
settled position of law that the Court should not interfere with the order of
transfer considering the fact that in a transferable post an order of transfer
is a normal consequence.
43) On the facts and circumstances of the case noted above it is found that
the impugned Notification of transfer of the petitioner to Nalbari under No.
IGN(E)65/98/229-A dated 06.09.2019 (Annexure-4) and its partial modification
vide notification No. IGN(E)65/98/231 dated 09.09.2019 (Annexure-5), have been
issued by the competent authority and the Court is of the view that those
Notifications does not violate any mandatory and/or statutory rule nor suffer
from any arbitrariness. Moreover, the petitioner has also failed to establish
any element of malafide in issuing those Notifications transferring the
petitioner from Guwahati to Nalbari in the same cadre of Superintending
Engineer (Civil) in the Irrigation Department.
44) For the reasons above, this writ petition, being devoid of merit, stands
dismissed.
45) The interim order passed earlier in this petition on 13.09.2019, staying
the transfer of the petitioner as Superintending Engineer, North Kamrup Circle
(Irrigation), Nalbari stands vacated.
JUDGE Comparing Assistant
the interest of administrative exigencies of the service concerned. It is also
settled position of law that the Court should not interfere with the order of
transfer considering the fact that in a transferable post an order of transfer
is a normal consequence.
43) On the facts and circumstances of the case noted above it is found that
the impugned Notification of transfer of the petitioner to Nalbari under No.
IGN(E)65/98/229-A dated 06.09.2019 (Annexure-4) and its partial modification
vide notification No. IGN(E)65/98/231 dated 09.09.2019 (Annexure-5), have been
issued by the competent authority and the Court is of the view that those
Notifications does not violate any mandatory and/or statutory rule nor suffer
from any arbitrariness. Moreover, the petitioner has also failed to establish
any element of malafide in issuing those Notifications transferring the
petitioner from Guwahati to Nalbari in the same cadre of Superintending
Engineer (Civil) in the Irrigation Department.
44) For the reasons above, this writ petition, being devoid of merit, stands
dismissed.
              SECRETARIAT
              DISPUR
              GHY- 6
             3:THE DEPUTY SECRETARY(E)
             TO THE GOVT OF ASSAM
              IRRIGATION DEPTT
              SECRETARIAT
              DISPUR
              GHY- 6
             4:SANJAY KUMAR MAHANTA
              SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER
             TEZPUR CIRCLE
              IRRIGATION DEPTT
              DIST- SONITPUR
             5:JOGEN BAISHYA
              S/O- LATE ADIT BAISHYA
                                                                                            Page No.# 2/13
                  R/O- SOBANCHAN
                  P.O- KHETRIHARDIA
                  P.S- HAZO
the interest of administrative exigencies of the service concerned. It is also
settled position of law that the Court should not interfere with the order of
transfer considering the fact that in a transferable post an order of transfer
is a normal consequence.
43) On the facts and circumstances of the case noted above it is found that
the impugned Notification of transfer of the petitioner to Nalbari under No.
IGN(E)65/98/229-A dated 06.09.2019 (Annexure-4) and its partial modification
vide notification No. IGN(E)65/98/231 dated 09.09.2019 (Annexure-5), have been
issued by the competent authority and the Court is of the view that those
Notifications does not violate any mandatory and/or statutory rule nor suffer
from any arbitrariness. Moreover, the petitioner has also failed to establish
any element of malafide in issuing those Notifications transferring the
petitioner from Guwahati to Nalbari in the same cadre of Superintending
Engineer (Civil) in the Irrigation Department.
44) For the reasons above, this writ petition, being devoid of merit, stands
dismissed.
              SECRETARIAT
              DISPUR
              GHY- 6
             3:THE DEPUTY SECRETARY(E)
             TO THE GOVT OF ASSAM
              IRRIGATION DEPTT
              SECRETARIAT
              DISPUR
              GHY- 6
             4:SANJAY KUMAR MAHANTA
              SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER
             TEZPUR CIRCLE
              IRRIGATION DEPTT
              DIST- SONITPUR
             5:JOGEN BAISHYA
              S/O- LATE ADIT BAISHYA
                                                                                            Page No.# 2/13
                  R/O- SOBANCHAN
                  P.O- KHETRIHARDIA
                  P.S- HAZO
the interest of administrative exigencies of the service concerned. It is also
settled position of law that the Court should not interfere with the order of
transfer considering the fact that in a transferable post an order of transfer
is a normal consequence.
43) On the facts and circumstances of the case noted above it is found that
the impugned Notification of transfer of the petitioner to Nalbari under No.
IGN(E)65/98/229-A dated 06.09.2019 (Annexure-4) and its partial modification
vide notification No. IGN(E)65/98/231 dated 09.09.2019 (Annexure-5), have been
issued by the competent authority and the Court is of the view that those
Notifications does not violate any mandatory and/or statutory rule nor suffer
from any arbitrariness. Moreover, the petitioner has also failed to establish
any element of malafide in issuing those Notifications transferring the
petitioner from Guwahati to Nalbari in the same cadre of Superintending
Engineer (Civil) in the Irrigation Department.
44) For the reasons above, this writ petition, being devoid of merit, stands
dismissed.
              SECRETARIAT
              DISPUR
              GHY- 6
             3:THE DEPUTY SECRETARY(E)
             TO THE GOVT OF ASSAM
              IRRIGATION DEPTT
              SECRETARIAT
              DISPUR
              GHY- 6
             4:SANJAY KUMAR MAHANTA
              SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER
             TEZPUR CIRCLE
              IRRIGATION DEPTT
              DIST- SONITPUR
             5:JOGEN BAISHYA
              S/O- LATE ADIT BAISHYA
                                                                                            Page No.# 2/13
                  R/O- SOBANCHAN
                  P.O- KHETRIHARDIA
                  P.S- HAZO
                  GHY- 78110
    Advocate for the Petitioner : MR P BORAH
    Advocate for the Respondent : SC, IRRIGATION
                                        BEFORE
                      HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE MANASH RANJAN PATHAK
                                                   ORDER
Date : 01-11-2019 Heard Mr. Pran Bora, learned counsel for the petitioner and
Mr. Dipankar Nath, learned Additional Senior Government Advocate, Assam for
the respondent No. 1. Also heard Mr. Narayan Upadhyay, learned Standing
Counsel, Irrigation Department, Assam for the respondent Nos. 2 and 3 and Mr.
Subhajit Banik, learned counsel for the respondent No. 4.
the interest of administrative exigencies of the service concerned. It is also
settled position of law that the Court should not interfere with the order of
transfer considering the fact that in a transferable post an order of transfer
is a normal consequence.
43) On the facts and circumstances of the case noted above it is found that
the impugned Notification of transfer of the petitioner to Nalbari under No.
IGN(E)65/98/229-A dated 06.09.2019 (Annexure-4) and its partial modification
vide notification No. IGN(E)65/98/231 dated 09.09.2019 (Annexure-5), have been
issued by the competent authority and the Court is of the view that those
Notifications does not violate any mandatory and/or statutory rule nor suffer
from any arbitrariness. Moreover, the petitioner has also failed to establish
any element of malafide in issuing those Notifications transferring the
petitioner from Guwahati to Nalbari in the same cadre of Superintending
Engineer (Civil) in the Irrigation Department.
44) For the reasons above, this writ petition, being devoid of merit, stands
dismissed.
              SECRETARIAT
              DISPUR
              GHY- 6
             3:THE DEPUTY SECRETARY(E)
             TO THE GOVT OF ASSAM
              IRRIGATION DEPTT
              SECRETARIAT
              DISPUR
              GHY- 6
             4:SANJAY KUMAR MAHANTA
              SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER
             TEZPUR CIRCLE
              IRRIGATION DEPTT
              DIST- SONITPUR
             5:JOGEN BAISHYA
              S/O- LATE ADIT BAISHYA
                                                                                            Page No.# 2/13
                  R/O- SOBANCHAN
                  P.O- KHETRIHARDIA
                  P.S- HAZO
                  GHY- 78110
    Advocate for the Petitioner : MR P BORAH
    Advocate for the Respondent : SC, IRRIGATION
                                        BEFORE
                      HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE MANASH RANJAN PATHAK
                                                   ORDER
Date : 01-11-2019 Heard Mr. Pran Bora, learned counsel for the petitioner and
Mr. Dipankar Nath, learned Additional Senior Government Advocate, Assam for
the respondent No. 1. Also heard Mr. Narayan Upadhyay, learned Standing
Counsel, Irrigation Department, Assam for the respondent Nos. 2 and 3 and Mr.
Subhajit Banik, learned counsel for the respondent No. 4.
the interest of administrative exigencies of the service concerned. It is also
settled position of law that the Court should not interfere with the order of
transfer considering the fact that in a transferable post an order of transfer
is a normal consequence.
43) On the facts and circumstances of the case noted above it is found that
the impugned Notification of transfer of the petitioner to Nalbari under No.
IGN(E)65/98/229-A dated 06.09.2019 (Annexure-4) and its partial modification
vide notification No. IGN(E)65/98/231 dated 09.09.2019 (Annexure-5), have been
issued by the competent authority and the Court is of the view that those
Notifications does not violate any mandatory and/or statutory rule nor suffer
from any arbitrariness. Moreover, the petitioner has also failed to establish
any element of malafide in issuing those Notifications transferring the
petitioner from Guwahati to Nalbari in the same cadre of Superintending
Engineer (Civil) in the Irrigation Department.
44) For the reasons above, this writ petition, being devoid of merit, stands
dismissed.
