Central Government Act
Section 28 in the Customs Act, 1962
1[28. Notice for payment of duties, interest, etc.—
(1) When any duty has not been levied or has been short-levied or erroneously
refunded, or when any interest payable has not been paid, part paid or
erroneously refunded, the proper officer may,—
(a) in the case of any import made by any individual for his personal use or
by Government or by any educational, research or charitable institution or
hospital, within one year;
(b) in any other case, within six months, from the relevant date, serve notice
on the person chargeable with the duty or interest which has not been levied
or charged or which has been so short-levied or part paid or to whom the
refund has erroneously been made, requiring him to show cause why he should
not pay the amount specified in the notice: Provided that where any duty has
not been levied or has been short-levied or the interest has not been charged
or has been part paid or the duty or interest has been erroneously refunded by
reason of collusion or any wilful mis-statement or suppression of facts by the
importer or the exporter or the agent or employee of the importer or exporter,
the provisions of this sub-section shall have effect as if for the words “one
year” and “six months”, the words “five years” were substituted: 2[***]
interest was not paid or was part paid or the duty or interest was erroneously
refunded by reason of collusion or any wilful mis-statement or suppression of
facts by the importer or the exporter or the agent or employee of the importer
or exporter. Explanation 2.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared
that the interest under section 28AB shall be payable on the amount paid by
the person under this sub-section and also on the amount of short-payment of
duty, if any, as may be determined by the proper officer, but for this sub-
section.
(2C) The provisions of sub-section (2B) shall not apply to any case where the
duty or the interest had become payable or ought to have been paid before the
date on which the Finance Bill, 2001 receives the assent of the President*.]
(3) For the purposes of sub-section (1), the expression “relevant date”
means,—
(a) in case where duty is not levied, or interest is not charged, the date on
which the proper officer makes an order for the clearance of the goods;
(b) in a case where duty is provisionally assessed under section 18, the date
year” and “six months”, the words “five years” were substituted: 2[***]
Explanation.—Where the service of the notice is stayed by an order of a court,
the period of such stay shall be excluded in computing the aforesaid period of
one year or six months or five years, as the case may be. 3[(1A) When any duty
has not been levied or has been short-levied or the interest has not been
charged or has been part paid or the duty or interest has been erroneously
refunded by reason of collusion or any wilful misstatement or suppression of
facts by the importer or the exporter or the agent or employee of the importer
or exporter, to whom a notice is served under the proviso to sub­-section (1)
by the proper officer, may pay duty in full or in part as may be accepted by
him, and the interest payable thereon under section 28AB and penalty equal to
twenty-five per cent. of the duty specified in the notice or the duty so
accepted by such person within thirty days of the receipt of the notice.]
(2) The proper officer, after considering the representation, if any, made by
the person on whom notice is served under sub-section (1), shall determine the
amount of duty or interest due from such person (not being in excess of the
amount specified in the notice) and thereupon such person shall pay the amount
so determined: 4[Provided that if such person has paid the duty in full
together with interest and penalty under sub-section (1A), the proceedings in
respect of such person and other persons to whom notice is served under sub-
section (1) shall, without prejudice to the provisions of sections 135, 135A
and 140, be deemed to be conclusive as to the matters stated therein: Provided
further that, if such person has paid duty in part, interest and penalty under
sub-section (1A), the proper officer shall determine the amount of duty or
interest not being in excess of the amount partly due from such person.]
5[(2A) Where any notice has been served on a person under sub-section (1), the
proper officer,—
(i) In case any duty has not been levied or has been short-levied, or the
interest has not been paid or has been part paid or the duty or interest has
been erroneously refunded by reason of collusion or any wilful mis-statement
or suppression of facts, where it is possible to do so, shall determine the
amount of such duty or the interest, within a period of one year; and
(ii) In any other case, where it is possible to do so, shall determine the
amount of duty which has not been levied or has been short-levied or
erroneously refunded or the interest payable which has not been paid, part
paid or erroneously refunded, within a period of six months, from the date of
service of the notice on the person under sub-section (1).
(2B) Where any duty has not been levied or has been short-levied or
erroneously refunded, or any interest payable has not been paid, part paid or
erroneously refunded, the person, chargeable with the duty or the interest,
may pay the amount of duty or interest before service of notice on him under
sub-section (1) in respect of the duty or the interest, as the case may be,
and inform the proper officer of such payment in writing, who, on receipt of
such information, shall not serve any notice under sub-section (1) in respect
of the duty or the interest so paid: Provided that the proper officer may
determine the amount of short-payment of duty or interest, if any, which in
his opinion has not been paid by such person and, then, the proper officer
shall proceed to recover such amount in the manner specified in this section,
and the period of "one year" or "six months" as the case may be, referred to
in sub-section (1) shall be counted from the date of receipt of such
information of payment. Explanation 1.—Nothing contained in this sub-section
shall apply in a case where the duty was not levied or was not paid or the
interest was not paid or was part paid or the duty or interest was erroneously
refunded by reason of collusion or any wilful mis-statement or suppression of
facts by the importer or the exporter or the agent or employee of the importer
or exporter. Explanation 2.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared
that the interest under section 28AB shall be payable on the amount paid by
the person under this sub-section and also on the amount of short-payment of
duty, if any, as may be determined by the proper officer, but for this sub-
section.
(2C) The provisions of sub-section (2B) shall not apply to any case where the
duty or the interest had become payable or ought to have been paid before the
date on which the Finance Bill, 2001 receives the assent of the President*.]
(3) For the purposes of sub-section (1), the expression “relevant date”
means,—
(a) in case where duty is not levied, or interest is not charged, the date on
which the proper officer makes an order for the clearance of the goods;
(b) in a case where duty is provisionally assessed under section 18, the date
of adjustment of duty after the final assessment thereof;
(c) in a case where duty or interest has been erroneously refunded, date of
refund;
(d) in any other case, the date of payment of duty or interest.]
interest was not paid or was part paid or the duty or interest was erroneously
refunded by reason of collusion or any wilful mis-statement or suppression of
facts by the importer or the exporter or the agent or employee of the importer
or exporter. Explanation 2.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared
that the interest under section 28AB shall be payable on the amount paid by
the person under this sub-section and also on the amount of short-payment of
duty, if any, as may be determined by the proper officer, but for this sub-
section.
(2C) The provisions of sub-section (2B) shall not apply to any case where the
duty or the interest had become payable or ought to have been paid before the
date on which the Finance Bill, 2001 receives the assent of the President*.]
(3) For the purposes of sub-section (1), the expression “relevant date”
means,—
(a) in case where duty is not levied, or interest is not charged, the date on
which the proper officer makes an order for the clearance of the goods;
(b) in a case where duty is provisionally assessed under section 18, the date
year” and “six months”, the words “five years” were substituted: 2[***]
Explanation.—Where the service of the notice is stayed by an order of a court,
the period of such stay shall be excluded in computing the aforesaid period of
one year or six months or five years, as the case may be. 3[(1A) When any duty
has not been levied or has been short-levied or the interest has not been
charged or has been part paid or the duty or interest has been erroneously
refunded by reason of collusion or any wilful misstatement or suppression of
facts by the importer or the exporter or the agent or employee of the importer
or exporter, to whom a notice is served under the proviso to sub­-section (1)
by the proper officer, may pay duty in full or in part as may be accepted by
him, and the interest payable thereon under section 28AB and penalty equal to
twenty-five per cent. of the duty specified in the notice or the duty so
accepted by such person within thirty days of the receipt of the notice.]
(2) The proper officer, after considering the representation, if any, made by
the person on whom notice is served under sub-section (1), shall determine the
amount of duty or interest due from such person (not being in excess of the
amount specified in the notice) and thereupon such person shall pay the amount
so determined: 4[Provided that if such person has paid the duty in full
together with interest and penalty under sub-section (1A), the proceedings in
respect of such person and other persons to whom notice is served under sub-
interest was not paid or was part paid or the duty or interest was erroneously
refunded by reason of collusion or any wilful mis-statement or suppression of
facts by the importer or the exporter or the agent or employee of the importer
or exporter. Explanation 2.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared
that the interest under section 28AB shall be payable on the amount paid by
the person under this sub-section and also on the amount of short-payment of
duty, if any, as may be determined by the proper officer, but for this sub-
section.
(2C) The provisions of sub-section (2B) shall not apply to any case where the
duty or the interest had become payable or ought to have been paid before the
date on which the Finance Bill, 2001 receives the assent of the President*.]
(3) For the purposes of sub-section (1), the expression “relevant date”
means,—
(a) in case where duty is not levied, or interest is not charged, the date on
which the proper officer makes an order for the clearance of the goods;
(b) in a case where duty is provisionally assessed under section 18, the date
year” and “six months”, the words “five years” were substituted: 2[***]
Explanation.—Where the service of the notice is stayed by an order of a court,
the period of such stay shall be excluded in computing the aforesaid period of
one year or six months or five years, as the case may be. 3[(1A) When any duty
has not been levied or has been short-levied or the interest has not been
charged or has been part paid or the duty or interest has been erroneously
refunded by reason of collusion or any wilful misstatement or suppression of
facts by the importer or the exporter or the agent or employee of the importer
or exporter, to whom a notice is served under the proviso to sub­-section (1)
by the proper officer, may pay duty in full or in part as may be accepted by
him, and the interest payable thereon under section 28AB and penalty equal to
twenty-five per cent. of the duty specified in the notice or the duty so
accepted by such person within thirty days of the receipt of the notice.]
(2) The proper officer, after considering the representation, if any, made by
the person on whom notice is served under sub-section (1), shall determine the
amount of duty or interest due from such person (not being in excess of the
amount specified in the notice) and thereupon such person shall pay the amount
so determined: 4[Provided that if such person has paid the duty in full
together with interest and penalty under sub-section (1A), the proceedings in
respect of such person and other persons to whom notice is served under sub-
interest was not paid or was part paid or the duty or interest was erroneously
refunded by reason of collusion or any wilful mis-statement or suppression of
facts by the importer or the exporter or the agent or employee of the importer
or exporter. Explanation 2.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared
that the interest under section 28AB shall be payable on the amount paid by
the person under this sub-section and also on the amount of short-payment of
duty, if any, as may be determined by the proper officer, but for this sub-
section.
(2C) The provisions of sub-section (2B) shall not apply to any case where the
duty or the interest had become payable or ought to have been paid before the
date on which the Finance Bill, 2001 receives the assent of the President*.]
(3) For the purposes of sub-section (1), the expression “relevant date”
means,—
(a) in case where duty is not levied, or interest is not charged, the date on
which the proper officer makes an order for the clearance of the goods;
(b) in a case where duty is provisionally assessed under section 18, the date
year” and “six months”, the words “five years” were substituted: 2[***]
Explanation.—Where the service of the notice is stayed by an order of a court,
the period of such stay shall be excluded in computing the aforesaid period of
one year or six months or five years, as the case may be. 3[(1A) When any duty
has not been levied or has been short-levied or the interest has not been
charged or has been part paid or the duty or interest has been erroneously
refunded by reason of collusion or any wilful misstatement or suppression of
facts by the importer or the exporter or the agent or employee of the importer
or exporter, to whom a notice is served under the proviso to sub­-section (1)
by the proper officer, may pay duty in full or in part as may be accepted by
him, and the interest payable thereon under section 28AB and penalty equal to
twenty-five per cent. of the duty specified in the notice or the duty so
accepted by such person within thirty days of the receipt of the notice.]
(2) The proper officer, after considering the representation, if any, made by
the person on whom notice is served under sub-section (1), shall determine the
amount of duty or interest due from such person (not being in excess of the
amount specified in the notice) and thereupon such person shall pay the amount
so determined: 4[Provided that if such person has paid the duty in full
together with interest and penalty under sub-section (1A), the proceedings in
respect of such person and other persons to whom notice is served under sub-
section (1) shall, without prejudice to the provisions of sections 135, 135A
and 140, be deemed to be conclusive as to the matters stated therein: Provided
further that, if such person has paid duty in part, interest and penalty under
sub-section (1A), the proper officer shall determine the amount of duty or
interest not being in excess of the amount partly due from such person.]
5[(2A) Where any notice has been served on a person under sub-section (1), the
proper officer,—
(i) In case any duty has not been levied or has been short-levied, or the
interest has not been paid or has been part paid or the duty or interest has
been erroneously refunded by reason of collusion or any wilful mis-statement
or suppression of facts, where it is possible to do so, shall determine the
interest was not paid or was part paid or the duty or interest was erroneously
refunded by reason of collusion or any wilful mis-statement or suppression of
facts by the importer or the exporter or the agent or employee of the importer
or exporter. Explanation 2.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared
that the interest under section 28AB shall be payable on the amount paid by
the person under this sub-section and also on the amount of short-payment of
duty, if any, as may be determined by the proper officer, but for this sub-
section.
(2C) The provisions of sub-section (2B) shall not apply to any case where the
duty or the interest had become payable or ought to have been paid before the
date on which the Finance Bill, 2001 receives the assent of the President*.]
(3) For the purposes of sub-section (1), the expression “relevant date”
means,—
(a) in case where duty is not levied, or interest is not charged, the date on
which the proper officer makes an order for the clearance of the goods;
(b) in a case where duty is provisionally assessed under section 18, the date
year” and “six months”, the words “five years” were substituted: 2[***]
Explanation.—Where the service of the notice is stayed by an order of a court,
the period of such stay shall be excluded in computing the aforesaid period of
one year or six months or five years, as the case may be. 3[(1A) When any duty
has not been levied or has been short-levied or the interest has not been
charged or has been part paid or the duty or interest has been erroneously
refunded by reason of collusion or any wilful misstatement or suppression of
facts by the importer or the exporter or the agent or employee of the importer
or exporter, to whom a notice is served under the proviso to sub­-section (1)
by the proper officer, may pay duty in full or in part as may be accepted by
him, and the interest payable thereon under section 28AB and penalty equal to
twenty-five per cent. of the duty specified in the notice or the duty so
accepted by such person within thirty days of the receipt of the notice.]
(2) The proper officer, after considering the representation, if any, made by
the person on whom notice is served under sub-section (1), shall determine the
amount of duty or interest due from such person (not being in excess of the
amount specified in the notice) and thereupon such person shall pay the amount
so determined: 4[Provided that if such person has paid the duty in full
together with interest and penalty under sub-section (1A), the proceedings in
respect of such person and other persons to whom notice is served under sub-
section (1) shall, without prejudice to the provisions of sections 135, 135A
and 140, be deemed to be conclusive as to the matters stated therein: Provided
further that, if such person has paid duty in part, interest and penalty under
sub-section (1A), the proper officer shall determine the amount of duty or
interest not being in excess of the amount partly due from such person.]
5[(2A) Where any notice has been served on a person under sub-section (1), the
proper officer,—
(i) In case any duty has not been levied or has been short-levied, or the
interest has not been paid or has been part paid or the duty or interest has
been erroneously refunded by reason of collusion or any wilful mis-statement
or suppression of facts, where it is possible to do so, shall determine the
interest was not paid or was part paid or the duty or interest was erroneously
refunded by reason of collusion or any wilful mis-statement or suppression of
facts by the importer or the exporter or the agent or employee of the importer
or exporter. Explanation 2.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared
that the interest under section 28AB shall be payable on the amount paid by
the person under this sub-section and also on the amount of short-payment of
duty, if any, as may be determined by the proper officer, but for this sub-
section.
(2C) The provisions of sub-section (2B) shall not apply to any case where the
duty or the interest had become payable or ought to have been paid before the
date on which the Finance Bill, 2001 receives the assent of the President*.]
(3) For the purposes of sub-section (1), the expression “relevant date”
means,—
(a) in case where duty is not levied, or interest is not charged, the date on
which the proper officer makes an order for the clearance of the goods;
(b) in a case where duty is provisionally assessed under section 18, the date
