Madras High Court
Tamil Nadu State Construction ... vs Gardner Landscape Pvt. Ltd. And ... on 7
January, 2005
Equivalent citations: AIR 2005 Mad 236, 2005 (2) ARBLR 622 Madras, III (2005)
BC 247, 2005 (1) CTC 401
Author: A Kulasekaran
Bench: A Kulasekaran
ORDER A. Kulasekaran, J.
1\. The Tamil Nadu State Construction Corporation Limited, who suffered an
award in Arbitration Case No. 1 of 1998 and the interim award in Application
No. 2 of 1998 in Arbitration Case No. 1 of 1998 has preferred this Original
Petition under Section 34 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996.
2\. The State Government of Tamil Nadu, Department of Information has issued
G.O.Ms. No. 162 dated 10.6.1992 for construction of film city at Taramani,
Chennai, thereby appointed the petitioner herein as Consultant and Contractor.
The petitioner has issued work order on 23.6.1992 to the first respondent,
which has commenced the work after furnishing bank guarantee on 15.7.1992.
During the course of execution of work, the second respondent/Government
included additional works by issuing G.O.Ms. No. 16 and 17 dated 27.1.1994.
There are 61 agreements entered into between the petitioner and the first
18\. Section 34 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act limits the judicial
intervention. The ground on which the award can be assailed is mentioned in
sub-section 2 namely a party to the agreement was under some incapacity, or
arbitration agreement is not valid under law to which the parties have
subjected it or, failing any indication thereon, under the Law for the time
being in force; or the party making the application was not given proper
notice of the appointment of an arbitrator or of the arbitral proceedings or
was otherwise unable to present his case; or the arbitral award deals with a
dispute not contemplated by or not falling within the terms of the submission
to arbitration, or it contains decisions on matters beyond the scope of the
submission to arbitration, the composition of the arbitral tribunal or the
arbitral procedure was not in accordance with the agreement of the parties,
unless such agreement was in conflict with the provisions of Part I from which
the parties cannot derogate, or, filing such agreement, was not in accordance
with Part I; or the Court finds that subject matter of the dispute is not
capable of settlement by arbitrator or the arbitral award is in conflict with
There are 61 agreements entered into between the petitioner and the first
respondent in respect of works covered in the above said three Government
Orders. It is an admitted fact that the work was completed and the film city
was also inaugurated on 31.8.1994. Dispute arose between the petitioner and
the first respondent, which was referred to the third respondent/Arbitral
Tribunal.
3\. The first respondent contended that it executed the works valued at Rs.
11,53,02,308.40 between 2.3.1994 and 4.3.1995, but it was paid only a sum of
Rs. 797.43 lacs and the balance of Rs. 3,54,80,000 not paid despite repeated
notice and requests. Pending arbitral proceedings, the petitioner filed I.A.
No. 1 of 1998 to implead the Film City Corporation as second respondent, which
was opposed by the first respondent on the ground that there is no privity of
contract between the first respondent and the Film City Corporation.
Ultimately, the Film City Corporation was impleaded. The first respondent
filed application No. 2 of 1998 for interim award of Rs. 41.97 lacs being 5%
of the bill amount withheld. The Arbitral Tribunal passed interim order on
16.7.1998 rejecting the petition of the petitioner stating that non-compliance
of work in full and failure to complete the work free from defects.
4\. Before the Arbitral Tribunal, the first respondent has filed Exs. C1 to
C60 and the petitioner herein has filed Exs. R1 to R24. After going through
the pleadings, the following seven issues were framed by the Arbitral Tribunal
with the consent of the counsel for both sides, which are as follows:
(i) Whether the claim has been made in time ?
(ii) Whether the claimant is entitled to the claim amount of Rs. 5,09,13,800
as sought for in the claim statement ? if not to what extent ?
(iii) Whether the claimant is entitled to claim interest at 18% per annum
pendente lite and till realization of the claim amount ?
(iv) Whether the claimant is entitled to the cost of the proceedings ?
(v) Is the claimant entitled to invoke the arbitration clause in respect of
the three alleged supplemental agreements ?
(vi) What amount, if any, is the respondent liable to pay to the claimant and
if so whether interest is payable and at what rate ?
(vii) To what reliefs the claimant is entitled to ?
5\. In addition to the above said seven issues, other material propositions of
law namely (i) whether the 61 agreements entered into between the parties can
be decided by the Arbitral Tribunal in a single arbitration (ii) whether the
first respondent is entitled to costs of infrastructural facilities (iii)
whether the first respondent herein is guilty of non-rectification of defects
during the defect liability period and (iv) whether the petitioner can seek to
deduct the amount of sales tax payable by the first respondent to the Sales
Tax Department.
6\. The Arbitral Tribunal has decided the four material propositions of Law
before going into the issues involved that there were 61 agreements entered
into between the petitioner and the first respondent herein in respect of
various items of work in the very same Film City; that each agreement contains
arbitration clause; that all the 61 agreements are in common form or more or
less identical; that the 61 agreements are integrated items of work for a
comprehensive project, which is evident from G.O.Ms. No. 162 dated 10.6.1992;
that the 61 agreements were prepared for the sake of convenience and easy
reference by the petitioner herein. The Arbitral Tribunal relied on the
decision reported in 1955 NUC Calcutta 3323 and also Olympus Superstructures
Pvt. Ltd. v. Meena Vijay Khetan and Ors., .
7\. The documents placed before this Court are perused. All the 61 agreements
are integrated part of the whole scheme and are not conflicting with each
other.
8\. In the decision Olympus Superstructures Pvt. Ltd. v. Meena Vijay Khetan
and Ors., , wherein in para-30 it was held thus:-
"30. If there is a situation where there are disputes and differences in
connection with the main agreement and also disputes in regard to "other
matters" "connected" with the subject-matter of the main agreement then in
such a situation, in our view, we are governed by the general arbitration
clause 39 of the main agreement under which disputes under the main agreement
and disputes connected therewith can be referred to the same arbitral
tribunal. This clause 39 no doubt does not refer to any named arbitrators. So
far as clause 5 of the Interior Design Agreement is concerned, it refers to
disputes and differences arising from that agreement which can be referred to
named arbitrators and the said clause 5, in our opinion, comes into play only
in a situation where there are no disputes and differences in relation to the
main agreement and the disputes and differences are solely confined to the
Interior Design Agreement. That, in our view, is the true intention of the
parties and that is the only way by which the general arbitration provision in
clause 39 of the main agreement and the arbitration provision for a named
arbitrator contained in clause 5 of the Interior Design Agreement can be
harmonized or reconciled. Therefore, in a case like the present where the
disputes and differences cover the main agreement as well as the Interior
Design Agreement, .......(that there are disputes arising under the main
agreement and the Interior Design Agreement is not in dispute)......it is the
general arbitration clause 39 in the main agreement that governs because the
questions arise also in regard to disputes relating to the overlapping items
in the schedule to the main agreement and the Interior Design Agreement, as
detailed earlier. There cannot be conflicting awards in regard to items which
overlap in the two agreements. Such a situation was never contemplated by the
parties. The intention of the parties when they incorporation clause 39 in the
main agreement and clause 5 in the Interior Design Agreement was that the
former clause was to apply to situations when there were disputes arising
under both agreements and the latter was to apply to a situation where there
were no disputes or differences arising under the main contract but the
disputes and differences were confined only to the Interior Design Agreement.
A case containing two agreements with arbitration clauses arose before this
Court in Agarwal Engg. Co. v. Technoimpex Hungarian Machine Industries Foreign
Trade Co., . There were arbitration clauses in two contracts, one for sale of
two machines to the appellant and the other appointing the appellant as sales
representative. On the facts of the case, it was held that both the clauses
operated separately and this conclusion was based on the specific clause in
the sale contract that it was the "sole repository" of the Sale transaction of
the two machines. Krishna Iyer, J. held that if that were so, then there was
no jurisdiction for travelling beyond the sale contract. The language of the
other agreement appointing the appellant as sales representative was
prospective and related to a sales agency and "later purchases", other than
the purchases of these two machines. There was therefore no overlapping. The
case before us and the above case exemplify contrary situations. In one case
the disputes are connected and in the other they are distinct and not
connected. Thus, in the present case, clause 39 of the main agreement applies.
Points 1 and 2 are decided accordingly in favour of the respondents.
In this case, the Honourable Supreme Court held that a situation where there
are disputes and differences in connection with the main agreement and also
disputes in regard to 'other matters' connected. The subject matter of the
main agreement would be governed by the general arbitration clause under which
disputes under the main agreement and disputes connected therewith can be
referred to the same Arbitral Tribunal.
9\. Applying the said judgment in this case, this Court is of the considered
view that the findings of the Arbitral Tribunal that though 61 similar
agreements between the same parties in respect of several items of work which
are integrated items of work for a comprehensive project is perfectly valid.
10\. The first respondent has claimed a sum of Rs. 6.23 lakhs as
infrastructural facilities against the petitioner herein which was refused.
The Arbitral Tribunal rightly held that the contractor tenders his quotation
only for the actual work to be done not for cost of providing infrastructural
facilities. In respect of the defect liability period and repairs, the
Arbitral Tribunal relied on Ex. R1 dated 10.11.1994 that the 2nd respondent
has complained of certain defects in their later dated 4.11.1994 i.e., Exs. R2
to R4 addressed to the petitioner herein. The first respondent by its letter
dated 16.12.1994 Ex. C55 and C56 replied that the said defects have been
rectified. The other defects pointed out in Ex. R16, R18, R20 to R24 have
emanated after March 1998 i.e., after notice of arbitration dated 1.12.1997
was given by the first respondent herein, beyond the period of liability. It
is also pointed out by the Arbitral Tribunal that Film City was put on use
from 1.10.1994, hence the usual wear and tear due to cyclone the said defects
pointed out in Exs. R16, R18, R20 to R24 were arisen. Ultimately, the Arbitral
Tribunal found that the first respondent is not guilty of non-rectification of
the defects during the defect liability period.
11\. The Arbitral Tribunal relied on G.O.Ms. No. 169 dated 27.6.1994 and also
Section 3B of TNGST Act, which provides for deferral of sales tax for a period
of five years, wherever sales tax levy is applicable. The said Government
Order came into force from 1.1.1994. The period of five years contemplated in
the said Government Order ends only on 31.12.1998 as such the sales tax
becomes payable from 1.1.1999, which is individual liability and the first
respondent has to discharge it. Pointing out the same, the Arbitral Tribunal
found that the petitioner herein cannot seek to deduct the amount of sales tax
payable by the first respondent herein.
12\. As far as the issue No. 1, whether the claim has been made in time is
concerned, the petitioner herein contended that the arbitration is barred by
limitation as it has been made three years after completion of various works
undertaken under the said 61 agreements. It is not in dispute that the works
relating to 61 agreements, check measurements were taken and final bills dated
12.12.1995 certifying for payments for the 61 items. Ex.C20 dated 25.9.1995 is
letter sent by the petitioner to its Regional Manager, mentioning the amount
due namely Rs. 315.20 lacs to the first respondent herein and requested the
Managing Director of the second respondent for early settlement. Ex.C20 also
contains details relating to name of work, final bill value, previous
payments, balance amount to be paid. The working sheet Ex.C21 dated 1.3.1996
shows the details of amount due by the 2nd respondent to the petitioner
herein. Taking into consideration of all the above said two exhibits namely
Ex,C20 and C21, the Arbitral Tribunal came to a conclusion that the limitation
reckons only from the date of final bill namely 12.12.1995. The notice of
arbitration was given on 1.12.1997 and the first sitting of the Arbitral
Tribunal took place on 23.2.1998. Taking into consideration of the above said
dates, the Arbitral Tribunal has rightly come to the conclusion that the claim
is not barred by limitation. It is also pointed out by the Arbitral Tribunal
that final bill namely Ex. C21 dated 1.3.1996 certifying for payment would
amount to an acknowledgment as mentioned in Section 19 of the Limitation Act.
The Arbitral Tribunal also relied on the decision of the Honourable Supreme
Court Shapoor Freedom Mazda v. Durga Prosad Chamaria, AIR 1961 SC 236, wherein
in Para 6 it was held thus:-
6\. It is thus clear that acknowledgment as prescribed by Section 19 merely
renews debt; it does not create a new right of action. It is a mere
acknowledgment of the liability in respect of the right in question; it need
not be accompanied by a promise to pay either expressly or even by
implication. The statement on which a plea of acknowledgment is based must
relate to a present subsisting liability though the exact nature or the
specific character of the said liability may not be indicated in words. Words
used in the acknowledgment must, however, indicate the existence of jural
relationship between the parties such as that of debtor and creditor, and it
must appear that the statement is made with the intention to admit such jural
relationship. Such intention can be inferred by implication from the nature of
the admission, and need not be expressed in words. If the statement is fairly
clear then the intention to admit jural relationship may be implied from it.
The admission in question need not be express but must be made in
circumstances and in words from which the Court can reasonably infer that the
person making the admission intended to refer to a subsisting liability a at
the date of the statement. In construing words used in the statements made in
writing on which a plea of acknowledgment rests oral evidence has been
expressly excluded but surrounding circumstances can always be considered.
Stated generally Courts lean in favour of a liberal construction of such
statements though it does not mean that where no admission is made one should
be inferred, or where a statement was made clearly without intending to admit
the existence of jural relationship such intention could be fastened on the
maker of the statement by an involved or farfetched process of reasoning.
Broadly stated that is the effect of the relevant provisions contained in
Section 19, and there is really no substantial difference between the parties
as to the true legal position in this matter.
13\. It is seen from the above judgment that the acknowledgment as prescribed
under Section 19 merely renews debt. It does not create a new right of action
and it is a mere acknowledgment of liability in respect of the right in
question and it need not be accompanied by promise to pay either expressly or
even by implication.
14\. The Arbitral Tribunal also answered the issue relating to interest in
favour of the first respondent herein stating that they vests with the
jurisdiction to award interest for pre-reference period, pendente lite and
post-award period. In this case, the petitioner herein has not settled the
balance amount due and payable out of the final bill. Certainly, the first
respondent is entitled to interest for pre-reference, pendente lite and post-
award period till the date of realization. State of Orissa v. B.N. Agarwalla,
1997 (2) SCC 467.
15\. In respect of additional work, which pertains to issue No. 5 of the award
namely three items of Moghul garden, Italian garden and Japanese garden,
though the first respondent has claimed amount covered by supplement
agreement, neither party produces the same. The Arbitral Tribunal after
careful consideration found that the additional works were carried out by the
first respondent. Though arguments were advanced by the petitioner before the
Arbitral Tribunal that claim in respect of additional works can be made only
before the ordinary Law Courts not under the arbitration clause, the Arbitral
Tribunal relied on Ex.C59 dated 12.12.1994 and found that additional works
also forms part of the said agreement. In order to justify their finding, the
Arbitral Tribunal relied on Schedule A of each agreement wherein it is stated
that each piece of work is probable and tentative and the same would stand
added or modified or deducted during the execution of the work and the actual
quantity of work done can be determined only on final and detailed
measurements. Further it is pointed out that Exs. C38 to C54 are payment made
on the bills passed by the petitioner herein on various dates between 4.2.1994
to 2.1.1995 and no distinction can be made between the agreed work and
additional works.
16\. In respect of issue Nos. 2, 6 and 7, the claim of interest of Rs.
1,54,33,800 towards interest at the rate of 18% from 1.10.1995, the Arbitral
Tribunal after deducting a sum of Rs. 44,022,946 which was paid by way of
interim award, the balance of Rs. 3,10,00,000 and Rs. 57,054 rounded off to
Rs. 3,10,57,000 and awarded interest for pre-reference period from 1.1.1996 to
1.3.1998, pendente lite and also post-award on the ground that the petitioner
is liable to pay interest for the balance amount since all bills were accepted
on 12.12.1995 and the transaction being commercial in nature, entitled to
interest at the rate of 18%.
17\. The Arbitral Tribunal also found in respect of issue No. 4 that the
petitioner is liable to pay 50% of Rs. 9,90,000 on the ground that the
petitioner, though liable to pay for the works completed, failed to pay on
several untenable pleas.
18\. Section 34 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act limits the judicial
intervention. The ground on which the award can be assailed is mentioned in
sub-section 2 namely a party to the agreement was under some incapacity, or
arbitration agreement is not valid under law to which the parties have
subjected it or, failing any indication thereon, under the Law for the time
being in force; or the party making the application was not given proper
notice of the appointment of an arbitrator or of the arbitral proceedings or
was otherwise unable to present his case; or the arbitral award deals with a
dispute not contemplated by or not falling within the terms of the submission
to arbitration, or it contains decisions on matters beyond the scope of the
submission to arbitration, the composition of the arbitral tribunal or the
arbitral procedure was not in accordance with the agreement of the parties,
unless such agreement was in conflict with the provisions of Part I from which
the parties cannot derogate, or, filing such agreement, was not in accordance
with Part I; or the Court finds that subject matter of the dispute is not
capable of settlement by arbitrator or the arbitral award is in conflict with
the public policy of India. I do not find any such reasons to interfere in the
said award, which is impugned in this petition.
19\. Hence, the Original Petition is dismissed. However, I am not inclined to
order costs. Consequently, connected Application is closed.
18\. Section 34 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act limits the judicial
intervention. The ground on which the award can be assailed is mentioned in
sub-section 2 namely a party to the agreement was under some incapacity, or
arbitration agreement is not valid under law to which the parties have
subjected it or, failing any indication thereon, under the Law for the time
being in force; or the party making the application was not given proper
notice of the appointment of an arbitrator or of the arbitral proceedings or
was otherwise unable to present his case; or the arbitral award deals with a
dispute not contemplated by or not falling within the terms of the submission
to arbitration, or it contains decisions on matters beyond the scope of the
submission to arbitration, the composition of the arbitral tribunal or the
arbitral procedure was not in accordance with the agreement of the parties,
unless such agreement was in conflict with the provisions of Part I from which
the parties cannot derogate, or, filing such agreement, was not in accordance
with Part I; or the Court finds that subject matter of the dispute is not
capable of settlement by arbitrator or the arbitral award is in conflict with
There are 61 agreements entered into between the petitioner and the first
respondent in respect of works covered in the above said three Government
Orders. It is an admitted fact that the work was completed and the film city
was also inaugurated on 31.8.1994. Dispute arose between the petitioner and
the first respondent, which was referred to the third respondent/Arbitral
Tribunal.
3\. The first respondent contended that it executed the works valued at Rs.
11,53,02,308.40 between 2.3.1994 and 4.3.1995, but it was paid only a sum of
Rs. 797.43 lacs and the balance of Rs. 3,54,80,000 not paid despite repeated
notice and requests. Pending arbitral proceedings, the petitioner filed I.A.
No. 1 of 1998 to implead the Film City Corporation as second respondent, which
was opposed by the first respondent on the ground that there is no privity of
contract between the first respondent and the Film City Corporation.
Ultimately, the Film City Corporation was impleaded. The first respondent
filed application No. 2 of 1998 for interim award of Rs. 41.97 lacs being 5%
of the bill amount withheld. The Arbitral Tribunal passed interim order on
16.7.1998 rejecting the petition of the petitioner stating that non-compliance
of work in full and failure to complete the work free from defects.
4\. Before the Arbitral Tribunal, the first respondent has filed Exs. C1 to
C60 and the petitioner herein has filed Exs. R1 to R24. After going through
18\. Section 34 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act limits the judicial
intervention. The ground on which the award can be assailed is mentioned in
sub-section 2 namely a party to the agreement was under some incapacity, or
arbitration agreement is not valid under law to which the parties have
subjected it or, failing any indication thereon, under the Law for the time
being in force; or the party making the application was not given proper
notice of the appointment of an arbitrator or of the arbitral proceedings or
was otherwise unable to present his case; or the arbitral award deals with a
dispute not contemplated by or not falling within the terms of the submission
to arbitration, or it contains decisions on matters beyond the scope of the
submission to arbitration, the composition of the arbitral tribunal or the
arbitral procedure was not in accordance with the agreement of the parties,
unless such agreement was in conflict with the provisions of Part I from which
the parties cannot derogate, or, filing such agreement, was not in accordance
with Part I; or the Court finds that subject matter of the dispute is not
capable of settlement by arbitrator or the arbitral award is in conflict with
There are 61 agreements entered into between the petitioner and the first
respondent in respect of works covered in the above said three Government
Orders. It is an admitted fact that the work was completed and the film city
was also inaugurated on 31.8.1994. Dispute arose between the petitioner and
the first respondent, which was referred to the third respondent/Arbitral
Tribunal.
3\. The first respondent contended that it executed the works valued at Rs.
11,53,02,308.40 between 2.3.1994 and 4.3.1995, but it was paid only a sum of
Rs. 797.43 lacs and the balance of Rs. 3,54,80,000 not paid despite repeated
notice and requests. Pending arbitral proceedings, the petitioner filed I.A.
No. 1 of 1998 to implead the Film City Corporation as second respondent, which
was opposed by the first respondent on the ground that there is no privity of
contract between the first respondent and the Film City Corporation.
Ultimately, the Film City Corporation was impleaded. The first respondent
filed application No. 2 of 1998 for interim award of Rs. 41.97 lacs being 5%
of the bill amount withheld. The Arbitral Tribunal passed interim order on
16.7.1998 rejecting the petition of the petitioner stating that non-compliance
of work in full and failure to complete the work free from defects.
4\. Before the Arbitral Tribunal, the first respondent has filed Exs. C1 to
C60 and the petitioner herein has filed Exs. R1 to R24. After going through
18\. Section 34 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act limits the judicial
intervention. The ground on which the award can be assailed is mentioned in
sub-section 2 namely a party to the agreement was under some incapacity, or
arbitration agreement is not valid under law to which the parties have
subjected it or, failing any indication thereon, under the Law for the time
being in force; or the party making the application was not given proper
notice of the appointment of an arbitrator or of the arbitral proceedings or
was otherwise unable to present his case; or the arbitral award deals with a
dispute not contemplated by or not falling within the terms of the submission
to arbitration, or it contains decisions on matters beyond the scope of the
submission to arbitration, the composition of the arbitral tribunal or the
arbitral procedure was not in accordance with the agreement of the parties,
unless such agreement was in conflict with the provisions of Part I from which
the parties cannot derogate, or, filing such agreement, was not in accordance
with Part I; or the Court finds that subject matter of the dispute is not
capable of settlement by arbitrator or the arbitral award is in conflict with
There are 61 agreements entered into between the petitioner and the first
respondent in respect of works covered in the above said three Government
Orders. It is an admitted fact that the work was completed and the film city
was also inaugurated on 31.8.1994. Dispute arose between the petitioner and
the first respondent, which was referred to the third respondent/Arbitral
Tribunal.
3\. The first respondent contended that it executed the works valued at Rs.
11,53,02,308.40 between 2.3.1994 and 4.3.1995, but it was paid only a sum of
Rs. 797.43 lacs and the balance of Rs. 3,54,80,000 not paid despite repeated
notice and requests. Pending arbitral proceedings, the petitioner filed I.A.
No. 1 of 1998 to implead the Film City Corporation as second respondent, which
was opposed by the first respondent on the ground that there is no privity of
contract between the first respondent and the Film City Corporation.
Ultimately, the Film City Corporation was impleaded. The first respondent
filed application No. 2 of 1998 for interim award of Rs. 41.97 lacs being 5%
of the bill amount withheld. The Arbitral Tribunal passed interim order on
16.7.1998 rejecting the petition of the petitioner stating that non-compliance
of work in full and failure to complete the work free from defects.
4\. Before the Arbitral Tribunal, the first respondent has filed Exs. C1 to
C60 and the petitioner herein has filed Exs. R1 to R24. After going through
the pleadings, the following seven issues were framed by the Arbitral Tribunal
with the consent of the counsel for both sides, which are as follows:
(i) Whether the claim has been made in time ?
(ii) Whether the claimant is entitled to the claim amount of Rs. 5,09,13,800
as sought for in the claim statement ? if not to what extent ?
(iii) Whether the claimant is entitled to claim interest at 18% per annum
pendente lite and till realization of the claim amount ?
(iv) Whether the claimant is entitled to the cost of the proceedings ?
(v) Is the claimant entitled to invoke the arbitration clause in respect of
the three alleged supplemental agreements ?
(vi) What amount, if any, is the respondent liable to pay to the claimant and
18\. Section 34 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act limits the judicial
intervention. The ground on which the award can be assailed is mentioned in
sub-section 2 namely a party to the agreement was under some incapacity, or
arbitration agreement is not valid under law to which the parties have
subjected it or, failing any indication thereon, under the Law for the time
being in force; or the party making the application was not given proper
notice of the appointment of an arbitrator or of the arbitral proceedings or
was otherwise unable to present his case; or the arbitral award deals with a
dispute not contemplated by or not falling within the terms of the submission
to arbitration, or it contains decisions on matters beyond the scope of the
submission to arbitration, the composition of the arbitral tribunal or the
arbitral procedure was not in accordance with the agreement of the parties,
unless such agreement was in conflict with the provisions of Part I from which
the parties cannot derogate, or, filing such agreement, was not in accordance
with Part I; or the Court finds that subject matter of the dispute is not
capable of settlement by arbitrator or the arbitral award is in conflict with
There are 61 agreements entered into between the petitioner and the first
respondent in respect of works covered in the above said three Government
Orders. It is an admitted fact that the work was completed and the film city
was also inaugurated on 31.8.1994. Dispute arose between the petitioner and
the first respondent, which was referred to the third respondent/Arbitral
Tribunal.
3\. The first respondent contended that it executed the works valued at Rs.
11,53,02,308.40 between 2.3.1994 and 4.3.1995, but it was paid only a sum of
Rs. 797.43 lacs and the balance of Rs. 3,54,80,000 not paid despite repeated
notice and requests. Pending arbitral proceedings, the petitioner filed I.A.
No. 1 of 1998 to implead the Film City Corporation as second respondent, which
was opposed by the first respondent on the ground that there is no privity of
contract between the first respondent and the Film City Corporation.
Ultimately, the Film City Corporation was impleaded. The first respondent
filed application No. 2 of 1998 for interim award of Rs. 41.97 lacs being 5%
of the bill amount withheld. The Arbitral Tribunal passed interim order on
16.7.1998 rejecting the petition of the petitioner stating that non-compliance
of work in full and failure to complete the work free from defects.
4\. Before the Arbitral Tribunal, the first respondent has filed Exs. C1 to
C60 and the petitioner herein has filed Exs. R1 to R24. After going through
the pleadings, the following seven issues were framed by the Arbitral Tribunal
with the consent of the counsel for both sides, which are as follows:
(i) Whether the claim has been made in time ?
(ii) Whether the claimant is entitled to the claim amount of Rs. 5,09,13,800
as sought for in the claim statement ? if not to what extent ?
(iii) Whether the claimant is entitled to claim interest at 18% per annum
pendente lite and till realization of the claim amount ?
(iv) Whether the claimant is entitled to the cost of the proceedings ?
(v) Is the claimant entitled to invoke the arbitration clause in respect of
the three alleged supplemental agreements ?
(vi) What amount, if any, is the respondent liable to pay to the claimant and
18\. Section 34 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act limits the judicial
intervention. The ground on which the award can be assailed is mentioned in
sub-section 2 namely a party to the agreement was under some incapacity, or
arbitration agreement is not valid under law to which the parties have
subjected it or, failing any indication thereon, under the Law for the time
being in force; or the party making the application was not given proper
notice of the appointment of an arbitrator or of the arbitral proceedings or
was otherwise unable to present his case; or the arbitral award deals with a
dispute not contemplated by or not falling within the terms of the submission
to arbitration, or it contains decisions on matters beyond the scope of the
submission to arbitration, the composition of the arbitral tribunal or the
arbitral procedure was not in accordance with the agreement of the parties,
unless such agreement was in conflict with the provisions of Part I from which
the parties cannot derogate, or, filing such agreement, was not in accordance
with Part I; or the Court finds that subject matter of the dispute is not
capable of settlement by arbitrator or the arbitral award is in conflict with
