Madras High Court
Mrs.J.Zeenath Bivi vs M.Khader Ibrahim on 24 December, 2003
     IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT MADRAS
    DATED: 24/12/2003
    CORAM
    THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE N.V.BALASUBRAMANIAN
    and
    THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE K.P.SIVASUBRAMANIAM
    O.S.A.No.30 of 2003
    and 31 to 37 of 2003 and
    CMPs.4313 to 4320 of 2003 & VCMPs.5573 to 5576 of 2003
    O.S.A.Nos.30 to 33 of 2003:
    Mrs.J.Zeenath Bivi,
    proprietrix,
    M/s.N.V.K.M.Traders,
    No.207, Poonamallee High Road,
    Chennai 600 029,
    rep. by her Power of Attorney holder
    Mr.J.Zackaria.  ...     Appellant
    -Vs-
80\. In the result,
a) there will be an order of injunction pending suits against the appellant
Zeenath Bivi from exploiting the trademarks in question;
b) the business hitherto carried on by the respondents shall be carried on by
the respondents 2, 3 and 5 in their capacity of receivers and they are
permitted to exploit the trademarks in question for and on behalf of and for
the benefit of all the joint owners;
c) the respondents 2, 3 and 5, namely, M.Raja Mohamed, M.Asi Mohamed and
A.Zaithoon Bivi are appointed as receivers to carry on the business;
d) the receivers shall submit annual accounts of the business carried on by
them on or before 31st of March every year; and
e) since we are ordering injunction against the appellant from exploiting the
trademarks in question, the judgment so far as it relates to the appellant is
concerned is suspended for a period of three weeks to enable her to make
alternative arrangements.
With the above directions, all the appeals are dismissed. No costs. All the
    -Vs-
    1. M.Khader Ibrahim
    2. M.Raja Mohamed
    3. M.Asi Mohamed
    4. S.Rahila Bivi
    5. A.Zaithoon Bivi
    6. S.Mohamed Ismail
    7. R.Asha Banu
    8. M.Zahira Banu
    9. M.Parveen Roja
    10.S.Sakkarai Mohamed
    11.J.Rahmath
    12.S.Raja Rashool
    13.M.Roja Mohamed
       rep. by his son, Mr.R.Noorul Amin                    ...     Respondents
    O.S.A.Nos.34 to 37 of 2003:
    Mrs.J.Zeenath Bivi                      ...     Apellant.
                                            vs.
    1. N.V.K.M.Khader Ibrahim
    2. N.V.K.M.Raja Mohamed
    3. N.V.K.M.Asi Mohamed
    4. N.V.K.M.Roja Mohamed
    5. S.Rahila Bivi
    6. A.Zaithoon Bivi
    7. S.Mohamed Ismail
    8. A.Asha Banu
    9. M.Zahira Banu
    10.M.Parveen Roja
    11.S.Sakkarai Mohamed
    12.Rahamath Jinnah
    13.S.Raja Razhool Mohamed
    14.M/s.N.V.K.Mohammed Sultan Rowther & Sons,
       a firm being rep. by its Joint Managing
       Partner, N.V.K.M.Raja Mohammed, having
       his office at No.95, Market Road,
       Dindigul 624 001, Dindigul Dist.,
       Tamil Nadu.
                                                    ...     Respondents.
                    O.S.As.  filed against the common order dated 31.12.2002  made
    in O.   A.Nos.444 to 447 and 730 to 733 of 2002 in C.S.Nos.455 and 727 of 2002
    respectively on the file of this Court.
    !For appellant          :       Mr.G.Masilamani, Sr.counsel
                                    for Mr.A.Prabhakara Reddy.
    ^For respondents        :       Mr.M.K.Rao, for
                            Mr.S.Kanniah for R2 to R14
                            Mr.P.S.Ganesh for
                            M/s.Kuriyan & Associates for R1.
    :JUDGMENT
N.V.BALASUBRAMANIAN,J.
The above O.S.A. Nos.30 to 37 of 2003 are preferred against a common order
passed in O.A.Nos.730 to 733 of 2002 in C.S.No.727 of 2002 and O.A.Nos.444 to
447 of 2002 in C.S.No.455 of 2002 on the file of this Court. There are two
suits filed one by the appellant herein in C.S.No.727 of 2002, and another by
the respondents herein in C.S.No.455 of 2002. Both the parties sought for
interim injunction in their pending suits restraining the other party from
infringing trademark ROJA or RAJA, from infringing copyright which the
respective parties have in the artistic work contained in their registered
copyright, from manufacturing, marketing, selling or advertising or packing in
respect of betel nut/supari or any kind or its allied products in the course
of business using the trademark ROJA or ROSE or using the trading style with
the initial N.V.K.M. or claiming the source or origin of business and against
the passing off action.
2\. All the eight petitions were considered together by a learned Single Judge
of this Court and the learned Single Judge, by common order passed on
31.12.2002, held that the respondents herein have established prima facie case
and the balance of convenience lies also in favour of the respondents herein.
Learned Judge also held that the parties are joint proprietors of the
registered trademarks and they are entitled to use the trademarks, ROJA and
RAJA for the purpose of manufacturing and selling the scented betel nuts and
no individual joint proprietor has any right to use the registered trademarks.
Learned Judge further held that if anyone of the joint proprietors is not
willing to join the majority of the joint proprietors, then it will be open to
the majority of the joint proprietors to make use of the registered trademarks
and the trading style and they should render a true and proper account once in
a month to the other joint proprietor who is unwilling to join the trade.
Learned Judge held that that this arrangement should continue in force till
the disposal of rectification applications filed on either side. It is against
this common order, the present appeals have been preferred.
3\. A Bench of this Court admitted the appeals and ordered status quo on
31.1.2003. The appellant is the defendant in the suit, C.S.No.4 55 of 2002
(hereinafter referred to as the appellant, Zeenath Bivi) and the respondents
in the appeal are plaintiffs in C.S.No.455 of 2002 (referred to hereinafter as
the respondents/plaintiffs).
4\. It is a dispute arising between the members of a family as to who is
entitled to use the trademarks ROJA or RAJA in the manufacture of betel
nut/supari. The brief facts necessary for the consideration of the appeals are
that somewhere in 1942, one N.V.K.Mohamed Sultan Rowther started a proprietary
concern in the name and style, N.V.K. Mohamed Sultan Rowther and Sons for the
manufacture of scented betel nuts using the trademarks, ROJA, RAJA and KERA.
On 22.1.1946 N.V.K. Mohamed Sultan Rowther obtained the registration of the
trademark ROJA and he was using the trademark ROJA in the manufacture and
marketing of the scented betel nuts. N.V.K. Mohamed Sultan Rowther started his
business in Dindigul, a town in the State of Tamil Nadu and slowly the
business developed. He formed a partnership firm on 1.4.1966 by making his
sons and daughters and also his brother-in-law as partners of the firm. At the
time of formation of the partnership firm, the appellant Zeenath Bivi was a
minor and she was admitted to the benefit of the partnership and her interest
was taken care of by the second plaintiff in C.S.No.455 of 2002. On 18.7.1966
N.V.K.Mohamed Sultan Rowther and his sons and daughters applied to the
Trademark Registry for recording the names of sons and daughters as subsequent
proprietors by virtue of the deed of partnership dated 1.4.1966 and on
30.7.1966 the sons and the daughters of Mohamed Sultan Rowther were brought on
record as subsequent proprietors of the trademark. On 29.10.1966 N.V.K.Mohamed
Sultan Rowther died. The partnership constituted on 1.4.1966 was reconstituted
between 1966 and 1986 and it is not necessary to refer to the reconstitution
of the partnership for the purpose of considering the points that arise in the
appeals.
5\. On 1.1.1984 the joint proprietors entered into a preincorporation
agreement to convert the partnership firm into a private limited company under
the provisions of the Companies Act. On 12.7.1984 N.V. K.M. and Sons (P) Ltd.
came to be incorporated and on the same day an agreement was entered into
among the proprietors to enable the company to exploit the trademarks for and
on behalf of all the joint proprietors for a period of five years. On
24.9.1986 a supplementary agreement was entered into among the joint-
proprietors as one of the joint proprietors, by name, S.Ameen Bibi died on
23.9.1986 and her legal heirs and other co-owners were desirous of permitting
the user of the trademarks on payment of royalty on sales of scented betel
nuts. It is necessary to mention here that in the supplementary agreement the
user period of five years provided in the user agreement dated 12.7.1984 was
not altered. From 1986 to 1992 the appellant Zeenath Bivi is said to be the
sole agent of N.V.K.M. & Sons (P) Ltd. for the City of Chennai. On 14.3.1992
the appellant Zeenath Bivi issued a cease and desist notice to the company
with copies marked to the jointproprietors stating that the period of the user
agreement dated 24.9.19 86 expired on 23.9.1991 and the user of the trademarks
in question on or after 23.9.1991 was illegal.
6\. On 30.11.1992 Zeenath Bivi, the appellant herein, filed an earlier suit in
C.S.No.1577 of 1992 on the file of this Court challenging the user of
trademarks by the N.V.K.M.& Sons P.Ltd. company. She also sought for an order
of interim injunction in O.A.No.961 of 1992 restraining the company from
manufacturing, marketing, dealing, supplying and selling scented betel nuts
and tobacco under the trademarks, ROJA, RAJA and KERA. She filed another
application in O.A.No.962 of 1 992 for the appointment of a Court Receiver to
take charge and collect amounts from the market, the dealers, distributors,
etc. On 8.2.199 5 Zeenath Bivi and her children filed applications before the
Registrar of Trademarks for registration of the trademark ROJA in their names
exclusively, and it is stated in the applications that they have been using
the same from 1934 and independently from 1.4.1993. Subsequently on 5.7.1995 a
learned Judge of this Court has passed an order in O.A.Nos.961 and 962 of 1992
dismissing the applications holding that it would not be proper on the part of
the Court to grant the relief of interim injunction restraining the company
from using the trademarks or to appoint a receiver. On 28.8.1995 the appellant
Zeenath Bivi sent a notice to the rest of the joint proprietors dissolving the
partnership firm and questioning their right to use the trademarks. She has
also stated in the notice that the High Court held that other co-owners are
not entitled to efface the right of the appellant Zeenath Bivi as a co-owner
and she started to use the trademark belonging to all the joint owners. On
11.9.1995 the second plaintiff has sent a reply on behalf of joint proprietors
informing that the partnership business has already been dissolved and that
the illegal act of using the trademark exclusively by the appellant Zeenath
Bivi would be defended properly.
7\. In March, 1996 the company filed an independent suit against the appellant
Zeenath Bivi in O.S.No.124 of 1996 on the file of District Munsif, Dindigul,
which was later on transferred to this Court and renumbered as C.S.No.688 of
1996, praying for permanent injunction restraining her from doing business in
scented betel nuts in the same pattern of the company. On 6.2.1996 the
appellant Zeenath Bivi filed eight original petitions before this Court for
rectification seeking to remove the names of other joint proprietors and to
retain the registration of trademarks in her individual name. It is stated
that in March, 1996 paper publications were made by N.V.K.M. & Sons (P) Ltd.
calling for applications from the willing persons to act as its agents. On
24.3.1996 an advertisement was effected by the appellant Zeenath Bivi refuting
the contents of the advertisement given on behalf of the company. It is also
relevant to notice here that in the suit filed by the appellant Zeenath Bivi
in C.S.No.1577 of 1992 the respondents herein were made parties as defendants
and subsequently she made an endorsement giving up them stating that no relief
was prayed against them.
8\. On 5.2.1998 the appellant Zeenath Bivi filed six applications seeking to
register the trademark ROJA in her name claiming independent right over the
trademark. An application in I.A.No.1034 of 1998 was taken out by the firm,
N.V.K.M. & Sons represented by the second plaintiff in C.S.No.688 of 1996 to
implead the firm as second plaintiff in the suit and that application was
dismissed on 24.3.1998. It is stated that after the order of dismissal passed
on 24.3.1998, on 13.4.1998 the partnership firm paid the renewal fees for the
its registration for the period from 1994 to 1998\. An appeal in O.S.A.No.64
of 1998 was preferred against the order passed in I.A.No.1034 of 199 8 and
that appeal was also dismissed on 22.4.1998. It is further stated that on
17.11.2000 the company as well as the firm jointly filed O.S.No.7973 of 2000
on the file of City Civil Court, Chennai against the appellant Zeenath Bivi
praying for permanent injunction and also for damages and an interim
injunction was gr anted by the City Civil Court and against the order of
interim injunction an appeal was filed before the City Civil Court, Chennai in
C.M.A.No.21 of 2001. It is stated on 23.2.2001 that C.M.A. was allowed. On
2.3.2001 a learned Judge of this Court passed an order decreeing the suit in
C.S.No.1577 of 1992 filed by the appellant Zeenath Bivi and dismissing the the
suit, C.S.No.688 of 1998 filed by the company. On 14.5.2001 a C.R.P. No.1541
of 2001 was filed on the file of this Court against the order passed in
C.M.A.No.21 of 2001. Similarly the company filed two appeals in O.S.A.Nos.87
and 88 of 2001. These two appeals along with C. R.P.No.1541 of 2001 were taken
up by a Bench of this Court and this Court, by order dated 14.2.2002,
dismissed O.S.A.Nos.87 and 88 of 2001 filed against the judgment and decree in
C.S.No.1577 of 1992 as well as C.S.No.688 of 1996. Learned Judges also
dismissed the C.R.P.No.15 41 of 2001 which was filed against the order made in
C.M.A.No.21 of 2 001. The Company carried the matter in appeal before the
Supreme Court and the Supreme Court by order dated 8.4.2002 dismissed the
Special Leave Petitions filed against the judgment and decree dated 14.2.2 002
made in O.S.A.Nos.87 and 88 of 2001. The Supreme Court ordered notice in
S.L.P.No.6803 of 2002 filed against the order made in C.R.P.No.1541 of 2001.
The Supreme Court, by order dated 2.12.2002, disposed of S.L.P.No.6803 of 2002
with the following observation:- "whether the finding or observation of the
High Court as to existence of the firm or otherwise could be traced only to
proceeding in C.R. P.No.1541/2001 or otherwise in OSA.Nos.87-88/2001 could be
examined by the trial Court while disposing of the suit pending before it and
depending upon its finding on this aspect give appropriate finding as to
existence or otherwise of the firm".
9\. On 11.5.2002 the joint proprietors issued a notice through their counsel
calling upon the appellant Zeenath Bivi to join them for joint exploitation of
the trademarks on four conditions including the condition to pay to the joint
proprietors a sum of Rs.75 lakhs being the approximate profit/benefit gained
by the appellant Zeenath Bivi. Learned counsel for the appellant relied upon
some portion of the said notice and and we feel that it will be advantageous
to refer to what is stated in the notice itself:-
"Our clients who are all joint proprietors and whose names are enumerated in
para 1 above, propose to carry on business in betel nut goods falling in
clause 31 by using the abovementioned registered trademarks, amongst others,
under the trading style, 'N.V.K.M.& Sons', and/ or 'N.V.K.Mohamed Sultan
Rowther & Sons' and/or 'Roja Betelnut Manufacturing Company' ".
10\. On 22.6.2002 the appellant Zeenath Bivi sent a reply notice through her
counsel refusing to accept the terms of the notice. On 24.6 .2002 O.P.Nos.406
to 411 of 2002 were filed on the file of this Court against the appellant
Zeenath Bivi by other joint proprietors seeking for rectification of the
register by removing the name of the appellant Zeenath Bivi as one of the
proprietors in respect of the registered trademarks. On 8.7.2002 the
respondents herein and the unregistered partnership firm filed a suit in
C.S.No.455 of 2002 against the appellant Zeenath Bivi praying for permanent
injunction restraining her from using the trademarks, from committing
infringement of the copyright and from manufacturing, marketing, selling or
advertising or packing in respect of betel nut/supari of any kind or its
allied products in the course of business using the trademark ROJA or ROSE or
or any other trademark phonetically and deceptively similar to the trademark
ROJA and from using the trading style with the initial N.V.K.M. and also for
damages of Rs.75 lakhs. They also filed interlocutory applications in
O.A.Nos.444 to 447 of 2002. In September, 2002 the appellant Zeenath Bivi also
filed a suit in C.S.No.727 of 2002 against other joint proprietors along with
O.A.Nos.730 to 733 of 2002 claiming almost the similar reliefs as claimed in
C.S.No.455 of 2002. On 31.12.2002 a common order was passed in all the
applications and against that common order, the present appeals have been
preferred. In the appeals preferred by Zeenath Bivi, it is stated, on
31.1.2003 status quo was ordered and it is not necessary to refer to various
interim orders passed in the appeals as we have heard and are deciding the
appeals on merits.
11\. Learned Single Judge while passing the common order in O.A.Nos.444 to 447
and 730 to 733 of 2002 have framed the following points for consideration:
1) Whether the plaintiffs in C.S.No.455 of 2002 have got a prima facie case
and the balance of convenience is in their favour?
2) Whether the defendant in C.S.No.455 of 2002 has made out a prima facie case
and the balance of convenience is in her favour?
> 3\. To what relief?
> 12\. Learned Single Judge held that there is no dispute that the plaintiffs
> 1 to 13 and the defendant are joint proprietors of the trademarks. The
> appellant Zeenath Bivi filed O.P.Nos.104 to 111 of 1996 against other joint
> proprietors for rectification of the register by removing the names of other
> joint proprietors and enter her name as the sole proprietor in respect of
> the registered trademarks. Learned Single Judge held that simply because the
> appellant Zeenath Bivi used the trademarks for seven years it cannot be
> automatically stated that the joint proprietors would be deemed to have lost
> their right or they have abandoned their right. Learned Single Judge also
> held that there is absolutely no evidence to come to the conclusion that the
> joint proprietors have virtually given away their right and they could not
> claim the right in future. Learned Single Judge also held that when the
> parties are joint proprietors of the registered trademarks, the appellant
> Zeenath Bivi has no right whatsoever to use the trademarks exclusively for
> her own benefit and the use, if any, made by her would be for the benefit of
> all the joint proprietors. Learned Single Judge rejected the submission that
> the suit filed by the respondents herein is barred by limitation and held
> that the question whether the suit is barred by time or not is a matter that
> can be considered only in the course of trial on the basis of evidence to be
> adduced by the parties. Learned Single Judge, after noticing the decision of
> the Division Bench in O.S.A.Nos.87 and 88 of 2001, held that the respondents
> have come forward with the suit on the ground that each one of them have the
> right to use the trademarks. Learned Single Judge has taken into account the
> public interest involved in the matter of trademarks. He also held that the
> appellant Zeenath Bivi has not only misappropriated the trademarks for her
> own independent use, but also misappropriated the trading style adopting the
> name, N.V.K.M.Traders, thereby rendering the deception practised upon the
> public complete and absolute. Learned Single Judge held that the appellant
> Zeenath Bivi has no background in the manufacture of betel nuts according to
> know-how and standards of the joint proprietors who have been actively
> associated with the manufacture of the goods for decades as she is a
> housewife without any formal education. Learned Single Judge ultimately held
> that neither the respondents, nor the appellant could claim exclusive right
> to use the trademarks and the exclusive use of the trademarks by the
> appellant Zeenath Bivi is impermissible in law and it could be construed as
> one done for the benefit of all the joint proprietors. He therefore held
> that the respondents/ plaintiffs have made out a prima facie case and the
> balance of convenience is in favour of the joint proprietors and not in
> favour of the appellant Zeenath Bivi alone. He ultimately held that till the
> disposal of rectification applications filed by either side no individual
> joint proprietor has any right to use the registered trademarks for personal
> benefit and the trademarks should be used by the joint proprietors and if
> any one of the joint proprietors is not willing to join with the majority of
> the joint proprietors, then it would be open to the majority joint
> proprietors to use the trademarks on the same trading style and they should
> render a true and proper account once in a month to the other unwilling
> joint proprietor. It is against the common order, the present appeals have
> been filed.
13\. We heard Mr.G.Masilamani, learned senior counsel for the appellant
Zeenath Bivi and Mr.M.K.Rao, learned counsel for the respondents. Both of them
have filed written arguments.
14\. Mr.G.Masilamani, learned senior counsel submitted that the appellant
Zeenath Bivi is the sole proprietor of the trademarks and the firm was
dissolved and converted into a company. He referred to the user agreement
dated 12.7.1984 and submitted that it expired on 12.7 .1989 and thereafter the
company could not exploit the trademarks after 12.7.1989. He submitted that
the trademarks were not used by the joint proprietors after 12.7.1989. He
referred to the provisions of section 46 of the Trade and Merchandise Marks
Act, 1958 (hereinafter referred to as 'Trademarks Act') and submitt ed that
from the date of expiry of the user agreement five years and one month period
has already expired and other joint proprietors have not used the trademarks
and hence, the appellant has taken appropriate action for using the
trademarks. He submitted that except the appellant, no other joint owners had
used the trademarks and the user of the trademarks by the company was not
proper and would not enure to the benefit of the respondents. He submitted
that after 23.9.1991 no one has used the same except the appellant and
referring to the letters dated 28.8.1995 and 27.10.1995, he submitted that the
appellant has openly declared that she was using all the trademarks from 1995
when she launched business and she was exercising her legal rights from the
year 1995 till the institution of the suit by the respondents in July, 2002
and the joint proprietors had not questioned the right of user by the
appellant. He also referred to the Original petition filed for rectification
and submitted that the appellant applied for registration of trademarks in her
name. He submitted that the user by the appellant is not for the benefit of
all the joint owners, nor is it a case of the coowners that the benefit
derived by the appellant was divided among others. He submitted that the
appellant continued to use the trademarks from 1995 and she has become the
exclusive user of the trademarks. He submitted that since other joint owners
have lost their right in the trademarks due to non-user by them, in so far as
other joint proprietors are concerned, the provisions of section 24 of the
Trademarks Act do not come to play and the user by the appellant is bona fide
and open against other co-owners from 1995 and the user by the appellant
cannot be construed to be for the benefit of other co-owners. He referred to
the user of the trademarks prior to 1995 and after 1995 and submitted that the
appellant was not using the trademarks stealthily, but it was an open user and
she was using the trademarks bona fide after taking proper steps. He further
submitted that on the date when the suit was instituted, she was using the
trademarks, but, on the other hand, the co-owners have not used the trademarks
but they proposed to exploit the trademarks. He also submitted that on equity
also the appellant is entitled to succeed as the appellant has been using the
trademarks from 1995 and she has invested considerable sum of money for
setting up business and irreparable loss and injury would be caused to her if
she is prevented from using the trademarks and if the respondents are
permitted to use the trademarks. He also submitted that the use of the
trademarks by the company is not permissible after the decision of this Court
in O.S.A.Nos.87 and 88 of 2002 which has been confirmed by the Supreme Court
and the co-owners are not doing any business and the business that is
allegedly carried on by them is an illegal business. He submitted that the
other co-owners have a proposal to jointly use the trademarks and if they
start a new business, the existing business carried on by the appellant would
be affected. He also submitted that the balance of convenience is in favour of
the appellant as the business was carried on by the appellant even prior to
1995 and the appellant should be allowed to continue her business and she is
prepared to submit accounts and if there are profits, the appellant would
share the profits along with the co-owners, in case she fails in the suit
filed by her. He submitted that the appellant has come to the Court with clean
hands and the respondents have come to the court with unclean hands and made a
false declaration in the Form-IIA filed for registration of the firm wherein
the date of declaration is stated to be 6.4.1998 but the period of declaration
is stated to be 1.4.1990 to 31.3.1991. He also referred to the plaint in
O.S.No.455 of 2002 and submitted that the averments made in the plaint are
incorrect and though the firm is made a formal party, the firm had ceased to
exist on the incorporation of the company. He also submitted that the
assertion that the co-owners have been using the trademarks is not correct and
as far as the observation of the Bench of this Court in O.S.A.Nos.87 and 88 of
2002 in paragraph-33 is concerned, his submission was that it is only an
obiter dictum and there was no issue at all and it was not the subject matter
of suit also. He also submitted that the question of right of the appellant to
use the trademarks as against other joint proprietors did not arise for
consideration before this Court and hence, the observation does not bind the
appellant. He submitted that there was no issue and there was no evidence on
this aspect also and the observation made by the Court is neither necessary,
nor incidental to the main issues that arose in that appeal. He submitted that
the user by the appellant is not detrimental to other co-owners as it does not
affect the rights of other co-owners and the observation cannot be put against
the appellant at the interlocutory stage. Mr.G.Masilamani, learned senior
counsel also submitted that the respondents have acted in a fraudulent and
mala fide manner to exploit the trademarks for themselves. He referred to the
affidavit filed by the appellant and submitted that the respondents have
committed various fraudulent acts in respect of the trademarks. He submitted
that the respondents were paying to the appellant only a sum of Rs.25,000/-
per annum as royalty when the company was doing business with an annual
turnover of Rs.30 crores. He submitted that the respondents have siphoned off
money by floating several sister concerns like M/s.Vaigai Trading Co. Ltd.,
M/s. Jaleel Traders, M/s.M.S.R.Co., M/s.Roja Finance and Investment Ltd. and
M/ s.Rose Agency and thereby depriving the appellant's right over the
legitimate profit which is detrimental to the right and interest of the
appellant. He further submitted that the trademarks should be exploited by all
co-owners, but such right is denied to the appellant and the finding of the
learned Judge of this Court that majority can do the business if any one of
the co-owners is not willing to join them is not correct in the case of
exploitation of trademarks belonging to joint proprietors. He also referred to
the conduct of the respondents and submitted that the respondents decided to
assign the trademarks in favour of the company and according to him, the
respondents have attempted to transfer the trademarks in favour of the
company. He also submitted that even the trademark, ROJA GOLD was claimed by
the respondents as belonging to the company which was negatived by the
Division Bench of this Court. He submitted that the act of respondents in
demanding from the appellant a sum of Rs.75,00,000/- as condition precedent to
admit her into the joint exploitation of the trademarks clearly shows their
intention that they never intended to join the appellant in their association
and according to him, the respondents have acted in a fraudulent manner. He
therefore submitted that the appellant was justified in not joining the other
joint proprietors for the exploitation of the trademarks. He also submitted
that the case pleaded in the notice is different from the case made in the
affidavit filed by the respondents and the user of the trademarks by some of
the joint proprietors without the consent of others is illegal. He also
referred to the notice dated 11.5.2002 and submitted that it clearly indicates
the proposal of the respondents to exploit the trademarks and it does not show
that the respondents have been using the trademarks and the respondents have
not carried on any business. He submitted that the Bench has also held that
the user of the trademarks by the company was not permissible and the benefit
of the user of trademarks cannot be attributed to the respondents as their
claim of user of the trademarks is not substantiated by law. Learned senior
counsel submitted that irreparable and irrecoverable loss would be caused to
the appellant if she is restrained from carrying on the business which she has
been carrying on from 1995. Learned senior counsel submitted that the
appellant would abide by any condition that may be imposed by the Court
pending disposal of the appeal. He therefore submitted that the appellant may
be allowed to use the trademarks. In addition to the oral arguments, learned
counsel for the appellant submitted written arguments also. We have gone
through the written arguments filed by the learned counsel for the appellant.
15\. Mr.M.K.Rao, learned counsel appearing for the respondents, on the other
hand, submitted that the respondents along with the appellant are joint
proprietors of the trademarks. In so far as the law relating to trademarks is
concerned, there should be one mark, one source and one proprietor. He
referred to the judgment of the Division Bench of this Court in O.S.A.Nos.87
and 88 of 2002 and submitted that it is well-established that the rights
vested with the joint owners of the trademarks can be regarded as if those
rights have been vested with a single person. He also submitted that the
Division Bench has clearly held that the use of the trademarks by the
appellant for her own benefit is clearly not an action in accordance with the
provisions of section 24 of the Trademarks Act. He also submitted that the
Division Bench has held that each one of the joint proprietors has the right
to file a suit if he/she is aggrieved by the exploitation of the trademarks by
the appellant for her own benefit. He submitted that on the basis of the
judgment of the Division Bench, the joint proprietors have instituted the suit
in C.S.No.455 of 2002. He also submitted that the basic concept of the
Trademarks Law is that unlike other forms of property or proprietary rights,
the Court has to consider not only the possibility of any injury that may be
caused to the proprietor, but also consider the possibility of the public
being injured by the use of the trademark by other party representing a false
origin and marketing goods of substandard quality. His submission is that the
appellant has not only misappropriated the trademarks for her own benefits,
but also misappropriated the trading style by adopting the name NVKM Traders.
According to him, the appellant has no background in the manufacture of betel
nuts and she is basically a house wife without formal education of any
significance. He submitted that the user of the trademarks by the appellant
has seriously affected the business of joint proprietors and the public are
also victims of the use of the trademarks by the appellant. He submitted that
the appellant has not challenged the finding of the Division Bench of this
Court in O.S.A.Nos.87 and 88 of 2002 and it is only the company that filed
Special Leave Petition before the Supreme Court which was dismissed. He
submitted that in the earlier suit instituted by the appellant against the
company, though originally joint proprietors have been impleaded as parties,
they were given up on the ground that they were not necessary parties in the
suit. Learned counsel referred to the user agreement and various conditions
contained in the user agreement and submitted that the user agreement
contemplates strict and close control to be exercised by the proprietors of
the trademarks over the activities of the company in the use of the trademarks
which are subject matter of the appeals. He further submitted that by the
reason of control exercised by the joint proprietors over the company in
respect of the use of the trademarks, the user by the company must be taken to
be the user by the joint proprietors. He further submitted that though the
agreement was not registered under the provisions of sections 48 and 49 of the
Trademarks Act, but the common law recognises the grant of permission by
registered proprietors of the trademarks to the company provided the
registered proprietors retained the control over the use of the trademarks by
the licensee. He therefore submitted that it cannot be contended that there
was non-user of the trademarks by the joint proprietors. He also submitted
that the period of user agreement came to an end on 12.7.1989 and even after
the expiry of the user agreement, the company was using the trademarks as a
licensee and the appellant had been receiving royalty from the company up to
the year 1993 and she was also a director of the company till 1995 and she was
a dealer of the company even after the expiry of the agreement till 1992. He
also submitted that the appellant made attempts even before the order was
pronounced on 5.7.1995 in O.A.Nos.961 and 962 of 1992 in the suit filed by
her, to start her own business she filed applications before the Registrar of
Trademarks for registration of her name even prior to 1995 which clearly shows
that the appellant had already decided to commence an independent business and
she took advantage of the observation made in O.A.Nos.961 and 962 of 19 92 in
C.S.No.1577 of 1992. He submitted that the fact that she filed various
applications for registration would go against her claim of proprietor of the
trademarks and the various letters issued by the appellant before the order
was passed in O.A.Nos.961 and 962 of 1992 clearly show that the appellant
decided to start a business of her own and her statement that she was forced
to start a business on the basis of the judgment of this Court is not correct.
Learned counsel submitted that even if there is siphoning off funds by way of
incorporation of company by other proprietors, that issue is not relevant in
considering the question of grant of injunction for the use of trademarks.
Learned counsel submitted that undue emphasis should not be placed on the
letter of the joint proprietors wherein the advocate has stated that the joint
proprietors proposed to carry on business. He submitted that the appellant was
fully aware that after the Special Leave Petition filed by the company was
dismissed on 8.4.2002 the company ceased to carry on the business and from
8.4.2002 the joint proprietors have been carrying on the business in the name
and style N.V.K.M. & Sons. He further submitted that the words, "proposed to
carry on business" would really mean "continue to carry on the same business"
and the words do not mean that a new bu siness was intended to be started by
the joint proprietors. Learned counsel referred to various averments made in
the plaint as well as in the affidavit. He also produced certain documents to
show that the joint proprietors were carrying on the business and he submitted
that it is incorrect to state that the business premises of the respondents
was sealed pursuant to the orders of the II Metropolitan Magistrate, Chennai.
He also submitted that the claim of the appellant that the suit filed by the
respondents is barred by limitation is not sustainable. He also submitted that
there is no delay at all in the institution of the suit and the appellant was
put on notice that it is impermissible for her to use the trademarks and there
is no abandonment of the trademarks by the respondents and the company was run
by the joint proprietors using the trademarks. He also submitted that when the
joint proprietors are closely associated with the use of trademarks in the
business, it cannot be stated that there is an abandonment of trademarks by
the joint proprietors. As far as the existence of partnership firm is
concerned, he submitted that the Supreme Court has left open the question to
be decided by the trial Court in O.S.No.7973 of 2000. Mr.M.K.Rao, learned
counsel submitted that the submission of the learned senior counsel for the
appellant that on the expiry of five years and one month from the date of
expiry of the user agreement, the trademarks got lapsed is not sustainable and
section 46 of the Trademarks Act does not come into operation automatically
and a case has to be made out in separate proceedings for non-user of the
trademarks. His submission is that the user by the appellant is impermissible
and the conduct of the appellant clearly shows that she is dishonest and
fraudulent and the fact that she was carrying on business even after the
judgment of the Division Bench shows that she has no inclination to respect
the orders of the Court. He submitted that if the appellant is permitted to
carry on the business using the trademarks, the interest of the joint
proprietors would be seriously affected and the interest of the public would
be seriously prejudiced. He also submitted that the contention of the
appellant that the joint proprietors did not commence the business is not
correct as the documents produced clearly show that the joint proprietors have
been carrying on the business and the auditor's report also shows the turnover
of the business of Rs.8 crores and 17 lakhs from April, 2002. He therefore
submitted that the appellant should be restrained from carrying on the
business using the trademarks for the benefit of her own. He further submitted
that after the expiry of the user agreement on 12.7.1989 the fact that the
company was carrying on the business clearly shows that all the joint
proprietors have impliedly renewed the agreement and the joint proprietors
exercised overall control of the company and the joint proprietors have no
objection for the user of the trademarks by the company. He submitted that
only in the year 1992 the appellant issued notice calling upon the company not
to use the trademarks which were registered in the names of joint proprietors.
He further submitted that there is no provision in the Trademarks Act which
prohibits carrying on the business on the basis of majority decision and there
is nothing illegal if the respondents carry on business for the benefit of all
the joint proprietors as the appellant is not willing to join them in the
business. He submitted that the joint proprietors carried on the business
through the company till 8.4.2002 and after that, they have been carrying on
the business and he prayed this Court to grant injunction as prayed for
against the appellant permitting the joint proprietors to continue to use the
trademarks in the business. He has also filed written arguments and we perused
the same also.
16\. We have considered the submissions of Mr.G.Masilamani, learned senior
counsel appearing for the appellant and Mr.M.K.Rao, learned counsel appearing
for the respondents. Though the arguments were elaborate, the points that
arise for consideration are whether the user of trademarks by the appellant,
Zeenath Bivi in her business is valid in the eye of law and whether there
should be an order of injunction either against the appellant, Zeenath Bivi or
against the respondents and whether the appellant or the respondents can be
permitted to carry on the business using the trademarks in question.
17\. Before considering the points that arise for consideration, it is
necessary to mention here certain developments that took place during the
course of hearing of the appeals. We suggested to the parties during the
hearing of the appeals whether it is possible to arrive at a compromise and
evolve a workable method for carrying on the business as the quarrel is
between the members of the family and in view of the fact that the trademarks
are owned by the joint proprietors and the internecine quarrel between them
would destroy one or the other. Learned counsel appearing for both the parties
have clearly stated that in spite of their best efforts, the parties are not
able to arrive at a compromise. Secondly, at the conclusion of the hearing of
appeal, we directed the counsel for the respondents to produce some evidence
to show that joint proprietors have been carrying on business after 8.4.2002.
When the matter was listed for the production of additional documents as
required by the Court, the first plaintiff in the suit, C.S.No.455 of 2002
(suit filed by the joint proprietors) N. V.K.M.Khader Ibrahim entered
appearance through another counsel and filed an affidavit on 17.10.2003 to the
effect that he was totally ignorant of the proceedings. He has stated that he
has not given any power of attorney to any one for the purpose of initiating
legal proceedings in respect of the trademark ROJA. The respondents were also
given notice and they have filed a counter affidavit denying various
allegations contained in the affidavit of Khader Ibrahim. According to them,
Khader Ibrahim participated in all earlier proceedings and he executed the
power of attorney in favour of N.V.K.M.Raja Mohamed who is the second
plaintiff in C.S.No.455 of 2003 and the second respondent herein. The matter
was again adjourned to 28.10.2003 and the counsel appearing for Khader Ibrahim
produced the copy of police complaint given by Khader Ibrahim and the copy of
legal notice. Mr.M.K.Rao learned counsel for the respondents pointed out that
in the other suit filed by the appellant in C.S.No.727 of 2002 the suit
summons was served on Khader Ibrahim and he received the summons as well as
the copy of the petition on 26.11.2002 which shows that he was aware of the
proceedings. Learned counsel appearing for Khader Ibrahim requested time to
address on merits of the case. Accordingly, the matter was adjourned and when
the case was posted for his arguments on merits of the matter, learned counsel
appearing for Khader Ibrahim merely reiterated the averments contained in the
affidavit filed by Khader Ibrahim. He has also stated that he is not
addressing any argument on merits of the case as his client is not willing to
get himself involved in the quarrel between the family members and he wants to
remain neutral in the proceedings. Since in the affidavit it is stated that
N.V.K.M.Khader Ibrahim has not executed the power of attorney, we called for
the original power of attorney and the same was produced. We also find that
the original power of attorney was produced at the time of institution of the
suit. The Registry of this Court on the basis of the original power of
attorney prima facie came to the conclusion that there was a valid power in
favour of the second respondent herein. In our view, the question whether
N.V.K.M.Khader Ibrahim has validly executed the power of attorney is beyond
the scope of the appeals and that question has to be decided either in an
independent proceedings or at the time of final hearing of the suit. Hence, we
are not expressing any opinion on the question, as we find that the original
power of attorney has been produced by the second respondent and it is also
seen from the records that N.V.K.M.Khader Ibrahim has received suit summons in
the other suit filed by the appellant herein which shows that the plea that he
was not aware of the suit instituted by the respondents in C.S.No.455 of 2002
prima facie is not acceptable. However, we are not expressing any opinion on
that question as the counsel appearing for him has not addressed any arguments
on merits of the case.
18\. As far as the first submission of Mr.G.Masilamani, learned senior counsel
for the appellant that there is no cause of action at all for the institution
of the suit in C.S. No.455 of 2002 is concerned, we find that the
plaintiffs/respondents herein have prima facie established that there is a
cause of action for filing the suit as it is stated by them that the suit
itself was filed pursuant to the judgment of this Court in O.S.A.No.87 and 88
of 2002 dated 14.2.2002 where the Division Bench of this Court has held that
the persons entitled to claim relief against Zeenath Bivi, appellant herein
are the joint owners and each one of them has the right to file suit against
the appellant Zeenath Bivi if he/she is aggrieved by the exploitation of
trademarks by the appellant for her own benefit. The plaintiffs in the suit
C.S.No.455 of 2002 have stated that the cause of action has arisen at Chennai
within the jurisdiction of this Court where the appellant resides and carries
on her business and when the appellant has claimed proprietary rights before
the Registrar of Trademarks at Chennai over the device ROJA and the expression
ROJA. Therefore we are of the view that the plaintiffs have prima facie
established the cause of action for filing the suit arose in Chennai. Further,
that question has to be gone into in detail on the basis of evidence that may
be let in at the time of trial.
19\. As far as the submission of Mr.G.Masilamani, learned senior counsel for
the appellant that the suit is barred by limitation is concerned, we are prima
facie of the view that the decision of this Court in O.S.A.Nos.87 and 88 of
2001 holding that each one of the joint owners would be entitled to institute
suit against the appellant would give rise to a cause of action for the
respondents herein to institute the suit. Moreover, the decision of the
Supreme Court in M/s. BENGAL WATERPROOF LTD. v. M/s.BOMBAY WATERPROOF MFG. CO.
(AIR 1997 S.C. 1 398) is of relevance as the Supreme Court has held that the
cause of action in a suit filed for infringement of trademark continues to
arise de die in diem when the trademark is infringed. We find that the
following principles laid down by the Supreme Court would prima facie apply to
the facts of the case and we are prima facie of the view that it cannot be
stated that the suit is barred by limitation:-
" The cause of action for filing this present second suit is the continuous
and recurring infringement of plaintiff's trade mark by the defendants
continuously till the filing of the present second suit. We asked the learned
counsel for the defendants as to whether pending the suit and at present also
the defendants are trading in the offending goods, namely, bearing the mark
'DACK BACK' and he informed us that defendants even at present are carrying on
this business. Therefore, pending the second suit all throughout and during
the pendency of these proceedings the defendants have carried on the business
of trading in the commodity waterproof raincoats 'DACK BACK'. It is obvious
that thus the alleged infringement of plaintiff's trade mark ' DUCK BACK' and
the alleged passing off action on the part of the defendants in selling their
goods by passing off their goods as if they were plaintiff's goods has
continued all throughout uninterrupted and in a recurring manner. It is
obvious that such infringement of a registered trademark carried on from time
to time would give a recurring cause of action to the holder of the trademark
to make a grievance about the same and similarly such impugned passing off
actions also would give a recurring cause of action to the plaintiff to make a
grievance about the same and to seek appropriate relief from the Court. It is
now well settled that an action for passing off is a common law remedy being
an action in substance of deceit under the Law of Torts. Wherever and whenever
fresh deceitful act is committed the person deceived would naturally have a
fresh cause of action in his favour. Thus every time when a person passes off
his goods as those of another he commits the act of such deceit. Similarly
whenever and wherever a person commits breach of a registered trade mark of
another he commits a recurring act of breach of infringement of such trade
mark giving a recurring and fresh cause of action at each time of such
infringement to the party aggrieved. it is difficult to agree how in such a
case when in historical past earlier suit was disposed of as technically not
maintainable in absence of proper reliefs, for all times to come in future
defendant of such a suit should be armed with a licence to go on committing
fresh acts of infringement and passing off with impunity without being
subjected to any legal action against such future acts."
The Supreme Court has held that the act of passing off is an act of deceit and
tort every time when such tortuous act or deceit is committed by the defendant
and the plaintiff would get a fresh cause of action to come to the Court by
appropriate proceedings and infringement of a registered trademark would also
be a continuing wrong so long as infringement continues.
20\. Mr.G.Masilamani, learned senior counsel submitted that in the cause of
action paragraph in the plaint the plaintiffs/respondents admitted that the
appellant has been using the trademarks from 1995 and if that is taken into
account, the suit would be barred by limitation. However, the question whether
the suit is barred by limitation or not is a matter to be ultimately decided
at the conclusion of trial and we are of the view that the
plaintiffs/respondents, on the basis of the decision of the Supreme Court in
M/s.BENGAL WATERPROOF LTD. Case (AIR 1997 SC 1398), have prima facie
established that the suit is not barred by limitation.
21\. Now let us consider whether the appellant would be justified in using the
trademarks for her benefit. It is true and there is also no dispute that the
appellant Zeenath Bivi commenced her business and has been carrying on her
independent business from the year 1995. She has earlier filed a suit against
the company in C.S.No.1577 of 19 92 in November, 1992 and also filed
applications in O.A.Nos.961 and 962 of 1992 seeking interim injunction and for
appointment of a Court receiver and both the applications were rejected by
this Court on 5.7.1995. After the orders were pronounced in O.A.Nos.961 and
962 of 1992 she issued a notice dated 28.8.1995 wherein she has stated that
the court held that she is one of the co-owners and other co-owners cannot
prevent her from using the trademarks for business purpose. She has also
stated that the Court held that the other co-owners are not entitled to efface
her right as a co-owner. She has stated that she has issued the notice to
dissolve the partnership. She has also stated that she has been exercising her
right in respect of various registered trademarks belonging to the firm as a
co-owner. In the letter dated 27.10.1995 she has stated that she has launched
her own business in supari and started using the trademarks to ensure that at
least her name is not removed from the list of owners of the registered
trademarks. Though the suit instituted by her was decreed and the suit filed
by the company was dismissed, on appeal a Division Bench of this Court
dismissed both the appeals preferred by the company holding that the use of
the trademarks by the appellant Zeenath Bivi for her own benefit is not an
action which is permissible under section 24 of the Trademarks Act.
22\. The Division Bench relied upon the decision of the Supreme Court in POWER
CONTROL APPLIANCES v. SUMEETH MACHINES PVT. LTD. (1994) 2 SCC 448) where the
Supreme Court held as under:-
" There can be only one mark, one source and one proprietor. It cannot have
two origins. Where, therefore, the first defendantrespondent has proclaimed
himself as a rival of the plaintiffs and as joint owner it is impermissible in
law. Even then, the joint proprietor must use the trademark jointly for the
benefit of all. It cannot be used in rivalry and in competition with each
other."
The Bench also held that the trademarks ROJA and RAJA were admittedly
registered in the names of joint proprietors and they have necessarily to act
together and for their common benefit and no one of them can act in a manner
detrimental to the rights of the other or against the wishes of the other.
Though Mr.G.Masilamani, learned senior counsel would submit that the right of
the appellant has not been determined by the Division Bench of this Court and
the Division Bench has merely declared the law, we are prima facie of the view
that the said observation of the Division Bench, even assuming to be an obiter
dictum, cannot be overlooked or side-tracked by the appellant. The appellant
Zeenath Bivi against whom the observation was made has not challenged the said
observation of the Division Bench of this Court whereas the company has
preferred a Special Leave Petition against the judgment of the Division Bench,
and as a party to the judgment, we are prima facie of the view, she is bound
by the judgment of the Division Bench of this Court. Though in the earlier
suit and in the present suit the parties are not the same, we are prima facie
of the view that the observation of the Division Bench of this Court made
against the appellant Zeenath Bivi would bind her as she was a party in the
appeal.
23\. We are of the view, it is not open to the appellant to disregard or
disobey the observation made by the Division Bench of this Court on the ground
that it is an obiter dictum. Apart from the decision rendered in O.S.A.Nos.87
and 88 of 2001, this Court in another unreported decision (between M/s.Shri
Rajaganapathi Sewing Machine and Co. rep. by its Proprietrix Ms.S.Revathi,
Salem and M/s.Radha Sewing Machine and Co. represented by its Partner
R.Varadarajan, No.1, Bungalow Street, Salem-1) in L.P.A.No.116 of 1999, in
which one of us was a party, by judgment dated 23.4.2003, held that a joint
proprietor has no right to exploit the mark for his or her own benefit to the
exclusion of other owners in view of section 24 of the Trademarks Act and it
is implicit in section 24(2) of the Act that when a mark is jointly
registered, the exploitation of the mark must only be for the benefit of all
joint proprietors of the mark and the mark may be used jointly in relation to
an article with which all of them are connected. This Court also held that so
long as the business was for the benefit of the joint proprietors there was no
question of infringement of the mark and only when one of them sought to carry
on business from a different location and as a rival, the user of the mark
becomes unauthorised user and the question of infringement of the mark arises.
24\. Learned Single Judge noticed the provisions of section 24 of the
Trademarks Act and held that when the appellant and the respondents are joint
proprietors of the registered trademarks, the appellant has no right
whatsoever to exclusively use the same and the use, if any, made by her is
only for the benefit of joint proprietors. Further, learned Single Judge also
noticed the letter dated 11.5.2002 issued by the joint proprietors calling
upon the appellant to join them in joint exploitation of the trademarks, and
held that the appellant did not respond to the call, but wanted to use the
trademarks exclusively for her own benefit. Further, learned Single Judge also
noticed that the appellant has no background in the manufacture of betel nuts
as she is basically a housewife without formal education on the basis of
deposition of her husband, Jafer Sait in C.S.No.1577 of 1992 on the file of
this Court, wherein he has stated that the appellant has studied up to 4th or
5th standard and she has not taken any active part in the business and before
their marriage her interest in the business was looked after by her brother
and after the marriage he was personally involved in her business. He has also
admitted that before 19 95 his wife was not doing any business of her own.
25\. The Supreme Court in POWER CONTROL APPLIANCES v. SUMEET MACHINES PVT.
LTD. (1994) 2 SCC 448) laid down the following principle relating to trademark
as under:-
" It is a settled principle of law relating to trademark that there can be
only one mark, one source and one proprietor. It cannot have two origins.
Where, therefore, the first defendant-respondent has proclaimed himself as a
rival of the plaintiffs and as joint owner it is impermissible in law. Even
then, the joint proprietors must use the trade mark jointly for the benefit of
all. It cannot be used in rivalry and in competition with each other."
26\. In CIBA LTD. v. M. RAMALINGAM (AIR 1958 Bombay 56) Chagla,C.J., speaking
for the Bench has held that the object of maintaining a Trademark Register is
that the public should know whose goods they are buying and with whom
particular goods are associated and the duty of the Court is to protect the
public irrespective of what hardship or inconvenience it may cause to a
particular party whose trademark is likely to deceive or cause confusion. The
Bombay High Court also held that the contest is not so much between the
parties to the litigation as it is a contest between the party defending his
right to a particular trademark and the public.
27\. House of Lords in ENO v. DUNN (118 Trademarks Cases 109) reiterated the
same view as under:-
" The question is one between Mr.Dunn and the public, not between Mr.Eno and
Mr.Dunn. It is immaterial whether the proposed registration is or is not
likely to injure Mr.Eno in his trade. Equally immaterial, as it seems to me,
is the fact that for a considerable time Mr. Eno had on the register as his
trade mark the words "Fruit Salt". Mr.Eno may have gained some advantage to
which he was not properly entitled; but that is hardly a reason for permitting
Mr.Dunn to practice a deception upon the public."
28\. The submission of Mr.G.Masilamani, learned senior counsel is that other
joint proprietors have not used the trademarks for a period of five years and
one month after the expiry of the period prescribed in the user agreement and
the non-user of the trademarks by other proprietors would show that the joint
proprietors have lost all their rights in the trademarks and the appellant had
started business independently using the trademarks from 1995 in her own right
when other joint owners disowned the trademarks. He therefore submitted that
the user of the trademarks by the appellant from 1995 is not by virtue of her
right as joint proprietor but by virtue of her independent right and she is
the only proprietor of the trademarks and her use is in no way contrary to the
provisions of the Trademarks Act. We are prima facie of the view that the said
contention is not acceptable as it cannot be said that the joint proprietors
have not used the trademarks after the expiry of five years and one month
period from the date of expiry of the user agreement and it cannot also be
stated that other joint proprietors ceased to have any interest in the
trademarks in question.
29\. Section 46(1) of the Trademarks Act provides for the removal from the
Register of the names of registered proprietors if there is no bona fide use
of trademark in relation to the goods for a period of five years and one
month. It is only an enabling provision enabling a party to approach the Court
or the Registrar of Trademarks for the removal of the name of registered
proprietor from the register if there is any non-use of the trademark for a
prescribed period and if there is bona fide intention not to use the
trademark. The section says that it is open to the aggrieved party to
establish before the High Court or the Registrar of Trademarks that there is
no intention on the part of the registered proprietor not to use the trademark
and the trademark has not been used in certain circumstances of the trade and
there was no intention to abandon the trademark or not to use the trademark in
relation to the goods to which the application relates. In other words, the
non-user for a period of five years and one month does not automatically
render the removal of the names of registered proprietors from the register
and the question has to be considered with reference to the non-user, the
intention and the reasons for the non-user, whether bona fide or not, for over
the stipulated period.
30\. The Supreme Court in HARDIE TRADING LTD. v. ADDISONS PAINT AND CHEMICALS
LTD. (2003 AIR SCW 4788) has considered the scope of section 46 of the
Trademarks Act and held that the intention to use the trademark required of
the proprietor would include the intention to permit the user of the trademark
by the registered user. The Supreme Court also held that there must be
evidence of abandonment and the evidence must be convincing. The Supreme Court
held that the user of trademark may be other than physical and section 46(3)
provides a special defence to the registered proprietor and is to be inferred
from the existence of special circumstances.
31\. On the facts of the case, it cannot be prima facie held that there is
absolutely non-user of the trademarks by other registered proprietors. It is
evident that joint proprietors were carrying on the business prior to the
formation of the firm. The trademarks were used by way of forming a firm and
the business of the firm was subsequently taken over by a company and the
company was permitted to use the trademarks belonging to the joint
proprietors. Even after the expiry of the period provided in the user
agreement in the year 1989, the company has used the the trademarks and all
the joint proprietors including the appellant were the recipients of the
benefits by the use of trademarks by the company without any protest and it
was only in the year 1992 the appellant filed a suit against the company and
thereafter the company filed a suit against the appellant. During the pendency
of the suits, this Court, by an interim order, permitted the company to use
the trademarks. This Court held that other joint proprietors allowed the
company to make use of the trademarks. We are therefore prima facie of the
view that on the expiry of five years and one month from the date of expiry of
the agreement it cannot prima facie be held that other joint proprietors have
lost all their rights in the trademarks in question. Moreover, that question
has to be gone into in detail in the application filed by the appellant or the
respondents for the removal of the name or names of other party in the said
application.
32\. We are also prima facie unable to accept the submission of Mr.
G.Masilamani, learned senior counsel that since the appellant was using the
trademarks as on the date of filing of the suit, she should be permitted to
use the trademarks pending disposal of the suit. The question whether the
appellant can use the trademarks for her own benefit and she can carry on the
business using the trademarks without the consent of other joint proprietors
was one of the issues posed for consideration before the Division Bench of
this Court in O.S.A.Nos.87 and 88 of 2001 and the Division Bench held that the
fact that other joint proprietors have not sought for injunction would not
disentitle them from seeking any relief against the appellant and the licence
for the user of the jointly owned marks can only be given with the consent of
all the joint owners and that is implicit in section 24 of the Trademarks Act.
After considering section 24 of the Trademarks Act, the Bench held that the
user by the appellant is clearly not an action which is permissible under
section 24 of the Trademarks Act. This Court also held that the fact that the
appellant was using the trademarks as on the date of filing the suit is not
material. The appellant has to establish in the suit filed by her that the
user by her is permissible by way of leading evidence and till that is
established, the observation of the Division Bench of this Court that the user
by her is not permissible under section 24 of the Trademarks Act would bind
her, and that observation has become final as far as the appellant is
concerned.
33\. We are also prima facie unable to accept the submission of
Mr.G.Masilamani, learned senior counsel that since the appellant has been
using the trademarks on the date of institution of the suit, her right to use
the trademarks should be protected when her action is not permitted by the
law. We hold that the action which is not permissible under the law cannot be
protected under the orders of the Court. Further, the basic principle of the
Trademark Law, as already seen, is that there must be one mark, one source and
one proprietor and there cannot be two origins and if both the appellant and
the respondents are allowed to market the goods manufactured by them under the
same trademark, the persons who would be really affected would be the general
public as the goods manufactured by them are supari and they are consumer
goods consumed not only by men and women, but also by young people, and
therefore the interest of general public has to be protected.
34\. As far as the other submission of Mr.G.Masilamani, learned senior counsel
that the appellant has established good market and dealership, and great
hardship and loss would be caused to the appellant, if the appellant is
restrained from using the trademarks at this stage is concerned, we have
already held that the user by the appellant of the trademarks in question is
not prima facie permissible under the law. The conduct of the appellant is
also relevant in considering the question. We have already seen that the
appellant earlier instituted a suit against the company and also filed a
petition for injunction restraining the company from using the trademarks.
When this Court rejected that injunction application, she issued a notice on
28.8.19 95 stating that she will be exercising her right with respect to the
trademarks belonging to the firm, N.V.K.M. & Sons. The joint proprietors, by
letter dated 11.9.1995 have stated that the Court has not permitted the
appellant to exercise the alleged right independent of other co-owners. In
spite of the same, the appellant reiterated that she has launched her own
business in supari under the registered trademarks inherited by her from her
father. It is also relevant to mention here that even before the order of this
Court dated 5.7.1995 the appellant filed application on 8.2.1995 for
registration of trademark ROJA in her name. She has stated in the application
for registration that she has been independently using the trademarks from
1.4.1993 and her predecessor-in-title from 1934. Her sons have also filed
similar applications on 8.2.1995 stating that the trademarks were used by
their predecessor-in-title since 1934 and by them from 1.11.1991. Her
intention to use the trademarks is evident from her application dated
8.2.1995. The submission of Mr.M.K.Rao, learned counsel that the order of this
Court rendered in O.A.Nos.961 and 962 of 1992 dated 5.7.1995 was taken
advantage of by the appellant as if the order rejecting her petition for stay
permitted her to use the trademarks cannot be said to be without any force. We
have already noticed that the appellant is basically a house wife and she has
no practical experience in running the business. Any permission granted to her
to run the business using the trademarks ROJA and RAJA would cause confusion
and deception in the minds of consumer-public. The other submission of
Mr.M.K.Rao, learned counsel for the respondents that the appellant continued
to carry on the business even after the judgment of this Court in O.S.A.Nos.87
and 88 of 2001 and she has no regard for the orders of the Court cannot also
stated to be without any force.
35\. The submission of Mr.G.Masilamani, learned senior counsel that the suit
instituted by the respondents herein is hit by acquiescence and laches as the
respondents were aware of the user of the trademarks by the appellant from
1995 has to be examined at the time of final hearing of the suit. We have
already held that the user by the appellant is not permissible as she is only
a joint proprietor and further, in considering the question of acquiescence
the entire conduct of the parties has to be taken into consideration. We have
already seen that there is an user agreement entered into on 12.7.1984 for a
period of five years and even after the expiry of the period prescribed in the
user agreement, the company was using the trademarks and only on 14.3.1992 the
appellant issued a notice stating that the period of user agreement was for a
period from 23.9.1986 to 23.9.1991. However, the stand taken by the appellant
in that notice seems to be not correct as the user agreement commenced on
12.7.1984 and ended on 12.7.1 989 and the supplementary agreement dated
24.9.1986 was entered into as there was a mere change in the ratio of payment
of royalty consequent on the death of one of the co-owners, but the period of
user agreement was not altered and the period of user remained the same,
namely, from 12.7.1984 to 12.7.1989. It is also seen that till 14.3.1992 the
appellant did not raise any objection against the company to use the
trademarks and she was the recipient of the benefit of user agreement without
protest. Thereafter she filed a suit against the company as well as the joint
proprietors and she sought for amendment of the plaint giving up the names of
joint proprietors from the suit and ultimately the suit filed by her and the
suit instituted by the company came to be disposed of by judgment and decree
dated 2.3.2001. During the pendency of those two suits, the appellant sought
for interim injunction restraining the company from using the trademarks and
that application came to be dismissed by order dated 5.7.1995 and that order
has become final as no appeal has been preferred against that order. Hence,
the company was using the trademarks till the disposal of the suit and
thereafter appeals were preferred against the judgment in both the suits and
the appeals were heard and orders were passed on 14.2.2002. The company
carried the matter to the Supreme Court by way of Special Leave Petition and
the Supreme Court dismissed the Special Leave Petition on 8.4.2002.
Admittedly, the company used the trademarks till 8.4.2002. The question then
arises whether the user by the company would amount to user by other joint
proprietors and we propose to consider the question later. However, for the
purpose of considering the question of acquiescence, it cannot be stated that
the joint proprietors have acquiesced in the use of the trademarks by the
appellant in her independent right.
36\. Further, the following observation of B.N.Kirpal,J. (as His Lordship then
was) in M/s.HINDUSTAN PENCILS PVT. LTD. v. M/s. INDIA STATIONERY PRODUCTS CO.
(AIR 1990 Delhi 19) is relevant for the purpose of this case:-
" Even though there may be some doubt as to whether laches or acquiescence can
deny the relief of a permanent injunction, it has been consistently held that
if the defendant acts fraudulently with the knowledge that he is violating the
plaintiff's rights then in that case, even if there is an inordinate delay on
the part of the plaintiff in taking action against the defendant, the relief
of injunction is not denied. Where there is an honest concurren t user by the
defendant then inordinate delay or laches may defeat the claim of damages or
rendition of accounts but the relief of injunction should not be refused. This
is so because it is the interest of the general public, which is the third
party in such cases, which has to be kept in mind. In the case of inordinate
delay or laches, as distinguished from the case of an acquiescence, the main
prejudice which may be caused to the defendant is that by reason of the
plaintiff not acting at an earlier point of time the defendant has been able
to establish his business by using the infringing mark. Inordinate delay or
laches may be there because the plaintiff may not be aware of the infringement
by the defendant or the plaintiff may consider such infringement by the
defendant as not being serious enough to hurt the plaintiff's business.
Nevertheless, if the court comes to the conclusion that prejudice is likely to
be caused to the general public who may be misled in to buying the goods
manufactured by the defendant thinking them to be the goods of the plaintiff
then an injunction must be issued. The Court may, inappropriate cases, allow
some time to the defendants to sell off their existing stock but an injunction
should not be denied."
It is not a case where the plaintiffs/respondents herein have not taken any
action and it is not a case where the appellant has any right to use the
trademarks independently. She used the trademarks in violation of the
provisions of Trademarks Law and there is no delay also on the part of the
respondents in taking action as immediately after the judgment was pronounced
by the Division Bench, which was confirmed in appeal, the suit was filed.
37\. The following observation of the Division Bench of Delhi High Court in
SWARAN SINGH v. M/s. USHA INDUSTRIES (INDIA), NEW DELHI (AIR 1986 Delhi 343)
is also relevant:
" The effect of a registered mark is so clearly defined in the Statute as to
be not capable of being misunderstood. Even if there is some delay, the
exclusive right cannot be lost. The registered mark cannot be reduced to a
nullity. The principles governing other types of injunctions are not to be
readily applied to a case like the present. Of course, if it was a case of a
similar mark as opposed to the same mark, the concurrent user coupled with
delay might be a ground for refusing an injunction. However, when the same
mark is being used, in a sense, the public is deceived into purchasing the
defendant's goods on the belief that they are plaintiffs goods, so a
registered trademark is a casualty, it is the duty of the court to protect the
registered mark. That is the whole concept of registration. So, we cannot
refuse an injunction even if there is some delay especially when the mark is
the same. To refuse the injunction would tantamount to permit a fraud being
practised on unwary customers. This is a matter of principle on which the
Court cannot refuse the injunction."
38\. The Supreme Court in the case of POWER CONTROL APPLIANCES v. SUMEET
MACHINES PVT. LTD. (1994) 2 SCC 448) explained the meaning of acquiescence in
the matter of infringement of trademarks as under:-
"Acquiescence is one of the defences available under section 30(1)(b) of the
1958 Act. Acquiescence is sitting by, when another is invading the rights and
spending money on it. It is a course of conduct inconsistent with the claim
for exclusive rights in a trademark, trade name, etc. It implies positive
acts; not merely silence or inaction such as is involved in laches. 'It is
important to distinguish mere negligence and acquiescence'. Acquiescence is
one facet of delay. If the plaintiff stood by knowingly and let the defendants
build up an important trade until it had become necessary to crush it, then
the plaintiffs would be stopped by their acquiescence. If the acquiescence in
the infringement amounts to consent, it will be a complete defence. The
acquiescence must be such as to lead to the inference of a licence sufficient
to create a new right in the defendant."
39\. Applying the principles laid down by the Supreme Court, it is not a case
where the plaintiffs/respondents herein filed the suit knowing that the
appellant built up a trade as the question whether the appellant would be
entitled to use the trademarks was the subject matter of consideration before
this Court in the earlier litigation. Further, it is a case where the joint
proprietors have decided to use the trademarks along with the appellant, but
in spite of the same, she has been using the trademarks in violation of law.
We are also prima facie of the view that it is not a case where inference can
be drawn that a new right has been created in favour of the appellant.
Further, the plea of acquiescence and delay made by the learned senior counsel
can be considered in detail on the basis of evidence that may be let in and
not on the basis of affidavit and counter affidavit and documents produced
before us. We are prima facie of the view that there is no question of
acquiescence involved in this case.
40\. We are of the view that whatever may be the justification for the
appellant Zeenath Bivi in her stand of refusing to join the other joint
proprietors for the joint exploitation, be it diversion of funds or excise
duty evasion or the attempt of the respondents to transfer the trademarks to
the company or the alleged fraudulent acts of the respondents, that would not
give her right to use the trademarks exclusively for her own benefit in
violation of the provisions of the law.
41\. Learned senior counsel also relied upon various acts of respondents and
then commented upon their acts stating that there is substantial siphoning off
funds which is not advantageous to the proprietors of the trademarks. We are
of the view that the contention raised by the learned counsel for the
appellant is beyond the scope of the appeals which have been filed against the
infringement of trademarks. Further, the acts complained of are all against
the company and not against the joint proprietors and these are all matters of
evidence which are to be considered at the time of trial.
42\. Further, the submission of Mr.G.Masilamani, learned senior counsel is
that the joint proprietors from the beginning have decided to assign the
trademarks in favour of the company. He referred to the draft deed of sale of
trademarks in favour of the company and submitted that there is a perpetual
fraud committed by the joint proprietors and the act of joint proprietors
would show that they continued to treat the company as the sole proprietor of
the trademarks which is illegal and detrimental to the interest of the
appellant. However, this submission is also a matter of evidence. Further, the
Division Bench of this Court in O.S.A.Nos.87 and 88 of 2001 held that the
concept of piercing the veil of company on the facts of the case could not be
invoked having regard to the conduct of the company and that of the joint
proprietors of the trademarks.
43\. Mr.G.Masilamani, learned senior counsel also submitted that the
respondents have not denied the case of mala fide and fraud raised by the
appellant. He also submitted that the respondents were paying to the appellant
only a meagre sum of Rs.25,000/- per annum towards royalty whereas the company
was doing business with a turnover of more than 24 crore rupees. He referred
to the auditor's report to show that there is siphoning off money. He also
referred to paragraph Nos.3,4 and 6 of the additional reply affidavit filed by
the appellant in O.A.Nos.730 to 733 of 2002. Mr.M.K.Rao, learned counsel for
the respondents, on the other hand, referred to the rejoinder affidavit filed
by the respondents. As we have already stated these are all matters that
should be gone into at the time of trial.
44\. Another fact that was brought to the attention of this Court by
Mr.M.K.Rao, learned counsel for the respondents is that the appellant had
instituted proceedings under the Companies Act for winding up of N.V.K.M. &
Sons (P) Ltd. in C.P.No.87 of 1992 on the file of this Court on the score that
the respondents 1 to 3 were involved in the mismanagement of funds which was
later withdrawn. As we have stated earlier, these are all matters which are
required to be decided on the basis of evidence.
45\. Learned senior counsel for the appellant also referred to the deposition
of Kadher Ibrahim, first respondent herein, who was examined as D.W.2 in
C.S.No.1577 of 1992 and submitted that he has stated in his deposition that in
a food adulteration case the Kerala Court imposed fine and imprisonment on him
as well as one G.Subbiayan and imposed fine on the company. However, it is not
necessary to consider this submission, as already held by this Court in
O.S.A.Nos.87 and 88 of 2001, the appellant would be entitled to have the
benefit of injunction against the company and further these are all matters
which are to be decided on the basis of evidence and not on the basis of
averments made in the affidavits by the parties. He also submitted that the
respondents have gone to the extent of developing a trademark, ROJA GOLD as
they also claimed in O.S.A.Nos.87 and 88 of 2001 that the company had
developed a trademark, ROJA GOLD and in the affidavit they have also stated
that they have no objection for the company to use the trademarks, RAJA, ROJA,
KERA and ROJA GOLD. In the affidavit they have stated that the company used
the trademarks. Learned counsel also referred to the judgment in O.S.A.Nos.87
and 88 of 2001 wherein the Division Bench of this Court held that the claim of
the company that it developed the trademark, ROJA GOLD is not tenable and the
company could not assert any right to use the trademark ROJA GOLD and that
mark is merely an extension of the registered trademark RAJA ( sic ROJA) and
the use of that mark by the company would also amount to infringement of
trademarks. He also submitted that the respondents have acted fraudulently and
the fraudulent intention of the respondents is clear when they demanded a sum
of Rs.75 lakhs as a precondition for the appellant to join them for joint
exploitation by notice dated 11.9.1995. He also submitted that the notice
issued by the respondents was not for joint exploitation of the trademarks,
but to file a suit which is not proper and justified.
46\. We are of the view that in considering the question whether the appellant
should be permitted to use the trademarks in question, the right of the
appellant to use the trademarks and the interest of public are of foremost
importance and since we are prima facie of the view that the use of the
trademarks by the appellant who happens to be one of joint proprietors for her
own benefit is impermissible under the law and the ultimate sufferer would be
the public at large, the appellant is not entitled to use the trademarks in
question. As far as various serious allegations made by the respondents are
concerned, those questions require a detailed investigation of facts and they
have to be examined during the trial of the suit.
47\. It is very well to remember that we are sitting in appeal over the order
passed by the learned Judge of this Court and we would be justified in
interfering with the order of the learned Judge only if it is established that
the learned Judge has not taken into consideration relevant facts and the
decision has been arrived at by the learned Judge taking into consideration
irrelevant facts without evidence in support of his conclusion and the
decision is perverse and not sustainable in law. But in so far as the view
taken by the learned Judge about the permissibility of the appellant to use
the trademarks is concerned, we find that the learned Judge has taken into
consideration all relevant aspects of the matter and applied the law and it
cannot be stated that the conclusion of the learned Judge is perverse and not
sustainable on the facts of the case.
48\. The next question that arises is whether the respondents should be
permitted to use the trademarks during the pendency of the suit. While
considering the question, it is necessary to briefly recapitulate the facts.
N.V.K.Mohamed Sultan Rowther formed a proprietary concern, called,
N.V.K.Mohamed Sultan Rowther and Sons which was later converted into a
partnership firm by including the sons and daughters of N.V.K.Mohamed Sultan
Rowther. On the death of M.V.K.Mohamed Sultan Rowther, the trademarks devolved
on his sons and daughters and they continued to retain the ownership of the
trademarks with them and they carried on the business in the name and style,
N.V.K. Mohamed Sultan Rowther & Sons till 1984 when a company called,
N.v.K.Mohamed Sultan Rowther & Sons (P) Ltd. was incorporated. Though it was
contended that the respondents 1 to 4 tampered the agreement by inserting the
words, " and also to transfer the registered trademark to the proposed
company", that question has to be decided at the time of trial of the suit.
There is no dispute that the registered trademarks were not transferred to the
proposed company, but the company was allowed to exploit the trademarks by the
user agreement dated 12.7.1984 for a period of five years. We have already
referred to some of the terms of the agreement earlier and a reading of the
agreement clearly shows that the joint proprietors had retained complete
control and supervision over the quality, specifications of the articles to be
manufactured by the company with the direction to the company that it should
market the products with a clear indication that the co-owners, namely,
N.V.K.Mohamed Sultan Rowther and his sons and daughters are the proprietors of
the trademarks. There was a further direction that the company should assist
the co-owners in protecting the right of the coowners in the marketing area of
the goods. That agreement expired on 12.7.1989 and there was a supplementary
agreement dated 24.9.1986 as one of the co-owners passed away and her legal
heirs along with other co-owners permitted the company to use the trademarks
on payment of royalty for the same period as mentioned in the original
agreement dated 12.7.1984. Though the agreement was not registered as per the
provisions of section 48 of the Trademarks Act, the company continued to use
the trademarks on the same terms of the agreement stated earlier. The
appellant Zeenath Bivi received royalty from the company till 31.3.1991. We
have already referred to the litigation instituted by the appellant against
the company and by the company against the appellant also.
49\. When the matter came before this Court, this Court in O.S.A. Nos.87 and
88 of 2001 proceeded on the basis that the agreement was required to be
registered under the provisions of the Trademarks Act and following passages
of the judgment of the Division Bench of this Court are relevant:-
" That agreement was to remain in force till 12.07.1989. Though the agreement
contemplated the possibility of renewal, no renewal has been effected, nor was
any fresh agreement executed after that date. On the 24th of September 1986 by
a supplementary royalty agreement, the rate of royalty payable for the scented
betel nuts sold under the trade mark 'Roja' was revised under the deed,
Ex.D.6, but the other terms of the user agreement remained unaltered. The user
agreement, however, was not registered with the Registrar of Trademarks and
sections 48 and 49 of the Trade Marks Act, and Rules 82, 83 and 88 of the
Trade Mark Rules were not complied with". xxx xxx xxx " The user agreement
which was required to be registered under the provisions of the Trade and
Merchandise Marks Act, 1958 (the Act) not having been registered, the company
cannot be regarded as the registered user even during the currency of the user
agreement. Any semblance of right in the company to use the marks clearly came
to an end when that agreement expired. The continued user of the marks clearly
amounts to infringement. The submission for the company that there is no
infringement cannot therefore be accepted."
50\. The Court proceeded on the basis that the agreement was required to be
registered under the provisions of the Trademarks Act and on that basis, it
came to the conclusion that the continued user of the trademarks by the
company was not permissible. However, it is wellsettled by the decision of the
Supreme Court in M/s. GUJARAT BOTTLING CO. LTD. v. COCA COLA COMPANY (AIR 1995
S.C. 2372) that apart from the provisions relating to registration of the
agreement, it is permissible for the registered proprietor of a trademark to
permit a person to use his registered trademark and such licensing of
trademark is governed by common law. The following observation of the Supreme
Court in that case would be relevant:-
" Apart from the said provisions relating to registered user, it is
permissible for the registered proprietor of a trade mark to permit a person
to use his registered trade mark. Such licensing of trade mark is governed by
by common law and is permissible provided (i) the licensing does not result in
causing confusion or deception among the public; (ii) it does not destroy the
distinctiveness of the trade mark, that is to say, the trade mark, before the
public eye, continues to distinguish the goods connected with the proprietor
of the mark from those connected with others; and (iii) a connection in the
course of trade consistent with the definition of trade mark continues to
exist between the goods and the proprietor of the mark. (See: P. Narayanan Law
of Trade Marks and Passing Off, 4th Ed., Para 20.16.P.335). It would thus
appear that use of a registered trade mark can be permitted to a registered
user in accordance with provisions of the Act and for that purpose the
registered proprietor has to enter into an agreement with the proposed
registered user. The use of the trade mark can also be permitted de hors the
provisions of the Act by grant of licence by the registered proprietor to the
proposed user."
51\. In Narayanan on Trademarks (4th Edn. at page 334) the following
observation of the learned author is also relevant:
"In the case of an unregistered licensed user, if the registered proprietor
retained the power to exercise sufficient control over the use of the mark as
to ensure that it would not become deceptive, and that he exercised such
control when necessary, the user of the mark by the licensed user inured to
the benefit of the proprietor and the registration cannot be attacked on the
ground of non-user or deceptive use. The definition of a trade mark does not
require that use of a trade mark indicate the identity of the proprietor or of
any registered user."
52\. In FATIMA TILE WORKS v. SUDARSAN TRADING COMPANY LTD. (AIR 1992 Madras
12) AR.Lakshmanan,J.(as His Lordship then was) was dealing with the case of a
licence granted by a company to use the trademark and the company retained the
power of control over the user, and the learned Judge held that the user of
the trademark by the licensee can legitimately be said to be the user by the
company and it cannot be said that there is non-user by the company.
53\. A similar question arose before a Division Bench of the Calcutta High
Court in CYCLE CORPORATION OF INDIA LTD. v. T.I.RALEIGH INDUSTRIES PVT. LTD.
(AIR 1995 Calcutta 73) where the Calcutta High Court considered the provisions
of section 46 of the Trademarks Act and held that the expression, 'by any
proprietor thereof' in section 46 would mean and include not only the
proprietor, but also any registered user and any other bona fide authorised
user. The Calcutta High Court held as under:-
" In dealing with the scope of section 46 of the said Act it was argued on
behalf of the respondents, both before the trial Court as also before us that
removal of a mark is highly prejudicial consequence on the registered
proprietor. There is no dispute that Raleighs are the registered proprietor.
Mr.Chakraborty, the learned senior counsel for the respondents submits that
the expression "by any proprietor thereof" should not be restricted to the
user by the proprietor himself or any registered user but should also take in
its sweep a bona fide authorised user. The learned trial Judge accepted this
submission as well founded to which we agree. We also agree with the learned
trial Judge when he says that removal of trade marks amount to depriving the
registered proprietor of the benefit of registration and prejudicially affects
his proprietary rights, in effect he is deprived of his property in the mark.
The learned Judge also proceeded to observe that Legislature did not intend
the owner to be deprived of his property at the instance of a person who has
been authorised to use the mark by the owner himself merely because the user
is not registered. We agree with this observation of the learned trial Judge.
In our view the said expression "by any proprietor thereof" should not be
restricted to the user by the proprietor himself or any registered user, but
it should also be taken into account if it is used by bona fide authorised
user."
54\. The said decision of the Calcutta High Court was upheld by the Supreme
Court in CYCLE CORPN. OF INDIA LTD. v. T.I. RALEIGH INDUSTRIES PVT. LTD. (AIR
1996 S.C. 3295) wherein the Supreme Court laid down the law as under:-
" It is true that while exercising discretion, the Court under section 46 of
the Act should take into consideration not only commercial interest of the
parties but also public interest. In para 21.82 at page 386 of the Law of
Trade Marks and Passing-off by P.Narayanan(4th Edn.), it is stated that the
Court or the Registrar has discretion in granting or refusing an application
for rectification. Ordinarily, however, the mark will be expunged (sic) (taken
off) when the factual circumstances necessary for the removal are established
unless it is shown that the case comes within the exceptions provided in
subsection (3). The High Court refused to exercise the discretion to strike
off the trade mark from the register. It is seen that the appellant had not
abandoned at any point of time, the use of the trade mark of the respondent-
registered proprietor till filing of the application. Though the appellant has
not used the trade mark by itself since 19 54 and after the expiry of the
permitted use by Sen Raleigh until the notice was issued by the respondent
directing the appellant not to use the trade mark, the appellant came to use
the same in passing off bicycles manufactured by it under trade mark of the
respondent. It is not relevant for the purpose of section 46(1)(b) whether the
bicycles were manufactured with the assistance of technical know-how passed on
by Sen Raleigh or the permitted user. Suffice it to state that the appellant,
as a fact, had used the trade mark of the respondent in passing off the
bicycles manufactured by it. The High Court, in our view, declined for good
reason, to rectify the trade mark under section 46(1)(b) of the Act. We are
also not persuaded to take a different view from that of the High Court. In
these circumstances, we are of the view that the High Court has properly
exercised its discretion and refused to rectify and strike off the trade mark
from the register of trade marks of the Registrar."
The same is the view taken by the Supreme Court in HARDIE TRADING LTD. v.
ADDISIONS PAINT AND CHEMICALS LTD. (2003 AIR SCW 4788).
55\. We have gone through the relevant clauses of the user agreement and find
that the joint proprietors have retained complete control over the use of
trademarks by the company and the permission to use the trademarks was granted
to the company subject to the condition that the user by the company should
not result in causing any confusion or deception in the minds of the public or
destroying the distinctiveness of the trademarks. Though the company was
permitted to use the trademarks, but there are clauses to the effect that
there should be a distinction between the goods connected with the proprietor
of the mark from those connected with others. The clauses also provided that
there must be a connection in the course of trade consistent with the
definition of trademarks continuing to exist between the goods and the
proprietor of the trademarks. Further, the directors are the joint proprietors
and they are not strangers. They exercised control over the affairs of the
company. The company was formed only to exploit the trademarks and the company
was functioning under the direct control and supervision of the joint
proprietors and in the user agreement there were clauses to show that there
existed a close link or connection between the goods manufactured and marketed
with the trademarks in question by the joint proprietors of the trademarks.
56\. Further, the decision of this Court in O.S.A.Nos.87 and 88 of 2 002 was
rendered in the case of company and joint proprietors were not parties in that
proceedings and the observation made by the Court that the agreement required
to be registered under section 48 of the Trademarks Act was not registered and
the company could not be regarded as the registered user even during the
currency of the user agreement would not strictly bind the joint proprietors.
Further, the joint proprietors have placed the agreement before the Court to
show that the joint proprietors had retained the control and supervision in
the user of trademarks by the company. Further, it is also not necessary to go
into the question whether the user by the company is an authorised one or not
for the purpose of deciding the issues that arise in these appeals as the user
by the company under the user agreement can prima facie be taken to be the
user by the joint proprietors during the currency of the period of agreement
and even after the expiry of the agreement, the user can be impliedly taken to
be the user by the joint proprietors as the company used the trademarks on the
same terms and conditions contained in the earl ier agreement and therefore it
cannot be prima facie stated that the joint proprietors have not used the
trademarks even after the expiry of the agreement entered into by them with
the company.
57\. The appellant, as we have already found, has instituted the suit
(C.S.No.1577 of 1992) only in the year 1992 and till 1992 she was receiving
the royalty and she was also a dealer of the company products for Chennai
region. It therefore can be easily stated that till the appellant issued the
notice dated 14.3.1992, all the joint proprietors including the appellant can
be said to have used the trademarks through the company. We have already
referred to the result of the litigation instituted by the appellant as well
as by the company. Moreover, till the suit instituted by the appellant was
decreed in her favour on 2.3.2001, on the basis of the injunction order passed
by this Court dated 5.7.1995, the company was using the trademarks. This Court
held that nearly 95% of the co-owners agreed for the company to make use of
the trademarks and hence, there was no infringement of trademarks by the
company and there was no use of false trademarks or false description and it
can therefore be stated that till the case was decided by this Court in favour
of the appellant, the user by the company cannot be said to be illegal as this
Court had not prevented the company from using the trademarks and the user by
the company can also be taken to be the user by the joint proprietors of the
trademarks.
58\. The judgment of learned Judge of this Court granting decree in favour of
the appellant was upheld by the Division Bench of this Court in O.S.A.Nos.87
and 88 of 2001 and the Supreme Court also refused to grant leave when the
company approached the Supreme Court by way of Special Leave petition on
8.4.2002. We are therefore prima facie of the view that there was no
abandonment by the joint proprietors by permitting the company to use the
trademarks either during the currency of the agreement or after the expiry of
the agreement till the suit was finally decided against the company.
59\. The question whether it is permissible for one of the joint proprietors
to withdraw her consent when other joint proprietors have granted consent to
the company to use the trademarks has to be gone into during the course of
trial of the suit. It is relevant to point out that it is the case of the
respondents that after the decision of the Supreme Court rendered in Special
Leave Petitions filed against the judgment in O.S.A.Nos.87 and 88 of 2002 they
have started using the trademarks in the business carried on by them.
60\. Mr.G.Masilamani, learned senior counsel submitted that the entire
business of the firm was taken over by the company. The Bench of this Court in
O.S.A.Nos.87 and 88 of 2001 has held that the firm was dissolved, though not
formally declared, and yet the dissolution was brought about when this user
agreement was executed. However, we have already noticed the order of the
Supreme Court in S.L.P.No.6803 of 2002 wherein it was held that the question
regarding the existence of the firm has to be examined by the trial Court
while disposal of the suit and hence, we are of the view that in view of the
direction of the Supreme Court, the question regarding existence of the firm
has to be decided by the trial Court while disposing of the suit and hence, we
are not rendering any finding on that question.
61\. Learned senior counsel also referred to the plaint and submitted that in
the plaint the partnership firm is shown as one of the parties as 14th
plaintiff, but described as a formal party to the suit. His submission was two
fold that since in the earlier suit instituted the firm was a party and the
decision rendered in the earlier proceedings would bind the firm. In so far as
this submission is concerned, we have already noticed that the other joint
proprietors were not parties to the earlier proceedings and therefore the
decision rendered in the earlier proceedings would not operate as res judicata
and would not bind the joint proprietors. Secondly, he submitted that when the
firm ceased to exist, it is inconceivable that the firm should continue to use
the trademarks after 8.4.2002 when the Supreme Court refused to grant leave in
the Special Leave Petitions. This submission is also not acceptable as it is
not the case of the respondents that the firm is using the trademarks after
8.4.2002, but the joint proprietors have been using the trademarks after
8.4.2002.
62\. Mr.G.Masilamani, learned senior counsel would contend that the plea is
not sustainable as the premises of the company has been sealed by virtue of
the orders passed by the II Metropolitan Magistrate, Chennai. However,
Mr.M.K.Rao, learned counsel for the respondents produced before us a copy the
order of the Second Metropolitan Magistrate, Chennai dated 14.5.2002
suspending his earlier order and submitted that on the basis of that order,
the manufacturing and marketing betel nut/supari under the trademarks RAJA and
ROJA in the premises at Dindigul were done by the joint proprietors. Further,
learned counsel also pointed out that the warrant issued by the II
Metropolitan Magistrate, Chennai shows that the police was authorised to
effect search and take possession of spurious scented betel nuts, raw
materials, all machines, wrappers, material packets, bags and accounts and to
bring them before the Court with an endorsement certifying its execution.
Learned counsel submitted that the warrant was issued only against the company
in May, 2002 and at that time, the company was not carrying on the business.
We find that no such argument was advanced before the learned Judge when he
heard the applications and the arguments proceeded on the basis that the joint
proprietors were using the trademarks after 8.4.2002.
63\. We have gone through the pleadings to find out the stand of the parties.
There is no dispute that in so far as the trademark ROJA is concerned, it was
registered in the name of N.V.K.Mohamed Sultan Rowther & Sons, 95, Market
Road, Dindigul with the registration No.32 4704 along with associated
trademarks and it was renewed for a period of seven years from 19.4.1998 which
will expire only on 18.4.2005. The reply notice issued by the appellant
through her counsel dated 22.6.2002 shows that it is her case that the joint
proprietors, Raja Mohammed, Khader Ibrahim, Asi Mohammed, e tc. were using the
trademarks without any right and authority and selling their goods and thereby
deceiving the public. In the notice the respondents were called upon to do the
following things:
" i. to forthwith withdraw all infringing spurious products from the market
and destroy the same;
ii. to stop the illegal business using the Trade Marks for their own benefit
contrary to law;
ii. to surrender all seals, machines, articles of manufacture, labels, packing
materials, vehicles instruments used in the process of manufacture and
marketing of such infringing spurious products; "
64\. Further, in the affidavit filed by the appellant in O.A.Nos.730 to 733 of
2002 in C.S.No.727 of 2002 she has stated that the respondents were doing
their illegal acts of infringement of trademarks and trading style and
therefore prayed for interim injunction restraining them from infringing the
trademarks, from passing off their goods as that of the appellant and from
infringing the copyright. In the suit filed by her, she has stated that the
cause of action for the suit arose on all subsequent occasions when the
respondents continued to produce offending products under the trademarks. In
the plaint filed by the respondents in C.S.No.455 of 2002 they have
categorically stated as under:-
" Plaintiffs 1 to 13 are the joint owners/proprietors of trademarks and in the
Trade Mark Registry, their names find a place and stated as all are trading as
N.V.K.M. & Sons; N.V.K. Mohamed Sultan Rowther & Sons at 95, Market Road,
Dindugal 624 001. "
They have also filed the labels used by them during the course of business.
The respondents have also taken a positive stand in their counter affidavit
stating that the respondents have been carrying on the business by means of
licence granted to the company and on the basis of orders of the Division
Bench of this Court, the company ceased to exist and thereafter the
respondents have been using the trademarks as joint proprietors of the same
and the appellant completely ignored the bona fide invitation extended to her
by the respondents. They also stated as under:-
" The allegation of the application that the respondents are proposing to
start a new venture to manufacture betel nut by using the trade mark ROJA as
contained in paragraph 11 of the affidavit is concocted. The applicant has
completely ignored the bona fide invitation extended to her by the respondents
under notice dated 11.5.2002 which was issued only with a view to afford an
opportunity to the applicant to join with the other joint proprietors and also
for joint exploitation of the trade marks as contemplated under the orders of
the Honourable Division Bench. But the applicant has completely disregarded
the generosity of the respondents and bent upon sticking to her stand without
mending her ways and with a greed to somehow misappropriate the trade marks
belonging to the joint proprietors for herself. The respondents being left
with no other option have instituted rectification proceedings in O.P.No.406
to 411 of 2002 to remove the name of the applicant from the trade mark
register and the same are pending before this Honourable Court."
They have repeated the same thing in paragraph-29 of the affidavit stating
that the respondents have not at any point of time withdrawn themselves from
using the trademarks and on the other hand, they have been all along involved
in the manufacture of the betel nut business under the trademarks without any
interruption at any point of time. The appellant also in her affidavit has
stated that the respondents have committed infringement of trademarks and they
are also guilty of passing off action apart from infringement of trademarks.
65\. The parties have come with a definite case that the joint proprietors
have been using the trademarks after the judgment of Division Bench of this
Court. We have already noticed that this point was not a subject matter of
consideration before the learned Judge of this Court and the point now sought
to be raised by Mr.G.Masilamani, learned senior counsel is only on the basis
that subsequent to the decision of the Division bench of this Curt, there was
an order by the Second Metropolitan Magistrate, Chennai ordering seizure of
the premises.
66\. Mr.G.Masilamani, learned senior counsel referred to the notice issued on
behalf of the joint proprietors dated 11.5.2002 wherein in paragraph-3 it is
stated as under:-
" Our clients, who are all joint proprietors and whose names are enumerated in
para-1 above propose to carry on business in betel nut goods falling in Clause
31 by using the above-mentioned registered trademarks, amongst others, under
the trading style 'N.V.K.M. & Sons' and/or 'N.V.K.Mohamed Sultan Rowther &
Sons', and/or 'Roja betel nut Manufacturing Company'. Even though from 1995
you have been independently and to the exclusion of all our clients, using the
abovementioned regd. trade marks in betel nut business, now that such use by
you has been disapproved by the DB judgment cited above, and since your name
presently appears as a joint proprietor in the Register of Trade Marks with
respect to the above-mentioned regd. trade marks, by this notice our clients
hereby call upon you to join our clients in this joint exploitation of the
said trade marks ...." Referring to the words, 'propose to carry on business
in betel nut goods', learned senior counsel submitted that since in the notice
dated 11.5.2002 the respondents have stated that they proposed to carry on the
business, it would imply that they did not carry on business even before
11.5.2002 and the stand taken by them now that the joint proprietors have been
carrying on the business before 8.4.2002 is against the stand taken in their
notice. He also referred to the plaint and the affidavit filed by the
appellant wherein she has stated that the respondents have not used the
trademarks, but they only proposed to use carry on the business. He also
submitted that the appellant was directed by the respondents to pay a sum of
Rs.75,00,000/- as pre-condition to join them in the joint exploitation and the
money has not been paid by the appellant and therefore the plea of the joint
proprietors that they have been using the trademarks is not sustainable.
67\. We have considered the submissions of Mr.G.Masilamani, learned senior
counsel and we have referred to the averments made in the plaints in both the
suits as well as the affidavits and counter affidavits filed by the parties.
In the affidavit the appellant has stated that the respondents are trying to
pass off their goods as those of the appellant. We have also referred to the
pleadings as well as the averments made in the affidavits. Though there are
averments in the plaint as well as in the affidavits that the respondents are
carrying on business, however, to satisfy ourselves whether the joint
proprietors have been carrying on the business, we directed the counsel for
the respondents to produce documents in support of their case. Mr.G.
Masilamani, learned senior counsel objected to the production of the documents
and submitted that the respondents in the plaint including in the cause of
action paragraph has not stated the actual date of commencement of their
business and therefore the documents now sought to be introduced are forged
documents. Learned senior counsel referred to the decision of the Allahabad
High Court in NARAIN DAS v. II ADDL. DIST. JUDGE, MORADABAD (AIR 1999 All.74),
the decision of this Court in A.MUNUSWAMI v. R.SETHURAMAN (AIR 1995 Mad. 375)
and the decision of the Supreme Court in BOMBAY CORPORATION v. PANCHAM (AIR
1965 S.C.1 008). The Supreme Court in Bombay Corporation case (AIR 1965 SC
1008 ) has held as under:-
" No doubt, under R.27, the High Court has the power to allow a document to be
produced and a witness to be examined. But the requirement of the High Court
must be limited to those cases where it found it necessary to obtain such
evidence for enabling it to pronounce judgment. This provision does not
entitle the High Court to let in fresh evidence at the appellate stage where
even without such evidence it can pronounce judgment in a case. It does not
entitle the appellate Court to let in fresh evidence only for the purpose of
pronouncing judgment in a particular way. In other words, it is only for
removing a lacuna in the evidence that the appellate Court is empowered to
admit additional evidence."
In A.Munuswami's case (AIR 1995 Mad.375) this Court held that the documents
marked as exhibits without proof cannot form basis of the judgment. In Narain
Das's case (AIR 1999 All. 74) the Allahabad High Court held that when a party
seeks to introduce additional evidence, the application must be supported by
an affidavit of the party.
68\. There can be no quarrel over the proposition of law laid down by the
Supreme Court as well as by this Court and the Allahabad High Court. It is
necessary to mention here the decision of this Court in HAW PAR BROS.
INTERNATIONAL LTD. v. TIGER BALM CO.(P) LTD. & ORS (199 6 PTC (16)(DB) 311)
wherein a Division Bench of this Court held as under:-
" At the interlocutory stage it is the practice to accept documents filed
along with affidavit. The respondents have also filed number of such documents
and if regular proof is necessary, the documents filed by both sides should be
completely ignored. If that procedure is adopted, it is not possible in any
interlocutory application to grant relief to parties."
However, we are making it clear that we are not relying upon any of the
additional documents produced to come to a conclusion as the parties
themselves in the pleadings have proceeded on the basis that the respondents
have been carrying on business as joint proprietors. The suit filed by the
appellant also proceeds on the basis that the respondents/plaintiffs have been
carrying on the business and hence, she prayed for injunction against the
passing off action. The respondents/plaintiffs in their affidavit have taken a
definite stand that they have been carrying on the business as joint
proprietors in more than one place. Since learned senior counsel for the
appellant has submitted that the business premises was sealed under the orders
of the II Metropolitan Magistrate, Chennai, learned counsel for the
respondents has produced a copy of the order of the learned II Metropolitan
Magistrate dated 14.5.2002 wherein he suspended his earlier order. Further
that order was passed against the company and not against the joint
proprietors. Learned counsel for the respondents produced before us the copy
of letter of the Chartered Accountant to show that the business of the company
was carried on by N.V.K.M. & Sons from April, 20 02. He has also enclosed the
copy of certificate showing the sales turnover from April, 2002 to August,
2003 and the copy of report of sales-tax authority in Form-A1 in respect of
the sales outside the State. It is also stated that the firm has been allotted
with a Permanent Account Number. He has also enclosed along with the report
the invoice-cum-delivery chalans of N.V.K.M. & Sons for the period from 3.5
.2002 to 11.10.2003. Learned counsel for the respondents has also produced
before us the returns filed under the Central Excise Act for and from the
month of April, 2002 wherein the Superintendent of Central Excise has affixed
his signature and the returns have been filed till the month of August, 2003.
Learned counsel for the respondent has also produced before us the sample
bills issued to advertising agents of N.V.K.M. & Sons, Dindigul.
69\. We are making it clear that we are not placing any reliance on any of the
documents, but the fact of production of documents is recorded. We are of the
view, de hors the additional documents produced before us, the respondents
have prima facie established on the basis of the pleadings that they have been
carrying on the business from April, 2002. However, it is a matter that has to
be gone into during the course of trial. We wanted to satisfy ourselves that
the respondents were jointly carrying on the business as in the letter dated
11.5.2002 issued by the joint proprietors to the appellant it is stated that
they proposed to carry on the business. Mr.G.Masilamani, learned senior
counsel placed emphasis on the expression, 'propose to carry on' and submitted
that the expression clearly shows that the respondents proposed to carry on
the business and it implies that they did not carry on the business till
11.5.2002 and the stand taken by the respondents that they were carrying on
the business from April, 2002 is not sustainable. However, we are prima facie
of the view that the mere use of the expression, 'propose to carry on' in the
letter dated 11.5.2002 cannot be construed to mean that the joint proprietors
were not carrying on the business on the date of the letter and the letter has
to be read as a whole and in the letter there was an invitation to the
appellant to join with them in the joint exploitation of the trademarks. In
that context, if the letter is read, the expression, 'propose to carry on' can
be construed to mean that the appellant was requested to join the other joint
proprietors for joint exploitation of the trademarks.
70\. Mr.G.Masilamani, learned senior counsel also filed certain additional
documents along with an affidavit sworn by the appellant and submitted that
the documents clearly show that the licence number continues to be the same.
In this regard, he also referred to the letter wherein learned counsel for the
respondents was directed to produce certain documents, but he did not produce
any document. He also referred to the show-cause notice issued by the Office
of Commissioner of Central Excise, Madurai both to the company and the
partnership firm. Counsel for the respondents has given explanation for each
one of the documents, however, it is not necessary to consider the same as we
are prima facie of the view that the respondents have established that the
were carrying on the business on the date of institution of the suit.
Therefore we are not rendering any finding on the question whether it is
permissible for other joint proprietors to use the same licence number granted
under the Central Sales Tax Act or the Factories Act to the company and
whether the joint proprietors have been using the same registration number
granted under the provisions of Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax Act and Central
Sales Tax Act to show their continuity in the business. We are of the view
that these are all matters that are to be decided at the time of trial of the
suit.
71\. Further, the question that has to be seen is whether on the date of
presentation of the plaint, namely, July, 2002 the respondents/plaintiffs were
carrying on the business. In the letter dated 22.6.2 002 issued on behalf of
the appellant in response to the notice dated 11.5.2002 issued by the joint
proprietors, the appellant has stated that the joint proprietors are using the
trademarks without any right or authority and selling their goods as those of
the appellant. In the letter the appellant called upon the joint proprietors
to stop their illegal business using the trademarks for their own benefit. The
respondents filed their suit subsequent to the notice dated 22.6.2002. When
there was an admission by the appe llant that the respondents have been
carrying on the business even in the month of June, 200 2, we are prima facie
of the view that the joint proprietors have proved that they have been
carrying on the business on the date of institution of the suit.
72\. So far as the other submission of Mr.G.Masilamani, learned senior counsel
that there is a contradiction between the stand taken by the respondents in
their notice dated 11.5.2002 and the stand now taken is concerned, we are of
the view, that is a matter which requires evidence and the respondents have to
establish that the other joint proprietors are carrying on the business from
April, 2002.
73\. The other submission of Mr.G.Masilamani, learned senior counsel is that
there are fraud and mala fide acts done by the respondents. So far as this
argument is concerned, we are of the view that this question has to be gone
into at the time of trial. He also submitted that there is a deliberate
attempt by the respondents to appropriate the trademarks. We are of the view
that this is also a matter that has to be gone into at the time of trial and
it cannot be decided now.
74\. We are also of the view that the disability which the appellant faces by
virtue of the operation of section 24 of the Trademarks Act would equally
apply to the respondents as well. It is relevant to notice here that the first
respondent has stated that he wants to remain neutral in the proceedings.
75\. The question that arises is what will be the proper relief that can be
granted in the appeals. We have already held that the appellant is one of the
joint proprietors and on the basis of the judgment of the Division Bench of
this Court her user of the trademarks is impermissible. On the other hand, the
respondents have shown that they have been carrying on the business on the
date of institution of the suit. The question whether the joint proprietors
are entitled to exploit the trademarks when one of the joint owners objects to
the same has to be gone into at the time of trial. As it is the case of the
joint proprietors that they are exploiting the trademarks, we hold that the
joint proprietors should not be denied the relief. Since the joint proprietors
have shown that they have been carrying on the business on the date of
institution of the suit, we are of the view that the business should be
protected and if the joint proprietors are also injuncted from carrying on the
business, it will kill the business. Since the appellant has come out of the
group, if the respondents are also restrained from using the trademarks, it
will not benefit any of the parties to the suit. We also find that the matter
is also pending for rectification of Trademarks Register in respect of the
trademarks in question and final decision has not been taken in that
proceedings.
76\. Moreover, the question whether it is open to one of the joint owners to
prevent the licensee to use the trademarks when there was a licence granted to
a licensee to use the trademarks has to be examined at the time of trial of
the suit. Further, the question as to the effect of one of them withdrawing
from the association and preventing other joint owners from exploiting their
right is a question that has also to be decided at the time of final hearing
of the suit.
77\. As far as the decision of this Court in O.S.A. Nos.87 and 88 of 2002
holding that the use of the trademarks by the company cannot be regarded as
that of the joint proprietors especially when one of the joint proprietors
objected to the use by the other joint owners is concerned, the decision was
rendered as against the user by the company and since the joint proprietors
were not parties to that proceedings, the above observation made by this Court
in O.S.A.Nos.87 and 88 of 2002 does not bind the respondents herein. Further,
we have already held that the court proceeded on the basis that the user
agreement was required to be registered under the provisions of the Trademarks
Act and under the common law it is permissible for the owners of trademarks to
allow the licensee to use the trademarks provided the control is retained by
the owners of the trademarks. Since the respondents were not parties to that
proceedings, the above observations of this Court in O.S.A.Nos.87 and 88 of
2002 do not bind the respondents herein.
78\. We are of the view that the order of the learned Single Judge holing that
the appellant Zeenath Bivi is not entitled to use the trademarks in question
is not liable to be interfered with as we find that the said view cannot be
said to be unreasonable or arbitrary or perverse. Learned Single Judge came to
the conclusion on the basis of the decision of the Supreme Court and the
decision of the Division Bench of this Court. Though the view of the learned
Single Judge that majority of the joint proprietors would be entitled to
exploit the trademarks may not be quite accurate, however, we find that he
exercised his discretion on the basis that there should be a joint
exploitation by all and only if there is unwillingness by one or some of joint
proprietors, other joint proprietors would be entitled to exploit the
trademarks. We are of the view that the above decision has been taken in the
interest of the running of the business and continued exploitation of
trademarks pending consideration of the applications for rectification.
79\. We are therefore of the view, pending consideration of the disputed fact
and law, the business carried on by the respondents should be carried on by
the respondents 2, 3 and 5 and the respondents 2, 3 and 5 shall carry on the
business in their capacity of receivers and they are also entitled to exploit
the trademarks in question for and on behalf of and for the benefit of all the
joint owners. We are of the view, considering the nature of the business and
in the interests of the business, if an outsider is appointed as a receiver,
it would result in divulging the trade secrets and know-how in the manufacture
of supari to others. In this situation, we appoint the respondents 2,3 and 5
as joint receivers to carry on the business as it is stated that the fourth
respondent is an insane person. Though there is no material to show that he is
an insane person, we are of the view that in view of the allegation made
against him, it will not be proper to appoint the fourth respondent as
receiver. Further, it is also stated that the appellant refused to ac cept the
offer of joint exploitation made by the respondents. The first respondent has
stated that he wants to remain neutral in the proceedings. In the
circumstances, we appoint the respondents 2,3 and 5 as receivers to run the
business and exploit the trademarks in question. The receivers shall maintain
proper accounts and they are empowered to carry on the business till the
disposal of the suits. One week's time from the date of the receipt of the
order is given to the concerned respondents/ receivers to accept the
receivership and if any one of them does not express willingness or declines
to accept, other receivers shall carry on the business. If all of them express
unwillingness, the Registry is directed to post the matter after two weeks for
further directions. The receivers are also directed to submit annual accounts
before the Court on or before 31st of March every year.
80\. In the result,
a) there will be an order of injunction pending suits against the appellant
Zeenath Bivi from exploiting the trademarks in question;
b) the business hitherto carried on by the respondents shall be carried on by
the respondents 2, 3 and 5 in their capacity of receivers and they are
permitted to exploit the trademarks in question for and on behalf of and for
the benefit of all the joint owners;
c) the respondents 2, 3 and 5, namely, M.Raja Mohamed, M.Asi Mohamed and
A.Zaithoon Bivi are appointed as receivers to carry on the business;
d) the receivers shall submit annual accounts of the business carried on by
them on or before 31st of March every year; and
e) since we are ordering injunction against the appellant from exploiting the
trademarks in question, the judgment so far as it relates to the appellant is
concerned is suspended for a period of three weeks to enable her to make
alternative arrangements.
With the above directions, all the appeals are dismissed. No costs. All the
C.M.Ps. are closed.
Index: Yes Website: Yes na.
To The Sub Asst. Registrar, Original Side, High Court, Madras.

80\. In the result,
a) there will be an order of injunction pending suits against the appellant
Zeenath Bivi from exploiting the trademarks in question;
b) the business hitherto carried on by the respondents shall be carried on by
the respondents 2, 3 and 5 in their capacity of receivers and they are
permitted to exploit the trademarks in question for and on behalf of and for
the benefit of all the joint owners;
c) the respondents 2, 3 and 5, namely, M.Raja Mohamed, M.Asi Mohamed and
A.Zaithoon Bivi are appointed as receivers to carry on the business;
d) the receivers shall submit annual accounts of the business carried on by
them on or before 31st of March every year; and
e) since we are ordering injunction against the appellant from exploiting the
trademarks in question, the judgment so far as it relates to the appellant is
concerned is suspended for a period of three weeks to enable her to make
alternative arrangements.
With the above directions, all the appeals are dismissed. No costs. All the
    -Vs-
    1. M.Khader Ibrahim
    2. M.Raja Mohamed
    3. M.Asi Mohamed
    4. S.Rahila Bivi
    5. A.Zaithoon Bivi
    6. S.Mohamed Ismail
    7. R.Asha Banu
    8. M.Zahira Banu
    9. M.Parveen Roja
    10.S.Sakkarai Mohamed
    11.J.Rahmath
    12.S.Raja Rashool
    13.M.Roja Mohamed
       rep. by his son, Mr.R.Noorul Amin                    ...     Respondents
    O.S.A.Nos.34 to 37 of 2003:
    Mrs.J.Zeenath Bivi                      ...     Apellant.
                                            vs.
    1. N.V.K.M.Khader Ibrahim
    2. N.V.K.M.Raja Mohamed
80\. In the result,
a) there will be an order of injunction pending suits against the appellant
Zeenath Bivi from exploiting the trademarks in question;
b) the business hitherto carried on by the respondents shall be carried on by
the respondents 2, 3 and 5 in their capacity of receivers and they are
permitted to exploit the trademarks in question for and on behalf of and for
the benefit of all the joint owners;
c) the respondents 2, 3 and 5, namely, M.Raja Mohamed, M.Asi Mohamed and
A.Zaithoon Bivi are appointed as receivers to carry on the business;
d) the receivers shall submit annual accounts of the business carried on by
them on or before 31st of March every year; and
e) since we are ordering injunction against the appellant from exploiting the
trademarks in question, the judgment so far as it relates to the appellant is
concerned is suspended for a period of three weeks to enable her to make
alternative arrangements.
With the above directions, all the appeals are dismissed. No costs. All the
    -Vs-
    1. M.Khader Ibrahim
    2. M.Raja Mohamed
    3. M.Asi Mohamed
    4. S.Rahila Bivi
    5. A.Zaithoon Bivi
    6. S.Mohamed Ismail
    7. R.Asha Banu
    8. M.Zahira Banu
    9. M.Parveen Roja
    10.S.Sakkarai Mohamed
    11.J.Rahmath
    12.S.Raja Rashool
    13.M.Roja Mohamed
       rep. by his son, Mr.R.Noorul Amin                    ...     Respondents
    O.S.A.Nos.34 to 37 of 2003:
    Mrs.J.Zeenath Bivi                      ...     Apellant.
                                            vs.
    1. N.V.K.M.Khader Ibrahim
    2. N.V.K.M.Raja Mohamed
80\. In the result,
a) there will be an order of injunction pending suits against the appellant
Zeenath Bivi from exploiting the trademarks in question;
b) the business hitherto carried on by the respondents shall be carried on by
the respondents 2, 3 and 5 in their capacity of receivers and they are
permitted to exploit the trademarks in question for and on behalf of and for
the benefit of all the joint owners;
c) the respondents 2, 3 and 5, namely, M.Raja Mohamed, M.Asi Mohamed and
A.Zaithoon Bivi are appointed as receivers to carry on the business;
d) the receivers shall submit annual accounts of the business carried on by
them on or before 31st of March every year; and
e) since we are ordering injunction against the appellant from exploiting the
trademarks in question, the judgment so far as it relates to the appellant is
concerned is suspended for a period of three weeks to enable her to make
alternative arrangements.
With the above directions, all the appeals are dismissed. No costs. All the
    -Vs-
    1. M.Khader Ibrahim
    2. M.Raja Mohamed
    3. M.Asi Mohamed
    4. S.Rahila Bivi
    5. A.Zaithoon Bivi
    6. S.Mohamed Ismail
    7. R.Asha Banu
    8. M.Zahira Banu
    9. M.Parveen Roja
    10.S.Sakkarai Mohamed
    11.J.Rahmath
    12.S.Raja Rashool
    13.M.Roja Mohamed
       rep. by his son, Mr.R.Noorul Amin                    ...     Respondents
    O.S.A.Nos.34 to 37 of 2003:
    Mrs.J.Zeenath Bivi                      ...     Apellant.
                                            vs.
    1. N.V.K.M.Khader Ibrahim
    2. N.V.K.M.Raja Mohamed
    3. N.V.K.M.Asi Mohamed
    4. N.V.K.M.Roja Mohamed
    5. S.Rahila Bivi
    6. A.Zaithoon Bivi
    7. S.Mohamed Ismail
    8. A.Asha Banu
    9. M.Zahira Banu
    10.M.Parveen Roja
    11.S.Sakkarai Mohamed
    12.Rahamath Jinnah
    13.S.Raja Razhool Mohamed
80\. In the result,
a) there will be an order of injunction pending suits against the appellant
Zeenath Bivi from exploiting the trademarks in question;
b) the business hitherto carried on by the respondents shall be carried on by
the respondents 2, 3 and 5 in their capacity of receivers and they are
permitted to exploit the trademarks in question for and on behalf of and for
the benefit of all the joint owners;
c) the respondents 2, 3 and 5, namely, M.Raja Mohamed, M.Asi Mohamed and
A.Zaithoon Bivi are appointed as receivers to carry on the business;
d) the receivers shall submit annual accounts of the business carried on by
them on or before 31st of March every year; and
e) since we are ordering injunction against the appellant from exploiting the
trademarks in question, the judgment so far as it relates to the appellant is
concerned is suspended for a period of three weeks to enable her to make
alternative arrangements.
With the above directions, all the appeals are dismissed. No costs. All the
    -Vs-
    1. M.Khader Ibrahim
    2. M.Raja Mohamed
    3. M.Asi Mohamed
    4. S.Rahila Bivi
    5. A.Zaithoon Bivi
    6. S.Mohamed Ismail
    7. R.Asha Banu
    8. M.Zahira Banu
    9. M.Parveen Roja
    10.S.Sakkarai Mohamed
    11.J.Rahmath
    12.S.Raja Rashool
    13.M.Roja Mohamed
       rep. by his son, Mr.R.Noorul Amin                    ...     Respondents
    O.S.A.Nos.34 to 37 of 2003:
    Mrs.J.Zeenath Bivi                      ...     Apellant.
                                            vs.
    1. N.V.K.M.Khader Ibrahim
    2. N.V.K.M.Raja Mohamed
    3. N.V.K.M.Asi Mohamed
    4. N.V.K.M.Roja Mohamed
    5. S.Rahila Bivi
    6. A.Zaithoon Bivi
    7. S.Mohamed Ismail
    8. A.Asha Banu
    9. M.Zahira Banu
    10.M.Parveen Roja
    11.S.Sakkarai Mohamed
    12.Rahamath Jinnah
    13.S.Raja Razhool Mohamed
80\. In the result,
a) there will be an order of injunction pending suits against the appellant
Zeenath Bivi from exploiting the trademarks in question;
b) the business hitherto carried on by the respondents shall be carried on by
the respondents 2, 3 and 5 in their capacity of receivers and they are
permitted to exploit the trademarks in question for and on behalf of and for
the benefit of all the joint owners;
c) the respondents 2, 3 and 5, namely, M.Raja Mohamed, M.Asi Mohamed and
A.Zaithoon Bivi are appointed as receivers to carry on the business;
d) the receivers shall submit annual accounts of the business carried on by
them on or before 31st of March every year; and
e) since we are ordering injunction against the appellant from exploiting the
trademarks in question, the judgment so far as it relates to the appellant is
concerned is suspended for a period of three weeks to enable her to make
alternative arrangements.
With the above directions, all the appeals are dismissed. No costs. All the
