Allahabad High Court
Smt. Ahmadi Usman vs State Of U.P. Thru' Secretary ... on 2 March, 2012
Bench: Sunil Ambwani, Manoj Misra
    HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD
    AFR
    Judgment reserved on 01.02.2012
    Judgment delivered on 02.03.2012
    Civil Misc. Writ Petition No.5369 of 2003
    Smt. Ahmadi Usman v. State of U.P. & Ors.
    Hon. Sunil Ambwani, J.
Hon. Manoj Misra, J.
1\. The petitioner is aggrieved by the order dated 27th September, 2001 of the
State Government by which she has been punished with 50% deduction of her
pension, after her retirement as Asstt. Director (Basic), Allahabad on
31.8.2000, for which she was served with charges, vide chargesheet dated
5.6.1998 by the State Government with the approval of Governor of Uttar
Pradesh, and with approval to the punishment by the U.P. Public Services
Commission dated 12.7.2001.
2\. We have heard Shri Avanish Mishra, learned counsel for the petitioner.
Learned Standing Counsel appears for the State respondents.
officiating appointment of the next seniormost teacher could not have been
treated as misconduct or on account of which any loss was caused to the State
Government.
30\. We further find that the departmental enquiry did not comply with the
principles of natural justice in as much as no oral enquiry was held nor any
witnesses were led or opportunity was given to the petitioner to lead oral
evidence. There was no finding recorded by the enquiry officer or by the
disciplinary authority that the petitioner has committed acts of gross
misconduct or have caused any loss to the State Government to exercise powers
under Art.351A of the Civil Services Regulation for making deductions from her
pension.
31\. The writ petition is allowed. The impugned order dated 27.9.2001 passed
by the Secretary, Education, Anubhag-13, U.P. Lucknow is set aside. The
respondents are directed to restore the entire pension of the petitioner. She
will be paid the entire amount of arrears of pension and retirement dues, if
any, within a period of three months. Since the departmental enquiry was
Learned Standing Counsel appears for the State respondents.
3\. The petitioner was appointed as Asstt. Teacher on 26.9.1961 in Government
Girls Inter College, Azamgarh. After selections she was appointed as Lecturer
of Urdu in Government Girls Inter College, Ghazipur in 1965. She was selected
for appointment on the post of Principal in the year 1990 and thereafter as
Principal of Government Girls Inter College, Daha, Meerut. In 1995 she was
promoted as District Inspector of Schools and was posted in Distt. Gonda from
where she was transferred to Distt. Mau in 1995 and on 1.11.1997 she was given
additional charge of District Inspector of Schools, Azamgarh. She was posted
as Distirct Inspectors of Schools, Jaunpur on 2.11.1997, and retired on
superannuation serving as Asstt. Director (Basic) at Allahabad on 31.8.2000.
4\. A chargesheet dated 5.6.1998, was served upon her, when she was posted as
District Inspector of Schools, Mau, with following allegations:-
"I. The petitioner had accorded approval to one Sri Mohd. Fuzail Ansari on the
post of Lecturer (Urdu) in Muslim Inter Collegte, Mau without there being a
sanctioned post.
II. The petitioner accorded financial approval and made the payment of the
following teachers in different institutions mentioned herein below:-
a) Shri Ganesh Dutt Upadhyaya V.R.K. Inter College Assistant Teacher Validpur
Mau
b) Sri Ram Narain Prasad Janta Siksha Niketan Inter College, Dubari, Mau
c) Sri Naseem Khan (Peon) Taleemuddin Inter College, Mau
d) Sri Ajajul Hassan Taleemuddin Inter (Assistant Teacher) College, Mau
e) Sri Mustaq Ahmad Darul Uloom Clerk Niswa, Mau A appointment as peon in
National Inter College, Mohamdabad, Gohana III. In violation of the order
dated 19.9.1997 passed by this Hon'ble Court, the petitioner certified
signature of the Manager on 22.9.1997.
IV. The petitioner had negligently submitted the certificate regarding
utilisation of Rs.60,000/- for construction of Common Room in Shaheed Inter
College, Madhuwan, District-Mau.
The petitioner illegally certified the signature of Sri Brijendra Yadav
ignoring the Senior Lecturer Sri Surendra Nath Chaubey."
5\. The petitioner submitted a detailed reply to the charges on 15.9.1998. In
respect of charge no.1 she submitted that she had already given an explanation
to Director (Madhyamik) U.P. on 23.4.1998, a copy of which was enclosed with
the reply. In reply to charge no.2 the petitioner stated that she passed the
order dated 1.11.1997 for releasing salary of Shri Ganesh Dutt Upadhyay,
Asstt. Teacher, VRK Inter College, Validpur on the interim order dated
15.4.1997 passed by the High Court. In respect of Ram Narain Prasad, Asstt.
Teacher, Janta Siksha Niketan Inter College, Dubari, Mau, she submitted that
he was appointed against substantive vacancy. She had requested the Accounts
Officer to submit report on 1.6.1996, on which she was advised by him on
8.7.1996 that financial approval can be given to his salary in view of the
orders of the High Court, and consequently she passed an order on 28.10.1997,
and was thereafter relieved on transfer on 1.11.1997. In respect of Shri
Naseem Khan, Peon in Taleemuddin Inter College, Mau, she submitted that he was
appointed on the death of late Imran Khan by decision of District Level
Selection Committee on 19.8.1997 in which the approval of the Accounts Officer
was also included. The charge of illegally approving appointment of Shri
Naseem Khan was not found proved.
6\. In respect of Shri Ajajul Hasan, Asstt. Teacher in Taleemuddin Inter
College, Mau the petitioner submitted that he was appointed on the vacancy
caused on the retirement of Shri Shameem Ahmad, the Principal of the college
on 30.6.1997. The financial approval of the appointment was given by the
Deputy Director of Education on 26.6.1997. He was Asstt. Teacher in the same
college. Shri Niyaj Ahmad was allowed to officiate as Principal and in his
place Shri Ajajul Hasan was appointed temporarily and had worked from
13.10.1997 to 14.5.1998.
    7.	In respect  of Shri Mustaq Ahmad, Clerk  in Darul Uloom Niswa, Mau, she had approved payment of salary in pursuance to the directions     of the High Court dated 22.8.1997  in Writ Petition No.28021 of 1994  on which the Deputy Director of Education, Azamgarh  had given orders on  his application  dated 12.12.1997,  for payment    of salary.
    8.	In respect of charge no.3 the petitioner submitted that the Committee of Management was elected in the election   meeting  dated 21.9.1997.  She approved the signature of Shri Shyam Bihari Tiwari as Manager on 22.9.1997.  A Writ Petition No.30872 of 1997   was filed in which the High Court passed orders on 21.9.1997, not to declare the result.  The copy of the order was issued    from the Copying Section of the High Court on 22.9.1997  and that she had received the order much after she had   verified the signatures of the elected Manager.  No contempt proceedings    were initiated by any party    for compliance  of the order.
9\. In respect of charge no.4 the petitioner submitted that the building of
common room constructed from Rs.60,000/- allocated to Shaheed Inter College,
Madhuwan, Mau was complete. Some finishing work was required to be done. Since
the entire amount was exhausted, the utility certificate given by the college
was forwarded by her. She submitted that she remembers that the DIOS, Mau had
in his letter dated 16.12.1997 mentioned that the building is still under
consideration.
10\. In respect of charge no.5 the petitioner replied that Shri Surender Nath
Chaubey had filed Writ Petition No.6837 of 1997 against the order of his
suspension dated 18.2.1997, which is still pending. Shri Akhilesh Dubey and
Shri Raghunath Singh were juniors to him. They had given in writing that they
are not willing to work as Officiating Principal on which Shri Brijendra Yadav
was allowed to officiate as Officiating Principal. So far as allegation of
giving opportunity to Shri Surendra Nath Chaubey is concerned, since the
matter was pending and Shri Brijendra Yadav was continuing under the interim
orders of the High Court, the petitioner found that her approval may amount to
contempt to the High Court and thus she approved the signature of Shri
Brijendra Yadav as Officiating Principal.
    11.	Along with reply the petitioner also  requested   to supply   copies of the orders of the High Court;  the vacancy position of the colleges; and   the date on which the    requisition   was sent to the Commission to fill up the post,  in respect of charge no.2/2.
    12.	The petitioner also forwarded a letter on 9.12.1998  for providing her the files of Shri Ganesh Dutt Upadhyay  and Shri Ram Narain Prasad, which were available   in the office of the Deputy Director of Education,  Azamgarh for verifying the facts regarding status of the vacancy in the college.  She also requested for the orders of the High Court in the case of Shri Ram Narain Prasad.
    13.	It is submitted that no  oral enquriy was held.  The enquiry report of Sushri  Urmila Shukla  does not disclose    that   any dates were fixed in the enquiry, or    any  opportunity    of hearing  was given  to the petitioner.  Further  there  is nothing   to demonstrate that any witnesses   were examined   or the petitioner was given any opportunity  to cross-examine them  or to lead oral evidence in her defence.  The petitioner  made a request on 23.12.1998   that  she does not want to produce   any more documents on which the enquiry officer closed the proceedings and submitted a report, which was forwarded to the petitioner along with letter of the Deputy Director   of Education, Directorate of Education, U.P. Allahabad dated 22.7.1999.  The petitioner  gave a reply to the enquiry report   on 23.8.1999, in which she submitted that the findings have been arrived   at without   looking    into the records and the directions  issued by the High Court in the writ petitions filed in the matters in which     she is alleged to have  given approvals     on her own. 
    14.	On the retirement of the petitioner on  31.8.2000  the State Government  took sanction of the Governor, under Art.351A of the Civil  Services Regulations, to continue  with   the enqiry, which was given on 15.2.2001.
    15.	By  order dated 27th September,  2001  signed by the Secretary  to the Government of U.P.   after getting approval of the U.P. Public Service Commission and the Governor of U.P.,  the   State Government found charge nos.1, 3, 4 and 5   out of five charges, to be fully established and   after considering the petitioner's  explanation to the enquiry report, she was punished with  deduction   of 50%  of her pension. 
16\. Shri Avanish Mishra, learned counsel for the petitioner submits that
though the enquiry officer in her report did not find approval of appointment
of Shri Naseem Khan, Peon and Shri Mustaq Ahmad, Clerk, she was found guilty
of the allegations of charge no.2 in respect of Shri Ganesh Dutt Upadhyay,
Shri Ram Narain Prasad and Shri Ajajul Hasan. The conclusions of enquiry
officer in respect of charge Nos.4 and 5 are more in the nature of doubt than
the proof of the charges. The disciplinary authority, however, in its order,
which has not been corrected, found charge Nos.1, 3 4 and 5 to be proved. He
submits that these mistakes demonstrates that the enquiry officer and the
disciplinary authority did not apply their mind to the proof of charges
against the petitioner for which she was made to suffer by delay in
finalisation of her gratuity and pension and award of provisional pension
until, the final orders were passed. Her pension was finally fixed on
11.7.2003 and gratuity was calculated by order dated 12.8.2005.
17\. Shri Avanish Mishra submits that during the pendency of the enquiry the
State Government, under the Proviso to Art.309 of the Constitution of India,
made the U.P. Government Servant (Discipline and Appeal) Rules, 1999. Sub-rule
(4) of Rule 9 of the Rules provides for action on enquiry report, and which
provides for passing reasoned order imposing one or more penalty mentioned in
Rule 3. Shri Avanish Mishra submits that no oral enquiry was held nor the
petitioner was given any opportunity to produce witnesses in her defence. The
order reducing pension by 50% is by way of major penalty, even if it is not so
defined in the Rules, as it has permanent effect and takes away a part of
pension, which is a valuable property right. The reservation of powers under
Art.351A of the Civil Services Regulations to recover from pension whole or
any part of pecuniary loss by way of withholding or withdrawing the pension or
any part of it, is a punishment, which may be awarded on account of gross
misconduct, after the retirement of the delinquent government servant, when it
is found that the actions of delinquent government servant had resulted into
loss to the State Government. He submits that in the present case the orders
were passed by the petitioner, in almost all the charges, in pursuance to the
interim orders issued by the High Court and that there is no finding recorded
by the enquiry officer that on account of approvals given by the petitioner
any financial loss was caused to the State Government. In the circumstances
the petitioner could not have been punished with reduction of 50% of her
pension after her retirement under Art.351A of the Civil Services Regulations.
He has relied upon the State of U.P. v. Brahm Dutt Sharma, (1987) 2 SCC 179,
followed by Division Bench judgment of the High Court in Gopi Chand Vishnoi v.
State of U.P. & Anr., 2007 (4) AWC 3591; Atma Deen Srivastava v. State of U.P.
& Ors., 1998 (4) AWC 218 and Ravindra Nath Banerjee v. State of U.P. & Ors.,
1999 (4) AWC 3371.
18\. Shri Avanish Mishra submits that in Ravindra Nath Banerjee's case
(Supra), which is much closer to the facts of the present case, the payment of
salaries were made by the Associate District Inspector of Schools, Fatehpur to
Sanskrit teachers in pursuance to the interim orders passed by the High Court.
It was held that, where the payments were made under the interim orders of the
High Court in writ petitions, even if the appointments were ultimately
cancelled, it cannot be said that the approving authority had caused any
financial loss to the Government. Similarly in Gopi Chand Vishnoi (Supra)
while discussing the powers of the Governor under Art.351A, it was held
following Sharad Kumar v. State of U.P., 2006 (7) AWC 7293, that an action
under Art.351A is permissible only if the charges against the retired
government servant are found proved, which are either in the nature of grave
misconduct, or cause pecuniary loss on account of misconduct or negligence of
the State Government.
19\. In State of Uttar Pradesh vs. Brahm Datt Sharma and another (1987) 2 SCC
179 the Supreme Court, in a matter arising out of a show cause notice given to
the petitioner, who was serving and had retired as Executive Engineer in the
Irrigation Department of the State Government, under Article 420 (b) of the
Civil Services Regulation calling upon him to show cause as to why his pension
and gratuity be not forfeited, held that the grant of pension to employees of
the State Government is regulated by the Civil Services Regulations, which
have statutory character. Article 348-A provides that pension shall be granted
subject to the conditions contained in the regulations. Article 351-A empowers
the Governor to withhold or withdraw pension, whole or any part of it, whether
permanently or for a specific period and also to order recovery from pension
of the whole or part of the pension, for any pecuniary loss caused to the
Government, if the pensioner is found guilty in departmental or in judicial
proceedings for any misconduct or negligence during his service. Article 353
lays down that no pension shall be granted to an officer dismissed or removed
from service for misconduct, insolvency or inefficiency, but compassionate
allowance may be granted on special consideration. The claim of pension is
determined by length of service, as provided by Articles 474 to 485. Full
pension is admissible under the rules not as a matter of course but only if
the service rendered by the government employee is approved. The regulations
empower the authority sanctioning the pension to make such reduction in the
amount of pension as it may think proper. The Supreme Court thereafter held:-
"6.....These provisions indicate that a Government servant is entitled to
pension but the claim of pension is determined in accordance with the
statutory rules. No doubt pension is no more a bounty; instead it is a right
earned by the Government servant on the basis of length of service.
Nonetheless grant of full pension depends on the approval of service rendered
by the employee. In other words if the service rendered by the Government
servant has not been satisfactory he would not be entitled to full pension and
it would always be open to the Govt. to withhold or reduce the amount of
pension in accordance with the statutory rules. If the Government incurs
pecuniary loss on account of misconduct or negligence of a Govt. servant and
if he retires from service before any departmental proceedings are taken
against him, it is open to the State Govt. to initiate departmental
proceedings, and if in those proceedings he is found guilty of misconduct,
negligence or any other such act or omission as a result of which Govt. is put
to pecuniary loss, the State Govt. is entitled to withhold, reduce or recover
the loss suffered by it by forfeiture or reduction of pension. These
provisions ordain the Govt. servant to perform his duties faithfully and
honestly. Honest and devoted service rendered by a Govt. servant ensures
efficiency in public administration. The statutory rules therefore contain
provisions for the forfeiture and deduction in the pension of Govt. servant
who have not rendered satisfactory service or who have been found guilty of
misconduct or negligence resulting in pecuniary loss to the Govt. Merely
because a Govt. servant retires from service on attaining the age of
superannuation he cannot escape the liability of misconduct and negligence or
financial irregularities.
The Supreme Court thereafter held in paragraph-8 as follows:-
"A plain reading of the regulation indicates that full pension is not awarded
as a matter of course to a Govt. servant on his retirement instead, it is
awarded to him if his satisfactory service is approved. If the service of a
Govt. servant has not been thoroughly satisfactory the authority competent to
sanction the pension is empowered to make such reduction in the amount of
pension as it may think proper. Proviso to the regulation lays down that no
order regarding reduction in the amount of pension shall be made without the
approval of the appointing authority. Though the Regulations do not expressly
provide for affording opportunity to the Govt. Servant before order for the
reduction in the pension is issued, but the principles of natural justice
ordain that opportunity of hearing must be afforded to the Govt. servant
before any order is passed. Art. 311(2) is not attracted, nonetheless the
Govt. servant is entitled to opportunity of hearing as the order of reduction
in pension affects his right to receive full pension. It is no more in dispute
that pension is not bounty; instead it is a right to property earned by the
Govt. servant on his rendering satisfactory service to the State. In State of
Punjab v. K.R. Erry and Sobhag Rai Mehta, [1973] 2 SCR 405 this Court held
that the State Govt. could not direct cut in the pension of officers without
giving a reasonable opportunity of bearing to them. In Deokinandan Prasad v.
State of Bihar & Ors., [1971] Suppl. SCR 634 it was held that pension is not
bounty pay- able at the sweet will and pleasure of the Govt.; instead the
right to pension is valuable right vested in a Govt. servant. Again in D.S.
Nakara and Ors. v. Union of India, [1983] 2 SCR 165 this Court held that
payment of pension does not depend upon the discretion of the Govt. but it is
governed by the rules and Govt. servant coming under those rules is entitled
to claim pension. A Govt. employee earns his pension by rendering long and
efficient service, the claim of pension is regulated by rules, which provide
for reduction in the amount of pension if the Govt. servant has failed to
render efficient service. In M. Narasimhachar v. State of Mysore, [1960] 1 SCR
981 this Court upheld the order of the State Govt. in reducing pension of a
Govt. employee as the rules regulating the grant of pension made provision for
reduction of pension on account of his having rendered unsatisfactory service.
Rule 6.4 of Punjab Civil Pension Rules provides for the reduction in the
amount of pension if the service of the Govt. employee has not been thoroughly
satisfactory. The State Govt.'s order directing reduction of pension of the
employee of State of Punjab were set aside by this Court in State of Punjab v.
K.R. Erry and Sebhag Rai Mehta (Supra) and in State of Punjab & Anr. v. Iqbal
Singh, [1976] 3 SCR 360 on the ground that the orders imposing deduction in
the pension had been passed in violation of principles of natural justice as
the affected employees had not been afforded opportunity of hearing. These
decisions leave no scope for any doubt that the State Govt. is competent to
direct reduction in pension after affording opportunity of hearing to the
Govt. servant."
20\. In State of Maharashtra vs. M.H. Mazumdar (1988) 2 SCC 52 the Supreme
Court followed the judgment in State of Uttar Pradesh vs. Brahm Datt Sharma
(supra) and held in respect of an enquiry on the two charges namely that the
delinquent government servant had collected permits from the Kolhapur Central
Co-operative Consumers Khatavane with mala fide intention after passing a
receipt thereof to the Godown Keeper to shield Shri K.P. Khatavane and his son
Baban Khatavane from criminal prosecution and on charge no. 2 that he had
deliberately and intentionally denied to have made any enquiry unauthorisedly
lifting of 10 bags of sugar on bogus or forged permit by Shri Baban Khatavane
and his son with some ulterior motive and abetted them in the disposal of
sugar in black market. Considering the punishment of the reduction in pension
by 50% as against the recommendation of the Collector to take a lenient view
and reducing the pension to the extent of Rs. 1/- per month the Supreme Court
held the punishment to be extremely harsh and disproportionate and observed in
paragraph-8 as follows:-
"8.On conclusion of the enquiry charge No. 1 was found to have been
established while charge No. 2 was partially proved. In his report to the
State Government the Collector of Kolhapur held that the respondent's action
was helpful to Shri Khatavane to sell the sugar in the black market, and it
amounted to a serious default on his part as a Government servant. He
recommended that since the respondent had already retired from service a
lenient view should be taken and reduction in pension to the extent of Re. 1
per month be made The State Government accepted the findings and passed the
impugned order reducing the pension by 50 per cent In our view the reduction
of pension 50 per cent was too harsh and disproportionate to the misconduct
proved against the respondent. The State Government should have taken into
consideration the fact that the respondent had retired from service and the
reduction of pension by 50 per cent would seriously affect his living."
21\. In State of West Bengal vs. Haresh C. Banerjee and others (2006) 7 SCC
651 the Supreme Court reiterated after following the judgments in Deokinandan
Prasad v. State of Bihar (1971) 2 SCC 330; State of Punjab v. K.R. Erry (1973)
1 SCC 120; State of Uttar Pradesh vs. Brahm Datt Sharma (supra); and State of
Maharashtra vs. M.H. Mazumdar (supra) in holding that the question of an order
withholding or reducing pension being invalid and bad in law on a legally
permissible ground is one thing but to hold such a rule to be ultra vires is
another. The Supreme Court had observed in State of Uttar Pradesh v. Brahm
Datt Sharma's case that if the Government incurs pecuniary loss on account of
misconduct or negligence of a Government servant and if he retires from
service before any departmental proceedings are taken against him, it is open
to the State Government to initiate departmental proceedings, and if in those
proceedings, he is found guilty of misconduct, negligence or any other such
act or omission as a result of which Government is put to pecuniary loss, the
State Government is entitled to withhold, reduce or recover the loss suffered
by it by forfeiture or reduction of pension.
22\. In State of U.P. vs. Harihar Bholenath (2006) INSC) 734 dated 1.11.2006,
and Secretary, Forest Department and others vs. Abdur Rasul Chowdhury (2009) 7
SCC the Supreme Court, following the afore-referred judgments, reiterated the
same principle that if in the proceedings drawn against a government servant
on the charges of misconduct in a departmental enquiry which has proceeded
beyond his retirement, the State Government is entitled to withhold, reduce or
recover the loss suffered by it for forfeiture and reduction of pension after
giving reasonable opportunity of hearing to such government servant.
23\. Learned Standing Counsel would submit that the petitioner committed gross
acts of misconduct in approving appointments, which resulted into payment of
salary to unauthorised persons causing loss to the State Government. The
charges of unauthorized approvals to Shri Mohd. Fazail Ansari, Shri Ganesh
Dutt Upadhyaya, Shri Ram Narain Prasad and Shri Ajajul Hassan were proved. The
charge of issuing utilization certificate of Rs.60,000/- of common room of
Shaheed Inter College, Madhuwan, Distt. Mau, which was not fully constructed,
was also established, and on which the State Government has powers to punish a
government servant even after retirement after seeking approval of the
Governor, which in this case has been duly obtained.
24\. It is fairly well settled, that the pension is neither a bounty nor
reward. It is earned by a government servant under the statutory rules after
rendering satisfactory services. The pension or part thereof can be withdrawn
under Art.351A, whether permanently or for specified period, where a pensioner
under any departmental or judicial proceedings is found to be guilty of grave
misconduct or to have caused pecuniary loss to government by misconduct or
negligence during his services including services rendered on re-employment.
The proceedings of departmental enquiry have to be held in accordance with law
serving principle of natural justice. The orders passed by withdrawing or
reducing the pension have permanent effect, and thus such proceedings are of
the nature of awarding major penalty in which the rules of enquiry must be
strictly followed. When the State Government has framed rules under the
proviso to Art.309 for imposing penalty including major penalty, namely the
U.P. Government Servant (Discipline and Appeal) Rules, 1999 the rules must be
strictly followed. Art.351A authorizes the punishment to be given even after
retirement. It does not in any way curtail or take away the right of the
pensioner, which is otherwise given to a serving government servant, to defend
himself in the enquiry. The punishment under Art.351A of withdrawing or
reducing the pension can be given only if the pensioner, while she was serving
as government servant is found to have committed gross misconduct or to have
caused pecuniary loss to the government by misconduct or negligence during her
services.
25\. In the present case there is no finding by the enquiry officer, or any
conclusion drawn by the disciplinary authority on the report of enquiry
officer that any gross misconduct or the financial loss was caused to the
State Government on account of negligence on the part of the petitioner. The
enquiry officer found that the approval to the appointment of Mohd. Fazail
Ansari, Shri Ganesh Dutt Upadhyay, Shri Ram Narain Prasad and Shri Ajajul
Hassan, was not in accordance with law. The petitioner had verified the
signature of Manager of the Committee of Management on 22.9.1997 against the
interim order dated 21.9.1997, which was not proved to have been received by
the petitioner before she had verified the signatures nor any contempt was
filed or the High Court had set aside the elections. Similarly the certificate
of utilization of Rs.60,000/- for construction of common room for which the
entire amount was found to be utilised and the signatures of Shri Brijendra
Yadav was attested as Principal ignoring the claim of Senior Lecturer Shri
Surendra Nath Chaubey did not amount to gross misconduct, which could have
resulted into any financial loss to the State Government.
26\. On a close examination of the findings recorded by the enquiry officer we
find that on the first charge of approval of appointment of Mohd. Fazail
Ansari it was found that the approval was given without waiting for reply of
the Manager of the college to produce the order of sanction of post and was
passed without financial approval given by the Accounts officers. On the reply
given by the petitioner that there were 12 teachers in the college on which
the appointment of Shri Ansari was approved, on 1.11.1997 the enquiry officer
observed that the petitioner committed error in granting approval without
verifying the sanction of the post after the financial survey held in the year
19986-87. There is no specific finding that the petitioner approved the
appointment without any sanctioned post or that there was no post, on which
Shri Fazail Ansari could be appointed.
27\. In respect of salary of Shri Ganesh Dutt Upadhyay, the defence of the
petitioner that she had paid the salary in pursuance to the directions issued
by the High Court on 15.4.1997 in Writ Petition No.12559 of 1997, the enquiry
officer found that inspite of interim orders the petitioner was required to
find out the date on which Shri Ganesh Dutt Upadhyay was appointed and whether
any counter affidavit was filed in the writ petition and also whether any
contempt petition was filed. She also observed that the petitioner should have
filed the counter affidavit in the High Court, which suggest that she was in
collusion in payment of salary. On the appointment of Shri Ram Narain Prasad,
the enquiry officer observed that the order of the High Court dated 4.12.1995
for payment of salary to him was complied within 1997 without giving
importance to the directions of the District Inspector of Schools. The orders
passed by the High Court were not to be followed by the District Inspector of
Schools as the High Court had given liberty to the District Inspector of
Schools to file counter affidavit, which is not shown to have been filed. The
petitioner did not follow the departmental rules in allowing the financial
approval to the appointment of Shri Ram Narain Prasad.
28\. For Ajajul Hassan, the enquiry officer found that though the appointment
was made in minority institution and the Deputy Director of Education,
Azamgarh had by his order dated 26.6.1997 gave approval to issue appointment
letter to him, the Committee of Management should have issued appointment
letter to him in pursuance to his selection and in pursuance to the directions
issued by the Deputy Director of Education (Madhyamik). The defence of the
petitioner that the post of Principal had fallen vacant substantively on which
Shri Niyaz Ahmad was appointed was incorrect. Shri Niyaz Ahmad was appointed
on a post, which had temporarily fallen vacant on the leave taken by Shri
Azajul Hassan without pay. The approval given by her prior to orders passed by
the Deputy Director of Education was irregular.
29\. So far as utilization certificate of common room of Shaheed Inter
College, Madhuwan, Mau is concerned, there was no dispute that building had
been constructed. The finishing of the building was, however, not over upto
the time, the petitioner on verification by the District Inspector of School
forwarded the utilization certificate. Once again the charge was found proved
as of an irregularity in forwarding certificate without verifying whether the
building was complete and not for non-utilisation of the amount on the
existing constructions, which could have caused any loss to the State
Government. The fifth charge relates to allowing a person junior to Shri
Surendra Nath Chaubey to officiate as Principal of the college, who was
suspended and had obtained interim order from this Court. In this matter also
the writ petition no.6837 of 1997 was pending and thus the approval of
officiating appointment of the next seniormost teacher could not have been
treated as misconduct or on account of which any loss was caused to the State
Government.
30\. We further find that the departmental enquiry did not comply with the
principles of natural justice in as much as no oral enquiry was held nor any
witnesses were led or opportunity was given to the petitioner to lead oral
evidence. There was no finding recorded by the enquiry officer or by the
disciplinary authority that the petitioner has committed acts of gross
misconduct or have caused any loss to the State Government to exercise powers
under Art.351A of the Civil Services Regulation for making deductions from her
pension.
31\. The writ petition is allowed. The impugned order dated 27.9.2001 passed
by the Secretary, Education, Anubhag-13, U.P. Lucknow is set aside. The
respondents are directed to restore the entire pension of the petitioner. She
will be paid the entire amount of arrears of pension and retirement dues, if
any, within a period of three months. Since the departmental enquiry was
pending, and that the writ petition was also filed, we do not find that the
respondents have caused any intentional or deliberate delay in finalizing the
pension to award any interest to the petitioner.
Dt.02.03.2012 SP/
officiating appointment of the next seniormost teacher could not have been
treated as misconduct or on account of which any loss was caused to the State
Government.
30\. We further find that the departmental enquiry did not comply with the
principles of natural justice in as much as no oral enquiry was held nor any
witnesses were led or opportunity was given to the petitioner to lead oral
evidence. There was no finding recorded by the enquiry officer or by the
disciplinary authority that the petitioner has committed acts of gross
misconduct or have caused any loss to the State Government to exercise powers
under Art.351A of the Civil Services Regulation for making deductions from her
pension.
31\. The writ petition is allowed. The impugned order dated 27.9.2001 passed
by the Secretary, Education, Anubhag-13, U.P. Lucknow is set aside. The
respondents are directed to restore the entire pension of the petitioner. She
will be paid the entire amount of arrears of pension and retirement dues, if
any, within a period of three months. Since the departmental enquiry was
Learned Standing Counsel appears for the State respondents.
3\. The petitioner was appointed as Asstt. Teacher on 26.9.1961 in Government
Girls Inter College, Azamgarh. After selections she was appointed as Lecturer
of Urdu in Government Girls Inter College, Ghazipur in 1965. She was selected
for appointment on the post of Principal in the year 1990 and thereafter as
Principal of Government Girls Inter College, Daha, Meerut. In 1995 she was
promoted as District Inspector of Schools and was posted in Distt. Gonda from
where she was transferred to Distt. Mau in 1995 and on 1.11.1997 she was given
additional charge of District Inspector of Schools, Azamgarh. She was posted
as Distirct Inspectors of Schools, Jaunpur on 2.11.1997, and retired on
superannuation serving as Asstt. Director (Basic) at Allahabad on 31.8.2000.
4\. A chargesheet dated 5.6.1998, was served upon her, when she was posted as
District Inspector of Schools, Mau, with following allegations:-
"I. The petitioner had accorded approval to one Sri Mohd. Fuzail Ansari on the
post of Lecturer (Urdu) in Muslim Inter Collegte, Mau without there being a
sanctioned post.
II. The petitioner accorded financial approval and made the payment of the
following teachers in different institutions mentioned herein below:-
a) Shri Ganesh Dutt Upadhyaya V.R.K. Inter College Assistant Teacher Validpur
Mau
officiating appointment of the next seniormost teacher could not have been
treated as misconduct or on account of which any loss was caused to the State
Government.
30\. We further find that the departmental enquiry did not comply with the
principles of natural justice in as much as no oral enquiry was held nor any
witnesses were led or opportunity was given to the petitioner to lead oral
evidence. There was no finding recorded by the enquiry officer or by the
disciplinary authority that the petitioner has committed acts of gross
misconduct or have caused any loss to the State Government to exercise powers
under Art.351A of the Civil Services Regulation for making deductions from her
pension.
31\. The writ petition is allowed. The impugned order dated 27.9.2001 passed
by the Secretary, Education, Anubhag-13, U.P. Lucknow is set aside. The
respondents are directed to restore the entire pension of the petitioner. She
will be paid the entire amount of arrears of pension and retirement dues, if
any, within a period of three months. Since the departmental enquiry was
Learned Standing Counsel appears for the State respondents.
3\. The petitioner was appointed as Asstt. Teacher on 26.9.1961 in Government
Girls Inter College, Azamgarh. After selections she was appointed as Lecturer
of Urdu in Government Girls Inter College, Ghazipur in 1965. She was selected
for appointment on the post of Principal in the year 1990 and thereafter as
Principal of Government Girls Inter College, Daha, Meerut. In 1995 she was
promoted as District Inspector of Schools and was posted in Distt. Gonda from
where she was transferred to Distt. Mau in 1995 and on 1.11.1997 she was given
additional charge of District Inspector of Schools, Azamgarh. She was posted
as Distirct Inspectors of Schools, Jaunpur on 2.11.1997, and retired on
superannuation serving as Asstt. Director (Basic) at Allahabad on 31.8.2000.
4\. A chargesheet dated 5.6.1998, was served upon her, when she was posted as
District Inspector of Schools, Mau, with following allegations:-
"I. The petitioner had accorded approval to one Sri Mohd. Fuzail Ansari on the
post of Lecturer (Urdu) in Muslim Inter Collegte, Mau without there being a
sanctioned post.
II. The petitioner accorded financial approval and made the payment of the
following teachers in different institutions mentioned herein below:-
a) Shri Ganesh Dutt Upadhyaya V.R.K. Inter College Assistant Teacher Validpur
Mau
officiating appointment of the next seniormost teacher could not have been
treated as misconduct or on account of which any loss was caused to the State
Government.
30\. We further find that the departmental enquiry did not comply with the
principles of natural justice in as much as no oral enquiry was held nor any
witnesses were led or opportunity was given to the petitioner to lead oral
evidence. There was no finding recorded by the enquiry officer or by the
disciplinary authority that the petitioner has committed acts of gross
misconduct or have caused any loss to the State Government to exercise powers
under Art.351A of the Civil Services Regulation for making deductions from her
pension.
31\. The writ petition is allowed. The impugned order dated 27.9.2001 passed
by the Secretary, Education, Anubhag-13, U.P. Lucknow is set aside. The
respondents are directed to restore the entire pension of the petitioner. She
will be paid the entire amount of arrears of pension and retirement dues, if
any, within a period of three months. Since the departmental enquiry was
Learned Standing Counsel appears for the State respondents.
3\. The petitioner was appointed as Asstt. Teacher on 26.9.1961 in Government
Girls Inter College, Azamgarh. After selections she was appointed as Lecturer
of Urdu in Government Girls Inter College, Ghazipur in 1965. She was selected
for appointment on the post of Principal in the year 1990 and thereafter as
Principal of Government Girls Inter College, Daha, Meerut. In 1995 she was
promoted as District Inspector of Schools and was posted in Distt. Gonda from
where she was transferred to Distt. Mau in 1995 and on 1.11.1997 she was given
additional charge of District Inspector of Schools, Azamgarh. She was posted
as Distirct Inspectors of Schools, Jaunpur on 2.11.1997, and retired on
superannuation serving as Asstt. Director (Basic) at Allahabad on 31.8.2000.
4\. A chargesheet dated 5.6.1998, was served upon her, when she was posted as
District Inspector of Schools, Mau, with following allegations:-
"I. The petitioner had accorded approval to one Sri Mohd. Fuzail Ansari on the
post of Lecturer (Urdu) in Muslim Inter Collegte, Mau without there being a
sanctioned post.
II. The petitioner accorded financial approval and made the payment of the
following teachers in different institutions mentioned herein below:-
a) Shri Ganesh Dutt Upadhyaya V.R.K. Inter College Assistant Teacher Validpur
Mau
b) Sri Ram Narain Prasad Janta Siksha Niketan Inter College, Dubari, Mau
c) Sri Naseem Khan (Peon) Taleemuddin Inter College, Mau
d) Sri Ajajul Hassan Taleemuddin Inter (Assistant Teacher) College, Mau
e) Sri Mustaq Ahmad Darul Uloom Clerk Niswa, Mau A appointment as peon in
National Inter College, Mohamdabad, Gohana III. In violation of the order
dated 19.9.1997 passed by this Hon'ble Court, the petitioner certified
signature of the Manager on 22.9.1997.
IV. The petitioner had negligently submitted the certificate regarding
utilisation of Rs.60,000/- for construction of Common Room in Shaheed Inter
College, Madhuwan, District-Mau.
The petitioner illegally certified the signature of Sri Brijendra Yadav
officiating appointment of the next seniormost teacher could not have been
treated as misconduct or on account of which any loss was caused to the State
Government.
30\. We further find that the departmental enquiry did not comply with the
principles of natural justice in as much as no oral enquiry was held nor any
witnesses were led or opportunity was given to the petitioner to lead oral
evidence. There was no finding recorded by the enquiry officer or by the
disciplinary authority that the petitioner has committed acts of gross
misconduct or have caused any loss to the State Government to exercise powers
under Art.351A of the Civil Services Regulation for making deductions from her
pension.
31\. The writ petition is allowed. The impugned order dated 27.9.2001 passed
by the Secretary, Education, Anubhag-13, U.P. Lucknow is set aside. The
respondents are directed to restore the entire pension of the petitioner. She
will be paid the entire amount of arrears of pension and retirement dues, if
any, within a period of three months. Since the departmental enquiry was
Learned Standing Counsel appears for the State respondents.
3\. The petitioner was appointed as Asstt. Teacher on 26.9.1961 in Government
Girls Inter College, Azamgarh. After selections she was appointed as Lecturer
of Urdu in Government Girls Inter College, Ghazipur in 1965. She was selected
for appointment on the post of Principal in the year 1990 and thereafter as
Principal of Government Girls Inter College, Daha, Meerut. In 1995 she was
promoted as District Inspector of Schools and was posted in Distt. Gonda from
where she was transferred to Distt. Mau in 1995 and on 1.11.1997 she was given
additional charge of District Inspector of Schools, Azamgarh. She was posted
as Distirct Inspectors of Schools, Jaunpur on 2.11.1997, and retired on
superannuation serving as Asstt. Director (Basic) at Allahabad on 31.8.2000.
4\. A chargesheet dated 5.6.1998, was served upon her, when she was posted as
District Inspector of Schools, Mau, with following allegations:-
"I. The petitioner had accorded approval to one Sri Mohd. Fuzail Ansari on the
post of Lecturer (Urdu) in Muslim Inter Collegte, Mau without there being a
sanctioned post.
II. The petitioner accorded financial approval and made the payment of the
following teachers in different institutions mentioned herein below:-
a) Shri Ganesh Dutt Upadhyaya V.R.K. Inter College Assistant Teacher Validpur
Mau
b) Sri Ram Narain Prasad Janta Siksha Niketan Inter College, Dubari, Mau
c) Sri Naseem Khan (Peon) Taleemuddin Inter College, Mau
d) Sri Ajajul Hassan Taleemuddin Inter (Assistant Teacher) College, Mau
e) Sri Mustaq Ahmad Darul Uloom Clerk Niswa, Mau A appointment as peon in
National Inter College, Mohamdabad, Gohana III. In violation of the order
dated 19.9.1997 passed by this Hon'ble Court, the petitioner certified
signature of the Manager on 22.9.1997.
IV. The petitioner had negligently submitted the certificate regarding
utilisation of Rs.60,000/- for construction of Common Room in Shaheed Inter
College, Madhuwan, District-Mau.
The petitioner illegally certified the signature of Sri Brijendra Yadav
officiating appointment of the next seniormost teacher could not have been
treated as misconduct or on account of which any loss was caused to the State
Government.
30\. We further find that the departmental enquiry did not comply with the
principles of natural justice in as much as no oral enquiry was held nor any
witnesses were led or opportunity was given to the petitioner to lead oral
evidence. There was no finding recorded by the enquiry officer or by the
disciplinary authority that the petitioner has committed acts of gross
misconduct or have caused any loss to the State Government to exercise powers
under Art.351A of the Civil Services Regulation for making deductions from her
pension.
31\. The writ petition is allowed. The impugned order dated 27.9.2001 passed
by the Secretary, Education, Anubhag-13, U.P. Lucknow is set aside. The
respondents are directed to restore the entire pension of the petitioner. She
will be paid the entire amount of arrears of pension and retirement dues, if
any, within a period of three months. Since the departmental enquiry was
