Gujarat High Court
A Whether Reporters Of Local ... vs High Court Of Gujarat & on 11 January,
2013
                C/SCA/12040/2007                                                                JUDGMENT
                    IN THE HIGH COURT OF GUJARAT AT AHMEDABAD
                       SPECIAL CIVIL APPLICATION  NO. 12040 of 2007
     
    FOR APPROVAL AND SIGNATURE: 
     
    HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE M.R. SHAH
    and
    HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE S.H.VORA
    =========================================
A Whether Reporters of Local Papers may be allowed to see the judgment ?
2\. To be referred to the Reporter or not ?
3\. Whether their Lordships wish to see the fair copy of the judgment ?
4\. Whether this case involves a substantial question of law as to the
interpretation of the constitution of India, 1950 or any order made thereunder
?
5\. Whether it is to be circulated to the civil judge ?
> complied with, the courts would not ordinarily interfere with the quantum of
> punishment imposed upon a delinquent employee. The Superior Courts only in
> some cases may invoke the doctrine of proportionality. If the decision of an
> employer is found to be within the legal parameters, the jurisdiction would
> ordinarily not be invoked when the misconduct stands proved. (emphasis
> supplied) 17.1 The High Court in exercise of its jurisdiction under Article
> 226 of the Constitution of India also cannot, on the basis of sympathy or
> sentiment, overturn a legal order.
16\. Since we have not found any infirmity in the conclusions of the inquiry
officer and have not been able to convince ourselves to accept that the
conclusions are not based on any evidence, we are also not able to hold that
the High Court was not justified in recommending the penalty of dismissal. In
the facts of the case, we are of the view that the penalty recommended by the
Court was eminently proper.
17\. The contentions do not merit any interference. Petition does not deserve
to be entertained.
5\. Whether it is to be circulated to the civil judge ?
============================================= N.R.PATEL....Petitioner(s)
Versus HIGH COURT OF GUJARAT & 1....Respondent(s)
============================================= Appearance:
MR. K.M. PATEL SR. ADV. WITH MR VAIBHAV A VYAS, ADVOCATE for the Petitioner(s)
No. 1 MS. NISHA THAKORE ASSIT. GOVERNMENT PLEADER for the Respondent(s) No. 2
LAW OFFICER BRANCH, ADVOCATE for the Respondent(s) No. 1 MR. SHALIN MEHTA SR.
ADV. WITH MR HEMANG M SHAH, ADVOCATE for the Respondent(s) No. 1 RULE SERVED
for the Respondent(s) No. 2 =============================================
CORAM: HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE M.R. SHAH and HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE S.H.VORA Date
: 1.11.2013 / 20.11.2014 ORAL JUDGMENT (PER : HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE M.R. SHAH)
1.0. By way of this petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India
the petitioner has prayed for an appropriate writ, direction and  Page 1 of 41
1 of 82 C/SCA/12040/2007 JUDGMENT order to quash and set aside the
departmental inquiry conducted against him by the Disciplinary Authority
(hereinafter referred to as the "High Court") on its administrative side as
well as impugned order dated 5.9.2006 passed by the High Court dismissing the
petitioner from service as well as consequential order dated 5.10.2006 passed
by the Government of Gujarat.
2.0. The facts leading to the present petition in nutshell are as under:
2.1. That initially the petitioner was appointed as Civil Judge (J.D.) and
Judicial Magistrate First Class in the year 1981 and thereafter he was
promoted in the year 1991. That at the relevant time the petitioner was
working as Chief Judicial Magistrate, Jamnagar. That the petitioner was served
with the chargesheet dated 7.1.1997 for the misconduct alleged to have been
committed by him, as a Judicial Officer while working as Chief Judicial
Magistrate, Jamnagar. That the departmental inquiry was initiated against the
petitioner on the following charges:
2.2. Two Criminal Cases No.1059 of 1992 and 2103 of 1987, for the offences
punishable under Section 135 of the Customs Act, 1962 were pending against the
accused viz. (1) Yusuf Haji Abdulla Bhaya; (2) Hasan Abdulla Bhaya; (3) Abdul
Jakub Sanghar; (4) Adam Kasam Sanghar; (5) Hasan Sidiq Moha (Bhadela); (6)
Abdul Hasan Arab; (7) Gani Hasan Bhadela (Dahej) and (1) Haji Ismail
Sumbhania; (2) Natha Khima Varu; (3) Dadu Karsan Chavda; (4) Ala Malde Ahir;
(4A) Jesha Natha Ahri (5) Taiyab Mamad Sandhi (6) Gogan Sava Koli (7) Devsi
Gogan (8) Dosa Gogan Koli (9) Deva Dohya Kagadia; (10) Bhimsi Laxman; (11)
Hamir Sajan Karangia (Aher) (12) Hamir Jeva Mer; (13)  Page 2 of 41 2 of 82
C/SCA/12040/2007 JUDGMENT Arjan Mulu Modhwadia (14) Sajan Harbhan; (15) Devsi
Bhima Mer; (16) Nagan Mulu, respectively, in the Court of Chief Judicial
Magistrate, Jamnagar out of the said two cases complaint in the Criminal Case
No.1059 of 1992, was filed on 13.3.1992 by Customs Department and no progress
was made in the matter till 17.11.1992.
2.3. That one Mr. A.R. Aggrawal, who was working in the office of Pavan
Travels in Jamnagar Branch, was known to Mr. N.R. Patel, as he was travelling
between Kalavad and Jamnagar, in the bus of Paval Travels and the accused no.1
of Criminal Case No.1059 of 1992 viz. Yusuf Patel, was also known to Mr. A.R.
Aggrawal, as he used to travel in the bus of Pavan Travels, for going to
Bombay.
2.4. While the said case was pending, about 8 months prior to 14.6.1993, Yusuf
Patel, went to the office of Pavan Travels and enquired from Mr. Ajay R.
Aggrawal, regarding his relations with Magistrate, Shri N.R. Patel, whereupon
Mr. Aggrawal replied that he had relations with Mr. N.R. Patel, therefore, Mr.
Yusuf Patel, told Mr. Aggrawal that his two cases were pending in the Court of
Mr. N.R. Patel and he wanted Mr. Aggrawal to have a talk with Mr. Patel, for
settlement of the cases. Mr. Aggrawal, asked Mr. Yusuf Patel to come after two
to four days. On the next day, Mr. Aggrawal asked the Magistrate Mr. N.R.
Patel, to show favour to the accused Yusuf Patel in the two cases and Mr. N.R.
Patel, demanded bribe of Rs. 5 lacs from Yusuf Patel, through said Mr.
Aggrawal.
2.5. After, two days Yusuf Patel, went to Mr. Aggrawal, who told him that Mr.
N.R. Patel, had demanded Rs. 5 lacs to settle both the cases. But the said
Yusuf Patel, agreed to pay Rs. 2 lcas, to Mr. N.R. Patel and agreed to pay Rs.
1 lac, initially for the case regarding smuggling of  Page 3 of 41 3 of 82
C/SCA/12040/2007 JUDGMENT Silver Bars i.e. in Criminal Case No.1059 of 1992
and told the other case be kept pending.
2.6. Mr. Aggrawal, told Mr. Yusuf Patel, to come after two days and after Mr.
Yusuf Patel left Mr. Aggrawal informed Mr. N.R. Patel, accordingly, and Mr.
N.R. Patel, agreed to the proposal made by the accused, Yusuf Patel and told
Mr. Aggrawal to inform him on telephone after collecting Rs. One lac from the
accused.
2.7. After about two days, Yusuf Patel went of the office of Mr. Aggrawal, who
told him that Mr. N.R. Patel Saheb has given his consent therefore, Mr. Yusuf
Patel told Mr. Aggrawal that he will hand over the money to Mr. Aggrawal,
thereafter three to four days accused Yusuf Patel went to the office of Mr.
Aggrawal, in Maruit Car No. GC­J­255, and handed over Rs. One lac to Mr.
Aggrawal, for delivering the same and to Mr. N.R. Patel. Immediately
thereafter, Mr. N.R. Patel, was informed on telephone at this residence by Mr.
Aggrawal, that he had received Rs. One lac, on his behalf and Mr. N.R. Patel
told him that after the Court hours, he will collect the amount from him and
accordingly, in between 7.30 p.m. And 8.00 p.m, Mr. N.R. Patel went to the
office of Mr. Aggrawal and collected the said amount of Rs. One lac from Mr.
Aggrawal and left the office of Mr. Aggrawal. Thereafter though the case of
the yeas from 1981 to 1991 were pending in his Court, even against the under
trial prisoners, suddenly, the matter was taken up for which Mr. N.R. Patel
had accepted the said bribe amount and in pre charge proceedings, Mr. N.R.
Patel examined nine witnesses. The arguments were heard on charge on date
1.2.1993 and on 2.2.1994 and then on 6.2.1993 Mr. N.R. Patel pronounced an
order discharging the said principal accused no.1, Yusuf Haji Abdulla Bhaya &
Yusuf Patel.
                                          Page 4 of 41
                                                                                      4 of 82
              C/SCA/12040/2007                                            JUDGMENT
This fact was narrated by Mr. Aggrawal to his friend Mr. Haribhai Soni,
resident of Jamnagar, in a casual manner.
2.8. About six months prior to 14.6.1993, Mr. Haribhai Soni went to the office
of Mr. Aggrawal and told him that one Hamirbhai Ahir is also facing the
similar case as of Mr. Yusuf Patel, pending in the Court of Mr. N.R. Patel and
that is also to be settled with Mr. N.R. Patel Saheb. At the instance of Mr.
Haribhai Soni to show favour to the accused viz. Mr. Hamir Ahir in Criminal
Case No.2103 of 1987, pending in the Court of Mr. N.R. Patel for offences
punishable under Section 135 of the Customs Act, 1962 said Mr. A.R. Agrawal
telephoned Mr. N.R. Patel and Mr. N.R. Patel demanded bribe of Rs.75000/­ for
showing favour to the accused, Hamirbhai Ahir through Mr. A.R. Aggrawal. Mr.
Aggrawal, informed Mr. Haribhai accordingly.
2.9. After about 15 days, Mr. Aggrawal went to the house of Mr. Haribhai to
collect the Video game at that time Mr. Haribhai paid Rs.50,000/­ to Mr.
Aggrawal, for paying the said amount to Mr. N.R. Patel and Mr. N.R. Patel, was
informed at this residence on phone by Mr. Aggrawal that he had received the
amount on behalf of Mr. N.R. Patel. Thereupon, Mr. N.R. Patel told Mr.
Aggrawal that his brother Mr. Jayesh would collect the money from M. Aggrawal
and on the same day, in the evening Mr. N.R. Patel's younger brother Jayesh
went to the office of Mr. Aggrawal and collected the said amount. After about
15 to 20 days at about 11.00 a.m. Mr. Haribhai Soni, gave the balance of the
amount of Rs.25000/­ to Mr. Aggrawal for paying it to Mr. N.R. Patel and on
receiving message from Mr. Aggrawal about receipt of the amount, Mr. N.R.
Patel collected the said amount through his brother Mr. Jayesh.
                                           Page 5 of 41
                                                                                         5 of 82
               C/SCA/12040/2007                                            JUDGMENT
2.10. Thereafter, as Mr. N.R. Patel received the bribe amount, the matter was
taken up by Mr. N.R. Patel hastily and during the pre­charge proceedings the
recorded the evidence of 22 witnesses, though the case for the years 1981 to
1991 were pending in his Court, including the cases against the under trial
prisoners.
The Jamnagar Police raided the house of the said accused Hamir Ahir and in the
search of the house carried out by the police a note book containing the
accounts maintained by the said accused was recovered wherein two payments are
shown to have been made to Mr. N.R. Patel, one on 29.12.1992 of Rs.50,000/­
and another on 16.1.1993 of Rs.25000/­.
2.11. That two to three days after 8.6.1993, Mr. N.R. Patel had enquired from
Mr. Jeblia, Dy.S.P, on telephone as to whether Mr. Hami, was arrested and also
requested Mr. Jeblia, Dy.Sp to take care of him, if anything is found against
him and after the news regarding seizure of note book from the house of Mr.
Hamir was broken, Mr. N.R. Patel had again made a telephone call to Mr. Jeblia
Dy.Sp and enquired as to whether his name appeared in the note book and
whether he could see that note book but Mr. Jeblia, Dy. Sp replied that note
book has been taken by the D.I.G, Ahmedabad.
On 14.6.1993, Mr. N.R. Patel, had telephonic talk with Mrs. Prafula, wife of
Mr. Aggrawal and Mr. N.R. Patel, told her "officers from the High Court have
come and tell Vikki he should not involve me by making any statement before
them".
2.12. That Mr. N.R. Patel, had sent two persons to the house of Mr. Aggrawal,
who told Mr. Aggrawal to telephone Mr. N.R. Patel from  Page 6 of 41 6 of 82
C/SCA/12040/2007 JUDGMENT outside. But Mr. Aggrawal, was apprehending danger
to his life, so he refused to go out for telephoning to Mr. N.R. Patel.
2.13. On 20.6.1993, at night time Mr. N.R. Patel, alongwith his brother had
gone to the house of Mr. Aggrawal, with a writing wherein it was written that
D.S.P Mr. Jha and Dy. Sp Mr. Jeblia had threatened Mr. Aggrawal that they will
file a false case of keeping AK­56 Rifle and would arrest Mr. Aggrawal under
TADA. Therefore, under that fear, Mr. Aggrawal had filed the Affidavit against
Mr. N.R. Patel;, but Mr. Aggrawal did not sign the same as his previous
Affidavit filed against Mr. N.R. Patel was made without any fear or pressure
and at his free will.
2.14. On 27.6.1993, Mr. N.R. Patel 's brother, Mr Jayesh at the instance of
Mr. N.R. Patel, telephoned Mr. Aggrawal to hand over the copy of the Affidavit
filed against Mr. N.R. Patel, but the same was not supplied as he had not copy
of the same and thereby;
(a). Mr. N.R. Patel indulged in corrupt pratice;
(b). Mr. N.R. Patel, was guilty of dereliction of discharging his judicial
functions and;
(c). Mr. N.R. Patel, acted in a manner unbecoming of a Judicial Officer.
2.15. The above acts of Mr. N.R. Patel, tantamount to act unbecoming of a
Judicial Officer, and are acts of grave misconduct which are violative of the
provisions contained in Rule 3 of the Gujarat Civil Services (conduct) Rules,
1971.
2.16. That the petitioner denied the charges levelled against him and
submitted his defence statement on 18.3.1997. That on receipt of such defence
statement of the petitioner, the High Court was of the  Page 7 of 41 7 of 82
C/SCA/12040/2007 JUDGMENT opinion that further inquiry in the matter was
required and therefore, one Shri C.S. Oza, Judge, City Civil Court, Ahmedabad
was appointed as Inquiry Officer on 23.9.1997. That the Inquiry Officer came
to the conclusion that the charges levelled against the petitioner are not
proved and accordingly recorded his finding to that effect and submitted his
inquiry report to the High Court on 29.7.1998.
2.17. That the High Court did not agree with the said inquiry report submitted
by the Inquiry Officer and exercise powers under Section 10 of the Gujarat
Civil Services (Discipline and Appeal) Rules 1971 remanded the matter to the
Inquiry Officer and the matter was entrusted to another person Shri A.J.
Bhatt, Judge, City Civil Court, Ahmedabad by order dated 24.12.1998. That by
passing order dated 24.12.1998 the High Court specifically pointed out that
report submitted by Inquiry Officer cannot be accepted and the case deserve
remand, so as to give opportunity to the department to prove its case. That
after the remand the petitioner was placed under suspension vide order dated
30.4.1999. That the petitioner participated in the inquiry on remand and as
such did not challenge the further inquiry / inquiry on remand pursuant to the
order dated 24.12.1998 passed by the High Court on its administrative side and
/ or at the relevant time did not make any grievance with respect to the order
dated 24.12.1998 not accepting the report of the earlier inquiry officer and
passing an order of remand and entrusting the inquiry to another officer or
appointing another inquiry officer.
2.18. Thereafter on conclusion of the inquiry and considering the entire
material on record and on appreciation of entire evidence on record, inquiry
officer came to the conclusion that charges levelled against the petitioner
are proved and accordingly submitted its report  Page 8 of 41 8 of 82
C/SCA/12040/2007 JUDGMENT dated 29.6.2001. It is to be noted that even before
the inquiry officer the petitioner did submit the written representation in
April 2000.
2.19. Thereafter copy of the inquiry report was forwarded to the petitioner
along with show cause notice dated 7.6.2002 whereby the petitioner was called
upon to show cause as to why the petitioner should not be dismissed from
service. That the petitioner submitted his reply to the said show cause notice
on 5.7.2002. That a personal hearing was also given to the petitioner. That
thereafter, after considering the report submitted by the inquiry officer;
reply given by the petitioner to the show cause notice and submission made by
the petitioner during the personal hearing, by order dated 5.9.2006,
disciplinary authority (High Court) has passed the impugned order of
punishment dismissing the petitioner from service by holding that petitioner
has indulged into corrupt practice. That thereafter, consequential order has
been passed by the State Government by order dated 5.10.2006. Being aggrieved
and dissatisfied with the impugned orders passed by the High Court dated
5.9.2006 and consequential order dated 5.10.2006 passed by the Government of
Gujarat, the petitioner has preferred present Special Civil Application under
Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
2.20. It is to be noted that in the present petition the petitioner has also
challenged the departmental inquiry conducted against the petitioner by the
High Court on its administrative side, despite the fact that he had
participated in the departmental inquiry and at no point of time earlier he
challenged the departmental inquiry.
3.0. Shri K.M. Patel, learned Senior Advocate appearing on behalf of the
petitioner has vehemently submitted that at the time when the disciplinary
authority (High Court) exercised the powers under  Page 9 of 41 9 of 82
C/SCA/12040/2007 JUDGMENT Section 10 of the Rules and disagreed with the
inquiry report which was in favour of the petitioner, no opportunity was given
to the petitioner. It is submitted not only that but even the inquiry officer
came to be changed and on remand the inquiry was handed over to another
officer. It is submitted not only that even the copy of the order sending the
matter to the another inquiry officer was also not given to the petitioner at
the relevant time and the same was given subsequently. It is submitted that
therefore, entire departmental inquiry initiated on remand is vitiated and
against the principles of natural justice which deserves to be quashed and set
aside. In support of his above submission, Shri K.M. Patel, learned Senior
Advocate appearing on behalf of the petitioner has relied upon the decision of
the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Mathura Prasad vs. Union of India and
Others reported in AIR 2007 SC 381.
3.1. It is further submitted by Shri K.M. Patel, learned Senior Advocate
appearing on behalf of the petitioner that even otherwise upon remand of the
matter for further inquiry, Disciplinary Authority ought not to have changed
the Inquiry Officer, more particularly when the first inquiry officer was very
much in service at the relevant time and continued in judicial service till
September 2004. It is submitted that consistency and fair play required that
the inquiry ought to have been remanded to the same inquiry officer for
further inquiry and the inquiry officer ought not to have been changed.
In support of his above submission, he has relied upon the decision of the
Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of K.R. Deb vs. The Collector, Central
Excise, Shillong reported in AIR 1971 SC 1447 (page 13 to 15).
3.2. It is further submitted by Shri K.M. Patel, learned Senior  Page 10 of 41
10 of 82 C/SCA/12040/2007 JUDGMENT Advocate appearing on behalf of the
petitioner that as such the disciplinary authority by not exercising the
option of recording descanting finding against the finding of exoneration
recorded by the Inquiry Officer in the first stage of inquiry as per Rule
10(2) of the Gujarat Civil Services (Discipline and Appeal) Rules, 1971 by
directing further inquiry, by all inherent and necessary implications,
accepted the position that on the basis of the evidence of two witnesses
examined in the first stage of inquiry, including that of Shri B.S. Jebaliya,
Deputy Superintendent of Police, the charges levelled against the petitioner
are not proved. It is submitted that as such in the further inquiry three more
witnesses were examined, whose evidence has not supported the case of the
department. It is submitted that thus, even after the further inquiry, solely
on the basis of Shri Jebaliya's evidence the allegations and charges are held
proved both by Inquiry Officer and the Disciplinary Authority, which was
already there and the Inquiry Officer submitted the report in the first stage
of inquiry. It is submitted that it was not open for the disciplinary
authority to take different view of allegations and charges being proved
solely on the basis of Shri Jebaliya's evidence, when by all necessary
implications the order directing further inquiry only be construed as
acceptance of the report of First Inquiry Officer that on the basis of Shri
Jebaliya's evidence allegations and charges do not stand proved. It is
submitted that Inquiry Officer and Disciplinary Authority ought to have
confined themselves as to whether the allegations and charges are proved on
the basis of evidence that has come in further inquiry. It is submitted that
since the evidence recorded in further inquiry does not establish and proved
allegations and charges against the petitioner ought to have been exonerated.
In support of his above submission, learned advocate for the petitioner has
heavily relied upon unreported judgment of the Hon'ble  Page 11 of 41 11 of 82
C/SCA/12040/2007 JUDGMENT Supreme Court dated 9.10.2007 in Civil Appeal No. 29
of 2004 in the case of Gujarat State Financial Corporation vs. Dilip Ratilal
Patel.
3.3. It is further submitted by Shri K.M. Patel, learned Senior Advocate
appearing on behalf of the petitioner that even otherwise the findings
recorded by the Inquiry Officer and the Disciplinary Authority are not based
on legal excepted evidence but they are based on assumptions and presumptions.
3.4. It is submitted that in the whole of the examination in chief or even in
his cross examination Shri Jehaliya has nowhere stated that he could recognize
the voice of the delinquent on telephone and that he had not done any inquiry
to ascertain as to whether or not the alleged telephones were made by the
delinquent. It is submitted that the evidence only shows that someone had
telephoned saying that the celler was N.R. Patel (delinquent) and therefore,
it emerges that he had presumed that the delinquent had telephoned. It is
submitted that therefore, even the allegations that the delinquent had made
alleged two telephones to said Shri Jeabliya itself is not established and if
considered in the light of possible grudges against the delinquent by the
police there, Shri Jebaliya evidence is not maintainable at all.
It is submitted that alleged xerox copy of a page of allege seized note book/
diary from the house of Hamir Sajan is also not proved at all.
3.5. It is submitted that even the alleged author of diary / note book Shri
Hamir Sajan is also examined by the Department, who has in no uncertain terms
said that no search was carried out in his house in his presence and no such
alleged diary /note book was seized and he has not kept any such alleged
account and hand writings of the chit are also  Page 12 of 41 12 of 82
C/SCA/12040/2007 JUDGMENT denied and the said chit is not proved by any other
evidence whatsoever and requires to be absolutely ignored as it is no
evidence.
3.6. It is further submitted by Shri Patel, learned Senior Advocate for the
petitioner that the inquiry officer has recorded the finding against the
petitioner solely relying upon the deposition of Shri Jebaliya relied upon his
bare words and no support or corroboration is coming forth from any
independent source. It is submitted that neither the inquiry officer or the
disciplinary authority has appreciated the fact that from the very beginning
as the police had grudge against the delinquent. It is submitted that there is
sufficient material and evidence on record including evidence of Bench clerk
Shri Chavda to believe that the police department was displeased and must be
having grudge against the delinquent.
3.7. It is further submitted that statement of Shri Jebaliya before the
Inquiry Officer does not implicate the delinquent as regards the imputations
are concerned, except that a story of two alleged telephones and alleged chit
stated to have been seized from the house of Hamir Sajan is told. It is
submitted that both the said aspects are absolutely unbelievable. It is
submitted that the evidence of Shri Jebaliya is vague and evasive as far as he
does not give details as to when the search was conducted and who were the
panchas and as to when the telephones were received and about the failure to
ascertain whether delinquent had telephoned and failure to record the same in
any reports or diary.
It is further submitted by Shri Patel, learned Senior Advocate for the
petitioner that neither Shri Agrawal nor Shri Haribhai Soni, who allegedly
paid the amount to Shri Agrawal have been examined in the inquiry.
                                          Page 13 of 41
                                                                                        13 of 82
               C/SCA/12040/2007                                             JUDGMENT
3.8. It is further submitted that the xerox copy of the page of diary
allegedly recovered from Hamir Ahri has no evidentiary value. It is submitted
that Hamir Sajan has not supported the case of the department.
3.9. It is further submitted by Shri Patel, learned Senior Advocate for the
petitioner that as such allegations and charges are held proved by the Inquiry
Officer and Disciplinary Authority on the basis of Shri Jebaliya's. It is
submitted that evidence of Shri Jebaliya cannot be relied upon in view of the
following facts.
(i). In first stage of Inquiry, evidence of Shri Jebaliya was not considered
sufficient or reliable to support finding of guilt. There was no corroboration
to his evidence in the further inquiry.
(ii). His evidence does not inspire confidence because there was no prior
communication on telephone between petitioner and Shri Jehaliya nor Shri
Jabaliya made any attempt to verify whether alleged telephone was from the
petitioner or any one else. He did not make any note of the phone call in the
station diary or personal diary.
(iii). Thus, as per the evidence of Shri Jehaliya he was not familiar with the
voice of the petitioner. However, since the caller identified himself to be
N.R. Patel, Magistrate, he had readily accepted that the caller was the
petitioner and none else, without verification of any kind.
(iv). Further, there is absolutely no evidence that any such phone call was
made to him. The evidence in this regard would have been easily available from
the telephone department. However, no such evidence is produced on record, as
no such phone call was in fact made by the petitioner.
(v). Not only that there is no scientific verification of voice to reach the
conclusion that the voice of the speaker was none other than that of the  Page
14 of 41 14 of 82 C/SCA/12040/2007 JUDGMENT petitioner.
(vi). He did not produced the original note book, not even the original chit
either before the Vigilance Officer or before the Inquiry Officer. Not only
that, he did not even certify the alleged chit to be a true copy of the
original at the time of his producing the same before the Vigilance Officer.
It is the case of the petitioner that the alleged chit was not certified by
Shri Jebaliyas as he was aware that it was not a true copy, as the original
did not exist.
(vii). The police had reason to harbour grudge against the petitioner, as the
petitioner was very strict with police officers and had dealt with them
sternly by issuing contempt notices, strictures etc. against them, which is a
matter of record. Moreover, the petitioner had passed strictures/ observations
in Bab Sheth's Murder Case, the investigation of which was supervised by Shri
Jabaliya.
3.10. It is submitted that therefore, the petitioner was framed in the case in
question by the police department through Shri Jabaliya. It is submitted that
therefore, the petitioner ought to have been appropriately protected.
In support of his above submission, learned advocate for the petitioner has
relied upon the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Yoginath
D. Bagde vs. State of Maharashtra reported in AIR1999 SC 3734 (para 51).
3.11. It is further submitted that during the course of further inquiry before
the second Inquiry Officer, three more witnesses were examined, however no
further material, incriminating or adverse to the petitioner, came on record,
which would have warranted reconsideration of the ultimate conclusion recorded
by the First Inquiry Officer. It is  Page 15 of 41 15 of 82 C/SCA/12040/2007
JUDGMENT submitted that under these circumstances the second officer ought not
to have come to the conclusion that the charges leveled against the petitioner
are proved that too on the basis of the same material on which the First
Inquiry Officer came to the conclusion that the charges are not proved. It is
submitted that thus, the Second Inquiry Officer has exceeded his jurisdiction,
and by not stopping there, further acted in absolute arbitrary manner by not
referring to the reasoning / finding recorded by the First Inquiry Officer,
much less dealing with the same. It is submitted that thus the Second Inquiry
Officer has in fact held a Fresh Inquiry against the petitioner in the guise
of further inquiry, which is not permissible in the eyes of law.
It is submitted that thus the change of Inquiry Officer has seriously
prejudice the case of the petitioner. It is submitted that had the First
Inquiry Officer not been replaced in that case, upon no further material,
incriminating or adverse to the petitioner coming on record of the case, the
same Inquiry Officer (First Inquiry Officer) would not have reversed his
earlier findings.
3.12. It is further submitted by Shri Patel, learned Senior Advocate for the
petitioner that as such Shri Hamir Sajan has not supported the case of the
department. It is submitted that his statement has been relied upon on the
ground that there is nothing on record to show that it was during custody. It
is submitted that aforesaid is factually incorrect. It is submitted that it is
undisputed position that his statement was recorded on 29.6.1993 while he was
in police custody from 8.6.1993 to 1.7.1993 in TADA Case. He was deposed that
he was beaten by the Police and his signature was obtained on blank papers
while in custody of the police. It is submitted that this complaint was made
by him at the first point of time when he was produced before the learned
Magistrate.
                                          Page 16 of 41
                                                                                        16 of 82
               C/SCA/12040/2007                                            JUDGMENT
It is submitted that even otherwise the said Hamir Sajan was having no reason
to support the petitioner, more particularly, when no favourable order was
passed in his favour and when the petitioner was placed under suspension and
was transferred from Jamnagar long back before he deposed before the Inquiry
Officer. It is submitted that Hamir Sajan has as such denied that any note is
recovered from him and it contained accounts in his handwriting. It is
submitted that therefore, the xerox chit cannot be relied or taken into
consideration in absence of its original and in view of specific deposition of
Hamir Sajan that he is not author of the same.
3.13. In support of his above submission, Shri Patel, learned Senior Advocate
for the petitioner has relied upon the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court
in the case of M/s. Bareilly Electricity Supply Co. Ltd vs. The Workmen and
others reported in 1971(2) SCC 617 (para14) and unreported decision of this
Court dated 23.7.2001 passed in LPA No. 64 of 2001 and other allied matters in
the case of Gujarat State Road Transport Corporation vs. Subhashbhai Keshabhai
(para 19).
3.14. It is further submitted that even affidavit and statement of Shri
Agrawal is referred to and is taken into consideration while passing the
impugned punishment order, however said witness is neither examined nor is
made subject to cross examination. It is submitted that therefore, his
affidavit and statement could not have been taken into consideration. In
support of his above submission, he has relied upon the decision of the Hon'be
Supreme Court in the case of Prahlad Saran Gupta vs. Bar Council of India and
another reported in AIR 1997 SC 1338 (para 10).
3.15. It is further submitted by Shri Patel, learned Senior Advocate for the
petitioner that there has been inordinate and  Page 17 of 41 17 of 82
C/SCA/12040/2007 JUDGMENT unexplained delay in initiating and concluding the
departmental inquiry. It is submitted that incident is of June 1993 for which
the charge sheet was issued on 7.1.1997 and punishment order is passed on
5.9.2006. It is submitted that the delay has operated against the petitioner
and the same has prejudiced the defence of the petitioner. It is submitted
that due to inordinate delay PW­Agrawal could not be produced before the
Inquiry Ofifcer for the purpose of deposition, who could have thrown light on
the facts of the case as to how the petitioner came to be framed by the
Police.
3.16. It is further submitted by Shri Patel, learned Senior Advocate for the
petitioner that statement of Shri Haribhai Soni and Shri Yusuf Patel was
recorded during the preliminary inquiry, but the same are not supplied to the
petitioner, in spite of his demand. It is submitted that the copies of two
complaints, one from a Junior Advocate and second from Anti Corruption Bureau
forwarding an anonymous complaint received by the said department as well as
the communication of the Principal Secretary, Home Department dated 11.6.1993,
thought referred to in the punishment order are not supplied to petitioner. It
is submitted that this has resulted into breach of principles of natural
justice. It is further submitted that the inquiry officer as well as
disciplinary authority has failed to taken into consideration the relevant
material and have taken into consideration irrelevant material or such
material which legally could not have been taken into consideration.
3.17. It is further submitted that the Inquiry Officer as well as Disciplinary
Authority have on conjectures and surmises, held the petitioner guilty of the
misconduct which the petitioner has not committed, which is illegal as per the
settled position of law, which provides that the serious charges of corruption
are required to be proved  Page 18 of 41 18 of 82 C/SCA/12040/2007 JUDGMENT
beyond reasonable doubt. In support of his above submission, he has relied
upon the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Union of India
and others vs. Gyan Chand Chattar reported in (2009) 12 SCC 78 (Head Note C).
It is further submitted that on the facts and circumstances of the case and
evidence on record, petitioner cannot be held guilty of the charges leveled
against him even on the basis of preponderance of probability. Making above
submissions and relying upon the above decisions, it is requested to allow
present Special Civil Application and quash and set aside the impugned orders
passed by the disciplinary authority as well as State Government dismissing
the petitioner from service.
4.0. Present petition is opposed by Shri Shalin Mehta, learned Senior Advocate
for the Disciplinary Authority (High Court) as well as Ms. Thakore, learned
Assistant Government Pleader appearing on behalf of the respondent no.2 State.
4.1. Shri Shalin Mehta, learned Senior Advocate for the Disciplinary Authority
(High Court) has vehemently submitted that once having participated in the
departmental inquiry on remand by the disciplinary authority and having not
challenged the earlier decision of the disciplinary authority in remanding the
matter the change of Inquiry Officer at appropriate stage and time and
thereafter having fully participated in the departmental inquiry and
thereafter when the decision has gone against the petitioner, thereafter it is
not open for the petitioner now to challenge the order passed by the
Disciplinary Authority remanding the matter so as to enable the department to
prove the case against the delinquent and change of inquiry officer.
                                           Page 19 of 41
                                                                                         19 of 82
              C/SCA/12040/2007                                            JUDGMENT
4.2. It is further submitted by Shri Shalin Mehta, learned Senior Advocate for
the Disciplinary Authority that as such while passing the earlier order dated
24.12.1998 and while remitting the case to the Inquiry Officer, the
Disciplinary Authority as such considered the inquiry report submitted by the
earlier Inquiry Officer and the reasons recorded by the Inquiry Officer
exonerating the delinquent and the Disciplinary Authority specifically
observed that in the High Court views those reasons recorded by the Inquiry
Officer are not followed at all and creates an impression that the inquiry has
been conducted in slip shod mannertherefore, as such Disciplinary Authority
did not accept the reasons recorded by the Inquiry Officer as sought to be
contended on behalf of the petitioner. It is submitted that as such the High
Court on administrative side while considering the report submitted by the
inquiry officer dated 29.7.1998 holding that the charges made against the
delinquent are not proved, specifically disagreed with the reasons and the
findings by observing that even sufficient opportunity was not given to the
petitioner to prove the case and no sincere efforts were made by the inquiry
officer to secure presence of important witnesses in the case. It is submitted
that as such High Court on administrative side (Disciplinary Authority) did
not accept the reasons given by the inquiry officer on appreciation of the
deposition of Shri Jebaliya. It is submitted that as such disciplinary
authority remanding the case to the Inquiry Officer as a whole and therefore,
it was open for the subsequent inquiry officer to appreciate the entire
evidence on record afresh and given his own finding. Therefore, it is
submitted by Shri Shalin Mehta, learned Senior Advocate for the Disciplinary
Authority that no illegality has been committed by the subsequent inquiry
officer in appreciating the entire evidence on record afresh more particularly
the evidence of Shri Jebaliya and given his own finding holding the delinquent
guilty.
                                          Page 20 of 41
                                                                                        20 of 82
              C/SCA/12040/2007                                           JUDGMENT
4.3. It is further submitted by Shri Shalin Mehta, learned Senior Advocate for
the Disciplinary Authority that the Inquiry Officer has specifically held on
appreciation of entire evidence on record that it is proved that delinquent
has indulged in corrupt practice and that the delinquent is guilty of
dereliction of discharging of his judicial function and acted in a manner
unbecoming to a judicial officer and has violated the provision contained in
Rule 3 of the Gujarat Civil Service Conduct Rules 1971 and considering the
report submitted by the Inquiry Officer and thereafter giving opportunity to
the delinquent to make submission against the inquiry report and after
considering the submission made by the petitioner, Disciplinary Authority has
rightly passed an order dismissing the petitioner from service.
4.4. It is submitted by Shri Shalin Mehta, learned Senior Advocate for the
Disciplinary Authority that as held by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case
reported in AIR 1964 SC 364 in exercising of its jurisdiction under Article
226 of the Constitution of India, the High Court cannot consider the question
about the sufficiency or adequacy of evidence in respect of a particular
conclusion.
4.5. It is further submitted by Shri Shalin Mehta, learned Senior Advocate for
the Disciplinary Authority that the charges levelled against the petitioner
are of grave nature, more so considering the position held by the petitioner
at the relevant time i.e. Judicial Magistrate, Jamnagar. Shri Shalin Mehta,
learned Senior Advocate for the Disciplinary Authority has submitted that
there is ample evidence to demonstrate that he charges have been rightly held
as proved and that the decision of terminating the petitioner from service is
also justified. It is submitted that though the settled legal position with
regard to the charges against the employee and the degree of proof in a
departmental inquiry is only of "preponderance of probability" and not of
"proof beyond doubt" in present case there are statements of witnesses and
also other material  Page 21 of 41 21 of 82 C/SCA/12040/2007 JUDGMENT
available on record which conclusively demonstrate that the charges leveled
against petitioner are rightly held as proved and the findings of the inquiry
officer are not incorrect or perverse or unjustified.
4.6. It is further submitted by Shri Shalin Mehta, learned Senior Advocate for
the Disciplinary Authority that conscious decision taken by the Full Bench of
the High Court considering the report submitted by the Inquiry Officer and the
nature of charges levelled against the delinquent which are serious in nature.
It is submitted that whenever a decision is taken by the Full Bench of the
High Court, a possibility of arbitrariness is altogether ruled out cause each
judge has the freedom to express opinion not only on the procedural aspect of
the inquiry and the evaluation of evidence made by the inquiry officer but
also on the quantum of punishment. It is submitted that decision to dismiss
the petitioner from service was taken by the High Court after dully
considering nature of his duties and functions as Judicial Officer, the
graveman of the charges levelled against him, his accountability to the public
at large and his abysmal failure to perform the judicial functions such
adversely affected the image of the judicial system in the eyes of public and
caused grave injury to the litigating public.
4.7. Now, so far as contention on behalf of the petitioner in initiating the
departmental proceedings belatedly is concerned, it is submitted that except
the bare statement that it has caused prejudice to the delinquent, nothing has
been pointed out. It is submitted that prejudice is not only to be pleaded but
it has to be demonstrated by instances made, the delay has caused any
prejudice. It is submitted that as such there is no inordinate delay and
deliberate delay in initiating departmental inquiry. It is submitted that as
such chamber meeting held on 16.9.1993 a decision was already taken to
initiate departmental inquiry against the petitioner. It is submitted that as
such on receiving  Page 22 of 41 22 of 82 C/SCA/12040/2007 JUDGMENT the
complaint against the petitioner it was decided to direct the Special Officer
(Vigilance) to conduct preliminary inquiry in the matter and thereafter on the
strength of the report of the Special Officer (Vigilance) dated 2.9.1993 it
was decided at the Chamber Meeting held on 16.9.1993 to initiate Departmental
Inquiry against the petitioner. It is submitted that on the basis of the
report dated 2.9.1993 and after calling for the necessary records from the
Principal District Judge, Jamnagar, charges were framed against the
delinquent. It is submitted that the petitioner has made unnecessary
allegations against Special Officer (Vigilance) with respect to bias and even
against Shri Jebaliya.
It is further submitted by Shri Mehta, learned Senior Advocate for the
Disciplinary Authority that the evidence of Jebaliya who is an independent
witness is absolute reliable and credible and there is no basis in the
allegation of the petitioner with respect to bias made against Shri Jebaliya.
4.8. It is further submitted by Shri Mehta, learned Senior Advocate for the
Disciplinary Authority that as such there is no violation of principles of
natural justice as alleged. It is submitted that statement of Shri Yusuf Patel
which was recorded by the Special Officer (Vigilance) while conducting
preliminary inquiry in the matter has not been relied upon as he has not been
examined during the course of regular departmental inquiry.
4.9. It is further submitted by Shri Mehta, learned Senior Advocate for the
Disciplinary Authority that the genuineness of the diary seized by Shri
Jebaliya, cannot be doubted since the averment on oath made by Shri Jebaliya,
the then Dy.Sp, Jamnagar(Rural) that the original diary was handed over to the
DIG is supported by the communication received from the Principal Secretary,
Home Department, wherein it is stated that original diary is in custody of the
Director General of Police.
                                          Page 23 of 41
                                                                                        23 of 82
                C/SCA/12040/2007                                            JUDGMENT
It is further submitted that as such there is no cogent, overwhelming and
convincing evidence on record to hold the delinquent guilty of the charges. It
is submitted that various links in the chain of evidence led by the department
have been satisfactorily proved. It is submitted that the said circumstances
point to the guilt of the accused with reasonable definiteness. It is
submitted that the facts which are established can be said to be consistent
only with the hypothesis of the guilt of the delinquent.
5.0. Ms. Thakore, learned Assistant Government Pleader has adopted the
submissions made by Shri Mehta, learned Senior Advocate for the disciplinary
authority and has stated that in the facts and circumstances of the case no
illegality and / or error has been committed in dismissing the petitioner from
service, more particularly, when the petitioner was holding the post of
Judicial Magistrate. Therefore, it is requested to dismiss the present Special
Civil Application.
6.0. Heard the learned advocates for the respective parties at length.
7.0. At the outset, it is required to be noted that the petitioner who was at
the relevant time serving as Chief Judicial Magistrate, Jamnagar has been
dismissed by the High Court (Disciplinary Authority) on the ground that he had
indulged in corrupt practice; that he was guilty of dereliction of discharging
of his judicial function and acted in a manner unbecoming to a judicial
officer. It is also required to be noted that petitioner has been dismissed
from service after holding departmental inquiry and considering the report
submitted by the Inquiry Officer holding the petitioner guilty for the charges
of corrupt practice; dereliction in discharging its judicial function and
acting in a manner unbecoming to a Judicial Officer proved and after giving
fullest  Page 24 of 41 24 of 82 C/SCA/12040/2007 JUDGMENT opportunity to the
petitioner and after considering the defence and reply of the petitioner to
the show cause notice and petitioner has been dismissed from service by
detailed speaking order. It appears from the report submitted by the Inquiry
Officer as well as order passed by the High Court (Disciplinary Authority)
dismissing the petitioner from service that the inquiry officer has held that
the petitioner guilty for the charges leveled against him and for the
misconduct proved on appreciation of evidence on record. As per the settled
proposition of law and law laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case
reported in (2006) 7 SCC 212 the High Court while exercising the powers under
Article 226 of the Constitution of India does not act as an Appellate
Authority and its jurisdiction is circumscribed and confined to correct errors
of law or procedural error, if any, resulting in manifest miscarriage of
justice and violation of principles of natural justice. It is held by the
Hon'ble Supreme Court in the aforesaid decision that High Court cannot
re­appreciated the evidence acting as Court of Appeal.
7.1. In the case of reported in AIR 1963 SC 1723 in para 7, the Hon'ble
Supreme Court has observed and held as under:
> 7\. There is no warrant for the view expressed by the High Court that in
> considering whether a public officer is guilty of the misconduct charred
> against him, the rule followed in criminal trials that an offence is not
> established unless proved by evidence beyond reasonable doubt to the
> satisfaction of the Court, must be applied, and if that rule be not applied,
> the High Court in a petition under Article 226 of the Constitution is
> competent to declare the order of the authorities holding a departmental
> enquiry invalid. The High Court is not constituted in a proceeding under
> Article 226 of the Constitution a Court of appeal over the decision of the
> authorities holding a departmental enquiry against a public servant: it is
> concerned to determine whether the enquiry is held by an authority competent
> in that behalf, and according to the procedure prescribed in that behalf,
> and whether the rules of natural justice are not violated. Where there is
> some  Page 25 of 41 25 of 82 C/SCA/12040/2007 JUDGMENT evidence, which the
> authority entrusted with the duty to hold the enquiry has accepted and which
> evidence may reasonably support theconclusion that the delinquent officer is
> guilty of the charge, it is not the function of the High Court in a petition
> for a writ under Article 226 to review the evidence and to arrive at an
> independent finding on the evidence. The High Court may undoubtedly
> interfere where the departmental authorities have held the proceedings
> against the delinquent in manner inconsistent with the rules of natural
> justice or in violation of the statutory rules prescribing the mode of
> enquiry or where the authorities have disabled themselves from reaching a
> fair decision by some considerations extraneous to the evidence and the
> merits of the case or by allowing themselves to be influenced by irrelevant
> considerations or where the conclusion on the very face of it is so wholly
> arbitrary and capricious that no reasonable person could ever have arrived
> at that conclusion, or on similar grounds. But the departmental authorities
> are, if the enquiry is otherwise properly held, the sole judges of facts and
> if there be some legal evidence on which their findings can be based, the
> adequacy or reliability of that evidence is not a matter which can be
> permitted to be canvassed before the High Court in a proceeding for a writ
> under Article 226 of the Constitution.
7.2. In the case of State of T.N vs. S. Subramaniam reported in (1996) 7 SCC
509; in the case of R.S. Saini vs. State of Punjab reported in (1999) 8 SCC 90
and in the case of Government of A.P. vs. Mohd. Nasrullah Khan reported in
(2006) 2 SCC 373, it is held by the Hon'ble Supreme Court that judicial review
is not akin to adjudication on merits by re­appreciating the evidence an
appellate authority. It is further held that only consideration the Court/
Tribunal has in its judicial review, is to consider whether the conclusion is
based on evidence or record and supports the finding or whether the conclusion
is based on no evidence. It is further held that adequacy or reliability of
the evidence is not a matter which can be permitted to be canvassed before the
Court in writ proceedings. In the case of Zora Singh vs. J.M. Tandon reported
in (1971) 3 SCC 834 in para 10 the Hon'ble Supreme Court has held and observed
as under:
Page 26 of 41
> 26 of 82 C/SCA/12040/2007 JUDGMENT
> 10.The principle that if some of the reasons relied on by a Tribunal for its
> conclusion turn out to be extraneous or otherwise unsustainable, its
> decision would be vitiated, applies to cases in which the conclusion is
> arrived at not on assessment of objective facts or evidence but on
> subjective satisfaction. The reason is that whereas in cases where the
> decision is based on subjective satisfaction if some of the reasons turn out
> to be irrelevant or invalid, it would be impossible for a superior Court to
> find out which of the reasons, relevant or irrelevant, valid or invalid, had
> brought about such satisfaction. But in a case where the conclusion is based
> on objective facts and evidence, such a difficulty would not arise. If it is
> found that there was legal evidence before the Tribunal, even if some of it
> was irrelevant, a superior court would not interfere if the finding can be
> sustained on the rest of the evidence. The reason is that in a writ petition
> for certiorari the superior Court does not sit in appeal but exercise only
> supervisory jurisdiction and therefore, does not enter into the question of
> sufficiency of evidence.
7.3. Thus, it is held that the Court will not normally exercise its power of
judicial review unless it is found that formation of belief by statutory
authority suffers from mala fides, dishonest/ corrupt practice. It is held
that neither the question as to whether there was sufficient evidence before
the authority can be raised / examined nor the question of re­appreciating the
evidence to examine the correctness of the order under challenge. It is held
that if there are sufficient ground for passing an order, then even if one of
them is found to be correct, and on its basis the order impugned can be
passed, there is no occasion for the Court to interfere. It is further held
and observed that even when some defect is found in the decision making
process, the Court must exercise its discretionary power with great caution
keeping in mind the larger public interest and only when it comes to the
conclusion that overwhelming public interest requires interference, the Court
should be intervene.
7.4. The present petition can be bifurcated into two reliefs. (1). Challenging
the departmental inquiry and the order passed by the  Page 27 of 41 27 of 82
C/SCA/12040/2007 JUDGMENT disciplinary authority in not accepting the inquiry
report submitted by the first Inquiry Officer and remanding the matter and
entrusting the inquiry to another Inquiry Officer.
(2). Challenging the impugned order passed by the Disciplinary Authority
dismissing the petitioner from service.
7.5. Now so far as the prayer of the petitioner to challenge the disciplinary
proceedings and to quash and set aside the decision of the disciplinary
authority on its administrative side, appointing new Inquiry Officer, for
further inquiry, in place of earlier Inquiry Officer and remanding the matter
by not accepting the inquiry report submitted by the First Inquiry Officer is
concerned, it is required to be noted that earlier at no point of time the
petitioner made any grievance with respect to remanding the matter for further
inquiry and entrusting the inquiry to another Inquiry Officer Shri A.J. Bhatt.
On the contrary, he fully participated in the inquiry conducted by the second
Inquiry Officer without making any grievance whatsoever either not accepting
the inquiry report submitted by the earlier inquiry officer and remanding the
matter for further inquiry or entrusting the inquiry on remand to another
Inquiry Officer i.e. appointing another Inquiry Officer Shri A.J. Bhatt. Only
when the inquiry report by the another Inquiry Officer Shri A.J. Bhatt has
gone against the petitioner on the basis of which the petitioner has been
dismissed from service, for the first the time the petitioner has made
grievance before this Court in the present petition. Under the circumstances,
once the petitioner participated in the inquiry conducted and held by the
another Inquiry Officer Shri A.J. Bhatt thereafter it is not open for the
petitioner to challenge the decision of the Disciplinary Authority on
administrative side not accepting the report submitted by the first Inquiry
Officer exonerating the petitioner and remanding the case / matter for further
inquiry / inquiry and entrusted inquiry to  Page 28 of 41 28 of 82
C/SCA/12040/2007 JUDGMENT another Inquiry Officer Shri A.J. Bhatt. Once having
participated in the inquiry before the Inquiry Officer, Shri A.J. Bhatt
without raising any grievance whatsoever, subsequently the petitioner is
estopped from making any grievance against the decision of the disciplinary
authority not accepting the inquiry report submitted by the earlier inquiry
officer and remanding the matter so as to enable the disciplinary authority to
prove the case against the petitioner and entrusting the inquiry to another
inquiry officer. It is required to be noted that as such as per Rule 10 of
Rules, 1971 it is open for the disciplinary authority not to agree with the
finding given by the Inquiry Officer and even remand the matter for further
inquiry.
Under the circumstances, challenge to decision of the disciplinary authority
in entrusting inquiry on remand to another officer and / or action of the
disciplinary authority remanding the matter by not accepting the inquiry
report submitted by Shri C. S. Oza earlier Inquiry Officer fails.
8.0. While considering challenge to the impugned order of dismissal,
background of the case and the circumstances under which Departmental Inquiry
was initiated against the petitioner deserves consideration.
8.1. The delinquent was working as Chief Judicial Magistrate, Jamnagar from
1.5.1992 to 23.6.1993. On 13.5.1993 and 25.5.1993 the High Court received two
complaints, first one from a Junior Advocate and the Second one from Anti
Corruption Bureau, Gujarat State forwarding an annoyance complaint received by
the said department. On 11.6.1993 Mr. R.Balkrishnan, the Principal Secretary,
Home Department, Government of Gujarat addressed a communication to the
Hon'ble the Chief Justice through the Registrar. The said communication  Page
29 of 41 29 of 82 C/SCA/12040/2007 JUDGMENT contained a copy of evening
edition dated 9.6.1993, of "Jaihind" Daily. On page 8 of the said newspaper,
in the portion sidelined "AA" the details of payment made by a smuggler, whose
premises had been raided by the police, to a Judicial Magistrate in Jamnagar
had been given. The latter of the Principal Secretary contained various
details and as stated in paragraph no.3 of the said letter a Xerox copy of the
relevant page from the note book seized by the police had also been enclosed.
The said letter records that the original note book is with the Director
General of Police, Gujarat State. In paragraph No.4 of the letter it is stated
that one Shri Patel mentioned in the note book is the Chief Judicial
Magistrate, Jamnagar and this has been revealed in the interrogation of the
accused Hamir Sajan Ahir. As the matter pertained to a Judicial Officer, the
Principal Secretary had forwarded the aforesaid documents to the High Court.
8.2. Accordingly, the Special Officer (Vigilance), High Court was directed on
11.6.1993 itself to conduct discrete inquiry Record reveals that the Special
Officer (Vigilance), High Court visited Jamnagar between 12.6.1993 to
14.6.1993 and collected various pieces of evidence. Thereafter, a preliminary
inquiry was conducted by the Special Officer (Vigilance), High Court and his
report having been placed before the Chamber Meeting held on 16.9.1993, a
decision to hold a regular departmental inquiry against the delinquent for
imposing major penalty as provided in Rule 6 of the Gujarat Civil Services
(Discipline and Appeal) Rules, 1976 was taken.
8.3. Accordingly, charges were served on the delinquent on 7.11.1997. The
delinquent was served with the statement of imputation and the list of
witnesses and documents. The statement of imputation which was served upon the
delinquent, reads as under:
Page 30 of 41
30 of 82 C/SCA/12040/2007 JUDGMENT "STATEMENT OF IMPUTATION"
Mr.N.R.Patel, was working as Chief Judicial Magistrate, Jamnagar (now Civil
Judge (S.D.), Rajkot).
While Mr. N.R.Patel was working as Chief Judicial Magistrate, Jamnagar, for
the period of 1/5/1992 to 23/6/1993:­ Two Criminal Cases No.1059/92 and
2103/87, for the offences punishable under Section 135 of the Customs Act,
1962, were pending against the accused, viz 1) Yusuf Haji Abdulla Bhaya: 2)
Hasam Abdulla Bhaya: 3) Abdul Jakub Sanghar: 4) Adam Kasam Sanghar: 5) Hasam
Sidiq Mokha (Bhadela); 6) Abdul Husen Arab; 7) Gani Hasam Bhadela (Dalej); And
1) Haji Ismail Sumbhania; 2) Natha Khima Varu; 3) Dadu Karsan Chavda; 4) Ala
Malde Ahir; 4 A) Jesha Natha Ahir; 5) Taiyab Mamad Sandhi; 6) Gogan Seva Koli;
7) Devsi Gogan;
8) Dosa Gogan Koli; 9) Deva Dohya Kagadia; 10) Bhimsi Laxman; 11) Hamir Sajan
Karangia (Aher); 12) Hamir Jeva Mer; 13) Arjan Mula Modhwadia; 14) Sajan
Harbhan: 15) Devsi Bhima Mer; 16) Nagan Malu, respectively in the Court of
Chief Judicial Magistrate, Jamnagar, out of the said two cases complaint in
the Criminal Case No.1059/92, was filed on 13/3/1992 by Customs Department,
and no progress was made in the matter till 17/11/1992.
That one Mr. A.R.Aggrawal, who was working in the office of Pavan Travels in
Jamnagar Branch, was known to Mr. N.R.Patel, as he was travelling between
Kalavad and Jamnagar, in the bus of Pavan Travels, and the accused No.1 of
Cri. Case No.1059/92, viz. Yusuf Patel, was also known to Mr. A.R.Aggrawal, as
he used to travel in the bus of Pavan Travels for going to Bombay.
While the said case was pending, about 8 months prior to 14/6/1993, Yusuf
Patel, went to the office of Pavan Travels and enquired from Mr. Ajay R.
Aggrawal, regarding his relations with Magistrate, Shri N.R.Patel whereupon
Mr. Aggrawal replied that he had relations with Mr. N.R.Patel, therefore, Mr.
Yusuf Patel told Mr. Aggrawal that his two cases were pending in the Court of
Mr. N.R.Patel and he wanted Mr. Aggrawal to have a talk with Mr. Patel, for
settlement of the cases. Mr. Aggrawal, asked Mr. Yusuf Patel to come after two
to four days. On the next day Mr. Aggrawal asked to Magistrate Mr. N.R.Patel
to show favour to the accused Yusuf Patel, in the two cases, and Mr.
N.R.Patel, demanded bribe of Rs.5 lacs from Yusuf Patel, through said Mr.
Aggrawal. After two days, Yusuf Patel, went to Mr. Aggrawal who told him that
Mr. N.R.Patel had demanded Rs. 5 lacs to settle both the cases. But the said
Yusuf Patel, agreed to pay Rs. 2 Lacs, to Mr. N.R.Patel, and agreed to pay Rs.
One lakh, initially for the case regarding smuggling of  Page 31 of 41 31 of
82 C/SCA/12040/2007 JUDGMENT Silver Bars, i.e. in Cri. Case No.1059/92, and
told the other case be kept pending.
Mr. Aggrawal, told Mr. Yusuf Patel, to come after two days, and after Mr.
Yusuf Patel left, Mr. Aggrawal informed Mr. N.R.Patel, accordingly, and Mr.
N.R.Patel, agreed to the proposal made by the accused, Yusuf Patel, and told
Mr. Aggrawal to inform him on telephone after collecting Rs. One Lac from the
accused.
After about 2 days, Yusuf Patel went to the office of Mr. Aggrawal, who told
him that Mr. N.R.Patel Saheb was given his consent therefore Mr. Yusuf Patel
told Mr. Aggrawal that he will handover the money to Mr. Aggrawal, thereafter
three to four days accused Yusuf Patel went to the office of Mr. Aggrawal, in
Maruti Car No.GC­J­255, and handed over Rs. One Lac to Mr. Aggrawal, for
delivering the same to Mr. N.R.Patel. Immediately thereafter Mr. N.R.Patel,
was informed on telephone at his residence by Mr. Aggrawal, that he had
received Rs.One lac, on his behalf and Mr. N.R.Patel told him that after the
Court Hours, he will collect the amount from him and accordingly, in between
7.30 p.m. And 8.00 p.m. Mr. N.R.Patel went to the office of Mr. Aggrawal and
collected the said amount of Rs. One lac from Mr. Aggrawal and left the office
of Mr. Aggrawal. Thereafter, though the case of the Years from 1981 to 1991
were pending in his Court, even against the under trial prisoners, suddenly
the matter was taken up for which Mr. N.R.Patel had accepted the said bribe
amount and in pre charge proceedings. Mr. N.R.Patel examined nine witnesses.
The agreements were heard on charge on date 1/2/1993 and on 2/2/1993 and then
on 6/2/1993 Mr. N.R.Patel pronounced an order discharging the said principal
accused No.1, Yusuf Haji Abdulla Bhaya @ Yusuf Patel.
This fact was narrated by Mr. Aggrawal to his friend Mr. Haribhai Soni,
resident of Jamnagar, in a casual manner.
About 6 months prior to 14/6/1993, Mr. Haribhai Soni went to the office of Mr.
Aggrawal and told him that one Hamirbhai Ahir is also facing the similar case
as of Mr. Yusuf Patel pending in the Court of Mr. N.R.Patel and that also to
be settled with Mr. N.R.Patel saheb. At the instance of Mr. Haribhai Soni to
show favour to the accused viz. Mr. Hamir Ahir, in Criminal Case No.2103/87,
pending in the Court of Mr. N.R.Patel for offence punishable under Section 135
of Custom Act, 1962, said Mr. A.R.Aggrawal telephoned Mr. N.R.Patel and Mr.
N.R.Patel, demanded bribe of Rs.75,000/­ for showing favour to the accused,
Hamirbhai Ahir, through Mr. A.R.Aggrawal. Mr. A.R. Aggrawal, informed Mr.
Haribhai accordingly.
After about 15 days, Mr. Aggrawal, went to the house of Mr. Haribhai to
collect the Video game at that time, Mr. Haribhai paid Rs.50,000/­ to  Page 32
of 41 32 of 82 C/SCA/12040/2007 JUDGMENT Mr. Aggrawal, for paying the said
amount to Mr. N.R.Patel, and Mr. N.R.Patel was informed at his residence on
phone by Mr. Aggrawal that he had received the amount on behalf of Mr.
N.R.Patel. Thereupon, Mr. N.R.Patel told Mr. Aggrawal that his brother Mr.
Jayesh would collect the money from Mr. Aggrawal and on the same day, in the
evening, Mr. N.R.Patel's younger brother Jayesh went to the office of Mr.
Aggrawal, and collected the said amount. After about 15 to 20 days, at about
11.00 a.m., Mr. Haribhai Soni, gave the balance of the amount of Rs.25,000/­
to Mr. Aggrawal, for paying it to Mr. N.R.Patel, and on receiving message from
Mr. Aggrawal, about receipt of the amount, Mr. N.R.Patel collected the said
amount through his brother Mr. Jayesh.
Thereafter, as Mr. N.R.Patel received the bribe amount, the matter was taken
up by Mr. N.R.Patel hastily and during the pre charge proceedings he recorded
the evidence of 22 witnesses, though the case for the Years 1981 to 1991 were
pending in the Court, including the cases against the under trial prisoners.
The Jamnagar police raided the house of the said accused Hamir Ahir and in the
search of the house collected the said amount through his brother Mr. Jayesh.
The carried out by the police a note book containing the accounts maintained
by the said accused was recovered wherein two payments are shown to have been
made to Mr. N.R.Patel, one on 29/12/1992 of Rs. 50,000/­ and another on
16/1/1993 of Rs.25,000/­.
That two to three days after 8/6/1993, Mr. N.R.Patel, had enquired from Mr.
Jeblia, Dy. S.P. on telephone as to whether Mr. Hamir was arrested and also
requested Mr. Jeblia, Dy. S.P. to take care of him, if anything is found
against him and after the news regarding seizure of note book from the house
of Mr. Hamir was broken, Mr. N.R.Patel had again made a telephone call to Mr.
Jeblia, Dy. S.P. and enquired as to whether his name appeared in the note book
and whether he could see the note book but Mr. Jeblia, Dy. S.P. replied that
note book has been taken by the D.I.G., Ahmedabad.
On 14/6/1993, Mr. N.R.Patel, had telephonic talk with Mrs. Prafula, wife of
Mr. Aggrawal and Mr. N.R.Patel told her "officers from the High Court have
come and tell vikki he should not involve me by making any statement before
them".
That Mr.N.R.Patel, had sent two persons to the house of Mr. Aggrawal, who told
Mr. Aggrawal to telephone Mr. N.R.Patel, from outside. But Mr. Aggrawal was
apprehending danger to his life, so he refused to go out for telephoning to
Mr. N.R.Patel.
On 20/6/1993, at night time Mr. N.R.Patel, along with his brother had  Page 33
of 41 33 of 82 C/SCA/12040/2007 JUDGMENT gone to the house of Mr. Aggrawal,
with a writing wherein it was written that D.S.P. Mr. Jha and Dy. S.P. Mr.
Jeblia had threatened Mr. Aggrawal that they will file a false case of keeping
AK­56 Rifle, and would arrest Mr. Aggrawal under TADA. Therefore, under that
fear, Mr. Aggrawal had filed the affidavit against Mr. N.R.Patel, but Mr.
Aggrawal did not sign the same as his previous affidavit filed against Mr.
N.R.Patel, was made without any fear or pressure and at his free will.
On 27/6/1993, Mr. N.R.Patel's brother Mr. Jayesh at the instance of Mr.
N.R.Patel, telephoned Mr. Aggrawal to handover the copy of the affidavit,
filed against Mr. N.R.Patel, but the same was not supplied as he had no copy
of the same, and thereby:
            a)     Mr. N.R.Patel indulged in corrupt practice
            b)     Mr. N.R.Patel, was guilty of dereliction in discharging his judicial  
            functions and;
            c)     Mr.   N.R.Patel,   acted   in   a   manner   unbecoming   of   a   Judicial  
            Officer.
The above acts of Mr. N.R.Patel, tantamount to acts unbecoming of a Judicial
Officer, and are acts of grave misconduct which are violative of the
provisions contained in Rule 3 of the Gujarat Civil Services (Conduct) Rules,
1971."
8.4. That the delinquent took inspection of relevant records on receipt of the
chargesheet and tendered his statement of defence on 18.3.1997. As the
statement of defence and the grounds stated therein were not found acceptable,
the Disciplinary Authority decided to proceed further with the inquiry. One
Shri C.S. Oza, City Civil Court Judge, Ahmedabad was appointed as Inquiry
Officer. In his report dated 29.7.1998 he held that the charges against the
delinquent were not proved. The report dated 29.7.1998 was placed along with
relevant papers before the Disciplinary Committee of the High Court and the
Disciplinary Committee found that the sufficient opportunity is not given to
the department to prove the case and if no sincere efforts were made by the
Inquiry Officer to secure the presence of the important witnesses of the case
and the Disciplinary Authority also pointed out that the report submitted by
the Inquiry Officer cannot be accepted and in that  Page 34 of 41 34 of 82
C/SCA/12040/2007 JUDGMENT view of the matter case deserves remand so as to
give opportunity to department to prove its case. The Disciplinary Authority
also observed that inquiry has been conducted in slip shod manner. Observing
the above, the High Court / Disciplinary Authority remitted the case to the
Inquiry Officer so as to enable the department to prove its case. That
thereupon further inquiry was conducted by Shri A.J. Bhatt, City Civil Court,
Judge, Ahmedabad who examined remaining witnesses and vide report dated
23.9.1997 held that the charges proved established. That thereafter after
giving an opportunity to the petitioner to make submission against the report
submitted by the Inquiry Officer and after issuing show cause notice to the
petitioner show cause as to why the petitioner should not be dismissed from
service, by a speaking reasoned order the Disciplinary Authority has passed
the impugned order dismissing the petitioner from service by holding that
cumulative effect on appreciation of the entire evidence goes to show that the
delinquent conducted himself in a manner which was not befitting a Judicial
Officer and the evidence goes to point towards a conduct of having indulged in
corrupt practice and in pursuance of receipt of illegal gratification matters
of Yusuf Patel and Hamri Sajan. That thereafter, the State of Gujarat has
passed consequential order on the basis of order passed by the Disciplinary
Authority (High Court) which are under challenge before this Court.
9.0. Challenge to impugned order of dismissal passed by the Disciplinary
Authority 9.1. The impugned order of dismissal passed by the Disciplinary
Authority is challenged by the petitioner on the ground that assuming that the
Disciplinary Authority was justified in not accepting the inquiry report
submitted by the earlier Inquiry Officer exonerating the petitioner  Page 35
of 41 35 of 82 C/SCA/12040/2007 JUDGMENT and remanding the matter even by
appointing another Inquiry Officer, as the remand was for further inquiry
only, disciplinary authority while passing the order of remand for further
inquiry, disciplinary authority confirmed the findings of the earlier Inquiry
Officer which were on appreciation of evidence of Shri Jebaliyas and that the
Inquiry Officer and Disciplinary Authority were required to confine themselves
as to whether allegations and charges are proved on the basis of evidence that
has given in further inquiry. It is the case of the petitioner that earlier
Inquiry Officer exonerated the petitioner on the basis of Shri Jebaliya
evidence and even after further inquiry, solely on the basis of Shri Jebaliya
evidence the allegations and the charges are held proved by Inquiry Officer
and the Disciplinary Authority, which is not permissible. The aforesaid cannot
be accepted. From the order of remand dated 24.12.1998 passed by the
Disciplinary Authority, it cannot be said that the Disciplinary Authority as
such accepted the report of the First Inquiry Officer (Shri C.S. Oza) that on
the basis of the Shri Jebaliya's evidence allegations and charges did not
stand proved. There is no such finding at all and / or even from the order of
remand no such impression can be gathered. From the order of remand, it
appears that on the contrary, it has been specifically observed that inquiry
has been conducted in slip shod manner. While admitting the case of the
Inquiry Officer, Disciplinary Authority has observed as under:
> The High Court has taken into consideration the relevant papers as well as
> contents of the report submitted by the Inquiry Officer. In the High Court's
> opinion, though the then Special Officer (Vigilance), High Court had
> recorded the statements of as many as seven witnesses, no sincere attempt
> was made by the Inquiry Officer to secure their presence for the purpose of
> Inquiry. The Inquiry Officer has given reasons in para 10 of the report to
> justify non examination of the witnesses Musa Ismail, Peon, District Court,
> Jamnagar. Similarly, the Inquiry Officer has recorded reasons in para 11
> justifying non­examination of the witness Hamir Sajan Aher who had made the
> statement before the Special Officer  Page 36 of 41 36 of 82
> C/SCA/12040/2007 JUDGMENT (Vigilance), High Court mentioning that, he had
> paid a sum of Rs.75000/­ to the delinquent. The Inquiry Officer had recorded
> reasons in para 12 of the report as to why the witness Ajay Ramprasad
> Agrawal could not be examined at the Departmental Inquiry. In the High
> Court's view, those reasons are not valid at all and creates an impression
> that the inquiry has been conducted in slip shod manner. It may be stated
> that, Musa Ismail is discharging duties as Peon in the District Court,
> Jamnagar and his presence could have been easily secured, if, the Inquiry
> Officer had addressed request letter to the learned District Judge of
> Jamnagar. Similarly, Hamir Sajan Ahir who is the main witness has not been
> examined on spacious ground, that the summons not be served at his address.
> Record does not indicate that any sincere attempt was made by the Inquiry
> Officer to serve summons on witness Hamir Sajan Ahir. Again reasons given by
> the Inquiry Officer for non examination Ajay Ramprasad Agrawal can hardly be
> said to be valid reasons at all. The High Court notes that, Ajay Ramprasad
> Agrawal at the relevant time was serving with Pavan Travels, and therefore,
> by making inquiry with responsible officer of Pavan Travels , the said
> witness could have been served with summons. With reference to the
> Departmental Inquiry against the delinquent, a sufficient opportunity is not
> given to the Department to prove the case and no sincere efforts were made
> by the Inquiry Officer to secure presence of important witnesses in the
> case. The High Court is of the opinion that report submitted by the Inquiry
> Officer cannot be accepted and in any view of the matter, the cases deserves
> remand so as to given opportunity to be Department to prove its case.
> Having regard to the facts of the case, the High Court has no option, but to
> remit the case to the Inquiry Officer for further inquiry as provided under
> Rule 10 of the Gujarat Civil Services (Discipline and Appeal) Rules, 1971.
> Accordingly, the matter is remitted to the Inquiry Officer for further
> inquiry. It is directed that all and sincere efforts shall be made by the
> Inquiry Officer to serve summons on the witnesses whose statements were
> recorded by the Special Officer (Vigilance), High Court and who could not be
> examined at the Departmental Inquiry.
9.2. It is true that in the operative portion of the order of remand it is
observed that the matter is remitted to the Inquiry Officer for further
inquiry. However, the same is required to be considered considering the matter
of remand as a whole and the observations and  Page 37 of 41 37 of 82
C/SCA/12040/2007 JUDGMENT findings given by the Disciplinary Authority.
Considering the order of remand as a whole and the observations made in the
said order, it appear to us that the Disciplinary Authority (High Court)
remitted the case to the Inquiry Officer by not accepting the report submitted
by the Inquiry Officer and so as to give opportunity to the department to
prove its case meaning thereby the case was remitted to the Inquiry Officer as
a whole and therefore, it was open for the Inquiry Officer Shri A.J. Bhatt to
consider the case as a whole and to consider the entire evidence on record
inclusive of evidence of Shri Jebaliya's and it was open for the Inquiry
Officer Shri A.J. Bhatt to appreciate the entire evidence on record.
Therefore, as such no error or illegality has been committed by the Inquiry
Officer Shri A.J. Bhatt in appreciating and considering the deposition of Shri
Jebaliya's and holding the charge against the petitioner proved.
9.3. That on appreciation of entire evidence on record and cumulative effect
of appreciation of entire evidence, the Inquiry Officer has come to the
definite finding that the delinquent conducted himself in a manner which was
not befitting the Judicial Officer. He has also come to the conclusion that
evidence goes to point towards a conduct of having indulged in corrupt
practice and in pursuance of receipt of illegal gratification matters of Yusuf
Patel and Hamri Sajan were taken up out of board and that the said Yusuf Patel
accused in Criminal Case No.1059 of 1992, came to be discharged while
remaining accused were charged with the offences for which they were
arraigned. The Inquiry Officer has also specifically observed that in fact it
was a fictitious circumstances that before the criminal case No. 2103 of 1987
could be decided the diary came to be seized, Vigilance Inquiry was initiated,
delinquent was transferred out of Jamnagar. The finding recorded by the
Inquiry Officer are thus on appreciation of evidence and considering the
cumulative  Page 38 of 41 38 of 82 C/SCA/12040/2007 JUDGMENT effect and on
appreciation of entire evidence.
10\. The Hon'ble Apex Court, with regard to the factual findings of the
inquiry officer and disciplinary authority has, in case between Y.P. Sarabhai
vs. Union Bank of India & another reported in 2006(5) SCC 377, held that:­
This Court has repeatedly held that the factual finding of the disciplinary
authority after holding a detailed enquiry and after going through elaborate
evidence is not assailable in the courts unless the breach of principles of
natural justice or the violation of any rules or any material irregularity on
the face of record is alleged and shown. However, in this case the High Court
in the jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India has again
gone into all aspects of the enquiry in detail and has come to the same
factual finding as the disciplinary authority and the Appellate Authority.
Such concurrent findings by three different authorities including the High
Court should not be disturbed by this Court under Article 136 of the
Constitution of India. We, therefore, have no other option except to dismiss
this appeal. Accordingly, the appeal stands dismissed.
11\. We are not sitting in appeal over the findings and the decision of the
inquiry officer and it is not within the purview of judicial review to examine
the sufficiency of evidence except lack or absence of evidence or to decide
about the propriety of inquiry officers decision to believe one piece of
evidence over another.
12\. At this stage, we consider it appropriate to refer to the law declared
Page 39 of 41 39 of 82 C/SCA/12040/2007 JUDGMENT by the Honble Apex Court, on
this point, in the judgment between High Court of Judicature, Bombay v/s
Shashikant Patel (supra) wherein the Honble Apex Court has observed that if
the inquiry has been properly conducted, then, as per the settled legal
position, if there is some legal evidence on which findings can be based, then
adequacy or even reliability of that evidence is not a matter to be canvassed
before the High Court in petition under Article 226.
13\. In present case, a fair and legal inquiry has been conducted and there
has been no dispute or grievance about the legality or propriety of inquiry
and on examination of the material we have already come to the conclusion that
this is not a case which can be considered a no evidence case.
14\. With regard to the scope of interference by the High Court in
jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution with the Hon'ble Apex Court
in case between State of U.P. & Another vs. Rajkishore Yadav & Another
reported in (2006) 5 SCC 673 held that:
> ...It is a settled law that the High Court has limited scope of interference
> in the administrative action of the State in exercise of extraordinary
> jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India and, therefore,
> the findings recorded by the enquiry officer and the consequent order of
> punishment of dismissal from service should not be disturbed... (emphasis
> supplied)
15\. In the facts of the case reference may also be made to the judgment of
the Apex Court in case between Chairman & MD V.S.P. vs. Goparaju Shri
Prabhakara Hari Babu reported in 2008(5) SCC 569 wherein the  Page 40 of 41 40
of 82 C/SCA/12040/2007 JUDGMENT Apex Court has in paragraph No. 17 and 17.1
observed as under:
> 17\. Once it is found that all the procedural requirements have been
> complied with, the courts would not ordinarily interfere with the quantum of
> punishment imposed upon a delinquent employee. The Superior Courts only in
> some cases may invoke the doctrine of proportionality. If the decision of an
> employer is found to be within the legal parameters, the jurisdiction would
> ordinarily not be invoked when the misconduct stands proved. (emphasis
> supplied) 17.1 The High Court in exercise of its jurisdiction under Article
> 226 of the Constitution of India also cannot, on the basis of sympathy or
> sentiment, overturn a legal order.
16\. Since we have not found any infirmity in the conclusions of the inquiry
officer and have not been able to convince ourselves to accept that the
conclusions are not based on any evidence, we are also not able to hold that
the High Court was not justified in recommending the penalty of dismissal. In
the facts of the case, we are of the view that the penalty recommended by the
Court was eminently proper.
17\. The contentions do not merit any interference. Petition does not deserve
to be entertained.
18\. For the reasons recorded above, we are not inclined to accept the
petition. The petition fails and deserves to be rejected. The petition is
accordingly rejected. No costs.
sd/­ (M.R.SHAH, J.) sd/­ (S.H.VORA, J.) Kaushik  Page 41 of 41 41 of 82
C/SCA/12040/2007 JUDGMENT IN THE HIGH COURT OF GUJARAT AT AHMEDABAD SPECIAL
CIVIL APPLICATION NO. 12040 of 2007 FOR APPROVAL AND SIGNATURE:
HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE M.R. SHAH and HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE S.H.VORA
========================================= A Whether Reporters of Local Papers
may be allowed to see the judgment ?
2\. To be referred to the Reporter or not ?
3\. Whether their Lordships wish to see the fair copy of the judgment ?
4\. Whether this case involves a substantial question of law as to the
interpretation of the constitution of India, 1950 or any order made thereunder
?
5\. Whether it is to be circulated to the civil judge ?
============================================= N.R.PATEL....Petitioner(s)
Versus HIGH COURT OF GUJARAT & 1....Respondent(s)
============================================= Appearance:
MR. K.M. PATEL SR. ADV. WITH MR VAIBHAV A VYAS, ADVOCATE for the Petitioner(s)
No. 1 MS. NISHA THAKORE ASSIT. GOVERNMENT PLEADER for the Respondent(s) No. 2
LAW OFFICER BRANCH, ADVOCATE for the Respondent(s) No. 1 MR. SHALIN MEHTA SR.
ADV. WITH MR HEMANG M SHAH, ADVOCATE for the Respondent(s) No. 1 RULE SERVED
for the Respondent(s) No. 2 =============================================
CORAM: HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE M.R. SHAH and HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE S.H.VORA Date
: 11.1.2013 / 20.11.2014 ORAL JUDGMENT (PER : HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE M.R. SHAH)
1.0. By way of this petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India
the petitioner has prayed for an appropriate writ, direction and  Page 1 of 41
42 of 82 C/SCA/12040/2007 JUDGMENT order to quash and set aside the
departmental inquiry conducted against him by the Disciplinary Authority
(hereinafter referred to as the "High Court") on its administrative side as
well as impugned order dated 5.9.2006 passed by the High Court dismissing the
petitioner from service as well as consequential order dated 5.10.2006 passed
by the Government of Gujarat.
2.0. The facts leading to the present petition in nutshell are as under:
2.1. That initially the petitioner was appointed as Civil Judge (J.D.) and
Judicial Magistrate First Class in the year 1981 and thereafter he was
promoted in the year 1991. That at the relevant time the petitioner was
working as Chief Judicial Magistrate, Jamnagar. That the petitioner was served
with the chargesheet dated 7.1.1997 for the misconduct alleged to have been
committed by him, as a Judicial Officer while working as Chief Judicial
Magistrate, Jamnagar. That the departmental inquiry was initiated against the
petitioner on the following charges:
2.2. Two Criminal Cases No.1059 of 1992 and 2103 of 1987, for the offences
punishable under Section 135 of the Customs Act, 1962 were pending against the
accused viz. (1) Yusuf Haji Abdulla Bhaya; (2) Hasan Abdulla Bhaya; (3) Abdul
Jakub Sanghar; (4) Adam Kasam Sanghar; (5) Hasan Sidiq Moha (Bhadela); (6)
Abdul Hasan Arab; (7) Gani Hasan Bhadela (Dahej) and (1) Haji Ismail
Sumbhania; (2) Natha Khima Varu; (3) Dadu Karsan Chavda; (4) Ala Malde Ahir;
(4A) Jesha Natha Ahri (5) Taiyab Mamad Sandhi (6) Gogan Sava Koli (7) Devsi
Gogan (8) Dosa Gogan Koli (9) Deva Dohya Kagadia; (10) Bhimsi Laxman; (11)
Hamir Sajan Karangia (Aher) (12) Hamir Jeva Mer; (13)  Page 2 of 41 43 of 82
C/SCA/12040/2007 JUDGMENT Arjan Mulu Modhwadia (14) Sajan Harbhan; (15) Devsi
Bhima Mer; (16) Nagan Mulu, respectively, in the Court of Chief Judicial
Magistrate, Jamnagar out of the said two cases complaint in the Criminal Case
No.1059 of 1992, was filed on 13.3.1992 by Customs Department and no progress
was made in the matter till 17.11.1992.
2.3. That one Mr. A.R. Aggrawal, who was working in the office of Pavan
Travels in Jamnagar Branch, was known to Mr. N.R. Patel, as he was travelling
between Kalavad and Jamnagar, in the bus of Paval Travels and the accused no.1
of Criminal Case No.1059 of 1992 viz. Yusuf Patel, was also known to Mr. A.R.
Aggrawal, as he used to travel in the bus of Pavan Travels, for going to
Bombay.
2.4. While the said case was pending, about 8 months prior to 14.6.1993, Yusuf
Patel, went to the office of Pavan Travels and enquired from Mr. Ajay R.
Aggrawal, regarding his relations with Magistrate, Shri N.R. Patel, whereupon
Mr. Aggrawal replied that he had relations with Mr. N.R. Patel, therefore, Mr.
Yusuf Patel, told Mr. Aggrawal that his two cases were pending in the Court of
Mr. N.R. Patel and he wanted Mr. Aggrawal to have a talk with Mr. Patel, for
settlement of the cases. Mr. Aggrawal, asked Mr. Yusuf Patel to come after two
to four days. On the next day, Mr. Aggrawal asked the Magistrate Mr. N.R.
Patel, to show favour to the accused Yusuf Patel in the two cases and Mr. N.R.
Patel, demanded bribe of Rs. 5 lacs from Yusuf Patel, through said Mr.
Aggrawal.
2.5. After, two days Yusuf Patel, went to Mr. Aggrawal, who told him that Mr.
N.R. Patel, had demanded Rs. 5 lacs to settle both the cases. But the said
Yusuf Patel, agreed to pay Rs. 2 lcas, to Mr. N.R. Patel and agreed to pay Rs.
1 lac, initially for the case regarding smuggling of  Page 3 of 41 44 of 82
C/SCA/12040/2007 JUDGMENT Silver Bars i.e. in Criminal Case No.1059 of 1992
and told the other case be kept pending.
2.6. Mr. Aggrawal, told Mr. Yusuf Patel, to come after two days and after Mr.
Yusuf Patel left Mr. Aggrawal informed Mr. N.R. Patel, accordingly, and Mr.
N.R. Patel, agreed to the proposal made by the accused, Yusuf Patel and told
Mr. Aggrawal to inform him on telephone after collecting Rs. One lac from the
accused.
2.7. After about two days, Yusuf Patel went of the office of Mr. Aggrawal, who
told him that Mr. N.R. Patel Saheb has given his consent therefore, Mr. Yusuf
Patel told Mr. Aggrawal that he will hand over the money to Mr. Aggrawal,
thereafter three to four days accused Yusuf Patel went to the office of Mr.
Aggrawal, in Maruit Car No. GC­J­255, and handed over Rs. One lac to Mr.
Aggrawal, for delivering the same and to Mr. N.R. Patel. Immediately
thereafter, Mr. N.R. Patel, was informed on telephone at this residence by Mr.
Aggrawal, that he had received Rs. One lac, on his behalf and Mr. N.R. Patel
told him that after the Court hours, he will collect the amount from him and
accordingly, in between 7.30 p.m. And 8.00 p.m, Mr. N.R. Patel went to the
office of Mr. Aggrawal and collected the said amount of Rs. One lac from Mr.
Aggrawal and left the office of Mr. Aggrawal. Thereafter though the case of
the yeas from 1981 to 1991 were pending in his Court, even against the under
trial prisoners, suddenly, the matter was taken up for which Mr. N.R. Patel
had accepted the said bribe amount and in pre charge proceedings, Mr. N.R.
Patel examined nine witnesses. The arguments were heard on charge on date
1.2.1993 and on 2.2.1994 and then on 6.2.1993 Mr. N.R. Patel pronounced an
order discharging the said principal accused no.1, Yusuf Haji Abdulla Bhaya &
Yusuf Patel.
                                          Page 4 of 41
                                                                                      45 of 82
              C/SCA/12040/2007                                            JUDGMENT
This fact was narrated by Mr. Aggrawal to his friend Mr. Haribhai Soni,
resident of Jamnagar, in a casual manner.
2.8. About six months prior to 14.6.1993, Mr. Haribhai Soni went to the office
of Mr. Aggrawal and told him that one Hamirbhai Ahir is also facing the
similar case as of Mr. Yusuf Patel, pending in the Court of Mr. N.R. Patel and
that is also to be settled with Mr. N.R. Patel Saheb. At the instance of Mr.
Haribhai Soni to show favour to the accused viz. Mr. Hamir Ahir in Criminal
Case No.2103 of 1987, pending in the Court of Mr. N.R. Patel for offences
punishable under Section 135 of the Customs Act, 1962 said Mr. A.R. Agrawal
telephoned Mr. N.R. Patel and Mr. N.R. Patel demanded bribe of Rs.75000/­ for
showing favour to the accused, Hamirbhai Ahir through Mr. A.R. Aggrawal. Mr.
Aggrawal, informed Mr. Haribhai accordingly.
2.9. After about 15 days, Mr. Aggrawal went to the house of Mr. Haribhai to
collect the Video game at that time Mr. Haribhai paid Rs.50,000/­ to Mr.
Aggrawal, for paying the said amount to Mr. N.R. Patel and Mr. N.R. Patel, was
informed at this residence on phone by Mr. Aggrawal that he had received the
amount on behalf of Mr. N.R. Patel. Thereupon, Mr. N.R. Patel told Mr.
Aggrawal that his brother Mr. Jayesh would collect the money from M. Aggrawal
and on the same day, in the evening Mr. N.R. Patel's younger brother Jayesh
went to the office of Mr. Aggrawal and collected the said amount. After about
15 to 20 days at about 11.00 a.m. Mr. Haribhai Soni, gave the balance of the
amount of Rs.25000/­ to Mr. Aggrawal for paying it to Mr. N.R. Patel and on
receiving message from Mr. Aggrawal about receipt of the amount, Mr. N.R.
Patel collected the said amount through his brother Mr. Jayesh.
                                           Page 5 of 41
                                                                                        46 of 82
               C/SCA/12040/2007                                            JUDGMENT
2.10. Thereafter, as Mr. N.R. Patel received the bribe amount, the matter was
taken up by Mr. N.R. Patel hastily and during the pre­charge proceedings the
recorded the evidence of 22 witnesses, though the case for the years 1981 to
1991 were pending in his Court, including the cases against the under trial
prisoners.
The Jamnagar Police raided the house of the said accused Hamir Ahir and in the
search of the house carried out by the police a note book containing the
accounts maintained by the said accused was recovered wherein two payments are
shown to have been made to Mr. N.R. Patel, one on 29.12.1992 of Rs.50,000/­
and another on 16.1.1993 of Rs.25000/­.
2.11. That two to three days after 8.6.1993, Mr. N.R. Patel had enquired from
Mr. Jeblia, Dy.S.P, on telephone as to whether Mr. Hami, was arrested and also
requested Mr. Jeblia, Dy.Sp to take care of him, if anything is found against
him and after the news regarding seizure of note book from the house of Mr.
Hamir was broken, Mr. N.R. Patel had again made a telephone call to Mr. Jeblia
Dy.Sp and enquired as to whether his name appeared in the note book and
whether he could see that note book but Mr. Jeblia, Dy. Sp replied that note
book has been taken by the D.I.G, Ahmedabad.
On 14.6.1993, Mr. N.R. Patel, had telephonic talk with Mrs. Prafula, wife of
Mr. Aggrawal and Mr. N.R. Patel, told her "officers from the High Court have
come and tell Vikki he should not involve me by making any statement before
them".
2.12. That Mr. N.R. Patel, had sent two persons to the house of Mr. Aggrawal,
who told Mr. Aggrawal to telephone Mr. N.R. Patel from  Page 6 of 41 47 of 82
C/SCA/12040/2007 JUDGMENT outside. But Mr. Aggrawal, was apprehending danger
to his life, so he refused to go out for telephoning to Mr. N.R. Patel.
2.13. On 20.6.1993, at night time Mr. N.R. Patel, alongwith his brother had
gone to the house of Mr. Aggrawal, with a writing wherein it was written that
D.S.P Mr. Jha and Dy. Sp Mr. Jeblia had threatened Mr. Aggrawal that they will
file a false case of keeping AK­56 Rifle and would arrest Mr. Aggrawal under
TADA. Therefore, under that fear, Mr. Aggrawal had filed the Affidavit against
Mr. N.R. Patel;, but Mr. Aggrawal did not sign the same as his previous
Affidavit filed against Mr. N.R. Patel was made without any fear or pressure
and at his free will.
2.14. On 27.6.1993, Mr. N.R. Patel 's brother, Mr Jayesh at the instance of
Mr. N.R. Patel, telephoned Mr. Aggrawal to hand over the copy of the Affidavit
filed against Mr. N.R. Patel, but the same was not supplied as he had not copy
of the same and thereby;
(a). Mr. N.R. Patel indulged in corrupt pratice;
(b). Mr. N.R. Patel, was guilty of dereliction of discharging his judicial
functions and;
(c). Mr. N.R. Patel, acted in a manner unbecoming of a Judicial Officer.
2.15. The above acts of Mr. N.R. Patel, tantamount to act unbecoming of a
Judicial Officer, and are acts of grave misconduct which are violative of the
provisions contained in Rule 3 of the Gujarat Civil Services (conduct) Rules,
1971.
2.16. That the petitioner denied the charges levelled against him and
submitted his defence statement on 18.3.1997. That on receipt of such defence
statement of the petitioner, the High Court was of the  Page 7 of 41 48 of 82
C/SCA/12040/2007 JUDGMENT opinion that further inquiry in the matter was
required and therefore, one Shri C.S. Oza, Judge, City Civil Court, Ahmedabad
was appointed as Inquiry Officer on 23.9.1997. That the Inquiry Officer came
to the conclusion that the charges levelled against the petitioner are not
proved and accordingly recorded his finding to that effect and submitted his
inquiry report to the High Court on 29.7.1998.
2.17. That the High Court did not agree with the said inquiry report submitted
by the Inquiry Officer and exercise powers under Section 10 of the Gujarat
Civil Services (Discipline and Appeal) Rules 1971 remanded the matter to the
Inquiry Officer and the matter was entrusted to another person Shri A.J.
Bhatt, Judge, City Civil Court, Ahmedabad by order dated 24.12.1998. That by
passing order dated 24.12.1998 the High Court specifically pointed out that
report submitted by Inquiry Officer cannot be accepted and the case deserve
remand, so as to give opportunity to the department to prove its case. That
after the remand the petitioner was placed under suspension vide order dated
30.4.1999. That the petitioner participated in the inquiry on remand and as
such did not challenge the further inquiry / inquiry on remand pursuant to the
order dated 24.12.1998 passed by the High Court on its administrative side and
/ or at the relevant time did not make any grievance with respect to the order
dated 24.12.1998 not accepting the report of the earlier inquiry officer and
passing an order of remand and entrusting the inquiry to another officer or
appointing another inquiry officer.
2.18. Thereafter on conclusion of the inquiry and considering the entire
material on record and on appreciation of entire evidence on record, inquiry
officer came to the conclusion that charges levelled against the petitioner
are proved and accordingly submitted its report  Page 8 of 41 49 of 82
C/SCA/12040/2007 JUDGMENT dated 29.6.2001. It is to be noted that even before
the inquiry officer the petitioner did submit the written representation in
April 2000.
2.19. Thereafter copy of the inquiry report was forwarded to the petitioner
along with show cause notice dated 7.6.2002 whereby the petitioner was called
upon to show cause as to why the petitioner should not be dismissed from
service. That the petitioner submitted his reply to the said show cause notice
on 5.7.2002. That a personal hearing was also given to the petitioner. That
thereafter, after considering the report submitted by the inquiry officer;
reply given by the petitioner to the show cause notice and submission made by
the petitioner during the personal hearing, by order dated 5.9.2006,
disciplinary authority (High Court) has passed the impugned order of
punishment dismissing the petitioner from service by holding that petitioner
has indulged into corrupt practice. That thereafter, consequential order has
been passed by the State Government by order dated 5.10.2006. Being aggrieved
and dissatisfied with the impugned orders passed by the High Court dated
5.9.2006 and consequential order dated 5.10.2006 passed by the Government of
Gujarat, the petitioner has preferred present Special Civil Application under
Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
2.20. It is to be noted that in the present petition the petitioner has also
challenged the departmental inquiry conducted against the petitioner by the
High Court on its administrative side, despite the fact that he had
participated in the departmental inquiry and at no point of time earlier he
challenged the departmental inquiry.
3.0. Shri K.M. Patel, learned Senior Advocate appearing on behalf of the
petitioner has vehemently submitted that at the time when the disciplinary
authority (High Court) exercised the powers under  Page 9 of 41 50 of 82
C/SCA/12040/2007 JUDGMENT Section 10 of the Rules and disagreed with the
inquiry report which was in favour of the petitioner, no opportunity was given
to the petitioner. It is submitted not only that but even the inquiry officer
came to be changed and on remand the inquiry was handed over to another
officer. It is submitted not only that even the copy of the order sending the
matter to the another inquiry officer was also not given to the petitioner at
the relevant time and the same was given subsequently. It is submitted that
therefore, entire departmental inquiry initiated on remand is vitiated and
against the principles of natural justice which deserves to be quashed and set
aside. In support of his above submission, Shri K.M. Patel, learned Senior
Advocate appearing on behalf of the petitioner has relied upon the decision of
the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Mathura Prasad vs. Union of India and
Others reported in AIR 2007 SC 381.
3.1. It is further submitted by Shri K.M. Patel, learned Senior Advocate
appearing on behalf of the petitioner that even otherwise upon remand of the
matter for further inquiry, Disciplinary Authority ought not to have changed
the Inquiry Officer, more particularly when the first inquiry officer was very
much in service at the relevant time and continued in judicial service till
September 2004. It is submitted that consistency and fair play required that
the inquiry ought to have been remanded to the same inquiry officer for
further inquiry and the inquiry officer ought not to have been changed.
In support of his above submission, he has relied upon the decision of the
Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of K.R. Deb vs. The Collector, Central
Excise, Shillong reported in AIR 1971 SC 1447 (page 13 to 15).
3.2. It is further submitted by Shri K.M. Patel, learned Senior  Page 10 of 41
51 of 82 C/SCA/12040/2007 JUDGMENT Advocate appearing on behalf of the
petitioner that as such the disciplinary authority by not exercising the
option of recording descanting finding against the finding of exoneration
recorded by the Inquiry Officer in the first stage of inquiry as per Rule
10(2) of the Gujarat Civil Services (Discipline and Appeal) Rules, 1971 by
directing further inquiry, by all inherent and necessary implications,
accepted the position that on the basis of the evidence of two witnesses
examined in the first stage of inquiry, including that of Shri B.S. Jebaliya,
Deputy Superintendent of Police, the charges levelled against the petitioner
are not proved. It is submitted that as such in the further inquiry three more
witnesses were examined, whose evidence has not supported the case of the
department. It is submitted that thus, even after the further inquiry, solely
on the basis of Shri Jebaliya's evidence the allegations and charges are held
proved both by Inquiry Officer and the Disciplinary Authority, which was
already there and the Inquiry Officer submitted the report in the first stage
of inquiry. It is submitted that it was not open for the disciplinary
authority to take different view of allegations and charges being proved
solely on the basis of Shri Jebaliya's evidence, when by all necessary
implications the order directing further inquiry only be construed as
acceptance of the report of First Inquiry Officer that on the basis of Shri
Jebaliya's evidence allegations and charges do not stand proved. It is
submitted that Inquiry Officer and Disciplinary Authority ought to have
confined themselves as to whether the allegations and charges are proved on
the basis of evidence that has come in further inquiry. It is submitted that
since the evidence recorded in further inquiry does not establish and proved
allegations and charges against the petitioner ought to have been exonerated.
In support of his above submission, learned advocate for the petitioner has
heavily relied upon unreported judgment of the Hon'ble  Page 11 of 41 52 of 82
C/SCA/12040/2007 JUDGMENT Supreme Court dated 9.10.2007 in Civil Appeal No. 29
of 2004 in the case of Gujarat State Financial Corporation vs. Dilip Ratilal
Patel.
3.3. It is further submitted by Shri K.M. Patel, learned Senior Advocate
appearing on behalf of the petitioner that even otherwise the findings
recorded by the Inquiry Officer and the Disciplinary Authority are not based
on legal excepted evidence but they are based on assumptions and presumptions.
3.4. It is submitted that in the whole of the examination in chief or even in
his cross examination Shri Jehaliya has nowhere stated that he could recognize
the voice of the delinquent on telephone and that he had not done any inquiry
to ascertain as to whether or not the alleged telephones were made by the
delinquent. It is submitted that the evidence only shows that someone had
telephoned saying that the celler was N.R. Patel (delinquent) and therefore,
it emerges that he had presumed that the delinquent had telephoned. It is
submitted that therefore, even the allegations that the delinquent had made
alleged two telephones to said Shri Jeabliya itself is not established and if
considered in the light of possible grudges against the delinquent by the
police there, Shri Jebaliya evidence is not maintainable at all.
It is submitted that alleged xerox copy of a page of allege seized note book/
diary from the house of Hamir Sajan is also not proved at all.
3.5. It is submitted that even the alleged author of diary / note book Shri
Hamir Sajan is also examined by the Department, who has in no uncertain terms
said that no search was carried out in his house in his presence and no such
alleged diary /note book was seized and he has not kept any such alleged
account and hand writings of the chit are also  Page 12 of 41 53 of 82
C/SCA/12040/2007 JUDGMENT denied and the said chit is not proved by any other
evidence whatsoever and requires to be absolutely ignored as it is no
evidence.
3.6. It is further submitted by Shri Patel, learned Senior Advocate for the
petitioner that the inquiry officer has recorded the finding against the
petitioner solely relying upon the deposition of Shri Jebaliya relied upon his
bare words and no support or corroboration is coming forth from any
independent source. It is submitted that neither the inquiry officer or the
disciplinary authority has appreciated the fact that from the very beginning
as the police had grudge against the delinquent. It is submitted that there is
sufficient material and evidence on record including evidence of Bench clerk
Shri Chavda to believe that the police department was displeased and must be
having grudge against the delinquent.
3.7. It is further submitted that statement of Shri Jebaliya before the
Inquiry Officer does not implicate the delinquent as regards the imputations
are concerned, except that a story of two alleged telephones and alleged chit
stated to have been seized from the house of Hamir Sajan is told. It is
submitted that both the said aspects are absolutely unbelievable. It is
submitted that the evidence of Shri Jebaliya is vague and evasive as far as he
does not give details as to when the search was conducted and who were the
panchas and as to when the telephones were received and about the failure to
ascertain whether delinquent had telephoned and failure to record the same in
any reports or diary.
It is further submitted by Shri Patel, learned Senior Advocate for the
petitioner that neither Shri Agrawal nor Shri Haribhai Soni, who allegedly
paid the amount to Shri Agrawal have been examined in the inquiry.
                                          Page 13 of 41
                                                                                        54 of 82
               C/SCA/12040/2007                                             JUDGMENT
3.8. It is further submitted that the xerox copy of the page of diary
allegedly recovered from Hamir Ahri has no evidentiary value. It is submitted
that Hamir Sajan has not supported the case of the department.
3.9. It is further submitted by Shri Patel, learned Senior Advocate for the
petitioner that as such allegations and charges are held proved by the Inquiry
Officer and Disciplinary Authority on the basis of Shri Jebaliya's. It is
submitted that evidence of Shri Jebaliya cannot be relied upon in view of the
following facts.
(i). In first stage of Inquiry, evidence of Shri Jebaliya was not considered
sufficient or reliable to support finding of guilt. There was no corroboration
to his evidence in the further inquiry.
(ii). His evidence does not inspire confidence because there was no prior
communication on telephone between petitioner and Shri Jehaliya nor Shri
Jabaliya made any attempt to verify whether alleged telephone was from the
petitioner or any one else. He did not make any note of the phone call in the
station diary or personal diary.
(iii). Thus, as per the evidence of Shri Jehaliya he was not familiar with the
voice of the petitioner. However, since the caller identified himself to be
N.R. Patel, Magistrate, he had readily accepted that the caller was the
petitioner and none else, without verification of any kind.
(iv). Further, there is absolutely no evidence that any such phone call was
made to him. The evidence in this regard would have been easily available from
the telephone department. However, no such evidence is produced on record, as
no such phone call was in fact made by the petitioner.
(v). Not only that there is no scientific verification of voice to reach the
conclusion that the voice of the speaker was none other than that of the  Page
14 of 41 55 of 82 C/SCA/12040/2007 JUDGMENT petitioner.
(vi). He did not produced the original note book, not even the original chit
either before the Vigilance Officer or before the Inquiry Officer. Not only
that, he did not even certify the alleged chit to be a true copy of the
original at the time of his producing the same before the Vigilance Officer.
It is the case of the petitioner that the alleged chit was not certified by
Shri Jebaliyas as he was aware that it was not a true copy, as the original
did not exist.
(vii). The police had reason to harbour grudge against the petitioner, as the
petitioner was very strict with police officers and had dealt with them
sternly by issuing contempt notices, strictures etc. against them, which is a
matter of record. Moreover, the petitioner had passed strictures/ observations
in Bab Sheth's Murder Case, the investigation of which was supervised by Shri
Jabaliya.
3.10. It is submitted that therefore, the petitioner was framed in the case in
question by the police department through Shri Jabaliya. It is submitted that
therefore, the petitioner ought to have been appropriately protected.
In support of his above submission, learned advocate for the petitioner has
relied upon the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Yoginath
D. Bagde vs. State of Maharashtra reported in AIR1999 SC 3734 (para 51).
3.11. It is further submitted that during the course of further inquiry before
the second Inquiry Officer, three more witnesses were examined, however no
further material, incriminating or adverse to the petitioner, came on record,
which would have warranted reconsideration of the ultimate conclusion recorded
by the First Inquiry Officer. It is  Page 15 of 41 56 of 82 C/SCA/12040/2007
JUDGMENT submitted that under these circumstances the second officer ought not
to have come to the conclusion that the charges leveled against the petitioner
are proved that too on the basis of the same material on which the First
Inquiry Officer came to the conclusion that the charges are not proved. It is
submitted that thus, the Second Inquiry Officer has exceeded his jurisdiction,
and by not stopping there, further acted in absolute arbitrary manner by not
referring to the reasoning / finding recorded by the First Inquiry Officer,
much less dealing with the same. It is submitted that thus the Second Inquiry
Officer has in fact held a Fresh Inquiry against the petitioner in the guise
of further inquiry, which is not permissible in the eyes of law.
It is submitted that thus the change of Inquiry Officer has seriously
prejudice the case of the petitioner. It is submitted that had the First
Inquiry Officer not been replaced in that case, upon no further material,
incriminating or adverse to the petitioner coming on record of the case, the
same Inquiry Officer (First Inquiry Officer) would not have reversed his
earlier findings.
3.12. It is further submitted by Shri Patel, learned Senior Advocate for the
petitioner that as such Shri Hamir Sajan has not supported the case of the
department. It is submitted that his statement has been relied upon on the
ground that there is nothing on record to show that it was during custody. It
is submitted that aforesaid is factually incorrect. It is submitted that it is
undisputed position that his statement was recorded on 29.6.1993 while he was
in police custody from 8.6.1993 to 1.7.1993 in TADA Case. He was deposed that
he was beaten by the Police and his signature was obtained on blank papers
while in custody of the police. It is submitted that this complaint was made
by him at the first point of time when he was produced before the learned
Magistrate.
                                          Page 16 of 41
                                                                                        57 of 82
               C/SCA/12040/2007                                            JUDGMENT
It is submitted that even otherwise the said Hamir Sajan was having no reason
to support the petitioner, more particularly, when no favourable order was
passed in his favour and when the petitioner was placed under suspension and
was transferred from Jamnagar long back before he deposed before the Inquiry
Officer. It is submitted that Hamir Sajan has as such denied that any note is
recovered from him and it contained accounts in his handwriting. It is
submitted that therefore, the xerox chit cannot be relied or taken into
consideration in absence of its original and in view of specific deposition of
Hamir Sajan that he is not author of the same.
3.13. In support of his above submission, Shri Patel, learned Senior Advocate
for the petitioner has relied upon the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court
in the case of M/s. Bareilly Electricity Supply Co. Ltd vs. The Workmen and
others reported in 1971(2) SCC 617 (para14) and unreported decision of this
Court dated 23.7.2001 passed in LPA No. 64 of 2001 and other allied matters in
the case of Gujarat State Road Transport Corporation vs. Subhashbhai Keshabhai
(para 19).
3.14. It is further submitted that even affidavit and statement of Shri
Agrawal is referred to and is taken into consideration while passing the
impugned punishment order, however said witness is neither examined nor is
made subject to cross examination. It is submitted that therefore, his
affidavit and statement could not have been taken into consideration. In
support of his above submission, he has relied upon the decision of the Hon'be
Supreme Court in the case of Prahlad Saran Gupta vs. Bar Council of India and
another reported in AIR 1997 SC 1338 (para 10).
3.15. It is further submitted by Shri Patel, learned Senior Advocate for the
petitioner that there has been inordinate and  Page 17 of 41 58 of 82
C/SCA/12040/2007 JUDGMENT unexplained delay in initiating and concluding the
departmental inquiry. It is submitted that incident is of June 1993 for which
the charge sheet was issued on 7.1.1997 and punishment order is passed on
5.9.2006. It is submitted that the delay has operated against the petitioner
and the same has prejudiced the defence of the petitioner. It is submitted
that due to inordinate delay PW­Agrawal could not be produced before the
Inquiry Ofifcer for the purpose of deposition, who could have thrown light on
the facts of the case as to how the petitioner came to be framed by the
Police.
3.16. It is further submitted by Shri Patel, learned Senior Advocate for the
petitioner that statement of Shri Haribhai Soni and Shri Yusuf Patel was
recorded during the preliminary inquiry, but the same are not supplied to the
petitioner, in spite of his demand. It is submitted that the copies of two
complaints, one from a Junior Advocate and second from Anti Corruption Bureau
forwarding an anonymous complaint received by the said department as well as
the communication of the Principal Secretary, Home Department dated 11.6.1993,
thought referred to in the punishment order are not supplied to petitioner. It
is submitted that this has resulted into breach of principles of natural
justice. It is further submitted that the inquiry officer as well as
disciplinary authority has failed to taken into consideration the relevant
material and have taken into consideration irrelevant material or such
material which legally could not have been taken into consideration.
3.17. It is further submitted that the Inquiry Officer as well as Disciplinary
Authority have on conjectures and surmises, held the petitioner guilty of the
misconduct which the petitioner has not committed, which is illegal as per the
settled position of law, which provides that the serious charges of corruption
are required to be proved  Page 18 of 41 59 of 82 C/SCA/12040/2007 JUDGMENT
beyond reasonable doubt. In support of his above submission, he has relied
upon the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Union of India
and others vs. Gyan Chand Chattar reported in (2009) 12 SCC 78 (Head Note C).
It is further submitted that on the facts and circumstances of the case and
evidence on record, petitioner cannot be held guilty of the charges leveled
against him even on the basis of preponderance of probability. Making above
submissions and relying upon the above decisions, it is requested to allow
present Special Civil Application and quash and set aside the impugned orders
passed by the disciplinary authority as well as State Government dismissing
the petitioner from service.
4.0. Present petition is opposed by Shri Shalin Mehta, learned Senior Advocate
for the Disciplinary Authority (High Court) as well as Ms. Thakore, learned
Assistant Government Pleader appearing on behalf of the respondent no.2 State.
4.1. Shri Shalin Mehta, learned Senior Advocate for the Disciplinary Authority
(High Court) has vehemently submitted that once having participated in the
departmental inquiry on remand by the disciplinary authority and having not
challenged the earlier decision of the disciplinary authority in remanding the
matter the change of Inquiry Officer at appropriate stage and time and
thereafter having fully participated in the departmental inquiry and
thereafter when the decision has gone against the petitioner, thereafter it is
not open for the petitioner now to challenge the order passed by the
Disciplinary Authority remanding the matter so as to enable the department to
prove the case against the delinquent and change of inquiry officer.
                                           Page 19 of 41
                                                                                         60 of 82
              C/SCA/12040/2007                                            JUDGMENT
4.2. It is further submitted by Shri Shalin Mehta, learned Senior Advocate for
the Disciplinary Authority that as such while passing the earlier order dated
24.12.1998 and while remitting the case to the Inquiry Officer, the
Disciplinary Authority as such considered the inquiry report submitted by the
earlier Inquiry Officer and the reasons recorded by the Inquiry Officer
exonerating the delinquent and the Disciplinary Authority specifically
observed that in the High Court views those reasons recorded by the Inquiry
Officer are not followed at all and creates an impression that the inquiry has
been conducted in slip shod mannertherefore, as such Disciplinary Authority
did not accept the reasons recorded by the Inquiry Officer as sought to be
contended on behalf of the petitioner. It is submitted that as such the High
Court on administrative side while considering the report submitted by the
inquiry officer dated 29.7.1998 holding that the charges made against the
delinquent are not proved, specifically disagreed with the reasons and the
findings by observing that even sufficient opportunity was not given to the
petitioner to prove the case and no sincere efforts were made by the inquiry
officer to secure presence of important witnesses in the case. It is submitted
that as such High Court on administrative side (Disciplinary Authority) did
not accept the reasons given by the inquiry officer on appreciation of the
deposition of Shri Jebaliya. It is submitted that as such disciplinary
authority remanding the case to the Inquiry Officer as a whole and therefore,
it was open for the subsequent inquiry officer to appreciate the entire
evidence on record afresh and given his own finding. Therefore, it is
submitted by Shri Shalin Mehta, learned Senior Advocate for the Disciplinary
Authority that no illegality has been committed by the subsequent inquiry
officer in appreciating the entire evidence on record afresh more particularly
the evidence of Shri Jebaliya and given his own finding holding the delinquent
guilty.
                                          Page 20 of 41
                                                                                        61 of 82
              C/SCA/12040/2007                                           JUDGMENT
4.3. It is further submitted by Shri Shalin Mehta, learned Senior Advocate for
the Disciplinary Authority that the Inquiry Officer has specifically held on
appreciation of entire evidence on record that it is proved that delinquent
has indulged in corrupt practice and that the delinquent is guilty of
dereliction of discharging of his judicial function and acted in a manner
unbecoming to a judicial officer and has violated the provision contained in
Rule 3 of the Gujarat Civil Service Conduct Rules 1971 and considering the
report submitted by the Inquiry Officer and thereafter giving opportunity to
the delinquent to make submission against the inquiry report and after
considering the submission made by the petitioner, Disciplinary Authority has
rightly passed an order dismissing the petitioner from service.
4.4. It is submitted by Shri Shalin Mehta, learned Senior Advocate for the
Disciplinary Authority that as held by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case
reported in AIR 1964 SC 364 in exercising of its jurisdiction under Article
226 of the Constitution of India, the High Court cannot consider the question
about the sufficiency or adequacy of evidence in respect of a particular
conclusion.
4.5. It is further submitted by Shri Shalin Mehta, learned Senior Advocate for
the Disciplinary Authority that the charges levelled against the petitioner
are of grave nature, more so considering the position held by the petitioner
at the relevant time i.e. Judicial Magistrate, Jamnagar. Shri Shalin Mehta,
learned Senior Advocate for the Disciplinary Authority has submitted that
there is ample evidence to demonstrate that he charges have been rightly held
as proved and that the decision of terminating the petitioner from service is
also justified. It is submitted that though the settled legal position with
regard to the charges against the employee and the degree of proof in a
departmental inquiry is only of "preponderance of probability" and not of
"proof beyond doubt" in present case there are statements of witnesses and
also other material  Page 21 of 41 62 of 82 C/SCA/12040/2007 JUDGMENT
available on record which conclusively demonstrate that the charges leveled
against petitioner are rightly held as proved and the findings of the inquiry
officer are not incorrect or perverse or unjustified.
4.6. It is further submitted by Shri Shalin Mehta, learned Senior Advocate for
the Disciplinary Authority that conscious decision taken by the Full Bench of
the High Court considering the report submitted by the Inquiry Officer and the
nature of charges levelled against the delinquent which are serious in nature.
It is submitted that whenever a decision is taken by the Full Bench of the
High Court, a possibility of arbitrariness is altogether ruled out cause each
judge has the freedom to express opinion not only on the procedural aspect of
the inquiry and the evaluation of evidence made by the inquiry officer but
also on the quantum of punishment. It is submitted that decision to dismiss
the petitioner from service was taken by the High Court after dully
considering nature of his duties and functions as Judicial Officer, the
graveman of the charges levelled against him, his accountability to the public
at large and his abysmal failure to perform the judicial functions such
adversely affected the image of the judicial system in the eyes of public and
caused grave injury to the litigating public.
4.7. Now, so far as contention on behalf of the petitioner in initiating the
departmental proceedings belatedly is concerned, it is submitted that except
the bare statement that it has caused prejudice to the delinquent, nothing has
been pointed out. It is submitted that prejudice is not only to be pleaded but
it has to be demonstrated by instances made, the delay has caused any
prejudice. It is submitted that as such there is no inordinate delay and
deliberate delay in initiating departmental inquiry. It is submitted that as
such chamber meeting held on 16.9.1993 a decision was already taken to
initiate departmental inquiry against the petitioner. It is submitted that as
such on receiving  Page 22 of 41 63 of 82 C/SCA/12040/2007 JUDGMENT the
complaint against the petitioner it was decided to direct the Special Officer
(Vigilance) to conduct preliminary inquiry in the matter and thereafter on the
strength of the report of the Special Officer (Vigilance) dated 2.9.1993 it
was decided at the Chamber Meeting held on 16.9.1993 to initiate Departmental
Inquiry against the petitioner. It is submitted that on the basis of the
report dated 2.9.1993 and after calling for the necessary records from the
Principal District Judge, Jamnagar, charges were framed against the
delinquent. It is submitted that the petitioner has made unnecessary
allegations against Special Officer (Vigilance) with respect to bias and even
against Shri Jebaliya.
It is further submitted by Shri Mehta, learned Senior Advocate for the
Disciplinary Authority that the evidence of Jebaliya who is an independent
witness is absolute reliable and credible and there is no basis in the
allegation of the petitioner with respect to bias made against Shri Jebaliya.
4.8. It is further submitted by Shri Mehta, learned Senior Advocate for the
Disciplinary Authority that as such there is no violation of principles of
natural justice as alleged. It is submitted that statement of Shri Yusuf Patel
which was recorded by the Special Officer (Vigilance) while conducting
preliminary inquiry in the matter has not been relied upon as he has not been
examined during the course of regular departmental inquiry.
4.9. It is further submitted by Shri Mehta, learned Senior Advocate for the
Disciplinary Authority that the genuineness of the diary seized by Shri
Jebaliya, cannot be doubted since the averment on oath made by Shri Jebaliya,
the then Dy.Sp, Jamnagar(Rural) that the original diary was handed over to the
DIG is supported by the communication received from the Principal Secretary,
Home Department, wherein it is stated that original diary is in custody of the
Director General of Police.
                                          Page 23 of 41
                                                                                        64 of 82
                C/SCA/12040/2007                                            JUDGMENT
It is further submitted that as such there is no cogent, overwhelming and
convincing evidence on record to hold the delinquent guilty of the charges. It
is submitted that various links in the chain of evidence led by the department
have been satisfactorily proved. It is submitted that the said circumstances
point to the guilt of the accused with reasonable definiteness. It is
submitted that the facts which are established can be said to be consistent
only with the hypothesis of the guilt of the delinquent.
5.0. Ms. Thakore, learned Assistant Government Pleader has adopted the
submissions made by Shri Mehta, learned Senior Advocate for the disciplinary
authority and has stated that in the facts and circumstances of the case no
illegality and / or error has been committed in dismissing the petitioner from
service, more particularly, when the petitioner was holding the post of
Judicial Magistrate. Therefore, it is requested to dismiss the present Special
Civil Application.
6.0. Heard the learned advocates for the respective parties at length.
7.0. At the outset, it is required to be noted that the petitioner who was at
the relevant time serving as Chief Judicial Magistrate, Jamnagar has been
dismissed by the High Court (Disciplinary Authority) on the ground that he had
indulged in corrupt practice; that he was guilty of dereliction of discharging
of his judicial function and acted in a manner unbecoming to a judicial
officer. It is also required to be noted that petitioner has been dismissed
from service after holding departmental inquiry and considering the report
submitted by the Inquiry Officer holding the petitioner guilty for the charges
of corrupt practice; dereliction in discharging its judicial function and
acting in a manner unbecoming to a Judicial Officer proved and after giving
fullest  Page 24 of 41 65 of 82 C/SCA/12040/2007 JUDGMENT opportunity to the
petitioner and after considering the defence and reply of the petitioner to
the show cause notice and petitioner has been dismissed from service by
detailed speaking order. It appears from the report submitted by the Inquiry
Officer as well as order passed by the High Court (Disciplinary Authority)
dismissing the petitioner from service that the inquiry officer has held that
the petitioner guilty for the charges leveled against him and for the
misconduct proved on appreciation of evidence on record. As per the settled
proposition of law and law laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case
reported in (2006) 7 SCC 212 the High Court while exercising the powers under
Article 226 of the Constitution of India does not act as an Appellate
Authority and its jurisdiction is circumscribed and confined to correct errors
of law or procedural error, if any, resulting in manifest miscarriage of
justice and violation of principles of natural justice. It is held by the
Hon'ble Supreme Court in the aforesaid decision that High Court cannot
re­appreciated the evidence acting as Court of Appeal.
7.1. In the case of reported in AIR 1963 SC 1723 in para 7, the Hon'ble
Supreme Court has observed and held as under:
> 7\. There is no warrant for the view expressed by the High Court that in
> considering whether a public officer is guilty of the misconduct charred
> against him, the rule followed in criminal trials that an offence is not
> established unless proved by evidence beyond reasonable doubt to the
> satisfaction of the Court, must be applied, and if that rule be not applied,
> the High Court in a petition under Article 226 of the Constitution is
> competent to declare the order of the authorities holding a departmental
> enquiry invalid. The High Court is not constituted in a proceeding under
> Article 226 of the Constitution a Court of appeal over the decision of the
> authorities holding a departmental enquiry against a public servant: it is
> concerned to determine whether the enquiry is held by an authority competent
> in that behalf, and according to the procedure prescribed in that behalf,
> and whether the rules of natural justice are not violated. Where there is
> some  Page 25 of 41 66 of 82 C/SCA/12040/2007 JUDGMENT evidence, which the
> authority entrusted with the duty to hold the enquiry has accepted and which
> evidence may reasonably support theconclusion that the delinquent officer is
> guilty of the charge, it is not the function of the High Court in a petition
> for a writ under Article 226 to review the evidence and to arrive at an
> independent finding on the evidence. The High Court may undoubtedly
> interfere where the departmental authorities have held the proceedings
> against the delinquent in manner inconsistent with the rules of natural
> justice or in violation of the statutory rules prescribing the mode of
> enquiry or where the authorities have disabled themselves from reaching a
> fair decision by some considerations extraneous to the evidence and the
> merits of the case or by allowing themselves to be influenced by irrelevant
> considerations or where the conclusion on the very face of it is so wholly
> arbitrary and capricious that no reasonable person could ever have arrived
> at that conclusion, or on similar grounds. But the departmental authorities
> are, if the enquiry is otherwise properly held, the sole judges of facts and
> if there be some legal evidence on which their findings can be based, the
> adequacy or reliability of that evidence is not a matter which can be
> permitted to be canvassed before the High Court in a proceeding for a writ
> under Article 226 of the Constitution.
7.2. In the case of State of T.N vs. S. Subramaniam reported in (1996) 7 SCC
509; in the case of R.S. Saini vs. State of Punjab reported in (1999) 8 SCC 90
and in the case of Government of A.P. vs. Mohd. Nasrullah Khan reported in
(2006) 2 SCC 373, it is held by the Hon'ble Supreme Court that judicial review
is not akin to adjudication on merits by re­appreciating the evidence an
appellate authority. It is further held that only consideration the Court/
Tribunal has in its judicial review, is to consider whether the conclusion is
based on evidence or record and supports the finding or whether the conclusion
is based on no evidence. It is further held that adequacy or reliability of
the evidence is not a matter which can be permitted to be canvassed before the
Court in writ proceedings. In the case of Zora Singh vs. J.M. Tandon reported
in (1971) 3 SCC 834 in para 10 the Hon'ble Supreme Court has held and observed
as under:
Page 26 of 41
> 67 of 82 C/SCA/12040/2007 JUDGMENT
> 10.The principle that if some of the reasons relied on by a Tribunal for its
> conclusion turn out to be extraneous or otherwise unsustainable, its
> decision would be vitiated, applies to cases in which the conclusion is
> arrived at not on assessment of objective facts or evidence but on
> subjective satisfaction. The reason is that whereas in cases where the
> decision is based on subjective satisfaction if some of the reasons turn out
> to be irrelevant or invalid, it would be impossible for a superior Court to
> find out which of the reasons, relevant or irrelevant, valid or invalid, had
> brought about such satisfaction. But in a case where the conclusion is based
> on objective facts and evidence, such a difficulty would not arise. If it is
> found that there was legal evidence before the Tribunal, even if some of it
> was irrelevant, a superior court would not interfere if the finding can be
> sustained on the rest of the evidence. The reason is that in a writ petition
> for certiorari the superior Court does not sit in appeal but exercise only
> supervisory jurisdiction and therefore, does not enter into the question of
> sufficiency of evidence.
7.3. Thus, it is held that the Court will not normally exercise its power of
judicial review unless it is found that formation of belief by statutory
authority suffers from mala fides, dishonest/ corrupt practice. It is held
that neither the question as to whether there was sufficient evidence before
the authority can be raised / examined nor the question of re­appreciating the
evidence to examine the correctness of the order under challenge. It is held
that if there are sufficient ground for passing an order, then even if one of
them is found to be correct, and on its basis the order impugned can be
passed, there is no occasion for the Court to interfere. It is further held
and observed that even when some defect is found in the decision making
process, the Court must exercise its discretionary power with great caution
keeping in mind the larger public interest and only when it comes to the
conclusion that overwhelming public interest requires interference, the Court
should be intervene.
7.4. The present petition can be bifurcated into two reliefs. (1). Challenging
the departmental inquiry and the order passed by the  Page 27 of 41 68 of 82
C/SCA/12040/2007 JUDGMENT disciplinary authority in not accepting the inquiry
report submitted by the first Inquiry Officer and remanding the matter and
entrusting the inquiry to another Inquiry Officer.
(2). Challenging the impugned order passed by the Disciplinary Authority
dismissing the petitioner from service.
7.5. Now so far as the prayer of the petitioner to challenge the disciplinary
proceedings and to quash and set aside the decision of the disciplinary
authority on its administrative side, appointing new Inquiry Officer, for
further inquiry, in place of earlier Inquiry Officer and remanding the matter
by not accepting the inquiry report submitted by the First Inquiry Officer is
concerned, it is required to be noted that earlier at no point of time the
petitioner made any grievance with respect to remanding the matter for further
inquiry and entrusting the inquiry to another Inquiry Officer Shri A.J. Bhatt.
On the contrary, he fully participated in the inquiry conducted by the second
Inquiry Officer without making any grievance whatsoever either not accepting
the inquiry report submitted by the earlier inquiry officer and remanding the
matter for further inquiry or entrusting the inquiry on remand to another
Inquiry Officer i.e. appointing another Inquiry Officer Shri A.J. Bhatt. Only
when the inquiry report by the another Inquiry Officer Shri A.J. Bhatt has
gone against the petitioner on the basis of which the petitioner has been
dismissed from service, for the first the time the petitioner has made
grievance before this Court in the present petition. Under the circumstances,
once the petitioner participated in the inquiry conducted and held by the
another Inquiry Officer Shri A.J. Bhatt thereafter it is not open for the
petitioner to challenge the decision of the Disciplinary Authority on
administrative side not accepting the report submitted by the first Inquiry
Officer exonerating the petitioner and remanding the case / matter for further
inquiry / inquiry and entrusted inquiry to  Page 28 of 41 69 of 82
C/SCA/12040/2007 JUDGMENT another Inquiry Officer Shri A.J. Bhatt. Once having
participated in the inquiry before the Inquiry Officer, Shri A.J. Bhatt
without raising any grievance whatsoever, subsequently the petitioner is
estopped from making any grievance against the decision of the disciplinary
authority not accepting the inquiry report submitted by the earlier inquiry
officer and remanding the matter so as to enable the disciplinary authority to
prove the case against the petitioner and entrusting the inquiry to another
inquiry officer. It is required to be noted that as such as per Rule 10 of
Rules, 1971 it is open for the disciplinary authority not to agree with the
finding given by the Inquiry Officer and even remand the matter for further
inquiry.
Under the circumstances, challenge to decision of the disciplinary authority
in entrusting inquiry on remand to another officer and / or action of the
disciplinary authority remanding the matter by not accepting the inquiry
report submitted by Shri C. S. Oza earlier Inquiry Officer fails.
8.0. While considering challenge to the impugned order of dismissal,
background of the case and the circumstances under which Departmental Inquiry
was initiated against the petitioner deserves consideration.
8.1. The delinquent was working as Chief Judicial Magistrate, Jamnagar from
1.5.1992 to 23.6.1993. On 13.5.1993 and 25.5.1993 the High Court received two
complaints, first one from a Junior Advocate and the Second one from Anti
Corruption Bureau, Gujarat State forwarding an annoyance complaint received by
the said department. On 11.6.1993 Mr. R.Balkrishnan, the Principal Secretary,
Home Department, Government of Gujarat addressed a communication to the
Hon'ble the Chief Justice through the Registrar. The said communication  Page
29 of 41 70 of 82 C/SCA/12040/2007 JUDGMENT contained a copy of evening
edition dated 9.6.1993, of "Jaihind" Daily. On page 8 of the said newspaper,
in the portion sidelined "AA" the details of payment made by a smuggler, whose
premises had been raided by the police, to a Judicial Magistrate in Jamnagar
had been given. The latter of the Principal Secretary contained various
details and as stated in paragraph no.3 of the said letter a Xerox copy of the
relevant page from the note book seized by the police had also been enclosed.
The said letter records that the original note book is with the Director
General of Police, Gujarat State. In paragraph No.4 of the letter it is stated
that one Shri Patel mentioned in the note book is the Chief Judicial
Magistrate, Jamnagar and this has been revealed in the interrogation of the
accused Hamir Sajan Ahir. As the matter pertained to a Judicial Officer, the
Principal Secretary had forwarded the aforesaid documents to the High Court.
8.2. Accordingly, the Special Officer (Vigilance), High Court was directed on
11.6.1993 itself to conduct discrete inquiry Record reveals that the Special
Officer (Vigilance), High Court visited Jamnagar between 12.6.1993 to
14.6.1993 and collected various pieces of evidence. Thereafter, a preliminary
inquiry was conducted by the Special Officer (Vigilance), High Court and his
report having been placed before the Chamber Meeting held on 16.9.1993, a
decision to hold a regular departmental inquiry against the delinquent for
imposing major penalty as provided in Rule 6 of the Gujarat Civil Services
(Discipline and Appeal) Rules, 1976 was taken.
8.3. Accordingly, charges were served on the delinquent on 7.11.1997. The
delinquent was served with the statement of imputation and the list of
witnesses and documents. The statement of imputation which was served upon the
delinquent, reads as under:
Page 30 of 41
71 of 82 C/SCA/12040/2007 JUDGMENT "STATEMENT OF IMPUTATION"
Mr.N.R.Patel, was working as Chief Judicial Magistrate, Jamnagar (now Civil
Judge (S.D.), Rajkot).
While Mr. N.R.Patel was working as Chief Judicial Magistrate, Jamnagar, for
the period of 1/5/1992 to 23/6/1993:­ Two Criminal Cases No.1059/92 and
2103/87, for the offences punishable under Section 135 of the Customs Act,
1962, were pending against the accused, viz 1) Yusuf Haji Abdulla Bhaya: 2)
Hasam Abdulla Bhaya: 3) Abdul Jakub Sanghar: 4) Adam Kasam Sanghar: 5) Hasam
Sidiq Mokha (Bhadela); 6) Abdul Husen Arab; 7) Gani Hasam Bhadela (Dalej); And
1) Haji Ismail Sumbhania; 2) Natha Khima Varu; 3) Dadu Karsan Chavda; 4) Ala
Malde Ahir; 4 A) Jesha Natha Ahir; 5) Taiyab Mamad Sandhi; 6) Gogan Seva Koli;
7) Devsi Gogan;
8) Dosa Gogan Koli; 9) Deva Dohya Kagadia; 10) Bhimsi Laxman; 11) Hamir Sajan
Karangia (Aher); 12) Hamir Jeva Mer; 13) Arjan Mula Modhwadia; 14) Sajan
Harbhan: 15) Devsi Bhima Mer; 16) Nagan Malu, respectively in the Court of
Chief Judicial Magistrate, Jamnagar, out of the said two cases complaint in
the Criminal Case No.1059/92, was filed on 13/3/1992 by Customs Department,
and no progress was made in the matter till 17/11/1992.
That one Mr. A.R.Aggrawal, who was working in the office of Pavan Travels in
Jamnagar Branch, was known to Mr. N.R.Patel, as he was travelling between
Kalavad and Jamnagar, in the bus of Pavan Travels, and the accused No.1 of
Cri. Case No.1059/92, viz. Yusuf Patel, was also known to Mr. A.R.Aggrawal, as
he used to travel in the bus of Pavan Travels for going to Bombay.
While the said case was pending, about 8 months prior to 14/6/1993, Yusuf
Patel, went to the office of Pavan Travels and enquired from Mr. Ajay R.
Aggrawal, regarding his relations with Magistrate, Shri N.R.Patel whereupon
Mr. Aggrawal replied that he had relations with Mr. N.R.Patel, therefore, Mr.
Yusuf Patel told Mr. Aggrawal that his two cases were pending in the Court of
Mr. N.R.Patel and he wanted Mr. Aggrawal to have a talk with Mr. Patel, for
settlement of the cases. Mr. Aggrawal, asked Mr. Yusuf Patel to come after two
to four days. On the next day Mr. Aggrawal asked to Magistrate Mr. N.R.Patel
to show favour to the accused Yusuf Patel, in the two cases, and Mr.
N.R.Patel, demanded bribe of Rs.5 lacs from Yusuf Patel, through said Mr.
Aggrawal. After two days, Yusuf Patel, went to Mr. Aggrawal who told him that
Mr. N.R.Patel had demanded Rs. 5 lacs to settle both the cases. But the said
Yusuf Patel, agreed to pay Rs. 2 Lacs, to Mr. N.R.Patel, and agreed to pay Rs.
One lakh, initially for the case regarding smuggling of  Page 31 of 41 72 of
82 C/SCA/12040/2007 JUDGMENT Silver Bars, i.e. in Cri. Case No.1059/92, and
told the other case be kept pending.
Mr. Aggrawal, told Mr. Yusuf Patel, to come after two days, and after Mr.
Yusuf Patel left, Mr. Aggrawal informed Mr. N.R.Patel, accordingly, and Mr.
N.R.Patel, agreed to the proposal made by the accused, Yusuf Patel, and told
Mr. Aggrawal to inform him on telephone after collecting Rs. One Lac from the
accused.
After about 2 days, Yusuf Patel went to the office of Mr. Aggrawal, who told
him that Mr. N.R.Patel Saheb was given his consent therefore Mr. Yusuf Patel
told Mr. Aggrawal that he will handover the money to Mr. Aggrawal, thereafter
three to four days accused Yusuf Patel went to the office of Mr. Aggrawal, in
Maruti Car No.GC­J­255, and handed over Rs. One Lac to Mr. Aggrawal, for
delivering the same to Mr. N.R.Patel. Immediately thereafter Mr. N.R.Patel,
was informed on telephone at his residence by Mr. Aggrawal, that he had
received Rs.One lac, on his behalf and Mr. N.R.Patel told him that after the
Court Hours, he will collect the amount from him and accordingly, in between
7.30 p.m. And 8.00 p.m. Mr. N.R.Patel went to the office of Mr. Aggrawal and
collected the said amount of Rs. One lac from Mr. Aggrawal and left the office
of Mr. Aggrawal. Thereafter, though the case of the Years from 1981 to 1991
were pending in his Court, even against the under trial prisoners, suddenly
the matter was taken up for which Mr. N.R.Patel had accepted the said bribe
amount and in pre charge proceedings. Mr. N.R.Patel examined nine witnesses.
The agreements were heard on charge on date 1/2/1993 and on 2/2/1993 and then
on 6/2/1993 Mr. N.R.Patel pronounced an order discharging the said principal
accused No.1, Yusuf Haji Abdulla Bhaya @ Yusuf Patel.
This fact was narrated by Mr. Aggrawal to his friend Mr. Haribhai Soni,
resident of Jamnagar, in a casual manner.
About 6 months prior to 14/6/1993, Mr. Haribhai Soni went to the office of Mr.
Aggrawal and told him that one Hamirbhai Ahir is also facing the similar case
as of Mr. Yusuf Patel pending in the Court of Mr. N.R.Patel and that also to
be settled with Mr. N.R.Patel saheb. At the instance of Mr. Haribhai Soni to
show favour to the accused viz. Mr. Hamir Ahir, in Criminal Case No.2103/87,
pending in the Court of Mr. N.R.Patel for offence punishable under Section 135
of Custom Act, 1962, said Mr. A.R.Aggrawal telephoned Mr. N.R.Patel and Mr.
N.R.Patel, demanded bribe of Rs.75,000/­ for showing favour to the accused,
Hamirbhai Ahir, through Mr. A.R.Aggrawal. Mr. A.R. Aggrawal, informed Mr.
Haribhai accordingly.
After about 15 days, Mr. Aggrawal, went to the house of Mr. Haribhai to
collect the Video game at that time, Mr. Haribhai paid Rs.50,000/­ to  Page 32
of 41 73 of 82 C/SCA/12040/2007 JUDGMENT Mr. Aggrawal, for paying the said
amount to Mr. N.R.Patel, and Mr. N.R.Patel was informed at his residence on
phone by Mr. Aggrawal that he had received the amount on behalf of Mr.
N.R.Patel. Thereupon, Mr. N.R.Patel told Mr. Aggrawal that his brother Mr.
Jayesh would collect the money from Mr. Aggrawal and on the same day, in the
evening, Mr. N.R.Patel's younger brother Jayesh went to the office of Mr.
Aggrawal, and collected the said amount. After about 15 to 20 days, at about
11.00 a.m., Mr. Haribhai Soni, gave the balance of the amount of Rs.25,000/­
to Mr. Aggrawal, for paying it to Mr. N.R.Patel, and on receiving message from
Mr. Aggrawal, about receipt of the amount, Mr. N.R.Patel collected the said
amount through his brother Mr. Jayesh.
Thereafter, as Mr. N.R.Patel received the bribe amount, the matter was taken
up by Mr. N.R.Patel hastily and during the pre charge proceedings he recorded
the evidence of 22 witnesses, though the case for the Years 1981 to 1991 were
pending in the Court, including the cases against the under trial prisoners.
The Jamnagar police raided the house of the said accused Hamir Ahir and in the
search of the house collected the said amount through his brother Mr. Jayesh.
The carried out by the police a note book containing the accounts maintained
by the said accused was recovered wherein two payments are shown to have been
made to Mr. N.R.Patel, one on 29/12/1992 of Rs. 50,000/­ and another on
16/1/1993 of Rs.25,000/­.
That two to three days after 8/6/1993, Mr. N.R.Patel, had enquired from Mr.
Jeblia, Dy. S.P. on telephone as to whether Mr. Hamir was arrested and also
requested Mr. Jeblia, Dy. S.P. to take care of him, if anything is found
against him and after the news regarding seizure of note book from the house
of Mr. Hamir was broken, Mr. N.R.Patel had again made a telephone call to Mr.
Jeblia, Dy. S.P. and enquired as to whether his name appeared in the note book
and whether he could see the note book but Mr. Jeblia, Dy. S.P. replied that
note book has been taken by the D.I.G., Ahmedabad.
On 14/6/1993, Mr. N.R.Patel, had telephonic talk with Mrs. Prafula, wife of
Mr. Aggrawal and Mr. N.R.Patel told her "officers from the High Court have
come and tell vikki he should not involve me by making any statement before
them".
That Mr.N.R.Patel, had sent two persons to the house of Mr. Aggrawal, who told
Mr. Aggrawal to telephone Mr. N.R.Patel, from outside. But Mr. Aggrawal was
apprehending danger to his life, so he refused to go out for telephoning to
Mr. N.R.Patel.
On 20/6/1993, at night time Mr. N.R.Patel, along with his brother had  Page 33
of 41 74 of 82 C/SCA/12040/2007 JUDGMENT gone to the house of Mr. Aggrawal,
with a writing wherein it was written that D.S.P. Mr. Jha and Dy. S.P. Mr.
Jeblia had threatened Mr. Aggrawal that they will file a false case of keeping
AK­56 Rifle, and would arrest Mr. Aggrawal under TADA. Therefore, under that
fear, Mr. Aggrawal had filed the affidavit against Mr. N.R.Patel, but Mr.
Aggrawal did not sign the same as his previous affidavit filed against Mr.
N.R.Patel, was made without any fear or pressure and at his free will.
On 27/6/1993, Mr. N.R.Patel's brother Mr. Jayesh at the instance of Mr.
N.R.Patel, telephoned Mr. Aggrawal to handover the copy of the affidavit,
filed against Mr. N.R.Patel, but the same was not supplied as he had no copy
of the same, and thereby:
            a)     Mr. N.R.Patel indulged in corrupt practice
            b)     Mr. N.R.Patel, was guilty of dereliction in discharging his judicial  
            functions and;
            c)     Mr.   N.R.Patel,   acted   in   a   manner   unbecoming   of   a   Judicial  
            Officer.
The above acts of Mr. N.R.Patel, tantamount to acts unbecoming of a Judicial
Officer, and are acts of grave misconduct which are violative of the
provisions contained in Rule 3 of the Gujarat Civil Services (Conduct) Rules,
1971."
8.4. That the delinquent took inspection of relevant records on receipt of the
chargesheet and tendered his statement of defence on 18.3.1997. As the
statement of defence and the grounds stated therein were not found acceptable,
the Disciplinary Authority decided to proceed further with the inquiry. One
Shri C.S. Oza, City Civil Court Judge, Ahmedabad was appointed as Inquiry
Officer. In his report dated 29.7.1998 he held that the charges against the
delinquent were not proved. The report dated 29.7.1998 was placed along with
relevant papers before the Disciplinary Committee of the High Court and the
Disciplinary Committee found that the sufficient opportunity is not given to
the department to prove the case and if no sincere efforts were made by the
Inquiry Officer to secure the presence of the important witnesses of the case
and the Disciplinary Authority also pointed out that the report submitted by
the Inquiry Officer cannot be accepted and in that  Page 34 of 41 75 of 82
C/SCA/12040/2007 JUDGMENT view of the matter case deserves remand so as to
give opportunity to department to prove its case. The Disciplinary Authority
also observed that inquiry has been conducted in slip shod manner. Observing
the above, the High Court / Disciplinary Authority remitted the case to the
Inquiry Officer so as to enable the department to prove its case. That
thereupon further inquiry was conducted by Shri A.J. Bhatt, City Civil Court,
Judge, Ahmedabad who examined remaining witnesses and vide report dated
23.9.1997 held that the charges proved established. That thereafter after
giving an opportunity to the petitioner to make submission against the report
submitted by the Inquiry Officer and after issuing show cause notice to the
petitioner show cause as to why the petitioner should not be dismissed from
service, by a speaking reasoned order the Disciplinary Authority has passed
the impugned order dismissing the petitioner from service by holding that
cumulative effect on appreciation of the entire evidence goes to show that the
delinquent conducted himself in a manner which was not befitting a Judicial
Officer and the evidence goes to point towards a conduct of having indulged in
corrupt practice and in pursuance of receipt of illegal gratification matters
of Yusuf Patel and Hamri Sajan. That thereafter, the State of Gujarat has
passed consequential order on the basis of order passed by the Disciplinary
Authority (High Court) which are under challenge before this Court.
9.0. Challenge to impugned order of dismissal passed by the Disciplinary
Authority 9.1. The impugned order of dismissal passed by the Disciplinary
Authority is challenged by the petitioner on the ground that assuming that the
Disciplinary Authority was justified in not accepting the inquiry report
submitted by the earlier Inquiry Officer exonerating the petitioner  Page 35
of 41 76 of 82 C/SCA/12040/2007 JUDGMENT and remanding the matter even by
appointing another Inquiry Officer, as the remand was for further inquiry
only, disciplinary authority while passing the order of remand for further
inquiry, disciplinary authority confirmed the findings of the earlier Inquiry
Officer which were on appreciation of evidence of Shri Jebaliyas and that the
Inquiry Officer and Disciplinary Authority were required to confine themselves
as to whether allegations and charges are proved on the basis of evidence that
has given in further inquiry. It is the case of the petitioner that earlier
Inquiry Officer exonerated the petitioner on the basis of Shri Jebaliya
evidence and even after further inquiry, solely on the basis of Shri Jebaliya
evidence the allegations and the charges are held proved by Inquiry Officer
and the Disciplinary Authority, which is not permissible. The aforesaid cannot
be accepted. From the order of remand dated 24.12.1998 passed by the
Disciplinary Authority, it cannot be said that the Disciplinary Authority as
such accepted the report of the First Inquiry Officer (Shri C.S. Oza) that on
the basis of the Shri Jebaliya's evidence allegations and charges did not
stand proved. There is no such finding at all and / or even from the order of
remand no such impression can be gathered. From the order of remand, it
appears that on the contrary, it has been specifically observed that inquiry
has been conducted in slip shod manner. While admitting the case of the
Inquiry Officer, Disciplinary Authority has observed as under:
> The High Court has taken into consideration the relevant papers as well as
> contents of the report submitted by the Inquiry Officer. In the High Court's
> opinion, though the then Special Officer (Vigilance), High Court had
> recorded the statements of as many as seven witnesses, no sincere attempt
> was made by the Inquiry Officer to secure their presence for the purpose of
> Inquiry. The Inquiry Officer has given reasons in para 10 of the report to
> justify non examination of the witnesses Musa Ismail, Peon, District Court,
> Jamnagar. Similarly, the Inquiry Officer has recorded reasons in para 11
> justifying non­examination of the witness Hamir Sajan Aher who had made the
> statement before the Special Officer  Page 36 of 41 77 of 82
> C/SCA/12040/2007 JUDGMENT (Vigilance), High Court mentioning that, he had
> paid a sum of Rs.75000/­ to the delinquent. The Inquiry Officer had recorded
> reasons in para 12 of the report as to why the witness Ajay Ramprasad
> Agrawal could not be examined at the Departmental Inquiry. In the High
> Court's view, those reasons are not valid at all and creates an impression
> that the inquiry has been conducted in slip shod manner. It may be stated
> that, Musa Ismail is discharging duties as Peon in the District Court,
> Jamnagar and his presence could have been easily secured, if, the Inquiry
> Officer had addressed request letter to the learned District Judge of
> Jamnagar. Similarly, Hamir Sajan Ahir who is the main witness has not been
> examined on spacious ground, that the summons not be served at his address.
> Record does not indicate that any sincere attempt was made by the Inquiry
> Officer to serve summons on witness Hamir Sajan Ahir. Again reasons given by
> the Inquiry Officer for non examination Ajay Ramprasad Agrawal can hardly be
> said to be valid reasons at all. The High Court notes that, Ajay Ramprasad
> Agrawal at the relevant time was serving with Pavan Travels, and therefore,
> by making inquiry with responsible officer of Pavan Travels , the said
> witness could have been served with summons. With reference to the
> Departmental Inquiry against the delinquent, a sufficient opportunity is not
> given to the Department to prove the case and no sincere efforts were made
> by the Inquiry Officer to secure presence of important witnesses in the
> case. The High Court is of the opinion that report submitted by the Inquiry
> Officer cannot be accepted and in any view of the matter, the cases deserves
> remand so as to given opportunity to be Department to prove its case.
> Having regard to the facts of the case, the High Court has no option, but to
> remit the case to the Inquiry Officer for further inquiry as provided under
> Rule 10 of the Gujarat Civil Services (Discipline and Appeal) Rules, 1971.
> Accordingly, the matter is remitted to the Inquiry Officer for further
> inquiry. It is directed that all and sincere efforts shall be made by the
> Inquiry Officer to serve summons on the witnesses whose statements were
> recorded by the Special Officer (Vigilance), High Court and who could not be
> examined at the Departmental Inquiry.
9.2. It is true that in the operative portion of the order of remand it is
observed that the matter is remitted to the Inquiry Officer for further
inquiry. However, the same is required to be considered considering the matter
of remand as a whole and the observations and  Page 37 of 41 78 of 82
C/SCA/12040/2007 JUDGMENT findings given by the Disciplinary Authority.
Considering the order of remand as a whole and the observations made in the
said order, it appear to us that the Disciplinary Authority (High Court)
remitted the case to the Inquiry Officer by not accepting the report submitted
by the Inquiry Officer and so as to give opportunity to the department to
prove its case meaning thereby the case was remitted to the Inquiry Officer as
a whole and therefore, it was open for the Inquiry Officer Shri A.J. Bhatt to
consider the case as a whole and to consider the entire evidence on record
inclusive of evidence of Shri Jebaliya's and it was open for the Inquiry
Officer Shri A.J. Bhatt to appreciate the entire evidence on record.
Therefore, as such no error or illegality has been committed by the Inquiry
Officer Shri A.J. Bhatt in appreciating and considering the deposition of Shri
Jebaliya's and holding the charge against the petitioner proved.
9.3. That on appreciation of entire evidence on record and cumulative effect
of appreciation of entire evidence, the Inquiry Officer has come to the
definite finding that the delinquent conducted himself in a manner which was
not befitting the Judicial Officer. He has also come to the conclusion that
evidence goes to point towards a conduct of having indulged in corrupt
practice and in pursuance of receipt of illegal gratification matters of Yusuf
Patel and Hamri Sajan were taken up out of board and that the said Yusuf Patel
accused in Criminal Case No.1059 of 1992, came to be discharged while
remaining accused were charged with the offences for which they were
arraigned. The Inquiry Officer has also specifically observed that in fact it
was a fictitious circumstances that before the criminal case No. 2103 of 1987
could be decided the diary came to be seized, Vigilance Inquiry was initiated,
delinquent was transferred out of Jamnagar. The finding recorded by the
Inquiry Officer are thus on appreciation of evidence and considering the
cumulative  Page 38 of 41 79 of 82 C/SCA/12040/2007 JUDGMENT effect and on
appreciation of entire evidence.
10\. The Hon'ble Apex Court, with regard to the factual findings of the
inquiry officer and disciplinary authority has, in case between Y.P. Sarabhai
vs. Union Bank of India & another reported in 2006(5) SCC 377, held that:­
This Court has repeatedly held that the factual finding of the disciplinary
authority after holding a detailed enquiry and after going through elaborate
evidence is not assailable in the courts unless the breach of principles of
natural justice or the violation of any rules or any material irregularity on
the face of record is alleged and shown. However, in this case the High Court
in the jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India has again
gone into all aspects of the enquiry in detail and has come to the same
factual finding as the disciplinary authority and the Appellate Authority.
Such concurrent findings by three different authorities including the High
Court should not be disturbed by this Court under Article 136 of the
Constitution of India. We, therefore, have no other option except to dismiss
this appeal. Accordingly, the appeal stands dismissed.
11\. We are not sitting in appeal over the findings and the decision of the
inquiry officer and it is not within the purview of judicial review to examine
the sufficiency of evidence except lack or absence of evidence or to decide
about the propriety of inquiry officers decision to believe one piece of
evidence over another.
12\. At this stage, we consider it appropriate to refer to the law declared
Page 39 of 41 80 of 82 C/SCA/12040/2007 JUDGMENT by the Honble Apex Court, on
this point, in the judgment between High Court of Judicature, Bombay v/s
Shashikant Patel (supra) wherein the Honble Apex Court has observed that if
the inquiry has been properly conducted, then, as per the settled legal
position, if there is some legal evidence on which findings can be based, then
adequacy or even reliability of that evidence is not a matter to be canvassed
before the High Court in petition under Article 226.
13\. In present case, a fair and legal inquiry has been conducted and there
has been no dispute or grievance about the legality or propriety of inquiry
and on examination of the material we have already come to the conclusion that
this is not a case which can be considered a no evidence case.
14\. With regard to the scope of interference by the High Court in
jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution with the Hon'ble Apex Court
in case between State of U.P. & Another vs. Rajkishore Yadav & Another
reported in (2006) 5 SCC 673 held that:
> ...It is a settled law that the High Court has limited scope of interference
> in the administrative action of the State in exercise of extraordinary
> jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India and, therefore,
> the findings recorded by the enquiry officer and the consequent order of
> punishment of dismissal from service should not be disturbed... (emphasis
> supplied)
15\. In the facts of the case reference may also be made to the judgment of
the Apex Court in case between Chairman & MD V.S.P. vs. Goparaju Shri
Prabhakara Hari Babu reported in 2008(5) SCC 569 wherein the  Page 40 of 41 81
of 82 C/SCA/12040/2007 JUDGMENT Apex Court has in paragraph No. 17 and 17.1
observed as under:
> 17\. Once it is found that all the procedural requirements have been
> complied with, the courts would not ordinarily interfere with the quantum of
> punishment imposed upon a delinquent employee. The Superior Courts only in
> some cases may invoke the doctrine of proportionality. If the decision of an
> employer is found to be within the legal parameters, the jurisdiction would
> ordinarily not be invoked when the misconduct stands proved. (emphasis
> supplied) 17.1 The High Court in exercise of its jurisdiction under Article
> 226 of the Constitution of India also cannot, on the basis of sympathy or
> sentiment, overturn a legal order.
16\. Since we have not found any infirmity in the conclusions of the inquiry
officer and have not been able to convince ourselves to accept that the
conclusions are not based on any evidence, we are also not able to hold that
the High Court was not justified in recommending the penalty of dismissal. In
the facts of the case, we are of the view that the penalty recommended by the
Court was eminently proper.
17\. The contentions do not merit any interference. Petition does not deserve
to be entertained.
18\. For the reasons recorded above, we are not inclined to accept the
petition. The petition fails and deserves to be rejected. The petition is
accordingly rejected. No costs.
sd/­ (M.R.SHAH, J.) sd/­ (S.H.VORA, J.) Kaushik  Page 41 of 41 82 of 82
> complied with, the courts would not ordinarily interfere with the quantum of
> punishment imposed upon a delinquent employee. The Superior Courts only in
> some cases may invoke the doctrine of proportionality. If the decision of an
> employer is found to be within the legal parameters, the jurisdiction would
> ordinarily not be invoked when the misconduct stands proved. (emphasis
> supplied) 17.1 The High Court in exercise of its jurisdiction under Article
> 226 of the Constitution of India also cannot, on the basis of sympathy or
> sentiment, overturn a legal order.
16\. Since we have not found any infirmity in the conclusions of the inquiry
officer and have not been able to convince ourselves to accept that the
conclusions are not based on any evidence, we are also not able to hold that
the High Court was not justified in recommending the penalty of dismissal. In
the facts of the case, we are of the view that the penalty recommended by the
Court was eminently proper.
17\. The contentions do not merit any interference. Petition does not deserve
to be entertained.
5\. Whether it is to be circulated to the civil judge ?
============================================= N.R.PATEL....Petitioner(s)
Versus HIGH COURT OF GUJARAT & 1....Respondent(s)
============================================= Appearance:
MR. K.M. PATEL SR. ADV. WITH MR VAIBHAV A VYAS, ADVOCATE for the Petitioner(s)
No. 1 MS. NISHA THAKORE ASSIT. GOVERNMENT PLEADER for the Respondent(s) No. 2
LAW OFFICER BRANCH, ADVOCATE for the Respondent(s) No. 1 MR. SHALIN MEHTA SR.
ADV. WITH MR HEMANG M SHAH, ADVOCATE for the Respondent(s) No. 1 RULE SERVED
for the Respondent(s) No. 2 =============================================
CORAM: HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE M.R. SHAH and HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE S.H.VORA Date
: 1.11.2013 / 20.11.2014 ORAL JUDGMENT (PER : HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE M.R. SHAH)
1.0. By way of this petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India
the petitioner has prayed for an appropriate writ, direction and  Page 1 of 41
1 of 82 C/SCA/12040/2007 JUDGMENT order to quash and set aside the
departmental inquiry conducted against him by the Disciplinary Authority
(hereinafter referred to as the "High Court") on its administrative side as
well as impugned order dated 5.9.2006 passed by the High Court dismissing the
petitioner from service as well as consequential order dated 5.10.2006 passed
by the Government of Gujarat.
2.0. The facts leading to the present petition in nutshell are as under:
> complied with, the courts would not ordinarily interfere with the quantum of
> punishment imposed upon a delinquent employee. The Superior Courts only in
> some cases may invoke the doctrine of proportionality. If the decision of an
> employer is found to be within the legal parameters, the jurisdiction would
> ordinarily not be invoked when the misconduct stands proved. (emphasis
> supplied) 17.1 The High Court in exercise of its jurisdiction under Article
> 226 of the Constitution of India also cannot, on the basis of sympathy or
> sentiment, overturn a legal order.
16\. Since we have not found any infirmity in the conclusions of the inquiry
officer and have not been able to convince ourselves to accept that the
conclusions are not based on any evidence, we are also not able to hold that
the High Court was not justified in recommending the penalty of dismissal. In
the facts of the case, we are of the view that the penalty recommended by the
Court was eminently proper.
17\. The contentions do not merit any interference. Petition does not deserve
to be entertained.
5\. Whether it is to be circulated to the civil judge ?
============================================= N.R.PATEL....Petitioner(s)
Versus HIGH COURT OF GUJARAT & 1....Respondent(s)
============================================= Appearance:
MR. K.M. PATEL SR. ADV. WITH MR VAIBHAV A VYAS, ADVOCATE for the Petitioner(s)
No. 1 MS. NISHA THAKORE ASSIT. GOVERNMENT PLEADER for the Respondent(s) No. 2
LAW OFFICER BRANCH, ADVOCATE for the Respondent(s) No. 1 MR. SHALIN MEHTA SR.
ADV. WITH MR HEMANG M SHAH, ADVOCATE for the Respondent(s) No. 1 RULE SERVED
for the Respondent(s) No. 2 =============================================
CORAM: HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE M.R. SHAH and HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE S.H.VORA Date
: 1.11.2013 / 20.11.2014 ORAL JUDGMENT (PER : HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE M.R. SHAH)
1.0. By way of this petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India
the petitioner has prayed for an appropriate writ, direction and  Page 1 of 41
1 of 82 C/SCA/12040/2007 JUDGMENT order to quash and set aside the
departmental inquiry conducted against him by the Disciplinary Authority
(hereinafter referred to as the "High Court") on its administrative side as
well as impugned order dated 5.9.2006 passed by the High Court dismissing the
petitioner from service as well as consequential order dated 5.10.2006 passed
by the Government of Gujarat.
2.0. The facts leading to the present petition in nutshell are as under:
> complied with, the courts would not ordinarily interfere with the quantum of
> punishment imposed upon a delinquent employee. The Superior Courts only in
> some cases may invoke the doctrine of proportionality. If the decision of an
> employer is found to be within the legal parameters, the jurisdiction would
> ordinarily not be invoked when the misconduct stands proved. (emphasis
> supplied) 17.1 The High Court in exercise of its jurisdiction under Article
> 226 of the Constitution of India also cannot, on the basis of sympathy or
> sentiment, overturn a legal order.
16\. Since we have not found any infirmity in the conclusions of the inquiry
officer and have not been able to convince ourselves to accept that the
conclusions are not based on any evidence, we are also not able to hold that
the High Court was not justified in recommending the penalty of dismissal. In
the facts of the case, we are of the view that the penalty recommended by the
Court was eminently proper.
17\. The contentions do not merit any interference. Petition does not deserve
to be entertained.
5\. Whether it is to be circulated to the civil judge ?
============================================= N.R.PATEL....Petitioner(s)
Versus HIGH COURT OF GUJARAT & 1....Respondent(s)
============================================= Appearance:
MR. K.M. PATEL SR. ADV. WITH MR VAIBHAV A VYAS, ADVOCATE for the Petitioner(s)
No. 1 MS. NISHA THAKORE ASSIT. GOVERNMENT PLEADER for the Respondent(s) No. 2
LAW OFFICER BRANCH, ADVOCATE for the Respondent(s) No. 1 MR. SHALIN MEHTA SR.
ADV. WITH MR HEMANG M SHAH, ADVOCATE for the Respondent(s) No. 1 RULE SERVED
for the Respondent(s) No. 2 =============================================
CORAM: HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE M.R. SHAH and HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE S.H.VORA Date
: 1.11.2013 / 20.11.2014 ORAL JUDGMENT (PER : HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE M.R. SHAH)
1.0. By way of this petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India
the petitioner has prayed for an appropriate writ, direction and  Page 1 of 41
1 of 82 C/SCA/12040/2007 JUDGMENT order to quash and set aside the
departmental inquiry conducted against him by the Disciplinary Authority
(hereinafter referred to as the "High Court") on its administrative side as
well as impugned order dated 5.9.2006 passed by the High Court dismissing the
petitioner from service as well as consequential order dated 5.10.2006 passed
by the Government of Gujarat.
2.0. The facts leading to the present petition in nutshell are as under:
2.1. That initially the petitioner was appointed as Civil Judge (J.D.) and
Judicial Magistrate First Class in the year 1981 and thereafter he was
promoted in the year 1991. That at the relevant time the petitioner was
working as Chief Judicial Magistrate, Jamnagar. That the petitioner was served
with the chargesheet dated 7.1.1997 for the misconduct alleged to have been
committed by him, as a Judicial Officer while working as Chief Judicial
Magistrate, Jamnagar. That the departmental inquiry was initiated against the
petitioner on the following charges:
2.2. Two Criminal Cases No.1059 of 1992 and 2103 of 1987, for the offences
punishable under Section 135 of the Customs Act, 1962 were pending against the
accused viz. (1) Yusuf Haji Abdulla Bhaya; (2) Hasan Abdulla Bhaya; (3) Abdul
> complied with, the courts would not ordinarily interfere with the quantum of
> punishment imposed upon a delinquent employee. The Superior Courts only in
> some cases may invoke the doctrine of proportionality. If the decision of an
> employer is found to be within the legal parameters, the jurisdiction would
> ordinarily not be invoked when the misconduct stands proved. (emphasis
> supplied) 17.1 The High Court in exercise of its jurisdiction under Article
> 226 of the Constitution of India also cannot, on the basis of sympathy or
> sentiment, overturn a legal order.
16\. Since we have not found any infirmity in the conclusions of the inquiry
officer and have not been able to convince ourselves to accept that the
conclusions are not based on any evidence, we are also not able to hold that
the High Court was not justified in recommending the penalty of dismissal. In
the facts of the case, we are of the view that the penalty recommended by the
Court was eminently proper.
17\. The contentions do not merit any interference. Petition does not deserve
to be entertained.
5\. Whether it is to be circulated to the civil judge ?
============================================= N.R.PATEL....Petitioner(s)
Versus HIGH COURT OF GUJARAT & 1....Respondent(s)
============================================= Appearance:
MR. K.M. PATEL SR. ADV. WITH MR VAIBHAV A VYAS, ADVOCATE for the Petitioner(s)
No. 1 MS. NISHA THAKORE ASSIT. GOVERNMENT PLEADER for the Respondent(s) No. 2
LAW OFFICER BRANCH, ADVOCATE for the Respondent(s) No. 1 MR. SHALIN MEHTA SR.
ADV. WITH MR HEMANG M SHAH, ADVOCATE for the Respondent(s) No. 1 RULE SERVED
for the Respondent(s) No. 2 =============================================
CORAM: HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE M.R. SHAH and HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE S.H.VORA Date
: 1.11.2013 / 20.11.2014 ORAL JUDGMENT (PER : HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE M.R. SHAH)
1.0. By way of this petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India
the petitioner has prayed for an appropriate writ, direction and  Page 1 of 41
1 of 82 C/SCA/12040/2007 JUDGMENT order to quash and set aside the
departmental inquiry conducted against him by the Disciplinary Authority
(hereinafter referred to as the "High Court") on its administrative side as
well as impugned order dated 5.9.2006 passed by the High Court dismissing the
petitioner from service as well as consequential order dated 5.10.2006 passed
by the Government of Gujarat.
2.0. The facts leading to the present petition in nutshell are as under:
2.1. That initially the petitioner was appointed as Civil Judge (J.D.) and
Judicial Magistrate First Class in the year 1981 and thereafter he was
promoted in the year 1991. That at the relevant time the petitioner was
working as Chief Judicial Magistrate, Jamnagar. That the petitioner was served
with the chargesheet dated 7.1.1997 for the misconduct alleged to have been
committed by him, as a Judicial Officer while working as Chief Judicial
Magistrate, Jamnagar. That the departmental inquiry was initiated against the
petitioner on the following charges:
2.2. Two Criminal Cases No.1059 of 1992 and 2103 of 1987, for the offences
punishable under Section 135 of the Customs Act, 1962 were pending against the
accused viz. (1) Yusuf Haji Abdulla Bhaya; (2) Hasan Abdulla Bhaya; (3) Abdul
> complied with, the courts would not ordinarily interfere with the quantum of
> punishment imposed upon a delinquent employee. The Superior Courts only in
> some cases may invoke the doctrine of proportionality. If the decision of an
> employer is found to be within the legal parameters, the jurisdiction would
> ordinarily not be invoked when the misconduct stands proved. (emphasis
> supplied) 17.1 The High Court in exercise of its jurisdiction under Article
> 226 of the Constitution of India also cannot, on the basis of sympathy or
> sentiment, overturn a legal order.
16\. Since we have not found any infirmity in the conclusions of the inquiry
officer and have not been able to convince ourselves to accept that the
conclusions are not based on any evidence, we are also not able to hold that
the High Court was not justified in recommending the penalty of dismissal. In
the facts of the case, we are of the view that the penalty recommended by the
Court was eminently proper.
17\. The contentions do not merit any interference. Petition does not deserve
to be entertained.
