Gujarat High Court
Neon Laboratories Ltd. vs Medical Technologies Ltd. And 2 ... on 19 December,
2005
Author: K R Vyas
Bench: K R Vyas
JUDGMENT Kshitij R. Vyas, J.
Page 129
1\. The appellant ori. Defendant No. 1 in Reg. Civil Suit No. 1244/2005 has
challenged the order dated 17.10.2005 confirming the ad interim injunction
granted in favour of respondents No. 1 and 2 (Ori. Plaintiffs) by the ld. City
Civil Judge, Ahmedabad, passed below notice of motion ex. 6. The parties
hereinafter be referred to as the plaintiffs and defendant for brevity.
2\. The plaintiffs have filed the suit for injunction, damages and accounts of
profits. The plaintiffs No. 1 and 2 are the companies incorporated under the
Companies Act, 1956, having their registered office at Ahmedabad and they are
engaged in the business of pharmaceutical drugs and medicinal preparations for
last number of years. According to them, they have acquired high reputation
and goodwill in the market. It is the case of the plaintiffs that the
predecessor in title of the plaintiff No. 2 is the first plaintiff company who
had introduced the word molecule 'PROFOL' in India. They have made an
trade mark, that is to say the registration of a trade mark by a proprietor
will not affect the user of an identical or nearly resembling mark by another
proprietor if the second mentioned proprietor has used the same on his goods
prior to the registration of the mark of the first mentioned proprietor. The
said provision further provides that Registrar has to permit registration of
such a mark by enacting that the Registrar shall ignore the registration of
the mark of the first mentioned proprietor. This is consistent with the common
law that no person shall affect the rights of another in relations to trade
marks merely because his mark is placed upon the Registrar prior to that of a
proprietor of a mark who has used his mark anterior in point of time but has
failed to register. In my opinion, Section 33 of the Act which is enacted only
to save such rights and no more. I, therefore, see no merits in the
submission.
Page 140
27\. Thus, considering the matter from all the angles, I see no merit in the
submissions advanced before me by the ld. Counsel for the appellant/defendant.
had introduced the word molecule 'PROFOL' in India. They have made an
application before the Drug Controller of India on 22.4.1998.
3\. It is the case of the plaintiffs that the predecessor of plaintiff No. 1
in title have coined and invested the trade mark SPROFOL in April, 1998, and
subsequently, thereafter from time to time, the licence was given to the
plaintiff companies for the trade mark 'SPROFOL'. It is the case of the
plaintiffs that as per the order of this court in Amalgamation Company
Petition No. 295/1999, the plaintiff No. 1 has become owner of the entire
business and assets of predecessor-in-title thereof on 17.2.2000, and thereby
the plaintiff No. 1 has become owner of trade mark 'SPROFOL'. The plaintiff
No. 2 is a licensee of the plaintiff No. 1 and at present, the plaintiff No. 2
is manufacturing products bearing trade mark 'SPROFOL'.
4\. According to the plaintiffs, the trade mark 'SPROFOL' was used by the
predecessor in title of the plaintiffs openly, extensively and continuously in
Indian market since 1998, and after the amalgamation, the plaintiff No. 1 has
become owner and he is using the said trade mark 'SPROFOL' and the plaintiffs
are using the trade mark 'SPROFOL' since the year 2000 openly, extensively and
continuously. Accordingly to the plaintiffs, the said trade mark has acquired
distinguish place in the market, traders, consumer and general public identify
and recognize the plaintiffs product by the trade mark 'SPROFOL'.
5\. It is further the case of the plaintiffs that the plaintiff No. 1 had
applied for the registration of the said trade mark bearing application No.
803692 on 24.5.1998 in Class-V. The plaintiff has also made necessary
application in the Trade Mark Registry to change the name of proprietor as the
original application was made by the predecessor in title of the plaintiff
Page 130 No. 1. It is also case of the plaintiffs that the plaintiffs are also
marketing the said goods and exporting the medicinal and pharmaceutical
products outside India. The plaintiffs have made an application for
manufacturing drugs and pharmaceutical products in India and various countries
have very wide marketing network.
6\. It is the case of the plaintiffs that the plaintiffs have come to know
that the defendant No. 1 has introduced the product with a trade mark SROFOL
in which the letter 'SP' is deleted. The defendant No. 2 is the local medical
store who is selling the product of the defendant No. 1's products under the
trade mark SROFOL. According to the plaintiff, the defendant No. 1 has adopted
the identical and deceptively similar to the well-known trade mark SPROFOL of
the plaintiffs. According to the plaintiffs, the use of the trade mark SROFOL
by the defendant No. 1 is nothing but malafide intention to pass off their
goods and for the goods of the plaintiffs, and therefore, the plaintiffs are
likely to suffer irreparable loss and damages, high reputation, goodwill, used
by the plaintiffs under the trade mark 'SPROFOL'. It is also the case of the
plaintiffs that the defendants are marketing and passing off their products to
Ahmedabad City through the defendant No. 2 ?" chemist within the territorial
jurisdiction of the trial court. It is submitted that in the interest of
justice, the defendants are required to be restrained from using the trade
mark 'SPROFOL'. According to the plaintiffs, the defendants have encroached
upon the plaintiffs' intellectual property rights.
7\. Though the summons was duly served upon the defendants, the defendant No.
2 have not appeared to resist their case. The defendant No. 1 has appeared in
the trial court through advocate and filed written statement at ex. 26,
wherein, has inter alia contended that the defendant No. 1 is a registered
proprietor of the trade mark containing the word SROFOL under No. 583227 dated
October 19, 1992, in respect of pharmaceutical in Class-V. The said mark was
duly renewed from time to time by the defendant No. 1 and its registration was
valid, subsisting and in force. It is admitted by the said defendant that the
trade mark SROFOL is used by the defendant since 16.10.2004 for the of
Anaesthetic preparations. The said mark is advertised on extensive scale
amongst the doctors and retailers.
8\. That according to the defendant No. 1, the plaintiff has applied for the
registration of trade mark in Class-V in respect of pharmaceutical and medical
preparation which is virtually identical to the defendant's prior registered
trade mark of defendant 'SROFOL'. The plaintiff has taken the registered trade
mark 'SROFOL' as a whole and just added the letter 'SP' to it. According to
the defendant No. 1, the trade mark 'SPROFOL' being used by the plaintiff is
dishonestly and attempt to actuate by malafide intention to derive the
benefits from the registered trade mark of the defendants 'SROFOL'. The
plaintiff No. 1 has dishonestly adopted the trade mark 'SPROFOL' and
reputation enjoyed by the defendants in the market. According to the defendant
No. 1, the trade mark 'SPROFOL' will be prejudicial to the public interest and
contrary to the universally adopted principles of ethics and morality. The use
of trade mark 'SPROFOL' by the Page 131 plaintiff No. 1 will undoubtedly cause
great, inconvenience, loss and hardship to the defendants and other
pharmaceutical manufacturers in general. The registration of the trade mark
would be contrary to the provisions of Section 9(2)(a) of the Trade Mark Act,
1999. It is also pleaded that the defendant No. 1 had also applied for the
registration of trade mark 'SPROFOL' in prior to the plaintiff bearing
application No. 677497 dated 14.8.1995 which is still pending for usual
procedure. According to the defendants, the application of the plaintiff No. 1
dated 24.5.1998 is about 3 years subsequent to the defendant's application for
the same trade mark 'SPROFOL' in respect of pharmaceutical and medicinal
preparations.
9\. The defendant No. 1 has also submitted that the rival word marks 'SPROFOL'
and 'SROFOL' per-se sound similar to, but, entire packing, are totally
different, and hence, no passing off action is maintainable. It is submitted
that the rival marks are required to be compared as a whole is used, and there
would be no confusion or deception in the trade or in consuming public. It is
also contended that the plaintiff is not a registered proprietor of the suit
trade mark. It is also contended that no cause of action has ever arisen for
the plaintiff to file the present suit in the trial court against the
defendants, and therefore, the suit deserves to be dismissed on this count
alone. It is also contended that the plaintiffs are limited company and,
hence, the present suit is verified by a person who has no authority to sign
and verify the suit, injunction application and affidavit. Hence, the suit is
not maintainable. The defendants have also denied all the averments of the
plaint and notice of motion application in toto.
10\. It is also contended by the defendants that the grant of interim
injunction against the defendants pending the final hearing and disposal of
the suit, the defendant's business in the said goods would be entirely
uprooted and hampered. It is also contended that the balance of convenience is
also not in favour of the plaintiffs but in favour of the defendants. There is
no prima-facie case in favour of the plaintiffs. The documents produced by the
plaintiffs are false, fabricated and misleading and the interim injunction
granted in favour of the plaintiffs deserves to be vacated forthwith.
11\. The ld. Trial Judge after hearing ld. Advocate appearing for the parties
and considering the material produced, held that the plaintiff has prima-facie
established all the ingredients like prior user, deceptively similarity and
establishment of goodwill. According to the ld. Judge the plaintiffs have
established a prima-facie case in their favour. The balance of convenience is
also in favour of the plaintiffs and if the injunction is not granted, it will
cause future loss to the plaintiffs, and hence every possibility that the
goods of the defendants' may pass off as that of the plaintiffs. He,
therefore, confirmed ad interim injunction granted earlier till the final
disposal of the suit. Hence, the present appeal.
12\. Heard Mr. Mihir Thakore ld. Sr. Counsel for Mr. RR Shah ld. Advocate
appearing for the appellant/appellant and Mr. SN Soparkar ld. Sr. Counsel for
Mr. YJ Trivedi appearing for the respondents/plaintiffs.
Page 132
13\. Mr. Thakore ld. sr. counsel for the appellant/defendant submitted that
the trial court failed to appreciate the fact that to the rival word marks
'SROFOL' and 'SPROFOL' of the defendant and plaintiffs, respectively, per-se
sound similar to, but, entire packing of rival products are totally different.
Hence, no passing off action is maintainable. In the submission of ld. Counsel
the rival marks are required to be compared as a whole as used with a view to
avoid any confusion or deception in the trade or in consuming public. It was
further submitted that the mark 'SROFOL' and 'SPROFOL' are dissimilar and
respective use of the respective marks in respect of trade dress get up and
colour scheme are also totally different and, therefore, no passing off would
take place. It was submitted that the appellant company is a running concern
and is engaged in the business of manufacturing pharmaceutical products since
1998. They are the registered proprietor in India of the trade mark word
containing 'SROFOL' under No. 583227 dated October 19, 1992 in respect of
pharmaceutical preparation in Clause-V. The said mark has been renewed from
time to time by the defendant and its registration is valid, subsisting and in
force. According to the ld. Counsel for the appellant/defendant, the
appellants are using the said trade mark 'SROFOL' since 16.10.2000. It was
therefore, submitted the impugned order will definitely affect the reputation
and goodwill earned by the appellants/defendants amongst the doctors and
consuming public etc.
14\. Mr. Soparkar ld. Sr. counsel appearing for the respondents/plaintiffs,
while supporting the order of the trial court at the out set, submitted that
when the trial court has discussed the law on the subject and has given cogent
and convincing reasons and when nothing is submitted about the judgment, no
interference is called. He has cited the decisions rendered by this Court in
the case of B.M. Amin v. Nirma Chemical Works Ltd. reported in 2005(2) GLH p.
585 and in the case of Rampal Singh v. Rais Ahmad Ansari and Anr. reported in
1990 (suppl.) SCC P. 726. He further submitted that the plaintiffs are first
in point of time, users of the product and, therefore, they are entitled to
get the injunction. According to him, words 'SPROFOL' and 'SROFOL' are
phonetically similar. By inviting my attention to the admission made by the
defendants in the written statement, namely that two are likely to create the
confusion in the marked, it was submitted that the plaintiffs are entitled to
injunction restraining the defendants from selling the products SROFOL.
15\. After having considered the arguments advanced before me and having also
gone through the authorities on the point, I find substance in the submissions
of Mr. Soparkar, namely, that when the trial court after appreciating the
contentions has given cogent and convincing reasons, this court should not
interfere unless it is shown that when the judgment of the trial court is
erroneous and perverse. In other words, the point raised before the trial
court cannot be re-agitated in the appeal when it was properly appreciated by
the trial court. This court, in the case of BM Amin v. Nirma Chemical Works
Ltd. (supra) after considering number of judgments on this point, held that
the trial court was perfectly justified in granting the injunction in favour
of the plaintiffs. Under the circumstances, no case is made out by the
defendants to call for the interference by this Court in the impugned Page 133
order. In the case of U.P. Cooperative Federation Ltd. v. Sunder Bros., Delhi
, in the matter under Section 34 of the Indian Arbitration Act, it was held
that the appellate court should be slow to interfere with the exercise of that
discretion. In dealing with the matter raised before it at the appellate stage
the appellate court would normally not be justified in interfering with the
exercise of the discretion under appeal solely on the ground that if it had
considered the matter at the trial stage it may have come to a contrary
conclusion. If the discretion has been exercised by the Trial Court reasonably
and in a judicial manner the fact that the appellate court would have taken a
different view may not justify interference with the trial court's exercise of
discretion. As is often said, it is ordinarily not open to the appellate court
to substitute its own exercise of discretion for that of the Trial Judge; but
if it appears to the appellate court that in exercising its discretion the
Trial Court has acted unreasonably or capriciously or has ignored relevant
facts then it would certainly be open to the appellate court to interfere with
the Trial Court's exercise of jurisdiction. In Wonder Ltd. and Anr. v. Antox
India P. Ltd. reported in 1990 (suppl.) SCC 727, the Apex Court considered the
question whether there was a prima-facie case on which the respondent could be
held entitled to restrain the appellant and the other company (appellant 2)
with whom the separate manufacturing arrangement was entered into, from
manufacturing and marketing goods under trade mark and whether on
considerations of balance of convenience and comparative hardship a temporary
injunction should be issued. The Ld. Single Judge of the High court refused
the temporary injunction but on appeal a Division Bench of the High Court
granted the same. Allowing the appeal, the Supreme Court held that :
The appellate court will not interfere with the exercise of discretion of the
court of first instance and substitute its own discretion except where the
discretion has been shown to have been exercised arbitrarily, or capriciously
or perversely or where the court had ignored the settled principles of law
regulating grant or refusal of interlocutory injunctions. An appeal against
exercise of discretion is said to e an appeal on principle. Appellate court
will not reassess the material and seek to reach a conclusion different from
the one reached by the court below solely on the ground that if it had
considered the matter at the trial stage it would have come to a contrary
conclusion. If the discretion has been exercised by the trial court reasonably
and in a judicial manner the fact that the appellate court would have taken a
different view may not justify interference with the trial court's exercise of
discretion.
16\. Having gone through the reasonings of the ld. Trial judge, I am clearly
of the opinion that the ld. Trial judge in his well reasoned judgment and
order has considered the very contentions advanced before me by the defendant
and rightly rejected the same by granting injunction in favour of the
plaintiffs. In my opinion, the ld. Trial judge has exercised the discretion
reasonably and in judicious manner and since I am in total agreement with the
same, it is not possible for me to take a different view. I could have Page
134 dismissed the appeal solely on this ground, however, with a view to see
that the defendant may not go with the feeling that its case is not
independently considered by this court, I have undertaken this exercise to re-
examine the case.
17\. It is not in dispute that the defendant is a registered proprietor of the
trade mark containing word 'SROFOL' under No. 583227 dated October 19, 1992 in
respect of pharmaceutical preparation in Class-V. It is also not in dispute
that the defendant using the trade mark 'SROFOL' since 16.10.1994 commercially
for a range of Anaesthetic and allied preparation in a lemon yellow colour
package. The plaintiffs, on the other hand, are using the trade mark 'SPROFOL'
in April, 1998 when they made application before the Drug Controller of India
and as per the order passed by this court in Company Petition No. 295/1999 in
amalgamation proceedings, the plaintiff No. 1 has become the owner of entire
business and assets of predecessor in title thereof on 17.2.2000 and, thereby
the plaintiff No. 1 has become owner of the trade mark 'SPROFOL'. It is,
therefore, the case of the plaintiffs that the trade mark 'SPROFOL' was used
by the predecessor in title of plaintiffs openly, extensively and continuously
in Indian market since 1998 and since the year 2000 the plaintiffs are using
the trade mark and acquired distinguish place in the market, traders, consumer
and general public identify and recognize the plaintiffs product by trade mark
'SPROFOL'. In substance, the defendant No. 1 though registered in 1992, as far
as the use of the product is concerned, defendants are in the market since
16.10.1994, while plaintiffs though unregistered, are using the trade mark
'SPROFOL' came in market in October, 2000 and marketing their product in a
blue colour packet.
18\. It is the contention of the defendant that it being registered
proprietor, it cannot be restrained from using the trade mark 'SROFOL'. In the
submission of the ld. Counsel for the defendant that the brand name of the
plaintiffs' and defendants' is derived by the generic name propofol and,
therefore, the plaintiffs can not claim ownership over the said name. One more
contention is raised by the appellants that as it had obtained registration,
therefore, prior use means prior to the registration. But, in the present
case, the respondents had used the mark after the mark was registered by the
appellants and, therefore, the respondents are not entitled for the
injunction. Ld. Counsel invited my attention to the judgment rendered by the
Delhi High Court in the case of P.M. Diesels Pvt. Ltd. v. Thukral Mechanical
Works reported in PTC (Suppl.)(2)863(Del) p. 863. In this decision, the Delhi
High Court observed as under:
Considering the provisions of Section 33 of the Trade and Merchandise Marks
Act, 1958 (Section 34 of the New Act), it was held that Section 33 undoubtedly
recognizes the right of a prior user of a trade mark. Because of the said
provision the registered owner of the trade mark cannot restrain a prior user
of the trade mark from using the said trade mark. Section 33 gives a right of
user to the prior user of the trade mark, but it does not in any way take away
the right of the registered proprietor from using the said trade mark. What
the plaintiff wants by this application is that the registered owner of the
trade mark should be restrained from Page 135 enjoying its proprietory right
in the said trade mark. Section 33 of the Act does not give any such right to
the plaintiff. At best it would protect the right of the plaintiff to use the
trade mark, if it can prove prior user, if the defendant wants to take any
action against the plaintiff. In N.R. Dongre v. Whirlpool Corporation reported
in 1996 PTC (16), the Delhi High Court has held that registration of a trade
mark does not provide a defence to the proceedings for passing off as under
Section 27(2) of the Act. A prior user of a trade mark can maintain an action
for passing off against any subsequent user of an identical trade mark
including a registered user thereof. Again this right is not affected by
Section 31 of the Act, under which the only presumption that follows from
registration of a mark is its prima facie evidentiary value about its validity
and nothing more. This presumption is not an unrebuttable one and can be
displaced.
A reading of Section 28(3) with Section 30(1)(d) shows that the proprietor of
a registered trade mark cannot file an infringement action against a
proprietor of an identical or a similar trade mark. While Sections 28(3) and
30(1)(d) on the one hand deal with the rights of registered proprietors of
identical trade marks and bar action of infringement against each other,
Section 27(2) on the other hand deals with the passing off action. The rights
of action under Section 27(2) are not affected by Section 28(3) and Section
30(1)(d). Therefore, registration of a trade mark under the Act would be
irrelevant in an action for passing off. Registration of a trade mark in fact
does not confer any new right on the proprietor thereof than what already
existed at common law without registration of the mark. The right of goodwill
and reputation in a trade mark was recognised at common law even before it was
subject of statutory law. Prior to codification of trade mark law there was no
provision in India for registration of a trade mark. The right in a trade mark
was acquired only by use thereof. This right has not been affected by the Act
and is preserved and recognized by Sections 27(2) and 33.
19\. This judgment in N.R. Dongre's case was carried in appeal by way of Civil
appeal to the Hon'ble Apex Court, which is reported in 1996(16) PTC 583. It
was held by the Apex Court that under Section 27(2) an action for passing off
against the registered user of trade mark is maintainable at the instance of a
prior user of the same, similar or identical mark. Since such a remedy is
available against the registered user of a trade mark, an interim injunction
restraining him to use the mark can also be granted to make the remedy
effective.
20\. Applying this principle, I come to the conclusion that even though the
defendant who registered the trade mark 'SROFOL' in 1992, as per undisputed
fact came in market only on 16.10.2004, the plaintiffs, though unregistered,
using 'SPROFOL' as their trade mark, came in market in November, 2000,
acquired reputation and goodwill in respect of its goods bearing trade mark
'SPROFOL' in the country, prima-facie, therefore, appears that buyers are
likely to be confused as to the origin and source of goods. They will believe
that the product is manufactured by the defendants as between the names
'SROFOL' and 'SPROFOL' there is hardly any dissimilarity. The imitation will
pass off as genuine, in my opinion, no one Page 136 can be permitted to trade
by deceiving or misleading the purchasers or to unauthorisedly derive to its
reputation and goodwill to the others. Ld. Counsel appearing for the
plaintiffs invited my attention to para-5,8 and 12 of the written statement.
Having gone through the same, it is an admitted position that the defendant
has categorically admitted that the word 'SPROFOL' and 'SROFOL' sound similar
and, therefore, in my opinion, the plaintiffs have made out a prima facie case
that the rival trade mark which will lead confusion and deception in the minds
of traders and buyers. From the record, it appears that plaintiff No. 2 had
obtained permission for manufacturing the product 'SPROFOL' on 13.10.2000 from
Food and Drug Department, Ahmedabad, as can be seen from the document mark
4/11, which was subsequently renewed on 20.6.2003. This establishes the prior
use and adoption of the mark 'SPROFOL' prior to March, 1998, while plaintiff
No. 1 is in the use of mark since 2000. From the document mark 4/35 to 4/41
which are sale invoices of the licence of the predecessor of plaintiff No. 1
Core Health Care Ltd., of the year 1989-90. The said invoices of sale is also
produced at mark 4/21 to 4/34 showing the sale of plaintiff No. 2 from
2000-2004. This, in my opinion, will go to show that plaintiff is in use of
the mark from 1998-99 by plaintiff No. 1 and from 2000 by plaintiff No. 2. As
the defendants have used the mark 'SPROFOL' from 16.10.2004, it is clear that
the plaintiffs are prior adopter and user and defendant is subsequent user of
the mark. From the document mark 4/13, it is clear that the sales of the
plaintiff's company of Rs. 22.11 crores and mark 4/14 is a promotional
expenses of 1.50 crores for the products.
21\. As stated above, the Apex court in the case of N.R. Dongre (supra) has
clearly laid down that under Section 27(2) an action for passing off against
registered user of trade mark is maintainable and at the instance of the prior
user of the same, similar or identical mark, remedy is available against the
registered user of the trade mark and interim injunction restraining him to
use the mark can also be granted to make the remedy effective. There are
catena of decisions on this point of this Court as well as of different High
Courts. This Court in the case of Shree Sainath Industries v. Sainath Auto
Industries reported in 2004(2) GLR p. 1314, has held that 'Sin the present
case, all the three essential ingredients for an action of passing off are
present, namely, prior use, establishment of goodwill and reputation and
chance of future loss by virtue of the use of such deceptively similar trade
name or device. The appellant, has therefore, a prima facie case in its
favour. Balance of convenience is also in its favour and if the interim
injunction is not granted in favour of the appellant, it may cause future loss
to the appellant. Ultimately, on the objective scrutiny of the records and
documents, the Court would have to come to a conclusion, may be based on
subjective satisfaction as to whether the respondent is liable for an action
of passing-off or as to whether the appellant is entitled to an interim
injunction and if an answer to this question is in the affirmative, there is
no reason to deny this interim injunction to the appellant. 'S In the case of
Amar Nath Chakroborty v. Dutta Bucket Industries and Ors. reported Page 137 in
2005(30) PTC 496 (Cal), it was held that though the defendant has obtained the
registration of his mark 'SMAJ', such fact cannot take away the Common Law
Right of the plaintiff to have an injunction restraining passing off, since it
appears that the plaintiff is the earlier user of the trade mark TAJ'. In the
instant case also, both the marks are found to be phonetically similar, not
only that, but there is similarity in the size of the products, merely because
the colour combination of the packet are different, there are every
possibilities of deception of the common people who are ignorant of details of
writing and are not efficient in English.
The case of Dhariwal Industries Ltd. v. M.S.S. Food Products reported in 2005
AIR SCW 1241, was a case before the Apex Court, where neither party has
registered trade mark as on the date of the suit, inspite of the same, the
Apex Court, held that it cannot stand in the way of entertaining the claim of
the plaintiff and granting the plaintiff an injunction in case the plaintiff
is in a position to show prima facie that it was the prior user of its mark,
that it had a prima facie case and that the balance of convenience was in
favour of the grant of an interim injunction.
22\. Ld. Counsel Mr. Soparkar by inviting my attention to the case of Milment
Oftho Industries and Ors. v. Allergan Inc. reported in AIR 2004 SC 3355, has
submitted that the ultimate test should who is first in the market. In the
said judgment, it was held that 'Swhilst considering the possibility of
likelihood of deception or confusion, in present times and particularly in the
field of medicines, the Courts must also keep in mind the fact that now a days
the field of medicine is of an international character. Doctors particularly
eminent doctors, medical practitioners and persons or Companies connected with
medical field keep abrest of latest developments in medicine and preparations
worldwide. Medical literature is freely available in this country. Doctors,
medical practitioners and persons connected with the medical field regularly
attend medical conferences, symposiums, lectures etc. It must also be
remembered that now a days goods are widely advertised in newspapers,
periodicals, magazines and other media which is available in the country. This
results in a product acquiring a world wide reputation. Thus, if a mark in
respect of a similar drug is allowed to be sold in India. However, one note of
caution must be expressed. Multinational Corporation, who have no intention of
coming to India or introducing their product in India should not be allowed to
throttle an Indian Company by not permitting it to sell a product in India, if
the Indian Company has genuinely adopted the mark and developed the product
and is first in the market.'
23\. Ld. Counsel for the defendant submitted that the brand name of the
plaintiffs and defendants is derived by the generic name PROPOFOL and,
therefore, the plaintiffs cannot claim ownership over the said name. This
submission of the appellants is contrary to their own case stated in para-4 of
the written statement. It is an admitted fact that generic name PROPOFOL, both
the marks of the plaintiffs and defendants are derived from it and, therefore,
I see no merits in the submission that it is the generic name. Assuming that
it is a generic name, the defendant cannot obtain registration, as Section
9(b) of the Trade Mark Act which prohibits the Page 138 mark having generic
name.
24\. It was submitted by the Ld. counsel for the defendant that the drug is of
Schedule-H and it is to be sold by the qualifying dispensing chemist or
druggist on production of prescription of a physician and it cannot be sold
over the counter as it is a specialised drugs for Anaesthetic purpose and,
therefore, phonetical similarity does not bear any significance. To
substantiate this argument, a reliance was placed on the judgment in the case
of Cadila Health Care Ltd. v. Cadila Pharmaceuticals Ltd. , wherein, the Apex
Court has held as under:
Broadly stated in an action for passing off on the basis of unregistered trade
mark generally for deciding the question of deceptive similarity the following
factors to be considered:
(a) The nature of the marks i.e. Whether the marks are word marks or label
marks or composite marks, i.e. Both words and label works.
(b) The degree of resemblances between the marks, phonetically similar and
hence similar in idea.
(c) The nature of the goods in respect of which they are used as trade marks.
(d)The similarity in the nature, character and performance of the goods of the
rival traders.
(e) The class of purchasers who are likely to buy the goods bearing the marks
they require, on their education and intelligence and a degree of care they
are likely to exercise in purchasing and/or using the goods.
(f) The mode of purchasing the goods or placing orders for the goods and,
(g) Any other surrounding circumstances which may be relevant in the extent of
dissimilarity between the competing marks. Weightage to be given to each of
the aforesaid factors depends upon facts of each case and the same weightage
cannot be given to each factor in every case.
However, this judgment of Cadila Health Care Ltd. Has been considered in the
latter decision by the Supreme Court in the case of Milment Oftho Industries
and Ors. v. Allergan Inc. AIR 2004 SC 3355, wherein the view is taken that in
respect of medicinal products, it was held that 'Sexacting judicial scrutiny
is required if there was a possibility of confusion over marks on medicinal
products because the potential harm may be far more dire than that in
confusion over ordinary consumer products. Even though certain products may
not be sold across the counter, neverthless it was not uncommon that because
of lack of competence or otherwise that mistakes arise specially where the
trade marks are deceptively similar. That confusion and mistakes could arise
even for prescription drugs where the similar goods are marketed under marks
which looked Page 139 alike and sound alike. The physicians are not immune
from confusion or mistake. It was common knowledge that many prescriptions are
telephoned to the pharmacists and others are handwritten, and frequently the
handwriting is not legible. These facts enhance the chances of confusion or
mistake by the pharmacists in filling the prescription if the marks appear too
much alike.' In my opinion, the above observation answers the contention of
the ld. Counsel for the appellant/defendant.
25\. On the contention of the appellant/defendant that it is not clear from
the pleadings of the plaintiffs that who is predecessor in title of the
plaintiffs of the suit trade mark, as there is no document declaring the
plaintiffs predecessor in title of the mark produced before the court, it was
contended that it is a material suppression of facts and, therefore, the trial
court could not have granted the injunction. In my opinion, the trial court
rightly observed that it is not a material suppression of the fact, namely,
who is the owner of the mark as it may be an inter-se dispute between the
plaintiff No. 1 and 2. In any case, while deciding the application for interim
injunction, the court is not required to decide the said dispute at that time
as it would be a matter of evidence. In any case, when both the plaintiffs
have come to the court as plaintiffs, the trial court rightly granted
injunction as prayed for. Apart from that, the plaintiffs had come to the
market before the defendants and even if the use by predecessor of the
plaintiffs is excluded, in that case also, the plaintiffs are prior to the
defendants. I, therefore, see no merits in this submission also.
26\. On the contention of the appellant/defendant that the defendants had
obtained registration but the plaintiffs have used the mark after the mark was
registered by the defendants and, therefore, the trial court illegally granted
injunction in their favour, I see no merit in the submission. I have gone
through the judgment cited on this point by the appellant/defendant in the
case of Wintrop Products Inc. v. Eupharma Laboratories Ltd. reported in 1998
PTC (18) 213, in the case of Marion Merrell Now Inc. v. Unichem Laboratories
Ltd. and in the case of Geoffrey Manners & Co. v. Megapharma Laboratories PTC
(suppl)(2) 11 (Bom). However, in view of Section 33 which has been enacted for
the specific purpose of saving the rights of proprietors of marks whose user
has been anterior in point of time to that of a proprietor of a registered
trade mark, that is to say the registration of a trade mark by a proprietor
will not affect the user of an identical or nearly resembling mark by another
proprietor if the second mentioned proprietor has used the same on his goods
prior to the registration of the mark of the first mentioned proprietor. The
said provision further provides that Registrar has to permit registration of
such a mark by enacting that the Registrar shall ignore the registration of
the mark of the first mentioned proprietor. This is consistent with the common
law that no person shall affect the rights of another in relations to trade
marks merely because his mark is placed upon the Registrar prior to that of a
proprietor of a mark who has used his mark anterior in point of time but has
failed to register. In my opinion, Section 33 of the Act which is enacted only
to save such rights and no more. I, therefore, see no merits in the
submission.
Page 140
27\. Thus, considering the matter from all the angles, I see no merit in the
submissions advanced before me by the ld. Counsel for the appellant/defendant.
The trial court, in my opinion, has rightly granted injunction in favour of
the plaintiffs till the disposal of the suit. Suffice it to say that I am in
total agreement with the reasonings and the conclusion reached by the trial
court. There being no substance in the appeal, it is dismissed.
trade mark, that is to say the registration of a trade mark by a proprietor
will not affect the user of an identical or nearly resembling mark by another
proprietor if the second mentioned proprietor has used the same on his goods
prior to the registration of the mark of the first mentioned proprietor. The
said provision further provides that Registrar has to permit registration of
such a mark by enacting that the Registrar shall ignore the registration of
the mark of the first mentioned proprietor. This is consistent with the common
law that no person shall affect the rights of another in relations to trade
marks merely because his mark is placed upon the Registrar prior to that of a
proprietor of a mark who has used his mark anterior in point of time but has
failed to register. In my opinion, Section 33 of the Act which is enacted only
to save such rights and no more. I, therefore, see no merits in the
submission.
Page 140
27\. Thus, considering the matter from all the angles, I see no merit in the
submissions advanced before me by the ld. Counsel for the appellant/defendant.
had introduced the word molecule 'PROFOL' in India. They have made an
application before the Drug Controller of India on 22.4.1998.
3\. It is the case of the plaintiffs that the predecessor of plaintiff No. 1
in title have coined and invested the trade mark SPROFOL in April, 1998, and
subsequently, thereafter from time to time, the licence was given to the
plaintiff companies for the trade mark 'SPROFOL'. It is the case of the
plaintiffs that as per the order of this court in Amalgamation Company
Petition No. 295/1999, the plaintiff No. 1 has become owner of the entire
business and assets of predecessor-in-title thereof on 17.2.2000, and thereby
the plaintiff No. 1 has become owner of trade mark 'SPROFOL'. The plaintiff
No. 2 is a licensee of the plaintiff No. 1 and at present, the plaintiff No. 2
is manufacturing products bearing trade mark 'SPROFOL'.
4\. According to the plaintiffs, the trade mark 'SPROFOL' was used by the
predecessor in title of the plaintiffs openly, extensively and continuously in
Indian market since 1998, and after the amalgamation, the plaintiff No. 1 has
become owner and he is using the said trade mark 'SPROFOL' and the plaintiffs
are using the trade mark 'SPROFOL' since the year 2000 openly, extensively and
continuously. Accordingly to the plaintiffs, the said trade mark has acquired
distinguish place in the market, traders, consumer and general public identify
and recognize the plaintiffs product by the trade mark 'SPROFOL'.
trade mark, that is to say the registration of a trade mark by a proprietor
will not affect the user of an identical or nearly resembling mark by another
proprietor if the second mentioned proprietor has used the same on his goods
prior to the registration of the mark of the first mentioned proprietor. The
said provision further provides that Registrar has to permit registration of
such a mark by enacting that the Registrar shall ignore the registration of
the mark of the first mentioned proprietor. This is consistent with the common
law that no person shall affect the rights of another in relations to trade
marks merely because his mark is placed upon the Registrar prior to that of a
proprietor of a mark who has used his mark anterior in point of time but has
failed to register. In my opinion, Section 33 of the Act which is enacted only
to save such rights and no more. I, therefore, see no merits in the
submission.
Page 140
27\. Thus, considering the matter from all the angles, I see no merit in the
submissions advanced before me by the ld. Counsel for the appellant/defendant.
had introduced the word molecule 'PROFOL' in India. They have made an
application before the Drug Controller of India on 22.4.1998.
3\. It is the case of the plaintiffs that the predecessor of plaintiff No. 1
in title have coined and invested the trade mark SPROFOL in April, 1998, and
subsequently, thereafter from time to time, the licence was given to the
plaintiff companies for the trade mark 'SPROFOL'. It is the case of the
plaintiffs that as per the order of this court in Amalgamation Company
Petition No. 295/1999, the plaintiff No. 1 has become owner of the entire
business and assets of predecessor-in-title thereof on 17.2.2000, and thereby
the plaintiff No. 1 has become owner of trade mark 'SPROFOL'. The plaintiff
No. 2 is a licensee of the plaintiff No. 1 and at present, the plaintiff No. 2
is manufacturing products bearing trade mark 'SPROFOL'.
4\. According to the plaintiffs, the trade mark 'SPROFOL' was used by the
predecessor in title of the plaintiffs openly, extensively and continuously in
Indian market since 1998, and after the amalgamation, the plaintiff No. 1 has
become owner and he is using the said trade mark 'SPROFOL' and the plaintiffs
are using the trade mark 'SPROFOL' since the year 2000 openly, extensively and
continuously. Accordingly to the plaintiffs, the said trade mark has acquired
distinguish place in the market, traders, consumer and general public identify
and recognize the plaintiffs product by the trade mark 'SPROFOL'.
trade mark, that is to say the registration of a trade mark by a proprietor
will not affect the user of an identical or nearly resembling mark by another
proprietor if the second mentioned proprietor has used the same on his goods
prior to the registration of the mark of the first mentioned proprietor. The
said provision further provides that Registrar has to permit registration of
such a mark by enacting that the Registrar shall ignore the registration of
the mark of the first mentioned proprietor. This is consistent with the common
law that no person shall affect the rights of another in relations to trade
marks merely because his mark is placed upon the Registrar prior to that of a
proprietor of a mark who has used his mark anterior in point of time but has
failed to register. In my opinion, Section 33 of the Act which is enacted only
to save such rights and no more. I, therefore, see no merits in the
submission.
Page 140
27\. Thus, considering the matter from all the angles, I see no merit in the
submissions advanced before me by the ld. Counsel for the appellant/defendant.
had introduced the word molecule 'PROFOL' in India. They have made an
application before the Drug Controller of India on 22.4.1998.
3\. It is the case of the plaintiffs that the predecessor of plaintiff No. 1
in title have coined and invested the trade mark SPROFOL in April, 1998, and
subsequently, thereafter from time to time, the licence was given to the
plaintiff companies for the trade mark 'SPROFOL'. It is the case of the
plaintiffs that as per the order of this court in Amalgamation Company
Petition No. 295/1999, the plaintiff No. 1 has become owner of the entire
business and assets of predecessor-in-title thereof on 17.2.2000, and thereby
the plaintiff No. 1 has become owner of trade mark 'SPROFOL'. The plaintiff
No. 2 is a licensee of the plaintiff No. 1 and at present, the plaintiff No. 2
is manufacturing products bearing trade mark 'SPROFOL'.
4\. According to the plaintiffs, the trade mark 'SPROFOL' was used by the
predecessor in title of the plaintiffs openly, extensively and continuously in
Indian market since 1998, and after the amalgamation, the plaintiff No. 1 has
become owner and he is using the said trade mark 'SPROFOL' and the plaintiffs
are using the trade mark 'SPROFOL' since the year 2000 openly, extensively and
continuously. Accordingly to the plaintiffs, the said trade mark has acquired
distinguish place in the market, traders, consumer and general public identify
and recognize the plaintiffs product by the trade mark 'SPROFOL'.
5\. It is further the case of the plaintiffs that the plaintiff No. 1 had
applied for the registration of the said trade mark bearing application No.
803692 on 24.5.1998 in Class-V. The plaintiff has also made necessary
application in the Trade Mark Registry to change the name of proprietor as the
original application was made by the predecessor in title of the plaintiff
Page 130 No. 1. It is also case of the plaintiffs that the plaintiffs are also
marketing the said goods and exporting the medicinal and pharmaceutical
products outside India. The plaintiffs have made an application for
manufacturing drugs and pharmaceutical products in India and various countries
have very wide marketing network.
6\. It is the case of the plaintiffs that the plaintiffs have come to know
trade mark, that is to say the registration of a trade mark by a proprietor
will not affect the user of an identical or nearly resembling mark by another
proprietor if the second mentioned proprietor has used the same on his goods
prior to the registration of the mark of the first mentioned proprietor. The
said provision further provides that Registrar has to permit registration of
such a mark by enacting that the Registrar shall ignore the registration of
the mark of the first mentioned proprietor. This is consistent with the common
law that no person shall affect the rights of another in relations to trade
marks merely because his mark is placed upon the Registrar prior to that of a
proprietor of a mark who has used his mark anterior in point of time but has
failed to register. In my opinion, Section 33 of the Act which is enacted only
to save such rights and no more. I, therefore, see no merits in the
submission.
Page 140
27\. Thus, considering the matter from all the angles, I see no merit in the
submissions advanced before me by the ld. Counsel for the appellant/defendant.
had introduced the word molecule 'PROFOL' in India. They have made an
application before the Drug Controller of India on 22.4.1998.
3\. It is the case of the plaintiffs that the predecessor of plaintiff No. 1
in title have coined and invested the trade mark SPROFOL in April, 1998, and
subsequently, thereafter from time to time, the licence was given to the
plaintiff companies for the trade mark 'SPROFOL'. It is the case of the
plaintiffs that as per the order of this court in Amalgamation Company
Petition No. 295/1999, the plaintiff No. 1 has become owner of the entire
business and assets of predecessor-in-title thereof on 17.2.2000, and thereby
the plaintiff No. 1 has become owner of trade mark 'SPROFOL'. The plaintiff
No. 2 is a licensee of the plaintiff No. 1 and at present, the plaintiff No. 2
is manufacturing products bearing trade mark 'SPROFOL'.
4\. According to the plaintiffs, the trade mark 'SPROFOL' was used by the
predecessor in title of the plaintiffs openly, extensively and continuously in
Indian market since 1998, and after the amalgamation, the plaintiff No. 1 has
become owner and he is using the said trade mark 'SPROFOL' and the plaintiffs
are using the trade mark 'SPROFOL' since the year 2000 openly, extensively and
continuously. Accordingly to the plaintiffs, the said trade mark has acquired
distinguish place in the market, traders, consumer and general public identify
and recognize the plaintiffs product by the trade mark 'SPROFOL'.
5\. It is further the case of the plaintiffs that the plaintiff No. 1 had
applied for the registration of the said trade mark bearing application No.
803692 on 24.5.1998 in Class-V. The plaintiff has also made necessary
application in the Trade Mark Registry to change the name of proprietor as the
original application was made by the predecessor in title of the plaintiff
Page 130 No. 1. It is also case of the plaintiffs that the plaintiffs are also
marketing the said goods and exporting the medicinal and pharmaceutical
products outside India. The plaintiffs have made an application for
manufacturing drugs and pharmaceutical products in India and various countries
have very wide marketing network.
6\. It is the case of the plaintiffs that the plaintiffs have come to know
trade mark, that is to say the registration of a trade mark by a proprietor
will not affect the user of an identical or nearly resembling mark by another
proprietor if the second mentioned proprietor has used the same on his goods
prior to the registration of the mark of the first mentioned proprietor. The
said provision further provides that Registrar has to permit registration of
such a mark by enacting that the Registrar shall ignore the registration of
the mark of the first mentioned proprietor. This is consistent with the common
law that no person shall affect the rights of another in relations to trade
marks merely because his mark is placed upon the Registrar prior to that of a
proprietor of a mark who has used his mark anterior in point of time but has
failed to register. In my opinion, Section 33 of the Act which is enacted only
to save such rights and no more. I, therefore, see no merits in the
submission.
Page 140
27\. Thus, considering the matter from all the angles, I see no merit in the
submissions advanced before me by the ld. Counsel for the appellant/defendant.
