Custom, Excise & Service Tax Tribunal
Maersk India Pvt. Ltd vs Raigad on 27 July, 2016
    IN THE CUSTOMS, EXCISE AND SERVICE TAX APPELLATE TRIBUNAL
    WEST ZONAL BENCH AT MUMBAI
    APPEAL NO:  ST/247/2009
    [Arising out of Order-in-Appeal No: YDB/18/RGD/2009 dated 31/07/2009 passed by the Commissioner of Central Excise (Appeals), Mumbai Zone  II.]
    For approval and signature:
         Honble Shri M V Ravindran, Member (Judicial)
         Honble Shri C J Mathew, Member (Technical)
    1.
    Whether Press Reporters may be allowed to see the Order for publication as per Rule 27 of the CESTAT (Procedure) Rules, 1982?
    :
    No
    2.
    Whether it should be released under Rule 27 of CESTAT (Procedure) Rules, 1982 for publication in any authoritative report or not?
    :
    No
    3.
    Whether Their Lordships wish to see the fair copy of the Order?
    :
4\. As regards the credit of service tax paid on auctioneer service, it is the
submission that the demand on CENVAT credit availed on auctioneer service,
export survey and survey of export cargo services used for setting up of
container freight station, were hit by limitation as the appellant had always
indicated in their ST-3 returns, the availment of CENVAT credit and they acted
bonafidely on an understanding that all the services were utilised in
connection with the output services rendered by them which is cargo handling
services, storage and warehousing services. We find merits in the
submissions made by the Learned Counsel. As regards the service tax credit in
respect of the input services used for setting up new container freight
station, we find that the said services resulted in setting up of a container
freight station which was used by the appellant for rendering output services
on which tax is discharged. If that be so, the judgment of the Honble High
Court of Andhra Pradesh in the case of Sai Samhita Storages 2011 (23) STR 341
(AP) and the decision of the Tribunal in the case of Navratna SG Highway 2012
(28) STR 166 (Tri.-Ahmd.) are directly applicable in favour of the appellant.
    :
    Seen
    4.
    Whether Order is to be circulated to the Departmental authorities?
    :
    Yes
    Maersk India Pvt. Ltd. 
    Appellant
    versus
    Commissioner of Central Excise & Customs
    Raigad
    Respondent
Appearance:
Shri Vishal Agarwal, Advocate for the appellant Shri A.B. Kulgod, Asstt.
Commissioner (AR) for the respondent CORAM:
Honble Shri M V Ravindran, Member (Judicial) Honble Shri C J Mathew, Member
(Technical) Date of hearing: 27/07/2016 Date of decision: 27/07/2016 ORDER NO:
____________________________ Per: M V Ravindran:
This appeal is directed against Order-in-Appeal No: YDB/18/RGD/2009 dated
31/07/2009 passed by the Commissioner of Central Excise (Appeals), Mumbai Zone
 II.
2\. The issue involved in this case is regarding denial of CENVAT credit
during the period from April 2004 to May 2006 in respect of GTA service, which
was utilized for handling of export cargo, credit of service tax paid in
respect of auctioneer service for the period October 2004 to March 2005,
credit availed for the service tax paid on export survey and export cargo
survey for the period from October 2004 to March 2005 and April 2004 to
September 2005 and denial of credit in respect of service tax paid on
retainership, consultancy, architect, and soil investigation services, etc.
for use of setting up of new CSF outside the registered premises. Both the
lower authorities have held against the appellant and confirmed the demands
raised along with interest and also imposed penalties.
3\. On perusal of records, we find that as regards the service tax credit in
respect of GTA service, it is undisputed that the said services are used for
transportation of goods in respect of export cargo, export survey and survey
of export cargo. As regards the service tax credit of the GTA services was for
movement of export cargo, we agree with the Learned Counsel that the issue is
now squarely covered by the Larger Bench decision of the Tribunal in an
identical situation, in the case of Panchmahal Steel Ltd v. Commissioner of
Central Excise & Service Tax, Vadodara 2014 (34) STR 351 (Tri.-LB) which is
followed in the case of Reliance Industries Ltd. v. Commissioner of Central
Excise & Service Tax (LTU), Mumbai 2015-TIOL-1277-CESTAT-MUM. It is also
brought to our notice that the decision of the Larger Bench in the case of
Panchmahal Steel Ltd has been upheld by the Honble High Court of Gujarat.
Accordingly, we find that on merits in respect of availment of CENVAT credit
on GTA services is in favour of the appellant.
4\. As regards the credit of service tax paid on auctioneer service, it is the
submission that the demand on CENVAT credit availed on auctioneer service,
export survey and survey of export cargo services used for setting up of
container freight station, were hit by limitation as the appellant had always
indicated in their ST-3 returns, the availment of CENVAT credit and they acted
bonafidely on an understanding that all the services were utilised in
connection with the output services rendered by them which is cargo handling
services, storage and warehousing services. We find merits in the
submissions made by the Learned Counsel. As regards the service tax credit in
respect of the input services used for setting up new container freight
station, we find that the said services resulted in setting up of a container
freight station which was used by the appellant for rendering output services
on which tax is discharged. If that be so, the judgment of the Honble High
Court of Andhra Pradesh in the case of Sai Samhita Storages 2011 (23) STR 341
(AP) and the decision of the Tribunal in the case of Navratna SG Highway 2012
(28) STR 166 (Tri.-Ahmd.) are directly applicable in favour of the appellant.
5\. In view of the foregoing and authoritative judicial pronouncements on the
issue, we set aside the impugned order and allow the appeal.
(Pronounced in Court) (C J Mathew) Member (Technical) (M V Ravindran) Member
(Judicial) */as 4 4
4\. As regards the credit of service tax paid on auctioneer service, it is the
submission that the demand on CENVAT credit availed on auctioneer service,
export survey and survey of export cargo services used for setting up of
container freight station, were hit by limitation as the appellant had always
indicated in their ST-3 returns, the availment of CENVAT credit and they acted
bonafidely on an understanding that all the services were utilised in
connection with the output services rendered by them which is cargo handling
services, storage and warehousing services. We find merits in the
submissions made by the Learned Counsel. As regards the service tax credit in
respect of the input services used for setting up new container freight
station, we find that the said services resulted in setting up of a container
freight station which was used by the appellant for rendering output services
on which tax is discharged. If that be so, the judgment of the Honble High
Court of Andhra Pradesh in the case of Sai Samhita Storages 2011 (23) STR 341
(AP) and the decision of the Tribunal in the case of Navratna SG Highway 2012
(28) STR 166 (Tri.-Ahmd.) are directly applicable in favour of the appellant.
    :
    Seen
    4.
    Whether Order is to be circulated to the Departmental authorities?
    :
    Yes
    Maersk India Pvt. Ltd. 
    Appellant
    versus
    Commissioner of Central Excise & Customs
    Raigad
    Respondent
Appearance:
Shri Vishal Agarwal, Advocate for the appellant Shri A.B. Kulgod, Asstt.
Commissioner (AR) for the respondent CORAM:
Honble Shri M V Ravindran, Member (Judicial) Honble Shri C J Mathew, Member
(Technical) Date of hearing: 27/07/2016 Date of decision: 27/07/2016 ORDER NO:
____________________________ Per: M V Ravindran:
This appeal is directed against Order-in-Appeal No: YDB/18/RGD/2009 dated
31/07/2009 passed by the Commissioner of Central Excise (Appeals), Mumbai Zone
4\. As regards the credit of service tax paid on auctioneer service, it is the
submission that the demand on CENVAT credit availed on auctioneer service,
export survey and survey of export cargo services used for setting up of
container freight station, were hit by limitation as the appellant had always
indicated in their ST-3 returns, the availment of CENVAT credit and they acted
bonafidely on an understanding that all the services were utilised in
connection with the output services rendered by them which is cargo handling
services, storage and warehousing services. We find merits in the
submissions made by the Learned Counsel. As regards the service tax credit in
respect of the input services used for setting up new container freight
station, we find that the said services resulted in setting up of a container
freight station which was used by the appellant for rendering output services
on which tax is discharged. If that be so, the judgment of the Honble High
Court of Andhra Pradesh in the case of Sai Samhita Storages 2011 (23) STR 341
(AP) and the decision of the Tribunal in the case of Navratna SG Highway 2012
(28) STR 166 (Tri.-Ahmd.) are directly applicable in favour of the appellant.
    :
    Seen
    4.
    Whether Order is to be circulated to the Departmental authorities?
    :
    Yes
    Maersk India Pvt. Ltd. 
    Appellant
    versus
    Commissioner of Central Excise & Customs
    Raigad
    Respondent
Appearance:
Shri Vishal Agarwal, Advocate for the appellant Shri A.B. Kulgod, Asstt.
Commissioner (AR) for the respondent CORAM:
Honble Shri M V Ravindran, Member (Judicial) Honble Shri C J Mathew, Member
(Technical) Date of hearing: 27/07/2016 Date of decision: 27/07/2016 ORDER NO:
____________________________ Per: M V Ravindran:
This appeal is directed against Order-in-Appeal No: YDB/18/RGD/2009 dated
31/07/2009 passed by the Commissioner of Central Excise (Appeals), Mumbai Zone
4\. As regards the credit of service tax paid on auctioneer service, it is the
submission that the demand on CENVAT credit availed on auctioneer service,
export survey and survey of export cargo services used for setting up of
container freight station, were hit by limitation as the appellant had always
indicated in their ST-3 returns, the availment of CENVAT credit and they acted
bonafidely on an understanding that all the services were utilised in
connection with the output services rendered by them which is cargo handling
services, storage and warehousing services. We find merits in the
submissions made by the Learned Counsel. As regards the service tax credit in
respect of the input services used for setting up new container freight
station, we find that the said services resulted in setting up of a container
freight station which was used by the appellant for rendering output services
on which tax is discharged. If that be so, the judgment of the Honble High
Court of Andhra Pradesh in the case of Sai Samhita Storages 2011 (23) STR 341
(AP) and the decision of the Tribunal in the case of Navratna SG Highway 2012
(28) STR 166 (Tri.-Ahmd.) are directly applicable in favour of the appellant.
    :
    Seen
    4.
    Whether Order is to be circulated to the Departmental authorities?
    :
    Yes
    Maersk India Pvt. Ltd. 
    Appellant
    versus
    Commissioner of Central Excise & Customs
    Raigad
    Respondent
Appearance:
Shri Vishal Agarwal, Advocate for the appellant Shri A.B. Kulgod, Asstt.
Commissioner (AR) for the respondent CORAM:
Honble Shri M V Ravindran, Member (Judicial) Honble Shri C J Mathew, Member
(Technical) Date of hearing: 27/07/2016 Date of decision: 27/07/2016 ORDER NO:
____________________________ Per: M V Ravindran:
This appeal is directed against Order-in-Appeal No: YDB/18/RGD/2009 dated
31/07/2009 passed by the Commissioner of Central Excise (Appeals), Mumbai Zone
 II.
2\. The issue involved in this case is regarding denial of CENVAT credit
during the period from April 2004 to May 2006 in respect of GTA service, which
was utilized for handling of export cargo, credit of service tax paid in
respect of auctioneer service for the period October 2004 to March 2005,
credit availed for the service tax paid on export survey and export cargo
survey for the period from October 2004 to March 2005 and April 2004 to
September 2005 and denial of credit in respect of service tax paid on
retainership, consultancy, architect, and soil investigation services, etc.
for use of setting up of new CSF outside the registered premises. Both the
lower authorities have held against the appellant and confirmed the demands
4\. As regards the credit of service tax paid on auctioneer service, it is the
submission that the demand on CENVAT credit availed on auctioneer service,
export survey and survey of export cargo services used for setting up of
container freight station, were hit by limitation as the appellant had always
indicated in their ST-3 returns, the availment of CENVAT credit and they acted
bonafidely on an understanding that all the services were utilised in
connection with the output services rendered by them which is cargo handling
services, storage and warehousing services. We find merits in the
submissions made by the Learned Counsel. As regards the service tax credit in
respect of the input services used for setting up new container freight
station, we find that the said services resulted in setting up of a container
freight station which was used by the appellant for rendering output services
on which tax is discharged. If that be so, the judgment of the Honble High
Court of Andhra Pradesh in the case of Sai Samhita Storages 2011 (23) STR 341
(AP) and the decision of the Tribunal in the case of Navratna SG Highway 2012
(28) STR 166 (Tri.-Ahmd.) are directly applicable in favour of the appellant.
    :
    Seen
    4.
    Whether Order is to be circulated to the Departmental authorities?
    :
    Yes
    Maersk India Pvt. Ltd. 
    Appellant
    versus
    Commissioner of Central Excise & Customs
    Raigad
    Respondent
Appearance:
Shri Vishal Agarwal, Advocate for the appellant Shri A.B. Kulgod, Asstt.
Commissioner (AR) for the respondent CORAM:
Honble Shri M V Ravindran, Member (Judicial) Honble Shri C J Mathew, Member
(Technical) Date of hearing: 27/07/2016 Date of decision: 27/07/2016 ORDER NO:
____________________________ Per: M V Ravindran:
This appeal is directed against Order-in-Appeal No: YDB/18/RGD/2009 dated
31/07/2009 passed by the Commissioner of Central Excise (Appeals), Mumbai Zone
 II.
2\. The issue involved in this case is regarding denial of CENVAT credit
during the period from April 2004 to May 2006 in respect of GTA service, which
was utilized for handling of export cargo, credit of service tax paid in
respect of auctioneer service for the period October 2004 to March 2005,
credit availed for the service tax paid on export survey and export cargo
survey for the period from October 2004 to March 2005 and April 2004 to
September 2005 and denial of credit in respect of service tax paid on
retainership, consultancy, architect, and soil investigation services, etc.
for use of setting up of new CSF outside the registered premises. Both the
lower authorities have held against the appellant and confirmed the demands
4\. As regards the credit of service tax paid on auctioneer service, it is the
submission that the demand on CENVAT credit availed on auctioneer service,
export survey and survey of export cargo services used for setting up of
container freight station, were hit by limitation as the appellant had always
indicated in their ST-3 returns, the availment of CENVAT credit and they acted
bonafidely on an understanding that all the services were utilised in
connection with the output services rendered by them which is cargo handling
services, storage and warehousing services. We find merits in the
submissions made by the Learned Counsel. As regards the service tax credit in
respect of the input services used for setting up new container freight
station, we find that the said services resulted in setting up of a container
freight station which was used by the appellant for rendering output services
on which tax is discharged. If that be so, the judgment of the Honble High
Court of Andhra Pradesh in the case of Sai Samhita Storages 2011 (23) STR 341
(AP) and the decision of the Tribunal in the case of Navratna SG Highway 2012
(28) STR 166 (Tri.-Ahmd.) are directly applicable in favour of the appellant.
