Delhi High Court
Baker Hughes Limited & Anr. vs Hiroo Khushalani & Anr. on 24 July, 1998
Equivalent citations: 2000 102 CompCas 203 Delhi, 74 (1998) DLT 715, ILR 1999
Delhi 41
Author: A D Singh
Bench: A D Singh
JUDGMENT Anil Dev Singh, J.
1\. This is an application whereby the plaintiffs seek to restrain the
defendants by means of a temporary injunction from using the trade mark and
trade name BAKER or any other trade mark or trade name deceptively similar
thereto as their corporate name or as a part thereof. The facts necessary for
the disposal of the application are as under:
The first plaintiff Baker Hughes Limited (formerly known as Baker
International Limited) is a company organized under the laws of United
Kingdom. The principal place of business is located in Warwick Street, London.
The second plaintiff Baker Hughes Incorporated is a company organized under
the laws of Delaware, United States of America. Its principal place of
business is located at Housten, Texas (hereinafter, for short, the group of
'Baker' or 'Baker Hughes' companies collectively shall be referred to as
"Baker" or "Baker Hughes"). The second plaintiff is a parent company of the
case will not be an adequate relief to them.
73\. It was also contended on behalf of the defendants that the plaintiffs are
guilty of acquiescence and laches, and therefore, no relief should be granted
to them. I am unable to agree with the submission of learned Counsel for the
defendants. The plaintiffs moved the instant suit immediately after it had
disinvested its shareholding in the second defendant company in February, 1995
and a notice was given to the second defendant to cease and desist from using
the name Baker in its corporate name. Therefore, the plaintiffs cannot be
accused of acquiescence and laches.
74\. In view of the above survey of facts and law I consider it appropriate to
pass an ad interim mandatory injunction against the second defendant.
Therefore, it is ordered as follows:
75\. The second defendant shall stop using the word BAKER in its corporate
name from the expiry of three months from today. The second defendant shall
approach the Registrar of Companies with an application in accordance with law
for deletion of the word 'BAKER' from its corporate name within two months
"Baker" or "Baker Hughes"). The second plaintiff is a parent company of the
first plaintiff and is stated to own the trade mark BAKER.
2\. The first defendant Mr. Hiroo Khushalani, is the Chief Executive Officer
and Managing Director of the second defendant. The second defendant Baker Oil
Tools (India) Private Limited is a company incorporated in India under a
certificate of incorporation dated February 13, 1985.
3\. In 1982 the first defendant had discussions with Bakerline, a Baker Oil
Tools Company, Texas, USA (a division of Baker International Ltd.), for
floating a joint venture company in India for the manufacture of oil field
equipment and products. On May 13,1982 the first defendant wrote a letter to
Bakerline, in confirmation of their discussions, in which it was stated,
inter-alia, that Baker Oil Tools or any of its subsidiary companies will have
40%, equity participation in the capital structure of the joint venture
company which was intended to be set up in India by the first defendant as its
promoter. It was proposed that Baker Oil Tools will receive 5% royalty on the
products manufactured by the joint venture company for use within India.
Besides, Baker Oil Tools or any of its nominated subsidiary companies will
receive a sum of US dollars 20,00,000 for the transfer of drawings and
technical documentation to the Indian company. On September 20,1983, the first
defendant, as the sole proprietor of Miraksha Associates, applied to the
Ministry of Industry, Department of Industrial Development for permission to
establish a joint venture with M/s. Bakerline for manufacturing oil field
equipment. The Government of India by its letter bearing No. L-/260(84) dated
April 6, 1984 (for short 'the letter of intent'), addressed to the first
defendant, expressed its willingness to issue an industrial licence under the
Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951, to the latter for the
establishment of a new industrial undertaking for the manufacture of oil field
equipment, namely, Conventional Float Collars and Shoe, Differential Float
Collars and Shoe, Centralizers, Scratchers. Stop Ring, Bridge Plugs, Cement
Retainers, Stage Cementing Collars, Liner Hangers and Accessories and Pump
Feud and Pass at Gurgaon (Haryana), subject to the following conditions
amongst others:
> (1) The terms of foreign collaboration (Financial and/or Technical) will be
> settled to the satisfaction of the Government of India.
> (2) The use of foreign brand name will not be permitted for the purpose of
> internal sales.
> By a separate letter bearing No. FC-147(83)Comp/SCS dated April 6, 1984 the
> Government of India, in response to the request of the first defendant dated
> September 20,1983, expressed its willingness to approve the terms of the
> collaboration with M/s. Bakerline (for short 'the letter of approval of
> foreign collaboration'), subsequently amended to read as Baker Oil Tools
> (U.K.) Limited and finally as 'Baker Oil Tools (U.K.) Division instead of
> M/s. Bakerline vide letter of the Government of India dated March 17, 1986
> read with letter dated February 4, 1986.
4\. The conditions for the permission, inter-alia, provided foreign equity
participation to the extent of 40% of the paid up capital of Rs.1 crore. It
also allowed the first defendant to pay a lumpsum technical know-how fee to
the extent of US $ 2,50,000 to 'Baker' subject to deduction of taxes in three
equal instalments. On December 21,1984, the first defendant, as the sole
proprietor of Miraksha Associates and Baker International Limited, Baker Oil
Tools (UK) Division entered into Articles of Agreement (for short 'Basic
Agreement'). The 'Basic Agreement provided inter-alia for the incorporation of
a company in India under the name 'Baker Oil Tools (India) Private Limited''
or such other name as may be decided by the parties for the purpose of
establishing a new industrial undertaking at Gurgaon, Haryana, for the
manufacture of the oil field equipment based on the technical know-how to be
made available by Baker Oil Tools (United Kingdom) Limited. In accordance with
the letter of approval of foreign collaboration, the 'Basic Agreement' fixed
the shares of the first defendant and 'Baker' in the proposed Indian company,
Baker Oil Tools (India) Pvt. Ltd. While the share of first defendant was fixed
at 60% the share of 'Baker' was fixed at 40%. Clause 8.3 of this 'Basic
Agreement provided that if the share holding of 'Baker' fell below 40%, the
Indian company would not be entitled to retain the word Baker in its corporate
name and the former would be entitled to revoke the permission granted to the
latter to use the word Baker in its corporate name. Clause 12 of the 'Basic
Agreement' postulated that the text of the agreement shall be incorporated as
part of the Articles of Association of the Indian company. The said clause
further provided that the Indian company shall, soon after its incorporation,
adopt this 'Basic Agreement' so as to confirm that it will be bound by the
provisions thereof. Clause 4.3 of the 'Basic Agreement' stipulated that a
technical know-how agreement for the manufacture of products, the draft of
which was attached as Annexure 'A' thereto, shall be entered into by and
between Baker Oil Tools (United Kingdom) Limited and Baker Oil Tools (India)
Private Limited after its was incorporation. Since by then the second
defendant had not been incorporated it was agreed as per Clause 4.2 that the
first defendant in his capacity as the promoter of the company in the offing
shall enter into the technical know-how agreement referred to in Clause 4.3.
Under Clause 4.2 of the 'Basic Agreement', the first defendant was also
required to make applications to various government authorities in India for
obtaining their approvals to the 'Basic Agreement' as well as the 'technical
know-how agreement' and for obtaining all statutory approvals and consents
required in connection with any matter pertaining to the project. Pursuant to
the stipulations made in the 'Basic Agreement' two important events took
place-(1) on December 21, 1984 the technical know-how agreement was executed
by and between the first defendant acting in his capacity as the promoter of
the proposed Indian company and Baker Oil Tools (United Kingdom) Limited, and
(2) on February 13, 1985 the second defendant was incorporated with two
shareholders, namely, the first defendant and Ms. Mira Khushalani, they being
the only subscribers to the Memorandum and Articles of Association of the
second defendant, having signed the same on January 4, 1985. Upon
incorporation of the second defendant, the 'letter of intent' and the 'letter
of approval of the foreign collaboration' both dated April 6, 1984 issued by
the Government of India were transferred from the name of the first defendant
to the name of the second defendant. On May 15, 1985, the first defendant and
Baker Oil Tools (United Kingdom) Limited entered into Articles of Agreement
amending various Clauses of the 'technical know-how agreement' (for short 'the
first addendum ). It also deleted Clause 10 (b) of the "Technical Know-how
agreement" as per the requirements of the Government of India. But on May
15,1985 itself a supplementary agreement between Baker Oil Tools (India)
Private Limited and Baker Oil Tools (United Kingdom) Limited was also executed
for giving effect to Clause 10(b) of the Technical Know-how Agreement, as if
the Clause had not been deleted by the first addendum, to the extent possible
and for reinstating the same, if lawfully feasible. Thereafter on September
30, 1985, the first defendant of the first part; Baker International Limited,
Baker Oil Tools (U.K.) Division of the second part and Baker Oil Tools (United
Kingdom) Limited of the third part entered into Articles of Agreement (for
short 'the second addendum') whereby Baker International Ltd., Baker Oil Tools
(U.K.) Division undertook to supervise the performance of obligation by Baker
Oil Tools (United Kingdom) Limited under the 'Technical Know-how Agreement' as
amended by the first addendum thereto. Subsequently, on November 18,1985, the
first defendant, Baker International Limited, Baker Oil Tools (U.K.) Division
and Baker Oil Tools (United Kingdom) Limited executed an agreement whereby
Baker International Limited, Baker Oil Tools (U.K.) Division assumed the
obligations of Baker Oil Tools (United Kingdom) Limited under the Technical
Know-how Agreement as amended by the first addendum. By the above said
agreement of novation, Baker Oil Tools (United Kingdom) Limited was relieved
of the obligations under the Technical Know-how Agreement and Baker Oil Tools
(U.K.) Division undertook to perform such obligations and agreed to be bound
by the terms of the Technical Know-how agreement as amended by the first
addendum and the second addendum.
5\. On July 25, 1986 the Reserve Bank of India accorded permission to the
second defendant under Section 29(1)(b) of the Foreign Exchange Regulation
Act, 1973, to issue 3,09,294 equity shares of Rs.10/- each, equivalent to 40%,
of its paid up equity capital to Baker International Limited, Baker Oil Tools
(U.K.) Division. Pursuant to the permission of the Reserve Bank of India and
in terms of the 'Basic Agreement', on August 20, 1986 Baker International
Limited, Baker Oil Tools (U.K.) Division subscribed to the share capital of
the second defendant to the extent of 40% of its paid up capital, thus,
leaving the remaining 60% of the shareholding with the first defendant and his
associates as per the following details:
          1.   First defendant                    :    10.71%
         2.   Mrs. Mira Khushalani               :    10.71%
         3.   Mr. Vivek Khushalani               :    10.70%
         4.   Ms. Raksha Khushalani              :    10.70%
         5.   M/s. Miraksha Associates Pvt. Ltd. :    17.18% 
6\. 'Baker' wanted the second defendant to incorporate in its Articles of
Association provisions of Clause 8.3 of the 'Basic Agreement' dated December
21, 1984 whereby it had been agreed between the parties thereto that in the
event of the holding of Baker International Limited, Baker Oil Tools (U.K.)
Division falling below 40% of the paid up equity capital, the second defendant
would not be entitled to retain the name Baker as part of its corporate name.
The question of inclusion of the provisions of Clause 8.3 of the 'Basic
Agreement' into the Articles of Association of the second defendant was taken
up at the extraordinary general meeting of the shareholders of the second
defendant held on December 3,1993. At the said meeting the plaintiffs were
represented by one Mr. Jims Smith. He voted in favour of the resolution for
insertion of the contents of Clause 8.3 of the 'Basic Agreement' in the
Articles of Association of the second defendant. However, the first defendant
and his associates holding 60% of the shares of second defendant voted against
the resolution. Thus the motion to include provisions of Clause 8.3 in the
Articles of Association of the second defendant stood defeated. On February
15, 1995, the plaintiff after obtaining the permission of the Government of
India sold its shares to White Horse Trading Limited, a company incorporated
in Hong Kong, though the offer of the latter to buy the shares had been
accepted by the former on October 17,1994. On February 15,1995 itself the
first plaintiff through Baker Oil Tools Asia Pecific, a division of Baker
Hughes (Singapore) Pvt. Ltd., a subsidiary of the second plaintiff, called
upon the second defendant by means of a notice to alter its corporate name by
omitting the word Baker therefrom. The second defendant while acknowledging
the receipt of the said notice by its letter dated March 15, 1995
categorically declined to accede to the demand of the plaintiffs on the ground
that it was under no legal obligation to change its name. The plaintiffs
feeling aggrieved of the action of the defendants, filed the present suit
seeking, inter alia, (1) a decree of permanent injunction restraining the
second defendant from using the word BAKER or any other word similar thereto
in its corporate name or trading style; (2) a decree of permanent injunction
restraining the defendants from passing off the business, services and goods
for that of the plaintiffs by the use of the word BAKER or any other word
deceptively similar thereto as a trade mark or as a trading style: (3)
specific performance of the agreement dated December 21,1984 by directing the
defendants to perform their contractual obligations and to take necessary
steps to change the corporate name of the second defendant; and (4) award of
compensation in their favour and against the defendant No.2 on account of the
latter's unauthorised use of the word BAKER in its corporate name. Along with
the suit, the plaintiffs moved the instant application for interim relief.
7\. The defendants appeared in the suit and filed their written statement and
reply to the instant application taking several grounds in opposition.
8\. Mr. Arun Jaitley, learned Senior Counsel appearing for the plaintiffs, in
support of the application submitted that the plaintiffs have a proprietory
right in the trade name Baker. They have extensive business world wide and
have incorporated several companies under the said trade name throughout the
world. The plaintiffs are world leaders in the oil field equipment, products
and services. Learned Counsel invited my attention to Volume 3, pages 069 to
0621, of the Court record to show that the plaintiffs had been selling their
products in India and else where, in different parts of the world. The
plaintiffs have acquired a trans-boarder reputation in the trade name Baker.
It was canvassed that the second defendant cannot use the word Baker as part
of its corporate name after the first plaintiff sold its entire share holding
in the second defendant. The second defendant does not have any proprietory
right in the name Baker as it was allowed only a permissive and licensed use
of the same. The permission to use the name Baker having been revoked by the
plaintiffs and notice to this effect having been served on the defendants, the
right to use the name Baker by the second defendant came to an end. The second
defendant cannot be allowed to pass off its goods as the goods of the
plaintiffs by retaining the word Baker as part of its corporate name.
9\. Mr. J.M. Mukhi, learned Counsel for the defendants, on the other hand,
vehemently argued that the second defendant has a right to use the word Baker
as part of its corporate name. He also pointed out that the second defendant
has been using the said name for more than a decade. The learned Counsel
highlighted the fact that the 'Technical Know-how Agreement' overrides all
other agreements by virtue of Clause 21 thereof which declares that the
'Technical Know-how Agreement' shall constitute the only valid and binding
agreement between the parties. Thus it was argued that the 'Basic Agreement'
is a dead letter and Clause 8.3 thereof is of no avail to the plaintiffs for
urging that the second defendant has lost the right to use the word Baker in
its corporate name. It was further submitted that the 'Basic Agreement' was
not furnished to the first defendant by the first plaintiff and consequently
the same was not sent to the Government of India for approval as required by
law. The only agreement which was approved by the Government of India was the
'Technical Know-how Agreement' which did not contain a provision like Clause
8.3 of the 'Basic Agreement'. It was also pointed out that the Government of
India in its "letter of approval of the foreign collaboration" had laid down
certain conditions and the approval for the joint venture was subject to the
same. One of the conditions contained in para 4(f) of the said letter
interdicted the use of a foreign brand name for the purposes of internal sales
by the joint venture. It was contended that Section 28 of the Foreign Exchange
Regulation Act, 1973 expressly forbids a foreign company to permit an Indian
company to use its brand name without the approval of the Reserve Bank of
India. It was argued that the brand name Baker in India could only be treated
as an Indian brand name. The first plaintiff had agreed that the Indian
company would use the name Baker in its own right and as an Indian brand name.
The first plaintiff had transferred its business to the second defendant
alongwith right to use the name Baker in its (second defendant's) corporate
name.
10\. Learned Counsel for the defendants accused the plaintiffs of supressing
the 'Technical Know-how Agreement' inasmuch as the same was not alluded to
either in the plaint or in the instant application. The learned Counsel
submitted that since the plaintiffs were guilty of suppressio veri no
equitable relief could be granted to them. They had also not made any
reference to the letter of the Government of India dated April 6,1984
according approval to the proposal of the first defendant for foreign
collaboration subject to certain conditions. They also withheld the fact that
the 'Basic Agreement' of December 21, 1984 was not submitted for the approval
of the Government of India. It was also not disclosed by the plaintiffs that
they were no longer manufacturing the items which were being manufactured by
the second defendant. Since the plaintiffs have not come to the Court with
clean hands no relief by way of interim injunction can be granted to them.
Learned Counsel also canvassed that the 'Basic Agreement' including Clause 8.3
thereof could not bind the second defendant as the second defendant was
incorporated much after the execution of the 'Basic Agreement'. Learned
Counsel further contended that the Articles and Memorandum of Association of
the second defendant were drafted in England at the instructions of the first
plaintiff by its solicitors and in order to conform to the conditions of
approval of the Government of India for the joint venture, the contents of
Clause 8.3 were not incorporated therein. He invited my attention to the
affidavits of Thomas Maccormack and James D. Green, former employees of the
plaintiffs, to show that the plaintiffs appointed Grindlays Bank Limited to
prepare the Memorandum and Articles of Association of the second defendant. It
was also submitted that the plaintiffs have no proprietary right in the word
Baker and there are hardly any purchasers in India for the items manufactured
by the plaintiffs. According to the learned Counsel, in India the word Baker
is being associated with the products of the second defendant, an Indian
company and not with the products of the plaintiffs. He also disputed the
contention of the learned Counsel for the plaintiffs that the plaintiffs have
acquired trans-border reputation. Learned Counsel for the defendants contended
that no interim mandatory injunction can be granted to the plaintiffs as they
have not established any prima facie case and even the balance of convenience
does not lie in their favour. Besides, the plaintiffs will not suffer any
damage, much less an irreparable one, on refusal to grant the injunction.
11\. I have considered the submissions of the learned Counsel for the parties.
At the threshold, it will be necessary to consider the scope of the 'Basic
Agreement' vis-a-vis the 'Technical Know-how Agreement' as it was argued by
the learned Counsel for the defendants that the 'Basic Agreement' has been
displaced by the 'Technical Know-how Agreement' and that being so Clause 8.3
of the former agreement, requiring the second defendant to alter its corporate
name to a name not including the word Baker or any similar name, ceases to be
in operation. In this regard learned Counsel referred to Clause 21 of the
'Technical Know-how Agreement'. This Clause reads as follows:
"Agreement to constitute the only valid and binding document; this agreement
as signed and executed, shall constitute the only valid and binding agreement
between the parties hereto in relation to the subject matter hereof and all
previous understanding or arrangements whether written or oral shall stand
expressly cancelled and superseded by this agreement."
Heavily relying on the above Clause, it was contended by the learned Counsel
for the defendants that it is only the 'Technical Know-how Agreement' which is
binding on the parties and the 'Basic Agreement' being a previous arrangement
stands expressly cancelled and superseded by this agreement. The words
"subject matter hereof" occurring in the above said Clause are of great
significance. In the context of these words the Clause merely means that the
'Technical Know-how Agreement' is the only binding agreement between the
parties in relation to the matters covered by the subject with which the
agreement deals, namely, technical know-how. If a question relating to a
matter of technical know-how arises this agreement will be the only agreement
which would be binding and the question must be determined in accordance
therewith. This agreement postulates that upon the formation of the Indian
company, it is to adopt this agreement and 'Baker' is to supply and transfer
the technical know-how to the Indian company. It is not disputed that the
second defendant after its incorporation has adopted the 'Technical Know-how
Agreement' and the first plaintiff has carried out its obligations under the
same. Clause 1 of the 'Technical Know-how Agreement' deals with the meaning of
the expressions "know-how" or "technical know-how". This Clause reads as
follows:
          "1. In this Agreement, unless the text otherwise requires and  if      written  in capital letters or with initial capital letters,  the      following  expressions shall have the meanings ascribed  to  them      hereunder, namely: 
          xx xx xx
          (b)  "KNOW-HOW" or "TECHNICAL KNOW-HOW" shall mean the  technical      information,  data, drawings, specification,  designs,  revisions      and documentation relating to the PRODUCTS that may be in      Baker's  possession  or under BAKER'S control  on  the  EFFECTIVE      DATE.  This  shall also include secret and  non-secret  know-how,      technical  data, drawings, documentation, designs, revisions  and      other particulars and information relating to the production  and      manufacture  of PRODUCTS all provided that such know-how is  possessed and /or controlled by BAKER on the EFFECTIVE DATE of  this      Agreement, and which is more particularly described in Schedule 2 hereunder written.
          (c)  "KNOW-HOW  DOCUMENTS" shall mean data,  drawings,  technical      manuals,  designs, revisions and such other information  or  know      how as may be in writing or in visual form required in connection      with the TECHNICAL KNOW-HOW. 
          xx xx xx ' 
          Clause  2  of the agreement relates to know-how and  its  scope.  This Clause reads as follows: 
          "2. Know-how and its Scope: 
          (A) 'BAKER' hereby agrees with HK to transfer, assign and  supply      to the Indian Company and make available at its plant in the city      of Aberdeen, Scotland, U.K., the TECHNICAL KNOW-HOW necessary  to      enable the India Company.... non-exclusive right over use of  the      TECHNICAL KNOW-HOW for manufacturing the PRODUCTS in India. 
          (B) The scope of the Know-how, including the drawings, specifications  and documents to be provided by 'BAKER' are  specified  in   Schedule II hereunder written. 
          (C) The aforesaid technical documentation shall be in the English 
         language and in the imperial systems of weights and measures  and 
         shall be in one reproducible and four copies." 
12\. Clause 4 of the 'Technical Know-how Agreement' provides that 'Baker'
shall deliver and give possession of the 'know-how documents' for the products
and its plant in the city of Aberdeen, Scotland, U.K., to the Indian company
in the manner laid down in the agreement. Clause 5 of the agreement also makes
a provision for training of the personnel of the Indian company at Aberdeen or
such other places outside India as 'Baker' shall deem fit. Clause 7 makes
provision for compensation and lays down the terms of payment by the Indian
company to 'Baker' in consideration of 'Baker' supplying, transferring and
assigning to the Indian company 'know-how' and all other rights, title and
interest in respect thereof for the manufacture of products as provided in
Schedule I to the agreement. The Indian company according to the above said
Clause were to pay compensation to 'Baker' in the following manner:
          1.  Dollars  83,333  within 30 days after  incorporation  of  the      Indian company, or such other period as may be extended by  Baker      provided  the letter of credit as stipulated in Clause  7(b)  has      been received by Baker.
          2. US $ 83,333 upon or within 10 days after receipt of the  technical know-how documents from Baker in Aberdeen.
          3.  US $ 88,334 within 10 days after the commencement of  production at the Indian company's plant at Gurgaon (Haryana). 
13\. Clause 7(A)(Il) of the agreement makes provisions for payment of royalty
by the Indian company. The other Clauses of the 'Technical Know-how
Agreement', inter-alia, deal with guarantee for know-how, taxes, period for
which technical assistance is to be extended to the Indian company by 'Baker',
stipulation of the Indian company that it shall keep the technical know-how a
secret and will not disclose the same to any person other than its employee or
licensee or sub-licensee or employee of the sub-licensee, the sale of the
products, force majeure, assignability and termination of the agreement and
the terms of the agreement governing law of conciliation and arbitration, and
modification of the agreement, etc. The agreement also declares that the
arrangements made under it shall not constitute a partnership or a joint
venture between the Indian company and 'Baker'. Besides, a specific reference
needs to be made to Clauses 21 and 24 of the 'Technical Know-how Agreement'.
Clause 21 provides that failure of either party to the agreement at any time
to enforce any other terms, provisions and conditions of this agreement shall
not be construed as a waiver of the same or of the rights of either party to
enforce the same on any subsequent occasion. Clause 24 of the agreement
declares that the agreement will ensure for the benefit of the Indian company
when formed. Thus this agreement deals with financial and technical matters.
14\. As against the terms of the above said 'Technical Know-how Agreement',
the 'Basic Agreement' which was executed by and between the first defendant
and the Baker Oil Tools (U.K.) Division deals mainly with the matters relating
to permission and formation of the Indian company. The agreement mentions that
the first defendant had obtained a letter of intent on December 6, 1984 from
the Government of India for the establishment of a new industrial undertaking
at Gurgaon (Haryana) for the manufacture of items of oil field equipment,
particulars whereof have been specified in Schedule I to the agreement. The
agreement also recites the resolve of the first defendant to promote and form
a private company by the name Baker Oil Tools (India) Private Ltd . The
agreement records the offer of the first plaintiff to become a shareholder of
the said company by contributing to its share capital. The agreement deals
with the matters relating to the formation of the said company including the
share capital of the company, the main objects of the company, details of the
cost of the project namely, preliminary and pre-operative expenses, land and
development, civil construction including factory and other buildings, plant
and machinery, margin of working capital, contingencies, authorised capital of
the company, provision to rescind the agreement, the obligations of the first
defendant before the incorporation of the company, duty of the first defendant
upon the formation of the company to transfer to the company such of his
obligations, as may be possible for the said company to carry out, the
understanding between the parties that the terms and conditions of the
'Technical Know-how Agreement' are to be substantially as per the draft given
in Annexure 'A' to the agreement, the time limit within which the first
plaintiff and the Indian company on its incorporation is to enter into an
agreement, disposal of shares held by the parties at any time before and after
the termination of the agreement, management of the Indian company including
constitution of its Board, accounts and appointment of the auditors of the
company, nature of rights and obligations of the parties, effective date of
its coming into operation, default or breach of the terms thereof, governing
law and settlement of disputes, and provision for incorporating the text of
this agreement in the Articles of Association of the company and notices.
Moreover it contains Clause 8.3 which is subject of much controversy between
the parties. This Clause reads as follows:
"In the event of Baker holding less than 40%, of the paid up equity capital of
the said Company, if the word "Baker" is part of the name of the said Company,
the said Company shall not be entitled to retain the said word as part of its
name; the intention being that the said word shall be used as part of the name
of the said Company by virtue of the permission of Baker and that the said
Company shall have no property interest in the said word; and if Baker so
requires the said Company shall change its name to a name not including the
word "Baker" or any similar word. If Baker so desires, the parties shall
ensure that Baker and the said Company shall enter into an agreement in a form
and substance satisfactory to Baker so as to ensure observance and
implementation of this condition by the said Company."
Thus, this Clause stipulates that in case the holding of the first plaintiff
falls below 40% of the paid-up equity capital of the Indian company, the
latter shall not be entitled to retain the word Baker as part of its name.
15\. Thus a comparison of the 'Basic Agreement' and the 'Technical Know-how
Agreement' clearly reveals their nature and scope. The two agreements operate
in different and separate fields. While the 'Basic Agreement' primarily deals
with incorporation of the Indian company, the 'Technical Know-how Agreement'
relates to the transfer of the technical know-how by the first plaintiff to
the Indian company for a price. The distinction between the two agreements is
also exhibited in the subsequent three agreements executed by the parties. The
first addendum to the 'Technical Know-how Agreement' dated May 15, 1985
recites that the first defendant and Baker Oil Tools (United Kingdom) Limited
entered into articles of agreement relating to supply and transfer by 'Baker'
of technical know-how to the Indian company in accordance with the provisions
of the 'letter of intent' of the Government of India dated April 6,1984. This
recital defines the scope of the 'Technical Know-how Agreement'. The parties
themselves describe this agreement as one for supply and transfer of the
technical know-how by 'Baker' to the Indian company. The distinction between
the 'basic agreement and the 'Technical Know-how Agreement' has been brought
out more pointedly in the second addendum dated September 30, 1985 to the
'Technical Know-how Agreement'. The recitals 'A' and ' B' of the Second
Addendum along with the relevant Clause dealing with its purpose read as
follows:
          "(A)  On the 21st day of December 1984 HK [Hiroo Khushalani]  and     BAKER [Baker international Limited, Baker Oil Tools (U.K.)  Division] entered into Articles of Agreement relating to the incorporation in India of a company to be named Baker Oil Tools  (India)      Private  Limited  (such Articles of Agreement  being  hereinafter      referred to as "the Articles of Agreement") 
          (B)  On the 21st day of December, 1984 HK and BOT UK  [Baker  Oil      Tools  (United Kingdom) Limited] entered into Articles of  Agreement relating to the transfer of technical know-how by BOT UK  to      the  said Baker Oil Tools (India) Private Limited (such  Articles      of  Agreement  being hereinafter referred to  as  "the  Technical      Know-how Agreement")" 
          xx xx xx
          1. BAKER agrees with HK that BAKER will supervise the performance      by  BOT UK of the obligation of BOT UK under the Technical  Know-how Agreement as amended by the First Addendum to Technical Know-how Agreement and will procure that BOT UK will fully comply with      such obligations.
          xx xx xx 
          Thus, while the 'Basic Agreement' (referred to in Clause '(A)'  above) deals with the subject of incorporation of the Indian company, the 'Technical  Know-how Agreement' (referred to in Clause '(B)' above)  concerns  the transfer of technical know-how by 'Baker' to the Indian company. 
Subsequent to the second addendum, the first defendant; Baker Oil Tools
(United Kingdom) Limited; and Baker International Limited, Baker Oil Tools
(U.K.) Division entered into an agreement dated November 18,1985 (called
'Novation Agreement') whereby Baker International Ltd., Baker Oil Tools (U.K.)
Division under took to perform the obligations of Baker Oil Tools (United
Kingdom) Limited under the 'Technical Know-how Agreement' as amended by the
first addendum and the second addendum. This agreement also highlights the
difference and distinction between the 'Basic Agreement' and the 'Technical
Know-how Agreement' just in the same manner as is done in the second addendum
to the 'Technical Know-how Agreement'.
16\. When Clause 21 of the 'Technical Know-how Agreement' speaks of the
'Technical Know-how Agreement' to be the only valid and binding agreement
between the parties, the stipulation must be confined and limited to the
previous understandings or arrangements relating to the same subject matter as
is covered by the 'Technical Know-how Agreement'. The 'Basic Agreement' does
not fall within the scope and ambit of Clause 21 of the 'Technical Know-how
Agreement'. This being the position, Clause 21 cannot extinguish, cancel or
supersede the 'Basic Agreement' which is outside its purview.
17\. The learned Counsel for the defendants next submitted that the 'Basic
Agreement' was not binding on the second defendant as it was not a party to
the same. It was emphasised that when the 'Basic Agreement' was executed
between the first defendant and Baker International Limited, Baker Oil Tools
(U.K.) Division, the second defendant was not in existence. Learned Counsel
also submitted that the 'Basic Agreement' was required to be placed before the
Government of India for its consideration and approval. Since the 'Basic
Agreement' was a dead letter the same was not even furnished to the first
defendant. This being so it could not be placed before the Government of
India. It was contended that the 'Basic Agreement' not having been placed
before the Government of India for approval has no existence in the eye of law
and is therefore illegal and unlawful. Consequently Clause 8.3 thereof would
also not be in existence. The learned Counsel challenged the validity of the
'Basic Agreement'. He referred to the provisions of the Foreign Exchange
Regulations Act, 1973, in support of his submission. He also submitted that
the first plaintiff assigned and transferred the goodwill of business attached
to the trade name Baker to the second defendant for consideration. Besides he
invited my attention to Clause 12 of the annexure to the 'letter of approval
for the foreign collaboration' dated April 6, 1984 and submitted that in case
the word Baker is to be considered as a foreign brand name belonging to the
plaintiffs, then its use in respect of the products of the Indian company is
prohibited by the Government of India.
18\. Insofar as the submission of the learned Counsel for the defendants that
the 'Basic Agreement' including Clause 8.3 thereof has no existence in the eye
of law as the 'Basic Agreement' was not placed before the Government of India
for its approval is concerned, it is significant to note that Clause 4.2 of
the same agreement required the first defendant to apply to various government
authorities in this country for obtaining their approvals in respect of this
agreement as well as the 'Technical Know-how Agreement' and for obtaining all
statutory approvals and consents required in connection with any matter
pertaining to the project. This plea of the defendants, which is based on the
alleged lapse of the first defendant in carrying out his obligations under
Clause 4.2 of the 'basic agreement', is being used as a shield to ward of the
effect of Clause 8.3 thereof. Thus, the first defendant is taking advantage of
his own wrong which cannot be countenanced in law and must be disapproved.
19\. As regards the submission of the defendants that the 'Basic Agreement'
being a dead letter was not furnished to the defendants by the plaintiffs, it
seems to me that the submission is not well founded. In case the agreement was
not furnished to the defendants or the same was a dead letter there would have
been no need to refer to the agreement in addendum I, addendum II and the
Novation Agreement. Moreover, it should not be forgotten that the 'Basic
Agreement' and the 'Technical Know-how Agreement' were executed simultaneously
on the same day. Therefore, it is not logical to contend that the 'Technical
Know-how Agreement' was intended to cancel and supersede the 'Basic
Agreement'. If the 'Basic Agreement' was to be shot down by the 'Technical
Know-how Agreement' then there was no point in executing the 'Basic Agreement'
in the first instance. Having executed the 'Basic Agreement' there was no
reason to rescind or supersede the same on that very day. It is also not the
case of the defendants that they at any point of time asked the plaintiffs to
furnish the 'Basic Agreement' or that they had protested that it was no longer
in existence having been superseded by the 'Technical Know-how Agreement'.
20\. The question whether the 'Basic Agreement' was produced before the
Government of India for its approval is a question of fact. The plaintiffs
referred to the letter of the Under Secretary to the Government of India,
Ministry of Industry, Department of Industrial Development, dated February 7,
1986, which states that the foreign collaboration agreement' has been taken on
record. As per the plaintiffs the 'Basic Agreement' provided for the
collaboration between 'Baker' and the Indian company and it was this agreement
which was taken on record by the Government of India.
21\. The defendants, however, submitted that the Government by mentioning the
'foreign collaboration agreement' in the above letter was actually referring
to the 'Technical Know-how Agreement'. He invited my attention to the letter
of the Government of India dated April 6, 1993 and stated that even in this
letter the Government of India had while referring to the 'Technical Know-how
Agreement' called the same as the collaboration agreement and mentioned that
it had a life of ten years. He pointed out that it was the 'Technical Know-how
Agreement' that provided for a term of ten years as its validity period and no
such time imperative was mentioned in the 'Basic Agreement'. It was,
therefore, surmised by the defendants that the Government of India was
actually calling the 'Technical Know-how Agreement' as the 'Collaboration
Agreement' and it was the 'Technical Know-how Agreement' which was taken on
record and not the 'Basic Agreement'.
22\. The final determination of the question whether the 'Basic Agreement' was
produced before the Government of India by the first defendant will depend
upon the evidence which the parties will lead at the trial, but one thing is
clear that the Articles of Agreement between the parties dated November 18,
1985 (Novation Agreement), whereby Baker International Limited, Baker Oil
Tools (U.K.) Division assumed the responsibility for financial equity
participation and technology transfer to the second defendant, not only
alluded to the factum of the execution of the 'Technical Know-how Agreement'
but also specifically referred to the execution of the 'Basic Agreement'.
Relevant portion of the 'Novation Agreement' along with Clause 1 thereof,
under which Baker Oil Tools (UK) Division took over the obligations of Baker
Oil Tools (UK) Limited under the 'Technical Know-how Agreement', is extracted
below:
          (A)  On the 21st day of December, 1984 HK [Hiroo Khushalani]  and      BAKER [Baker International Limited, Baker Oil Tools (U.K.)  Division] entered into Articles of Agreement relating to the incorporation in India of a company to be named Baker Oil Tools  (India)      Private  Limited  (such Articles of Agreement  being  hereinafter      referred to as "the Articles of Agreement") 
          (B)  On the 21st day of December, 1984 HK and BOT UK  [Baker  Oil      Tools  (United Kingdom) Limited] entered into Articles of  Agreement relating to the transfer of technical know-how by BOT UK  to      the  said Baker Oil Tools (India) Private Limited (such  Articles      of  Agreement  being hereinafter referred to  as  "the  Technical      Know-how Agreement") 
          xx xx xx
          1.  BAKER undertakes to perform the obligations of BOT  UK  under      the Technical Know-how Agreement as amended by the First Addendum      and  the  Second Addendum and be bound by the  terms  thereof  in      every  way as if BAKER were named therein as a party  thereto  in      lieu of BOT UK at the date of signature thereof. 
          xx xx xx" 
          The  above said supplementary (novation) agreement was transmitted  to the Government of India by the first defendant by his letter dated November 25,1985.  This letter has been placed on record by the plaintiffs  and  has not been denied by the defendants. The letter reads as follows: 
          "November 25, 1985 
          The  Joint Secretary to the (Government of India,  Department  of      Heavy  Industry,  Ministry of Industry & Company  Affairs,  Udyog      Bhavan, New Delhi 110011. 
          ATTN: MR S.C. DHINGRA 
          Dear Sir,
          COMPOSITE PROPOSAL FOR  OF OIL FIELD EQUIPMENTS;.
          "Further  to our letter of September 19,1985, we are  pleased  to      enclose original and sixteen copies of an Amendment to the Original Agreement whereby Baker International Limited-Baker Oil Tools      (UK)  Division  assumes  complete  responsibility  for  financial      equity participation and technology transfer to the Joint Venture      Indian Company Baker Oil Tools India Private Limited. 
          We  will be grateful if you will kindly accord your approval  for      having  this  Agreement taken on record as soon as  possible.  We      take  this  opportunity  of placing on record  that  the  factory      construction is substantially advanced and several of the machine      tools  have  already arrived at the factory site and  subject  to      Government's  approval, we propose to commence production  during      the first quarter of 1986. 
          Thanking you, 
         Yours faithfully,
          For MIRAKSHA ASSOCIATES,
          Sd/ 
         (H.L.KHUSHALANI)  
         CHIEF EXECUTIVE." 
          The  Government  of India in its letter dated  February  7,  1986      acknowledged  the  receipt of the letter of the  first  defendant      dated November 25,1985. This letter runs thus:
          "I am directed to refer to your letter dated 26.12.1984  forwarding  therewith copies of foreign collaboration agreement  on  the      above subject and to say that the same along with the  supplementary  agreements  forwarded  under cover  of  your  letter  dated      20.5.1985 and 25.11.85 respectively have been taken on record  in      terms   of  Deptt.  of  Industrial  Development,SIA  letter   No.      FC:147(83)/  Comp/SCS dated 6.4.1984, as amended vide letter  No.      FC:147(83)/Comp/ SCS dated 4.2.1986.
          2.  This  issues  with the concurrence  of  Ministry  of  Finance      (Deptt.  of  Economic Affiars) vide their  U.O.  No.  122/85-Fl&T      dated 4.2.1985. 
          3. Kindly acknowledge receipt. 
          Yours faithfully,
          Sd/  
         (R.L. Sidhu) 
         Under Secretary to the Government of India"
23\. From this letter it is apparent that the Government of India was apprised
not only of the technical know-how agreement but was also made aware of the
'Basic Agreement'. It is not the case of the second defendant that the
Government of India raised any objection to the effect that the 'Basic
Agreement' was not presented before it or the same was not approved by it and,
therefore, was illegal and not operative between the parties, being contrary
to the provisions of FERA and to the conditions laid down in its letters of
April 6, 1984. It appears to me that the only Clause in the 'Basic Agreement'
which could attract the provisions of FERA is Clause 5.1, as it allowed the
first plaintiff to acquire 40% of the shareholding of the second defendant.
Therefore, except Clause 5.1 of the 'Basic Agreement', rest of the Clauses did
not require the approval of the Government of India and therefore they would
be operative even without the approval of the Government of India. This,
however, is not to suggest that the Government of India had disapproved the
'Basic Agreement'. It is important to note that for the acquisition of the
equity by the first plaintiff approval of the Government of India was required
for this could involve in flow of foreign exchange. Since the Government of
India did approve the equity participation of Baker Oil Tools (U.K.) Division
to the extent of 40% of the paid up equity capital of the second defendant, it
was not necessary for the Government of India to accord a formal approval to
Clause 5.1 of the 'Basic Agreement', providing for equity participation of
Baker International Ltd, Baker Oil Tools (U.K.) Division, as it was not
contrary to the FERA or to the terms of the approval laid down by the
Government in its 'letter of intent' and 'letter of approval of foreign
collaboration', both dated April 6,1984. None of these letters provide for any
consequences, penal or otherwise, for not presenting any of the agreements
before Government of India for its approval. After the receipt of the novation
agreement the knowledge of the Government of India regarding the execution of
the 'Basic Agreement' is not in doubt. In case the 'Basic Agreement' was
compulsorily required to be produced before the Government of India and was
not so produced for approval, or any of the mandatory conditions subject to
which the 'letter of intent' and the 'letter of approval of foreign
collaboration' were issued, were not carried out by the parties, the
Government of India would have cancelled the letters or would have taken some
punitive action against the parties. This was not done by the Government of
India. The 'Basic Agreement', therefore, was not unlawful or violative of the
provisions of FERA.
24\. Learned Counsel for the defendants relied upon various decisions in
support of his submission that it is not permissible to any person to rely
upon a contract the making of which the law prohibits. It is unnecessary to
burden the judgment by making reference to them as it appears to me that the
'Basic Agreement' is not unlawful.
25\. From the conduct of the second defendant, it appears to me that the
'Basic Agreement' was adopted and acted upon by the second defendant. The
second defendant having taken the benefit of the 'Basic Agreement' cannot be
heard to say that the same was not adopted by it. If the same was not adopted
by the second defendant, the question that arises is as to how it was using
the trade name Baker as part of its corporate name. Prima facie it appears to
me that the trade name Baker belongs to the plaintiffs which fact would be
evident from the further analysis of the matter detailed in the latter part of
the judgment. Obviously the permission to the second defendant to use the
trade name Baker as part of its corporate name flowed from the 'Basic
Agreement'. The allotment of shares of the second defendant to the first
plaintiff is also as per the 'Basic Agreement'.
26\. There is also nothing to show that the first defendant paid any
consideration in the form of money to the first plaintiff for reaching an
agreement, incorporated in Clause 8.3 of the 'Basic Agreement', permitting the
Indian Company on its incorporation to use the word 'Baker' as part of its
corporate name till such time the shareholding of the first plaintiff does not
fall below 40% of the paid up equity capital of the latter. The Foreign
Exchange Regulation Act is meant to prevent unauthorised inflow and outflow of
foreign exchange into and out of the country. Therefore, no permission of the
Government of India or the Reserve Bank of India would have been necessary for
such an agreement permitting the use of the word 'Baker' in the corporate name
of the second defendant. Under Section 28(1)(c) of the Foreign Exchange
Regulation Act, as it existed at the relevant time, the permission of the
Reserve Bank of India for the use of the foreign trade mark or brand name by a
company would be necessary in case any consideration was paid or promised to
be paid for it. Where, however, no element of consideration is involved no
permission would be required by the user of the foreign trade mark as Section
28(1)(c) of the FERA will not be attracted. Therefore, Clause 8.3 of the
'Basic Agreement' allowing the second defendant to use the name Baker as part
of its corporate name upto the time the first plaintiff holds 40% of its
equity capital and interdicting the use of the name Baker as part of its
corporate name in case the shareholding of the first plaintiff drops below 40%
is not illegal, unlawful or void. The above view finds support from a decision
of this Court in Pioneer Hybrid International Inc. USA Vs. Pioneer Seed
Company Ltd., AIR 1989 NOC 120 (Delhi), B.N. Kirpal, J., (as his Lordship then
was) held as follows:
           "The  Registered  User Agreement was not void for  not  obtaining      permission of Reserve Bank of India under Sec. 28 of the  Foreign 
         Exchange Regulation Act as the Registered User Agreement does not      provide for any consideration in the form of money being paid  by      the  defendant  to the plaintiff for the use of  the  said  trade      mark.The  Foreign Exchange Regulation Act is  directly  concerned      with the inflow and outflow of the foreign exchange into and  out      of the contry and it is for this reason that Sec. 28 required the 
         permission  of  the Reserve Bank before any permission  could  be      granted for the use of the trade mark for any "direct or indirect      consideration". It is only that consideration which would  affect      the inflow and outflow of the foreign exchange into or out of the      country, whether directly or indirectly, which is contemplated by      Sec. 28(1)(c). Any promise made by the user of the trade mark  to      the  owner  thereof  which would affect or concern  the  flow  of      foreign  exchange  would be regarded a consideration  under  Sec.      28(1)(c)  for the use of the trade mark. Where, however,  permission  has been granted by the owner to a registered user for  the      use  of the trade mark and the said permission does  not  require      the  registered user to do anything which affects the  inflow  or      outflow  of the foreign exchange, then such an agreement  or  ar     rangement  would not come within the purview of Sec. 28(1)(c)  of      the Act."  
27\. Learned Counsel for the defendants, however, submitted that the
defendants not only paid royalty to the plaintiffs for acquiring the right to
manufacture certain items of oil field equipment and to trade in them, but the
royalty also included payment for acquiring the right to use the goodwill
associated with the mark and name Baker. To substantiate the argument he
placed reliance on the letter of Baker Hughes (Singapore) Pvt. Ltd. dated
October 27, 1994 addressed to the second defendant, and Clauses 7(A), 2(A),
2(B) and 4(A) of the 'Technical Know-how Agreement'. On going through the
letter of Baker Hughes Ltd. dated October 27, 1994 and the various Clauses of
the 'Technical Know-how Agreement' I am unable to accept the contention raised
on behalf of the defendants. The letter of Baker Hughes Limited dated October
27,1994 addressed to the second defendant merely acknowledges the receipt of
all the three instalments of the technology fee as approved by the Ministry of
Industry by their letter dated April 6,1984. This letter does not talk of
receipt of any money for permitting the second defendant to use the mark and
name Baker. None of the Clauses of the 'Technical Know-how Agreement'
including Clauses 2(A), 2(B), 4(A) and 7(A) speak of payment of any
consideration by the second defendant for acquiring the permission of the
first plaintiff to use the mark or name Baker. Clauses 2(A) and 2(B) of the
'Technical Know-how Agreement' record the agreement of 'Baker' with the first
defendant to transfer, assign and supply to the Indian company the technical
know-how described in Schedule II thereto. Schedule II specifies the scope of
the know-how. Clause 4(A) of the 'Technical Know-how Agreement' makes
provisions for transfer and supply of technical know-how from the first
plaintiff to the Indian company. Clause 7(A) makes provision for payment of
consideration by the defendants to 'Baker' for supply, transfer and assignment
to the Indian company of technical know-how and all other rights, title and
interest in respect of the technical know-how for manufacture of products
specified in the agreement. The transfer of all rights, title and interest
from 'Baker' to the second defendant is in respect of the technical know-how.
Keeping in view the context in which the expression "all other rights, title
and interest" has been used in Clause 7(A) it cannot be held that payment for
all other rights, title and interest include payment for use of trade mark and
trade name Baker by the second defendant. It is significant to note that the
sweep and the meaning of the words "all other rights, title and interest" is
controlled by the words following them, namely, "in respect of the technical
know-how for manufacture of the products specified in the agreement."
28\. Learned Counsel for the defendants was not able to point out any Clause
even in the 'Basic Agreement' indicating any payment, direct or indirect, by
the defendants to the plaintiffs for acquisition of the permission to use the
trade mark 'Baker' or for any promise on the part of the defendants to do or
abstain from doing anything with reference to the adoption of the word Baker
in the corporate name of the Indian company affecting the foreign exchange
resources of the country. Thus, no case has been made out for the application
of section 28(1)(c) of the FERA as it existed on the relevant date.
29\. Even Clause 12 of the annexure to the "letter of approval of foreign
collaboration" dated April 6, 1984 does not render Clause 8.3 of the 'basic
agreement' a nullity. Clause 12 of the said annexure reads as follows:
"Foreign trade names will not ordinarily be allowed for use on the products
for internal sales although there is no objection to their use on products to
the exporters."
Strictly speaking the above Clause deals with the use of foreign trade names
on the products and not with the use of foreign trade names as part of the
corporate names of the Indian companies. As the Clause suggests ordinarily the
Government of India will not allow foreign trade names to be used on the
products for internal sales. But there is no embargo on the use thereof if the
Government of India permits such a user.
30\. Neither the Government of India nor the Reserve Bank of India objected to
the use of the word Baker by the second defendant as part of its corporate
name at any point of time. The Registrar of Companies while granting the
certificate of incorporation dated February 13, 1985 to the second defendant
did not take any exception to the use of the word Baker by it as part of its
corporate name. The Government of India on February 7, 1986 while taking one
of the above-said agreements between the first defendant and 'Baker' on record
at the request of the second defendant did not object to the word Baker
occurring in its corporate name though the word forms part of the name of the
foreign company. It has rightly not been argued by the learned Counsel for the
defendants that the Government of India did not know that the word Baker was
being used by the foreign company as part of its corporate name. The knowledge
of the Government of India that the word Baker was part of the corporate name
of the foreign company 'Bakerline' is exhibited by its letter of April 6,1984
as it expressed its willingness to approve the terms of the collaboration of
the first defendant with Bakerine, USA, for manufacture of oil field
equipment. Even in a subsequent letter dated April 6, 1993 the Government of
India did not express any misgivings in regard to the word Baker being used by
the second defendant as part of its corporate name. The Reserve Bank of India
while allowing the second defendant to issue 309294 equity shares to M/s.
Baker International Limited, Baker Oil Tools (U.K.) Division did not ask the
second defendant to drop the word Baker from its corporate name though the
word was being used by the foreign collaborator as part of its corporate name.
Obviously the Government of India or R.B.I. will not permit the use of a
foreign trade name or trade mark in India without there being a user agreement
whereby the proprietor of the foreign trade name or trade mark permits the use
of that name/mark on the products of its Indian licensee, assignee, etc. The
Government of India is not expected to permit the use of a foreign trade
mark/trade name by a pirator or an imitator of the same on its products or as
part of its corporate name. It also cannot be attributed to the Government of
India that it would be a party to the infringement of a foreign trade
mark/trade name by allowing the Indian party to the use thereof without the
requisite permission from its owner. The Government of India before allowing
an Indian party to use the foreign trade mark/trade name will certainly
satisfy itself about the existence of a user agreement. It would be
unreasonable to hold that when a foreign trade name/trade mark is being used
by an Indian company without the permission of the one to whom such trade
mark/trade name belongs, it can be treated as an Indian trade name or trade
mark and it cannot be assumed that the Government of India gave permission to
the use thereof treating it as an Indian trade name or trade mark. In the
instant case Clause 8.3 of the 'Basic Agreement' permitted the use of the name
'Baker' to the second defendant but permissive use thereof could continue as
long as the share holding of the first plaintiff was not reduced below 40% of
the share capital of the second defendant. The Clause mandates that once the
share holding of the first plaintiff dips below 40%, the second defendant
would be precluded from using the name Baker as part of its corporate name. It
prima facie appears to me that the Government of India would have been aware
of user agreement and therefore permitted the second defendant to the use of
the trade mark trade name Baker. As without the user agreement the Government
of India would not have allowed the adoption of the word Baker as part of the
corporate name of the second defendant. It needs to be noticed that the 'Basic
Agreement' was entered into by and between the parties thereto in the year
1984. The second defendant owes its existence to the said agreement as it was
pursuant to that agreement that the second defendant was incorporated and it
was able to secure the collaboration with 'Baker' for its project. It was also
because of the 'Basic Agreement' that 'Baker' participated in the equity of
the second defendant and gave permission to the second defendant to use the
name 'Baker' in its corporate name till the happening of the specified
contingency. The second defendant has clearly taken benefit of the 'Basic
Agreement' and this could only be possible by adopting the 'Basic Agreement'.
31\. The defendants while questioning the validity of the 'Basic Agreement'
have overlooked the fact that in case the 'Basic Agreement' is not binding on
the second defendant then in that event the use of the word Baker by the
second defendant as part of its corporate name would have been without the
permission of the plaintiffs. The following observations of B.N. Kirpal, J.,
in Pioneer Hy-Bred International Inc., USA Vs. Pioneer Seed Company Ltd. and
Another (supra) support the view which I have taken:
"... The injury which is complained of in the present case is to the improper
use of the trade mark belonging to the plaintiff. The plaintiff is the owner
of the trade mark "PIONEER" and, if the Registered User Agreement is not
valid, the defendant is using the said trade mark against the wishes and
without a valid permission of the owner. Trade mark is a valuable right which
vests in its owner, and an injunction under Order 39, Rule 2, C.P.C. can be
issued to prevent injury to such a right. "
32\. Another case in point is Synthes AG Chur Vs. Rob Mathys India (P) Ltd.,
1996 PTC (16) 401. The facts of the case were thus : The first plaintiff, a
company incorporated in Switzerland, was the proprietor of trade mark AO/ASIF.
The trade mark AO was being used world wide in relation to the orthopedic
implants and instruments including screws, plates, wires, etc., and was being
used in India since 1979. The first plaintiff licenced the second plaintiff to
use the trade mark AO/ASIF in relation to the above said goods in this
country. In 1977 a 'collaboration agreement' was executed between the
plaintiffs, being represented by Dr. Robert Mathys and Reinhold Mathys on the
one hand and defendant being represented by S/Shri M.P. Dhawan and S.M. Dhawan
on the other. Pursuant to the collaboration agreement the defendant company
was incorporated. Under the collaboration agreement the defendant was
permitted to use the trade mark AO/ASIF in relation to the above said products
which were being supplied by the plaintiffs. By letter dated June 24,1992 the
plaintiffs revoked the 'collaboration agreement' with the defendant. The
plaintiffs issued a notice to the defendant requesting it not to use the trade
mark of the plaintiffs. The defendant did not desist from using the trade
mark. The plaintiffs thereupon filed a suit for passing off against the
defendant and also moved an application for interim relief. This Court while
accepting the application of the plaintiffs for interim relief observed that
once the collaboration agreement was cancelled the defendant would cease to
have any right to use the mark. In this regard the Court observed as follows:
".... Once the agreement dated 15.4.77 was cancelled the defendant would cease
to have any right at all to use the marks. The argument by the learned Senior
Counsel that such a thing is within the contemplation of common law and not
the Trade Mark Law is not at all tenable. Therefore, having regard to the
facts and circumstances, I have no hesitation in coming to the conclusion that
the plaintiffs have made out a prima facie strong case for the grant of
injunction."
It is noteworthy that in the above case the defendant did not raise the plea
that the agreement was not binding on it as the same was executed between the
plaintiffs on the one hand and the promoters of the defendant on the other.
But that will not matter as the net effect of the plea, if accepted, would
mean that the agreement was not binding on the defendant, and if the agreement
did not bind the defendant he would have no right to use the trade mark of the
plaintiffs as it was by virtue of the 'basic agreement' that the defendant was
given a right to use the same.
33\. It was pointed out by the learned Counsel for the plaintiff that the
'Basic Agreement' was executed by the first defendant who was the promoter of
the second defendant and the moving spirit behind its incorporation. It was
because of him that the motion to include the contents of Clause 8.3 into the
Articles of Association of the second defendant was defeated. It was further
contended that the corporate veil of the second defendant company should be
lifted to see the real person behind its facade. On the other hand, learned
Counsel for the defendants, contended that the Memorandum and Articles of
Association were drafted in England by the Solicitors and the bankers of the
plaintiffs, and at that stage they did not think it appropriate to include the
contents of Clause 8.3 of the 'Basic Agreement' in the Articles and Memorandum
of Association of the second defendant as the inclusion of the Clause would
have violated the provisions of Section 28 of the FERA. It was further
canvassed that the Memorandum and Articles of Association of a company
override any prior agreement between the promoters of the company and the same
will not survive after the incorporation of the company. Learned Counsel in
support of his submission relied upon a decision of the Supreme Court in V. B.
Rangaraj Vs. V. B. Gopalakrishnan and Others, (1992) 73 Company Cases 201. He
also submitted that the corporate veil of the company can only be lifted where
the company is a party to the fraud or where it has evaded taxes. Since no
case of fraud or loss to the revenue has been made out by the plaintiffs the
principle of lifting of corporate veil cannot be invoked by them.
It is not necessary to consider the question whether a case has been made out
for lifting of the corporate veil of the second defendant as, for the reasons
already stated in the earlier part of the judgment, I am prima facie of the
opinion that the second defendant had adopted the 'Basic Agreement' and had
acted upon it.
34\. Even if the contents of Clause 8.3 of the 'Basic Agreement' have not been
incorporated in the articles of association, it does not in any manner affect
the right of the plaintiffs to ask the second defendant to stop the use of the
name Baker by deleting the same from its corporate name as with the name Baker
is attached the goodwill of the business belonging to the plaintiffs. I fail
to see how the decision of the Supreme Court in V.B. Rangaraj Vs. V.B.
Gopalakrishnan and Others, [1992] 73 Company Cases 201, on which reliance was
placed by the learned Counsel for the defendants, helps the defendants. The
question that fell for consideration was whether the shareholders can among
themselves enter into an agreement in respect of transfer of shares which is
contrary to or inconsistent with the Articles of Association of the company.
The question was answered by the Supreme Court in the light of Section 82 of
the Companies Act, 1956 (which defines the nature of shares and states that
the shares or other interests of any member in a company shall be movable
property transferable in the manner provided by the Articles of Association of
the company) and Sections 28, 31, 36 and 39 thereof and Article 13 of the
Articles of Association of the company thus:
          "These  provisions of the Act make it clear that the Articles  of      Association  are  the regulations of the company binding  on  the      company  and on its shareholders and that the shares are  movable      property  and  their  transfer is regulated by  the  Articles  of      Association of the company. 
          Whether under the Companies Act or the Transfer of Property  Act,      the  shares are, therefore, transferable like any  other  movable      property. The only restriction on the transfer of the shares of a      company  is as laid down in its articles, if any.  A  restriction      which is not specified in the articles is, therefore, not binding      either on the company or on the shareholders..... 
          xx xx xx
     Hence,  the private agreement which is relied upon by the  plaintiff,  whereunder  there is a restriction on a living  member  to      transfer  his shareholding only to the branch of family to  which      he belongs in terms imposes two restrictions which are not stipulated  in  the article. Firstly, it imposes a  restriction  on  a      living member to transfer the shares only to the existing members      and secondly the transfer has to be only to a member belonging to      the  same branch of family. The agreement  obviously,  therefore,      imposes additional restrictions on the member's right to transfer      his  shares which are contrary to the provisions of  Article  13.      They are, therefore, not binding either on the shareholders or on      the company...."  
Thus, it is obvious that the Supreme Court was dealing with a case in which
the private agreement provided for restrictions on the transfer of the shares
which were not specified in the Articles of Association of the company. The
private agreement between the shareholders imposing restrictions on the
transfer of shares was clearly contrary to the Articles of Association of the
company which placed no restriction on their transfer. Under Section 82 of the
Companies Act the transfer of shares is left to be governed by the Articles of
Association of the company. In these circumstances the Supreme Court held that
the private agreement was not binding on the shareholders and the company. In
the instant case the private agreement is not contrary to the Articles of
Association of the company. The Articles of Association of the company do not
at all deal with the subject of grant of permission by the first plaintiff to
the second defendant for use by the second defendant of the name Baker in its
corporate name and the matters connected therewith. The Articles of
Association are silent on the subject. Therefore, Clause 8.3 of the 'basic
agreement' remains unaffected by the Memorandum and Articles of Association of
the company. Even Section 36 of the Companies Act would not be available to
the defendants for being pressed into service as it binds the company and the
members thereof. The first plaintiff had divested itself of its shareholding
on February 15, 1995 with the permission of the Government of India and after
ceasing to be a shareholder it asked the second defendant to discontinue the
use of the word Baker in terms of the 'Basic Agreement'.
35\. Learned Counsel for the defendants also urged that the first plaintiff
had transferred its business to the second defendant which carried with it the
right to use the goodwill of the business including the name Baker. This
argument of the defendants is not well founded. The mere transfer of technical
know-how by the first plaintiff to the second defendant to manufacture certain
items of oil field equipments does not amount to transfer of business carried
on by the plaintiffs to the defendants, and therefore, the further argument
that transfer of business carries with it the right to use the name and the
mark Baker is not available to the defendants. Since prima facie it appears to
me that the second defendant has not purchased the business of the plaintiffs
and the right to use of the name Baker, the authorities cited on behalf of the
defendants to the effect that the transfer of business carries with it the
right to use the name and mark of that business do not advance the case of the
defendants. Learned Counsel for the defendant placed much reliance on the
following passages from 'The Law of Passing Off' by Christopher Wadlow, 2nd
Edition, 1995:
> "Goodwill is personal property and can pass by voluntary assignment, under a
> Will or intestacy, or by operation of law....2.66.
      ....  The most important restriction is that goodwill cannot  be      assigned or otherwise dealt with in gross, but must remain in the      same ownership as the business to which it relates....
           .....  An assignment of goodwill does not have to be in  writing      or in any particular form and need not mention goodwill by  name.      A transaction intended to assign a business as a whole necessarily passed the goodwill to the assignee..... 
           ....  Between the parties to an assignment of the goodwill in  a      business,  the effect is to confer on the assignee the  exclusive      right to carry on the business assigned and to represent  himself      as  carrying on that business. Consequently the assignee has  the      right  to  sue the assignor for damages and an injunction  if  he      infringes the rights assigned 2.69. 
           ....  Once the plaintiff's business has been discontinued  then,      even  though he may intend to resume it sometime, it is a  matter      of  fact  and  degree at what point he should be  treated  as  no      longer having any goodwill in that business or in respect of  any      name attached to it....2.89  
36\. The above would show that assignment of goodwill in a business in favour
of the assignee can take place by conferring on the assignee exclusive and
total right to carry on the business belonging to the assignor. In the instant
case I have not been persuaded to hold that there is a prima facie evidence to
show that the second defendant acquired exclusive and total right to carry on
the business as a whole belonging to the plaintiff. The transaction did not
constitute a transfer of the business or goodwill of the first plaintiff to
the second defendant, rather it was only a transaction in the nature of a
transfer of technical know-how from the first plaintiff to the second
defendant with permission from the former to the latter to use Baker as part
of its corporate name till the happening of a particular event. As already
seen, Clause 8.3 of the 'Basic Agreement' stipulates that in case the holding
of the first plaintiff falls below 40% of the paid-up equity capital of the
Indian company, the latter shall not be entitled to retain the word Baker as
part of its name, the intention being that the said word shall be used as part
of the name of the Indian company by virtue of the permission of 'Baker' and
the Indian company shall have no property interest in the said word; and if
'Baker' so requires the Indian company shall change its name to a name not
including the word Baker or any similar word, meaning thereby that as long as
the shareholding of the first plaintiff does not fall below 40% of the paid up
capital of the second defendant, the latter will have the permission of the
former to adopt and use the word Baker as part of its corporate name. Such a
permission did not constitute assignment of the mark Baker in favour of the
second defendant. This being so the second defendant cannot claim that the
right to use Baker as part of its corporate name was assigned to it by the
first plaintiff.
37\. Learned Counsel for the defendants also relied upon the principle stated
in Drysdale and Sylverleaf's Passing Off, Law and Practice, 2nd Edition, which
can be encapsulated thus:
> The transfer of a goodwill in a business normally carries with it the right
> to use the name and get-up used in that business and the name and get-up
> cannot be assigned separately from the goodwill in the business in which it
> is used.
> The above principle does not advance the case of the defendants as it does
> not apply to the facts of the instant case.
> In Thorneloe Vs. Hill, (1891-4) AllER Rep.1263, which was cited by the
> defendants, it was held that a purchaser of a business, if he continues it,
> has the right to use the trade name and trade mark of the business in any
> way he pleases which is not calculated to deceive. In the case in hand the
> second defendant cannot be said to have purchased the business of the
> plaintiffs. Therefore, this decision also does not take the second defendant
> any further.
38\. The use of the name Baker as part of its corporate name by the second
defendant was permissive in nature and once the plaintiffs disassociated
themselves from the second defendant the use of the word Baker in the
corporate name of the second defendant becomes highly improper, and it
impinges upon the right of the plaintiffs to use the same exclusively. Learned
Counsel for the plaintiffs submitted that assuming without admitting that the
'Basic Agreement' was not binding on the second defendant even then the
plaintiffs will be entitled to interim injunction as the second defendant is
passing off its goods and business as that of the plaintiffs by using the word
Baker in its corporate name despite the fact that the plaintiffs have
proprietory right over the name Baker and the goodwill attached thereto. It
was pointed out that the word Baker is being used by the plaintiffs and its
associate companies all over the world for a long time. The second defendant
was not entitled to use the word Baker in its corporate name after the first
plaintiff had sold its share in the second defendant. Once the first plaintiff
snapped its ties with the second defendant the continued use of the word Baker
in the corporate name of the second defendant cannot be permitted. On the
other hand, learned Counsel for the defendants contended that in this part of
the world the plaintiffs have not earned any goodwill or reputation associated
with the word Baker. The plaintiffs do not have any proprietory right in India
in the trade name or trade mark Baker. The name/mark Baker is not distinctive
of their goods and the relevant members of the public in India do not
associate the same with the goods manufactured by them. Rather it is the
second defendant who has established the goodwill and reputation in respect of
oil field equipment manufactured in India under the name Baker. The buyers
identify the name and mark Baker with the goods of the second defendant and
not with the goods of the plaintiffs who do not have a trans-border reputation
in India.
39\. I have considered the submissions of the learned Counsel for the parties.
Prima facie, there cannot be any genuine controversy with regard to the
goodwill and trans-border extra territorial reputation of 'Baker' or 'Baker
Hughes' (plaintiffs) in this country. Goodwill and trans-border reputation of
'Baker' is a fact which has even been conceded by the first defendant in its
letter dated September 20,1983 addressed to the Secretariat for Industrial
Approval, Foreign Collaboration Unit, Ministry of Industry, Department of
Industrial Development. In this letter while seeking approval for
collaboration with M/s. Bakerline, a division of Baker International Limited,
the first defendant pointed out that M/s. Bakerline had been regularly
supplying equipment to ONGC and Oil India for the past decade and the imports
from the company added upto several million dollars over the period. It was
also pointed out that 'Baker' had a turnover of two billion US dollars per
annum. Highlighting the achievements of 'Baker', the first defendant in the
said letter pointed out that 'Baker' was a leading manufacturer of oil-field
drilling and exploration equipment with manufacturing units in several parts
of the world. Thus, on the own showing of the first defendant, 'Baker' is: (1)
a leading manufacturer of oil-field drilling and exploration equipment, (2)
having existence in several parts of the world, and (3) known in India since
it was supplying oil field equipment to ONGC and Oil India. It was for these
reasons that the first defendant selected the said company for collaboration
to manufacture oil field equipment in India. Therefore, it is not correct, at
this stage, to say that the plaintiffs did not have any goodwill in this
country. The plaintiffs were not only known in this part of the world but
their products were also being used by the various oil companies in India. The
second defendant had adopted the word Baker in its corporate name to show that
it was a 'Baker' Group of Companies and this was done to cash on the goodwill
associated with 'Baker'. The trade name Baker is distinctive of the plaintiffs
and the second defendant has no right to continue the use of the same after
the termination of the licence created by Clause 8.3 of the collaboration
agreement. There is good authority for the proposition that after the licensor
has terminated the licence of the licensee to use its trade name, the licensee
has no right to continue the use thereof.
40\. In the issue of October 1995 of 'Fortune', a magazine having circulation
in this part of the world, the following observations were made with regard to
'Baker Hughes':
"This oil-field well equipment and services company holds number one and
number two market share position in almost everything it does including oil
field drilling and drill-bit production."
41\. The fact that 'Baker' is known in this sub-continent is apparent from the
various purchase orders and agreements of sale between various divisions of
'Baker', on the one hand, and companies transacting business in oil field
equipment, on the other. Such purchase orders and agreements exist at pages
3.019, 3.104, 3.130, 3.154, 3.413, 3.419 and 3.427 of the Court record. That
apart, at pages 3.323 to 3.326 of the Court record the plaintiffs have
produced copies of index of Composite Catalog of Oil-Field Equipment And
Services 1984-85 where the name of Baker International Corporation and Baker
Oil Tools Inc. figures.
42\. Over looking what was stated in its letter dated September 20,1983,
learned Counsel for the defendants submitted that "in this part of the word
plaintiffs have acquired no reputation as there are hardly two or three
companies in India which are buying oil-field equipment". The submission fails
to recognise the fact that it is not the number of companies buying the oil-
field equipment which is material, but what is material is whether 'Baker' is
known in India as a leading manufacturer of oil-field equipment. In view of
the material on record the answer obviously has to be in the affirmative. The
name Baker, as already seen above, is associated exclusively with plaintiff
and its trans-border reputation extends to India.
43\. The fact that Baker was the leader in the manufacture of oil-field
equipment was sufficiently known to the first defendant several years back as
is reflected by his letter dated September 20,1983, and therefore he applied
to the Government of India for permission to establish a joint venture with
Bakerline. The international borders are quite porous in so faras the
dissemination of the information regarding products and manufacturers and
their trade names/trade marks/corporate names are concerned. The said
information along with the goodwill and the business can reach a geographical
area even before the products have hit its markets. Goodwill or reputation of
a business does not wholly or solely depend upon the availability of the
product or upon the number of customers buying the same.
44\. A Division Bench of this Court in N.R. Dongre Vs. Whirlpool Corporation,
1996 (16) PTC 476, held that the knowledge and awareness of a trade mark in
respect of the goods of a trader is not necessarily restricted only to the
people of the country where such goods are freely available, but the knowledge
and awareness of the same can reach even the shores of those countries where
the goods have not been marketed. It was further observed that the product and
its name transcends the physical boundaries of a geographical region and
acquires a transborder or overseas or extra territorial reputation not only
through import of goods but also through dissemination of information about
them. It is also recognised that the information of the goods of a foreign
trader and its trade mark can be available at a place where goods are not
marketed and consequently not being used. A trade mark of a foreign trader in
respect of a prdouct need not be associated with the actual use of the product
in order to establish reputation. The principle laid down in this case was
upheld by the Supreme Court in appeal against the above decision of the
Division Bench of this Court [See N.R. Dongre Vs. M/s. Whirlpool Corporation
Limited, ]. While upholding the decision of the Division Bench of this Court,
the Supreme Court held as follows:
           "The mark/name 'WHIRLPOOL' is associated for long, much prior  to      the  defendants' application in 1986 with the Whirlpool  Corporation-plaintiff  No. 1. In view of the prior user of the  mark  by      plaintiff  No.  1 and its trans-border  reputation  extending  to      india,  the  trade mark 'WHIRLPOOL' gives an  indication  of  the      origin  of the goods as emanating from or relating to the  Whirl     pool Corporation - plaintiff No. 1."  
     45.  Again  in Daimler Benz Aktiegesellschaft and Another Vs.  Hybo  Hindustan,  , a learned Single Judge of  this  Court,  while commenting  upon the trans-border reputation of trade name 'Benz', held  as 
    follows: 
           "In  my  view, the Trade Mark law is not intended  to  protect  a      person who deliberately sets out to take the benefit of  somebody      else's reputation with reference to goods, especially so when the      reputation  extends world wide. By no stretch of imagination  can      it  be  said that use for any length of time of the  name  "Benz"      should be not objected to."  
46\. In Apple Computer Inc. Vs. Apple Leasing and lndustries, (I.A. No. 7678
of 1989 in Suit No. 2751 of 1989, decided on May 10,1991) it was held by this
Court that in order to prove a prima facie case for grant of interim
injunction it was not necessary for the plaintiff in a passing off action to
prove that it was carrying on business in India. For the grant of interim
injunction it was enough that the plaintiff had a reputation in India. In that
case the principle laid down in Budweiser's case (1984) FSR 413, namely, that
unless there was a business activity in the place where passing off was
alleged to have taken place, action for passing off could not be maintained,
was departed from. It was also recognised that there was a strong trend to
prevent deception of the public, whether it was deliberate or innocent. This
principle is more relevant to India because there is a greater need to catch
up with the more advanced countries in the matter of business enterprises
including manufacture of products and services. This can only be possible when
a foreign trader has the confidence that its trade mark/name will be safe and
will not be imitated. Transfer of technology and collaboration will get a big
boost if unfair competition is avoided and nobody is allowed to thrive at
somebody else's reputation and goodwill.
The Madras High Court in Haw Par Bros. International Ltd. Vs. Tiger Balm Co.
(P) Ltd. and Others, 1996 PTC (16) (DB) 311, on review of several decisions of
the various Courts agreed with the view taken by this Court on the question of
trans-border reputation. In Kamal Trading Co. Vs. Gillette UK Ltd., Middle
Sex, England, (1988) 1 Patent Law Reports 135, the principle laid down by the
Budweiser's case was not accepted by a Division Bench of the Bombay High
Court. The Bombay High Court expressing its view held as follows:
"It is necessary to note that the goodwill is not limited to a particular
country because in the present days, the trade is spread all over the world
and the goods are transported from one country to another very rapidly and on
extensive scale. The goodwill acquired by the manufacturer is not necessarily
limited to the country where the goods are freely available because the goods
though not available are widely advertised in newspapers, periodicals,
magazines and in other medias. The result is that though the goods are not
available in the country, the goods and the mark under which they are sold
acquires wide reputation. Take for example, the televisions, and Video
Cassette Recorder manufactured by National, Sony or other well known Japanese
concerns. These televisions and V.C.Rs. are not imported in India and sold in
open market because of trade restrictions, but is it possible even to suggest
that the word 'National' or 'Sony' has not acquired reputation in this
country. In our judgment, the goodwill or reputation of goods or marks does
not depend upon its availability in a particular country. "
47\. Learned Counsel for the defendants pointed out that in this country only
three customers, namely, ONGC, Oil India and Essar are buying oilfield
equipment and there is no likelihood of their being deceived into buying the
products manufactured by the second defendant by mistaking them to be
manufactured by the plaintiffs. He emphasised that the purchasers have
sophisticated knowledge of the oil field equipment and the companies
manufacturing the same, and in such circumstances the action for passing off
is not maintainable. The learned Counsel for the defendants contended that in
ascertaining the possibility of deception or confusion it is important to
identify the class of likely consumers in each case and in a speialised
limited market consumers are not likely to be confused especially where they
buy goods directly from the manufacturer. The learned Counsel referred to
passages from 'Passing Off Law and Practice' by John Drysdale and Michael
Silverleaf, Second Edition (Butterworths,1995), para 4.03; 'Law of Passing Off
by Christopher Wadlow, Second Edition 1995, and the decision rendered in John
Hayter Motor Undertaking Agencies Ltd. Vs. RBHS Agencies Limited and Another,
[1977] 2 Lloyds Rep. 105; [1977] Fleet Street Patent Law Reports 285.
48\. I have given my anxious consideration to the submissions of the learned
Counsel for the defendants on this aspect of the matter. There can be an
informed class of purchasers who have a degree of knowledge and a sense of
discrimination more substantial than that of an ordinary purchaser, but the
mere fact that the customers are sophisticated, knowledgeable and
discriminating does not rule out the element of confusion if the trade
marks/trade names/corporate names of two companies are identical or if the
similarity between them is profound. In several cases it has been held that
initial confusion is likely to arise even amongst sophisticated and
knowledgeable purchasers under a mistaken belief that the two companies using
the same corporate name, trading name or style are inter-related. It is the
awakened consumers who are more aware of the modern business trends such as
trade mark licensing, mergers, franchising, etc. It is this class of buyers
who are likely to think that there is some sort of association between the
products of two different companies when they come across common or similar
trade names or corporate names or trading styles used by them. The
sophistication of a buyer is no guarantee against likely confusion. In some
cases, however, it is also possible that such a purchaser after having been
misled into an initial interest in a product manufactured by an imitator
discovers his folly, but this initial interest being based on confusion and
deception can give rise to a cause of action for the tort of passing off as
the purchaser has been made to think that there is some connection or nexus
between the products and business of two disparate companies. This view finds
support from various decisions gathered in Section 20.12 of the Filing
Instructions 1988, Fall Cumulative Supplement from Callmann 'Unfair
Competition, Trademarks and Monopolies'. This section reads as under:
> "But even apart from the doctrine of greater care, if the manner of
> purchasing becomes routine, the possibility of confusion can arise
> notwithstanding the expertise of the purchasers (Layne-Western Co. Vs. Fry,
> 174 F Supp 621 (CCPA 1960). The mere fact that all the customers are
> discriminating technicians does not by itself insure against confusion;
> being skilled in the relevant art does not necessarily preclude confusion if
> the similarity between the marks is great (Wincharger Corpn. Vs. Rinco,
> Inc., 297 F2d 261 (CCPA 1962). "The words 'sophisticated' and
> 'knowledgeable' are not talismans which, when invoked, act magically to
> dissipate a likelihood of confusion. It must also be shown how the
> purchasers react to trademarks, how observant and discriminating they are in
> practice, or that the decision to purchase involves such careful
> consideration over such a long period of time that even subtle differences
> are likely to result in a recognition that different marks are involved
> before an irrevocable decision is made" (Refreshment Mach., Inc. Vs. Reed
> Industries, Inc.,196 USPQ 840 (TTAB 1977)."
> xx xx xx "In some cases it has been held that a different type of confusion,
> referred to as "initial confusion," is likely to arise even among
> sophisticated purchasers. As one Court has said: "by intentionally copying
> the trade mark of another more established company, one company attempts to
> attract potential customers based on the reputation and name built up by the
> first user, the older company. The danger here is not that the sophisticated
> purchaser [in the oil trading market] will actually purchase from Pegasus
> Petroleum believing that he has purchased from Mobil [Oil Co.]; the danger
> is that the purchaser will be misled into an initial interest in Pegasus
> Petroleum based on a mistaken belief as to the two companies' inter
> relationships [Mobil Oil Corp. Vs. Pegasus Petroleum Corp., 229 USPQ 890].
          It  has also been suggested that sophisticated  consumers,  being      more aware of such modern business trends as trademark  licensing      and  conglomerate  mergers, are more rather than less  likely  to      suspect some association between disparate companies or  products      when they see what appears to be one company's mark on  another's      product  [Lois Sportswear, USA, Inc. Vs. Levi Straus &  Co.,  230      USPQ 831, 837 (CA2, 1986)]."  
          In John Hayter's case (supra) the Court failed to notice the principle that  even the informed, sophisticated and knowledgeable  customers  suffer from  initial  confusion where the corporate names, trade  names  or  trade marks  of  two different companies are the same or similar to  each  other. Therefore,  the view expressed in the case does not commend to me and  compels me to respectfully depart from the same. 
          In  Mobil  Oil Corp. Vs. Pegasus Petroleum Corp., 229  USPQ  890,  the Court  while dealing with the question of 'initial confusion' held as  follows: 
           "....  In short, the harm to Mobil is the likelihood that  potential purchasers will think that there is some connection or nexus      between  the products and business of Pegasus Petroleum and  that      of  Mobil. "Such initial confusion works an injury  to  (Mobil)."      See Grotrian-Steinweg, supra, 523 F.2d at 1342,186 USPQ at 445."  
          In  Lois Sportswear, USA, Inc. et al Vs. Levi Straus & Co.,  230  USPQ 831, the Court of Appeal, Second Circuit, held as follows:
           "The  eighth  and final factor _the  sophistication  of  relevant      buyers does  not,  under the circumstances of this  case,  favour      appellants.  The  District Court found, and the  parties  do  not      dispute, that the typical buyer of "designer" jeans is  sophisticated  with respect to jeans buying. Appellants argue  that  this      sophistication prevents these consumers from becoming confused by      nearly identical back packet stitching patterns. On the contrary,      we believe that it is a sophisticated jeans consumer who is  most      likely  to  assume  that the  presence  of  appellee's  trademark      stitching  pattern  on appellants' jeans indicates some  sort  of      association between the two manufacturers. Presumably it is these      sophisticated  jeans  buyers who pay the most attention  to  back      pocket  stitching  patterns and their  "meanings".  Cf  Steinway,      supra, 523 F.2d at 1341-42, 186 USPQ at 444-45 (buyers of quality      pianos, being sophisticated, are more likely mistakenly to  associate piano manufacturers using similar trade names).Likewise, in      the post-sale context, the sophisticated buyer is more likely  to      be  affected  by  the sight of appellee's  stitching  pattern  on      appellants' jeans and, consequently, to transfer goodwill. Finally,  to  the  extent  the sophisticated  buyer  is  attracted  to      appellee's  jeans because of the exclusiveness of  its  stitching      pattern,  appellee's  sales will be affected adversely  by  these      buyers'  ultimatum  realisation  that the pattern  is  no  longer      exclusive."  
          In  Wincharger Corporation Vs. Rinco, Inc. 297 F2d 261 (1962), it  was 
    observed as follows: 
           "It  is  true that in most instances technicians  would  use  the      products  of either party and they are a discriminating group  of      people  but that does not eliminate the likelihood  of  purchaser      confusion  here. Being skilled in their own art does  not  necessarily  preclude their mistaking one trademark for  another  when      the marks are as similar as those here in issue, and cover merchandise in the same general field."  
          Again in Grotrian, Helfferich, Schulz, Th. Steinweg Nachf, A  Corporation Vs. Steinway & Sons, A corporation, 365 F.Supp. 707 (1973), striking a similar note the Court held as under:
          "Plaintiff argues that purchaser will not be confused because  of      the  degree  of their sophistication and the price (B &  L  Sales      Associates  Vs. H. Daroff & Sons, Inc., supra, 421 F.2d at  354).      It is true that deliberate buyers of expensive pianos are not  as      vulnerable  to confusion as to products as hasty buyers of  inexpensive  merchandise  at  a newsstand or  drug  store  [Callmann,      Unfair Competition Trademarks and Monopolies, (3d ed. 1971)]. The      sophistication  of  buyers, however, does not always  assure  the      absence of confusion [Communications Satellite Corp. Vs.  Comcet,      Inc., 429 F.2d at 1252]. It is the subliminal confusion  apparent      in  the record as to the relationship, past and present,  between      the  corporate entities and the products that can  transcend  the      competence of even the most sophisticated consumer. 
          Misled  into an initial interest, a potential Steinway buyer  may      satisfy  himself that the less expensive Grotrian-Steinweg is  at      least  as  good, if not better, than a  Steinway.  Deception  and      confusion  thus work to appropriate defendant's good  will.  This      confusion, or mistaken beliefs as to the companies' inerrelationships,  can destroy the value of the trademark which is  intended      to  point  to  only one company [American Drill  Busing  Co.  Vs.      Rockwell Mfg. Co., 342 F.2d 1922, 52 CCPA 1173 (1965)]. Thus, the      mere fact that purchasers may be sophisticated or  discriminating      is not sufficient to preclude the likelihood of confusion. "Being      skilled  in  their own art does not  necessarily  preclude  their      mistaking one trademark for another when the marks are as similar      as those here in issue, and cover mer-chandise in the same general field" [Id]. 
> 49\. Having regard to the above discussion prima facie I am of the opinion
> that the word Baker occurring in the corporate name of the second defendant
> suggests its connection or nexus with 'Baker', which depicts a wrong picture
> as from February, 1995 'Baker' has terminated its relation with the
> defendants. The continuance of the word Baker as part of the corporate name
> of the second defendant is likely to cause deception and confusion in the
> mind of the customers. There would be no justification for the second
> defendant to use the word Baker as part of its corporate name after the ties
> between the first plaintiff and the second defendant have ceased to exist.
50\. Learned Counsel for the defendants contended that 'Baker' has sent
letters to the consumers apprising them of the fact that the first plaintiff
has terminated its relationship with the second defendant company. It has also
published the information in the trade journal which has world wide
circulation. It is submitted that in view of this clarification there is
hardly any chance of confusion persisting in the minds of the consumers with
regard to the real state of affairs. The defendants in making this submission
have missed the fact that due to globalisation of trade a large number of
buyers have world wide presence. They are maintaining offices having different
departments and levels. They are also working through their representatives in
various countries and cities. It is difficult for a manufacturer and seller to
reach the information to all concerned at all levels. Even an advertisement or
notice inserted in a publication having wide circulation may not fulfill the
desired objective. In India there may be only three consumers of oil field
equipment but they cannot be the only ones in the world market.
51\. Learned Counsel for the defendants referred to para 4.03 of "Passing Off
Law and Practice" by John Drysdale and Michael Silverleaf, Second Edition
(1995) published by Butterworths. But for a complete understanding of the
state of law a reference to para 5.04 thereof is also necessary. It may be
noted that in para 4.03 it is pointed out that some cases of passing off arise
in relation to the goods or services of which there is a specialised limited
market, and the customers in such cases are often better informed about the
products and services they are buying than members of the general public. Such
customers may not be likely to be confused and in limited cases it may never
be possible for the defendant to pass off his goods as the plaintiff's because
all potential customers of those goods buy them only directly from the
plaintiff. At the same time while noticing the judicial decisions it has been
observed that if the defendant is in direct competition with the plaintiff,
the Court will readily infer the likelihood of the damage to the plaintiff's
goodwill not only through loss of sales but also through loss of exclusive use
of his name or mark in relation to the particular goods or business. In para
5.04 it is observed as follows:
"5.04. If a defendant is in direct competition with the plaintiff, the Court
will readily infer the likelihood of damage to the plaintiff's goodwill, not
merely through loss of sales but also through loss of the exclusive use of his
name or mark in relation to the particular goods or business concerned, on
evidence of the plaintiff's reputation in the goods or business and a relevant
misrepresentation by the defendant in relation to the same or similar goods or
the same or a similar business."
52\. Reverting to the case in hand, it can be readily inferred that when a
purchaser of the oil field equipment comes to know that the name Baker is no
longer the sole preserve of the plaintiffs and can be used even by a company
which is not associated with the plaintiffs, his confidence in the products of
the plaintiffs is likely to receive a set back. A buyer who was being
attracted to the products of the plaintiffs for the exclusivity of the name
Baker may turn away from them. The value and the strength of the goodwill
attached to the word Baker which hitherto was the exclusive and the sole
preserve of the plaintiffs is likely to depreciate. That a part the use of the
word Baker as part of the corporate name of the second defendant will put the
reputation of the plaintiffs in the hands of the second defendant over whom
they have no control, being immune from their direction and command. The
dilution of the trade mark or corporate name of the plaintiffs by the use of
the word Baker by the defendants after the plaintiffs have ceased to have any
association or relationship with the defendants, will adversely affect the
business interests of the plaintiffs. I am supported in this view by the
following observations of Neville, J. in Warwick Tyre Co. Vs. New Motor and
General Rubber Co., [1910] 1 Chancery Division 248 (at page 255):
"Practically the sole asset possessed by the plaintiff is the goodwill which
attaches to the name of Warwick in the tyre market, and I think the evidence
shows that the goodwill is an asset of great value. It would not be doubted
that the value of the trade name Warwick in the tyre market would be
considerably lessened by the fact that there was another person in the market
who was entitled to deal in tyres in connection with the name Warwick. In the
first place it would limit the right of the owner of the name Warwick in the
tyre market, to the use of his name in respect of those articles-only those
actual articles on which he had used it hitherto, and in the second place, it
puts the reputation of the plaintiffs in the hands of persons over whom they
have no control whatever."
53\. Again in American Drill Busing Co. Vs. Rockwell Mfg. Co., 342 F.2d 1922,
52 CCPA 1173 (1965), it was held that the confusion or mistaken beliefs as to
the companies' inter-relationships, can destroy the value of the trade mark
which is intended to point to only one company.
54\. Neither the receipt of ISO 9002 Certification by the second defendant nor
the plea that the types of items being manufactured by the second defendant
are not being manufactured by the first plaintiff can dissipate the likelihood
of confusion. Since the second defendant undoubtedly had a strong relationship
with 'Baker' in the past, that knowledge of the buyers can affect their
judgment and competence leading to varying degrees of confusion - initial,
partial or total. Even a discerning consumer could fall prey to confusion. A
situation cannot be legitimised where a company which extends its technical
know-how to another company is made to lose its corporate name to the company
to which technical know-how is extended. A licensee permitted to use the trade
name of the licensor on its goods cannot claim to continue the use of the same
even after the cancellation of its licence by the licensor. In the event of a
contrary view the international trade and commerce will receive a set back and
will undermine the faith of the trading community in the country where such
acts are condoned.
55\. It was also contended by the learned Counsel for the defendants that
after the establishment of the second defendant there is hardly any sale of
the products of the plaintiffs in this country. The learned Counsel urged that
since the plaintiffs are not carrying on business in India, they cannot bring
an action for passing off. The argument is not well founded. In Calvin Klein
Inc. Vs. International Apparel Syndicate, 1996 PTC (16) 293, a Single Judge of
the Calcutta High Court, on the basis of judicial dicta including the decision
of the Supreme Court in Rustom and Hornby Ltd. Vs. Zamindars Engineering Co.,
, held that it was not necessary that the plaintiff must carry on business in
India before bringing an action for passing off if he otherwise proves that he
has established a reputation in this country.
56\. Learned Counsel for the defendants placed reliance on the decision in
Star Industrial Company Limited Vs. Yap Kwee Kor (trading as New Start
Industrial Company), [1976] FSR 256, in support of the proposition that if no
business is transacted in a country by the plaintiff, though it has business
elsewhere, it will not acquire any goodwill in that country. With respect I
cannot subscribe to this view. The grafting of the concept of user to the
requirement of reputation in the definition of the tort of passing off cannot
be accepted in view of the decisions of the Supreme Court in Ruston and Hornby
Ltd. Vs. Zamindars Engineering Co. (supra) and N.R. Dongre Vs. M/s. Whirlpool
Corporation Limited (supra).
57\. As already pointed out while dealing with the issue of trans-border
reputation, the plaintiffs have prima facie established their reputation and
goodwill in this country. This is not to suggest that the goodwill and
reputation was established merely by dissemination of information in this
country relating to the products of the plaintiffs, its corporate name, trade
mark and trade name and not by the actual sale of its products.
58\. In order to determine whether the plaintiffs have established the
ingredients for successfully bringing an action for passing off it will be
appropriate to advert to the broad principles of the law of passing off. In
'Kerly's Law of Trade Marks and Trade Names'-Supplement-pages 42 and 43,
paragraph 16-02, the concept of passing off is stated thus:
          "The  law of passing-off can be summarised in one  short  general      proposition  -no man may pass off his goods as those of  another.      More  specifically, it may be expressed in terms of the  elements      which  the plaintiff in such an action has to prove in  order  to      succeed. These are three in number. 
          Firstly,  he must establish a goodwill or reputation attached  to      the  goods or services which he supplies in the mind of the  purchasing  public  by  association with  the  identifying  'get-up'      (whether  it consists simply of a brand name or a trade  description,or the individual features of labelling or packaging)  under      which his particular goods or services are offered to the public,      such  that the get-up is recognised by the public as  distinctive      specifically of the plaintiff's goods or services. 
          Secondly, he must demonstrate a misrepresentation by the  defendant to the public (whether or not intentional) leading or  likely      to  lead the public to belief that the goods or services  offered      by him are the goods or services of the plaintiff.
          Thirdly, he must demonstrate that he suffers or, in a quick  time      action,  that  he  is likely to suffer damage by  reason  of  the      erroneous belief engendered by the defendant's  misrepresentation      that  the source of the defendant's goods or service is the  same      as the source of those offered by the plaintiff..." 
     59.  In Kaviraj Pandit Durga Dutt Sharma Vs. Navartna Pharmaceutical  Laboratories, , the Supreme Court commenting on the characteristics of an action for passing off observed that the action for passing  off is a common law remedy and in substance an action for deceit where a person passes off his own goods as those of another. 
     60.  In 'Passing Off Law and Practice' by John Drysdale and Michael Silverleaf, 2nd Edition, the tort of 'passing off' has been described as follows: 
          "4.01.  At  the  heart of every case of passing off  is  the  act      committed  by  the defendant which is alleged to  constitute  the      misrepresentation  that the defendant's goods or business are  in      fact the plaintiff's. As has been seen, the nature of the reputation  which  the plaintiff's entitled to protect  can  take  many      forms.  The  same is also true of the  act  of  misrepresentation      committed by the defendant. Additionally, the use by a trader  of      names, marks, or get-up which would by themselves be  confusingly      similar  to  those of another trader, so as to give  rise  to  an      improper  misrepresentation,  may be offset by  combination  with      other  material which distinguishes the goods or business of  the      one  from those of the other. Thus, it is always necessary  in  a      case  of potential passing off to consider the totality  of  what      the defendant is doing in order to determine whether or not there      is a likelihood of confusion."  
     61.  'The  Law of Passing-Off' by Christopher Wadlow, Second  Edition,  alludes to the tort of passing off thus:
          ".....  None of the numerous authorities cited at the bar by  the      appellants'  Counsel carry the exclusive right of a trader  to  a      particular  name, beyond that limit. There is no authority,  and,      in  my  opinion, no principle for giving the  trader  any  higher      right.  If  he cannot allege and prove that the  public  are  deceived,  or that there is a reasonable probability of  deception,      he has no right to interfere with the use of his name by others.
          xx xx xx
          4.03. In Spalding Vs. Gamage, (1915) 32 R.P.C. 273 (H.L..),  Lord      Parker said that it would be impossible to enumerate or  classify      all the possible ways in which a man might make the false  representation relied on. It is clear that the class of misrepresentation  is wide, but not unlimited. Misrepresentations  which  have      been recognised as actionable in passing-off are categorised  and      described  in detail in the next chapter, and an attempt is  made      to  deduce a general rule. What follows is a summary of  some  of      the  forms of misrepresentation which are most often  encountered      or  are particularly valuable in illustrating the  boundaries  of      the  tort. It is assumed that all the other elements of the  tort      are  present,  and in particular, that the  plaintiff  is  really      likely to suffer substantial damage to his business or be  useful      to summarise and dismiss some of the most persistent. Most importantly,  the  misrepresentation in passing off need not  be  made      fraudulently  or with any intention to deceive;  "calculated"  in      Lord  Diplock's  speech in Advocate [Erven Warnink  B.U.  Vs.  J.      Townend  & Sons (Hull) Ltd., (1979) A.C.731] means likely  rather      than intended. The only continuing importance of fraud is for its      evidential value. 
          The  misrepresentation  need  not  be  to  the  effect  that  the      defendant's goods or business are those of the plaintiff; and  as      two  partial corollaries of this, passing-off is not confined  to      misrepresentations in the nature of trade mark infringement,  and      the misrepresentation may be such as to be actionable by a potentially  large but determinate class of plaintiffs.  Finally,  the      oddly  durable fallacy that the plaintiff and defendant  must  in      some  sense share a common field of activity may be  regarded  as      obsolete.  The presence or absence of a common field is  no  more      than a matter of degree and inference." 
62\. In Erven Warnink BV and Others Vs. J. Townend & Sons (Hull) Ltd. and
Others, [1979] 2 All ER 927 (HL), Lord Diplock identified five characteristics
which must be present in order to create a valid cause of action for passing
off: "(1) a misrepresentation, (2) made by a trader in the course of trade,
(3) to prospective customers of his or ultimate consumers of goods or services
supplied by him, (4) which is calculated to injure the business or goodwill of
another trader (in the sense that this is a reasonably foreseeable
consequence), and (5) which causes actual damage to a business or goodwill of
the trader by whom the action is brought or in a quia timet action will
probably do so". In the same decision, Lord Fraser of Tullybelton also
identified five ingredients, not being identical to the ones stated by Lord
Diplock, for invoking the tort of passing off, namely-
          (1) that his business consists of or includes, selling in England      a class of goods to which the particular trade name applies; 
          (2)  that the class of goods is clearly defined, and that in  the      minds of the public, or a section of the public, in England,  the      trade name distinguishes that class from other similar goods; 
          (3) that because of the reputation of the goods there is goodwill      attached to the name; 
          (4) that he, the plaintiff, as a member of the class of those who      sell  the goods, is the owner of goodwill in England which is  of 
         substantial value; 
          (5) that he has suffered, or is really likely to suffer, substantial  damage  to his property in the goodwill by  reason  of  the      defendants selling goods which are falsely described by the trade      name to which the goodwill is attached". 
63\. In Consorzio Del Prosciutto Di Parma Vs. Marks & Spencer Plc and Others,
[1991] RPC (15) 351 (at pages 368-369), Nourse, L.J., took into account the
dicta of the Courts, including the speeches of Lord Diplock and Lord Fraser of
Tullybelton in Warnink Vs. Townend (supra), in each of which five ingredients
for invoking the tort of passing off are identified, the ingredients not being
the same in each case. However, Nourse, L.J . was of the opinion that five
ingredients given by each of the two law lords do not give the same degree of
assistance in analysis and decision as the classical trinity of elements to
prove the tort of passing off, namely, (1) a reputation of goodwill acquired
by the plaintiff in his goods, name, mark, etc., (2) a misrepresentation by
the defendant leading to the confusion, or deception (3) causing damage to the
plaintiff.
64\. In Reckitt & Colman Products Ltd. Vs. Borden Inc and Others, [1990] 1 All
ER 873, the trinity of characteristics for invoking the remedy for tort of
passing off was applied. In this case the respondent had been manufacturing
and supplying domestic products including preserved lemon juice. The
respondent marketed the lemon juice in plastic squeeze containers under the
brand name "Jif" in the United Kingdom. Until the 1970s the respondents were
substantially the only supplier in the United Kingdom of lemon juice packed in
squeeze bottles. The appellants (Borden Inc) were carrying on business in the
USA for manufacturing food products including preserved lemon juice. In the
U.S. market the juice was being marketed under the brand name 'Rea Lemon'. The
mark was registered in the U.S. This was also marketed in plastic squeeze
containers of lemon colour but of a shape resembling the familiar (Mills) hand
grenade. Subsequently, the appellants Borden Inc decided to market the juice
in U.K. in lemon shaped plastic squeeze containers. It was the contention of
the respondents that this was done by the appellants to pass off their goods
as the goods of the respondent. The Court of original jurisdiction granted the
injunction sought by the respondents who were the plaintiffs before it. This
decision was upheld by the Court of appeal. The House of Lords dismissing the
appeal held that a plaintiff has to prove three elements in order to succeed
in an action for passing off. These three elements as laid down by the House
of Lords are : "(1) the plaintiff must establish a goodwill or reputation
attached to the goods or services in the mind of the purchasing public by
association with the identifying get up (whether it consists simply of a brand
name or a trade description, or the individual features of labelling or
packaging) under which his particular goods or services are offered to the
public, such that the get-up is recognised by the public as distinctive
specifically of the plaintiff's goods or services; (2) the plaintiff must
demonstrate a misrepresentation by the defendant to the public (whether or not
intentional) leading or likely to lead the public to believe that goods or
services offered by him are the goods or services of the plaintiff, whether
the public is aware of the plaintiff's identity as the manufacturer or
supplier of the goods or services is immaterial as long as they are identified
with a particular source which is in fact the plaintiff. For example, if the
public is accustomed to rely on a particular brand name in purchasing goods of
a particular description, it matters not at all that there is little or no
public awareness of the identify of the proprietor of the brand name; (3) he
must demonstrate that he suffers or, in a quia timet action, that he is likely
to suffer damage by reason of the erroneous belief engendered by the
defendant's misrepresentation that the source of the defendant's goods or
services is the same as the source of those offered by the plaintiff".
65\. It is not necessary to multiply authorities to show as to what must be
established by a plaintiff in order to bring an action for passing off.
66\. From the analysis of the above decisions it is apparent that a plaintiff
in an action for passing off must establish the following elements:
          1.  The  plaintiff has acquired a reputation or goodwill  in  his      goods, name or mark;
          2.  A  misrepresentation, whether intentional  or  unintentional,      which proceeds from the defendant by the use of the name or  mark      of the plaintiff or by any other method or means and which  leads      or is likely to lead the purchaser into believing that the  goods      or  services offered by the defendant are the goods and  services      of  the plaintiff, or that the goods and services offered by  the      defendant are the result of its association with the plaintiff; 
     3.  The plaintiff has suffered or is likely to suffer damage  due      to the belief engendered by the defendant's representation. 
          Prima  facie  the  plaintiffs have been able to  establish  the  above ingredients. 
67\. As already pointed out, the plaintiffs have acquired goodwill attached to
the name Baker which is part of the corporate name of the plaintiffs and its
associate companies. Thus, prima facie, the first ingredient for invoking the
action for passing off is satisfied . In so far as the second ingredient is
concerned, ex facie the same also stands established. After the first
plaintiff had sold its shares in the second defendant company, it ceased to
have any relationship with the latter. The continued use of the word Baker by
the second defendant is likely to engender the belief in the purchasers that
the second defendant is associated with the plaintiffs and the goods and
services offered by the defendants are the outcome of its association with the
plaintiffs. The use of the name Baker thus amounts to misrepresentation by the
second defendant. As regards the third element, the continued use of the word
Baker in the corporate name of the second defendant is likely to injure and
damage the business, goodwill and reputation of the plaintiffs.
68\. Learned Counsel for the defendants next submitted that the plaintiffs
have not come to the Court with clean hands and, therefore, a Court of equity
will not exercise its discretion to give relief to the plaintiffs by way of
interim injunction. In support of his submission learned Counsel referred to
the following decisions:
> 1\. Anand Swarup Vs. M.C.D., .
          2.  J.N. Bhambhani Vs. Indian Overseas Bank, AIR 1979  (NOC)  106      Delhi.
          3. Padmanabhan Vs. Thomas, .
          4. Penguin Books Ltd. Vs. India Book Distributors, (I.As. No.2286      and  2287  in Suit No. 726/83 decided on 2.8.1983  by  a  learned      Single Judge of this Court).
He also referred to Halsbury's Laws of England, Fourth Edition, Vol.16, pages
685887, para 751; Halsbury's Laws of England, Fourth Edition, Vol.24, pages
448-455, Para 857; Snell's Equity, 29th Edition, 1990, pages 660 to 666; and
Hanbury and Maudsley, Modern Equity, 13th Edition, 1989, pages 676 to 680.
Elaborating his argument learned Counsel submitted that the plaintiffs had
suppressed the technical know-how agreement and had not referred to the same
in the plaint. He also pointed out that the plaintiffs concealed the fact that
the Memorandum and Articles of Association of the second defendant were
drafted in England by the Solicitors of the first plaintiff.
69\. Insofar as the allegation that the technical know-how agreement was
concealed by the plaintiffs from this Court is concerned, it has already been
pointed out that the scope of the 'Technical Know-how Agreement' was different
from the scope of the 'Basic Agreement'. It has also been found that the
'Technical Know-how Agreement' did not supersede the 'Basic Agreement'.
Therefore, for the purposes of the plea of the plaintiffs that the defendants
were not entitled to use the word Baker in its corporate name after the first
plaintiff had sold its shareholding in the second defendant to White Horse
Trading Limited, it was the 'Basic Agreement' which was relevant and not the
'Technical Know-how Agreement'. In any event there was no question of
suppression of 'Technical Know-how Agreement' as the 'Basic Agreement' at
various places speaks of the 'Technical Know-how Agreement'. Therefore, the
defendants are not right in their submission that the plaintiffs had
suppressed the 'Technical Know-how Agreement'.
70\. As regards the submission of the learned Counsel for the defendants that
the plaintiffs concealed the fact that the Memorandum and Articles of
Association of the second defendant were drafted at England under their
(plaintiffs') instructions and this was done to cover up the fact that they
were themselves instrumental in not incorporating the contents of Clause 8.3
of the 'Basic Agreement' in the Articles of Association so as to prevent the
'Basic Agreement' from falling foul of the provisions of the FERA and the
'letter of intent' and the 'letter of approval of the foreign collaboration',
I am of the opinion that the submission does not advance the case of the
defendants as Clause 8.3 of the 'Basic Agreement' does not violate any of the
provisions of FERA or any of the mandatory terms of the letter of intent or
letter of approval of foreign collaboration. Therefore, it appears to me that
that could not have been the reason for not incorporating the contents of
Clause 8.3 initially. It will be seen that when the second defendant was
incorporated there were only two shareholders, namely, the first defendant and
Mira Khushalani. Baker International (U.K.) Division was not a shareholder. If
the contents of Clause 8.3 had been included in the Articles of Association of
the second defendant, as one of the Articles thereof subscribed by the above
said two shareholders, then the same would have been binding on them and the
company as per Section 36 of the Companies Act, 1956. This would have
disentitled the second defendant to utilise the name Baker as part of its
corporate name since the requirement of the said Clause would not have been
satisfied, the first plaintiff's share holding being nil at the time of
incorporation of the company. Therefore, no capital can be made out of the
fact that the plaintiffs had not included the contents of Clause 8.3 in the
Articles of Association of the second defendant company or that they had
failed to disclose in that plaint that the Articles of Association were
drafted at their instance.
71\. Besides, the above said alleged concealments, the defendants also accused
the plaintiffs to have concealed several other facts, but none of these are
material for the controversy between the parties. Some of the alleged
concealments could have been of some consequence if the second plaintiff had
transferred and assigned its business as a whole to the second defendant
thereby in the process transferring its name or mark. The defendants have also
accused the plaintiffs to have made misrepresentations. These allegations are
made on the basis of conclusions drawn from set of facts as perceived by the
defendants. Similarly, the representations which the plaintiffs made were
based on how they saw the facts. While the plaintiffs said that the 'Basic
Agreement' was subsisting and binding on the second defendant, the latter
considered the same to have been superseded and not subsisting, besides being
violative of FERA. It cannot be said that while making these submissions
either the defendants or the plaintiffs made misrepresentations. The same
would apply to the other points of view which the parties hold. Unless a set
of facts point towards one and only one direction, they are at liberty to make
submissions and statements according to their own lights. Therefore, I find no
substance in the said allegations of the defendants. Since I am of the opinion
that the plaintiffs had not concealed any material facts, therefore, the
authorities cited by the defendants are of no avail to them.
72\. Having regard to the above discussion I am of the view that the
plaintiffs have established a strong prima facie case for grant of interim
relief. The balance of convenience also lies in their favour. In case the
interim injunction is refused to the plaintiffs they are likely to suffer
damage to their goodwill and award of compensation in the circumstances of the
case will not be an adequate relief to them.
73\. It was also contended on behalf of the defendants that the plaintiffs are
guilty of acquiescence and laches, and therefore, no relief should be granted
to them. I am unable to agree with the submission of learned Counsel for the
defendants. The plaintiffs moved the instant suit immediately after it had
disinvested its shareholding in the second defendant company in February, 1995
and a notice was given to the second defendant to cease and desist from using
the name Baker in its corporate name. Therefore, the plaintiffs cannot be
accused of acquiescence and laches.
74\. In view of the above survey of facts and law I consider it appropriate to
pass an ad interim mandatory injunction against the second defendant.
Therefore, it is ordered as follows:
75\. The second defendant shall stop using the word BAKER in its corporate
name from the expiry of three months from today. The second defendant shall
approach the Registrar of Companies with an application in accordance with law
for deletion of the word 'BAKER' from its corporate name within two months
from today. The Registrar of Companies will proceed to dispose of the
application in accordance with law within one month from the date of making of
the application. These directions will enure till the disposal of the suit.
The I.A. is disposed of.
case will not be an adequate relief to them.
73\. It was also contended on behalf of the defendants that the plaintiffs are
guilty of acquiescence and laches, and therefore, no relief should be granted
to them. I am unable to agree with the submission of learned Counsel for the
defendants. The plaintiffs moved the instant suit immediately after it had
disinvested its shareholding in the second defendant company in February, 1995
and a notice was given to the second defendant to cease and desist from using
the name Baker in its corporate name. Therefore, the plaintiffs cannot be
accused of acquiescence and laches.
74\. In view of the above survey of facts and law I consider it appropriate to
pass an ad interim mandatory injunction against the second defendant.
Therefore, it is ordered as follows:
75\. The second defendant shall stop using the word BAKER in its corporate
name from the expiry of three months from today. The second defendant shall
approach the Registrar of Companies with an application in accordance with law
for deletion of the word 'BAKER' from its corporate name within two months
"Baker" or "Baker Hughes"). The second plaintiff is a parent company of the
first plaintiff and is stated to own the trade mark BAKER.
2\. The first defendant Mr. Hiroo Khushalani, is the Chief Executive Officer
and Managing Director of the second defendant. The second defendant Baker Oil
Tools (India) Private Limited is a company incorporated in India under a
certificate of incorporation dated February 13, 1985.
3\. In 1982 the first defendant had discussions with Bakerline, a Baker Oil
Tools Company, Texas, USA (a division of Baker International Ltd.), for
floating a joint venture company in India for the manufacture of oil field
equipment and products. On May 13,1982 the first defendant wrote a letter to
Bakerline, in confirmation of their discussions, in which it was stated,
inter-alia, that Baker Oil Tools or any of its subsidiary companies will have
40%, equity participation in the capital structure of the joint venture
company which was intended to be set up in India by the first defendant as its
promoter. It was proposed that Baker Oil Tools will receive 5% royalty on the
products manufactured by the joint venture company for use within India.
Besides, Baker Oil Tools or any of its nominated subsidiary companies will
receive a sum of US dollars 20,00,000 for the transfer of drawings and
technical documentation to the Indian company. On September 20,1983, the first
defendant, as the sole proprietor of Miraksha Associates, applied to the
case will not be an adequate relief to them.
73\. It was also contended on behalf of the defendants that the plaintiffs are
guilty of acquiescence and laches, and therefore, no relief should be granted
to them. I am unable to agree with the submission of learned Counsel for the
defendants. The plaintiffs moved the instant suit immediately after it had
disinvested its shareholding in the second defendant company in February, 1995
and a notice was given to the second defendant to cease and desist from using
the name Baker in its corporate name. Therefore, the plaintiffs cannot be
accused of acquiescence and laches.
74\. In view of the above survey of facts and law I consider it appropriate to
pass an ad interim mandatory injunction against the second defendant.
Therefore, it is ordered as follows:
75\. The second defendant shall stop using the word BAKER in its corporate
name from the expiry of three months from today. The second defendant shall
approach the Registrar of Companies with an application in accordance with law
for deletion of the word 'BAKER' from its corporate name within two months
"Baker" or "Baker Hughes"). The second plaintiff is a parent company of the
first plaintiff and is stated to own the trade mark BAKER.
2\. The first defendant Mr. Hiroo Khushalani, is the Chief Executive Officer
and Managing Director of the second defendant. The second defendant Baker Oil
Tools (India) Private Limited is a company incorporated in India under a
certificate of incorporation dated February 13, 1985.
3\. In 1982 the first defendant had discussions with Bakerline, a Baker Oil
Tools Company, Texas, USA (a division of Baker International Ltd.), for
floating a joint venture company in India for the manufacture of oil field
equipment and products. On May 13,1982 the first defendant wrote a letter to
Bakerline, in confirmation of their discussions, in which it was stated,
inter-alia, that Baker Oil Tools or any of its subsidiary companies will have
40%, equity participation in the capital structure of the joint venture
company which was intended to be set up in India by the first defendant as its
promoter. It was proposed that Baker Oil Tools will receive 5% royalty on the
products manufactured by the joint venture company for use within India.
Besides, Baker Oil Tools or any of its nominated subsidiary companies will
receive a sum of US dollars 20,00,000 for the transfer of drawings and
technical documentation to the Indian company. On September 20,1983, the first
defendant, as the sole proprietor of Miraksha Associates, applied to the
case will not be an adequate relief to them.
73\. It was also contended on behalf of the defendants that the plaintiffs are
guilty of acquiescence and laches, and therefore, no relief should be granted
to them. I am unable to agree with the submission of learned Counsel for the
defendants. The plaintiffs moved the instant suit immediately after it had
disinvested its shareholding in the second defendant company in February, 1995
and a notice was given to the second defendant to cease and desist from using
the name Baker in its corporate name. Therefore, the plaintiffs cannot be
accused of acquiescence and laches.
74\. In view of the above survey of facts and law I consider it appropriate to
pass an ad interim mandatory injunction against the second defendant.
Therefore, it is ordered as follows:
75\. The second defendant shall stop using the word BAKER in its corporate
name from the expiry of three months from today. The second defendant shall
approach the Registrar of Companies with an application in accordance with law
for deletion of the word 'BAKER' from its corporate name within two months
"Baker" or "Baker Hughes"). The second plaintiff is a parent company of the
first plaintiff and is stated to own the trade mark BAKER.
2\. The first defendant Mr. Hiroo Khushalani, is the Chief Executive Officer
and Managing Director of the second defendant. The second defendant Baker Oil
Tools (India) Private Limited is a company incorporated in India under a
certificate of incorporation dated February 13, 1985.
3\. In 1982 the first defendant had discussions with Bakerline, a Baker Oil
Tools Company, Texas, USA (a division of Baker International Ltd.), for
floating a joint venture company in India for the manufacture of oil field
equipment and products. On May 13,1982 the first defendant wrote a letter to
Bakerline, in confirmation of their discussions, in which it was stated,
inter-alia, that Baker Oil Tools or any of its subsidiary companies will have
40%, equity participation in the capital structure of the joint venture
company which was intended to be set up in India by the first defendant as its
promoter. It was proposed that Baker Oil Tools will receive 5% royalty on the
products manufactured by the joint venture company for use within India.
Besides, Baker Oil Tools or any of its nominated subsidiary companies will
receive a sum of US dollars 20,00,000 for the transfer of drawings and
technical documentation to the Indian company. On September 20,1983, the first
defendant, as the sole proprietor of Miraksha Associates, applied to the
Ministry of Industry, Department of Industrial Development for permission to
establish a joint venture with M/s. Bakerline for manufacturing oil field
equipment. The Government of India by its letter bearing No. L-/260(84) dated
April 6, 1984 (for short 'the letter of intent'), addressed to the first
defendant, expressed its willingness to issue an industrial licence under the
Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951, to the latter for the
establishment of a new industrial undertaking for the manufacture of oil field
equipment, namely, Conventional Float Collars and Shoe, Differential Float
Collars and Shoe, Centralizers, Scratchers. Stop Ring, Bridge Plugs, Cement
Retainers, Stage Cementing Collars, Liner Hangers and Accessories and Pump
Feud and Pass at Gurgaon (Haryana), subject to the following conditions
case will not be an adequate relief to them.
73\. It was also contended on behalf of the defendants that the plaintiffs are
guilty of acquiescence and laches, and therefore, no relief should be granted
to them. I am unable to agree with the submission of learned Counsel for the
defendants. The plaintiffs moved the instant suit immediately after it had
disinvested its shareholding in the second defendant company in February, 1995
and a notice was given to the second defendant to cease and desist from using
the name Baker in its corporate name. Therefore, the plaintiffs cannot be
accused of acquiescence and laches.
74\. In view of the above survey of facts and law I consider it appropriate to
pass an ad interim mandatory injunction against the second defendant.
Therefore, it is ordered as follows:
75\. The second defendant shall stop using the word BAKER in its corporate
name from the expiry of three months from today. The second defendant shall
approach the Registrar of Companies with an application in accordance with law
for deletion of the word 'BAKER' from its corporate name within two months
"Baker" or "Baker Hughes"). The second plaintiff is a parent company of the
first plaintiff and is stated to own the trade mark BAKER.
2\. The first defendant Mr. Hiroo Khushalani, is the Chief Executive Officer
and Managing Director of the second defendant. The second defendant Baker Oil
Tools (India) Private Limited is a company incorporated in India under a
certificate of incorporation dated February 13, 1985.
3\. In 1982 the first defendant had discussions with Bakerline, a Baker Oil
Tools Company, Texas, USA (a division of Baker International Ltd.), for
floating a joint venture company in India for the manufacture of oil field
equipment and products. On May 13,1982 the first defendant wrote a letter to
Bakerline, in confirmation of their discussions, in which it was stated,
inter-alia, that Baker Oil Tools or any of its subsidiary companies will have
40%, equity participation in the capital structure of the joint venture
company which was intended to be set up in India by the first defendant as its
promoter. It was proposed that Baker Oil Tools will receive 5% royalty on the
products manufactured by the joint venture company for use within India.
Besides, Baker Oil Tools or any of its nominated subsidiary companies will
receive a sum of US dollars 20,00,000 for the transfer of drawings and
technical documentation to the Indian company. On September 20,1983, the first
defendant, as the sole proprietor of Miraksha Associates, applied to the
Ministry of Industry, Department of Industrial Development for permission to
establish a joint venture with M/s. Bakerline for manufacturing oil field
equipment. The Government of India by its letter bearing No. L-/260(84) dated
April 6, 1984 (for short 'the letter of intent'), addressed to the first
defendant, expressed its willingness to issue an industrial licence under the
Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951, to the latter for the
establishment of a new industrial undertaking for the manufacture of oil field
equipment, namely, Conventional Float Collars and Shoe, Differential Float
Collars and Shoe, Centralizers, Scratchers. Stop Ring, Bridge Plugs, Cement
Retainers, Stage Cementing Collars, Liner Hangers and Accessories and Pump
Feud and Pass at Gurgaon (Haryana), subject to the following conditions
case will not be an adequate relief to them.
73\. It was also contended on behalf of the defendants that the plaintiffs are
guilty of acquiescence and laches, and therefore, no relief should be granted
to them. I am unable to agree with the submission of learned Counsel for the
defendants. The plaintiffs moved the instant suit immediately after it had
disinvested its shareholding in the second defendant company in February, 1995
and a notice was given to the second defendant to cease and desist from using
the name Baker in its corporate name. Therefore, the plaintiffs cannot be
accused of acquiescence and laches.
74\. In view of the above survey of facts and law I consider it appropriate to
pass an ad interim mandatory injunction against the second defendant.
Therefore, it is ordered as follows:
75\. The second defendant shall stop using the word BAKER in its corporate
name from the expiry of three months from today. The second defendant shall
approach the Registrar of Companies with an application in accordance with law
for deletion of the word 'BAKER' from its corporate name within two months
