Customs, Excise and Gold Tribunal - Delhi
Commissioner Of Central Excise vs Hanut Industries And Ors. on 22 January,
2002
Equivalent citations: 2002 (80) ECC 552
Bench: A T V.K., K Kumar
ORDER V.K. Agrawal, Member (T)
1\. In these five appeals preferred by Revenue, the issue involved is whether
powder of LLDPE/LDPE/HDPE coming into existence as an intermediate product in
the manufacture of water storage tanks by the respondents is chargeable to
excise duty.
2\. Shri B.C. Mahay, Ld. DR, submitted that all the respondents manufacture
water storage tanks, in the manufacture of which, they get the impugned
powder, which falls under Heading 39.01 of the Schedule to the Central Excise
Tariff Act; that the respondents were availing of benefit of Notification No.
217/86-CE, dated 2.4.86 and subsequently Notification No. 67/95-CE, dated
16.3.95 in respect of impugned powder; that as the water storage tanks up to
300 Lt. is subjected to nil rate of duty, show cause notices were issued for
disallowing the benefit of Notification No. 217/86/67/95-CE; that the
Assistant Commissioner, however, withdrew the proceedings for demand on the
ground that the process carried out on converting polymers granules into
the Adjudication Order as to at what rate the powder absorbs atmospheric
moisture and what is its shelf life. In absence of any detail, merely because
the powder, in question, is hygroscopic in nature, it cannot be concluded that
the product is not marketable. A very large number of products are hygroscopic
in nature and they are marketed freely. We also observe that the Revenue, on
the other hand, has contended that another manufacturer in Jaipur
Commissionerate is manufacturing and marketing the said powder. However, the
Revenue has also not brought on record any evidence in the form of invoice
etc. in which the said powder is being marketed. It is also required to be
seen whether the powder manufactured by the said Polycon International Ltd. is
the same powder, which is in dispute in these appeals. In view of all these
facts and circumstances and in the interest of justice, we are of the view
that there is no sufficient material on record to decide the matters and these
matters should be remanded to the Adjudicating Authority for afresh
adjudication after taking evidence from both the sides. The Adjudicating
Authority will also consider the plea of the respondents that they are
ground that the process carried out on converting polymers granules into
powder does not bring into existence a new and distinct commodity, as it is
consumed captively in the continuous process for the manufacture of water
storage tanks and further, impugned powder is not marketable because being
hygroscopic in nature, it absorbs atmospheric moisture at a rapid rate
resulting in the lump formation in the powder which makes it unusable for the
manufacture of water storage tanks; that the Commissioner (Appeals) also under
the impugned orders has upheld the Adjudication Orders. The Ld. DR, further,
submitted that as per Note 6B to Chapter39 of the Central Excise Tariff
Heading Nos. 39.01 to 39.14 shall also include primary forms obtained from
conversion of another primary form, falling under the same Heading and such
conversion shall amount to manufacture. He, therefore, contended that in terms
of this Chapter Note, the process of conversion of granules into powder would
amount to manufacture. He, further, mentioned that the impugned goods are
marketable as another unit in Jaipur Commisssionerate, namely M/s. Polycon
International Ltd. (which is also a unit of same group of companies) is
clearing the powder of LLDPE/LDPE/HDPE on payment of CE duty, which goes to
show that the powder in question is marketable. He relied upon the decision in
the case of Motil amniotes Pvt. Ltd. v. CCE, Ahmedabad wherein it was held
that the goods are excisable if they are manufactured by the assessee and are
marketable. Reliance was also placed on the decision in the case of Laminated
Packaging Pvt. Ltd. v. CCE wherein it was held that lamination of duty paid
craft paper with polyethylene results in polyethylene laminated craft paper
and the process amounts to manufacture.
3\. Shri Punkaj Mullick, Ld. Advocate, on the other hand, submitted that the
plea of marketability taken by the Ld. DR, as well as in the memo of Appeals,
is not supported by any documents and it is in the shape of a bald statement;
that further, no application has been filed by the Revenue for admission of
additional evidence by the Appellate Tribunal as is required under the CEGAT
(Procedure) Rules. He, further, submitted that it is not the case of the
Department that the powder manufactured by said Polycon International Ltd. is
quite the same as the powder which emerges in the respondents' units during
the course of manufacture of water storage tanks; that, therefore, the fact
that any kind of powder manufactured by any other unit is being marketable
again does not lead to an inference that the impugned powder is also
marketable as such; that the Asstt. Commissioner has given a very specific
arid categorical finding that the impugned product is not marketable as it
absorbs moisture and gets converted into lump form. Ld. Advocate also claimed
the benefit of Exemption under Notification No. 1/93-CE, dated 28.2.93; that
Explanation VI to the said Notification provides that if any specific goods
are used for further manufacture of a specified goods within factory of
production, the clearances of said specified goods for captive use shall not
be taken into account for the purpose of calculating the aggregated value of
clearances under the Notification; that Explanation VI read with Explanation
II provides that no duty will be chargeable if small scale unit consumes goods
manufactured by it captively for the manufacture of another product. In
support of his contention, he relied upon the decision in the case of
Universal Electrical Co. v. CCE, New Delhi and CCE, New Delhi v. Gadgets India
Ltd. (Tribunal) wherein it was held that the value of clearances captively
consumed is not to be taken into account if the final product is not cleared
under the Notification. Finally the Ld. Advocate mentioned that if the
impugned powder is held to be dutiable, the respondents would be eligible for
availing of the Modvat credit of the duty paid on inputs as held in the case
of Vivek Rerolling Mills v. CCE Chandigarh .
4\. We have considered the submissions of both the sides. The facts, which are
not in dispute are that the granules of LLDPE/LDPE/HDPE are converted into
powder form by all the respondents. In terms of Note 6(b) to Chapter 39 of the
Central Excise Tariff, conversion from one primary form into another primary
form amounts to manufacture. Accordingly, the conversion of granules into
powder form will amount to manufacture. It is well settled law that the
marketability of the product is to be proved before any goods can be made
chargeable to excise duty. We observe from the perusal of the Adjudication
Orders that the product in question has been held to be not marketable only on
the ground that it is of hygroscopic nature which absorbs atmospheric moisture
at a rapid rate resulting in the lump formation which makes it unusable for
the manufacture of water storage tanks. There are no details given in any of
the Adjudication Order as to at what rate the powder absorbs atmospheric
moisture and what is its shelf life. In absence of any detail, merely because
the powder, in question, is hygroscopic in nature, it cannot be concluded that
the product is not marketable. A very large number of products are hygroscopic
in nature and they are marketed freely. We also observe that the Revenue, on
the other hand, has contended that another manufacturer in Jaipur
Commissionerate is manufacturing and marketing the said powder. However, the
Revenue has also not brought on record any evidence in the form of invoice
etc. in which the said powder is being marketed. It is also required to be
seen whether the powder manufactured by the said Polycon International Ltd. is
the same powder, which is in dispute in these appeals. In view of all these
facts and circumstances and in the interest of justice, we are of the view
that there is no sufficient material on record to decide the matters and these
matters should be remanded to the Adjudicating Authority for afresh
adjudication after taking evidence from both the sides. The Adjudicating
Authority will also consider the plea of the respondents that they are
eligible for the benefit of Notification No. 1/93. In case the product is held
to be chargeable to Central Excise duty, that Modvat availability has also to
be considered by the Adjudicating Authority. Thus, all the appeals are allowed
by way of remand.
the Adjudication Order as to at what rate the powder absorbs atmospheric
moisture and what is its shelf life. In absence of any detail, merely because
the powder, in question, is hygroscopic in nature, it cannot be concluded that
the product is not marketable. A very large number of products are hygroscopic
in nature and they are marketed freely. We also observe that the Revenue, on
the other hand, has contended that another manufacturer in Jaipur
Commissionerate is manufacturing and marketing the said powder. However, the
Revenue has also not brought on record any evidence in the form of invoice
etc. in which the said powder is being marketed. It is also required to be
seen whether the powder manufactured by the said Polycon International Ltd. is
the same powder, which is in dispute in these appeals. In view of all these
facts and circumstances and in the interest of justice, we are of the view
that there is no sufficient material on record to decide the matters and these
matters should be remanded to the Adjudicating Authority for afresh
adjudication after taking evidence from both the sides. The Adjudicating
Authority will also consider the plea of the respondents that they are
ground that the process carried out on converting polymers granules into
powder does not bring into existence a new and distinct commodity, as it is
consumed captively in the continuous process for the manufacture of water
storage tanks and further, impugned powder is not marketable because being
hygroscopic in nature, it absorbs atmospheric moisture at a rapid rate
resulting in the lump formation in the powder which makes it unusable for the
manufacture of water storage tanks; that the Commissioner (Appeals) also under
the impugned orders has upheld the Adjudication Orders. The Ld. DR, further,
submitted that as per Note 6B to Chapter39 of the Central Excise Tariff
Heading Nos. 39.01 to 39.14 shall also include primary forms obtained from
conversion of another primary form, falling under the same Heading and such
conversion shall amount to manufacture. He, therefore, contended that in terms
of this Chapter Note, the process of conversion of granules into powder would
amount to manufacture. He, further, mentioned that the impugned goods are
marketable as another unit in Jaipur Commisssionerate, namely M/s. Polycon
International Ltd. (which is also a unit of same group of companies) is
clearing the powder of LLDPE/LDPE/HDPE on payment of CE duty, which goes to
show that the powder in question is marketable. He relied upon the decision in
the case of Motil amniotes Pvt. Ltd. v. CCE, Ahmedabad wherein it was held
that the goods are excisable if they are manufactured by the assessee and are
the Adjudication Order as to at what rate the powder absorbs atmospheric
moisture and what is its shelf life. In absence of any detail, merely because
the powder, in question, is hygroscopic in nature, it cannot be concluded that
the product is not marketable. A very large number of products are hygroscopic
in nature and they are marketed freely. We also observe that the Revenue, on
the other hand, has contended that another manufacturer in Jaipur
Commissionerate is manufacturing and marketing the said powder. However, the
Revenue has also not brought on record any evidence in the form of invoice
etc. in which the said powder is being marketed. It is also required to be
seen whether the powder manufactured by the said Polycon International Ltd. is
the same powder, which is in dispute in these appeals. In view of all these
facts and circumstances and in the interest of justice, we are of the view
that there is no sufficient material on record to decide the matters and these
matters should be remanded to the Adjudicating Authority for afresh
adjudication after taking evidence from both the sides. The Adjudicating
Authority will also consider the plea of the respondents that they are
ground that the process carried out on converting polymers granules into
powder does not bring into existence a new and distinct commodity, as it is
consumed captively in the continuous process for the manufacture of water
storage tanks and further, impugned powder is not marketable because being
hygroscopic in nature, it absorbs atmospheric moisture at a rapid rate
resulting in the lump formation in the powder which makes it unusable for the
manufacture of water storage tanks; that the Commissioner (Appeals) also under
the impugned orders has upheld the Adjudication Orders. The Ld. DR, further,
submitted that as per Note 6B to Chapter39 of the Central Excise Tariff
Heading Nos. 39.01 to 39.14 shall also include primary forms obtained from
conversion of another primary form, falling under the same Heading and such
conversion shall amount to manufacture. He, therefore, contended that in terms
of this Chapter Note, the process of conversion of granules into powder would
amount to manufacture. He, further, mentioned that the impugned goods are
marketable as another unit in Jaipur Commisssionerate, namely M/s. Polycon
International Ltd. (which is also a unit of same group of companies) is
clearing the powder of LLDPE/LDPE/HDPE on payment of CE duty, which goes to
show that the powder in question is marketable. He relied upon the decision in
the case of Motil amniotes Pvt. Ltd. v. CCE, Ahmedabad wherein it was held
that the goods are excisable if they are manufactured by the assessee and are
the Adjudication Order as to at what rate the powder absorbs atmospheric
moisture and what is its shelf life. In absence of any detail, merely because
the powder, in question, is hygroscopic in nature, it cannot be concluded that
the product is not marketable. A very large number of products are hygroscopic
in nature and they are marketed freely. We also observe that the Revenue, on
the other hand, has contended that another manufacturer in Jaipur
Commissionerate is manufacturing and marketing the said powder. However, the
Revenue has also not brought on record any evidence in the form of invoice
etc. in which the said powder is being marketed. It is also required to be
seen whether the powder manufactured by the said Polycon International Ltd. is
the same powder, which is in dispute in these appeals. In view of all these
facts and circumstances and in the interest of justice, we are of the view
that there is no sufficient material on record to decide the matters and these
matters should be remanded to the Adjudicating Authority for afresh
adjudication after taking evidence from both the sides. The Adjudicating
Authority will also consider the plea of the respondents that they are
ground that the process carried out on converting polymers granules into
powder does not bring into existence a new and distinct commodity, as it is
consumed captively in the continuous process for the manufacture of water
storage tanks and further, impugned powder is not marketable because being
hygroscopic in nature, it absorbs atmospheric moisture at a rapid rate
resulting in the lump formation in the powder which makes it unusable for the
manufacture of water storage tanks; that the Commissioner (Appeals) also under
the impugned orders has upheld the Adjudication Orders. The Ld. DR, further,
submitted that as per Note 6B to Chapter39 of the Central Excise Tariff
Heading Nos. 39.01 to 39.14 shall also include primary forms obtained from
conversion of another primary form, falling under the same Heading and such
conversion shall amount to manufacture. He, therefore, contended that in terms
of this Chapter Note, the process of conversion of granules into powder would
amount to manufacture. He, further, mentioned that the impugned goods are
marketable as another unit in Jaipur Commisssionerate, namely M/s. Polycon
International Ltd. (which is also a unit of same group of companies) is
clearing the powder of LLDPE/LDPE/HDPE on payment of CE duty, which goes to
show that the powder in question is marketable. He relied upon the decision in
the case of Motil amniotes Pvt. Ltd. v. CCE, Ahmedabad wherein it was held
that the goods are excisable if they are manufactured by the assessee and are
marketable. Reliance was also placed on the decision in the case of Laminated
Packaging Pvt. Ltd. v. CCE wherein it was held that lamination of duty paid
craft paper with polyethylene results in polyethylene laminated craft paper
and the process amounts to manufacture.
3\. Shri Punkaj Mullick, Ld. Advocate, on the other hand, submitted that the
plea of marketability taken by the Ld. DR, as well as in the memo of Appeals,
is not supported by any documents and it is in the shape of a bald statement;
that further, no application has been filed by the Revenue for admission of
additional evidence by the Appellate Tribunal as is required under the CEGAT
(Procedure) Rules. He, further, submitted that it is not the case of the
Department that the powder manufactured by said Polycon International Ltd. is
the Adjudication Order as to at what rate the powder absorbs atmospheric
moisture and what is its shelf life. In absence of any detail, merely because
the powder, in question, is hygroscopic in nature, it cannot be concluded that
the product is not marketable. A very large number of products are hygroscopic
in nature and they are marketed freely. We also observe that the Revenue, on
the other hand, has contended that another manufacturer in Jaipur
Commissionerate is manufacturing and marketing the said powder. However, the
Revenue has also not brought on record any evidence in the form of invoice
etc. in which the said powder is being marketed. It is also required to be
seen whether the powder manufactured by the said Polycon International Ltd. is
the same powder, which is in dispute in these appeals. In view of all these
facts and circumstances and in the interest of justice, we are of the view
that there is no sufficient material on record to decide the matters and these
matters should be remanded to the Adjudicating Authority for afresh
adjudication after taking evidence from both the sides. The Adjudicating
Authority will also consider the plea of the respondents that they are
ground that the process carried out on converting polymers granules into
powder does not bring into existence a new and distinct commodity, as it is
consumed captively in the continuous process for the manufacture of water
storage tanks and further, impugned powder is not marketable because being
hygroscopic in nature, it absorbs atmospheric moisture at a rapid rate
resulting in the lump formation in the powder which makes it unusable for the
manufacture of water storage tanks; that the Commissioner (Appeals) also under
the impugned orders has upheld the Adjudication Orders. The Ld. DR, further,
submitted that as per Note 6B to Chapter39 of the Central Excise Tariff
Heading Nos. 39.01 to 39.14 shall also include primary forms obtained from
conversion of another primary form, falling under the same Heading and such
conversion shall amount to manufacture. He, therefore, contended that in terms
of this Chapter Note, the process of conversion of granules into powder would
amount to manufacture. He, further, mentioned that the impugned goods are
marketable as another unit in Jaipur Commisssionerate, namely M/s. Polycon
International Ltd. (which is also a unit of same group of companies) is
clearing the powder of LLDPE/LDPE/HDPE on payment of CE duty, which goes to
show that the powder in question is marketable. He relied upon the decision in
the case of Motil amniotes Pvt. Ltd. v. CCE, Ahmedabad wherein it was held
that the goods are excisable if they are manufactured by the assessee and are
marketable. Reliance was also placed on the decision in the case of Laminated
Packaging Pvt. Ltd. v. CCE wherein it was held that lamination of duty paid
craft paper with polyethylene results in polyethylene laminated craft paper
and the process amounts to manufacture.
3\. Shri Punkaj Mullick, Ld. Advocate, on the other hand, submitted that the
plea of marketability taken by the Ld. DR, as well as in the memo of Appeals,
is not supported by any documents and it is in the shape of a bald statement;
that further, no application has been filed by the Revenue for admission of
additional evidence by the Appellate Tribunal as is required under the CEGAT
(Procedure) Rules. He, further, submitted that it is not the case of the
Department that the powder manufactured by said Polycon International Ltd. is
the Adjudication Order as to at what rate the powder absorbs atmospheric
moisture and what is its shelf life. In absence of any detail, merely because
the powder, in question, is hygroscopic in nature, it cannot be concluded that
the product is not marketable. A very large number of products are hygroscopic
in nature and they are marketed freely. We also observe that the Revenue, on
the other hand, has contended that another manufacturer in Jaipur
Commissionerate is manufacturing and marketing the said powder. However, the
Revenue has also not brought on record any evidence in the form of invoice
etc. in which the said powder is being marketed. It is also required to be
seen whether the powder manufactured by the said Polycon International Ltd. is
the same powder, which is in dispute in these appeals. In view of all these
facts and circumstances and in the interest of justice, we are of the view
that there is no sufficient material on record to decide the matters and these
matters should be remanded to the Adjudicating Authority for afresh
adjudication after taking evidence from both the sides. The Adjudicating
Authority will also consider the plea of the respondents that they are
