Delhi District Court
Judgment/Rambir Singh Raghav vs . Om Prakash/ Cc No.161/1/U.S.138 ... on 13
July, 2009
Author: Sh. Dig Singh
              IN THE COURT OF SH. DIG VINAY SINGH, ADDITIONAL CHIEF METROPOLITAN 
                                           MAGISTRATE­03 (IPR), ROHINI, DELHI
    In re: 
    RAMBIR SINGH RAGHAV  ...COMPLAINANT
    VS.
    OM PRAKASH CHOPRA                      ...ACCUSED
    CC NO.161/1
    PS SARASWATI VIHAR
    U/S. 138 OF NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS ACT.
    DATE OF RESERVATION OF JUDGMENT: 01.6.2009
    DATE OF PRONOUNCEMENT OF JUDGMENT: 13.7.2009
                                                             JUDGEMENT
    (a) The serial no. of the case                            : RO962292008.
    (b) The date of commission of offence                     : 16.10.2008.
    (c) The name of complainant                          : Rambir Singh Raghav s/o. Sh. Malkhan Singh r/o. 
                                                                2229, Raja Park, Rani Bagh, Shakur Basti, Delhi.
rebut the presumptions arising under Sections 118 and 139 of the Act. The
accused has also an option to prove the non­ existence of consideration and
debt or liability either by letting in evidence or in some clear and
exceptional cases, from the case set out by the complainant, that is, the
averments in the complaint, the case set out in the statutory notice and
evidence adduced by the complainant during the trial. Once such rebuttal
evidence is adduced and accepted by the court, having regard to all the
circumstances of the case and the preponderance of probabilities, the
evidential burden shifts back to the complainant and, thereafter, the
presumptions under Sections 118 and 139 of the Act will not again come to the
complainant's rescue. "
13\. Therefore, in my considered view, the accused is guilty for the dishonour
of cheque despite having legally enforceable liability and for failure to pay
the cheque amount to the complainant despite receiving the legal notice and
within the stipulated period of fifteen days from the date of receipt of the
notice. The accused is accordingly convicted for the offence u/s.138 N.I. Act.
                                                                2229, Raja Park, Rani Bagh, Shakur Basti, Delhi.
    (d) The name, parentage, residence of                     : Om Prakash Chopra s/o. Late. Sh. Amarnath Chopra 
         accused                                                r/o. D­22, Mansarovar Garden, Delhi.     
    (e) The offence complained of/ proved             : U/s.138 of Negotiable Instruments Act.
    (f) The plea of accused                                     : Pleaded not guilty
    (g) The final order                                             : Convicted.
    (h) The date of such order                                  : 13.7.2009.
    (i) Brief statement of the reasons for the decision:­
JUDGMENT/RAMBIR SINGH RAGHAV VS. OM PRAKASH/ CC NO.161/1/U.S.138 N.I. ACT/
CONVICTED/13.7.2009 /Page 1 of 9 k
1\. This is a complaint u/s.138 of Negotiable Instruments Act, filed by the
complainant against the accused, regarding dishonour of one cheque bearing no.
446240, for Rs.10,000/­, dated 10.9.2008 and, drawn on Punjab & Sind Bank,
Coronation Hotel Building, Fateh Puri, Delhi. The complainant claimed that
this cheque was issued by the accused in discharge of his legally enforceable
liability but it was dishonoured due to 'stop payment'. Legal notice as
required was sent to the accused within the stipulated period, but the accused
failed to make payment of the cheque amount within fifteen days of receipt of
notice and hence this complaint. Accused was summoned by this Court and notice
for the said offence was framed against him on 17.2.2009 to which the accused
claimed trial, claiming that he had no legally enforceable liability towards
the complainant.
2\. In support of its case, complainant examined himself as PW1, tendering his
evidence by way of affidavit Ex. P1. After evidence of complainant, statement
of accused was recorded under section 313 read with section 281 of Cr. P. C.,
and subsequently the accused examined himself as DW1 to prove his defence and,
also tendered his evidence by way of affidavit Ex. D1.
3\. I have heard counsels for both the parties, and have perused the record.
4\. Certain facts are not in dispute in the present case. Those admitted facts
are: • That the complainant is proprietor of M/s. Abhinav Prints, and was into
the business of printing/publishing.
• The complainant had an order for printing of railway timetable for the
northern zone of Indian Railways, for the period 2008­2009.
• The accused approached the complainant for printing of his advertisement of
his hotel namely Malabar Hotel in the railway timetable. (Although the accused
claimed that it was the representative of the complainant, who approached the
accused wheras complainant claimed that it was the accused who approached the
complainant, for the job of printing, but it is not in dispute that the
printing order was indeed placed by the accused with the complainant.) • The
total amount agreed between the parties as consideration for the said job was
Rs.55000/­, out of which the accused paid Rs.15,000/­ to the complainant.
(Although the complainant claimed that he received the money in cash, whereas
the accused claimed that the same was paid by cheque, but the amount already
paid is not in dispute.) JUDGMENT/RAMBIR SINGH RAGHAV VS. OM PRAKASH/ CC
NO.161/1/U.S.138 N.I. ACT/ CONVICTED/13.7.2009 /Page 2 of 9 k • The said
agreement between the parties was oral only.
• It is also not in dispute that the cheque no. 446240 (cheque in question in
this case), dated 10.9.2008, for Rs.10,000/­, drawn on Punjab & Sind Bank,
Fateh Puri, Delhi, Ex. CW1/1 was issued by the accused in favour of the
complainant's firm M/s Abhinav Prints.
• It is also not in dispute that remaining amount of Rs.30,000/­ out of total
agreed consideration between the parties was to be paid by the accused later
on.
• The said Ex.CW1/1 was returned dishonoured by the bankers of accused vide
memo Ex. CW1/5 dated 01.10.2008 for reasons "payment stopped by the drawer".
• It is also not in dispute between the parties that the accused wrote a
letter dated 04.9.2008 Ex. CW1/2 to the complainant intimating the complainant
that he has given instructions to his bankers to stop the payment of cheque in
question and, the reason claimed by the accused for doing so was, non­printing
of advertisement in all the copies of timetable books published and that the
advertisement paper was pasted subsequently in the book to befool the accused.
• This letter was received by the complainant and the complainant gave a reply
to this letter vide his letter dated 20.9.2008 Ex. CW1/3 in which it was
specifically mentioned by the complainant that the advertisement of the
accused was indeed printed in all the saleable copies of the timetable. The
complainant requested the accused to instruct his bankers to clear the cheque.
But despite this request, the cheque was dishonoured.
• The dishonoured cheque of the accused was forwarded to the complainant by
the bankers of the complainant Andhra Bank vide memo Ex. CW1/6 dated
04.10.2008.
• It is also not in dispute that within the stipulated period of thirty days
from the date of knowledge of dishonour, a legal notice Ex. CW1/7 dated
25.10.2008 was sent to the accused, by the complainant, through registered
postal receipt Ex. CW1/8 & UPC Ex. CW1/9. • It is also not in dispute that the
said legal notice was received by the accused vide acknowledgment card Ex.
CW1/10 and, the accused also gave a reply to this legal notice vide reply
dated 28.11.2008 sent to the complainant.
5\. The only controversy between the parties in this case is that the accused
claims that his JUDGMENT/RAMBIR SINGH RAGHAV VS. OM PRAKASH/ CC
NO.161/1/U.S.138 N.I. ACT/ CONVICTED/13.7.2009 /Page 3 of 9 k advertisement
was not published in all the published copies of railway timetable for the
year 2008­ 2009 for the northern zone of Indian Railways. Rather the accused
claims that the page carrying his advertisement was subsequently pasted by the
complainant, therefore, the accused is not liable to pay any money to the
complainant. On the other hand, the complainant claims that the advertisement
was published in all the sale copies of the said railway timetable and the
advertisement was not to be published in the complimentary copies and the
copies meant for staff of the Railways, as per instructions of the Indian
Railways. Complainant claims that in all the sale copies, this advertisement
of accused was properly and indeed published.
6\. In order to prove its case, the complainant proved railway timetable for
the said year in English as well as in Hindi as Ex. CW1/12 & CW1/13. Perusal
of the said railway timetable reveals that the advertisement of the accused
was indeed published in railway timetable.
7\. On the other hand , in order to prove its case, the accused in his
evidence did not prove any railway timetable to show that the advertisement of
the accused was not published in the sale copies of railway timetable. Rather
the accused proved one copy of railway timetable as Ex. RW1/1 in which also
the advertisement of the accused is found to be duly published. The accused in
the cross examination of the complainant suggested that after he placed an
order of publication to the complainant, even in the sale copies of the
timetable, the advertisement of the accused was not published. The complainant
denied the suggestion that the page carrying publication/advertisement of the
accused was subsequently pasted in the book. During evidence the said railway
timetable was perused by this Court and a Court observation was made, that
although there was difference of quality in paper carrying advertisement of
various parties including the accused and the paper carrying timetable was
different but it was found that it was not correct that only the page carrying
advertisement of the accused was distinct from the remaining pages. It is not
uncommon that such timetables are published in one cover, but carrying
different quality of pages. A large number of publishers are publishing such
books with different quality of papers meant for different purposes such as in
this case. The advertisements are published on a fine quality of papers then
the other contents of remaining timetable. Such practice is not uncommon.
Perusal of the railway's timetable proved in the Court reveals that the
advertisement of the accused was indeed published in the timetable in the sale
copies. It is not correct that only the page carrying the advertisement of
accused is different from JUDGMENT/RAMBIR SINGH RAGHAV VS. OM PRAKASH/ CC
NO.161/1/U.S.138 N.I. ACT/ CONVICTED/13.7.2009 /Page 4 of 9 k remaining book.
The complainant has also filed on record copy of the tender document in which
it is mentioned that advertisement was to be their in the sale copies and not
in complimentary and staff copies. There was no written agreement between the
accused and complainant in this case regarding the advertisement to be
published in all the copies including complimentary copies and staff copies.
It is a case of "his words" against "his words". Therefore, the accused cannot
claim that his advertisement was also to be published in the complementary
copies and copies meant for staff. Even otherwise, it would have been against
the tender documents issued by railway authorities in favour of the
complainant.
8\. During the cross examination of the accused, the complainant specifically
questioned the accused as to in which month or date the accused came to know
about non publishing of his advertisement, to which the accused replied that
he cannot recollect it. The accused even claimed in the cross examination that
one of his customer at Allahabad, UP, purchased a railway timetable which was
not carrying the advertisement of the accused and, sent it to the accused, but
the said railway timetable allegedly not containing the advertisement of the
accused was never proved in the Court nor the accused proved any other sale
copy of the timetable to prove that his advertisement was not published. The
accused even stated that he cannot deny the suggestion that the railway
timetable published by the complainant was a perfect binding in which separate
sheets cannot be added subsequently. The accused in his reply rather admitted
that despite efforts he could not buy any railway timetable which was not
carrying the advertisement of the accused. Although, during his evidence the
accused exhibited certain documents showing that he had sent certain
complaints to the railway authorities mentioning that his advertisement was
not published, the sending of those communication to the railway authorities
does not belie the fact that in all the three railway timetable copies proved
on record by both the parties, the advertisement is indeed published.
9\. Once, the accused has not proved any copy of railway timetable to show
that his timetable was not published, the accused failed to discharge the
burden which was upon the accused u/s.139 & 118 of the Negotiable Instruments
Act.
10\. U/s. 139 r/w section 118 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, there is a
presumption in favour of the complainant that the cheque in question was
issued in discharge of legally enforceable liability of the accused and it was
for consideration. There is a legal presumption in favour of complainant and
JUDGMENT/RAMBIR SINGH RAGHAV VS. OM PRAKASH/ CC NO.161/1/U.S.138 N.I. ACT/
CONVICTED/13.7.2009 /Page 5 of 9 k against the accused, that the cheque in
question was received by the complainant in discharge of any debt or other
liability from the accused either in whole or in part. As per this section,
the burden to rebut the presumption was on the accused which the accused
failed to rebut in the present case. A mere oral allegation by the accused
that the advertisement was not published is insufficient to discharge this
burden. To rebut the presumption u/s.138 N.I. Act, there has to be some more
evidence from the accused besides making of bare oral denial. The accused has
not proved any documentary proof to prove that the advertisement was not
published. If such a defence without any document is to be taken as sufficient
rebuttal, in every case u/s.138 N.I. Act, the accused can escape his liability
by mere oral claim that the cheque was not in discharge of his liability.
11\. Under section 118 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, there is a legal
presumption in favour of the complainant that every negotiable instrument
(which includes a cheque) was made or drawn for consideration. The legal
presumption is also regarding date of cheque, time of its acceptance, time of
transfer, order of endorsement and also as to stamps. Reading section 118 and
139 of Negotiable Instruments Act, a presumption arises in favour of the
complainant and not in favour of accused that, when this cheque was received
by the complainant, it was against consideration and also towards discharge of
liability by the accused.
12\. In the case of M/s. Kumar Exports v. M/s. Sharma Carpets , 2009(1)
R.C.R.(Criminal) 478 : 2009(1) R.C.R.(Civil) 453 : 2009(1) R.A.J. 154 hon'ble
Supreme court of India, held as follows; "9. In order to determine the
question whether offence punishable under Section 138 of the Act is made out
against the appellant, it will be necessary to examine the scope and ambit of
presumptions to be raised as envisaged by the provisions of Sections 118 and
139 of the Act. In a suit to enforce a simple contract, the plaintiff has to
aver in his pleading that it was made for good consideration and must
substantiate it by evidence. But to this rule, the negotiable instruments are
an exception. In a significant departure from the general rule applicable to
contracts, Section 118 of the Act provides certain presumptions to be raised.
This Section lays down some special rules of evidence relating to
presumptions. The reason for these presumptions is that, negotiable instrument
passes from hand to hand on endorsement and it would make trading very
difficult and negotiability of the instrument impossible, unless certain
presumptions are made. The presumption, therefore, is a matter of
JUDGMENT/RAMBIR SINGH RAGHAV VS. OM PRAKASH/ CC NO.161/1/U.S.138 N.I. ACT/
CONVICTED/13.7.2009 /Page 6 of 9 k principle to facilitate negotiability as
well as trade. Section 118 of the Act provides presumptions to be raised until
the contrary is proved (i) as to consideration, (ii) as to date of instrument,
(iii) as to time of acceptance, (iv) as to time of transfer, (v) as to order
of endorsements, (vi) as to appropriate stamp and (vii) as to holder being a
holder in due course. Section 139 of the Act provides that it shall be
presumed, unless the contrary is proved, that the holder of a cheque received
the cheque of the nature referred to in Section 138 for the discharge, in
whole or in part, of any debt or other liability. Presumptions are devices by
use of which the courts are enabled and entitled to pronounce on an issue
notwithstanding that there is no evidence or insufficient evidence. Under the
Indian Evidence Act all presumptions must come under one or the other class of
the three classes mentioned in the Act, namely, (1) "may presume"
(rebuttable), (2) "shall presume" (rebuttable) and (3) "conclusive
presumptions" (irrebuttable). The term `presumption' is used to designate an
inference, affirmative or dis affirmative of the existence a fact,
conveniently called the "presumed fact" drawn by a judicial tribunal, by a
process of probable reasoning from some matter of fact, either judicially
noticed or admitted or established by legal evidence to the satisfaction of
the tribunal. Presumption literally means "taking as true without examination
or proof". Section 4 of the Evidence Act inter­alia defines the words `may
presume' and `shall presume as follows: ­ "(a) `may presume' ­ Whenever it is
provided by this Act that the Court may presume a fact, it may either regard
such fact as proved, unless and until it is disproved or may call for proof of
it.
(b) `shall presume' ­ Whenever it is directed by this Act that the Court shall
presume a fact, it shall regard such fact as proved, unless and until it is
disproved."
In the former case the Court has an option to raise the presumption or not,
but in the latter case, the Court must necessarily raise the presumption. If
in a case the Court has an option to raise the presumption and raises the
presumption, the distinction between the two categories of presumptions ceases
and the fact is presumed, unless and until it is disproved."
"10. Section 118 of the Act inter alia directs that it shall be presumed,
until the contrary is proved, that JUDGMENT/RAMBIR SINGH RAGHAV VS. OM
PRAKASH/ CC NO.161/1/U.S.138 N.I. ACT/ CONVICTED/13.7.2009 /Page 7 of 9 k
every negotiable instrument was made or drawn for consideration. Section 139
of the Act stipulates that unless the contrary is proved, it shall be
presumed, that the holder of the cheque received the cheque, for the discharge
of, whole or part of any debt or liability. "
"Applying the definition of the word `proved' in Section 3 of the Evidence Act
to the provisions of Sections 118 and 139 of the Act, it becomes evident that
in a trial under Section 138 of the Act a presumption will have to be made
that every negotiable instrument was made or drawn for consideration and that
it was executed for discharge of debt or liability once the execution of
negotiable instrument is either proved or admitted. As soon as the complainant
discharges the burden to prove that the instrument, say a note, was executed
by the accused, the rules of presumptions under Sections 118 and 139 of the
Act help him shift the burden on the accused. The presumptions will live,
exist and survive and shall end only when the contrary is proved by the
accused, that is, the cheque was not issued for consideration and in discharge
of any debt or liability. A presumption is not in itself evidence, but only
makes a prima facie case for a party for whose benefit it exists." " 11. The
use of the phrase "until the contrary is proved" in Section 118 of the Act and
use of the words "unless the contrary is proved" in Section 139 of the Act
read with definitions of "may presume" and "shall presume" as given in Section
4 of the Evidence Act, makes it at once clear that presumptions to be raised
under both the provisions are rebuttable. When a presumption is rebuttable, it
only points out that the party on whom lies the duty of going forward with
evidence, on the fact presumed and when that party has produced evidence
fairly and reasonably tending to show that the real fact is not as presumed,
the purpose of the presumption is over. The accused in a trial under Section
138 of the Act has two options. He can either show that consideration and debt
did not exist or that under the particular circumstances of the case the
non­existence of consideration and debt is so probable that a prudent man
ought to suppose that no consideration and debt existed. To rebut the
statutory presumptions an accused is not expected to prove his defence beyond
reasonable doubt as is expected of the complainant in a criminal trial. The
accused may adduce direct evidence to prove that the note in question was not
supported by consideration and that there was no debt or liability to be
discharged by him. However, the court need not insist in every case that the
accused JUDGMENT/RAMBIR SINGH RAGHAV VS. OM PRAKASH/ CC NO.161/1/U.S.138 N.I.
ACT/ CONVICTED/13.7.2009 /Page 8 of 9 k should disprove the non­existence of
consideration and debt by leading direct evidence because the existence of
negative evidence is neither possible nor contemplated. At the same time, it
is clear that bare denial of the passing of the consideration and existence of
debt, apparently would not serve the purpose of the accused. Something which
is probable has to be brought on record for getting the burden of proof
shifted to the complainant. To disprove the presumptions, the accused should
bring on record such facts and circumstances, upon consideration of which, the
court may either believe that the consideration and debt did not exist or
their non­ existence was so probable that a prudent man would under the
circumstances of the case, act upon the plea that they did not exist. Apart
from adducing direct evidence to prove that the note in question was not
supported by consideration or that he had not incurred any debt or liability,
the accused may also rely upon circumstantial evidence and if the
circumstances so relied upon are compelling, the burden may likewise shift
again on to the complainant. The accused may also rely upon presumptions of
fact, for instance, those mentioned in Section 114 of the Evidence Act to
rebut the presumptions arising under Sections 118 and 139 of the Act. The
accused has also an option to prove the non­ existence of consideration and
debt or liability either by letting in evidence or in some clear and
exceptional cases, from the case set out by the complainant, that is, the
averments in the complaint, the case set out in the statutory notice and
evidence adduced by the complainant during the trial. Once such rebuttal
evidence is adduced and accepted by the court, having regard to all the
circumstances of the case and the preponderance of probabilities, the
evidential burden shifts back to the complainant and, thereafter, the
presumptions under Sections 118 and 139 of the Act will not again come to the
complainant's rescue. "
13\. Therefore, in my considered view, the accused is guilty for the dishonour
of cheque despite having legally enforceable liability and for failure to pay
the cheque amount to the complainant despite receiving the legal notice and
within the stipulated period of fifteen days from the date of receipt of the
notice. The accused is accordingly convicted for the offence u/s.138 N.I. Act.
ANNOUNCED IN OPEN COURT ON 13th July, 2009.
DIG VINAY SINGH ADDITIONAL CHIEF METROPOLITAN MAGISTRATE­03 IPR, ROHINI, DELHI
JUDGMENT/RAMBIR SINGH RAGHAV VS. OM PRAKASH/ CC NO.161/1/U.S.138 N.I. ACT/
CONVICTED/13.7.2009 /Page 9 of 9 k
rebut the presumptions arising under Sections 118 and 139 of the Act. The
accused has also an option to prove the non­ existence of consideration and
debt or liability either by letting in evidence or in some clear and
exceptional cases, from the case set out by the complainant, that is, the
averments in the complaint, the case set out in the statutory notice and
evidence adduced by the complainant during the trial. Once such rebuttal
evidence is adduced and accepted by the court, having regard to all the
circumstances of the case and the preponderance of probabilities, the
evidential burden shifts back to the complainant and, thereafter, the
presumptions under Sections 118 and 139 of the Act will not again come to the
complainant's rescue. "
13\. Therefore, in my considered view, the accused is guilty for the dishonour
of cheque despite having legally enforceable liability and for failure to pay
the cheque amount to the complainant despite receiving the legal notice and
within the stipulated period of fifteen days from the date of receipt of the
notice. The accused is accordingly convicted for the offence u/s.138 N.I. Act.
                                                                2229, Raja Park, Rani Bagh, Shakur Basti, Delhi.
    (d) The name, parentage, residence of                     : Om Prakash Chopra s/o. Late. Sh. Amarnath Chopra 
         accused                                                r/o. D­22, Mansarovar Garden, Delhi.     
    (e) The offence complained of/ proved             : U/s.138 of Negotiable Instruments Act.
    (f) The plea of accused                                     : Pleaded not guilty
    (g) The final order                                             : Convicted.
    (h) The date of such order                                  : 13.7.2009.
    (i) Brief statement of the reasons for the decision:­
JUDGMENT/RAMBIR SINGH RAGHAV VS. OM PRAKASH/ CC NO.161/1/U.S.138 N.I. ACT/
CONVICTED/13.7.2009 /Page 1 of 9 k
1\. This is a complaint u/s.138 of Negotiable Instruments Act, filed by the
complainant against the accused, regarding dishonour of one cheque bearing no.
446240, for Rs.10,000/­, dated 10.9.2008 and, drawn on Punjab & Sind Bank,
Coronation Hotel Building, Fateh Puri, Delhi. The complainant claimed that
this cheque was issued by the accused in discharge of his legally enforceable
liability but it was dishonoured due to 'stop payment'. Legal notice as
required was sent to the accused within the stipulated period, but the accused
failed to make payment of the cheque amount within fifteen days of receipt of
notice and hence this complaint. Accused was summoned by this Court and notice
for the said offence was framed against him on 17.2.2009 to which the accused
rebut the presumptions arising under Sections 118 and 139 of the Act. The
accused has also an option to prove the non­ existence of consideration and
debt or liability either by letting in evidence or in some clear and
exceptional cases, from the case set out by the complainant, that is, the
averments in the complaint, the case set out in the statutory notice and
evidence adduced by the complainant during the trial. Once such rebuttal
evidence is adduced and accepted by the court, having regard to all the
circumstances of the case and the preponderance of probabilities, the
evidential burden shifts back to the complainant and, thereafter, the
presumptions under Sections 118 and 139 of the Act will not again come to the
complainant's rescue. "
13\. Therefore, in my considered view, the accused is guilty for the dishonour
of cheque despite having legally enforceable liability and for failure to pay
the cheque amount to the complainant despite receiving the legal notice and
within the stipulated period of fifteen days from the date of receipt of the
notice. The accused is accordingly convicted for the offence u/s.138 N.I. Act.
                                                                2229, Raja Park, Rani Bagh, Shakur Basti, Delhi.
    (d) The name, parentage, residence of                     : Om Prakash Chopra s/o. Late. Sh. Amarnath Chopra 
         accused                                                r/o. D­22, Mansarovar Garden, Delhi.     
    (e) The offence complained of/ proved             : U/s.138 of Negotiable Instruments Act.
    (f) The plea of accused                                     : Pleaded not guilty
    (g) The final order                                             : Convicted.
    (h) The date of such order                                  : 13.7.2009.
    (i) Brief statement of the reasons for the decision:­
JUDGMENT/RAMBIR SINGH RAGHAV VS. OM PRAKASH/ CC NO.161/1/U.S.138 N.I. ACT/
CONVICTED/13.7.2009 /Page 1 of 9 k
1\. This is a complaint u/s.138 of Negotiable Instruments Act, filed by the
complainant against the accused, regarding dishonour of one cheque bearing no.
446240, for Rs.10,000/­, dated 10.9.2008 and, drawn on Punjab & Sind Bank,
Coronation Hotel Building, Fateh Puri, Delhi. The complainant claimed that
this cheque was issued by the accused in discharge of his legally enforceable
liability but it was dishonoured due to 'stop payment'. Legal notice as
required was sent to the accused within the stipulated period, but the accused
failed to make payment of the cheque amount within fifteen days of receipt of
notice and hence this complaint. Accused was summoned by this Court and notice
for the said offence was framed against him on 17.2.2009 to which the accused
rebut the presumptions arising under Sections 118 and 139 of the Act. The
accused has also an option to prove the non­ existence of consideration and
debt or liability either by letting in evidence or in some clear and
exceptional cases, from the case set out by the complainant, that is, the
averments in the complaint, the case set out in the statutory notice and
evidence adduced by the complainant during the trial. Once such rebuttal
evidence is adduced and accepted by the court, having regard to all the
circumstances of the case and the preponderance of probabilities, the
evidential burden shifts back to the complainant and, thereafter, the
presumptions under Sections 118 and 139 of the Act will not again come to the
complainant's rescue. "
13\. Therefore, in my considered view, the accused is guilty for the dishonour
of cheque despite having legally enforceable liability and for failure to pay
the cheque amount to the complainant despite receiving the legal notice and
within the stipulated period of fifteen days from the date of receipt of the
notice. The accused is accordingly convicted for the offence u/s.138 N.I. Act.
                                                                2229, Raja Park, Rani Bagh, Shakur Basti, Delhi.
    (d) The name, parentage, residence of                     : Om Prakash Chopra s/o. Late. Sh. Amarnath Chopra 
         accused                                                r/o. D­22, Mansarovar Garden, Delhi.     
    (e) The offence complained of/ proved             : U/s.138 of Negotiable Instruments Act.
    (f) The plea of accused                                     : Pleaded not guilty
    (g) The final order                                             : Convicted.
    (h) The date of such order                                  : 13.7.2009.
    (i) Brief statement of the reasons for the decision:­
JUDGMENT/RAMBIR SINGH RAGHAV VS. OM PRAKASH/ CC NO.161/1/U.S.138 N.I. ACT/
CONVICTED/13.7.2009 /Page 1 of 9 k
1\. This is a complaint u/s.138 of Negotiable Instruments Act, filed by the
complainant against the accused, regarding dishonour of one cheque bearing no.
446240, for Rs.10,000/­, dated 10.9.2008 and, drawn on Punjab & Sind Bank,
Coronation Hotel Building, Fateh Puri, Delhi. The complainant claimed that
this cheque was issued by the accused in discharge of his legally enforceable
liability but it was dishonoured due to 'stop payment'. Legal notice as
required was sent to the accused within the stipulated period, but the accused
failed to make payment of the cheque amount within fifteen days of receipt of
notice and hence this complaint. Accused was summoned by this Court and notice
for the said offence was framed against him on 17.2.2009 to which the accused
claimed trial, claiming that he had no legally enforceable liability towards
the complainant.
2\. In support of its case, complainant examined himself as PW1, tendering his
evidence by way of affidavit Ex. P1. After evidence of complainant, statement
of accused was recorded under section 313 read with section 281 of Cr. P. C.,
and subsequently the accused examined himself as DW1 to prove his defence and,
also tendered his evidence by way of affidavit Ex. D1.
3\. I have heard counsels for both the parties, and have perused the record.
4\. Certain facts are not in dispute in the present case. Those admitted facts
are: • That the complainant is proprietor of M/s. Abhinav Prints, and was into
the business of printing/publishing.
rebut the presumptions arising under Sections 118 and 139 of the Act. The
accused has also an option to prove the non­ existence of consideration and
debt or liability either by letting in evidence or in some clear and
exceptional cases, from the case set out by the complainant, that is, the
averments in the complaint, the case set out in the statutory notice and
evidence adduced by the complainant during the trial. Once such rebuttal
evidence is adduced and accepted by the court, having regard to all the
circumstances of the case and the preponderance of probabilities, the
evidential burden shifts back to the complainant and, thereafter, the
presumptions under Sections 118 and 139 of the Act will not again come to the
complainant's rescue. "
13\. Therefore, in my considered view, the accused is guilty for the dishonour
of cheque despite having legally enforceable liability and for failure to pay
the cheque amount to the complainant despite receiving the legal notice and
within the stipulated period of fifteen days from the date of receipt of the
notice. The accused is accordingly convicted for the offence u/s.138 N.I. Act.
                                                                2229, Raja Park, Rani Bagh, Shakur Basti, Delhi.
    (d) The name, parentage, residence of                     : Om Prakash Chopra s/o. Late. Sh. Amarnath Chopra 
         accused                                                r/o. D­22, Mansarovar Garden, Delhi.     
    (e) The offence complained of/ proved             : U/s.138 of Negotiable Instruments Act.
    (f) The plea of accused                                     : Pleaded not guilty
    (g) The final order                                             : Convicted.
    (h) The date of such order                                  : 13.7.2009.
    (i) Brief statement of the reasons for the decision:­
JUDGMENT/RAMBIR SINGH RAGHAV VS. OM PRAKASH/ CC NO.161/1/U.S.138 N.I. ACT/
CONVICTED/13.7.2009 /Page 1 of 9 k
1\. This is a complaint u/s.138 of Negotiable Instruments Act, filed by the
complainant against the accused, regarding dishonour of one cheque bearing no.
446240, for Rs.10,000/­, dated 10.9.2008 and, drawn on Punjab & Sind Bank,
Coronation Hotel Building, Fateh Puri, Delhi. The complainant claimed that
this cheque was issued by the accused in discharge of his legally enforceable
liability but it was dishonoured due to 'stop payment'. Legal notice as
required was sent to the accused within the stipulated period, but the accused
failed to make payment of the cheque amount within fifteen days of receipt of
notice and hence this complaint. Accused was summoned by this Court and notice
for the said offence was framed against him on 17.2.2009 to which the accused
claimed trial, claiming that he had no legally enforceable liability towards
the complainant.
2\. In support of its case, complainant examined himself as PW1, tendering his
evidence by way of affidavit Ex. P1. After evidence of complainant, statement
of accused was recorded under section 313 read with section 281 of Cr. P. C.,
and subsequently the accused examined himself as DW1 to prove his defence and,
also tendered his evidence by way of affidavit Ex. D1.
3\. I have heard counsels for both the parties, and have perused the record.
4\. Certain facts are not in dispute in the present case. Those admitted facts
are: • That the complainant is proprietor of M/s. Abhinav Prints, and was into
the business of printing/publishing.
rebut the presumptions arising under Sections 118 and 139 of the Act. The
accused has also an option to prove the non­ existence of consideration and
debt or liability either by letting in evidence or in some clear and
exceptional cases, from the case set out by the complainant, that is, the
averments in the complaint, the case set out in the statutory notice and
evidence adduced by the complainant during the trial. Once such rebuttal
evidence is adduced and accepted by the court, having regard to all the
circumstances of the case and the preponderance of probabilities, the
evidential burden shifts back to the complainant and, thereafter, the
presumptions under Sections 118 and 139 of the Act will not again come to the
complainant's rescue. "
13\. Therefore, in my considered view, the accused is guilty for the dishonour
of cheque despite having legally enforceable liability and for failure to pay
the cheque amount to the complainant despite receiving the legal notice and
within the stipulated period of fifteen days from the date of receipt of the
notice. The accused is accordingly convicted for the offence u/s.138 N.I. Act.
