Madras High Court
C.V. Ramasamy Goundar Sons vs Deputy Commercial Tax Officer, ... on 31
October, 1988
Author: S Kader
Bench: S Kader
JUDGMENT S.A. Kader, J.
1\. This writ petition has been filed under article 226 of the Constitution of
India for the issuance of a writ quashing the assessment order passed by the
respondent against the petitioner in TNGST No. 719976/86-87 dated 15th
February, 1988, for the assessment year 1986-87.
2\. The petitioner is a partnership firm carrying on business of turmeric
commission agency at Erode. According to the petitioner, agriculturists in and
around Erode used to bring their turmeric to the petitioner-firm to be stored
in the godowns of the petitioner. They are sold subsequently in public auction
in the premises of the Erode Turmeric Merchants' Association in the immediate
presence of the concerned agriculturist. The highest offer is accepted by the
concerned agriculturist and thereafter the goods are sold in specific
quantities. The contention of the petitioner is that he is not a dealer within
the meaning of section 2(g) of the Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax Act
(hereinafter referred to as "the Act") and is not liable for any assessment of
Income-tax Officer, Rampur , the question whether the jurisdictional fact has
been rightly decided or not, is a question that is open for examination by the
High Court in an application or a writ of certiorari. Further more, the Bench
of this Court in Tiruchengode Co-operative Marketing Society Limited v. State
of Tamil Nadu [1978] 41 STC 212 already referred to, has clearly laid down
that such a transaction as is carried on by the petitioner does not render it
a "dealer" within the meaning of the Act. But, the respondent-Deputy
Commercial Tax Officer has totally ignored this position. In East India
Commercial Co. Ltd. v. Collector of Customs, Calcutta , the Supreme Court has
pointed out that law declared by the High Court is binding on the lower courts
and Tribunals within its jurisdiction. The respondents-Deputy Commercial Tax
Officer exercising quasi-judicial functions is bound by the aforesaid decision
of this Court and his failure to follow the same invites the exercise of the
extraordinary jurisdiction of this Court. I therefore uphold the
maintainability of this writ petition.
11\. In the result, the writ petition is allowed, the impugned order of the
(hereinafter referred to as "the Act") and is not liable for any assessment of
sales tax. Previously the petitioner not being aware of the correct legal
position was paying sales tax. As soon as it came to know of the real legal
position, the petitioner denied its liability for assessment. But, the
respondent-Deputy Commercial Tax Officer, Erode, rejected the contention of
the petitioner and passed impugned order levying tax for the year 1986-87 on a
total turnover of Rs. 23,57,198. Hence this writ petition.
3\. The Deputy commercial Tax Officer, Erode, has filed a counter-affidavit
challenging the contentions of the petitioner and disputing the
maintainability of this writ petition.
4\. Under section 3 of the Act, the liability to pay sales tax on the taxable
turnover is fastened on every dealer whose total turnover for a year is not
less than Rs. 50,000. The main question which, therefore arises is whether the
petitioner is a "dealer" within the ambit of section 2(g) of the Act, which
runs thus :
"'Dealer' means any person who carries on the business of buying, selling,
supplying or distributing goods, directly or otherwise, whether for cash or
for deferred payment, or for commission, remuneration or other valuable
consideration, and includes -
(i) ............
(ii) ............
(iii) a commission agent, a broker or a del credere agent, or an auctioneer or
any other mercantile agent, by whatever name called, who carries on the
business of buying, selling, supplying or distributing goods on behalf of any
principal".
It has been held by a Bench of this Court in National Chamber of Commerce v.
State of Madras [1970] 25 STC 185, that the "distribution" referred to in the
aforesaid definition is such as involves a transfer of property. "Supplying"
and "distributing" are therefore associated with the transfer of property. We
have now to see whether the petitioner is a dealer.
5\. The modus operandi adopted in the transactions carried on by the
petitioner and similar commission agents is this : The agriculturists being
the turmeric grown in their lands to the petitioner and other commission
agents in Erode and these goods are stored in the godowns of the commission
agents. Periodically, auction is held in the premises of the Erode Turmeric
Merchants' Association on the basis of the samples taken from the stock stored
in the godowns of the commission agents. The concerned agriculturists are
present at the time of the auction and the highest bid has to be accepted by
the particular agriculturist and thereafter his goods are sold in specified
quantities at the agreed price. They are then weighed and delivered to the
buyer. The price is received by the commission agent, and after deducting the
storage, labour, weighment and other charges he pays the balance to the
agriculturist concerned. It is, therefore, the contention of the petitioner
that it acts only as an intermediary bringing together the agriculturists and
the respective purchasers in the auction held in the presence of the
agriculturists and the petitioner does not do any business of purchasing or
selling to make itself liable to assessment under the Act. In support of this
contention the petitioner has produced copies of receipts issued in the course
of these transactions. As soon as the agriculturist brings the turmeric to the
petitioner-firm, a receipt is issued for the quantity of the turmeric received
and this receipt is signed by the petitioner's agent by the agriculturist
concerned. On the back of this receipt there are several conditions of which
the important ones are : that the agriculturist is liable for any shrinkage,
the commission agent has no right to sell the turmeric and that it is the
responsibility of the agriculturist-producer to decide the price and sell the
same. After the auction is over and the price is agreed to by agriculturist-
producer, the weighing receipt is issued by the petitioner-commission agent
giving the full details about the agriculturist-producer, the purchaser, the
weight of the goods sold, their total value and the service charges. It
contains a recital by the agriculturist-producer that his turmeric bags are
sold by him in auction at the rate agreed to by him and that he is receiving
the sale amount from the petitioner after deducting the expenses and charges.
This receipt is signed by the agriculturist-producer, the purchaser and by the
representative of the petitioner-firm. On the same day the Marketing
Committee, in whose premises the auction take place, issues a receipt for the
number of the bags and the weight therefor and this is signed by the
agriculturist as seller and by the merchant. It also contains the signature of
the weigher and the receipt of the weighing charges.
6\. In the counter-affidavit filed by the respondent, there is no denial of
the fact that the turmeric stored in the godown of the petitioner-firm is sold
in public auction in the immediate presence of the concerned agriculturist,
that the highest bid is accepted by the agriculturist and only thereafter the
goods are sold at the accepted price. We can, therefore, safely conclude that
the sale of the turmeric takes place by public auction, that the concerned
agriculturist is present at that time, that he accepts the price and sells the
goods. The petitioner-firm has no hand in the determination of the price or
the sale of goods. It only acts as an intermediary, delivers the goods to the
purchaser after the sale is completed, receives the price, deducts its charges
and pays the balance to the agriculturist-seller. On the facts so established
the question is, whether the petitioner-firm is a dealer.
7\. The point is covered by a direct decision of a Bench of this Court in
Tiruchengode Co-operative Marketing Society Limited v. State of Tamil Nadu
[1978] 41 STC 212 and by another Bench decision of the High Court of Madhya
Pradesh in Karelal Kundanlal Trust v. Commissioner of Sales Tax [1980] 46 STC
202. In the Bench decision of this Court, the established facts were these :
The stock was received by the Co-operative Marketing Society from its members
and placed for auction. The sale is knocked down in favour of the highest
bidder and when only agreed upon by the seller, i.e., the agriculturist, the
sale is declared. The auction is conducted only in the presence of the
agriculturist (member) and the buyer (merchant). The commodity tendered is
then weighed or measured and sales chit is prepared which contains details of
tenderer, his address, quantity tendered for sale, name of the buyer, rate of
sale, total amount of sales proceeds, deductions such as advances, commission
towards handling and other charges, if any, and the net amount due to the
agriculturist-member. A copy of this chit is handed over to him at the time of
payment. The receipt issued by the Co-operative Marketing Society (assessee)
at the time of the receipt of the agricultural produce contained a condition
that the assessee had no authority to sell the goods without the consent of
the member and that the goods are sold only when the agriculturist-member
accepts the price offered. The Bench observed :
"These two facts about which there is no controversy clearly establish that
the assessee cannot be said to have authority to transfer the property in the
goods. Even if the assessee could be said to have dominion over the goods if
it did not have authority to transfer the property in such goods, certainly as
per the law laid down by the Bench, referred to already, [Zackria Sons Private
Ltd. v. State of Madras [1965] 16 STC 136 (Mad.)], the assessee in the present
case be said to have effected a sale and, therefore, cannot be said to have
acquired a turnover liable to sales tax."
In Karelal kundanlal Trust v. Commissioner of Sales Tax [1980] 46 STC 202
(MP), the cultivators brought their produce to a place in the mundy in the
occupation of the assessee as licensee. The produce so brought by the
cultivators are sold by auction and the bid was accepted by the cultivators,
who remained present till the goods were sold. The buyers then removed the
goods from the place. The assessee issued a bill to the buyers and entered the
name of the buyers and sellers in the books. The price was paid to the
cultivators and the assessee retained the commission. The Bench held :
"It is difficult to hold that the assessee was carrying on the business of
buying, selling, supplying or distributing the goods on behalf of the
cultivators. The assessee made available his fad to the cultivators for
stocking their goods. The assessee helped them with his technical knowledge of
the market. The assessee had no dominion over or custody of the goods. The
sale was by the cultivators themselves who accepted the bids of the buyers.
The goods were removed by the buyers from the fad. The assessee recovered the
price from the buyers and paid over the some to the cultivators after
retaining the commission. These facts do not bring the assessee within the
definition of 'dealer'."
8\. The facts of the case before me are identical with the facts of the cases
dealt with in the aforesaid decisions. The petitioner had absolutely no hand
in the sale of the goods stored in his godown by the cultivators, who
themselves sold the goods to the highest bidder in the auction held in the
premises of the Erode Turmeric Merchants' Association. The petitioner is not,
therefore, a "dealer" within the meaning of section 2(g) of the Act and is not
liable for assessment of sales tax.
9\. It is pointed out that the petitioner had on prior years accepted his
liability for payment of sales tax and must, therefore, be deemed to have
admitted that he is a dealer. This contention has no force. It is well-settled
that there is no estoppel against a statute and particularly a fiscal statute.
In Karelal Kundanlal Trust v. Commissioner of Sales Tax [1980] 46 STC 202
(MP), already referred to, the assessee had recovered sales tax from the buyer
and it was contended that he was estopped from saying that the he was not a
dealer as defined in the Madhya Pradesh General Sales Tax Act. Rejecting the
contention the Bench held that cannot be any estoppel against a statute and
the question whether the assessee was a dealer in respect of the transactions
had to be answered in the light of the facts and the definition of dealer
contained in section 2(d) of the Madhya Pradesh Act. In Hyderabad Asbestos
Cement Products Ltd. v. State of Andhra Pradesh , the appellant-company
collected sales tax on railway freights also and subsequently challenged its
liability to pay sales tax on the freight. It was held that the freight did
not form part of the price and the company was no liable for sales tax on the
freight. The Supreme Court observed that if the company apprehending that it
may have to pay sales tax on the freight, collected sales tax on the freight,
the true nature of the contract between the company and the purchasers cannot
on that account be altered, that the company may be liable to refund the
amount of excess sales tax to its purchasers, but, that is a matter between
the company and the purchasers and the State cannot seek to levy tax on the
road railway freight if it was not made a part of the price. Hence the fact
that the petitioner has in prior years accepted the liability and paid sales
tax does not estop the petitioner from challenging the assessment for the
subsequent years on a true appreciation of the position of law.
10\. It is finally urged by the learned government Advocate that the
petitioner has not availed of the remedies available to him under the Act by
way of appeal, etc., and he is not, therefore, entitled to seek the
extraordinary jurisdiction of this Court under article 226 of the
Constitution. This contention has not been specifically raised in the counter-
affidavit. Further, the availability of alternative remedy is not an absolute
bar to the maintainability of a writ petition. It is a matter of discretion
rather than of jurisdiction. Again, the liability of the petitioner for levy
of sales tax arises only if he is a "dealer" within the meaning of section
2(g) of the Act. This is a jurisdictional fact, the condition precedent to the
levy of tax. As pointed out by the Supreme Court in Raza Textiles Ltd. v.
Income-tax Officer, Rampur , the question whether the jurisdictional fact has
been rightly decided or not, is a question that is open for examination by the
High Court in an application or a writ of certiorari. Further more, the Bench
of this Court in Tiruchengode Co-operative Marketing Society Limited v. State
of Tamil Nadu [1978] 41 STC 212 already referred to, has clearly laid down
that such a transaction as is carried on by the petitioner does not render it
a "dealer" within the meaning of the Act. But, the respondent-Deputy
Commercial Tax Officer has totally ignored this position. In East India
Commercial Co. Ltd. v. Collector of Customs, Calcutta , the Supreme Court has
pointed out that law declared by the High Court is binding on the lower courts
and Tribunals within its jurisdiction. The respondents-Deputy Commercial Tax
Officer exercising quasi-judicial functions is bound by the aforesaid decision
of this Court and his failure to follow the same invites the exercise of the
extraordinary jurisdiction of this Court. I therefore uphold the
maintainability of this writ petition.
11\. In the result, the writ petition is allowed, the impugned order of the
respondent in his TNGST No. 719976/86-87 dated 15th February, 1988, levying
sales tax on the petitioner for the assessment year 1986-87 is quashed. There
will, however, be no order as to costs.
12\. Writ petition allowed.
Income-tax Officer, Rampur , the question whether the jurisdictional fact has
been rightly decided or not, is a question that is open for examination by the
High Court in an application or a writ of certiorari. Further more, the Bench
of this Court in Tiruchengode Co-operative Marketing Society Limited v. State
of Tamil Nadu [1978] 41 STC 212 already referred to, has clearly laid down
that such a transaction as is carried on by the petitioner does not render it
a "dealer" within the meaning of the Act. But, the respondent-Deputy
Commercial Tax Officer has totally ignored this position. In East India
Commercial Co. Ltd. v. Collector of Customs, Calcutta , the Supreme Court has
pointed out that law declared by the High Court is binding on the lower courts
and Tribunals within its jurisdiction. The respondents-Deputy Commercial Tax
Officer exercising quasi-judicial functions is bound by the aforesaid decision
of this Court and his failure to follow the same invites the exercise of the
extraordinary jurisdiction of this Court. I therefore uphold the
maintainability of this writ petition.
11\. In the result, the writ petition is allowed, the impugned order of the
(hereinafter referred to as "the Act") and is not liable for any assessment of
sales tax. Previously the petitioner not being aware of the correct legal
position was paying sales tax. As soon as it came to know of the real legal
position, the petitioner denied its liability for assessment. But, the
respondent-Deputy Commercial Tax Officer, Erode, rejected the contention of
the petitioner and passed impugned order levying tax for the year 1986-87 on a
total turnover of Rs. 23,57,198. Hence this writ petition.
3\. The Deputy commercial Tax Officer, Erode, has filed a counter-affidavit
challenging the contentions of the petitioner and disputing the
maintainability of this writ petition.
4\. Under section 3 of the Act, the liability to pay sales tax on the taxable
turnover is fastened on every dealer whose total turnover for a year is not
less than Rs. 50,000. The main question which, therefore arises is whether the
petitioner is a "dealer" within the ambit of section 2(g) of the Act, which
runs thus :
"'Dealer' means any person who carries on the business of buying, selling,
supplying or distributing goods, directly or otherwise, whether for cash or
for deferred payment, or for commission, remuneration or other valuable
consideration, and includes -
(i) ............
Income-tax Officer, Rampur , the question whether the jurisdictional fact has
been rightly decided or not, is a question that is open for examination by the
High Court in an application or a writ of certiorari. Further more, the Bench
of this Court in Tiruchengode Co-operative Marketing Society Limited v. State
of Tamil Nadu [1978] 41 STC 212 already referred to, has clearly laid down
that such a transaction as is carried on by the petitioner does not render it
a "dealer" within the meaning of the Act. But, the respondent-Deputy
Commercial Tax Officer has totally ignored this position. In East India
Commercial Co. Ltd. v. Collector of Customs, Calcutta , the Supreme Court has
pointed out that law declared by the High Court is binding on the lower courts
and Tribunals within its jurisdiction. The respondents-Deputy Commercial Tax
Officer exercising quasi-judicial functions is bound by the aforesaid decision
of this Court and his failure to follow the same invites the exercise of the
extraordinary jurisdiction of this Court. I therefore uphold the
maintainability of this writ petition.
11\. In the result, the writ petition is allowed, the impugned order of the
(hereinafter referred to as "the Act") and is not liable for any assessment of
sales tax. Previously the petitioner not being aware of the correct legal
position was paying sales tax. As soon as it came to know of the real legal
position, the petitioner denied its liability for assessment. But, the
respondent-Deputy Commercial Tax Officer, Erode, rejected the contention of
the petitioner and passed impugned order levying tax for the year 1986-87 on a
total turnover of Rs. 23,57,198. Hence this writ petition.
3\. The Deputy commercial Tax Officer, Erode, has filed a counter-affidavit
challenging the contentions of the petitioner and disputing the
maintainability of this writ petition.
4\. Under section 3 of the Act, the liability to pay sales tax on the taxable
turnover is fastened on every dealer whose total turnover for a year is not
less than Rs. 50,000. The main question which, therefore arises is whether the
petitioner is a "dealer" within the ambit of section 2(g) of the Act, which
runs thus :
"'Dealer' means any person who carries on the business of buying, selling,
supplying or distributing goods, directly or otherwise, whether for cash or
for deferred payment, or for commission, remuneration or other valuable
consideration, and includes -
(i) ............
Income-tax Officer, Rampur , the question whether the jurisdictional fact has
been rightly decided or not, is a question that is open for examination by the
High Court in an application or a writ of certiorari. Further more, the Bench
of this Court in Tiruchengode Co-operative Marketing Society Limited v. State
of Tamil Nadu [1978] 41 STC 212 already referred to, has clearly laid down
that such a transaction as is carried on by the petitioner does not render it
a "dealer" within the meaning of the Act. But, the respondent-Deputy
Commercial Tax Officer has totally ignored this position. In East India
Commercial Co. Ltd. v. Collector of Customs, Calcutta , the Supreme Court has
pointed out that law declared by the High Court is binding on the lower courts
and Tribunals within its jurisdiction. The respondents-Deputy Commercial Tax
Officer exercising quasi-judicial functions is bound by the aforesaid decision
of this Court and his failure to follow the same invites the exercise of the
extraordinary jurisdiction of this Court. I therefore uphold the
maintainability of this writ petition.
11\. In the result, the writ petition is allowed, the impugned order of the
(hereinafter referred to as "the Act") and is not liable for any assessment of
sales tax. Previously the petitioner not being aware of the correct legal
position was paying sales tax. As soon as it came to know of the real legal
position, the petitioner denied its liability for assessment. But, the
respondent-Deputy Commercial Tax Officer, Erode, rejected the contention of
the petitioner and passed impugned order levying tax for the year 1986-87 on a
total turnover of Rs. 23,57,198. Hence this writ petition.
3\. The Deputy commercial Tax Officer, Erode, has filed a counter-affidavit
challenging the contentions of the petitioner and disputing the
maintainability of this writ petition.
4\. Under section 3 of the Act, the liability to pay sales tax on the taxable
turnover is fastened on every dealer whose total turnover for a year is not
less than Rs. 50,000. The main question which, therefore arises is whether the
petitioner is a "dealer" within the ambit of section 2(g) of the Act, which
runs thus :
"'Dealer' means any person who carries on the business of buying, selling,
supplying or distributing goods, directly or otherwise, whether for cash or
for deferred payment, or for commission, remuneration or other valuable
consideration, and includes -
(i) ............
(ii) ............
(iii) a commission agent, a broker or a del credere agent, or an auctioneer or
any other mercantile agent, by whatever name called, who carries on the
business of buying, selling, supplying or distributing goods on behalf of any
principal".
It has been held by a Bench of this Court in National Chamber of Commerce v.
State of Madras [1970] 25 STC 185, that the "distribution" referred to in the
aforesaid definition is such as involves a transfer of property. "Supplying"
and "distributing" are therefore associated with the transfer of property. We
have now to see whether the petitioner is a dealer.
5\. The modus operandi adopted in the transactions carried on by the
Income-tax Officer, Rampur , the question whether the jurisdictional fact has
been rightly decided or not, is a question that is open for examination by the
High Court in an application or a writ of certiorari. Further more, the Bench
of this Court in Tiruchengode Co-operative Marketing Society Limited v. State
of Tamil Nadu [1978] 41 STC 212 already referred to, has clearly laid down
that such a transaction as is carried on by the petitioner does not render it
a "dealer" within the meaning of the Act. But, the respondent-Deputy
Commercial Tax Officer has totally ignored this position. In East India
Commercial Co. Ltd. v. Collector of Customs, Calcutta , the Supreme Court has
pointed out that law declared by the High Court is binding on the lower courts
and Tribunals within its jurisdiction. The respondents-Deputy Commercial Tax
Officer exercising quasi-judicial functions is bound by the aforesaid decision
of this Court and his failure to follow the same invites the exercise of the
extraordinary jurisdiction of this Court. I therefore uphold the
maintainability of this writ petition.
11\. In the result, the writ petition is allowed, the impugned order of the
(hereinafter referred to as "the Act") and is not liable for any assessment of
sales tax. Previously the petitioner not being aware of the correct legal
position was paying sales tax. As soon as it came to know of the real legal
position, the petitioner denied its liability for assessment. But, the
respondent-Deputy Commercial Tax Officer, Erode, rejected the contention of
the petitioner and passed impugned order levying tax for the year 1986-87 on a
total turnover of Rs. 23,57,198. Hence this writ petition.
3\. The Deputy commercial Tax Officer, Erode, has filed a counter-affidavit
challenging the contentions of the petitioner and disputing the
maintainability of this writ petition.
4\. Under section 3 of the Act, the liability to pay sales tax on the taxable
turnover is fastened on every dealer whose total turnover for a year is not
less than Rs. 50,000. The main question which, therefore arises is whether the
petitioner is a "dealer" within the ambit of section 2(g) of the Act, which
runs thus :
"'Dealer' means any person who carries on the business of buying, selling,
supplying or distributing goods, directly or otherwise, whether for cash or
for deferred payment, or for commission, remuneration or other valuable
consideration, and includes -
(i) ............
(ii) ............
(iii) a commission agent, a broker or a del credere agent, or an auctioneer or
any other mercantile agent, by whatever name called, who carries on the
business of buying, selling, supplying or distributing goods on behalf of any
principal".
It has been held by a Bench of this Court in National Chamber of Commerce v.
State of Madras [1970] 25 STC 185, that the "distribution" referred to in the
aforesaid definition is such as involves a transfer of property. "Supplying"
and "distributing" are therefore associated with the transfer of property. We
have now to see whether the petitioner is a dealer.
5\. The modus operandi adopted in the transactions carried on by the
Income-tax Officer, Rampur , the question whether the jurisdictional fact has
been rightly decided or not, is a question that is open for examination by the
High Court in an application or a writ of certiorari. Further more, the Bench
of this Court in Tiruchengode Co-operative Marketing Society Limited v. State
of Tamil Nadu [1978] 41 STC 212 already referred to, has clearly laid down
that such a transaction as is carried on by the petitioner does not render it
a "dealer" within the meaning of the Act. But, the respondent-Deputy
Commercial Tax Officer has totally ignored this position. In East India
Commercial Co. Ltd. v. Collector of Customs, Calcutta , the Supreme Court has
pointed out that law declared by the High Court is binding on the lower courts
and Tribunals within its jurisdiction. The respondents-Deputy Commercial Tax
Officer exercising quasi-judicial functions is bound by the aforesaid decision
of this Court and his failure to follow the same invites the exercise of the
extraordinary jurisdiction of this Court. I therefore uphold the
maintainability of this writ petition.
11\. In the result, the writ petition is allowed, the impugned order of the
