Delhi District Court
The Present Complaint U/S.138 ... vs . on 11 May, 2009
Author: Sh. Dig Singh
    IN THE COURT OF SH. DIG VINAY SINGH, ADDITIONAL CHIEF METROPOLITAN MAGISTRATE­03 
                                                               (IPR), ROHINI, DELHI
                In re:                                 
               ANAND GARG                                              ...COMPLAINANT
               VS.
               PRAVEEN GOEL                                            ...ACCUSED
                CC NO.36/1/2008    
                U/s.138 N.I. ACT                                                                                              
                P.S. SHALIMAR BAGH                                                                             
    DATE OF RESERVATION OF JUDGMENT: 25.4.2009
    DATE OF PRONOUNCEMENT OF JUDGMENT: 11.5.2009
                                                                     JUDGEMENT
    (a) The serial no. of the case                                                : R0036782008.
    (b) The date of commission of offence                                         : 07.10.2008
    (c) The name of complainant                                                   : ANAND GARG S/O. SH. R.K. GARG
    (d) The name, parentage, residence of accused                                 : PRAVEEN GARG S/O. SH. BHOLA RAM
                                                                                    C­6/66, POCKET­C­6, SECTOR­5, ROHINI, 
Presumption regarding discharge of liability is in favour of the complainant.
Legal notice was sent to the accused within limitation prescribed. The notice
was received by the accused. Accused was even failed to reply to the said
notice.
20\. Had the claim of complainant being false, the first reaction of the
accused, immediately upon receiving the legal notice, would have been to reply
to the notice of the complainant specifically denying that he obtained
Rs.4,00,000/­ as loan from the complainant, but the accused did not reply
JUDGMENT/ANAND GARG VS. PRAVEEN GOEL/ CCNO.36/1/08/U.S.138N.I.ACT/ CONVICTED/
11.5.2009 /Page 11 of 12 k to this notice. This fact indicates that the
defence taken by the accused is false. It may be mentioned here that the two
cheques in question were dishonoured due to "insufficient funds" and not due
to any other reason. All these facts prove the case of complainant beyond
reasonable doubt against the accused and the accused is held guilty for the
dishonour of two cheques in question u/s.138 N.I. Act and is accordingly
convicted u/s.138 N.I. Act.
                                                                                    C­6/66, POCKET­C­6, SECTOR­5, ROHINI, 
                                                                                    DELHI.
    (e) The offence complained of/ proved                                         : U/s.138 N.I. ACT.
    (f) The plea of accused                                                       : pleaded not guilty
    (g) The final order                                                           : CONVICTED.
    (h) The date of such order                                                    : 11.5.2009.
    (i) Brief statement of the reasons for the decision:­
1\. The present complaint u/s.138 Negotiable Instruments Act is filed by the
complainant Anand Garg against the accused Praveen Goel alleging that the
complainant and the accused were on friendly terms and, in January, 2007, the
accused obtained a friendly loan of Rs.4,00,000/­ from the complainant which
he assured to return within a short period. In discharge of this liability,
the accused issued two post dated cheques to the complainant, details of which
are as follows : JUDGMENT/ANAND GARG VS. PRAVEEN GOEL/
CCNO.36/1/08/U.S.138N.I.ACT/ CONVICTED/ 11.5.2009 /Page 1 of 12 k Cheque No.
Dated Amount Drawn On 843714 25.4.2008 2,00,000/­ Punjab National Bank
Prashant Vihar Branch, Delhi.
        843715                     02.5.2008         2,00,000/­        Punjab National Bank
                                                                       Prashant Vihar Branch, Delhi.
Both the cheques when presented for encashment were dishonoured due to
"insufficient funds" on 22.9.2006 and thereafter, the complainant sent a legal
notice dated 30.9.2008 to the accused demanding the cheque amount within
stipulated period, but when the accused failed to make payment of the cheque
amount, the present complaint was filed.
2\. Accused was summoned u/s.138 Negotiable Instruments Act and thereafter a
notice u/s.251 Cr.P.C. for the offence u/s.138 Negotiable Instruments Act was
framed against the accused on 15.12.2008 to which accused claimed trial and
stated that he did not receive the notice. The accused admitted that the
residential address i.e. C­6/80, Pocket C­6, Sector­6, Rohini, Delhi­ 110085,
is his correct address and he is residing at this address for the last many
years. This is the same address where the legal notice was sent by the
complainant to the accused. In the next breath, the accused admitted that he
received one notice from lawyer Mr. R.K. Jain. However, he claimed that he
does not know as to by which mode he received the same, from registered post
or courier. He admitted signatures on the two cheques in question and stated
that he issued these two cheques to the complainant in business transaction.
He claimed that when he signed these two cheques, they were blank and besides
signatures, no other contents of the two cheques are in his handwriting.
3\. To prove his case, the complainant examined himself as PW1 and deposed
that accused was on friendly relation with the complainant for the last many
years and in the month of January, 2007, on the request of accused, he
extended a friendly loan of Rs.4,00,000/­ to the accused which, the accused
had assured to return within a short period. In discharge of this liability,
accused issued two cheques Ex. CW1/1 and CW1/2 bearing nos. 843714 dated
25.4.2008 of Rs. 2,00,000/­ & 843715 dated 02.5.2008 of Rs.2,00,000/­, both
drawn on Punjab National Bank, Prashant Vihar Branch, Delhi. Those two cheques
were lastly presented by the complainant on 20.9.2008, but were dishonoured
due to "insufficient funds" vide memo dated 22.9.2008. The said memos were
proved as Ex. CW1/3 & CW1/4 respectively. Thereafter, he informed the accused
about the dishonour of cheques, but accused did not pay any heed and
complainant was constrained to issue legal notice Ex. CW1/5 dated 30.9.2008 to
the accused vide registered postal receipt, courier JUDGMENT/ANAND GARG VS.
PRAVEEN GOEL/ CCNO.36/1/08/U.S.138N.I.ACT/ CONVICTED/ 11.5.2009 /Page 2 of 12
k receipt Ex. CW1/6 & CW1/7 respectively. It is deposed that despite receipt
of notice, accused failed to make the payment of cheque amount within
stipulated period. It is also deposed that on 09.5.2008, complainant lodged a
complaint in PS Shalimar Bagh, Delhi, regarding intimidation received from the
accused by the complainant whereas accused pursuant to complaint Ex. CW1/8
gave an undertaking dated 11.5.2008 which is mark A. In the said document, the
accused admitted his liability and agreed to pay cheque amount to the
complainant. This witness complainant was tendered for cross examination by
the accused and during cross examination, the complainant CW1 admitted that
although he is an income tax assessee but he did not mention the factum of
loan in in his income tax returns. The complainant also admitted that he filed
returns for approximately 1.5 lacs­2 lacs only. The complainant also admitted
that he gave the loan to the accused as a friendly loan, but the accused
promised to pay some interest in case the accused was able to earn profit. The
complainant also admitted that besides the accused, he has extended loan to
one Vijay Aggarwal and he also extended loan to some other persons, but he
claimed that all those loans were friendly loan only. He claimed that when the
two cheques were given to him, they were already filled up except the date
part and the dates were filled up by the complainant. Complainant denied the
suggestion that the two cheques were filled up by him.
4\. In the cross examination, accused suggested a new defence to the
complainant that the accused obtained loan of Rs.20,000/­ from the complainant
and in discharge of liability of Rs.20,000/­, he issued the two cheques in
question which were blank and which were towards security of this loan amount
of Rs.20,000/­. It may be mentioned here that in the notice, the accused
claimed that he issued the two cheques to the complainant in business
transaction and in the cross examination of complainant, he took up absolutely
contradictory stand that he gave the cheque as security towards loan amount of
Rs.20,000/­ and not Rs.4,00,000/­. Besides this, nothing material could be
brought out on record from the cross examination of complainant in order to
impeach the creditworthiness or trustworthiness of the complainant. It may be
mentioned here that subsequently at the stage of final arguments, the
complainant was again called in the witness box since the accused wanted to
prove the income tax returns of the complainant and those income tax returns
were proved by the complainant as Ex. X1 to X3 for the assessment year
2005­2006, 2006­2007 & 2007­2008 respectively.
5\. After evidence of complainant, entire incriminating evidence was put to
the accused whilst under examination u/s.313 Cr.P.C. In the statement, the
accused admitted that he knew the complainant JUDGMENT/ANAND GARG VS. PRAVEEN
GOEL/ CCNO.36/1/08/U.S.138N.I.ACT/ CONVICTED/ 11.5.2009 /Page 3 of 12 k for
the last many years, but he denied that he took any loan from the complainant.
The accused specifically stated that he did not take any loan whatsoever from
the complainant at all. Now this stand of accused is again in absolute
contradiction to the stand taken by the accused in the cross examination of
the complainant where he claimed to have taken a loan of Rs.20,000/­. The
accused in his statement u/s.313 Cr.P.C. claimed that the two cheques in
question were given by him to the complainant as the complainant and accused
were friends. No reason whatsoever is mentioned by the accused as to the fact
that even if the complainant and accused were friends, why and for what
reasons such cheques were given by the accused to the complainant. Whether it
were given to the complainant in discharge of liability or extending of
monetary help to the accused or any other reason? Now, again this stand is
absolutely contradictory. The accused in his statement however admitted that
he received the legal notice Ex. CW1/5, but he claimed that he does not
remember as to when he received the notice. However, he admitted that his
address written on the notice and on the postal receipt and courier receipt
are correct. He also admitted that he did not reply to the notice. In his
statement, the accused did not give any reason whatsoever as to why and for
what reasons he issued these two cheques. Although, the accused claimed that
he is implicated falsely, but the accused did not come up with any reason for
his false implication.
6\. In his defence the accused examined himself as DW1, in which he deposed
that he had no money transaction with the complainant and around 1½ years ago
from the date of his deposition, he obtained a loan of R.10,000/­ on two
occasions from the complainant. He deposed that he obtained the said loan on
interest of Rs.500/­ per month per Rs.10,000/­, but no agreement was executed
between the parties. He further deposed that the two cheques were given by him
as security to the complainant towards this loan transaction. He claimed that
when he issued these two cheques to the complainant, they were blank cheques
bearing his signatures only and nothing else was written on the cheques.
During cross examination of this accused, the complainant put three documents
to the accused on which the accused admitted his signatures. Those three
documents were proved as Ex. DW1/A, DW1/B & DW1/C which are, one blank paper
on which signatures of accused exist on revenue stamp, one blank promissory
note and, one blank receipt bearing signatures of accused. Accused was
specifically put a question by the complainant that he stated in his statement
that the cheques were given since accused and complainant were friends whereas
in th evidence the accused claimed that they were were given as security
towards liability JUDGMENT/ANAND GARG VS. PRAVEEN GOEL/
CCNO.36/1/08/U.S.138N.I.ACT/ CONVICTED/ 11.5.2009 /Page 4 of 12 k and as to
which of these statement is correct. The accused claimed that the deposition
of accused that the cheques were given as security is correct.
7\. I have heard Ld. Counsel for the complainant and Ld. Counsel for the
accused and I have also perused the written arguments submitted by the
accused. The accused claims acquittal on the ground that the complainant has
failed to prove that the cheques in question were issued in discharge of
liability which was legally enforceable and that complainant was entitled to
receive the amount. It is claimed that complainant in his cross examination
admitted that he was entitled for interest on this loan amount and besides the
present accused, loans were extended to few other persons, therefore, without
a licence, the present complaint was barred u/s.4 of the Punjab Money Lenders
Act. He claimed that accordingly the complaint ought to be dismissed. There is
no force in this contention.
8\. The complainant has specifically deposed that the loan extended to the
accused and to others were friendly loan only. Law nowhere provides that a
friendly loan has to be without interest. Friendly loan can be with or without
interest merely because accused was to pay some interest to the complainant
does not make out the present case as a case of money lending. In case, the
accused wants this Court to believe that the complainant extended similar
loans to the others on interest, it was for the accused to have examined those
other persons in his defence to prove that they were also given loan by the
complainant on interest and not on friendly loan basis. Without examining
those other persons, the accused has failed to prove that the complainant is
dealing in the business of money lending.
9\. It is next argued by the accused that the complainant did not mention the
loan amount in his income tax returns and he claimed that he paid such huge
loan amount to the accused and the complainant obtained Rs.1.5 lacs from his
brother to be paid to the accused. Said obtaining of loan by the complainant
from his brother and extending the loan to the accused is hit by section
44(aa) of Income Tax Act, 1961, and , section 269 of Income Tax Act, 1961.
Again this fact by itself does not entitle the accused to claim acquittal. If
the complainant has violated some provisions of Income Tax Act, 1961, at the
most the complainant would be liable for penalty provided in Income Tax Act,
1961. Those provisions of Income Tax Act, 1961, do not say that violations of
those provisions make the claim of the complainant as legally unenforceable.
10\. The accused further claimed that once the cheques were given to the
complainant blank, any addition in the same would amount to material
alteration and thus the instrument becomes void JUDGMENT/ANAND GARG VS.
PRAVEEN GOEL/ CCNO.36/1/08/U.S.138N.I.ACT/ CONVICTED/ 11.5.2009 /Page 5 of 12
k and unenforceable. Reliance is placed upon the cases of Kaliana Gortender
Vs. Palin Gownder, AIR 1970 SC 1942; Aldow Vs. Cornweath 1892 9 QBD 555;
Bhaskaran Chandershekharan Vs. Radhakrishan I(1999) BC Kerala 301(2000);
Jayantilal Goel Vs. Zubeda Khanom AIR 1986 (AP) 120 and the case of Criminal
Appeal No.52/06 decided by Hon'ble Bombay High Court on 29.11.2007
(2008(1)CR432) in the case of Hemant R. Nayak Vs. Ajit Azarika.
11\. There is no force in the last mentioned contention also. First of all,
the complainant claims that when he received these two cheques, the date part
of the cheque were blank and remaining portion was already filled up. The
accused has also admitted his signature on the cheque in question. The claim
of accused that he gave these two cheques in blank whereas the complainant
claims that only dates were blank and remaining portion of the cheques were
already filled up.
12\. In the case of Ravi Chopra Vs. State & Another 2008 (102) DRJ 147 (Delhi
High Court), the facts were that complaint u/s 138 N. I. Act was filed by the
complainant on the ground that between 2000 to 2003 accused took a loan of Rs.
8 lakhs from the complainant and issued certain cheques which were
dishonoured. The defence of the accused in the case was that complainant did
not extend any loan but in fact the amount of Rs. 8 lakhs was invested by the
complainant in real estate business by brother of accused and the cheques in
question were issued by the accused on the insistence of complainant as
security. The accused claimed that when he signed the cheques, they were blank
i.e. without filling the name, date and crossings. The accused further claimed
that he had repaid the loan amount in October 2000 but the complainant did not
return the cheques stating that he would return the cheques in due course. The
accused claimed that complaint was filed by the complainant after filling the
name of the payee, date and crossing of the cheques. During trial, accused
filed an application for sending the cheques with specimen handwriting of
complainant and accused to handwriting expert claiming that it would falsify
the entire case of complainant. The said application was dismissed by Ld.
Trial court and matter went to Hon'ble Delhi High Court. Before Hon'ble Delhi
High Court, it was argued on behalf of accused that handwriting expert opinion
would mainly probablise the accused's defence in the trial as expert opinion
would show the date of ink to ascertain the time when signatures were appended
and the material particulars were filled up subsequently. It was also argued
that it would show that what was handed over by the accused to the complainant
was not a cheque within the meaning of Section 138 N. I. Act. The accused also
claimed that report of expert regarding JUDGMENT/ANAND GARG VS. PRAVEEN GOEL/
CCNO.36/1/08/U.S.138N.I.ACT/ CONVICTED/ 11.5.2009 /Page 6 of 12 k difference
in ink would show that there was no liability of accused when cheques were
presented for encashment. Hon'ble Delhi High Court examined Section 87, 20,
49, 86 and 125 of N. I. Act and it was held as follows in paragraph no. 20.
"20. A collective reading of the above provisions shows that even under the
scheme of the N. I. Act it is possible for the drawer of a cheque to give a
blank cheque signed by him to the payee and consent either impliedly or
expressly to the said cheque being filled up at a subsequent point in time and
presented for payment by the drawee. There is no provision in the N. I. Act
which either defines the difference in the handwriting or the ink pertaining
to the material particulars filled up in comparison with the signature thereon
as constituting a "material alteration" for the purposes of Section 87 N. I.
Act. What however is essential is that the cheque must have been signed by the
drawer. If the signature is altered or does not tally with the normal
signature of the maker, that would be a material alteration. Therefore as long
as the cheque has been signed by the drawer, the fact that the ink in which
the name and figures are written or the date is filled up is different from
the ink of the signature is not a material alteration for the purposes of
Section 87 N. I. Act." Hon'ble Delhi High Court came to conclusion that
contention of the accused that if signatures on the cheques are shown to be
much prior to the date of filling up of the material particulars on the cheque
would probablise the defence of the accused cannot be accepted. It was held
that it matters little if the name of the payee, date and amount are filled up
at a subsequent point of time subject to proviso to Section 118 N. I. Act.
13\. The judgments relied upon by the accused are of no help to the accused in
view of the judgment in the case of Ravi Chopra.
14\. In the present case also, once the accused admits his signatures on the
two cheques under the provisions of Negotiable Instruments Act, he gave
authority to the complainant to fill up the particulars. In view of the
judgment of Ravi Chopra, the claim of accused that filling up of the date or
other particulars amounts to material alteration is without force.
15\. U/s. 139 r/w section 118 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, there is a
presumption in favour of the complainant that the cheque in question was
issued in discharge of legally enforceable liability of the accused and it was
for consideration. There is a legal presumption in favour of complainant and
against the accused, that the cheque in question was received by the
complainant in JUDGMENT/ANAND GARG VS. PRAVEEN GOEL/
CCNO.36/1/08/U.S.138N.I.ACT/ CONVICTED/ 11.5.2009 /Page 7 of 12 k discharge of
any debt or other liability from the accused either in whole or in part. As
per this section, the burden to rebut the presumption was on the accused which
the accused failed to rebut in the present case. Mere oral allegations by the
accused that the cheque was not given in discharge of his liability or that he
gave the cheque to the complainant towards security would not suffice. To
rebut the presumption u/s.138 N.I. Act, there has to be some more evidence
from the accused besides making of bare oral denial. The accused has not
proved any documentary proof to show that he gave the cheque to the
complainant towards security. If such a defence without any document are to be
taken as sufficient rebuttal, in every case u/s.138 N.I. Act, the accused can
escape his liability by mere oral claim that the cheque was not in discharge
of his liability.
16\. Under section 118 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, there is a legal
presumption in favour of the complainant that every negotiable instrument
(which includes a cheque) was made or drawn for consideration. The legal
presumption is also regarding date of cheque, time of its acceptance, time of
transfer, order of endorsement and also as to stamps. Reading section 118 and
139 of Negotiable Instruments Act, a presumption arises in favour of the
complainant and not in favour of accused that, when this cheque was received
by the complainant, it was against consideration and also towards discharge of
liability by the accused.
17\. In the case of M/s. Kumar Exports v. M/s. Sharma Carpets , 2009(1)
R.C.R.(Criminal) 478 : 2009(1) R.C.R.(Civil) 453 : 2009(1) R.A.J. 154 hon'ble
Supreme court of India, held as follows;
"9. In order to determine the question whether offence punishable under
Section 138 of the Act is made out against the appellant, it will be necessary
to examine the scope and ambit of presumptions to be raised as envisaged by
the provisions of Sections 118 and 139 of the Act. In a suit to enforce a
simple contract, the plaintiff has to aver in his pleading that it was made
for good consideration and must substantiate it by evidence. But to this rule,
the negotiable instruments are an exception. In a significant departure from
the general rule applicable to contracts, Section 118 of the Act provides
certain presumptions to be raised. This Section lays down some special rules
of evidence relating to presumptions. The reason for these presumptions is
that, negotiable instrument passes from hand to hand on endorsement and it
would make trading very difficult and negotiability of the instrument
impossible, unless certain presumptions are made. The presumption, therefore,
is a matter of principle to facilitate negotiability as well as trade. Section
118 of the Act provides presumptions to be raised until the contrary is proved
(i) as to JUDGMENT/ANAND GARG VS. PRAVEEN GOEL/ CCNO.36/1/08/U.S.138N.I.ACT/
CONVICTED/ 11.5.2009 /Page 8 of 12 k consideration, (ii) as to date of
instrument, (iii) as to time of acceptance, (iv) as to time of transfer,
(v) as to order of endorsements, (vi) as to appropriate stamp and (vii) as to
holder being a holder in due course. Section 139 of the Act provides that it
shall be presumed, unless the contrary is proved, that the holder of a cheque
received the cheque of the nature referred to in Section 138 for the
discharge, in whole or in part, of any debt or other liability. Presumptions
are devices by use of which the courts are enabled and entitled to pronounce
on an issue notwithstanding that there is no evidence or insufficient
evidence. Under the Indian Evidence Act all presumptions must come under one
or the other class of the three classes mentioned in the Act, namely, (1) "may
presume" (rebuttable), (2) "shall presume" (rebuttable) and (3) "conclusive
presumptions" (irrebuttable). The term `presumption' is used to designate an
inference, affirmative or dis affirmative of the existence a fact,
conveniently called the "presumed fact" drawn by a judicial tribunal, by a
process of probable reasoning from some matter of fact, either judicially
noticed or admitted or established by legal evidence to the satisfaction of
the tribunal. Presumption literally means "taking as true without examination
or proof". Section 4 of the Evidence Act inter­alia defines the words `may
presume' and `shall presume as follows:­ "(a) `may presume' ­ Whenever it is
provided by this Act that the Court may presume a fact, it may either regard
such fact as proved, unless and until it is disproved or may call for proof of
it.
(b) `shall presume' ­ Whenever it is directed by this Act that the Court shall
presume a fact, it shall regard such fact as proved, unless and until it is
disproved."
In the former case the Court has an option to raise the presumption or not,
but in the latter case, the Court must necessarily raise the presumption. If
in a case the Court has an option to raise the presumption and raises the
presumption, the distinction between the two categories of presumptions ceases
and the fact is presumed, unless and until it is disproved." "10. Section 118
of the Act inter alia directs that it shall be presumed, until the contrary is
proved, that every negotiable instrument was made or drawn for consideration.
Section 139 of the Act stipulates that unless the contrary is proved, it shall
be presumed, that the holder of the cheque received the cheque, for the
discharge of, whole or part of any debt or liability. " Applying the
definition of the word `proved' in Section 3 of the Evidence Act to the
provisions of Sections 118 and 139 of the Act, it becomes evident that in a
trial under Section 138 of the Act a presumption will have to be made that
every negotiable instrument was made or drawn for consideration and that it
was executed for discharge of debt or liability once the execution of
JUDGMENT/ANAND GARG VS. PRAVEEN GOEL/ CCNO.36/1/08/U.S.138N.I.ACT/ CONVICTED/
11.5.2009 /Page 9 of 12 k negotiable instrument is either proved or admitted.
As soon as the complainant discharges the burden to prove that the instrument,
say a note, was executed by the accused, the rules of presumptions under
Sections 118 and 139 of the Act help him shift the burden on the accused. The
presumptions will live, exist and survive and shall end only when the contrary
is proved by the accused, that is, the cheque was not issued for consideration
and in discharge of any debt or liability. A presumption is not in itself
evidence, but only makes a prima facie case for a party for whose benefit it
exists."
" 11. The use of the phrase "until the contrary is proved" in Section 118 of
the Act and use of the words "unless the contrary is proved" in Section 139 of
the Act read with definitions of "may presume" and "shall presume" as given in
Section 4 of the Evidence Act, makes it at once clear that presumptions to be
raised under both the provisions are rebuttable. When a presumption is
rebuttable, it only points out that the party on whom lies the duty of going
forward with evidence, on the fact presumed and when that party has produced
evidence fairly and reasonably tending to show that the real fact is not as
presumed, the purpose of the presumption is over. The accused in a trial under
Section 138 of the Act has two options. He can either show that consideration
and debt did not exist or that under the particular circumstances of the case
the non­existence of consideration and debt is so probable that a prudent man
ought to suppose that no consideration and debt existed. To rebut the
statutory presumptions an accused is not expected to prove his defence beyond
reasonable doubt as is expected of the complainant in a criminal trial. The
accused may adduce direct evidence to prove that the note in question was not
supported by consideration and that there was no debt or liability to be
discharged by him. However, the court need not insist in every case that the
accused should disprove the non­existence of consideration and debt by leading
direct evidence because the existence of negative evidence is neither possible
nor contemplated. At the same time, it is clear that bare denial of the
passing of the consideration and existence of debt, apparently would not serve
the purpose of the accused. Something which is probable has to be brought on
record for getting the burden of proof shifted to the complainant. To disprove
the presumptions, the accused should bring on record such facts and
circumstances, upon consideration of which, the court may either believe that
the consideration and debt did not exist or their non­existence was so
probable that a prudent man would under the circumstances of the case, act
upon the plea that they did not exist. Apart from adducing direct evidence to
prove that the note in question was not supported by JUDGMENT/ANAND GARG VS.
PRAVEEN GOEL/ CCNO.36/1/08/U.S.138N.I.ACT/ CONVICTED/ 11.5.2009 /Page 10 of 12
k consideration or that he had not incurred any debt or liability, the accused
may also rely upon circumstantial evidence and if the circumstances so relied
upon are compelling, the burden may likewise shift again on to the
complainant. The accused may also rely upon presumptions of fact, for
instance, those mentioned in Section 114 of the Evidence Act to rebut the
presumptions arising under Sections 118 and 139 of the Act. The accused has
also an option to prove the non­ existence of consideration and debt or
liability either by letting in evidence or in some clear and exceptional
cases, from the case set out by the complainant, that is, the averments in the
complaint, the case set out in the statutory notice and evidence adduced by
the complainant during the trial. Once such rebuttal evidence is adduced and
accepted by the court, having regard to all the circumstances of the case and
the preponderance of probabilities, the evidential burden shifts back to the
complainant and, thereafter, the presumptions under Sections 118 and 139 of
the Act will not again come to the complainant's rescue. "
18\. The accused has failed to rebut the said presumption particularly in view
of the fact that in notice he claimed that the cheques were issued in business
transaction whereas he changed his stand in cross examination of the
complainant and claimed that the cheques were issued as security of loan
amount of Rs.20,000/­. Accused again changed his stand in the statement
u/s.313 Cr.P.C in which he claimed that he gave the cheques to the complainant
merely because complainant and accused were friends and he did not offer any
explanation as to why the cheques were so given. The accused once again
changed his defence and claimed that cheques were given as security of loan of
Rs.20,000/­. This mutual contradictory stand of the accused at different
stages of the proceedings clearly indicates that the defence taken by the
accused is absolutely false. In such circumstances, he has failed to rebut the
presumption in favour of the complainant.
19\. Receipt of legal notice is admitted by the accused. Despite receiving the
legal notice, he failed to make the payment of the cheque amount to the
complainant within stipulated period. There is no dispute that the cheques
were presented within six months of the dates of which they were drawn.
Presumption regarding discharge of liability is in favour of the complainant.
Legal notice was sent to the accused within limitation prescribed. The notice
was received by the accused. Accused was even failed to reply to the said
notice.
20\. Had the claim of complainant being false, the first reaction of the
accused, immediately upon receiving the legal notice, would have been to reply
to the notice of the complainant specifically denying that he obtained
Rs.4,00,000/­ as loan from the complainant, but the accused did not reply
JUDGMENT/ANAND GARG VS. PRAVEEN GOEL/ CCNO.36/1/08/U.S.138N.I.ACT/ CONVICTED/
11.5.2009 /Page 11 of 12 k to this notice. This fact indicates that the
defence taken by the accused is false. It may be mentioned here that the two
cheques in question were dishonoured due to "insufficient funds" and not due
to any other reason. All these facts prove the case of complainant beyond
reasonable doubt against the accused and the accused is held guilty for the
dishonour of two cheques in question u/s.138 N.I. Act and is accordingly
convicted u/s.138 N.I. Act.
th ANNOUNCED IN OPEN COURT ON 11 May, 2009.
DIGVINAY SINGH ADDITIONAL CHIEF METROPOLITAN MAGISTRATE­03 IPR, ROHINI, DELHI
JUDGMENT/ANAND GARG VS. PRAVEEN GOEL/ CCNO.36/1/08/U.S.138N.I.ACT/ CONVICTED/
11.5.2009 /Page 12 of 12 k
Presumption regarding discharge of liability is in favour of the complainant.
Legal notice was sent to the accused within limitation prescribed. The notice
was received by the accused. Accused was even failed to reply to the said
notice.
20\. Had the claim of complainant being false, the first reaction of the
accused, immediately upon receiving the legal notice, would have been to reply
to the notice of the complainant specifically denying that he obtained
Rs.4,00,000/­ as loan from the complainant, but the accused did not reply
JUDGMENT/ANAND GARG VS. PRAVEEN GOEL/ CCNO.36/1/08/U.S.138N.I.ACT/ CONVICTED/
11.5.2009 /Page 11 of 12 k to this notice. This fact indicates that the
defence taken by the accused is false. It may be mentioned here that the two
cheques in question were dishonoured due to "insufficient funds" and not due
to any other reason. All these facts prove the case of complainant beyond
reasonable doubt against the accused and the accused is held guilty for the
dishonour of two cheques in question u/s.138 N.I. Act and is accordingly
convicted u/s.138 N.I. Act.
                                                                                    C­6/66, POCKET­C­6, SECTOR­5, ROHINI, 
                                                                                    DELHI.
    (e) The offence complained of/ proved                                         : U/s.138 N.I. ACT.
    (f) The plea of accused                                                       : pleaded not guilty
    (g) The final order                                                           : CONVICTED.
    (h) The date of such order                                                    : 11.5.2009.
    (i) Brief statement of the reasons for the decision:­
1\. The present complaint u/s.138 Negotiable Instruments Act is filed by the
complainant Anand Garg against the accused Praveen Goel alleging that the
complainant and the accused were on friendly terms and, in January, 2007, the
accused obtained a friendly loan of Rs.4,00,000/­ from the complainant which
he assured to return within a short period. In discharge of this liability,
the accused issued two post dated cheques to the complainant, details of which
are as follows : JUDGMENT/ANAND GARG VS. PRAVEEN GOEL/
CCNO.36/1/08/U.S.138N.I.ACT/ CONVICTED/ 11.5.2009 /Page 1 of 12 k Cheque No.
Dated Amount Drawn On 843714 25.4.2008 2,00,000/­ Punjab National Bank
Prashant Vihar Branch, Delhi.
        843715                     02.5.2008         2,00,000/­        Punjab National Bank
                                                                       Prashant Vihar Branch, Delhi.
Both the cheques when presented for encashment were dishonoured due to
Presumption regarding discharge of liability is in favour of the complainant.
Legal notice was sent to the accused within limitation prescribed. The notice
was received by the accused. Accused was even failed to reply to the said
notice.
20\. Had the claim of complainant being false, the first reaction of the
accused, immediately upon receiving the legal notice, would have been to reply
to the notice of the complainant specifically denying that he obtained
Rs.4,00,000/­ as loan from the complainant, but the accused did not reply
JUDGMENT/ANAND GARG VS. PRAVEEN GOEL/ CCNO.36/1/08/U.S.138N.I.ACT/ CONVICTED/
11.5.2009 /Page 11 of 12 k to this notice. This fact indicates that the
defence taken by the accused is false. It may be mentioned here that the two
cheques in question were dishonoured due to "insufficient funds" and not due
to any other reason. All these facts prove the case of complainant beyond
reasonable doubt against the accused and the accused is held guilty for the
dishonour of two cheques in question u/s.138 N.I. Act and is accordingly
convicted u/s.138 N.I. Act.
                                                                                    C­6/66, POCKET­C­6, SECTOR­5, ROHINI, 
                                                                                    DELHI.
    (e) The offence complained of/ proved                                         : U/s.138 N.I. ACT.
    (f) The plea of accused                                                       : pleaded not guilty
    (g) The final order                                                           : CONVICTED.
    (h) The date of such order                                                    : 11.5.2009.
    (i) Brief statement of the reasons for the decision:­
1\. The present complaint u/s.138 Negotiable Instruments Act is filed by the
complainant Anand Garg against the accused Praveen Goel alleging that the
complainant and the accused were on friendly terms and, in January, 2007, the
accused obtained a friendly loan of Rs.4,00,000/­ from the complainant which
he assured to return within a short period. In discharge of this liability,
the accused issued two post dated cheques to the complainant, details of which
are as follows : JUDGMENT/ANAND GARG VS. PRAVEEN GOEL/
CCNO.36/1/08/U.S.138N.I.ACT/ CONVICTED/ 11.5.2009 /Page 1 of 12 k Cheque No.
Dated Amount Drawn On 843714 25.4.2008 2,00,000/­ Punjab National Bank
Prashant Vihar Branch, Delhi.
        843715                     02.5.2008         2,00,000/­        Punjab National Bank
                                                                       Prashant Vihar Branch, Delhi.
Both the cheques when presented for encashment were dishonoured due to
Presumption regarding discharge of liability is in favour of the complainant.
Legal notice was sent to the accused within limitation prescribed. The notice
was received by the accused. Accused was even failed to reply to the said
notice.
20\. Had the claim of complainant being false, the first reaction of the
accused, immediately upon receiving the legal notice, would have been to reply
to the notice of the complainant specifically denying that he obtained
Rs.4,00,000/­ as loan from the complainant, but the accused did not reply
JUDGMENT/ANAND GARG VS. PRAVEEN GOEL/ CCNO.36/1/08/U.S.138N.I.ACT/ CONVICTED/
11.5.2009 /Page 11 of 12 k to this notice. This fact indicates that the
defence taken by the accused is false. It may be mentioned here that the two
cheques in question were dishonoured due to "insufficient funds" and not due
to any other reason. All these facts prove the case of complainant beyond
reasonable doubt against the accused and the accused is held guilty for the
dishonour of two cheques in question u/s.138 N.I. Act and is accordingly
convicted u/s.138 N.I. Act.
                                                                                    C­6/66, POCKET­C­6, SECTOR­5, ROHINI, 
                                                                                    DELHI.
    (e) The offence complained of/ proved                                         : U/s.138 N.I. ACT.
    (f) The plea of accused                                                       : pleaded not guilty
    (g) The final order                                                           : CONVICTED.
    (h) The date of such order                                                    : 11.5.2009.
    (i) Brief statement of the reasons for the decision:­
1\. The present complaint u/s.138 Negotiable Instruments Act is filed by the
complainant Anand Garg against the accused Praveen Goel alleging that the
complainant and the accused were on friendly terms and, in January, 2007, the
accused obtained a friendly loan of Rs.4,00,000/­ from the complainant which
he assured to return within a short period. In discharge of this liability,
the accused issued two post dated cheques to the complainant, details of which
are as follows : JUDGMENT/ANAND GARG VS. PRAVEEN GOEL/
CCNO.36/1/08/U.S.138N.I.ACT/ CONVICTED/ 11.5.2009 /Page 1 of 12 k Cheque No.
Dated Amount Drawn On 843714 25.4.2008 2,00,000/­ Punjab National Bank
Prashant Vihar Branch, Delhi.
        843715                     02.5.2008         2,00,000/­        Punjab National Bank
                                                                       Prashant Vihar Branch, Delhi.
Both the cheques when presented for encashment were dishonoured due to
"insufficient funds" on 22.9.2006 and thereafter, the complainant sent a legal
notice dated 30.9.2008 to the accused demanding the cheque amount within
stipulated period, but when the accused failed to make payment of the cheque
amount, the present complaint was filed.
2\. Accused was summoned u/s.138 Negotiable Instruments Act and thereafter a
notice u/s.251 Cr.P.C. for the offence u/s.138 Negotiable Instruments Act was
framed against the accused on 15.12.2008 to which accused claimed trial and
stated that he did not receive the notice. The accused admitted that the
residential address i.e. C­6/80, Pocket C­6, Sector­6, Rohini, Delhi­ 110085,
is his correct address and he is residing at this address for the last many
years. This is the same address where the legal notice was sent by the
Presumption regarding discharge of liability is in favour of the complainant.
Legal notice was sent to the accused within limitation prescribed. The notice
was received by the accused. Accused was even failed to reply to the said
notice.
20\. Had the claim of complainant being false, the first reaction of the
accused, immediately upon receiving the legal notice, would have been to reply
to the notice of the complainant specifically denying that he obtained
Rs.4,00,000/­ as loan from the complainant, but the accused did not reply
JUDGMENT/ANAND GARG VS. PRAVEEN GOEL/ CCNO.36/1/08/U.S.138N.I.ACT/ CONVICTED/
11.5.2009 /Page 11 of 12 k to this notice. This fact indicates that the
defence taken by the accused is false. It may be mentioned here that the two
cheques in question were dishonoured due to "insufficient funds" and not due
to any other reason. All these facts prove the case of complainant beyond
reasonable doubt against the accused and the accused is held guilty for the
dishonour of two cheques in question u/s.138 N.I. Act and is accordingly
convicted u/s.138 N.I. Act.
                                                                                    C­6/66, POCKET­C­6, SECTOR­5, ROHINI, 
                                                                                    DELHI.
    (e) The offence complained of/ proved                                         : U/s.138 N.I. ACT.
    (f) The plea of accused                                                       : pleaded not guilty
    (g) The final order                                                           : CONVICTED.
    (h) The date of such order                                                    : 11.5.2009.
    (i) Brief statement of the reasons for the decision:­
1\. The present complaint u/s.138 Negotiable Instruments Act is filed by the
complainant Anand Garg against the accused Praveen Goel alleging that the
complainant and the accused were on friendly terms and, in January, 2007, the
accused obtained a friendly loan of Rs.4,00,000/­ from the complainant which
he assured to return within a short period. In discharge of this liability,
the accused issued two post dated cheques to the complainant, details of which
are as follows : JUDGMENT/ANAND GARG VS. PRAVEEN GOEL/
CCNO.36/1/08/U.S.138N.I.ACT/ CONVICTED/ 11.5.2009 /Page 1 of 12 k Cheque No.
Dated Amount Drawn On 843714 25.4.2008 2,00,000/­ Punjab National Bank
Prashant Vihar Branch, Delhi.
        843715                     02.5.2008         2,00,000/­        Punjab National Bank
                                                                       Prashant Vihar Branch, Delhi.
Both the cheques when presented for encashment were dishonoured due to
"insufficient funds" on 22.9.2006 and thereafter, the complainant sent a legal
notice dated 30.9.2008 to the accused demanding the cheque amount within
stipulated period, but when the accused failed to make payment of the cheque
amount, the present complaint was filed.
2\. Accused was summoned u/s.138 Negotiable Instruments Act and thereafter a
notice u/s.251 Cr.P.C. for the offence u/s.138 Negotiable Instruments Act was
framed against the accused on 15.12.2008 to which accused claimed trial and
stated that he did not receive the notice. The accused admitted that the
residential address i.e. C­6/80, Pocket C­6, Sector­6, Rohini, Delhi­ 110085,
is his correct address and he is residing at this address for the last many
years. This is the same address where the legal notice was sent by the
Presumption regarding discharge of liability is in favour of the complainant.
Legal notice was sent to the accused within limitation prescribed. The notice
was received by the accused. Accused was even failed to reply to the said
notice.
20\. Had the claim of complainant being false, the first reaction of the
accused, immediately upon receiving the legal notice, would have been to reply
to the notice of the complainant specifically denying that he obtained
Rs.4,00,000/­ as loan from the complainant, but the accused did not reply
JUDGMENT/ANAND GARG VS. PRAVEEN GOEL/ CCNO.36/1/08/U.S.138N.I.ACT/ CONVICTED/
11.5.2009 /Page 11 of 12 k to this notice. This fact indicates that the
defence taken by the accused is false. It may be mentioned here that the two
cheques in question were dishonoured due to "insufficient funds" and not due
to any other reason. All these facts prove the case of complainant beyond
reasonable doubt against the accused and the accused is held guilty for the
dishonour of two cheques in question u/s.138 N.I. Act and is accordingly
convicted u/s.138 N.I. Act.
