Delhi High Court
J.N. Electricals (India) vs President Electricals on 20 August, 1979
Equivalent citations: ILR 1980 Delhi 215
Author: Y Dayal
Bench: Y Dayal
JUDGMENT Yogeshwar Dayal, J.
(1) This is a suit against infringement of registered design of electric
toaster of the plaintiffs, for passing off and rendition of accounts and
damages.
(2) The plaintiffs are M/s. J. N. Electricals (India) a partnership firm,
manufacturing various electrical goods, including electric toaster for the
last so many years.
(3) The plaintiffs started manufacturing and selling electric toaster of a
design which they got registered vide No. 140873 dated April 23, 1973.
(4) It is alleged in the plaint that apart from distinctive features of the
electric toaster of the plaintiffs, the shpe, configuration, upper view and
side view of the plaintiffs' toaster are new and original and protected under
the Designs Act, 1911 (hereinafter called 'the Act').
(5) It is further averred in the plaint that the arrangement of the outer
sheet of the plaintiff's toaster has been made into two sheets which is quite
of accounts.
(36) Shri K. L. Aggarwal, who appears on behalf of the plaintiffs, however,
submitted that in common law in case or decree for infringement and passing
off. the plaintiffs may be entitled to a decree for rendition of accounts but
during the hearing of the suit, learned counsel for the plaintiffs gave up the
claim for damages and/or accounts.
(37) The result of the aforesaid discussion is that the plaintiffs are granted
a decree for permanent injunction restraining the defendants, their servants,
agents, dealers and/or representatives from manufacturing/selling and offering
for sale or dealing with the impugned electric toaster either directly or
indirectly which is fradulent of obvious imitation of the plaintiffs electric
toaster registered under No. 140873 and from doing anything with a view to
enable the registered design belonging to the plaintiffs to be so applied.
(38) The plaintiffs are further granted a decree for permanent injunction,
restraining the defendants, their servants, agents, dealers and
representatives from using the impugned pamphlet/catalogues of the plaintiffs.
sheet of the plaintiff's toaster has been made into two sheets which is quite
novel. The upper portion of the said sheet is approximately 1/3rd and the
lower portion is approximately 2/3rd of the total height of the plaintiffs'
toaster. The said arrangement has been made in such a manner as to give fine
outlook and appealing to the eye. The distinctive knob of the plaintiffs'
toaster is different from a conventional know which has been put on the side
of the toaster.
(6) The further case of the plaintiffs is that the plaintiffs are the prior
user of the distinctive design in respect of the electric toaster since 1973
while the defendants came into the market with their electric toaster in the
year 1977.
(7) The defendants have adopted identical and/or deceptively similar features
as those of the plaintiffs' toaster and have been marketing the same, thereby
infringing the plaintiffs' registered design. Both, the shape and
configuration of the plaintiffs' registered design, have been infringed by the
defendants. It is also alleged by the plaintiffs that apart from infringement
of the plaintiffs' aforesaid design, the defendants have copied each and every
word of instruction/pamphlet and each every photo and arrangement of the said
pamphlet.
(8) The plaintiffs have prayed for permanent injunction restraining the
defendants from infringing their registered design in relation to the electric
toaster and also for permanent injunction restraining the defendants from
passing off electric toaster and pamphlet as that of the plaintiffs'
manufacture.
(9) The plaintiffs have also prayed for rendition of accounts with regard to
manufacture and sale of impugned electric toaster and also for an order for
destruction of the impugned electric toaster as well as other media pertaining
thereto, including the pamphlet and semifinished goods.
(10) The defendants, M/s. President Electricals in their written statement
admit having started marketing electric toaster recently.
(11) The other pleas taken by the defendants in the written-statement is that
there are several manufactures of these goods in the market whose goods are
much better.
(12) The case of infringement of design as well as copyright was denied. The
distinctive features of the plaintiffs' toaster are also denied.
(13) The plea of the defendants further is that they are selling their toaster
at a higher price. On the pleadings of the parties, Saffer, J. by his order
dated March 22, 1978, framed the following issue :
1.Is there any infringement by the defendants of the registered design which
the plaintiffs claim as being their own ? OP.
2.Are the defendants passing off their toasters as those manufactured by the
plaintiffs ? OP.
3.Have the defendants copied every word of the pamphlet and the photograph
arrangement, and if so to what effect ? O.P.
4.Are the plaintiffs entitled to rendition of any accounts or damages, if so,
to what amount they are entitled ?
5.Relief.
In support of his case, the plaintiffs examined one of its partners, namely,
Ved Prakash (P.W. 1) and the defendants examined one of its partners, Sardar
Khan (D.W. 1).
(14) Ved Prakash (P.W. 1), in his evidence, proved the electric toasters which
are being manufactured by the plaintiffs (Exhibits Pi and P2) and stated that
they have got the design of Exhibit P/l registered with the Controller of
Patents and Designs, Calcutta under registration certificate No. : 140873.
Exhibit P/3 is the copy of the said certificate and Exhibit P/4 is the
representation of the plaintiffs in respect' of toaster Exhibit P/1. This
witness also proved the toasters manufactured by defendants, viz. toasters
Exhibits P/5 and P/6.
(15) It was further stated by Ved Prakash that' the distinctive features of
the plaintiffs' toaster are its outer design. He stated that the plaintiffs
have fixed one knob on the side of the toaster which is a distinctive feature
of their toaster. Their toaster is known as "four slice" toaster. He also
stated that their toaster's registration is in respect of the outward design
and it has nothing to do with the inside mechanism of the toaster. He further
stated that the outward appearance of the defendants' toaster (Ex. P/6) is
deceptively similar to the toaster of the plaintiffs (Ex. P/1) and similarly,
toaster (Ex, P(5) manufactured by the defendants is deceptively similar to the
toaster (Ex. P(2) of the plaintiffs. He also proved the figure of sales of the
plaintiffs' toaster. He stated that the sale stood at about Rs. 80,000 in
1977.
(16) This witness also proved catalogue which was got registered by the
plaintiffs with the Registrar of Copyrights, registered under No. A-1 9489/78
and Exhibit P/9 is the copy of the said certificate. He also proved the
catalogue Exhibit P/1 O. Public Witness , 1 also stated that he had advertised
for the sale of the plaintiffs' toaster and copies of advertisements are
Exhibits P/1 1 and P/12.
(17) Ved Prakash (P.W. 1) also proved the catalogues of the defendants (Ex.
P/14 and P/15) and stated that these catalogues resemble precisely the
catalogues used by the plaintiffs in respect of the picture and the words used
therein. He further stated that the sale of the toaster manufactured by the
defendants, imitating the style of toasters manufactured by the plaintiffs,
has adversely affected the sale of the plaintiffs and he estimated their loss
to Rs. 70,000 to Rs. 80,000, per year.
(18) In cross-examination, the witness denied if there was any difference in
the knobs, handle and the stand fixed on the bottom of the two competing
toasters. He, however, admitted that there are lines on the side of the
toaster manufactured by the defendants while the toaster manufactured by the
plaintiffs is plain. This witness further stated that the size of the two
plates of the toasters is the same.
(19) Sardar Khan, on behalf of the defendants, as D.W. I stated that he
started his business along with his partner Shauqat Ali in August 1973 and is
carrying on the business of manufacturing electric toasters which was started
in' 1974. He stated that the defendants' toaster is different from the
plaintiffs' toaster, both from inside and outside and they have not tried to
copy the design of the plaintiffs' toaster. He stated that the wholesale price
of their toaster is Rs. 85 including Rs. 17 as excise duty.
(20) In cross-examination, this witness admitted that his partner, Shauqat
Ali, was in the service of the plaintiffs but denied if Shaqual Ali learnt the
art of manufacturing toaster while in service of the plaintiffs. He stated
that Shauqat Ali had learnt this job while in the service of some other
concern, namely, Rex Electricals, Joshi Road, Delhi. He also admitted that the
goods of both the plaintiffs and the respondents are sold in the wholesale
market of Sadar Bazar, Delhi. He further admitted that the plaintiffs' toaster
was in the market before the defendants introduced their toaster.
(21) On being further cross-examined, he stated that without actual
measurements he could not tell the size of the two parts of the panel on both
sides of the toasters. He could not say whether the lower part of the toaster
is 2/3rd and the upper part is 1/3rd. However, on further cross-examination,
he stated that the size of the toaster of the plaintiff's (Exhibit P/1) and
that of the defendants (Ex. P/6) is exactly the same but he stated that there
is difference of one 'soot'. He also stated that he could not say if the
margin of the handle on the side is also the same, without measuring it. He
also stated that the manner of operation of the knob on both the toasters is
the same but the design is different. He also could not say, without
measuring, whether the margin between the knob and the handle is the same.
(22) This witness further stated that the stand of the defendants' toaster
(Ex. P. 6) is fixed over the body of the toaster whereas the stand of the
toaster of the plaintiffs is in continuation of the body. He also admitted
that the sides of Ex. P. I and P. 6 are in chromium and red colour. The top
part is of chromium and bottom is of red colour. He denied the suggestion that
when they manufactured the toaster (Ex. P. 6) they had a toaster similar to
(Ex. P. 1) of the plaintiffs before them which they have copied. He also
denied the suggestion that the defendants have copied the size, arrangement of
the knob on the right hand side and "placing of the handles of the toaster of
the plaintiffs". I may state at the outset that the defendants never applied
for cancellation of the registered design of the plaintiffs, in respect of the
electric toaster, Section 2(5) of the Designs Act, 1911 defines "design" which
is as under : "DESIGN"means only the features of shape, configuration, pattern
or ornament applied to any article by any industrial process or means,
"whether manual, mechanical or Chemical, separate or combined, which in the
finished article appeal to and are judged solely by the eye; but does not
include any mode or principle of construction or anything which is in
substance a mere mechanical device, and does not include any trade mark as
defined in clause (v) of sub-sec. (1) of S. 2 of the Trade and Marchandise
Marks Act, 1958 or property mark as defined in section 479 of the Indian Penal
Code".
(23) Section 43 of the Act contemplates applications being filed by any person
claiming to be the proprietor of a new or original design, not previously
published in India, to apply for registration of the design and the Controller
grants certificate under section 45 of the Act. Under section 46(3) of the
Act, the register of designs shall be prima facie evidence of registration.
Section 53 of the Act prohibits piracy of a registered design.
(24) Looking at the definition of the 'design', infringement of the design
applied to an article is to be judged solely by the "eye", and the 'design'
does not include any mode or principle of construction or anything which is in
substance a mere mechanical device, and does not include any trade mark.
Therefore, all that is required to be seen in an action for infringement of
design is the "sameness" of the features of shape, configuration, pattern etc.
Admittedly, the design of the plaintiffs' toaster is earlier in point of time.
The "sameness" of features does not necessarily mean that: the two designs
must be identical on all points and should differ on none. They have to be
substantially the same.
(25) Cave, J. in Gordon and Munro v. Patrick and Hili : (1895) Vol. 12 Reports
Of Patent, Design And Trade Mark Cases 22, at page 24(1) gave the following
direction to the Jury while deciding a case relating to infringement of design
: "GENTLEMANof the Jury: the question quite a simple one, and one with regard
to which it seems to me that no evidence can affect the matter. This is a
registered design an ornamental design. Somebody or other hit on the notion
that coffin plates and coffin handles with a border like this around them
would take the market. I do not suppose the world has been very much richer,
or better, or happier by them. Still, for what it is worth, that design is
protected, and people must not reap the benefit who have not hit upon the
plan; and that is really the whole point. There is no magic at all about it.
It is for a plain common sense man to say, when he looks at these things,
whether they are substantially the same, or substantially different. If they
are substantially the same, then the Plaintiffs are entitled to recover, if
they are substantially different, then they are not. That is what you have to
decide."
Masud, J.
(26) In Western Engineering Co. v. Paul Engineering Co. : , while dealing with
an application for cancellation and/revocation of a design, observed as
follows "READMGSs. 51-A and 2(5) of the Patents and Designs Act, it appears
that a subsequent design should be self same or identical design registered
earlier. The design, the registration of which is sought to be cancelled under
S. 51-A, must not have different features of shape, configuaration, pattern
etc. from those of the earlier design. The definition itself lays emphasis on
the fact that the sameness of the features is to be decided by the eye. The
sameness of the features does not necessarily mean that the two designs must
be identical on all points and differ on no point.
ONEof the practical tests to find out the identity or the sameness of the
design is to find out whether there are substantial differences between the
design subsequently registered and the design which was earlier registered.
These differences cannot be based on purely subjective or utilitarian or
aesthetic considerations. The difference must be objective in its essential
features. A general view of the features of both the designs should be looked
into to find out if the one design is as good as the other and the conclusion
is to be arrived at by visual examination of the two things. Similarity and
device in external appearance must be a relative feature in considering the
substantial difference between the two, but is certainly not a determining
factor.
The underlying principle behind the law of infringement of design is that,
while the commercial exegencies require that a specific design which is novel
and original should be protected, the monopoly of the trade in respect of a
common design with no special skill or originality should not be encouraged."
(27) Having noticed the test to be applied in such cases, the question now
arises of its application. The design of the plaintiffs toaster having been
registered, its main distinctive features may be noticed.
(28) The main distinctive feature of the plaintiffs' registered design of the
toaster is the arrangement of the outer sheet having been made in two sheets
which is quite novel. The upper portion of the sheet is approximately 1/3rd,
which is white chromium, and the lower portion is 2/3rd of the total height,
which is painted. There is a distinctive knob on the side of the plaintiffs'
toaster which is different from conventional knob which can be seen from a
conventional toaster like Exhibit P-7.
(29) The defendant, in the witness-box, was completely cornered when he had to
admit that even the size of the two toasters is precisely the same, except
that there is a difference of one 'soot' only. He avoided to admit that the
margin of the handle and knob in the two toasters is the same.
(30) It appears that one of the partners of the defendants was an employee of
the plaintiffs and the complete design of the plaintiffs' electric toaster has
been pirated lock, stock and barrel.
(31) The only difference between the two toasters pointed out is in their
stands, which is not very material. Again, the presence of lines in the outer
planes of the defendants' toaster is not material. An unwary purchaser is
likely to be deceived by the overall similarity in the two toasters. At least,
this is the impression my eyes got after looking at the two toasters. The
overall effect is that the defendants' toaster is deceptively similar to the
toaster of the plaintiffs. Issues I and 2 :
(32) It is true that the toaster of the defendants bears the name 'CRISPY'
while the toaster of the plaintiffs is being sold in the market by the name of
"BROWNIE", but this is not a case for 'passing off' in relation to trade mark.
Issues Nos. 1 and 2 are accordingly decided in favor of the plaintiffs. Issue
No. 3.
(33) This issue presents no difficulty. It is a case of an outright piracy of
the plaintiffs' pamphlet. The pamphlet/catalogue of the plaintiffs is Exhibit
P-10 registered vide registration certificate No. A-19489/78 (Exhibit P-9),
and the copy of the defendants pamphlet/ catalogue is Exhibit P-14 as well as
Exhibit P-15. Exhibits P-14 and P-15 are word for word, line for line and
sentence for sentence the same as the catalogue of the plaintiffs (Ex. P-IO).
The defendants have committed the same mistakes where the plaintiffs have
committed in their pamphlet/catalogue. So much so that the defendants have
used the same device of a woman demonstrating the use of the electric toaster.
The defendants have copied the exact instructions on the last page of their
pamphlet. This is sheer dishonesty.
(34) Issue No. 3 is also decided in favor of the plaintiffs and the effect of
it would be that the defendants are restrained from using the pamphlets
Exhibits P-14 and P-15. Issue No. 4 (35) So far as statutory remedy under
section 53 of the Act is concerned, it does not talk of remedy by rendition.
of accounts.
(36) Shri K. L. Aggarwal, who appears on behalf of the plaintiffs, however,
submitted that in common law in case or decree for infringement and passing
off. the plaintiffs may be entitled to a decree for rendition of accounts but
during the hearing of the suit, learned counsel for the plaintiffs gave up the
claim for damages and/or accounts.
(37) The result of the aforesaid discussion is that the plaintiffs are granted
a decree for permanent injunction restraining the defendants, their servants,
agents, dealers and/or representatives from manufacturing/selling and offering
for sale or dealing with the impugned electric toaster either directly or
indirectly which is fradulent of obvious imitation of the plaintiffs electric
toaster registered under No. 140873 and from doing anything with a view to
enable the registered design belonging to the plaintiffs to be so applied.
(38) The plaintiffs are further granted a decree for permanent injunction,
restraining the defendants, their servants, agents, dealers and
representatives from using the impugned pamphlet/catalogues of the plaintiffs.
(39) An order is also passed for destruction of the impugned electric toasters
of the defendants as well as other media pertaining thereto including the
pamphlets/catalogues in dispute.
(40) Parties are, however, left to bear their own costs.
of accounts.
(36) Shri K. L. Aggarwal, who appears on behalf of the plaintiffs, however,
submitted that in common law in case or decree for infringement and passing
off. the plaintiffs may be entitled to a decree for rendition of accounts but
during the hearing of the suit, learned counsel for the plaintiffs gave up the
claim for damages and/or accounts.
(37) The result of the aforesaid discussion is that the plaintiffs are granted
a decree for permanent injunction restraining the defendants, their servants,
agents, dealers and/or representatives from manufacturing/selling and offering
for sale or dealing with the impugned electric toaster either directly or
indirectly which is fradulent of obvious imitation of the plaintiffs electric
toaster registered under No. 140873 and from doing anything with a view to
enable the registered design belonging to the plaintiffs to be so applied.
(38) The plaintiffs are further granted a decree for permanent injunction,
restraining the defendants, their servants, agents, dealers and
representatives from using the impugned pamphlet/catalogues of the plaintiffs.
sheet of the plaintiff's toaster has been made into two sheets which is quite
novel. The upper portion of the said sheet is approximately 1/3rd and the
lower portion is approximately 2/3rd of the total height of the plaintiffs'
toaster. The said arrangement has been made in such a manner as to give fine
outlook and appealing to the eye. The distinctive knob of the plaintiffs'
toaster is different from a conventional know which has been put on the side
of the toaster.
(6) The further case of the plaintiffs is that the plaintiffs are the prior
user of the distinctive design in respect of the electric toaster since 1973
while the defendants came into the market with their electric toaster in the
year 1977.
(7) The defendants have adopted identical and/or deceptively similar features
as those of the plaintiffs' toaster and have been marketing the same, thereby
infringing the plaintiffs' registered design. Both, the shape and
configuration of the plaintiffs' registered design, have been infringed by the
defendants. It is also alleged by the plaintiffs that apart from infringement
of the plaintiffs' aforesaid design, the defendants have copied each and every
word of instruction/pamphlet and each every photo and arrangement of the said
pamphlet.
(8) The plaintiffs have prayed for permanent injunction restraining the
of accounts.
(36) Shri K. L. Aggarwal, who appears on behalf of the plaintiffs, however,
submitted that in common law in case or decree for infringement and passing
off. the plaintiffs may be entitled to a decree for rendition of accounts but
during the hearing of the suit, learned counsel for the plaintiffs gave up the
claim for damages and/or accounts.
(37) The result of the aforesaid discussion is that the plaintiffs are granted
a decree for permanent injunction restraining the defendants, their servants,
agents, dealers and/or representatives from manufacturing/selling and offering
for sale or dealing with the impugned electric toaster either directly or
indirectly which is fradulent of obvious imitation of the plaintiffs electric
toaster registered under No. 140873 and from doing anything with a view to
enable the registered design belonging to the plaintiffs to be so applied.
(38) The plaintiffs are further granted a decree for permanent injunction,
restraining the defendants, their servants, agents, dealers and
representatives from using the impugned pamphlet/catalogues of the plaintiffs.
sheet of the plaintiff's toaster has been made into two sheets which is quite
novel. The upper portion of the said sheet is approximately 1/3rd and the
lower portion is approximately 2/3rd of the total height of the plaintiffs'
toaster. The said arrangement has been made in such a manner as to give fine
outlook and appealing to the eye. The distinctive knob of the plaintiffs'
toaster is different from a conventional know which has been put on the side
of the toaster.
(6) The further case of the plaintiffs is that the plaintiffs are the prior
user of the distinctive design in respect of the electric toaster since 1973
while the defendants came into the market with their electric toaster in the
year 1977.
(7) The defendants have adopted identical and/or deceptively similar features
as those of the plaintiffs' toaster and have been marketing the same, thereby
infringing the plaintiffs' registered design. Both, the shape and
configuration of the plaintiffs' registered design, have been infringed by the
defendants. It is also alleged by the plaintiffs that apart from infringement
of the plaintiffs' aforesaid design, the defendants have copied each and every
word of instruction/pamphlet and each every photo and arrangement of the said
pamphlet.
(8) The plaintiffs have prayed for permanent injunction restraining the
of accounts.
(36) Shri K. L. Aggarwal, who appears on behalf of the plaintiffs, however,
submitted that in common law in case or decree for infringement and passing
off. the plaintiffs may be entitled to a decree for rendition of accounts but
during the hearing of the suit, learned counsel for the plaintiffs gave up the
claim for damages and/or accounts.
(37) The result of the aforesaid discussion is that the plaintiffs are granted
a decree for permanent injunction restraining the defendants, their servants,
agents, dealers and/or representatives from manufacturing/selling and offering
for sale or dealing with the impugned electric toaster either directly or
indirectly which is fradulent of obvious imitation of the plaintiffs electric
toaster registered under No. 140873 and from doing anything with a view to
enable the registered design belonging to the plaintiffs to be so applied.
(38) The plaintiffs are further granted a decree for permanent injunction,
restraining the defendants, their servants, agents, dealers and
representatives from using the impugned pamphlet/catalogues of the plaintiffs.
sheet of the plaintiff's toaster has been made into two sheets which is quite
novel. The upper portion of the said sheet is approximately 1/3rd and the
lower portion is approximately 2/3rd of the total height of the plaintiffs'
toaster. The said arrangement has been made in such a manner as to give fine
outlook and appealing to the eye. The distinctive knob of the plaintiffs'
toaster is different from a conventional know which has been put on the side
of the toaster.
(6) The further case of the plaintiffs is that the plaintiffs are the prior
user of the distinctive design in respect of the electric toaster since 1973
while the defendants came into the market with their electric toaster in the
year 1977.
(7) The defendants have adopted identical and/or deceptively similar features
as those of the plaintiffs' toaster and have been marketing the same, thereby
infringing the plaintiffs' registered design. Both, the shape and
configuration of the plaintiffs' registered design, have been infringed by the
defendants. It is also alleged by the plaintiffs that apart from infringement
of the plaintiffs' aforesaid design, the defendants have copied each and every
word of instruction/pamphlet and each every photo and arrangement of the said
pamphlet.
(8) The plaintiffs have prayed for permanent injunction restraining the
defendants from infringing their registered design in relation to the electric
toaster and also for permanent injunction restraining the defendants from
passing off electric toaster and pamphlet as that of the plaintiffs'
manufacture.
(9) The plaintiffs have also prayed for rendition of accounts with regard to
manufacture and sale of impugned electric toaster and also for an order for
destruction of the impugned electric toaster as well as other media pertaining
thereto, including the pamphlet and semifinished goods.
(10) The defendants, M/s. President Electricals in their written statement
admit having started marketing electric toaster recently.
(11) The other pleas taken by the defendants in the written-statement is that
of accounts.
(36) Shri K. L. Aggarwal, who appears on behalf of the plaintiffs, however,
submitted that in common law in case or decree for infringement and passing
off. the plaintiffs may be entitled to a decree for rendition of accounts but
during the hearing of the suit, learned counsel for the plaintiffs gave up the
claim for damages and/or accounts.
(37) The result of the aforesaid discussion is that the plaintiffs are granted
a decree for permanent injunction restraining the defendants, their servants,
agents, dealers and/or representatives from manufacturing/selling and offering
for sale or dealing with the impugned electric toaster either directly or
indirectly which is fradulent of obvious imitation of the plaintiffs electric
toaster registered under No. 140873 and from doing anything with a view to
enable the registered design belonging to the plaintiffs to be so applied.
(38) The plaintiffs are further granted a decree for permanent injunction,
restraining the defendants, their servants, agents, dealers and
representatives from using the impugned pamphlet/catalogues of the plaintiffs.
sheet of the plaintiff's toaster has been made into two sheets which is quite
novel. The upper portion of the said sheet is approximately 1/3rd and the
lower portion is approximately 2/3rd of the total height of the plaintiffs'
toaster. The said arrangement has been made in such a manner as to give fine
outlook and appealing to the eye. The distinctive knob of the plaintiffs'
toaster is different from a conventional know which has been put on the side
of the toaster.
(6) The further case of the plaintiffs is that the plaintiffs are the prior
user of the distinctive design in respect of the electric toaster since 1973
while the defendants came into the market with their electric toaster in the
year 1977.
(7) The defendants have adopted identical and/or deceptively similar features
as those of the plaintiffs' toaster and have been marketing the same, thereby
infringing the plaintiffs' registered design. Both, the shape and
configuration of the plaintiffs' registered design, have been infringed by the
defendants. It is also alleged by the plaintiffs that apart from infringement
of the plaintiffs' aforesaid design, the defendants have copied each and every
word of instruction/pamphlet and each every photo and arrangement of the said
pamphlet.
(8) The plaintiffs have prayed for permanent injunction restraining the
defendants from infringing their registered design in relation to the electric
toaster and also for permanent injunction restraining the defendants from
passing off electric toaster and pamphlet as that of the plaintiffs'
manufacture.
(9) The plaintiffs have also prayed for rendition of accounts with regard to
manufacture and sale of impugned electric toaster and also for an order for
destruction of the impugned electric toaster as well as other media pertaining
thereto, including the pamphlet and semifinished goods.
(10) The defendants, M/s. President Electricals in their written statement
admit having started marketing electric toaster recently.
(11) The other pleas taken by the defendants in the written-statement is that
of accounts.
(36) Shri K. L. Aggarwal, who appears on behalf of the plaintiffs, however,
submitted that in common law in case or decree for infringement and passing
off. the plaintiffs may be entitled to a decree for rendition of accounts but
during the hearing of the suit, learned counsel for the plaintiffs gave up the
claim for damages and/or accounts.
(37) The result of the aforesaid discussion is that the plaintiffs are granted
a decree for permanent injunction restraining the defendants, their servants,
agents, dealers and/or representatives from manufacturing/selling and offering
for sale or dealing with the impugned electric toaster either directly or
indirectly which is fradulent of obvious imitation of the plaintiffs electric
toaster registered under No. 140873 and from doing anything with a view to
enable the registered design belonging to the plaintiffs to be so applied.
(38) The plaintiffs are further granted a decree for permanent injunction,
restraining the defendants, their servants, agents, dealers and
representatives from using the impugned pamphlet/catalogues of the plaintiffs.
