Madras High Court
Khoday Distilleries Ltd. vs The Scotch Whisky Association And ... on 25
September, 1998
Author: R J Babu
Bench: R J Babu
JUDGMENT R. Jayasimha Babu, J.
1\. This appeal is directed against the order of the Asst. Registrar of Trade
Marks allowing the application filed by the Respondents 1 and 2 herein for
rectification of the register by expunging the trade mark No. 273203
registered in the name of the appellant herein. The mark that has been
registered was in class 33 under No. 273203 consisting the words "Peter Scot".
That mark had been registered with effect from 3-7-1971 in the name of the
appellant herein. The application for rectification was filed on 17-4-1986 by
the Respondents 1 and 2 herein namely (1) The Scotch Whisky Association and
Johny Walker and Sons Limited, London. The application was on the ground that
the trade mark offended Section 9 of the Trade and Merchandise Marks Act, 1958
as it was neither distinctive nor was capable of distinguishing the registered
proprietor's goods; that the registration contravenes Section 11(a) of the Act
as it contains the words 'Scot' which is likely to deceive or cause confusion
and/or the said mark was and is disentitled to protection of the Court under
41\. Though in normal circumstances the fact that a suit for passing off is
pending in the appropriate Court, would have been sufficient reason to
exercise the discretion against the applicant for rectification, on the facts
of this case, having regard to the inherent inappropriateness of the use of
the word 'Scot' in relation to whisky made in India, the exercise of the
discretion of this Court in this case has to be in favour of the respondents.
42\. Learned senior counsel for the appellant prayed that the Court grant a
certificate of fitness to appeal. Section 109(5) of the Trade and Merchandise
Marks Act, 1958, provided that where an appeal is heard by a single Judge,
further appeal shall lie to a Division Bench of the High Court. That is the
statutory right of the appellant and it is for the Division Bench to make such
orders as it considers appropriate on the further appeal that may be preferred
by the appellant.
43\. Counsel for the appellant submitted that appellant intends preferring an
appeal, and therefore the operation of this judgment be stayed till such time
as the appellant, after securing certified copy is able to file the appeal and
and/or the said mark was and is disentitled to protection of the Court under
Section 11(e) of the Act.
2\. The trade mark 'Peter Scot' is used by the appellant for whisky
manufactured by it. The second respondent is a manufacturer of Scotch Whisky
in the United Kingdom. The first respondent is the association of manufactures
of Scotch Whisky, That Association being one whose principal object is to
protect the interests of its members world wide.
3\. The Respondents 1 and 2 had also filed a civil suit against the appellant
in the High Court of Judicature at Bombay alleging that the whisky sold by the
appellant under name 'Peter Scot' has resulted in the passing off of the goods
of the appellant as that of the manufacturer of Scotch Whisky in Scotland who
are well known for the Scotch Whisky manufactured by them and which is
universally known as Scotch Whisky. During the pendency of that suit, this
present application for rectification of the register was filed on the grounds
mentioned earlier.
4\. In support of the application, the Respondents 1 and 2 filed affidavit of
Oneian Glen Barclay of British Nationality and in house solicitor to the 1st
respondent Association, as also 20 third party affidavits. It has been
observed by the Asst. Registrar of Trade Marks in his order that though the
appellant had taken several extensions of time for filing it's evidence, it
did not do so and no material whatsoever was produced by the appellant before
him. It may also be noted here that neither Barclay nor any of the deponents
of the other affidavits was sought to be cross-examined by the appellant,
before the Asst. Registrar, although under Section 99 of the Trade Marks Act,
it was open to the Registrar to take oral evidence in lieu of or in addition
to, such evidence by affidavit. The appellant did not choose to call upon the
respondents to make available the deponents of the affidavits for cross-
examination and the appellant did not cross-examine those deponents before the
Asst. Registrar. The Asst, Registrar therefore proceeded to decide the matter
on the basis of the affidavits filed by the respondents, after observing that
unfortunately, there is absolutely no evidence whatever from the registered
proprietors to assail or counter-act or rebut the applicant's evidence. In the
absence of any material or evidence in rebuttal, he had held that the evidence
of the applicant before him stood unquestioned, unrebutted, unassailed and
even unmitigated and he had no other go except to receive the voluminous
affidavits and documentary evidence filed by the applicants on its face value.
5\. One of the affidavits filed by the respondents before the Asst. Registrar
was that of one Peter Jeffery Warrenn. He has stated in his affidavit that he
and his father were in the employment of the appellant therein, between 1965
and 1973; and that his father who was called Peter Warren and he were
responsible for building and setting up the appellant's distillery which
commenced operation around the end of 1965. He has stated that before they
joined the services of the appellant, the appellant was not engaged in the
production and sale of whiskies. He has further stated that the brand name
'Peter Scot' was coined primarily with his father in mind, i.e., using his
first name 'Peter' and his nationality 'Scot'. He has stated that another
factor behind the coining of this brand name was the internationally known
British Explorer Captain Scott, and his son Peter Scot who is widely known as
an artist, naturalist and Chairman of the World Wildlife Fund. He has finally
staled that as far as he was aware, Khodaya has not employed any other
Scottish distiller to manage their distillery since 1973.
6\. That is the only explanation offered for the choice by the applicant of
the brand name 'Peter Scot' by the appellant. The appellant has not disputed
the contents of that affidavit. The appellant has thus deliberately chosen to
use the word 'Scot' as part of the mark under which the Whisky manufactured by
it was to be sold, by taking advantage of the fact that me person who was in
charge of the distillery at that time came from Scotland.
7\. Before the Asst. Registrar, the Respondents 1 and 2 had filed numerous
documents as annexures of the affidavit of Barclay to show that whisky is made
in Scotland has a special flavour; that the whisky universally known as Scotch
Whisky always has been regarded as manufactured in Scotland; that Scotch
Whisky has been imported into India for many decades; that such imports have
been consistently on the rise and that large number of users in India are
familier with Scot Whisky which has also been regarded as superior whisky.
8\. The use of the word 'Scot' for the Whisky therefore, according to the
respondents is likely to result in deception and confusion as the customers
are likely to be misled into thinking that the use of the name 'Scot' as part
of the mark under which the whisky is sold, would indicate that the whisky is
of Scottish origin. The word 'Scot' in the appellant's mark is spelt with a
single 't' hut is phonetically the same as 'Scott' which is the word used to
refer to persons hailing from Scotland. A person of average intelligence with
imperfect recollection according to the respondents, was likely to be deceived
and misled into thinking that the whisky sold under the name 'Peter Scot' by
the appellant is a whisky manufactured by one of the manufacturers of Scotch
Whisky in Scotland.
9\. The other affidavits filed by the respondents are affidavits of some
businessmen and a lady who claims to be consumer of Scotch Whisky as also or
persons working in restaurants. These affidavits were produced to show that
there was likelihood of deception and confusion by reason of the plaintiff's
registered mark being deceptively similar to Scotch Whisky. The affidavits
produced by the respondents as also the contents of the documents produced
along with the affidavits remained unrebutted.
10\. Mr. N. Narayanan, learned Senior counsel for the appellant submitted that
the impugned order is not one made in accordance with law and cannot be
sustained. It was submitted that the trade mark 'Peter Scot' is the
combination of the first name of a person and that of his nationality and that
the appellant has been using the mark for a long time from 1970 onwards; that
the respondents had acquiesced with the use of the mark that the mark was
distinctive; and that the evidence produced by the respondents before the
Asst. Registrar was not satisfactory. The deponents of affidavits other than
Barclay were characterised as professional witnesses as some of them had been
examined by the respondents before the Bombay High Court in the Civil Suit
filed by them against another manufacturer of Whisky in India who had also
used mark which included the word 'Scot'. It was further submitted that there
was no plea or proof of fraud and that there was no blameworthy conduct on the
part of the appellant. Reliance was placed on a portion of the judgment of the
Bombay High Court in the case of 'Royal Scot' wherein it was held that the
principle of acquiescence is applicable to the individual case and it cannot
be made applicable or invoked for the entire trade.
11\. Counsel also submitted that the conduct of the respondents also
disentitles them from securing any relief in the proceedings under Section 56
as the respondents though aware of the advertisement of the appellant's
application had not objected to the same and had allowed the appellant's mark
to remain on the register for many years and had not initiated any action, and
even the action for passing off that was ultimately initiated was still
pending in the High Court at Bombay and instead of proceeding with that
action, they had abused the provisions of the Act by seeking rectification of
the register. The long user by the appellant, it was submitted, shows the
acquiescence on the part of the respondents and therefore, despite the fact
that no period of limitation is prescribed in Section 56 of the Act, the
application should have been rejected.
12\. It was also pointed out that the Asst. Registrar had held that the mark
is distinctive and so long as the mark is distinctive, it should be allowed to
remain on the register.
13\. It was the further case of the appellant that the mark 'Peter Scot' has
not been used as a trade mark for any Scotch Whisky, and therefore no question
of any deception by the appellant's (sic) of that mark would arise. It was
also submitted that many other marks are in use for Whisky made in India
although those marks are also capable of being regarded as indicative of
having originated in Scotland, the mark 'Bagpiper' was cited. 'Bagpiper', it
was submitted, is a musical instrument which is associated with Scotland. The
likelihood of deception, it was submitted, is nil as in the bars and
restaurants, Peter Scot is listed under Indian Whiskies and never as a Scotch
Whisky. The statement of the deponents of the affidavits was also questioned
on the ground that the Scotch Whisky is very expensive and the deponents were
not persons who could be regarded as regular customers of Scotch Whisky.
14\. The onus of proof was on the respondents and that onus, according to the
appellant has not been discharged. When the onus had not been discharged,
there is no discretion left to the Asst. Registrar and the approach of the
Court should be, not to prevent the continuance of the registration which has
been there for a long time especially when no evidence of actual confusion
during that period has been produced. It was finally submitted that in the
absence of proof of blameworthy conduct on the part of the appellant, there is
no case at all for rectification of the register.
15\. Counsel for the appellant referred to the decision of the Privy Council
in the case of Solavoid Tm, 1977 RPC 1 (PC) wherein it was held that the two
marks Solaroid and Polaroid were not deceptively similar; that the length of
the use of the registered mark is relevant in drawing an inference from the
lack of evidence of actual confusion or deception and in exercising the
discretion of the Court in expunging the mark. Reference was also made to the
decision of the House of Lords in the case of GE Trade Mark, 1973 RPC 337
wherein the law relating to a trade mark which is likely to cause confusion
was summarised in four propositions. It was held that the entry of the
registered mark in the register is prima facie evidence of its validity; that
if the mark was likely to cause confusion at the time when it was first
registered, it should be expunged; that if the likelihood of causing confusion
did not exist at the time when the mark was first registered, but was the
result of events occurring between that date and the date of application to
expunge it, the mark may not be expunged from the register as an entry wrongly
remaining on the register, unless the likelihood of causing deception resulted
from some blameworthy conduct of the registered proprietor of the trade mark
or of a precedessor in title of his as registered proprietor and finally that
the Court has a discretion whether or not to expunge it and also any
conditions or limitations to be imposed in the event of its being permitted to
remain on the register.
16\. Counsel referred to the decision of the Supreme Court in the case of
Amritdhara Pharmacy v. Satya Deo Gupta, to support his contention that in a
case of acquiescence the mark could not be deleted from the Register. That was
a case of opposition to prior to (sic) registration and not a case of
rectification. The decision of the Supreme Court in the case of National Bell
Co. v. Metal Goods Mfg. Co. (P.) Ltd., AIR 1971 SC 898 was referred to in
support of the submission that power to rectify is discretionary. It was held
in that case that under Section 56 the power to rectify is undoubtedly
discretionary, and where such discretion has been properly exercised the Court
on appeal would refuse to interfere, but where the principle embodied in the
relevant statutory provisions was not properly applied, the Court would
interfere. That decision was also relied on for the proposition that an
'aggrieved person' could includ a person who has, before registration used
trade mark in question, as also person against whom infringement action is
taken or threatened.
17\. The decision of the Delhi High Court in the case of Rajya Synthetics v.
Pradeep Corpuration, 1997 PTC 17 was relied on for the proposition that the
onus in a passing off action is on the plaintiff. Certain passages in the Law
of Trade Marks and Passing Off by P. Narayanan (4th Edition) were referred to
regarding standard of proof -- particularly paragraph 354A wherein it is
stated that the standard of proof in a matter relating to the grant of patent
is the normal proof required in a civil litigation -- that is to say the
balance of probability should be adopted. If something is inherently
improbable more weighty evidence is required to establish that it probably
occurred than if it were inherently probable.
18\. Mr. V. Tulzapurkar learned counsel for the respondents supported the
impugned order and submitted that the order is well reasoned one based on
affidavits documentary evidence, and applicable law and that the order also
being discretionary order does not require any interference. The decision of
the Supreme Court in the case of National Bell Co. v. Metal Goods
Manufacturing Private Limited, AIR 1971 SC 898 was referred to in support of
the proposition that the discretionary order of the Asst. Registrar is not to
be lightly interfered with. It was also submitted that Stoch Whisky
Association is a person aggrieved and entitled to maintain application for
rectification. The impugned order, it was submitted, is perfectly valid.
19\. The word 'Scot', it was submitted, was likely to cause deception and
confusion inasmuch as that would indicate Scottish origin, though the whisky
is in fact manufactured in India. The word 'Scot' cannot be registered in
respect of Indian Whisky. The mark registered is one which has been wrongly
registered and is required to be expunged. It was also submitted that the
Courts in India recognise the reputation of marks registered elsewhere and
Scotch Whisky being well known in India, its mark 'Peter Scot' though not
registered in favour of any of the respondents, the use of the word 'Scot'
must be held to be one which was likely to cause deception and confusion.
20\. Reliance was placed in this context on the decisions rendered in the case
of Bollinger J. v. Costs Brawa Wine Company Limited, 1960 RPC 16; Vide
Products v. Henry Ost, 1970 RFC 489; Erven Warnic v. Towned and Sons, 1980 RPC
131 and unreported judgment of the Bombay High Court in the case of Scotch
Whisky Association v. Mohan Meakin Limited in Suit No. 1352 of 1986 decided on
19-11-1986; Dyer Meaking Limited v. The Scotch Whisky Association, AIR 1980
Delhi 125 and the Scotch Whisky Association v. Pravara Sahakar Sakhar Karkhana
Limited, .
21\. Counsel repudiated the charge of acquiescence and submitted that the
delay in making the application for rectification which was only for a period
of seven years from the date of registration cannot be regarded as a long
period; that the adoption of the mark by the applicant was not bona fide; that
a person who has been dishonest at the inception, cannot assert a right to
retain a mark dishonestly adopted even after rectification has been sought by
the person aggrieved by the registration of the mark. It was submitted that
the word 'Scot' was inherently incapable of being registered in respect of any
Indian Whisky and therefore the mark should never have been registered and is
required to be expunged. It was also the submission that the continuation of
the mark on the register was against the public interest.
22\. The appellants are guilty of blameworthy conduct, according to the
respondents, from the inception by the very choice of the name 'Scot' as part
of the mark for the whisky. The fact that the nationality of one of the
employees of the appellant at the relevant time was a Scottish would not
afford a justification for adopting his nationality as a part of the
appellant's trade mark. The respondents, it was submitted, had never done
anything to encourage the Appellant to use that mark.
23\. It was not disputed by the learned counsel for the respondents that the
onus of proof was on the respondents. Counsel in this context referred to the
case of the Shredded Wehat Company Limited v. Kellogg Company of Great Britain
Limited (Vol. LVII RFC 137) and National Bell Co. v. Metal Goods Mfg. Co., AIR
1971 SC 898. So far as the standard of proof is concerned, it was submitted,
that the standard is the same as in the registration as also rectification
proceedings, the only difference being that in registration proceedings it is
the applicant for the registration of mark who has to discharge the burden
while in the rectification proceedings, it is the applicant seeking for
rectification who has to discharge that burden of proof. In this context
reference was made to the case of United Chemist Association, (1923) 40 RFC
219.
24\. As regards Section 11(a) of the Trade and Merchandise Marks Act, 1958, it
was submitted that what is required of the person seeking to rely on that
provision is to show that the person has acquired reputation in trade in
connection with the mark or trading style or a device before, the Tribunal
proceeds to consider whether having regard to that reputation, there is
possibility of confusion. Once it is established that confusion or deception
is likely to result, the burden would shift to the holder of the registered
mark to demonstrate that there was no likelihood of deception or confusion.
The statutory standard is only 'likelihood' of deception or confusion and not
the actual confusion or deception. In the instant case, it is submitted, that
the appellant has got a false trade description registered as trade mark and
therefore, irrespective of any other consideration, it is the duty of the
Tribunal to rectify the register. The probability of deception depends mainly
on the degree of resemblance between the marks which the Tribunal can decide
by looking at the marks even without any other evidence and no further
evidence is in fact required.
25\. It was further submitted that the evidence produced by the respondents
showed that 'Scot' formed part of the registered trade mark of various
distilleries in Scotland manufacturing 'Scotch Whisky'. The use of the word
'Scot' in relation to a whisky, which is not Scotch Whisky is likely to lead
the public to think that such whisky is Scotch Whisky. The evidence by way of
affidavits given by the respondents, it was pointed out by the counsel,
remains unchallenged and uncontroverted. The use of the word 'Scot' by the
appellant as part of its mark was intended to give its product a false trade
description, and such use was dishonest, The adoption of a name which
indicates the geographical region even when the goods had no connection with
that place, was itself dishonest. It was lastly submitted that if there is
evidence to show that there was likelihood of deception and confusion, that is
sufficient for the Tribunal to arrive at the conclusion that there is
likelihood of deception or confusion.
26\. Respondents have filed cross-objections as well, questioning the finding
of the Asst. Registrar that the Scotch Whisky Association is not a person
aggrieved. It was submitted by the counsel for the respondents that the view
of the Asst. Registrar was legally incorrect as it was not necessary that a
person has to be trader to be able to claim to be a person aggrieved and what
is required is that he must not be a busybody and relied on the decision in
the case of Powell's Trade Mark, 1984 (11 RFC 4). In that case it was observed
that though the words "person aggrieved" are used in the statute to prevent
interference by those who had no interest at all in the register being
corrected, it is undoubtedly in public interest that they should not be unduly
limited, inasmuch as it is a public register. Counsel submitted that though
Scotch Whisky Association is not a trading body and as such, it can still
claim a right to be a person aggrieved if it's objects are to protect and to
promote the interest of its members who are traders. Reliance was placed in
the case of Karo Step Trade Mark; 1977 RFC 255. It was submitted that Scotch.
Whisky Association consists of those engaged in the manufacture or trading in
Scotch Whisky and they have a common interest in protecting their rights in
relation to whisky produced in Scotland, and in furtherance of their common
object, the Association is the person aggrieved when it seeks to have the
register rectified by seeking the deletion of the marks which are deceptively
similar to those used by the members of the Association or the marks are
likely to cause confusion. It is also submitted that the Association has a
direct financial interest as it cannot retain its members unless it
effectively protects their interest.
27\. The principal controversy in this appeal is the registrability of the
word 'scot' either independently or in association on with other words for a
whisky which is manufactured in India. The mark that was registered in favour
of the appellant is 'Peter Scot'. The word 'Scot' does not refer to any part
of India or anything Indian. It is used normally to refer to persons who
regard Scotland as their home land or who are descended from persons who hail
from Scotland. Though the word normally is spent with two 't's as 'Scott' when
referring to persons of Scottish origin, phonetically 'Scot' and 'Scott' are
similar. Scotland is not an independent country. It is a part of United
Kingdom, Scotland is one of the regions in United Kingdom but with its own
distinctive history and traditions and culture. It is known among other things
for its distinctive culture in music and dress -- Bagpiper and kilts. It is
known universally as the home of scotch whisky. The water in the streams
flowing there and which is used in Scotch whisky is regarded as a significant
factor adding to the flavour of that whisky. 'Scotch whisky' is well known in
almost all parts of the world among those who consume whisky. A mark which is
likely to deceive or confuse a person into thinking that the whisky sold under
that mark is a scotch whisky even though it is not made in Scotland is a mark
which prejudices the legitimate interest of those who manufacture scotch
whisky in Scotland.
28\. All things evocative of Scotland cannot be regarded as the exclusive
monopoly of manufacturers and traders in Scotland. It is only the word or mark
which when used for a particular product is likely to cause deception or
confusion by reason of it being evocative not only of Scotland but also of the
well known product of Scotland with which that word or mark is closely
identified that the mark can be regarded as one which is likely to cause
deception or confusion. The use of the words like Kilt, Loch or Bagpiper
though evocative of Scotland cannot normally be regarded as resulting in
deception or confusion when used in relation to whi sky made outside Scotland
as those words are not evocative of whisky made in Scotland. But when the word
'Scot' which so nearly resembles 'Scott' is used in relation to whisky made
outside Scotland, 'Scot' would be evocative of 'Scotch Whisky' and would cause
confusion and/or deception, the average consumer of ordinary intelligence and
imperfect recollection being misled into thinking that the whisky bearing the
name scot is but a variant of Scotch whisky. The word 'Scot' when used in
relation to whisky made outside Scotland being per se capable of causing
confusion or deception is ineligible for being registered as a trade mark for
whisky made in the Country when used by itself or in association with another
word such as 'Peter'.
29\. The reputation and good will earned by Scotch whisky has been set out at
great length in the affidavit of the Solicitor to the Scotch whisky
Association. The appellant did not choose to controvert any of the averments
in that affidavit of in the other affidavits nor did it offer any evidence.
The objection statement filed by the appellant cannot be treated as evidence.
30\. Substantial volume of export of Scotch whisky to India continuously for
several decades, has been proved by the affidavit of Barclay. The trade mark
that was adopted by the appellant 'Peter Scot' was in relation to whisky and
when so used, the mark was deceptively similar to 'Scotch' and was likely to
lead a consumer of whisky into thinking that the whisky manufactured in the
country by the appellant and sold under the trade mark 'Peter Scot' was also
scotch whisky. The mention on the label of the name of the manufacturer does
not nullify the likelihood of deception or contusion. What is prominently
displayed on the label is the name 'Peter Scot'. That is the name by which the
whisky is referred to by those who consume it.
31\. The registering authority should have declined to register that mark,
notwithstanding the fact that no objection had been filed. The fact that it
did not do so cannot result in the appellant acquiring indefeasible right to
the mark. A trade murk registered in contravention of Section 11 of the Act is
not to be regarded as valid on all respects, even after a lapse of seven years
from the date of registration as provided in Section 32(b) of the Act.
32\. The appellant's contention that the inaction on the part of the
respondents for a period of about seven years amounts to acquiescence and
therefore rectification was not legally permissible, cannot be accepted.
Section 56 of the Act does not prescribe any period of limitation for making
an application thereunder. The fact that ihc application was made some years
after the registration by itself would not prevent the authority from
directing the rectification if it was found to be otherwise justified. The
acquiescence if it is to be made a ground for declining to rectify, must be of
such a character as to establish gross-negligence on the part of the applicant
or deliberate inaction which had regulated in the appellant incurring
substantial expenditure or being misled into the belief that the respondents
though entitled to, had deliberately refrained from taking any action and were
unmindful of the use of the mark by the person in whose name it was
registered.
33\. The facts of this case are not such as to warrant the conclusion that
there has been acquiescence. At the time the registration of the mark was
applied for some time in 1971, had the respondents been more vigilant could
have objected and prosecuted their objection thereby preventing the
registration at the very inception, the fact that they did not do so cannot be
regarded as acquiescence on their part. Section 56 of the Act does not disable
one who, though having the opportunity to object, had failed to object before
the registration was effected for seeking rectification.
34\. A strong case is required to be made out by an applicant under Section 56
of the Act especially when the rectification is sought several years after the
registration of the mark. In case of reasonable doubt as to whether the mark
when registered was likely to cause deception or confusion, it would be proper
to exercise the discretion in favour of the registered owner of the mark.
However, in cases where the mark registered is inherently one which was likely
to cause deception or confusion, the discretion is properly exercised by
directing the rectification of the register.
35\. The standard of proof required to be met by an applicant under Section
56(2) of the Act is the same standard which an applicant for registration is
required to meet except that in a proceeding for rectification, the proof
adduced should also be such as to warrant the exercise of the discretion in
favour of the applicant. While the authority dealing with the application for
registration has no discretion to declare to register a mark which is
otherwise fully in conformity with the provisions of the Act, in a proceeding
for rectification the authority has the discretion in directing or declining
to direct the removal of a mark on the register. Such discretion is vested in
the authority in view of the fact that despite registration of a mark under
the Trade Marks Act, it is still open to any one prejudicially affected by
that registration, to bring an action for passing off and the fact of
registration of the mark by itself is not to be regarded as an unimpeachable
defence in such action.
36\. It is unfortunate that the appellant had chosen to refrain from placing
any material before the authority to refuse the claim for rectification.
Apparently appellant did not have great faith in the validity of the
registration and did not consider it worthwhile even to cross-examine the
witnesses who had filed the affidavits in support of the application for
rectification. It is evident that adoption of the mark 'Peter scot' by the
appellant was for the reasons mentioned in the affidavit of Peter Jeffery
Warren. The mark was adopted apparently with a view to take advantage of the
good will associated with Scotch whisky by using the word "Scot" as part of
the trade mark for the whisky manufactured by the appellant.
37\. The conduct of the appellant subsequent to the registration is not of
much materiality. The appellant has continued to use that mark. The fact that
appellant did not do anything more than use the mark does not have the effect
of discharging it from the consequences of adopting a mark which should not
have been registered.
38\. The criticism levelled against the deponents of some of the affidavits
filed by the respondents as evidence though justified to some extent does not
help the appellant to avoid rectification. The statutory standard is not the
actual confusion and deception but likelihood thereof. The term 'Scot' when
used in association with whisky of non-Scottish origin is inherently capable
of and is likely to cause confusion and deception.
39\. The discretion exercised by the authority in favour of the respondents
cannot be said to have been exercised contrary to any valid legal principle or
in violation of any of the provisions of the Act. The discretion exercised by
the authority is not the result of any arbitrary exercise of power but is
based upon the material placed before the authority and does not require
interference.
40\. So far as the cross-objections are concerned, the fact that the Scotch
Whisky association consists of manufacturers by itself is insufficient to
enable the Association to maintain the action by itself. It may however do so
along with the member who is prejudicially affected by the registration. In
this case, the association had filed the application along with one of its
members whose standing is not in question. Having regard to that fact, the
authority below was in error in holding that the association had no standing
to maintain the application along with one who had the standing. The
association of traders and manufacturers cannot always take the place of their
members in all matters which affect the members unless the statute permits
them to do so. The right of action of the member does not by virtue of the
membership vest in the Association. It would be within the competence of the
association to support the action of its members and join them in the action,
but the association cannot replace a member in a statutory action unless the
statute permits it. The words "person aggrieved" in Section 56(2) however
widely interpreted cannot dislodge the need for a direct link between the
person and the grievance.
41\. Though in normal circumstances the fact that a suit for passing off is
pending in the appropriate Court, would have been sufficient reason to
exercise the discretion against the applicant for rectification, on the facts
of this case, having regard to the inherent inappropriateness of the use of
the word 'Scot' in relation to whisky made in India, the exercise of the
discretion of this Court in this case has to be in favour of the respondents.
42\. Learned senior counsel for the appellant prayed that the Court grant a
certificate of fitness to appeal. Section 109(5) of the Trade and Merchandise
Marks Act, 1958, provided that where an appeal is heard by a single Judge,
further appeal shall lie to a Division Bench of the High Court. That is the
statutory right of the appellant and it is for the Division Bench to make such
orders as it considers appropriate on the further appeal that may be preferred
by the appellant.
43\. Counsel for the appellant submitted that appellant intends preferring an
appeal, and therefore the operation of this judgment be stayed till such time
as the appellant, after securing certified copy is able to file the appeal and
move the matter before the Division Bench. As the impugned order of the
Assistant Registrar of Trade Marks has not been given effect to till date, the
request so made by counsel is reasonable. The operation of this judgment is
stayed till 20th of February, 1999.
41\. Though in normal circumstances the fact that a suit for passing off is
pending in the appropriate Court, would have been sufficient reason to
exercise the discretion against the applicant for rectification, on the facts
of this case, having regard to the inherent inappropriateness of the use of
the word 'Scot' in relation to whisky made in India, the exercise of the
discretion of this Court in this case has to be in favour of the respondents.
42\. Learned senior counsel for the appellant prayed that the Court grant a
certificate of fitness to appeal. Section 109(5) of the Trade and Merchandise
Marks Act, 1958, provided that where an appeal is heard by a single Judge,
further appeal shall lie to a Division Bench of the High Court. That is the
statutory right of the appellant and it is for the Division Bench to make such
orders as it considers appropriate on the further appeal that may be preferred
by the appellant.
43\. Counsel for the appellant submitted that appellant intends preferring an
appeal, and therefore the operation of this judgment be stayed till such time
as the appellant, after securing certified copy is able to file the appeal and
and/or the said mark was and is disentitled to protection of the Court under
Section 11(e) of the Act.
2\. The trade mark 'Peter Scot' is used by the appellant for whisky
manufactured by it. The second respondent is a manufacturer of Scotch Whisky
in the United Kingdom. The first respondent is the association of manufactures
of Scotch Whisky, That Association being one whose principal object is to
protect the interests of its members world wide.
3\. The Respondents 1 and 2 had also filed a civil suit against the appellant
in the High Court of Judicature at Bombay alleging that the whisky sold by the
appellant under name 'Peter Scot' has resulted in the passing off of the goods
of the appellant as that of the manufacturer of Scotch Whisky in Scotland who
are well known for the Scotch Whisky manufactured by them and which is
universally known as Scotch Whisky. During the pendency of that suit, this
present application for rectification of the register was filed on the grounds
mentioned earlier.
4\. In support of the application, the Respondents 1 and 2 filed affidavit of
Oneian Glen Barclay of British Nationality and in house solicitor to the 1st
respondent Association, as also 20 third party affidavits. It has been
observed by the Asst. Registrar of Trade Marks in his order that though the
appellant had taken several extensions of time for filing it's evidence, it
41\. Though in normal circumstances the fact that a suit for passing off is
pending in the appropriate Court, would have been sufficient reason to
exercise the discretion against the applicant for rectification, on the facts
of this case, having regard to the inherent inappropriateness of the use of
the word 'Scot' in relation to whisky made in India, the exercise of the
discretion of this Court in this case has to be in favour of the respondents.
42\. Learned senior counsel for the appellant prayed that the Court grant a
certificate of fitness to appeal. Section 109(5) of the Trade and Merchandise
Marks Act, 1958, provided that where an appeal is heard by a single Judge,
further appeal shall lie to a Division Bench of the High Court. That is the
statutory right of the appellant and it is for the Division Bench to make such
orders as it considers appropriate on the further appeal that may be preferred
by the appellant.
43\. Counsel for the appellant submitted that appellant intends preferring an
appeal, and therefore the operation of this judgment be stayed till such time
as the appellant, after securing certified copy is able to file the appeal and
and/or the said mark was and is disentitled to protection of the Court under
Section 11(e) of the Act.
2\. The trade mark 'Peter Scot' is used by the appellant for whisky
manufactured by it. The second respondent is a manufacturer of Scotch Whisky
in the United Kingdom. The first respondent is the association of manufactures
of Scotch Whisky, That Association being one whose principal object is to
protect the interests of its members world wide.
3\. The Respondents 1 and 2 had also filed a civil suit against the appellant
in the High Court of Judicature at Bombay alleging that the whisky sold by the
appellant under name 'Peter Scot' has resulted in the passing off of the goods
of the appellant as that of the manufacturer of Scotch Whisky in Scotland who
are well known for the Scotch Whisky manufactured by them and which is
universally known as Scotch Whisky. During the pendency of that suit, this
present application for rectification of the register was filed on the grounds
mentioned earlier.
4\. In support of the application, the Respondents 1 and 2 filed affidavit of
Oneian Glen Barclay of British Nationality and in house solicitor to the 1st
respondent Association, as also 20 third party affidavits. It has been
observed by the Asst. Registrar of Trade Marks in his order that though the
appellant had taken several extensions of time for filing it's evidence, it
41\. Though in normal circumstances the fact that a suit for passing off is
pending in the appropriate Court, would have been sufficient reason to
exercise the discretion against the applicant for rectification, on the facts
of this case, having regard to the inherent inappropriateness of the use of
the word 'Scot' in relation to whisky made in India, the exercise of the
discretion of this Court in this case has to be in favour of the respondents.
42\. Learned senior counsel for the appellant prayed that the Court grant a
certificate of fitness to appeal. Section 109(5) of the Trade and Merchandise
Marks Act, 1958, provided that where an appeal is heard by a single Judge,
further appeal shall lie to a Division Bench of the High Court. That is the
statutory right of the appellant and it is for the Division Bench to make such
orders as it considers appropriate on the further appeal that may be preferred
by the appellant.
43\. Counsel for the appellant submitted that appellant intends preferring an
appeal, and therefore the operation of this judgment be stayed till such time
as the appellant, after securing certified copy is able to file the appeal and
and/or the said mark was and is disentitled to protection of the Court under
Section 11(e) of the Act.
2\. The trade mark 'Peter Scot' is used by the appellant for whisky
manufactured by it. The second respondent is a manufacturer of Scotch Whisky
in the United Kingdom. The first respondent is the association of manufactures
of Scotch Whisky, That Association being one whose principal object is to
protect the interests of its members world wide.
3\. The Respondents 1 and 2 had also filed a civil suit against the appellant
in the High Court of Judicature at Bombay alleging that the whisky sold by the
appellant under name 'Peter Scot' has resulted in the passing off of the goods
of the appellant as that of the manufacturer of Scotch Whisky in Scotland who
are well known for the Scotch Whisky manufactured by them and which is
universally known as Scotch Whisky. During the pendency of that suit, this
present application for rectification of the register was filed on the grounds
mentioned earlier.
4\. In support of the application, the Respondents 1 and 2 filed affidavit of
Oneian Glen Barclay of British Nationality and in house solicitor to the 1st
respondent Association, as also 20 third party affidavits. It has been
observed by the Asst. Registrar of Trade Marks in his order that though the
appellant had taken several extensions of time for filing it's evidence, it
did not do so and no material whatsoever was produced by the appellant before
him. It may also be noted here that neither Barclay nor any of the deponents
of the other affidavits was sought to be cross-examined by the appellant,
before the Asst. Registrar, although under Section 99 of the Trade Marks Act,
it was open to the Registrar to take oral evidence in lieu of or in addition
to, such evidence by affidavit. The appellant did not choose to call upon the
respondents to make available the deponents of the affidavits for cross-
examination and the appellant did not cross-examine those deponents before the
Asst. Registrar. The Asst, Registrar therefore proceeded to decide the matter
on the basis of the affidavits filed by the respondents, after observing that
unfortunately, there is absolutely no evidence whatever from the registered
41\. Though in normal circumstances the fact that a suit for passing off is
pending in the appropriate Court, would have been sufficient reason to
exercise the discretion against the applicant for rectification, on the facts
of this case, having regard to the inherent inappropriateness of the use of
the word 'Scot' in relation to whisky made in India, the exercise of the
discretion of this Court in this case has to be in favour of the respondents.
42\. Learned senior counsel for the appellant prayed that the Court grant a
certificate of fitness to appeal. Section 109(5) of the Trade and Merchandise
Marks Act, 1958, provided that where an appeal is heard by a single Judge,
further appeal shall lie to a Division Bench of the High Court. That is the
statutory right of the appellant and it is for the Division Bench to make such
orders as it considers appropriate on the further appeal that may be preferred
by the appellant.
43\. Counsel for the appellant submitted that appellant intends preferring an
appeal, and therefore the operation of this judgment be stayed till such time
as the appellant, after securing certified copy is able to file the appeal and
and/or the said mark was and is disentitled to protection of the Court under
Section 11(e) of the Act.
2\. The trade mark 'Peter Scot' is used by the appellant for whisky
manufactured by it. The second respondent is a manufacturer of Scotch Whisky
in the United Kingdom. The first respondent is the association of manufactures
of Scotch Whisky, That Association being one whose principal object is to
protect the interests of its members world wide.
3\. The Respondents 1 and 2 had also filed a civil suit against the appellant
in the High Court of Judicature at Bombay alleging that the whisky sold by the
appellant under name 'Peter Scot' has resulted in the passing off of the goods
of the appellant as that of the manufacturer of Scotch Whisky in Scotland who
are well known for the Scotch Whisky manufactured by them and which is
universally known as Scotch Whisky. During the pendency of that suit, this
present application for rectification of the register was filed on the grounds
mentioned earlier.
4\. In support of the application, the Respondents 1 and 2 filed affidavit of
Oneian Glen Barclay of British Nationality and in house solicitor to the 1st
respondent Association, as also 20 third party affidavits. It has been
observed by the Asst. Registrar of Trade Marks in his order that though the
appellant had taken several extensions of time for filing it's evidence, it
did not do so and no material whatsoever was produced by the appellant before
him. It may also be noted here that neither Barclay nor any of the deponents
of the other affidavits was sought to be cross-examined by the appellant,
before the Asst. Registrar, although under Section 99 of the Trade Marks Act,
it was open to the Registrar to take oral evidence in lieu of or in addition
to, such evidence by affidavit. The appellant did not choose to call upon the
respondents to make available the deponents of the affidavits for cross-
examination and the appellant did not cross-examine those deponents before the
Asst. Registrar. The Asst, Registrar therefore proceeded to decide the matter
on the basis of the affidavits filed by the respondents, after observing that
unfortunately, there is absolutely no evidence whatever from the registered
41\. Though in normal circumstances the fact that a suit for passing off is
pending in the appropriate Court, would have been sufficient reason to
exercise the discretion against the applicant for rectification, on the facts
of this case, having regard to the inherent inappropriateness of the use of
the word 'Scot' in relation to whisky made in India, the exercise of the
discretion of this Court in this case has to be in favour of the respondents.
42\. Learned senior counsel for the appellant prayed that the Court grant a
certificate of fitness to appeal. Section 109(5) of the Trade and Merchandise
Marks Act, 1958, provided that where an appeal is heard by a single Judge,
further appeal shall lie to a Division Bench of the High Court. That is the
statutory right of the appellant and it is for the Division Bench to make such
orders as it considers appropriate on the further appeal that may be preferred
by the appellant.
43\. Counsel for the appellant submitted that appellant intends preferring an
appeal, and therefore the operation of this judgment be stayed till such time
as the appellant, after securing certified copy is able to file the appeal and
