Madras High Court
Krishna Gopal Agarwal vs The State Represented By on 17 February, 2021
                                                                         Crl.O.P.Nos.22493 & 23891 of 2015
                                       IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT MADRAS
                                                    DATED : 17.02.2021
                                                          CORAM
                            THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE A.D.JAGADISH CHANDIRA
                                              Crl.O.P.Nos.22493 & 23891 of 2015
                                                              and
                                                  M.P.Nos.1 and 2 of 2015 in
                                                   Crl.O.P.No.22493 of 2015
                         Krishna Gopal Agarwal,
                         S/o. Shri.Fakir Chand Agarwal (late)               ... Petitioner/A1 in
                                                                           Crl.O.P.No.22493/2015
                         M/s.APL Apollo Tubes Limited,
                         Rep. By its Chairman and Managing Director
                         Mr.Sanjay Gupta,
                         Alur Village, Perandapali,
                         Hosur, Krishnagiri District.                       ... Petitioner/A5 in
                                                                            Crl.O.P.No.23891/2015
20.Accordingly, these Criminal Original Petitions stand allowed. and the
proceedings in Crime No.33 of 2015 dated 08.04.2015, on the file of the Sub-
Inspector of police, Thimmapettai Police Station, Vaniyambadi Town Circle,
Vellore District, shall stand quashed. Consequently, connected Miscellaneous
Petitions are also disposed.
21.In view of quashing of FIR, M.P.No.2 of 2015 filed by the petitioner in
Crl.O.P.No.22493 of 2015, stands allowed. A direction is  17/19
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis/ Crl.O.P.Nos.22493 & 23891 of 2015 issued to
the learned Principal District Munsif cum Judicial Magistrate, Vaniyambadi,
Vellore District, to return the 985 pipes seized by the 1 st respondent in
connection with Crime No.33 of 2015 to the petitioner. If the pipes are not
produced before the Court the 1st respondent is directed to return the pipes
seized in Crime No.33 of 2015 to the petitioner in Crl.O.P.No.22493 of 2015
forthwith.
17.02.2021 Index:Yes/No Internet: Yes/No ssi To The Sub-Inspector of Police,
Thimmapettai Police Station, Vaniyambadi Town Circle, Vellore District.
                                                                            Crl.O.P.No.23891/2015
                                                            Vs.
                         1.The State Represented by
                         The Sub-Inspector of Police,
                         Thimmapettai Police Station,
                         Vaniyambadi Town Circle,
                         Vellore District.                            ...Respondent/Complainant
                                                                                    both Crl.O.Ps
                         2.K.Boopathi,
                         S/o.G.K.Kesavalu Naidu @ Kesavan           ... Respondent/ de facto
                                                                     complainant in both Crl.O.Ps
                         1/19
    https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis/
                                                                           Crl.O.P.Nos.22493 & 23891 of 2015
                         Prayer in Crl.O.P.No.22493/ 2015:        Criminal Original Petition filed
                         under Section 482 Cr.P.C., to call for the records and to quash the First
                         Information Report in Crime No.33 of 2015 dated 08.04.2015, on the file
                         of      the   Sub-Inspector   of   police,   Thimmapettai     Police     Station,
                         Vaniyambadi Town Circle, Vellore District registered for the offence
                         under Sections 468, 471, 418, 420 IPC and 51, 63, 65(A) of the
                         Copyright Act, 1957 and subsequent search and seizure made.
                         Prayer in Crl.O.P.No.23891/ 2015:        Criminal Original Petition filed
                         under Section 482 Cr.P.C., to call for the records relating to the complaint
                         in Crime No.33 of 2015, on the file of the 1st respondent and quash the
                         same.
                                   For Petitioner in
                                         Crl.O.P.No.22493/2015: Mr.A.Ramesh, Senior Counsel
                                                                for Mr.C.Arun Kumar
                                   For Petitioner in
                                         Crl.O.P.No.23891/2015: Mr.C.Manishankar, Senior Counsel
                                                                for Mr.A.Velmurugan
                                   For R1 in Both Crl.O.Ps: Mr.C.Iyyappa Raj,
                                                            Additional Public Prosecutor
                                   For R2 in Both Crl.O.Ps: Mr.ARL.Sundaresan, Senior Counsel
                                                            for Mrs.AL.Gandhimathi
                                                              *****
2/19
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis/ Crl.O.P.Nos.22493 & 23891 of 2015 COMMON
ORDER The Petitioners who are Accused No.1 and Accused No.5 in Crime No.33 of
2015, dated 08.04.2015, on the file of the 1st respondent and they have filed
these Criminal Original Petitions seeking to quash the proceedings.
2.The brief facts of the case as per the defacto complainant viz., K.Boopathi,
the 2nd respondent in these cases, is that his father viz., G.Kesavalu Naidu @
Kesavan, was engaged in the business of digging bore wells and he passed away
on 15.10.2014 and after his demise, the de facto complainant is taking care of
his business and also the cases which were run by him. The de facto
complainant's father in the course of his business of digging bore wells had
invented a different process and he had applied for registration of Copyright
before the Copyrights Office at Chennai. The Copyright was published in the
Government Gazette vide No.441/ MAS/ 1999, 836/ MAS/ 2000 and 097/ MAS/ 2001.
3/19 https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis/ Crl.O.P.Nos.22493 & 23891 of 2015
3.In order to give the effect to the invention, his father had approached
manufacturers and owners of pipe manufacturing companies and he entered into
an agreement that one Binjarajaka Steel Tubes Limited at Secundarabad. He had
also applied for getting his Trademark of “G.K.T” registered at the Office of
the Registrar of Trademarks and he had also obtained a certificate for the
same. While so, he came to understand that one Sri Lakshmi Mettal Udyog
Limited and some other companies in violation of the Provisions of the
Copyright Act, had manufactured duplicate pipes and sold them at Bangalore,
Coimbatore, Hosur and Vaniyampadi and thereby, his father had preferred
complaints against the violators based on which, cases in Crime Nos.139 of
2005 and 140 of 2005 were registered by the 1st respondent police against the
petitioners.
4.The offenders/violators in Crime Nos.139 of 2005 and 140 of 2005 had
individually approached this Court and filed petitions in
Crl.O.P.Nos.17500/2008 and 17503/2008 and obtained stay orders and thereby,
the proper investigation could not be done. On 28.10.2014, this Court had
dismissed the petitions and had directed the 1 st respondent  4/19
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis/ Crl.O.P.Nos.22493 & 23891 of 2015 police to
complete the full-fledged enquiry and had also directed to submit the report
of the investigation before this Court on or before 31.03.2015. While that was
so, two other companies viz., “Apollo Tubes Limited, Hosur” and Calcutta Tubes
India (P) Limited, Banglore” and its Chairman and Directors have misused the
invention of the de facto complainant and had in order to cause wrongful loss
to the de facto complainant had manufactured and sold duplicate pipes, by
appointing authorised dealers and one such dealer Naaz Enterprises had sold
the pipes to one Mahesh, a rig owner by Bill No.082, dated 16.10.2014. The de
facto complainant personally enquired and found it to be true and he had
preferred the complaint against them for violating Sections 51& 63 of the
Copyrights Act. Based on the complaint, a case was registered by the 1st
respondent in Crime No.33 of 2015, for the offence under Sections 468, 471,
480, 420 IPC and Sections 51, 63, 65(A) of the Copyright Act, 1957, against
the companies and its officials. The present petitions have been filed by the
A1 and A5 to quash the FIR in Crime No.33 of 2015.
5.Heard Mr.A.Ramesh, Senior Counsel appearing for the  5/19
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis/ Crl.O.P.Nos.22493 & 23891 of 2015
petitioner/A1 and Mr.Mani Shankar, Senior Counsel appearing for the
petitioner/A5.
6.Mr.A.Ramesh, the learned Senior Counsel appearing for the 1st petitioner /A1
would submit that at the outset, the entire proceedings is nothing but an
abuse of process of law. The de facto complainant, on the date of complaint
was not having any rights either Copyright or the patent right in respect of
the tubes as claimed by him. The de facto complainant had suppressed the same
and the FIR itself has to be quashed on the ground of suppression of material
facts. The learned senior counsel would submit that the fact remains that the
father of the defacto complainant had earlier preferred a complaint which was
registered in Crime No.141 of 2005, by the very same 1st respondent. Against
the registration of the FIR, the petitioner had approached this Court and
filed Crl.O.P.No.20386 of 2005, and this Court by an order dated 03.11.2009,
finding that the copyright granted to the de facto complainant's father
relates only to the drawing submitted by him and that it does not relate to
the steel pipes manufactured by using the drawings had held that the offence
under Section 63 of the Copyrights  6/19 https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis/
Crl.O.P.Nos.22493 & 23891 of 2015 Act is not made out and had quashed the
earlier complaint. This Court had also quashed the complaint in respect of the
other offences also.
7.Against the quashing of the FIR, the de facto complainant's father viz.,
G.K.Kesavalu Naidu @ Kesavan had approached the Hon'ble Supreme Court, by
filing Special Leave to Appeal (Crl.) No(s).10081 of 2009 and the special
leave petition was dismissed at the admission stage itself on 26.02.2010 and
thereby, confirming the order passed by this Court. Thereafter, the de facto
complainant's father had filed Review Petition (Crl.) No(s).236 of 2010 in
Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No.10081 of 2009 and the same was also dismissed
by this Court on 28.04.2010. Suppressing the same, the present complaint has
been filed.
8.Meanwhile, the de facto complainant's father in violation of the Statutory
Provision under Proviso to Sub Section (1) of Section 45 of the Copyright Act
got the copyright entered in the Register, dated 09.12.2003.
7/19 https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis/ Crl.O.P.Nos.22493 & 23891 of 2015
9.Against the registration of the copyright granted to the de facto
complainant's father, the Federation of Industries of India (in which, the
petitioner is a member) through its Secretary General, had filed Case No.2 of
2006, before the Copyright Board at Delhi, for the expunction of two entries
wrongly remaining in the Copyright Register and the Copyright Board, Delhi
after hearing the parties, by an order dated 04.07.2008, expunged the entries
relating to registration granted to the de facto complainant's father. Against
the order of expunging the entries, the father of the de facto complainant had
preferred C.M.A.No.2859 of 2008, before the Division Bench of this Court and
thereafter, he did not pursue further and thereby, the C.M.A.No.2859 of 2008
came to be dismissed. Further, the Federation of Industries of India and
another have filed a Civil Suit before the High Court of Delhi in CS (OS)
No.596 of 2007, seeking to declare that the Copyright does not subsist in the
drawings entered in the Registrar of Copyrights under entry Nos.A- 65629/2003
and A-65630/2003, or in any another similar drawings that may be in the
possession of the de facto complainant's father and the suit came to be
allowed in favour of the Federation of Industries in India, by an order dated
18.11.2011, declaring that the Copyright does not subsist  8/19
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis/ Crl.O.P.Nos.22493 & 23891 of 2015 in favour
of the de facto complainant's father. Further, the de facto complainant's
father was also directed to pay punitive damages to the tune of Rs.2 Lakhs to
the Federation of Industries in India for making a wrong claim. The relevant
paragraphs of the decree / order is extracted hereunder:
> “29.The suit of the plaintiffs is decreed in terms of Para 30(i) to (iii) of
> the plaint. The same read as under:
> (i)A declaration that copyright does not subsist in the drawings entered in
> the Registrar of Copyrights under entry numbers A-65629/2003 and 65630/2003,
> or in any other similar drawings that may be in the possession of the
> defendants;
> (ii)An order restraining the defendants, together with their employees,
> agents, servants and all other acting on their behalf, from threatening the
> plaintiffs including the members of plaintiff No.1 and from interfering with
> the manufacture of steel tubes by them on the basis of the drawings
> registered as “artistic works” under Nos.A-
65629/2003 and Nos.A-65630/2003 or any other  9/19
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis/ Crl.O.P.Nos.22493 & 23891 of 2015 similar
drawings in the possession of the defendants or that they may make in future;
(iii)An order restraining the defendants, together with their employees,
agents servants and all others acting on their behalf, from defaming the
plaintiffs including the members of plaintiff No.1, by alleging that their
activity of manufacturing steel tubes amounts to any kind of copyright
infringement.
30.As far as other reliefs are concerned, the plaintiffs are entitled for
punitive damages to the tune of Rs.2 lac against the relief of damages claimed
by the plaintiffs who are also entitled for costs. The decree be drawn
accordingly. All pending applications stand disposed of. ”
10.Learned Senior Counsel would submit that in view of the above orders, no
right either Copyright or Patent Right subsists in favour of the de facto
complainant or his father, while so, in order to blackmail the genuine
manufactures and to obtain illegal gains, the de facto complainant in
collusion with the 1st respondent had preferred a false  10/19
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis/ Crl.O.P.Nos.22493 & 23891 of 2015 complaint,
based on which, he had been continuing to harass the manufactures of pipes
like that of the petitioners.
11.The learned Senior Counsel would further submit that the entire proceedings
is nothing but mere abuse of process of law by which, the de facto complainant
had obtained unjust enrichment under the threat of arrest and seizure of the
pipes from the factories belonging to genuine manufacturers. He would
reiterate that the entire registration of FIR and further proceedings is
nothing but an abuse of process of law and would seek to quash the FIR. The
learned senior counsel would further submit that based on the false complaint
and the registration of the case, the petitioner had been subjected to
harassment and loss. After registration of the FIR, the 1st respondent police
approached the learned Judicial Magistrate, Vaniyambadi and obtained search
warrant on 20.06.2015 and also approached the Principal Civil Judge and JMFC
at Nelmangala and obtained permission to execute the search warrant. Pursuant
to which, the factory premises of the petitioner was searched on 01.09.2015.
Though, search warrant had been issued only to search the premises situated at
M/s.Calcutta Tubes India Private Limited at RRMR Extension at Bengaluru, the
premises of the petitioner at Budhihal Village,  11/19
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis/ Crl.O.P.Nos.22493 & 23891 of 2015 Nelmangala
Taluk, Bengaluru Rural District was searched and 985 pipes were seized. The
value of the seized pipes is worth about Rs.17,73,000/- on the date of seizure
and later, they were transported and they are now in the custody of the
respondent. Due to stay granted by this Court, the petitioner in
Crl.O.P.No.22493 of 2015 was unable to take return of the pipes and thereby,
M.P.No.2 of 2015 in Crl.O.P.No.22493 of 2015 had been filed seeking for a
direction to the 1st respondent police, to produce the seized 985 pipes before
the learned Principal District Munsif cum Judicial Magistrate, Vaniyambadi and
to return the pipes to the petitioner.
12.Mr.Manishankar, learned Senior Counsel appearing for the 5th petitioner/A5
in Crl.O.P.No.23891/2015/A5, would submit that the petitioner is a genuine
manufacturer of pipes. Based on the false complaint made with suppressions of
vital facts, the case has been registered and the petitioner has been
subjected to continuous harassment. He would submit that the fact remains that
as on date, the Copyright which was wrongly given to the de facto complainant
has been expunged by the order of the Copyright Board, Delhi, dated 04.07.2008
in Case No.2 of 2006. Further, the complaint is not clear as to whether  12/19
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis/ Crl.O.P.Nos.22493 & 23891 of 2015 the de
facto complainant claims to have got Copyright or a patent right. Admittedly,
as on date, the defacto complainant does not have copyright as claimed by him.
The copyright granted to his father had been expunged. Once the Copyright
granted to the de facto complainant's father has been expunged, he has no
right to maintain a complaint. He would submit that when the de facto
complainant does not have any copyright, the complaint filed invoking the
provisions of the Copyright Act, is liable to be quashed.
13.In support of his contention he would rely upon on the Judgment of the
Hon'ble Apex Court in Krishika Lulla v. Shyam Vithalrao Devkatta reported in
(2016) 2 SCC 521. Wherein, the Apex Court has held that when there is no
copyright, the question of infringement will not arise.
14.Mr.C.Iyyappa Raj, learned Additional Public Prosecutor would vehemently
oppose stating that there is no bar in entertaining the second complaint when
a case is made out. He would submit that the case has  13/19
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis/ Crl.O.P.Nos.22493 & 23891 of 2015 been
registered only on the directions of this Court and that the case is only at
the initial stage of investigation and the complaint cannot be quashed at the
threshold, without any enquiry or investigation being conducted. He would
further submit that because of stay, there is no progress in this case and the
investigation could not be conducted.
15.Mr.ARL.Sundaresan, learned Senior Counsel appearing for the 2nd
respondent/de facto complainant would submit that in respect of a similar
complaint, some other accused similar to that of the petitioners have
approached this Court by filing Criminal Original Petitions in
Crl.O.P.Nos.17500, 17503 of 2008 and this Court by an order dated 28.10.2014,
had dismissed the quash petitions stating that the ingredients on the offences
are satisfied and he would oppose for quashing the Criminal Original
Petitions. However, he would fairly submit that the copyright granted to the
father of the defacto complainant has been expunged.
16.At this juncture, Mr.C.Manishankar, learned senior counsel would submit
that this Court, while dismissing the Crl.O.P.Nos.17500  14/19
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis/ Crl.O.P.Nos.22493 & 23891 of 2015 and
17503/2008, had decided on the wrong premises that the Trademark of the de
facto complainant was infringed, whereas, it is the admitted case of the
complainant that the Trademark was not infringed. He would submit that much
water has flown down the bridge after the earlier dismissal and as on date the
de facto complainant has no Copyright as allegedly claimed by him and thereby,
the complaint itself cannot be maintained and thereby further proceedings is
nothing but an abuse of process of law. He would further submit that as on
date, the copyright granted in favour of the defacto complainant's father has
been expunged by the Copyright Board, Delhi in Case No.2 of 2006, dated
04.07.2008 and the appeal preferred by the father of the defacto complainant
has also been dismissed and as on date, the defacto complainant does not have
any copyright.
17.Heard the counsels and perused the materials placed on record.
18.In this case, the defacto complainant has preferred the complaint based on
the Copyright alleged to be granted to his father. The Federation of
Industries of India through its General Secretary had filed  15/19
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis/ Crl.O.P.Nos.22493 & 23891 of 2015 Case No.2
of 2006, before the Copyright Board at Delhi for expunging the entries in the
Copyright Register and the Copyright Board, Delhi by an order dated 04.07.2008
had expunged the entries relating to registration granted to the defacto
complainant's father. Against that order, the father of the defacto
complainant had preferred C.M.A.No.2859 of 2008 which came to be dismissed
later. Further, the Federation of Industries of India and another have also
filed a Civil Suit before the High Court of Delhi in CS (OS) No.596 of 2007,
seeking to declare that copyright does not subsist in the drawings entered in
the Register of Copyrights under entry Nos.A-65629/2003 and A- 65630/2003 or
in any other similar drawings that may be in the possession of defacto
complainants father and the suit came to be allowed in favour of the
Federation of Industries of India by order dated 18.11.2011, declaring that
the copyright does not subsist in favour of the defacto complainants father
and further the defacto complainant's father was also directed to pay punitive
damages to the tune of Rs.2 Lakhs to the Federation of Industries of India for
making a false claim. The fact remains that, as on date, no copyright subsists
either in favour of the father of the defacto complainant or the defacto
complainant who claims  16/19 https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis/
Crl.O.P.Nos.22493 & 23891 of 2015 through his father. When such being so, when
there is no copyright, the question of infringement will not arise as held by
the Hon'ble Apex Court in Krishika Lulla v. Shyam Vithalrao Devkatta stated
supra and thereby, the complaint cannot be maintained. However, the pendency
of the FIR is nothing but an abuse of process of law.
19.In view of the above, this Court is inclined to allow the Criminal Original
Petition filed by the petitioners and quash the FIR in Crime No.33 of 2015, in
respect of the petitioner.
20.Accordingly, these Criminal Original Petitions stand allowed. and the
proceedings in Crime No.33 of 2015 dated 08.04.2015, on the file of the Sub-
Inspector of police, Thimmapettai Police Station, Vaniyambadi Town Circle,
Vellore District, shall stand quashed. Consequently, connected Miscellaneous
Petitions are also disposed.
21.In view of quashing of FIR, M.P.No.2 of 2015 filed by the petitioner in
Crl.O.P.No.22493 of 2015, stands allowed. A direction is  17/19
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis/ Crl.O.P.Nos.22493 & 23891 of 2015 issued to
the learned Principal District Munsif cum Judicial Magistrate, Vaniyambadi,
Vellore District, to return the 985 pipes seized by the 1 st respondent in
connection with Crime No.33 of 2015 to the petitioner. If the pipes are not
produced before the Court the 1st respondent is directed to return the pipes
seized in Crime No.33 of 2015 to the petitioner in Crl.O.P.No.22493 of 2015
forthwith.
17.02.2021 Index:Yes/No Internet: Yes/No ssi To The Sub-Inspector of Police,
Thimmapettai Police Station, Vaniyambadi Town Circle, Vellore District.
18/19 https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis/ Crl.O.P.Nos.22493 & 23891 of 2015
A.D.JAGADISH CHANDIRA, J.
ssi Crl.O.P.Nos.22493 & 23891 of 2015 and M.P.Nos.1 and 2 of 2015 in
Crl.O.P.No.22493 of 2015 17.02.2021  19/19 https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis/
20.Accordingly, these Criminal Original Petitions stand allowed. and the
proceedings in Crime No.33 of 2015 dated 08.04.2015, on the file of the Sub-
Inspector of police, Thimmapettai Police Station, Vaniyambadi Town Circle,
Vellore District, shall stand quashed. Consequently, connected Miscellaneous
Petitions are also disposed.
21.In view of quashing of FIR, M.P.No.2 of 2015 filed by the petitioner in
Crl.O.P.No.22493 of 2015, stands allowed. A direction is  17/19
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis/ Crl.O.P.Nos.22493 & 23891 of 2015 issued to
the learned Principal District Munsif cum Judicial Magistrate, Vaniyambadi,
Vellore District, to return the 985 pipes seized by the 1 st respondent in
connection with Crime No.33 of 2015 to the petitioner. If the pipes are not
produced before the Court the 1st respondent is directed to return the pipes
seized in Crime No.33 of 2015 to the petitioner in Crl.O.P.No.22493 of 2015
forthwith.
17.02.2021 Index:Yes/No Internet: Yes/No ssi To The Sub-Inspector of Police,
Thimmapettai Police Station, Vaniyambadi Town Circle, Vellore District.
                                                                            Crl.O.P.No.23891/2015
                                                            Vs.
                         1.The State Represented by
                         The Sub-Inspector of Police,
                         Thimmapettai Police Station,
                         Vaniyambadi Town Circle,
                         Vellore District.                            ...Respondent/Complainant
                                                                                    both Crl.O.Ps
                         2.K.Boopathi,
                         S/o.G.K.Kesavalu Naidu @ Kesavan           ... Respondent/ de facto
                                                                     complainant in both Crl.O.Ps
                         1/19
    https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis/
                                                                           Crl.O.P.Nos.22493 & 23891 of 2015
                         Prayer in Crl.O.P.No.22493/ 2015:        Criminal Original Petition filed
                         under Section 482 Cr.P.C., to call for the records and to quash the First
                         Information Report in Crime No.33 of 2015 dated 08.04.2015, on the file
                         of      the   Sub-Inspector   of   police,   Thimmapettai     Police     Station,
                         Vaniyambadi Town Circle, Vellore District registered for the offence
                         under Sections 468, 471, 418, 420 IPC and 51, 63, 65(A) of the
20.Accordingly, these Criminal Original Petitions stand allowed. and the
proceedings in Crime No.33 of 2015 dated 08.04.2015, on the file of the Sub-
Inspector of police, Thimmapettai Police Station, Vaniyambadi Town Circle,
Vellore District, shall stand quashed. Consequently, connected Miscellaneous
Petitions are also disposed.
21.In view of quashing of FIR, M.P.No.2 of 2015 filed by the petitioner in
Crl.O.P.No.22493 of 2015, stands allowed. A direction is  17/19
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis/ Crl.O.P.Nos.22493 & 23891 of 2015 issued to
the learned Principal District Munsif cum Judicial Magistrate, Vaniyambadi,
Vellore District, to return the 985 pipes seized by the 1 st respondent in
connection with Crime No.33 of 2015 to the petitioner. If the pipes are not
produced before the Court the 1st respondent is directed to return the pipes
seized in Crime No.33 of 2015 to the petitioner in Crl.O.P.No.22493 of 2015
forthwith.
17.02.2021 Index:Yes/No Internet: Yes/No ssi To The Sub-Inspector of Police,
Thimmapettai Police Station, Vaniyambadi Town Circle, Vellore District.
                                                                            Crl.O.P.No.23891/2015
                                                            Vs.
                         1.The State Represented by
                         The Sub-Inspector of Police,
                         Thimmapettai Police Station,
                         Vaniyambadi Town Circle,
                         Vellore District.                            ...Respondent/Complainant
                                                                                    both Crl.O.Ps
                         2.K.Boopathi,
                         S/o.G.K.Kesavalu Naidu @ Kesavan           ... Respondent/ de facto
                                                                     complainant in both Crl.O.Ps
                         1/19
    https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis/
                                                                           Crl.O.P.Nos.22493 & 23891 of 2015
                         Prayer in Crl.O.P.No.22493/ 2015:        Criminal Original Petition filed
                         under Section 482 Cr.P.C., to call for the records and to quash the First
                         Information Report in Crime No.33 of 2015 dated 08.04.2015, on the file
                         of      the   Sub-Inspector   of   police,   Thimmapettai     Police     Station,
                         Vaniyambadi Town Circle, Vellore District registered for the offence
                         under Sections 468, 471, 418, 420 IPC and 51, 63, 65(A) of the
20.Accordingly, these Criminal Original Petitions stand allowed. and the
proceedings in Crime No.33 of 2015 dated 08.04.2015, on the file of the Sub-
Inspector of police, Thimmapettai Police Station, Vaniyambadi Town Circle,
Vellore District, shall stand quashed. Consequently, connected Miscellaneous
Petitions are also disposed.
21.In view of quashing of FIR, M.P.No.2 of 2015 filed by the petitioner in
Crl.O.P.No.22493 of 2015, stands allowed. A direction is  17/19
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis/ Crl.O.P.Nos.22493 & 23891 of 2015 issued to
the learned Principal District Munsif cum Judicial Magistrate, Vaniyambadi,
Vellore District, to return the 985 pipes seized by the 1 st respondent in
connection with Crime No.33 of 2015 to the petitioner. If the pipes are not
produced before the Court the 1st respondent is directed to return the pipes
seized in Crime No.33 of 2015 to the petitioner in Crl.O.P.No.22493 of 2015
forthwith.
17.02.2021 Index:Yes/No Internet: Yes/No ssi To The Sub-Inspector of Police,
Thimmapettai Police Station, Vaniyambadi Town Circle, Vellore District.
                                                                            Crl.O.P.No.23891/2015
                                                            Vs.
                         1.The State Represented by
                         The Sub-Inspector of Police,
                         Thimmapettai Police Station,
                         Vaniyambadi Town Circle,
                         Vellore District.                            ...Respondent/Complainant
                                                                                    both Crl.O.Ps
                         2.K.Boopathi,
                         S/o.G.K.Kesavalu Naidu @ Kesavan           ... Respondent/ de facto
                                                                     complainant in both Crl.O.Ps
                         1/19
    https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis/
                                                                           Crl.O.P.Nos.22493 & 23891 of 2015
                         Prayer in Crl.O.P.No.22493/ 2015:        Criminal Original Petition filed
                         under Section 482 Cr.P.C., to call for the records and to quash the First
                         Information Report in Crime No.33 of 2015 dated 08.04.2015, on the file
                         of      the   Sub-Inspector   of   police,   Thimmapettai     Police     Station,
                         Vaniyambadi Town Circle, Vellore District registered for the offence
                         under Sections 468, 471, 418, 420 IPC and 51, 63, 65(A) of the
                         Copyright Act, 1957 and subsequent search and seizure made.
                         Prayer in Crl.O.P.No.23891/ 2015:        Criminal Original Petition filed
                         under Section 482 Cr.P.C., to call for the records relating to the complaint
                         in Crime No.33 of 2015, on the file of the 1st respondent and quash the
                         same.
                                   For Petitioner in
                                         Crl.O.P.No.22493/2015: Mr.A.Ramesh, Senior Counsel
                                                                for Mr.C.Arun Kumar
                                   For Petitioner in
                                         Crl.O.P.No.23891/2015: Mr.C.Manishankar, Senior Counsel
                                                                for Mr.A.Velmurugan
20.Accordingly, these Criminal Original Petitions stand allowed. and the
proceedings in Crime No.33 of 2015 dated 08.04.2015, on the file of the Sub-
Inspector of police, Thimmapettai Police Station, Vaniyambadi Town Circle,
Vellore District, shall stand quashed. Consequently, connected Miscellaneous
Petitions are also disposed.
21.In view of quashing of FIR, M.P.No.2 of 2015 filed by the petitioner in
Crl.O.P.No.22493 of 2015, stands allowed. A direction is  17/19
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis/ Crl.O.P.Nos.22493 & 23891 of 2015 issued to
the learned Principal District Munsif cum Judicial Magistrate, Vaniyambadi,
Vellore District, to return the 985 pipes seized by the 1 st respondent in
connection with Crime No.33 of 2015 to the petitioner. If the pipes are not
produced before the Court the 1st respondent is directed to return the pipes
seized in Crime No.33 of 2015 to the petitioner in Crl.O.P.No.22493 of 2015
forthwith.
17.02.2021 Index:Yes/No Internet: Yes/No ssi To The Sub-Inspector of Police,
Thimmapettai Police Station, Vaniyambadi Town Circle, Vellore District.
                                                                            Crl.O.P.No.23891/2015
                                                            Vs.
                         1.The State Represented by
                         The Sub-Inspector of Police,
                         Thimmapettai Police Station,
                         Vaniyambadi Town Circle,
                         Vellore District.                            ...Respondent/Complainant
                                                                                    both Crl.O.Ps
                         2.K.Boopathi,
                         S/o.G.K.Kesavalu Naidu @ Kesavan           ... Respondent/ de facto
                                                                     complainant in both Crl.O.Ps
                         1/19
    https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis/
                                                                           Crl.O.P.Nos.22493 & 23891 of 2015
                         Prayer in Crl.O.P.No.22493/ 2015:        Criminal Original Petition filed
                         under Section 482 Cr.P.C., to call for the records and to quash the First
                         Information Report in Crime No.33 of 2015 dated 08.04.2015, on the file
                         of      the   Sub-Inspector   of   police,   Thimmapettai     Police     Station,
                         Vaniyambadi Town Circle, Vellore District registered for the offence
                         under Sections 468, 471, 418, 420 IPC and 51, 63, 65(A) of the
                         Copyright Act, 1957 and subsequent search and seizure made.
                         Prayer in Crl.O.P.No.23891/ 2015:        Criminal Original Petition filed
                         under Section 482 Cr.P.C., to call for the records relating to the complaint
                         in Crime No.33 of 2015, on the file of the 1st respondent and quash the
                         same.
                                   For Petitioner in
                                         Crl.O.P.No.22493/2015: Mr.A.Ramesh, Senior Counsel
                                                                for Mr.C.Arun Kumar
                                   For Petitioner in
                                         Crl.O.P.No.23891/2015: Mr.C.Manishankar, Senior Counsel
                                                                for Mr.A.Velmurugan
20.Accordingly, these Criminal Original Petitions stand allowed. and the
proceedings in Crime No.33 of 2015 dated 08.04.2015, on the file of the Sub-
Inspector of police, Thimmapettai Police Station, Vaniyambadi Town Circle,
Vellore District, shall stand quashed. Consequently, connected Miscellaneous
Petitions are also disposed.
21.In view of quashing of FIR, M.P.No.2 of 2015 filed by the petitioner in
Crl.O.P.No.22493 of 2015, stands allowed. A direction is  17/19
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis/ Crl.O.P.Nos.22493 & 23891 of 2015 issued to
the learned Principal District Munsif cum Judicial Magistrate, Vaniyambadi,
Vellore District, to return the 985 pipes seized by the 1 st respondent in
connection with Crime No.33 of 2015 to the petitioner. If the pipes are not
produced before the Court the 1st respondent is directed to return the pipes
seized in Crime No.33 of 2015 to the petitioner in Crl.O.P.No.22493 of 2015
forthwith.
17.02.2021 Index:Yes/No Internet: Yes/No ssi To The Sub-Inspector of Police,
Thimmapettai Police Station, Vaniyambadi Town Circle, Vellore District.
