Delhi High Court
Procter & Gamble Company vs Joy Creators & Others on 21 February, 2011
Author: V. K. Jain
             THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
    %                     Judgment Reserved on: 15.02.2011
                          Judgment Pronounced on: 21.02.2011
    + CS(OS) No. 2085/2008
    Procter & Gamble Company                       .....Plaintiff
                                - versus -
    Joy Creators & Others                       .....Defendants
    Advocates who appeared in this case:
    For the Plaintiff:      Mr. Peeyoosh Kalra with Mr.
                            Kamal Sharma, Advs.
    For the Defendant:            None.
    CORAM:-
    HON'BLE MR JUSTICE V.K. JAIN
    1.
Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed to see the judgment? Yes
2\. To be referred to the Reporter or not? Yes
3\. Whether the judgment should be reported Yes in Digest?
2085/2008 Page 27 of 29 that well known brand. If punitive damages are not
awarded in such cases, it would only encourage unscrupulous persons who
actuated by dishonest intention, use the well-reputed trademark of another
person, so as to encash on the goodwill and reputation which that mark enjoys
in the market, with impunity, and then avoid payment of damages by remaining
absent from the Court, thereby depriving the plaintiff an opportunity to
establish actual profit earned by him from use of the infringing mark, which
can be computed only on the basis of his account books. This would, therefore,
amount to putting premium on dishonesty and give an unfair advantage to an
unscrupulous infringer over those who have a bona fide defence to make and
therefore come forward to contest the suit and place their case before the
Court.
24\. For the reasons given in the preceding paragraph, the defendants are
hereby restrained from manufacturing, selling or marketing age defying
foundation or any other product in respect of which the plaintiff holds the
registered word mark OLAY TOTAL EFFECTS. The plaintiff is also CS(OS)No.
3\. Whether the judgment should be reported Yes in Digest?
V.K. JAIN, J
1\. This is a suit for permanent injunction, rendition of accounts, damages
and delivery up of the infringing material. The plaintiff is a fortune 500
company, having business operations in 80 countries, dealing in a large number
of products and employing 1,38,000/- persons. CS(OS)No. 2085/2008 Page 1 of 29
The plaintiff company is also engaged in the business of manufacturing and
selling skin care and personal cleansing products, including anti-aging
moisturizer under the trademark OLAY. The plaintiff company is also using the
trademarks OLAY TOTAL EFFECTS and TOTAL EFFECTS in respect of anti-aging
products. The plaintiff holds registration in respect of trademark OLAY TOTAL
EFFECTS in Class 3 of Schedule 4 of Trademarks Act, 1999 in respect of
Foundation, Make-up Base, Skin Moisturizing Cream, Lotions and Gels, Skin
Whitening Preparations, Facial and Skin Masks, Skin Tonners, Cleansers and
Astringents, Eye Masks, Eye Gel Patch, Eye Creams, Lotions and Gels, Skin and
Body Massage Creams, Soaps (excluding soaps for fabric use), Perfumeries,
Essential Oils, Dentifrices, Shampoo, Conditioners, Hair Styling Preparations,
Hair Care Preparations and Hair Colouring Preparations. It also holds
registration in respect of the trademark OLAY in Class 3 of the same Schedule.
The plaintiff claims turnover of $236 million, $282 million and $344 million
for the years 2005-2006, 2006-2007 and 2007-2008 respectively in respect of
products sold under the name OLAY TOTAL EFFECTS/TOTAL EFFECTS. The plaintiff
company claims CS(OS)No. 2085/2008 Page 2 of 29 to have incurred expenditure
amounting to $89 million, $99 million and $111 million respectively during the
aforesaid years, on brand support activities undertaken by it across the
world. It is further alleged that the plaintiff launched its products under
the trademark OLAY TOTAL EFFECTS/TOTAL EFFECTS in India in the year 2007 and
has been giving wide publicity to such products, which had sale amounting to
Rs.266.65 million in India during the period from 1st July, 2007 to 30th July,
2008. The plaintiff company has incurred expenditure of Rs.263 million in
India alone on promotion of the aforesaid trademarks.
2\. It is alleged that in or about April, 2008, the plaintiff company came
across an advertisement of application No.1224385 for registration of the
label, which contains the mark JOY ULTRA LOOK TOTAL EFFECTS in respect of
Soap, Perfumery Essential Oils, Hair Lotions and Creams, Dentifrices etc.,
claiming use of the aforesaid mark/label since April, 2001. The plaintiff
filed a notice of opposition to the registration sought by the defendants and
the opposition proceedings are stated to be pending. It is further alleged
that on carrying investigation, the plaintiff came to know that the defendants
are conducting business CS(OS)No. 2085/2008 Page 3 of 29 throughout the
country including Delhi using the above referred trademarks and defendant Nos.
1 and 2 have also licensed the aforesaid mark to defendant No.3, which is
manufacturing and marketing products bearing the offending label. It is
further alleged that the words TOTAL EFFECTS are being used by the defendants
only in respect of anti-aging/age defying products and the adoption of the
mark TOTAL EFFECTS in respect of identical products cannot be a mere co-
incidence and indicates a dishonest and fraudulent intention on their part to
derive pecuniary benefits from using the impugned mark/label. The plaintiff,
thus, claims infringement of its registered and well known trademark OLAY
TOTAL EFFECTS. The plaintiff has sought injunction restraining the defendants
from using the trademark TOTAL EFFECTS or any other mark deceptively similar
to the trademark of the plaintiff. It has further sought an injunction
restraining the defendants from passing off the plaintiffâ€Ÿs trademarks OLAY
TOTAL EFFECTS/TOTAL EFFECTS and from applying and obtaining registration in
respect of the impugned trademark or any deceptive variation thereof. The
plaintiff has also sought damages amounting to Rs.50 lakhs besides seeking
CS(OS)No. 2085/2008 Page 4 of 29 rendition of accounts and delivery up of the
infringing packaging material etc.
3\. The defendants filed the written statement contesting the suit. They took
a preliminary objection that this Court has no territorial jurisdiction to try
the suit since defendant No.1 does not carry any activity nor does it sell any
product in Delhi. On merits, it has been admitted that the defendants are
engaged in the business of manufacturing, marketing and selling cosmetic
products including soap, perfumery, essential oils, hair lotions and creams,
dentifrices etc. The defendants claim to be leading manufacturers and traders
in respect of various cosmetic products, carrying business since 1988-89 and
extensively selling various products under the trademark JOY. It is alleged
that the defendants adopted the label JOY ULTRA LOOK TOTAL EFFECTS with the
words ULTRA LOOK being given prominence on the label and the word JOY being
written above the word ULTRA LOOK. It is also pointed out that the words TOTAL
EFFECTS written below the words ULTRA LOOK are much smaller in font size. The
present label is alleged to have been adopted by the defendants in the year
2001. The defendants claim to have incurred CS(OS)No. 2085/2008 Page 5 of 29
advertisement expenditure of Rs.69,76,797/-, Rs.46,53,621/- and Rs,64,46,355/-
in the years 2005-2006, 2006-2007 and 2007-2008 respectively. They also claim
to have incurred Rs.2.5 crores towards advertisement and publicity expenses
between 1st April, 2008 and 28th February, 2009. It is also alleged that the
defendants had sale of Rs.12,26,57,801/- in the year 2006-07,
Rs.19,41,41,916/- in the year 2007-08 and Rs.31,66,82,164.55 between 1st
April, 2008 and 28th February, 2009. It is further alleged that on receipt of
notice from the plaintiff, the defendants, without prejudice to their rights
and contentions, agreed to delete the words TOTAL EFFECTS on the plaintiff
withdrawing the suit and not claiming any damages or costs. The plaintiff,
however, refused to withdraw the suit. It is also claimed that the defendant
Nos.3 and 4 have no connection with defendant Nos. 1 and 2 and have been
wrongly joined as parties to this suit only with a view to raise jurisdiction
of this Court. It is further alleged that the defendant Nos. 1 and 2 are the
prior user of the words TOTAL EFFECTS and, therefore, have a superior right of
use of the trademark TOTAL EFFECTS.
4\. Defendant No.4 was proceeded ex-parte vide order CS(OS)No. 2085/2008 Page
6 of 29 dated 18th December, 2008. Defendant Nos. 1 to 3 were proceeded ex
parte vide order dated 24th January, 2011.
5\. Vide interim order dated 1st October, 2008, this Court restrained the
defendants from using the trademark TOTAL EFFECTS or any other deceptive
variation thereof, singularly or in conjunction with any other word in
relation to their products and services. The interim order was made absolute
on 24th January, 2011.
6\. The plaintiff has filed affidavit of its constituted attorney Mr. Cyril
Abrol by way of ex parte evidence. In his affidavit by way of evidence, Mr.
Abrol, supported the case set up in the plaint and stated on oath that the
plaintiff company had sale of $236 million, $282 million and $344 million for
the years 2005-2006, 2006-2007 and 2007-2008 respectively in respect of
products sold under the name OLAY TOTAL EFFECTS/TOTAL EFFECTS and had incurred
expenditure amounting to $89 million, $99 million and $111 million
respectively during the aforesaid years, on brand support activities. He also
stated that the plaintiff company had sale of Rs.266.65 million in respect of
the products bearing trademark OLAY TOTAL EFFECTS/TOTAL EFFECTS during the
period 1st July, 2007 to 30th June, CS(OS)No. 2085/2008 Page 7 of 29 2008 and
had incurred expenditure of Rs.263 million towards promotion of the brand in
India, availing the services of former Miss Universe Sushmita Sen for the
purpose.
He further stated that the products involved in the present suit are cosmetic
preparations, which are akin to pharmaceutical preparations, requiring higher
degree of judicial protection, so that there is no confusion to the ordinary
customer.
7\. Exhibit PW1/5 (Colly) is the certificate issued by the Trademark Registry
in respect of registration Nos.903943 and 895212. Vide registration No.895212
the Word Mark OLAY has been registered in the name of plaintiff company in
respect of lip moisturizers and conditioners, liquid and powder foundation,
make-up base, skin moisturizing creams, lotions, and gels, skin whitening
preparations, facial and skin masks, skin toners, cleansers and astringents,
eye masks, eye creams, lotions and gels, skin and body massage creams, soaps,
perfumeries, essential oils, dentifrices, shampoos, conditioners, hair styling
preparations, hair care preparations and hair coloring preparations included
in Class 03. Vide CS(OS)No. 2085/2008 Page 8 of 29 registration No.903943 the
Word Mark OLAY TOTAL EFFECTS has been registered in the name of the plaintiff
company in respect of foundation, make-up base skin, moisturizing creams,
lotions and gels, skin whitening preparations, facial and skin masks, skin
toners, cleansers and astringents, eye masks, eye gel patch, eye creams,
lotions and gels, skin and body massage creams, soaps, (excluding soaps for
fabric use), perfumeries essential oils, shampoos, conditioners, hair styling
preparations, hair care preparations and hair colouring preparations. The
registration of the aforesaid trademarks in favour of the plaintiff has not
been disputed in the written statement of defendant Nos. 1 to 3.
8\. Exhibit PW1/17 (Colly), which includes promotional material of defendant
No.1 would show that the defendant has been using the words, TOTAL EFFECTS
etc. on its packaging. A perusal of Exhibit PW1/14, which is an advertisement
of the defendant Ram Autar Gupta, who is using the trade name JOY CREATORS
would show that he had sought registration of the label bearing JOY ULTRA LOOK
TOTAL EFFECTS in respect of soap, perfumery essential oils, hair lotions and
creams and dentifrices for CS(OS)No. 2085/2008 Page 9 of 29 sale in India and
for export. A perusal of the packing in which age defying solution is sold by
defendant N.3 Joy Beauty Care Private Limited would show that the words JOY,
ULTRA LOOK and TOTAL EFFECTS have been used on the bottle. A perusal of the
invoice Exhibit PW1/19 would show that the defendant No.4 SKS Instruments
(India) sold U.L. Foundation (Total Effects) in Delhi on 9th June, 2008.
9\. Section 28 of Trade Marks Act, 1999 gives to the registered proprietor of
the trade mark the exclusive right to the use of the trade mark in relation to
the goods or services in respect of which the trade mark is registered and to
obtain relief in respect of infringement of the trade mark in the manner
provided by this Act. The action for infringement is, thus, a remedy provided
by Trade Marks Act to the registered proprietor of a registered trade mark in
case there is an invasion of the statutory right provided to him for use of
that trade mark in relation to the goods for which the trade mark has been
registered in his name. Section 29(1) of Trade Marks Act, 1999 provides that a
registered trade mark is infringed by a person who, not being a registered
proprietor or a person using by way of permitted use, uses in the course of
trade, a mark which is CS(OS)No. 2085/2008 Page 10 of 29 identical with, or
deceptively similar to, the trade mark in relation to goods or services in
respect of which the trade mark is registered and in such manner as to render
the use of the mark likely to be taken as being used as a trade mark.
10\. It is also a settled proposition of law, which was reiterated by Supreme
Court in Kaviraj Pandit Durga Dutt Sharma v. Navaratna Pharmaceutical
Laboratories, PTC (Suppl) (2) 680 (SC), that if the defendant resorts to
colourable use of a registered trade mark such an act of the defendant would
give rise to an action for passing off as well as for infringement. In an
action based upon infringement of a registered trade mark if the mark used by
the defendant is visually, phonetically or otherwise so close to the
registered trade mark of the plaintiff that it is found to be an imitation of
the registered trade mark, the statutory right of the owner of the registered
trade mark is taken as infringed. In such a case, if it is found that the
defendant has adopted the essential features of the registered trade mark of
the plaintiff, he would be liable even if he is able to establish that on
account of packaging, get up and other writings on his goods or on the
container in which the goods are sold by CS(OS)No. 2085/2008 Page 11 of 29
him, it is possible to clearly distinguish his goods from the goods of the
plaintiff. On the other hand in a case of passing off if it is shown that on
account of these factors it is very much possible for the purchaser to
identify the origin of the goods and thereby distinguish the goods of the
defendant from the goods of the plaintiff, the defendant may not be held
liable.
11\. In Corn Products Refining Co. vs. Shangrila Food Products Ltd. 1960 (1)
SCR 968, the Supreme Court observed that the question whether two competing
marks are so similar as to be likely to deceive or cause confusion is one of
first impression and it is for the court to decide it. The question has to be
approached from the point of view of a man of average intelligence and
imperfect recollection.
12\. In Parle Products (P) Ltd. v. J.P. & Co., Mysore, AIR 1972 SC 1359,
Supreme Court inter alia observed as under:-
> According to Karlyâ€Ÿs Law of Trade Marks and Trade Names (9th Edition
> Paragraph 838) "Two marks, when placed side by side, may exhibit many and
> various differences, yet the main idea left on the mind by both may be the
> same. A person acquainted with the one mark, and not having the two side by
> side for CS(OS)No. 2085/2008 Page 12 of 29 comparison, might well be
> deceived, if the goods were allowed to be impressed with the second mark,
> into a belief that he was dealing with goods which bore the same mark as
> that with which he was acquainted.
> It would be too much to expect that persons dealing with trademarked goods,
> and relying, as they frequently do, upon marks, should be able to remember
> the exact details of the marks upon the goods with which they are in the
> habit of dealing. Marks are remembered rather by general impressions or by
> some significant detail than by any photographic recollection of the whole.
> Moreover, variations in detail might well be supposed by customers to have
> been made by the owners of the trade mark they are already acquainted with
> for reasons of their own.
> It is therefore clear that in order to come to the conclusion whether one
> mark is deceptively similar to another, the broad and essential features of
> the two are to be considered. They should not be placed side by side to find
> out if there are any differences in the design and if so, whether they are
> of such character as to prevent one design from being mistaken for the
> other. It would be enough if the impugned mark bears such an overall
> similarity to the registered mark as would be likely to mislead a person
> usually dealing with one to accept the other if offered to him.
CS(OS)No. 2085/2008 Page 13 of 29
13\. It is not necessary that in order to constitute infringement, the
impugned trademark should be an absolute replica of the registered trademark
of the plaintiff. When the mark of the defendant is not identical to the mark
of the plaintiff, it would be necessary for the plaintiff to establish that
the mark being used by the defendant resembles his mark to such an extent that
it is likely to deceive or cause confusion and that the user of the impugned
trademark is in relation to the goods in respect of which the plaintiff has
obtained registration in his favour. It will be sufficient if the plaintiff is
able to show that the trademark adopted by the defendant resembles its
trademark in a substantial degree, on account of extensive use of the main
features found in his trademark. In fact, any intelligent person, seeking to
encash upon the goodwill and reputation of a well-established trademark, would
make some minor changes here and there so as to claim in the event of a suit
or other proceeding, being initiated against him that the trademark being used
by him, does not constitute infringement of the trademark, ownership of which
vests in some other person. But, such rather minor variations or
distinguishing features would not deprive the CS(OS)No. 2085/2008 Page 14 of
29 plaintiff of injunction in case resemblance in the two trademarks is found
to be substantial, to the extent that the impugned trademark is found to be
similar to the registered trademark of the plaintiff. But, such malpractices
are not acceptable and such a use cannot be permitted since this is actuated
by a dishonest intention to take pecuniary advantage of the goodwill and brand
image which the registered mark enjoys, it is also likely to create at least
initial confusion in the mind of a consumer with average intelligence and
imperfect recollection. It may also result in giving an unfair advantage to
the infringer by creating an initial interest in the customer, who on account
of such deceptive use of the registered trademark may end up buying the
product of the infringer, though after knowing, either on account of
difference in packaging etc. or on account of use of prefixes or suffixes that
the product which he is buying is not the product of the plaintiff, but is the
product of the defendant.
14\. As held by the Supreme Court in Amritdhara Pharmacy v. Satyadeo Gupta,
AIR 1963 SC 449, whether a trade name is likely to deceive or cause confusion
by its CS(OS)No. 2085/2008 Page 15 of 29 resemblance to another mark already
registered is a matter of first impression and the standard of comparison to
be adopted in judging the resemblance is from the point of view of a man of
average intelligence and imperfect recollection. What is important to keep in
mind that the purchaser does not have both the marks lying side by side for
comparison and, therefore, chances of deception are rather strong.
15\. Every person has a legal right to sell his goods or render services using
any trade name for the purpose. With the passage of time the goods sold or the
services rendered by him, as the case may be, may acquire certain reputation
or goodwill in the market which becomes the property of that person and needs
to be protected by the court. It is not permissible for any other person to
start selling goods or rendering services either using the same name or
imitating that name so as to cause injury to that person and enrich himself at
the cost of the person who has already been using that name and whose mark has
acquired a certain reputation with the passage of time and on account of the
quality of the goods sold or services rendered by him. Any attempt on the part
of a person to enrich upon the goodwill CS(OS)No. 2085/2008 Page 16 of 29
generated by any other person needs to be curbed by the court whenever
approached by the aggrieved party in this regard.
In a case based on infringement of a registered trademark, the plaintiff need
not prove anything more than the use of its registered trademark by the
defendant. In such a case, even if the defendant is able to show that on
account of use of other words by him in conjunction with the registered
word/mark of the plaintiff, there would be no confusion in the mind of the
customer when he come across the product of the defendant and/or that on
account of the packaging, get up and the manner of writing trademark on the
packaging, it is possible for the consumer to distinguish his product from
that of the plaintiff, he would still be liable for infringement of the
registered trademark. Of course, use of a registered trademark or an essential
part of it, whether alone or in conjunction with some other words would
constitute infringement only when the product and/or service in respect of
which the impugned trademark is used fall in the same category in which
registration has been granted to the plaintiff.
CS(OS)No. 2085/2008 Page 17 of 29
16\. The defendants are manufacturing/selling age defying foundation, which is
a cosmetic product to be applied on skin, under the brand name JOY ULTRA LOOK
TOTAL EFFECTS. The plaintiff company is an established and very well reputed
manufacturer and marketer of various products including age defying products
under the brand name OLAY TOTAL EFFECTS. Thus, both the parties are engaged in
the same business, as far as the manufacture/sale of age defying foundation is
concerned. The words TOTAL EFFECTS are an essential and integral component of
plaintiffâ€Ÿs registered trademark OLAY TOTAL EFFECTS. The defendants have
virtually lifted two of the three words out of the registered word trademark
OLAY TOTAL EFFECTS of the plaintiff-company and are using those two words as
part of their trademark JOY ULTRA LOOK TOTAL EFFECTS. It is, therefore,
difficult to dispute that the defendants by use of the words TOTAL EFFECTS as
an essential part of their trademark JOY ULTRA LOOK TOTAL EFFECTS have
infringed the registered trademark OLAY TOTAL EFFECTS of the plaintiff. It is
true that words TOTAL EFFECTS are only a part of the composite trademark of
the defendants, but, that to my mind would make no CS(OS)No. 2085/2008 Page 18
of 29 difference since an essential and integral part of the plaintiffâ€Ÿs
registered trademark is being used by them for selling their product. Neither
deletion of a part of a registered trademark nor the prefix or suffix of
another word to it would validate the use of the registered mark by an
unlicensed user, once it is shown that the part used by the infringer is an
essential part of the registered trademark. Another important aspect in the
case before the Court is that the words TOTAL EFFECTS use the last two words
in the mark of the plaintiff as well as of the defendant, which in turn,
indicates that adoption and use of these two words from the mark of the
plaintiff was deceptive, intended to confuse the consumer and encash upon the
goodwill enjoyed by plaintiffâ€Ÿs trademark OLAY TOTAL EFFECTS. The trademark
JOY ULTRA LOOK TOTAL EFFECTS, on account of incorporation of the words TOTAL
EFFECTS in it has become deceptively similar to the registered trademark OLAY
TOTAL EFFECTS of the plaintiff company.
17\. It is also in the interest of the consumer that a well established brand
or an essential component of that brand is not allowed to be used by another
person. A person CS(OS)No. 2085/2008 Page 19 of 29 purchasing age defying
foundation being sold under the name OLAY TOTAL EFFECTS may not necessarily
remember all the words used in the trademark and, therefore, when he comes
across another product being sold under the trademark JOY ULTRA LOOK TOTAL
EFFECTS, on account of imperfect recollection and he is not having the product
of the plaintiff bearing the trademark OLAY TOTAL EFFECTS with him at that
time, he may get an impression that both the products emanate from the same
source and that is why both of them are using the words TOTAL EFFECTS as part
of the trademark under which they are being sold. This may cause confusion in
the mind of the consumer even if he does not purchase the product of the
defendant on a careful scrutiny of the trademark under which it is being sold
or on account of packaging of the product of the defendant being different
from the packaging of the product of the plaintiff.
18\. In K.R. Chinna Krishna Chettiar vs. Shri Ambal and Co., Madras and Anr.,
AIR 1970 SC 146, the respondents were the two registered trademarks. The first
mark consisted of a label containing a device of a goddess CS(OS)No. 2085/2008
Page 20 of 29 Sri Ambal seated on a globe floating on water enclosed in a
circular frame with the legend "Sri Ambal parimala snuff" at the top of the
label, whereas the other mark consisted of expression "Sri Ambal". The
appellant before Supreme Court was seeking registration of a label containing
three panels. The first and the third panels contained equivalents of the
words "Sri Andal Madras Snuff", whereas the central panel contained the
picture of goddess Sri Andal and the legend "Sri Andal". Sri Andal and Sri
Ambal are separate divinities. The question before the Court was whether the
proposed mark of the appellant was deceptively similar to the respondentsâ€Ÿ
mark. Noticing that the word Ambal was an essential feature of the registered
trademarks, the Court was of the view that the name Andal proposed to be used
by the appellant did not cease to be deceptively similar because it was used
in conjunction with a pictorial device. Supreme Court referred to the case of
De Cordova and Ors. v. Vick Chemical Coy. (1951) 68 R.P.C.103 where Vick
Chemical Coy were the proprietors of the registered trade mark consisting of
the word "Vaporub" and another registered trade mark consisting of a design of
which the words "Vicks Vaporub Salve" formed a part. The defendants advertised
CS(OS)No. 2085/2008 Page 21 of 29 their ointment as 'Karsote vapour Rub" and
the Court held that the defendants had infringed the registered marks. The
view taken by Lord Radcliffe that "a mark is infringed by another trader if,
even without using the whole of it upon or in connection with his goods, he
uses one or more of its essential features" was affirmed by the Supreme Court.
The appeal was accordingly dismissed by Supreme Court, despite the fact that
the words Ambal and Andal had distinct meanings. In the case before this
Court, the defendants have used the words "TOTAL EFFECTS" without even
attempting any change in those words, as an essential component of their
trademark "JOY ULTRA LOOK TOTAL EFFECTS". The infringement by the defendants,
therefore, is more serious than the infringement in the case of K.R. Chinna
Krishna Chettiar (supra) In Atlas Cycle Industries Ltd. vs. Hind Cycles
Limited: ILR 1973, Delhi 393, the plaintiff was the registered proprietor of
the trademark "EASTERN STAR" in respect of bicycles. The defendant was found
selling cycles under the trademark "ROYAL STAR". The stand taken by the
defendant was that the word trademark ROYAL STAR CS(OS)No. 2085/2008 Page 22
of 29 was not likely to cause confusion or deception or was not any
infringement of appellantâ€Ÿs trademark EASTERN STAR since the word STAR was
common to the trade and was being used by several cycle manufacturers. It was
observed by this Court that when the words EASTERN STAR and ROYAL STAR are
uttered, a person of average intelligence and imperfect memory was likely to
remember only the sound and word STAR and those likely to be deceived or
confused between the two names or mark and, therefore the two marks had an
overall structural and phonetic similarity and consequently, their use in
respect of the same kind of goods viz. cycles will cause confusion or
deception within the meaning of Section 29 of the Trade and Merchandise Marks
Act, 1958.
In Ansul Industries vs. Shiva Tobacco Company: 2007(34) PTC 392, the appellant
was marketing tobacco under the name 'Udta Panchhi', whereas the respondent
was manufacturing/selling chewing tobacco under the trade name 'Panchhi
Chaap'. Noticing that the word â€žPanchhiâ€Ÿ in the mark 'Udta Panchhi' and
'Panchhi Chaap' enjoys prominence and is the focal point of two marks, it was
held CS(OS)No. 2085/2008 Page 23 of 29 by this Court that despite the getup
and colour of packing being different, there was likelihood of deception and
confusion on account of phonetic similarity of the word â€žPanchhiâ€Ÿ in both the
marks.
19\. Though it was alleged in the written statement of defendant Nos. 1 to 3
that they were prior user of the words "TOTAL EFFECTS", they have not come
forward to prove the claim made by them. In fact, they have themselves
admitted that they had agreed to delete the words "TOTAL EFFECTS" from their
trademark provided the plaintiff agreed not to claim damages. This clearly
shows an admission on the part of the defendants that they are not entitled to
use the words "TOTAL EFFETS" as a part of their trademark.
20\. For the reasons given in the preceding paragraphs, the plaintiff is
entitled to injunction against use of the trademark JOY ULTRA LOOK TOTAL
EFFECTS or any other deceptively similar name by the defendants in respect of
anti-ageing foundation or any other product for which registration has been
obtained by the plaintiff for the word mark OLAY TOTAL EFFECTS.
CS(OS)No. 2085/2008 Page 24 of 29
21\. Neither the relief of injunction nor the relief of delivery up of
infringing material was pressed during the course of arguments. The learned
counsel for the plaintiff, however, insisted on award of punitive compensatory
damages and in this regard, he placed reliance on the decisions of this Court
in Time Incorporated v. Lokesh Srivastava & Anr., 2005 (30) PTC 3 (Del),
Microsoft Corporation v. Deepak Raval, MIPR 2007 (1) 72, Hero Honda Motors
Ltd. V. Shree Assuramji Scooters, 2006 (32) PTC 117 (Del), General Electric
Company v. Mr.Altamas Khan and Others (CS(OS) No.1283/2006 decided on
18.12.2008), Indian Performing Right Society Ltd. V. Debashis Patnaik and
Others, 2007 (34) PTC 201 (Del), Microsoft Corporation v. Yogesh Papat and
another, 2005 (30) PTC 245 (Del.), The Coca Cola Company and another v.
Dwarkadhish Khandelwal Trading as Mewar Soda Water Factory, MIPR 2007 (3) 188,
Asian Paints (India) Ltd. V. Balaji Paints and Chemicals and Others, 2006 (33)
PTC 683 (Del.), SAP AG and another v. Somaya Kanti Dutta and another, 2008
(36) PTC 598(Del), Larsen and Toubro Ltd. v. Chagan Bhai Patel, MIPR 2009 (1)
194, Relaxo Rubber Ltd and CS(OS)No. 2085/2008 Page 25 of 29 another v.
Selection Footwear and another, 1999 (19) PTC 578, Adobe Systems Inc. and
another v. Mr. P. Bhoominathan and another, 2009 (39) PTC 658 (Del) and
Microsoft Corporation and another v. Mr. A. Jain and others, 2008 (36) PTC 346
(Del.). In the case of Time Incorporated (supra), this Court observed that
punitive damages are founded on the philosophy of corrective justice and as
such, in appropriate cases these must be awarded to give a signal to the wrong
doers that the law does not take a breach merely as a matter between rival
parties but feels concerned about those also who are not party to the lis but
suffer on account of the breach. In the case of Hero Honda Motors (supra),
this Court noticing that the defendant had chosen to stay away from the
proceedings of the Court felt that in such case punitive damages need to be
awarded, since otherwise the defendant, who appears in the Court and submits
its account books would be liable for damages whereas a party which chooses to
stay away from the Court proceedings would escape the liability on account of
the failure of the availability of account books. CS(OS)No. 2085/2008 Page 26
of 29
22\. In Microsoft Corporation vs. Deepak Raval: MIPR 2007 (1) 72, this Court
observed that in our country the Courts are becoming sensitive to the growing
menace of piracy and have started granting punitive damages even in cases
where due to absence of defendant, the exact figures of sale made by them
under the infringing copyright and/or trademark, exact damages are not
available. The justification given by the Court for award of compulsory
damages was to make up for the loss suffered by the plaintiff and deter a
wrong doer and like-minded from indulging in such unlawful activities.
In Larsen and Toubro Limited vs. Chagan Bhai Patel: MIPR 2009 (1) 194, this
Court observed that it would be encouraging the violators of intellectual
property, if the defendants notwithstanding having not contested the suit are
not burdened with punitive damages.
23\. Also, the Court needs to take note of the fact that a lot of energy and
resources are spent in litigating against those who infringe the trademark and
copyright of others and try to encash upon the goodwill and reputation of
other brands by passing of their goods and/or services as those of CS(OS)No.
2085/2008 Page 27 of 29 that well known brand. If punitive damages are not
awarded in such cases, it would only encourage unscrupulous persons who
actuated by dishonest intention, use the well-reputed trademark of another
person, so as to encash on the goodwill and reputation which that mark enjoys
in the market, with impunity, and then avoid payment of damages by remaining
absent from the Court, thereby depriving the plaintiff an opportunity to
establish actual profit earned by him from use of the infringing mark, which
can be computed only on the basis of his account books. This would, therefore,
amount to putting premium on dishonesty and give an unfair advantage to an
unscrupulous infringer over those who have a bona fide defence to make and
therefore come forward to contest the suit and place their case before the
Court.
24\. For the reasons given in the preceding paragraph, the defendants are
hereby restrained from manufacturing, selling or marketing age defying
foundation or any other product in respect of which the plaintiff holds the
registered word mark OLAY TOTAL EFFECTS. The plaintiff is also CS(OS)No.
2085/2008 Page 28 of 29 awarded punitive damages amounting to Rs.1,00,000/-
each against defendants No.2 & 3\.
Decree sheet be prepared accordingly.
(V.K. JAIN) JUDGE FEBRUARY 21, 2011 Vk/bg CS(OS)No. 2085/2008 Page 29 of 29
2085/2008 Page 27 of 29 that well known brand. If punitive damages are not
awarded in such cases, it would only encourage unscrupulous persons who
actuated by dishonest intention, use the well-reputed trademark of another
person, so as to encash on the goodwill and reputation which that mark enjoys
in the market, with impunity, and then avoid payment of damages by remaining
absent from the Court, thereby depriving the plaintiff an opportunity to
establish actual profit earned by him from use of the infringing mark, which
can be computed only on the basis of his account books. This would, therefore,
amount to putting premium on dishonesty and give an unfair advantage to an
unscrupulous infringer over those who have a bona fide defence to make and
therefore come forward to contest the suit and place their case before the
Court.
24\. For the reasons given in the preceding paragraph, the defendants are
hereby restrained from manufacturing, selling or marketing age defying
foundation or any other product in respect of which the plaintiff holds the
registered word mark OLAY TOTAL EFFECTS. The plaintiff is also CS(OS)No.
3\. Whether the judgment should be reported Yes in Digest?
V.K. JAIN, J
1\. This is a suit for permanent injunction, rendition of accounts, damages
and delivery up of the infringing material. The plaintiff is a fortune 500
company, having business operations in 80 countries, dealing in a large number
of products and employing 1,38,000/- persons. CS(OS)No. 2085/2008 Page 1 of 29
The plaintiff company is also engaged in the business of manufacturing and
selling skin care and personal cleansing products, including anti-aging
moisturizer under the trademark OLAY. The plaintiff company is also using the
trademarks OLAY TOTAL EFFECTS and TOTAL EFFECTS in respect of anti-aging
products. The plaintiff holds registration in respect of trademark OLAY TOTAL
EFFECTS in Class 3 of Schedule 4 of Trademarks Act, 1999 in respect of
Foundation, Make-up Base, Skin Moisturizing Cream, Lotions and Gels, Skin
Whitening Preparations, Facial and Skin Masks, Skin Tonners, Cleansers and
Astringents, Eye Masks, Eye Gel Patch, Eye Creams, Lotions and Gels, Skin and
Body Massage Creams, Soaps (excluding soaps for fabric use), Perfumeries,
Essential Oils, Dentifrices, Shampoo, Conditioners, Hair Styling Preparations,
Hair Care Preparations and Hair Colouring Preparations. It also holds
registration in respect of the trademark OLAY in Class 3 of the same Schedule.
The plaintiff claims turnover of $236 million, $282 million and $344 million
2085/2008 Page 27 of 29 that well known brand. If punitive damages are not
awarded in such cases, it would only encourage unscrupulous persons who
actuated by dishonest intention, use the well-reputed trademark of another
person, so as to encash on the goodwill and reputation which that mark enjoys
in the market, with impunity, and then avoid payment of damages by remaining
absent from the Court, thereby depriving the plaintiff an opportunity to
establish actual profit earned by him from use of the infringing mark, which
can be computed only on the basis of his account books. This would, therefore,
amount to putting premium on dishonesty and give an unfair advantage to an
unscrupulous infringer over those who have a bona fide defence to make and
therefore come forward to contest the suit and place their case before the
Court.
24\. For the reasons given in the preceding paragraph, the defendants are
hereby restrained from manufacturing, selling or marketing age defying
foundation or any other product in respect of which the plaintiff holds the
registered word mark OLAY TOTAL EFFECTS. The plaintiff is also CS(OS)No.
3\. Whether the judgment should be reported Yes in Digest?
V.K. JAIN, J
1\. This is a suit for permanent injunction, rendition of accounts, damages
and delivery up of the infringing material. The plaintiff is a fortune 500
company, having business operations in 80 countries, dealing in a large number
of products and employing 1,38,000/- persons. CS(OS)No. 2085/2008 Page 1 of 29
The plaintiff company is also engaged in the business of manufacturing and
selling skin care and personal cleansing products, including anti-aging
moisturizer under the trademark OLAY. The plaintiff company is also using the
trademarks OLAY TOTAL EFFECTS and TOTAL EFFECTS in respect of anti-aging
products. The plaintiff holds registration in respect of trademark OLAY TOTAL
EFFECTS in Class 3 of Schedule 4 of Trademarks Act, 1999 in respect of
Foundation, Make-up Base, Skin Moisturizing Cream, Lotions and Gels, Skin
Whitening Preparations, Facial and Skin Masks, Skin Tonners, Cleansers and
Astringents, Eye Masks, Eye Gel Patch, Eye Creams, Lotions and Gels, Skin and
Body Massage Creams, Soaps (excluding soaps for fabric use), Perfumeries,
Essential Oils, Dentifrices, Shampoo, Conditioners, Hair Styling Preparations,
Hair Care Preparations and Hair Colouring Preparations. It also holds
registration in respect of the trademark OLAY in Class 3 of the same Schedule.
The plaintiff claims turnover of $236 million, $282 million and $344 million
2085/2008 Page 27 of 29 that well known brand. If punitive damages are not
awarded in such cases, it would only encourage unscrupulous persons who
actuated by dishonest intention, use the well-reputed trademark of another
person, so as to encash on the goodwill and reputation which that mark enjoys
in the market, with impunity, and then avoid payment of damages by remaining
absent from the Court, thereby depriving the plaintiff an opportunity to
establish actual profit earned by him from use of the infringing mark, which
can be computed only on the basis of his account books. This would, therefore,
amount to putting premium on dishonesty and give an unfair advantage to an
unscrupulous infringer over those who have a bona fide defence to make and
therefore come forward to contest the suit and place their case before the
Court.
24\. For the reasons given in the preceding paragraph, the defendants are
hereby restrained from manufacturing, selling or marketing age defying
foundation or any other product in respect of which the plaintiff holds the
registered word mark OLAY TOTAL EFFECTS. The plaintiff is also CS(OS)No.
3\. Whether the judgment should be reported Yes in Digest?
V.K. JAIN, J
1\. This is a suit for permanent injunction, rendition of accounts, damages
and delivery up of the infringing material. The plaintiff is a fortune 500
company, having business operations in 80 countries, dealing in a large number
of products and employing 1,38,000/- persons. CS(OS)No. 2085/2008 Page 1 of 29
The plaintiff company is also engaged in the business of manufacturing and
selling skin care and personal cleansing products, including anti-aging
moisturizer under the trademark OLAY. The plaintiff company is also using the
trademarks OLAY TOTAL EFFECTS and TOTAL EFFECTS in respect of anti-aging
products. The plaintiff holds registration in respect of trademark OLAY TOTAL
EFFECTS in Class 3 of Schedule 4 of Trademarks Act, 1999 in respect of
Foundation, Make-up Base, Skin Moisturizing Cream, Lotions and Gels, Skin
Whitening Preparations, Facial and Skin Masks, Skin Tonners, Cleansers and
Astringents, Eye Masks, Eye Gel Patch, Eye Creams, Lotions and Gels, Skin and
Body Massage Creams, Soaps (excluding soaps for fabric use), Perfumeries,
Essential Oils, Dentifrices, Shampoo, Conditioners, Hair Styling Preparations,
Hair Care Preparations and Hair Colouring Preparations. It also holds
registration in respect of the trademark OLAY in Class 3 of the same Schedule.
The plaintiff claims turnover of $236 million, $282 million and $344 million
for the years 2005-2006, 2006-2007 and 2007-2008 respectively in respect of
products sold under the name OLAY TOTAL EFFECTS/TOTAL EFFECTS. The plaintiff
company claims CS(OS)No. 2085/2008 Page 2 of 29 to have incurred expenditure
amounting to $89 million, $99 million and $111 million respectively during the
aforesaid years, on brand support activities undertaken by it across the
world. It is further alleged that the plaintiff launched its products under
the trademark OLAY TOTAL EFFECTS/TOTAL EFFECTS in India in the year 2007 and
has been giving wide publicity to such products, which had sale amounting to
Rs.266.65 million in India during the period from 1st July, 2007 to 30th July,
2008. The plaintiff company has incurred expenditure of Rs.263 million in
India alone on promotion of the aforesaid trademarks.
2085/2008 Page 27 of 29 that well known brand. If punitive damages are not
awarded in such cases, it would only encourage unscrupulous persons who
actuated by dishonest intention, use the well-reputed trademark of another
person, so as to encash on the goodwill and reputation which that mark enjoys
in the market, with impunity, and then avoid payment of damages by remaining
absent from the Court, thereby depriving the plaintiff an opportunity to
establish actual profit earned by him from use of the infringing mark, which
can be computed only on the basis of his account books. This would, therefore,
amount to putting premium on dishonesty and give an unfair advantage to an
unscrupulous infringer over those who have a bona fide defence to make and
therefore come forward to contest the suit and place their case before the
Court.
24\. For the reasons given in the preceding paragraph, the defendants are
hereby restrained from manufacturing, selling or marketing age defying
foundation or any other product in respect of which the plaintiff holds the
registered word mark OLAY TOTAL EFFECTS. The plaintiff is also CS(OS)No.
3\. Whether the judgment should be reported Yes in Digest?
V.K. JAIN, J
1\. This is a suit for permanent injunction, rendition of accounts, damages
and delivery up of the infringing material. The plaintiff is a fortune 500
company, having business operations in 80 countries, dealing in a large number
of products and employing 1,38,000/- persons. CS(OS)No. 2085/2008 Page 1 of 29
The plaintiff company is also engaged in the business of manufacturing and
selling skin care and personal cleansing products, including anti-aging
moisturizer under the trademark OLAY. The plaintiff company is also using the
trademarks OLAY TOTAL EFFECTS and TOTAL EFFECTS in respect of anti-aging
products. The plaintiff holds registration in respect of trademark OLAY TOTAL
EFFECTS in Class 3 of Schedule 4 of Trademarks Act, 1999 in respect of
Foundation, Make-up Base, Skin Moisturizing Cream, Lotions and Gels, Skin
Whitening Preparations, Facial and Skin Masks, Skin Tonners, Cleansers and
Astringents, Eye Masks, Eye Gel Patch, Eye Creams, Lotions and Gels, Skin and
Body Massage Creams, Soaps (excluding soaps for fabric use), Perfumeries,
Essential Oils, Dentifrices, Shampoo, Conditioners, Hair Styling Preparations,
Hair Care Preparations and Hair Colouring Preparations. It also holds
registration in respect of the trademark OLAY in Class 3 of the same Schedule.
The plaintiff claims turnover of $236 million, $282 million and $344 million
for the years 2005-2006, 2006-2007 and 2007-2008 respectively in respect of
products sold under the name OLAY TOTAL EFFECTS/TOTAL EFFECTS. The plaintiff
company claims CS(OS)No. 2085/2008 Page 2 of 29 to have incurred expenditure
amounting to $89 million, $99 million and $111 million respectively during the
aforesaid years, on brand support activities undertaken by it across the
world. It is further alleged that the plaintiff launched its products under
the trademark OLAY TOTAL EFFECTS/TOTAL EFFECTS in India in the year 2007 and
has been giving wide publicity to such products, which had sale amounting to
Rs.266.65 million in India during the period from 1st July, 2007 to 30th July,
2008. The plaintiff company has incurred expenditure of Rs.263 million in
India alone on promotion of the aforesaid trademarks.
2085/2008 Page 27 of 29 that well known brand. If punitive damages are not
awarded in such cases, it would only encourage unscrupulous persons who
actuated by dishonest intention, use the well-reputed trademark of another
person, so as to encash on the goodwill and reputation which that mark enjoys
in the market, with impunity, and then avoid payment of damages by remaining
absent from the Court, thereby depriving the plaintiff an opportunity to
establish actual profit earned by him from use of the infringing mark, which
can be computed only on the basis of his account books. This would, therefore,
amount to putting premium on dishonesty and give an unfair advantage to an
unscrupulous infringer over those who have a bona fide defence to make and
therefore come forward to contest the suit and place their case before the
Court.
24\. For the reasons given in the preceding paragraph, the defendants are
hereby restrained from manufacturing, selling or marketing age defying
foundation or any other product in respect of which the plaintiff holds the
registered word mark OLAY TOTAL EFFECTS. The plaintiff is also CS(OS)No.
