Supreme Court of India
Chairman, Public Service ... vs Sudarshan Singh Jamwal And Anr. on 14 January,
1998
Equivalent citations: AIR 1999 SC 840, JT 1998 (8) SC 516, (1998) 9 SCC 327
Bench: S Bharucha, V Khare
ORDER
1\. Rule 7 of the Jammu and Kashmir Civil Service (Judicial Recruitment)
Rules, 1967, provided that no person should be recruited to that service who
was more than 35 years of age on the first date of January preceding the year
the examination for recruitment was conducted by the appellant-Commission. The
first respondent was age-barred, but sought to rely upon an order dated
14-2-1985 in the following words:
"Sanction is accorded to the relaxation of upper age bar by two years, eight
months and twenty-three days in favour of Shri Sudarshan Singh Jamwal,
Librarian, High Court of Jammu and Kashmir.
By order of the Government of Jammu and Kashmir.
sd/-
(Secretary to Govt.
Law Department)"
Meeting with resistance from the appellant, the first respondent moved the
safely place reliance on the authority of their Lordships of the Supreme Court
reported in Sampat Prakash v. State of J&K, ."
3\. The decision in the case of Sampat Prakash, speaks of the application of
Section 21 of the General Clauses Act. Section 21 of the General Clauses Act
says that where by any Central Act or Regulation a power to issue
notifications, orders, rules, or bye-laws is conferred, then that power
includes a power, exercisable in the like manner and subject to the like
sanction and conditions (if any), to add to, amend, vary or rescind any
notifications, orders, rules or bye-laws so issued. The order, upon which the
first respondent relied, was, according to the High Court itself, issued in
the exercise of the State Government's inherent power, meaning, apparently,
the power derived from Section 21 of the General Clauses Act. The order was
not issued in exercise of the power to make the said Rules and power was not
exercised in the like manner and subject to the like sanction and conditions
which operated for the making of the said Rules. Reliance upon the judgment in
the case of Sampat Prakash, was, therefore, misplaced as also reliance upon
Meeting with resistance from the appellant, the first respondent moved the
High Court of Jammu and Kashmir in a writ petition. The writ petition was
allowed on the basis that the State Government was competent to relax the age
bar.
2\. The said Rules had earlier provided for such relaxation in Rule 9-A, which
read thus: "9-A. Notwithstanding anything contained in Rules 7 and 9 of these
Rules, the Governor may, on the recommendation of the Court, exempt any person
who holds any post under the Government by virtue of which he has kept himself
in touch with and gained sufficient experience in the knowledge and
application of law, from the operation of Rules 7 and 9."
The appellant moved the High Court in review pointing out that Rule 9-A had
been deleted from the said Rules by reason of an amendment made in August
1974. The High Court rejected the review petition holding, "Even if the
provisions of Rule 9-A would have been placed before us, in our opinion it
would.not have any effect on the judgment as the order on the basis of which
the age bar was relaxed is passed by the Government in exercise of its
inherent powers, which always exists with the Government for which we can
safely place reliance on the authority of their Lordships of the Supreme Court
reported in Sampat Prakash v. State of J&K, ."
3\. The decision in the case of Sampat Prakash, speaks of the application of
Section 21 of the General Clauses Act. Section 21 of the General Clauses Act
says that where by any Central Act or Regulation a power to issue
notifications, orders, rules, or bye-laws is conferred, then that power
includes a power, exercisable in the like manner and subject to the like
sanction and conditions (if any), to add to, amend, vary or rescind any
notifications, orders, rules or bye-laws so issued. The order, upon which the
first respondent relied, was, according to the High Court itself, issued in
the exercise of the State Government's inherent power, meaning, apparently,
the power derived from Section 21 of the General Clauses Act. The order was
not issued in exercise of the power to make the said Rules and power was not
exercised in the like manner and subject to the like sanction and conditions
which operated for the making of the said Rules. Reliance upon the judgment in
the case of Sampat Prakash, was, therefore, misplaced as also reliance upon
Section 21 of the General Clauses Act. The exemption order did not, therefore,
entitle the first respondent to appear at the recruitment examination.
4\. The appeal is allowed. The order under appeal is set aside and the writ
petition filed by the first respondent is dismissed. No order as to costs.
safely place reliance on the authority of their Lordships of the Supreme Court
reported in Sampat Prakash v. State of J&K, ."
3\. The decision in the case of Sampat Prakash, speaks of the application of
Section 21 of the General Clauses Act. Section 21 of the General Clauses Act
says that where by any Central Act or Regulation a power to issue
notifications, orders, rules, or bye-laws is conferred, then that power
includes a power, exercisable in the like manner and subject to the like
sanction and conditions (if any), to add to, amend, vary or rescind any
notifications, orders, rules or bye-laws so issued. The order, upon which the
first respondent relied, was, according to the High Court itself, issued in
the exercise of the State Government's inherent power, meaning, apparently,
the power derived from Section 21 of the General Clauses Act. The order was
not issued in exercise of the power to make the said Rules and power was not
exercised in the like manner and subject to the like sanction and conditions
which operated for the making of the said Rules. Reliance upon the judgment in
the case of Sampat Prakash, was, therefore, misplaced as also reliance upon
Meeting with resistance from the appellant, the first respondent moved the
High Court of Jammu and Kashmir in a writ petition. The writ petition was
allowed on the basis that the State Government was competent to relax the age
bar.
2\. The said Rules had earlier provided for such relaxation in Rule 9-A, which
read thus: "9-A. Notwithstanding anything contained in Rules 7 and 9 of these
Rules, the Governor may, on the recommendation of the Court, exempt any person
who holds any post under the Government by virtue of which he has kept himself
in touch with and gained sufficient experience in the knowledge and
application of law, from the operation of Rules 7 and 9."
The appellant moved the High Court in review pointing out that Rule 9-A had
been deleted from the said Rules by reason of an amendment made in August
1974. The High Court rejected the review petition holding, "Even if the
provisions of Rule 9-A would have been placed before us, in our opinion it
would.not have any effect on the judgment as the order on the basis of which
the age bar was relaxed is passed by the Government in exercise of its
inherent powers, which always exists with the Government for which we can
safely place reliance on the authority of their Lordships of the Supreme Court
reported in Sampat Prakash v. State of J&K, ."
3\. The decision in the case of Sampat Prakash, speaks of the application of
safely place reliance on the authority of their Lordships of the Supreme Court
reported in Sampat Prakash v. State of J&K, ."
3\. The decision in the case of Sampat Prakash, speaks of the application of
Section 21 of the General Clauses Act. Section 21 of the General Clauses Act
says that where by any Central Act or Regulation a power to issue
notifications, orders, rules, or bye-laws is conferred, then that power
includes a power, exercisable in the like manner and subject to the like
sanction and conditions (if any), to add to, amend, vary or rescind any
notifications, orders, rules or bye-laws so issued. The order, upon which the
first respondent relied, was, according to the High Court itself, issued in
the exercise of the State Government's inherent power, meaning, apparently,
the power derived from Section 21 of the General Clauses Act. The order was
not issued in exercise of the power to make the said Rules and power was not
exercised in the like manner and subject to the like sanction and conditions
which operated for the making of the said Rules. Reliance upon the judgment in
the case of Sampat Prakash, was, therefore, misplaced as also reliance upon
Meeting with resistance from the appellant, the first respondent moved the
High Court of Jammu and Kashmir in a writ petition. The writ petition was
allowed on the basis that the State Government was competent to relax the age
bar.
2\. The said Rules had earlier provided for such relaxation in Rule 9-A, which
read thus: "9-A. Notwithstanding anything contained in Rules 7 and 9 of these
Rules, the Governor may, on the recommendation of the Court, exempt any person
who holds any post under the Government by virtue of which he has kept himself
in touch with and gained sufficient experience in the knowledge and
application of law, from the operation of Rules 7 and 9."
The appellant moved the High Court in review pointing out that Rule 9-A had
been deleted from the said Rules by reason of an amendment made in August
1974. The High Court rejected the review petition holding, "Even if the
provisions of Rule 9-A would have been placed before us, in our opinion it
would.not have any effect on the judgment as the order on the basis of which
the age bar was relaxed is passed by the Government in exercise of its
inherent powers, which always exists with the Government for which we can
safely place reliance on the authority of their Lordships of the Supreme Court
reported in Sampat Prakash v. State of J&K, ."
3\. The decision in the case of Sampat Prakash, speaks of the application of
safely place reliance on the authority of their Lordships of the Supreme Court
reported in Sampat Prakash v. State of J&K, ."
3\. The decision in the case of Sampat Prakash, speaks of the application of
Section 21 of the General Clauses Act. Section 21 of the General Clauses Act
says that where by any Central Act or Regulation a power to issue
notifications, orders, rules, or bye-laws is conferred, then that power
includes a power, exercisable in the like manner and subject to the like
sanction and conditions (if any), to add to, amend, vary or rescind any
notifications, orders, rules or bye-laws so issued. The order, upon which the
first respondent relied, was, according to the High Court itself, issued in
the exercise of the State Government's inherent power, meaning, apparently,
the power derived from Section 21 of the General Clauses Act. The order was
not issued in exercise of the power to make the said Rules and power was not
exercised in the like manner and subject to the like sanction and conditions
which operated for the making of the said Rules. Reliance upon the judgment in
the case of Sampat Prakash, was, therefore, misplaced as also reliance upon
Meeting with resistance from the appellant, the first respondent moved the
High Court of Jammu and Kashmir in a writ petition. The writ petition was
allowed on the basis that the State Government was competent to relax the age
bar.
2\. The said Rules had earlier provided for such relaxation in Rule 9-A, which
read thus: "9-A. Notwithstanding anything contained in Rules 7 and 9 of these
Rules, the Governor may, on the recommendation of the Court, exempt any person
who holds any post under the Government by virtue of which he has kept himself
in touch with and gained sufficient experience in the knowledge and
application of law, from the operation of Rules 7 and 9."
The appellant moved the High Court in review pointing out that Rule 9-A had
been deleted from the said Rules by reason of an amendment made in August
1974. The High Court rejected the review petition holding, "Even if the
provisions of Rule 9-A would have been placed before us, in our opinion it
would.not have any effect on the judgment as the order on the basis of which
the age bar was relaxed is passed by the Government in exercise of its
inherent powers, which always exists with the Government for which we can
safely place reliance on the authority of their Lordships of the Supreme Court
reported in Sampat Prakash v. State of J&K, ."
3\. The decision in the case of Sampat Prakash, speaks of the application of
Section 21 of the General Clauses Act. Section 21 of the General Clauses Act
says that where by any Central Act or Regulation a power to issue
notifications, orders, rules, or bye-laws is conferred, then that power
includes a power, exercisable in the like manner and subject to the like
sanction and conditions (if any), to add to, amend, vary or rescind any
notifications, orders, rules or bye-laws so issued. The order, upon which the
first respondent relied, was, according to the High Court itself, issued in
the exercise of the State Government's inherent power, meaning, apparently,
the power derived from Section 21 of the General Clauses Act. The order was
not issued in exercise of the power to make the said Rules and power was not
exercised in the like manner and subject to the like sanction and conditions
safely place reliance on the authority of their Lordships of the Supreme Court
reported in Sampat Prakash v. State of J&K, ."
3\. The decision in the case of Sampat Prakash, speaks of the application of
Section 21 of the General Clauses Act. Section 21 of the General Clauses Act
says that where by any Central Act or Regulation a power to issue
notifications, orders, rules, or bye-laws is conferred, then that power
includes a power, exercisable in the like manner and subject to the like
sanction and conditions (if any), to add to, amend, vary or rescind any
notifications, orders, rules or bye-laws so issued. The order, upon which the
first respondent relied, was, according to the High Court itself, issued in
the exercise of the State Government's inherent power, meaning, apparently,
the power derived from Section 21 of the General Clauses Act. The order was
not issued in exercise of the power to make the said Rules and power was not
exercised in the like manner and subject to the like sanction and conditions
which operated for the making of the said Rules. Reliance upon the judgment in
the case of Sampat Prakash, was, therefore, misplaced as also reliance upon
Meeting with resistance from the appellant, the first respondent moved the
High Court of Jammu and Kashmir in a writ petition. The writ petition was
allowed on the basis that the State Government was competent to relax the age
bar.
2\. The said Rules had earlier provided for such relaxation in Rule 9-A, which
read thus: "9-A. Notwithstanding anything contained in Rules 7 and 9 of these
Rules, the Governor may, on the recommendation of the Court, exempt any person
who holds any post under the Government by virtue of which he has kept himself
in touch with and gained sufficient experience in the knowledge and
application of law, from the operation of Rules 7 and 9."
The appellant moved the High Court in review pointing out that Rule 9-A had
been deleted from the said Rules by reason of an amendment made in August
1974. The High Court rejected the review petition holding, "Even if the
provisions of Rule 9-A would have been placed before us, in our opinion it
would.not have any effect on the judgment as the order on the basis of which
the age bar was relaxed is passed by the Government in exercise of its
inherent powers, which always exists with the Government for which we can
safely place reliance on the authority of their Lordships of the Supreme Court
reported in Sampat Prakash v. State of J&K, ."
3\. The decision in the case of Sampat Prakash, speaks of the application of
Section 21 of the General Clauses Act. Section 21 of the General Clauses Act
says that where by any Central Act or Regulation a power to issue
notifications, orders, rules, or bye-laws is conferred, then that power
includes a power, exercisable in the like manner and subject to the like
sanction and conditions (if any), to add to, amend, vary or rescind any
notifications, orders, rules or bye-laws so issued. The order, upon which the
first respondent relied, was, according to the High Court itself, issued in
the exercise of the State Government's inherent power, meaning, apparently,
the power derived from Section 21 of the General Clauses Act. The order was
not issued in exercise of the power to make the said Rules and power was not
exercised in the like manner and subject to the like sanction and conditions
safely place reliance on the authority of their Lordships of the Supreme Court
reported in Sampat Prakash v. State of J&K, ."
3\. The decision in the case of Sampat Prakash, speaks of the application of
Section 21 of the General Clauses Act. Section 21 of the General Clauses Act
says that where by any Central Act or Regulation a power to issue
notifications, orders, rules, or bye-laws is conferred, then that power
includes a power, exercisable in the like manner and subject to the like
sanction and conditions (if any), to add to, amend, vary or rescind any
notifications, orders, rules or bye-laws so issued. The order, upon which the
first respondent relied, was, according to the High Court itself, issued in
the exercise of the State Government's inherent power, meaning, apparently,
the power derived from Section 21 of the General Clauses Act. The order was
not issued in exercise of the power to make the said Rules and power was not
exercised in the like manner and subject to the like sanction and conditions
which operated for the making of the said Rules. Reliance upon the judgment in
the case of Sampat Prakash, was, therefore, misplaced as also reliance upon
