Central Government Act
Section 28AB in the Customs Act, 1962
1[28AB. Interest on delayed payment of duty in special cases.—2[
(1) Where any duty has not been levied or paid or has been short-levied or
short-paid or erroneously refunded, the person who is liable to pay the duty
as determined under sub-section (2), or has paid the duty under sub-section
(2B) of section 28, shall, in addition to the duty, be liable to pay interest
at such rate not below 3[ten per cent.] and not exceeding thirty-six per cent.
per annum, as is for the time being fixed by the Central Government, by
notification in the Official Gazette, from the first day of the month
succeeding the month in which the duty ought to have been paid under this Act,
or from the date of such erroneous refund, as the case may be, but for the
provisions contained in sub-section (2) or sub-section (2B) of section 28,
till the date of payment of such duty: Provided that in such cases where the
duty becomes payable consequent to issue of an order, instruction or direction
by the Board under section 151A, and such amount of duty payable is
voluntarily paid in full, without reserving any right to appeal against such
payment at any subsequent stage, within forty-five days from the date of issue
of such order, instruction or direction, as the case may be, no interest shall
be payable and in other cases the interest shall be payable on the whole of
or from the date of such erroneous refund, as the case may be, but for the
provisions contained in sub-section (2) or sub-section (2B) of section 28,
till the date of payment of such duty: Provided that in such cases where the
duty becomes payable consequent to issue of an order, instruction or direction
by the Board under section 151A, and such amount of duty payable is
voluntarily paid in full, without reserving any right to appeal against such
payment at any subsequent stage, within forty-five days from the date of issue
of such order, instruction or direction, as the case may be, no interest shall
be payable and in other cases the interest shall be payable on the whole of
the amount, including the amount already paid.] 4[(2) The provisions of sub-
section (1) shall not apply to cases where the duty or interest had become
payable or ought to have been paid before the date on which the Finance Bill,
2001 receives the assent of the President*.] Explanation 1.—Where the duty
determined to be payable is reduced by theCommissioner (Appeals), the
Appellate Tribunal 5[, National Tax Tribunal] or, as the case may be, the
court, the interest shall be payable on such reduced amount of duty.
be payable and in other cases the interest shall be payable on the whole of
the amount, including the amount already paid.] 4[(2) The provisions of sub-
section (1) shall not apply to cases where the duty or interest had become
payable or ought to have been paid before the date on which the Finance Bill,
2001 receives the assent of the President*.] Explanation 1.—Where the duty
determined to be payable is reduced by theCommissioner (Appeals), the
Appellate Tribunal 5[, National Tax Tribunal] or, as the case may be, the
court, the interest shall be payable on such reduced amount of duty.
Explanation 2.—Where the duty determined to be payable is increased or further
increased by the Commissioner (Appeals), the Appellate Tribunal 5[, National
Tax Tribunal] or, as the case may be, the court, the interest shall be payable
on such increased or further increased amount of duty].
or from the date of such erroneous refund, as the case may be, but for the
provisions contained in sub-section (2) or sub-section (2B) of section 28,
till the date of payment of such duty: Provided that in such cases where the
duty becomes payable consequent to issue of an order, instruction or direction
by the Board under section 151A, and such amount of duty payable is
voluntarily paid in full, without reserving any right to appeal against such
payment at any subsequent stage, within forty-five days from the date of issue
of such order, instruction or direction, as the case may be, no interest shall
be payable and in other cases the interest shall be payable on the whole of
the amount, including the amount already paid.] 4[(2) The provisions of sub-
section (1) shall not apply to cases where the duty or interest had become
payable or ought to have been paid before the date on which the Finance Bill,
2001 receives the assent of the President*.] Explanation 1.—Where the duty
determined to be payable is reduced by theCommissioner (Appeals), the
Appellate Tribunal 5[, National Tax Tribunal] or, as the case may be, the
court, the interest shall be payable on such reduced amount of duty.
be payable and in other cases the interest shall be payable on the whole of
the amount, including the amount already paid.] 4[(2) The provisions of sub-
section (1) shall not apply to cases where the duty or interest had become
payable or ought to have been paid before the date on which the Finance Bill,
2001 receives the assent of the President*.] Explanation 1.—Where the duty
determined to be payable is reduced by theCommissioner (Appeals), the
Appellate Tribunal 5[, National Tax Tribunal] or, as the case may be, the
court, the interest shall be payable on such reduced amount of duty.
Explanation 2.—Where the duty determined to be payable is increased or further
increased by the Commissioner (Appeals), the Appellate Tribunal 5[, National
Tax Tribunal] or, as the case may be, the court, the interest shall be payable
on such increased or further increased amount of duty].
or from the date of such erroneous refund, as the case may be, but for the
provisions contained in sub-section (2) or sub-section (2B) of section 28,
till the date of payment of such duty: Provided that in such cases where the
duty becomes payable consequent to issue of an order, instruction or direction
by the Board under section 151A, and such amount of duty payable is
voluntarily paid in full, without reserving any right to appeal against such
payment at any subsequent stage, within forty-five days from the date of issue
of such order, instruction or direction, as the case may be, no interest shall
be payable and in other cases the interest shall be payable on the whole of
the amount, including the amount already paid.] 4[(2) The provisions of sub-
section (1) shall not apply to cases where the duty or interest had become
payable or ought to have been paid before the date on which the Finance Bill,
2001 receives the assent of the President*.] Explanation 1.—Where the duty
determined to be payable is reduced by theCommissioner (Appeals), the
Appellate Tribunal 5[, National Tax Tribunal] or, as the case may be, the
court, the interest shall be payable on such reduced amount of duty.
be payable and in other cases the interest shall be payable on the whole of
the amount, including the amount already paid.] 4[(2) The provisions of sub-
section (1) shall not apply to cases where the duty or interest had become
payable or ought to have been paid before the date on which the Finance Bill,
2001 receives the assent of the President*.] Explanation 1.—Where the duty
determined to be payable is reduced by theCommissioner (Appeals), the
Appellate Tribunal 5[, National Tax Tribunal] or, as the case may be, the
court, the interest shall be payable on such reduced amount of duty.
Explanation 2.—Where the duty determined to be payable is increased or further
increased by the Commissioner (Appeals), the Appellate Tribunal 5[, National
Tax Tribunal] or, as the case may be, the court, the interest shall be payable
on such increased or further increased amount of duty].
or from the date of such erroneous refund, as the case may be, but for the
provisions contained in sub-section (2) or sub-section (2B) of section 28,
till the date of payment of such duty: Provided that in such cases where the
duty becomes payable consequent to issue of an order, instruction or direction
by the Board under section 151A, and such amount of duty payable is
voluntarily paid in full, without reserving any right to appeal against such
payment at any subsequent stage, within forty-five days from the date of issue
of such order, instruction or direction, as the case may be, no interest shall
be payable and in other cases the interest shall be payable on the whole of
the amount, including the amount already paid.] 4[(2) The provisions of sub-
section (1) shall not apply to cases where the duty or interest had become
payable or ought to have been paid before the date on which the Finance Bill,
2001 receives the assent of the President*.] Explanation 1.—Where the duty
determined to be payable is reduced by theCommissioner (Appeals), the
Appellate Tribunal 5[, National Tax Tribunal] or, as the case may be, the
court, the interest shall be payable on such reduced amount of duty.
be payable and in other cases the interest shall be payable on the whole of
the amount, including the amount already paid.] 4[(2) The provisions of sub-
section (1) shall not apply to cases where the duty or interest had become
payable or ought to have been paid before the date on which the Finance Bill,
2001 receives the assent of the President*.] Explanation 1.—Where the duty
determined to be payable is reduced by theCommissioner (Appeals), the
Appellate Tribunal 5[, National Tax Tribunal] or, as the case may be, the
court, the interest shall be payable on such reduced amount of duty.
Explanation 2.—Where the duty determined to be payable is increased or further
increased by the Commissioner (Appeals), the Appellate Tribunal 5[, National
Tax Tribunal] or, as the case may be, the court, the interest shall be payable
on such increased or further increased amount of duty].
or from the date of such erroneous refund, as the case may be, but for the
provisions contained in sub-section (2) or sub-section (2B) of section 28,
till the date of payment of such duty: Provided that in such cases where the
duty becomes payable consequent to issue of an order, instruction or direction
by the Board under section 151A, and such amount of duty payable is
voluntarily paid in full, without reserving any right to appeal against such
payment at any subsequent stage, within forty-five days from the date of issue
of such order, instruction or direction, as the case may be, no interest shall
be payable and in other cases the interest shall be payable on the whole of
the amount, including the amount already paid.] 4[(2) The provisions of sub-
section (1) shall not apply to cases where the duty or interest had become
payable or ought to have been paid before the date on which the Finance Bill,
2001 receives the assent of the President*.] Explanation 1.—Where the duty
determined to be payable is reduced by theCommissioner (Appeals), the
Appellate Tribunal 5[, National Tax Tribunal] or, as the case may be, the
court, the interest shall be payable on such reduced amount of duty.
be payable and in other cases the interest shall be payable on the whole of
the amount, including the amount already paid.] 4[(2) The provisions of sub-
section (1) shall not apply to cases where the duty or interest had become
payable or ought to have been paid before the date on which the Finance Bill,
2001 receives the assent of the President*.] Explanation 1.—Where the duty
determined to be payable is reduced by theCommissioner (Appeals), the
Appellate Tribunal 5[, National Tax Tribunal] or, as the case may be, the
court, the interest shall be payable on such reduced amount of duty.
Explanation 2.—Where the duty determined to be payable is increased or further
increased by the Commissioner (Appeals), the Appellate Tribunal 5[, National
Tax Tribunal] or, as the case may be, the court, the interest shall be payable
on such increased or further increased amount of duty].
or from the date of such erroneous refund, as the case may be, but for the
provisions contained in sub-section (2) or sub-section (2B) of section 28,
till the date of payment of such duty: Provided that in such cases where the
duty becomes payable consequent to issue of an order, instruction or direction
by the Board under section 151A, and such amount of duty payable is
voluntarily paid in full, without reserving any right to appeal against such
payment at any subsequent stage, within forty-five days from the date of issue
of such order, instruction or direction, as the case may be, no interest shall
be payable and in other cases the interest shall be payable on the whole of
the amount, including the amount already paid.] 4[(2) The provisions of sub-
section (1) shall not apply to cases where the duty or interest had become
payable or ought to have been paid before the date on which the Finance Bill,
2001 receives the assent of the President*.] Explanation 1.—Where the duty
determined to be payable is reduced by theCommissioner (Appeals), the
Appellate Tribunal 5[, National Tax Tribunal] or, as the case may be, the
court, the interest shall be payable on such reduced amount of duty.
