Allahabad High Court
Ramashray Singh vs Dy. Director Of Education ... on 17 February, 2012
Bench: Sunil Ambwani, Manoj Misra
    HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD
    					Judgment reserved on 31.1.2012						Judgment delivered on 17.2.2012
     	         WRIT TAX NO. 2953 OF 2003
        				 Ramashray Singh 
    					   vs.
    		 Dy Director of Education (Service-1st)  & others
    Hon'ble Sunil Ambwani, J.
Hon'ble Manoj Misra, J.
1\. We have heard Shri Indra Raj Singh, learned counsel appearing for the
petitioner. Learned Standing Counsel appears for the State respondents.
2\. The petitioner, serving as District Inspector of Schools, Jaunpur, was
placed under suspension on 30.4.1997. A departmental enquiry was initiated
against him in which the Joint Director of Education, Azamgarh Region,
Azamgarh was appointed as Enquiry Officer. During the pendency of the
departmental enquiry, the petitioner retired on attaining the age of
superannuation on 31.1.1998. The departmental enquiry was allowed to continue
under Article 351-A of the Civil Services Regulations. In the enquiry report
25\. We also find that in the impugned order, by which the petitioner's
pension has been deducted at 10%, and a direction has been made to recover Rs.
86, 40, 000/- from the petitioner, there is no finding of loss caused to the
State Government. The entire calculation is on presumptive basis, without
recording any clear and specific findings of any collusion, fraud or resultant
loss. The observations in the punishment order that the petitioner should have
taken steps to file appeals against the orders passed by the High Court for
payment of salaries rather proves his defence that he had given the subject
approvals in compliance with the orders of the High Court. The detail of the
orders passed by the High Court and the opinion of the counsels appearing for
the State, that any such appeal should have been filed, was not considered.
There was no such material brought on record, nor any such charge was levelled
or proved against the petitioner.
26\. The writ petition is allowed. The impugned order dated 19.6.2002 passed
by the Secretary, Secondary Education, Shiksha Anubhag-I, Government of UP,
Lucknow is set aside. The petitioner shall be paid the entire arrears of
under Article 351-A of the Civil Services Regulations. In the enquiry report
dated 24.7.1999, charge nos. 1 and 2 alleging approval of irregular
appointments made by the petitioner, were found proved, causing financial loss
to the State Government.
3.By this writ petition, the petitioner is challenging an order dated
19.6.2002, by which the State Government has, after holding the petitioner
guilty of financial loss of Rs. 86, 40, 000/- caused to the State Government
on account of payment of salaries of twenty four employees from January, 2000,
at the rate of Rs. 5000/- per month for six years, forfeited the entire
gratuity; proposed deduction of 50% pension and recovery of the entire loss.
4\. The petitioner was served with a copy of the enquiry report and was given
an opportunity to submit his reply. He denied the charge of illegal
appointment of twenty four employees and the consequential loss caused to the
State Government.
5\. The petitioner's reply was considered by the State Government. It was
found that the petitioner did not take timely steps to file appeals against
the irregular appointments. The matter, along with proposed punishment, was
sent for consultation of the U.P. Public Service Commission. Relying on the
recommendations of the Commission, the State Government has directed the
recovery of 10% from the pension of the petitioner permanently; to forfeit the
entire gratuity and other retiral dues in accordance with the law and to
initiate proceedings by filing a civil suit for recovery of Rs. 86, 40, 000/-.
The entire period of his suspension has been directed to be treated to be in
service, for which he has been made entitled for payment of salary.
6\. In the charge sheet dated 30.4.1997 two allegations were imputed, namely
that he gave approval to 60 appointments made irregularly between 4.1.1994 to
30.6.1994, inspite of the ban imposed by the State Government on appointments.
The petitioner, in collusion with the Accounts Officer and the
Managers/Principals of these Schools, was alleged to have ensured payment of
salaries to such irregularly appointed employees causing loss of lacs of
rupees to the State Government. The second charge is correlated with the first
charge, namely that the petitioner allowed the fund allocated by the education
department for payment of salaries to irregularly appointed employees. A
further allegation was that the petitioner did not deposit the GPF amount of
the teaching and non-teaching employees in the concerned account head in the
treasury nor maintained proper accounts causing loss of interest on the GPF
amount.
7\. In his reply dated 25.10.1997, the petitioner denied the charges, and
submitted that he had joined as District Inspector of Schools, Jaunpur on
3.3.1994, whereas he was shown to have taken charge on 04.1.1994. He submitted
that he was going to retire in January, 1998 and was not given a departmental
audit report Part 'A' and 'B', and the details of the teaching and non-
teaching employees. The 60 letters, showing the alleged illegal appointments
of which the details have been given in the charge sheet, are not related to
the appointments, but orders on various matters, which came before him.
8\. The petitioner submitted in his reply that from serial nos. 1 to 16, and
39, in the list of employees do not relate to the petitioner's period of
posting. The employees mentioned at serial no. 17, 18, 19, 48 and 59 were
appointed on compassionate grounds for which the financial approval was given
in accordance with the rules, as they were appointed after recommendations by
the District Selection Committee. The documents at serial no. 35, 36 and 39
are not appointment letters but letters of regularization of teachers in
respect of three schools of which serial no. 39 relates to the period, prior
to the petitioner's posting. The remaining two matters relate to Section 10-Ga
of U.P. Secondary Education Services Selection Board with which the petitioner
had no concern. The petitioner further submitted in his reply that the letter
nos. 54, 55, 56, 57, 58 and 60, are the letters written by the petitioner for
financial sanction for payment in pursuance to the orders of the High Court.
The orders were passed by him to avoid the contempt proceedings. So far as
serial nos. 43, 49 and 51 are concerned, these appointments relate to Class-IV
employees, Sweeper and Chowkidar, which come under the essential services.
These appointments were approved after legal consultation with the Accounts
Officer. On these posts the appointments were made by the Principals of the
Schools. In respect of serial no. 50 the orders were issued as the College was
a minority institution. The appointment was made on the retirement of a
permanent employee. Item 38 does not relate to new appointment but for
releasing the salary of those teachers in respect of whom orders were issued
to stop salaries as they did not cooperate in the board's examinations after
giving them warning. Similarly in respect of serial nos. 20, 40, 33, 52, 53,
37, 44 and 45, there are no orders with regard to these appointments in the
office of District Inspector of Schools, Jaunpur. The Principals of five
Colleges, in which these appointments were made, have verified that no such
approvals were granted for such appointments.
9\. So far as item no. 34 relating to Brijesh Inter College, Gulalpur,
Jaunpur, it was submitted by the petitioner that the letter is not approval
for appointment, but a request to give the details of the sanctioned posts. He
also submitted in paragraph-10 of his reply that serial nos. 21 to 32 and 41,
42, 46 and 47 (total 16 teachers), were not given any approval for their
appointments. The Mangers of the Schools had disapproved the proposals, and in
this manner out of 60 appointments 17 letters were issued by his predecessor;
08 are unknown and forged letters; 05 relate to appointments under Dying-in-
Harness Rules; 03 relate to Class IV employees; 01 in respect of minority
institution; 01 in respect of orders for releasing the salary, which was
stopped; 02 for regularisation; 06 in compliance with the orders of the High
Court in making payment; 01 in relation to the enquiries and 16 disapproval of
the appointments. Consequently, according to the petitioner, the charges were
baseless.
10\. In the enquiry report of Km. Champa Misra, Regional Joint Director of
Education, Azamgarh Region, Azamgarh dated 24.7.1999, she found that the
petitioner had joined on 03.3.1994 and not on 04.1.1994. Shri Kripa Shanker
Sharma was the District Inspector of Schools, Jaunpur prior to the
petitioner's posting. The 60 letters are approval for appointments. Serial
nos. 1 to 14, 16 and 39 are signed by Shri Kripa Shanker Sharma-the
predecessor of the petitioner and serial no. 15 is signed by Shri Pratap
Bahadur Pathak, the then Incharge District Inspector of Schools. Serial nos.
17, 18, 19 and 48 are appointments on compassionate grounds. In the office of
the District Inspector of Schools, Jaunpur there was no proceedings register
available to prove that these appointments were made by the District Selection
Committee. Serial No. 39 is a letter signed by Shri Pratap Bahadur Pathak,
whereas the letter nos. 35 and 36 are signed by the petitioner. The records
were not available to establish that the regularisations were validly made.
11\. So far as letter nos. 54, 55, 56, 57, 58 and 60 are concerned, the
petitioner had sent letters to the Directorate for financial approval to the
grant of salary in pursuance to the order of the High Court. The petitioner
did not make any effort to file the appeals against these orders, and thus the
petitioner appeared to be in collusion with the teachers.
12\. In respect of other letters, namely serial nos. 43, 49, 51 the enquiry
officer found that to support these appointments of Class IV employees the
sanctioned strength of the College has not been mentioned. In respect of
letter at serial no. 50 on appointment in Mohd. Hasan Inter College, the
enquiry officer found that the College is a minority institution, but that
does not establish that the procedure of appointment in minority institution
was not to be followed. In so far as letter nos. 20, 40, 33, 52, and 53 the
enquiry officer did not accept the reply that these letters are not available
in the office of the District Inspector of Schools, with observations that
when these letters were issued from the office, there is no question that they
are not available, and thus the charge was proved.
13\. In respect of letter no. 38 the enquiry officer agreed with the
petitioner's defence that it is not a letter of approval but for release of
the salary, which was stopped on account of the non-cooperation of the
teachers. Similarly letter no. 34 is a request to send a report and is not
approval for appointment.
14\. Lastly, in respect of letter nos. 21 to 32 and 41, 42, 46 and 47 (total
16 teachers) the enquiry officer found that the cancellation of selections
were made in collusion with the Principals and that the same reasons were
given in respect of all the appointments, so that they should get the benefit
of getting interim orders from the High Court.
15\. The State Government, on the basis of the enquiry report dated 24.7.1999,
in view of the petitioner's retirement, requested the Regional Joint Director
of Education, Azamgarh Region, Azamgarh to calculate the other liability as
the entire amount of loss of Rs. 86 lacs for illegal appointments of 22
teachers and 02 peons cannot be recovered from his gratuity and pension. The
State Government again sent a letter on 29.4.2000 to serve a copy of the
enquiry report on the petitioner and to obtain his reply. The petitioner
submitted a detailed reply to the enquiry report reiterating his oral reply to
the charges and once again explained that on the basis of the enquiry report
no loss can be attributed to him to be caused to the State Government. The
entire assessment of loss is only notional without appreciating the enquiry
report.
16\. Shri Indra Raj Singh submits that the entire enquiry has been disposed of
mechanically after retirement of the petitioner. The petitioner had given
specific reply to both the charges and had denied that he has anything to do
with the appointments. The approval of appointments for the period prior to
03.3.1994, do not relate to him and that in respect of appointments on
compassionate grounds made by the District Selection Committee, and the
appointments of the sweeper, peons and teachers of the minority institutions
were made by the Principals of the Colleges. These appointments also could not
be attributed to the petitioner. There was absolutely no evidence of collusion
nor any oral evidence was led to establish that the petitioner was in
collusion with the Principals and Managers of the institution. In respect of
16 letters the petitioner had in fact disapproved the appointments, and that
on 06 matters the petitioner had written to the Directorate for financial
grants to comply with the orders of the High Court.
17\. Shri Indra Raj Singh submits that in none of the cases, which were
subject matter of the enquiry, any financial loss was established. No one in
the State Government has cared to look into the enquiry report before
calculating the alleged loss. In the impugned order a mechanical approach had
been adopted by attributing a loss of Rs. 5000/- in respect of 60 appointments
without appreciating that most of the letters were not letters of approval of
appointments. He submits that finally the State Government had concluded that
the petitioner has not taken steps to file appeals in respect of those matters
in which the High Court had issued directions to make appointments. Once again
there are no specific findings of the nature of the those appointments and
whether any steps were taken by the office of the Chief Standing Counsel of
the State Government, to vacate interim orders, or to file appeals. In any
case there is no finding of collusion or any financial gain to the petitioner.
18\. Learned Standing Counsel submits that the charges were proved. Some of
the documents may not have been available but that it was the duty of the
petitioner to establish that he did not give approval to these appointments.
19\. In State of Uttar Pradesh vs. Brahm Datt Sharma and another (1987) 2 SCC
179 the Supreme Court, in a matter arising out of a notice given to the
petitioner, who was serving and had retired as Executive Engineer in the
Irrigation Department of the State Government to show cause under Article 420
(b) of the Civil Services Regulation, as to why his pension and gratuity be
not forfeited, held that the grant of pension to employees of the State
Government is regulated by the Civil Services Regulations, which have
statutory character. Article 348-A provides that pension shall be granted
subject to the conditions contained in the regulations. Article 351-A empowers
the Governor to withhold or withdraw pension or any part of it, whether
permanently or for a specific period and also to order recovery from pension
of the whole or part of the pension, for any pecuniary loss caused to the
Government, if the pensioner is found guilty in departmental or in judicial
proceedings for any misconduct or negligence during his service. Article 353
lays down that no pension shall be granted to an officer dismissed or removed
from service for misconduct, insolvency or inefficiency, but compassionate
allowance may be granted on special consideration. The claim of pension is
determined by length of service, as provided by Articles 474 to 485. Full
pension is admissible under the rules not as a matter of course but only if
the service rendered by the government employee is approved. The regulations
empower the authority sanctioning the pension to make such reduction in the
amount of pension as it may think proper. The Supreme Court thereafter held:-
"6.....These provisions indicate that a Government servant is entitled to
pension but the claim of pension is determined in accordance with the
statutory rules. No doubt pension is no more a bounty; instead it is a right
earned by the Government servant on the basis of length of service.
Nonetheless grant of full pension depends on the approval of service rendered
by the employee. In other words if the service rendered by the Government
servant has not been satisfactory he would not be entitled to full pension and
it would always be open to the Govt. to withhold or reduce the amount of
pension in accordance with the statutory rules. If the Government incurs
pecuniary loss on account of misconduct or negligence of a Govt. servant and
if he retires from service before any departmental proceedings are taken
against him, it is open to the State Govt. to initiate departmental
proceedings, and if in those proceedings he is found guilty of misconduct,
negligence or any other such act or omission as a result of which Govt. is put
to pecuniary loss, the State Govt. is entitled to withhold, reduce or recover
the loss suffered by it by forfeiture or reduction of pension. These
provisions ordain the Govt. servant to perform his duties faithfully and
honestly. Honest and devoted service rendered by a Govt. servant ensures
efficiency in public administration. The statutory rules therefore contain
provisions for the forfeiture and deduction in the pension of Govt. servant
who have not rendered satisfactory service or who have been found guilty of
misconduct or negligence resulting in pecuniary loss to the Govt. Merely
because a Govt. servant retires from service on attaining the age of
superannuation he cannot escape the liability of misconduct and negligence or
financial irregularities.
The Supreme Court thereafter held in paragraph-8 as follows:-
"A plain reading of the regulation indicates that full pension is not awarded
as a matter of course to a Govt. servant on his retirement instead, it is
awarded to him if his satisfactory service is approved. If the service of a
Govt. servant has not been thoroughly satisfactory the authority competent to
sanction the pension is empowered to make such reduction in the amount of
pension as it may think proper. Proviso to the regulation lays down that no
order regarding reduction in the amount of pension shall be made without the
approval of the appointing authority. Though the Regulations do not expressly
provide for affording opportunity to the Govt. Servant before order for the
reduction in the pension is issued, but the principles of natural justice
ordain that opportunity of hearing must be afforded to the Govt. servant
before any order is passed. Art. 311(2) is not attracted, nonetheless the
Govt. servant is entitled to opportunity of hearing as the order of reduction
in pension affects his right to receive full pension. It is no more in dispute
that pension is not bounty; instead it is a right to property earned by the
Govt. servant on his rendering satisfactory service to the State. In State of
Punjab v. K.R. Erry and Sobhag Rai Mehta, [1973] 2 SCR 405 this Court held
that the State Govt. could not direct cut in the pension of officers without
giving a reasonable opportunity of bearing to them. In Deokinandan Prasad v.
State of Bihar & Ors., [1971] Suppl. SCR 634 it was held that pension is not
bounty pay- able at the sweet will and pleasure of the Govt.; instead the
right to pension is valuable right vested in a Govt. servant. Again in D.S.
Nakara and Ors. v. Union of India, [1983] 2 SCR 165 this Court held that
payment of pension does not depend upon the discretion of the Govt. but it is
governed by the rules and Govt. servant coming under those rules is entitled
to claim pension. A Govt. employee earns his pension by rendering long and
efficient service, the claim of pension is regulated by rules, which provide
for reduction in the amount of pension if the Govt. servant has failed to
render efficient service. In M. Narasimhachar v. State of Mysore, [1960] 1 SCR
981 this Court upheld the order of the State Govt. in reducing pension of a
Govt. employee as the rules regulating the grant of pension made provision for
reduction of pension on account of his having rendered unsatisfactory service.
Rule 6.4 of Punjab Civil Pension Rules provides for the reduction in the
amount of pension if the service of the Govt. employee has not been thoroughly
satisfactory. The State Govt.'s order directing reduction of pension of the
employee of State of Punjab were set aside by this Court in State of Punjab v.
K.R. Erry and Sebhag Rai Mehta (Supra) and in State of Punjab & Anr. v. Iqbal
Singh, [1976] 3 SCR 360 on the ground that the orders imposing deduction in
the pension had been passed in violation of principles of natural justice as
the affected employees had not been afforded opportunity of hearing. These
decisions leave no scope for any doubt that the State Govt. is competent to
direct reduction in pension after affording opportunity of hearing to the
Govt. servant."
20\. In State of Maharashtra vs. M.H. Mazumdar (1988) 2 SCC 52 the Supreme
Court followed the judgment in State of Uttar Pradesh vs. Brahm Datt Sharma
(supra) and held in respect of an enquiry on the two charges namely that the
delinquent government servant had collected permits from the Kolhapur Central
Co-operative Consumers Khatavane with mala fide intention after passing a
receipt thereof to the Godown Keeper to shield Shri K.P. Khatavane and his son
Baban Khatavane from criminal prosecution and on charge no. 2 that he had
deliberately and intentionally denied to have made any enquiry unauthorisedly
lifting of 10 bags of sugar on bogus or forged permit by Shri Baban Khatavane
and his son with some ulterior motive and abetted them in the disposal of
sugar in black market. Considering the punishment of the reduction in pension
by 50% as against the recommendation of the Collector to take a lenient view
and reducing the pension to the extent of Rs. 1/- per month the Supreme Court
held the punishment to be extremely harsh and disproportionate and observed in
paragraph-8 as follows:-
"8.On conclusion of the enquiry charge No. 1 was found to have been
established while charge No. 2 was partially proved. In his report to the
State Government the Collector of Kolhapur held that the respondent's action
was helpful to Shri Khatavane to sell the sugar in the black market, and it
amounted to a serious default on his part as a Government servant. He
recommended that since the respondent had already retired from service a
lenient view should be taken and reduction in pension to the extent of Re. 1
per month be made The State Government accepted the findings and passed the
impugned order reducing the pension by 50 per cent In our view the reduction
of pension 50 per cent was too harsh and disproportionate to the misconduct
proved against the respondent. The State Government should have taken into
consideration the fact that the respondent had retired from service and the
reduction of pension by 50 per cent would seriously affect his living."
21\. In State of West Bengal vs. Haresh C. Banerjee and others (2006) 7 SCC
651 the Supreme Court reiterated, after following the judgments in Deokinandan
Prasad v. State of Bihar (1971) 2 SCC 330; State of Punjab v. K.R. Erry (1973)
1 SCC 120; State of Uttar Pradesh vs. Brahm Datt Sharma (supra); and State of
Maharashtra vs. M.H. Mazumdar (supra) in holding that the question of an order
withholding or reducing pension being invalid and bad in law on a legally
permissible ground is one thing but to hold such a rule to be ultra vires is
another. The Supreme Court had observed in State of Uttar Pradesh v. Brahm
Datt Sharma's case that if the Government incurs pecuniary loss on account of
misconduct or negligence of a Government servant and if he retires from
service before any departmental proceedings are taken against him, it is open
to the State Government to initiate departmental proceedings, and if in those
proceedings, he is found guilty of misconduct, negligence or any other such
act or omission as a result of which Government is put to pecuniary loss, the
State Government is entitled to withhold, reduce or recover the loss suffered
by it by forfeiture or reduction of pension.
22\. In State of U.P. vs. Harihar Bholenath (2006) INSC) 734 dated 1.11.2006,
and Secretary, Forest Department and others vs. Abdur Rasul Chowdhury (2009) 7
SCC the Supreme Court, following the afore-referred judgments, reiterated the
same principle, that in the proceedings drawn against a government servant on
the charges of misconduct in a departmental enquiry which has proceeded beyond
his retirement, the State Government is entitled to withhold, reduce or
recover the loss suffered by it for forfeiture and reduction of pension after
giving reasonable opportunity of hearing to such government servant.
23\. In the present case, we find that the State Government has not applied
its mind to the enquiry report, and the reply given by the petitioner to the
enquiry report. The entire assessment of loss is notional without appreciating
that the enquiry officer had clearly found that the approval to the
appointments prior to 3.3.1994 were not referable to the petitioner as he had
joined on 3.3.1994. Further no one cared to observe that the letter nos. 35,
36, and 39 were not signed by the petitioner but his predecessors and incharge
District Inspector of Schools; the letter nos. 54, 55, 56, 47, 58 and 60 were
in fact letters to the Directorate for giving grants to comply with the orders
of the High Court and serial nos. 39, 49, 51 were the letters of approval of
Class-IV employees for which the appointments were made by the Principals of
the Schools.
24\. In the present case, neither the enquiry officer nor the State Government
has recorded finding of gross misconduct or any loss caused to the State
Government. There is nothing to show that any appointments were made
illegally, and were subsequently cancelled or that the appointees did not join
or performed their duties. There were only a few approvals given by the
petitioner, in respect of which there is no finding of collusion or fraud and
consequential loss to the State Government.
25\. We also find that in the impugned order, by which the petitioner's
pension has been deducted at 10%, and a direction has been made to recover Rs.
86, 40, 000/- from the petitioner, there is no finding of loss caused to the
State Government. The entire calculation is on presumptive basis, without
recording any clear and specific findings of any collusion, fraud or resultant
loss. The observations in the punishment order that the petitioner should have
taken steps to file appeals against the orders passed by the High Court for
payment of salaries rather proves his defence that he had given the subject
approvals in compliance with the orders of the High Court. The detail of the
orders passed by the High Court and the opinion of the counsels appearing for
the State, that any such appeal should have been filed, was not considered.
There was no such material brought on record, nor any such charge was levelled
or proved against the petitioner.
26\. The writ petition is allowed. The impugned order dated 19.6.2002 passed
by the Secretary, Secondary Education, Shiksha Anubhag-I, Government of UP,
Lucknow is set aside. The petitioner shall be paid the entire arrears of
retiral dues and pension within a period of three months along with 9%
interest. The petitioner will also be entitled to Rs. 10,000/- as cost of the
writ petition to be recovered from the respondents.
Dt.17.2.2012 RKP/
25\. We also find that in the impugned order, by which the petitioner's
pension has been deducted at 10%, and a direction has been made to recover Rs.
86, 40, 000/- from the petitioner, there is no finding of loss caused to the
State Government. The entire calculation is on presumptive basis, without
recording any clear and specific findings of any collusion, fraud or resultant
loss. The observations in the punishment order that the petitioner should have
taken steps to file appeals against the orders passed by the High Court for
payment of salaries rather proves his defence that he had given the subject
approvals in compliance with the orders of the High Court. The detail of the
orders passed by the High Court and the opinion of the counsels appearing for
the State, that any such appeal should have been filed, was not considered.
There was no such material brought on record, nor any such charge was levelled
or proved against the petitioner.
26\. The writ petition is allowed. The impugned order dated 19.6.2002 passed
by the Secretary, Secondary Education, Shiksha Anubhag-I, Government of UP,
Lucknow is set aside. The petitioner shall be paid the entire arrears of
under Article 351-A of the Civil Services Regulations. In the enquiry report
dated 24.7.1999, charge nos. 1 and 2 alleging approval of irregular
appointments made by the petitioner, were found proved, causing financial loss
to the State Government.
3.By this writ petition, the petitioner is challenging an order dated
19.6.2002, by which the State Government has, after holding the petitioner
guilty of financial loss of Rs. 86, 40, 000/- caused to the State Government
on account of payment of salaries of twenty four employees from January, 2000,
at the rate of Rs. 5000/- per month for six years, forfeited the entire
gratuity; proposed deduction of 50% pension and recovery of the entire loss.
4\. The petitioner was served with a copy of the enquiry report and was given
an opportunity to submit his reply. He denied the charge of illegal
appointment of twenty four employees and the consequential loss caused to the
State Government.
5\. The petitioner's reply was considered by the State Government. It was
found that the petitioner did not take timely steps to file appeals against
the irregular appointments. The matter, along with proposed punishment, was
sent for consultation of the U.P. Public Service Commission. Relying on the
recommendations of the Commission, the State Government has directed the
recovery of 10% from the pension of the petitioner permanently; to forfeit the
25\. We also find that in the impugned order, by which the petitioner's
pension has been deducted at 10%, and a direction has been made to recover Rs.
86, 40, 000/- from the petitioner, there is no finding of loss caused to the
State Government. The entire calculation is on presumptive basis, without
recording any clear and specific findings of any collusion, fraud or resultant
loss. The observations in the punishment order that the petitioner should have
taken steps to file appeals against the orders passed by the High Court for
payment of salaries rather proves his defence that he had given the subject
approvals in compliance with the orders of the High Court. The detail of the
orders passed by the High Court and the opinion of the counsels appearing for
the State, that any such appeal should have been filed, was not considered.
There was no such material brought on record, nor any such charge was levelled
or proved against the petitioner.
26\. The writ petition is allowed. The impugned order dated 19.6.2002 passed
by the Secretary, Secondary Education, Shiksha Anubhag-I, Government of UP,
Lucknow is set aside. The petitioner shall be paid the entire arrears of
under Article 351-A of the Civil Services Regulations. In the enquiry report
dated 24.7.1999, charge nos. 1 and 2 alleging approval of irregular
appointments made by the petitioner, were found proved, causing financial loss
to the State Government.
3.By this writ petition, the petitioner is challenging an order dated
19.6.2002, by which the State Government has, after holding the petitioner
guilty of financial loss of Rs. 86, 40, 000/- caused to the State Government
on account of payment of salaries of twenty four employees from January, 2000,
at the rate of Rs. 5000/- per month for six years, forfeited the entire
gratuity; proposed deduction of 50% pension and recovery of the entire loss.
4\. The petitioner was served with a copy of the enquiry report and was given
an opportunity to submit his reply. He denied the charge of illegal
appointment of twenty four employees and the consequential loss caused to the
State Government.
5\. The petitioner's reply was considered by the State Government. It was
found that the petitioner did not take timely steps to file appeals against
the irregular appointments. The matter, along with proposed punishment, was
sent for consultation of the U.P. Public Service Commission. Relying on the
recommendations of the Commission, the State Government has directed the
recovery of 10% from the pension of the petitioner permanently; to forfeit the
25\. We also find that in the impugned order, by which the petitioner's
pension has been deducted at 10%, and a direction has been made to recover Rs.
86, 40, 000/- from the petitioner, there is no finding of loss caused to the
State Government. The entire calculation is on presumptive basis, without
recording any clear and specific findings of any collusion, fraud or resultant
loss. The observations in the punishment order that the petitioner should have
taken steps to file appeals against the orders passed by the High Court for
payment of salaries rather proves his defence that he had given the subject
approvals in compliance with the orders of the High Court. The detail of the
orders passed by the High Court and the opinion of the counsels appearing for
the State, that any such appeal should have been filed, was not considered.
There was no such material brought on record, nor any such charge was levelled
or proved against the petitioner.
26\. The writ petition is allowed. The impugned order dated 19.6.2002 passed
by the Secretary, Secondary Education, Shiksha Anubhag-I, Government of UP,
Lucknow is set aside. The petitioner shall be paid the entire arrears of
under Article 351-A of the Civil Services Regulations. In the enquiry report
dated 24.7.1999, charge nos. 1 and 2 alleging approval of irregular
appointments made by the petitioner, were found proved, causing financial loss
to the State Government.
3.By this writ petition, the petitioner is challenging an order dated
19.6.2002, by which the State Government has, after holding the petitioner
guilty of financial loss of Rs. 86, 40, 000/- caused to the State Government
on account of payment of salaries of twenty four employees from January, 2000,
at the rate of Rs. 5000/- per month for six years, forfeited the entire
gratuity; proposed deduction of 50% pension and recovery of the entire loss.
4\. The petitioner was served with a copy of the enquiry report and was given
an opportunity to submit his reply. He denied the charge of illegal
appointment of twenty four employees and the consequential loss caused to the
State Government.
5\. The petitioner's reply was considered by the State Government. It was
found that the petitioner did not take timely steps to file appeals against
the irregular appointments. The matter, along with proposed punishment, was
sent for consultation of the U.P. Public Service Commission. Relying on the
recommendations of the Commission, the State Government has directed the
recovery of 10% from the pension of the petitioner permanently; to forfeit the
entire gratuity and other retiral dues in accordance with the law and to
initiate proceedings by filing a civil suit for recovery of Rs. 86, 40, 000/-.
The entire period of his suspension has been directed to be treated to be in
service, for which he has been made entitled for payment of salary.
6\. In the charge sheet dated 30.4.1997 two allegations were imputed, namely
that he gave approval to 60 appointments made irregularly between 4.1.1994 to
30.6.1994, inspite of the ban imposed by the State Government on appointments.
The petitioner, in collusion with the Accounts Officer and the
Managers/Principals of these Schools, was alleged to have ensured payment of
salaries to such irregularly appointed employees causing loss of lacs of
rupees to the State Government. The second charge is correlated with the first
25\. We also find that in the impugned order, by which the petitioner's
pension has been deducted at 10%, and a direction has been made to recover Rs.
86, 40, 000/- from the petitioner, there is no finding of loss caused to the
State Government. The entire calculation is on presumptive basis, without
recording any clear and specific findings of any collusion, fraud or resultant
loss. The observations in the punishment order that the petitioner should have
taken steps to file appeals against the orders passed by the High Court for
payment of salaries rather proves his defence that he had given the subject
approvals in compliance with the orders of the High Court. The detail of the
orders passed by the High Court and the opinion of the counsels appearing for
the State, that any such appeal should have been filed, was not considered.
There was no such material brought on record, nor any such charge was levelled
or proved against the petitioner.
26\. The writ petition is allowed. The impugned order dated 19.6.2002 passed
by the Secretary, Secondary Education, Shiksha Anubhag-I, Government of UP,
Lucknow is set aside. The petitioner shall be paid the entire arrears of
under Article 351-A of the Civil Services Regulations. In the enquiry report
dated 24.7.1999, charge nos. 1 and 2 alleging approval of irregular
appointments made by the petitioner, were found proved, causing financial loss
to the State Government.
3.By this writ petition, the petitioner is challenging an order dated
19.6.2002, by which the State Government has, after holding the petitioner
guilty of financial loss of Rs. 86, 40, 000/- caused to the State Government
on account of payment of salaries of twenty four employees from January, 2000,
at the rate of Rs. 5000/- per month for six years, forfeited the entire
gratuity; proposed deduction of 50% pension and recovery of the entire loss.
4\. The petitioner was served with a copy of the enquiry report and was given
an opportunity to submit his reply. He denied the charge of illegal
appointment of twenty four employees and the consequential loss caused to the
State Government.
5\. The petitioner's reply was considered by the State Government. It was
found that the petitioner did not take timely steps to file appeals against
the irregular appointments. The matter, along with proposed punishment, was
sent for consultation of the U.P. Public Service Commission. Relying on the
recommendations of the Commission, the State Government has directed the
recovery of 10% from the pension of the petitioner permanently; to forfeit the
entire gratuity and other retiral dues in accordance with the law and to
initiate proceedings by filing a civil suit for recovery of Rs. 86, 40, 000/-.
The entire period of his suspension has been directed to be treated to be in
service, for which he has been made entitled for payment of salary.
6\. In the charge sheet dated 30.4.1997 two allegations were imputed, namely
that he gave approval to 60 appointments made irregularly between 4.1.1994 to
30.6.1994, inspite of the ban imposed by the State Government on appointments.
The petitioner, in collusion with the Accounts Officer and the
Managers/Principals of these Schools, was alleged to have ensured payment of
salaries to such irregularly appointed employees causing loss of lacs of
rupees to the State Government. The second charge is correlated with the first
25\. We also find that in the impugned order, by which the petitioner's
pension has been deducted at 10%, and a direction has been made to recover Rs.
86, 40, 000/- from the petitioner, there is no finding of loss caused to the
State Government. The entire calculation is on presumptive basis, without
recording any clear and specific findings of any collusion, fraud or resultant
loss. The observations in the punishment order that the petitioner should have
taken steps to file appeals against the orders passed by the High Court for
payment of salaries rather proves his defence that he had given the subject
approvals in compliance with the orders of the High Court. The detail of the
orders passed by the High Court and the opinion of the counsels appearing for
the State, that any such appeal should have been filed, was not considered.
There was no such material brought on record, nor any such charge was levelled
or proved against the petitioner.
26\. The writ petition is allowed. The impugned order dated 19.6.2002 passed
by the Secretary, Secondary Education, Shiksha Anubhag-I, Government of UP,
Lucknow is set aside. The petitioner shall be paid the entire arrears of
