Kerala High Court
Indira Raveendran vs The Secrtary on 18 August, 2010
      IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM
    WP(C).No. 25104 of 2010(O)
    1. INDIRA RAVEENDRAN, AGED 49 YEARS,
                          ...  Petitioner
                            Vs
    1. THE SECRTARY, DEPARTMENT OF LABOUR,
                           ...       Respondent
    2. SRI.A.ALEXANDER, DISTRICT LABOUR OFFICER
    3. SMT.A.V.GEETHA KUMARI, DISTRICT
                    For Petitioner  :SRI.N.J.MATHEWS
                    For Respondent  : No Appearance
    The Hon'ble MR. Justice THOMAS P.JOSEPH
     Dated :18/08/2010
     O R D E R
                                  THOMAS P. JOSEPH, J.
                                 --------------------------------------
                                  W.P.(C) No.25104 of 2010
                                 --------------------------------------
a matter of routine and on mere asking. Learned Sub Judge on facts was
satisfied that respondents must be given an opportunity to contest the case. I
find no reason to interfere with the discretion exercised by the learned Sub
Judge.
WP(C) No.25104/2010  11
9\. The last objection is that in one application two reliefs - one to set
aside the exparte order and the other, to receive written statement - are
claimed which is defective. The defect is only concerning the form and if the
required fee is paid on the application, it is not of any fatal consequence.
10\. Having gone through the order under challenge and having heard learned
counsel for petitioner and learned Government Pleader I do not find reason to
interfere with the impugned order. Writ Petition is dismissed.
Learned counsel for petitioner has requested leave of this court to appeal to
the Supreme Court under Article 134A read with Article 133(1)(a) of the
Constitution of India and requests for issue of a certificate. Having regard
to the facts and circumstances of the case I am not satisfied that any
                                 --------------------------------------
                        Dated this the 18th day of August, 2010.
                                           JUDGMENT
This Writ Petition at the instance of the plaintiff is in challenge of Ext.P3,
order dated 22.06.2010 on I.A.No.1479 of 2010 in O.S.No.481 of 2009 setting
aside the exparte order against respondent Nos.1 to 3, the State and its
officials and receiving written statement filed by them beyond 90 days of date
of service of summons on them. In the affidavit in support of I.A.No.1479 of
2010 sworn by respondent No.3, it is stated that respondents were served with
"notice" on 11.08.2009 and the case was adjourned to 24.11.2009 for written
statement but on that day respondents could not file the written statement due
to non- availability of records and statement of facts and hence the matter
was represented to the court. But the court declared respondents/State and its
officials exparte for not filing written statement. It is stated that non-
filing of written statement was not due to any willful laches or negligence of
respondents but only due to the delay in getting statement of facts from
various departments (of the Government). The application was resisted by
petitioner as per Ext.P2, objection where she contended that there is no good
cause shown to set aside the exparte order and receive written statement filed
beyond the period of 90 days. Learned counsel for petitioner states that
Ext.P2, objection was filed in court on 21.06.2010. Learned Sub Judge heard
I.A.No.1479 of 2010 on 22.06.2010 and observing that petitioner has not filed
objection, allowed WP(C) No.25104/2010  2 request of respondents and passed
the impugned order. Learned counsel wanted this Court to consider Ext.P2,
objection also while disposing of this Writ Petition. Learned counsel for
petitioner contends that the impugned order is bad in law for various reasons.
2\. One contention raised is that as there is no compliance with Order XXVII
Rule 8 of the Code, the Government Pleader could not appear in the court below
on behalf of respondent Nos.2 and 3. It is also contended that as per Rule 27
of the Kerala Government Law Officers (Appointment and Conditions of Service)
and Conduct of Cases Rules, 1978 (for short, "the Rules"), the Government
Pleader could not have appeared on behalf of a private parties (referring to
respondent Nos.2 and 3) while he is appearing on behalf of the Government
(respondent No.1). According to the learned counsel, it should therefore be
taken that there was no appearance for respondent Nos.2 and 3 in the court
below. Further argument is that the learned Sub Judge should not and could not
have extended the time for filing written statement beyond 90 days from date
of service of summons in view of Section 148 of the Code. According to the
learned counsel it is only in exceptional circumstances that court could
extent time as held in Kailash v. Nanhku and others ((2005) 4 SCC
480) and R.N.Jadi & Brothers and others v. Subhashchandra ((2007) 6 SCC 420).
On facts it is contended that court below went wrong in allowing request to
set aside the exparte order and extent time for filing written WP(C)
No.25104/2010  3 statement. It is also argued that the application filed by
respondents is defective since in one application two reliefs are claimed.
Learned Government Pleader appearing for the respondents contended that there
was no objection before the learned Sub Judge when the application was heard
and disposed of. At any rate, on facts and circumstances as well as the point
of law learned Sub Judge is justified in allowing the application to set aside
the exparte order and receiving the written statement.
3\. To decide the contention raised by learned counsel it is relevant to refer
to the facts involved. According to the petitioner, respondent Nos.2 and 3
who, it is not disputed before me are public officers under the Government
(respondent No.1) initiated prosecution proceedings against petitioner,
malafide and without any material and ultimately petitioner was acquitted in
the criminal prosecution. Petitioner wanted the respondents to pay
compensation to her for the injury and mental agony she suffered. Before
instituting the suit a notice under Section 80 of the Code was also served on
respondents. Order XXVII Rule 8 of the Code relied on by the learned counsel
says that when the Government undertakes defence of a suit against a public
officer, the Government Pleader, upon being furnished with authority to appear
and answer the plaint, shall apply to the court and upon such application the
court shall cause a note of his authority to be entered in the register of
civil suits. Sub-rule (2) says that where no application as referred to under
Sub-rule (1) is made by the Government Pleader on or before the day fixed in
the notice for the WP(C) No.25104/2010  4 defendant to appear and answer, the
case shall proceed as in a suit between private parties. Learned counsel has
placed reliance on the decisions in Lutfar Rahaman Laskar Haji Kabadali Naskar
v. The State of West Bengal and others(AIR 1954 Calcutta 455) and State of
Orissa and others v. Orissa Oil Industries Ltd. and others (AIR 1982 Orissa
245) to buttress his contention that in so far as no such application in
compliance of Rule 8 of Order XXVII of the Code has been made by the
Government Pleader he could not have appeared in the court below on behalf of
respondent Nos.2 and 3 in his capacity as Government Pleader. Rule 27(5) of
the Rules relied on by learned counsel states that the Government Law Officer
referred to therein shall not accept any engagement or fee from private
parties in cases in which he appears on behalf of Government. According to the
learned counsel, for the said reason the Government Pleader could not appear
on behalf of respondent Nos.2 and 3 personally also.
4\. Two questions arise for decision; whether respondent Nos.2 and 3 have been
impleaded in the suit as private parties and whether in the absence of an
application under Order XXVII Rule 8 of the Code the Government Pleader could
have appeared on behalf of respondent Nos.2 an 3. What is stated in the plaint
is that respondent Nos.2 and 3 (though they are also described in the cause
title by their names) in their capacity as public officers initiated
prosecution proceedings against petitioner, malafide, and without probable
cause and it resulted in acquittal of petitioner resulting in loss and injury
to her which is WP(C) No.25104/2010  5 required to be compensated by payment
of damages by the respondents. As I stated, though respondent Nos.2 and 3 are
mentioned by their names also, they are described by the respective
departments as well. There is no case that prosecution proceedings were
initiated by respondent Nos.2 and 3 in their individual and personal capacity.
Instead allegations in the plaint show that they initiated prosecution only in
the capacity as officials of the department concerned. In otherwords it was in
the discharge of their official duty though allegedly tainted with malafides
that they acted against petitioner. It is apposite to refer to Rule 5A of
Order XXVII of the Code which states that where a suit is instituted against a
public officer for damages or other relief in respect of any act alleged to
have been done by him in his official capacity, the Government shall be joined
as a party to the suit. Here, State has been made a party to the suit
obviously in compliance of the said Rule and as petitioner is proceeding
against respondent Nos.2 and 3, public officers for recovery of damages for
acts alleged to be done by them in the discharge of their official duty. Hence
I cannot accept a contention that respondent Nos.2 and 3 are impleaded in
their individual capacity as private parties to the suit. Notwithstanding that
respondent Nos.2 and 3 are also named by their names I must understand that
they have been impleaded as public officers for discharging their official
duty which ofcourse petitioner would say is tainted with malafides. Rule 27(2)
of the Rules has therefore no application.
5\. Then the question is whether for non-compliance of Order XXVII Rule 8 of
the Code appearance of Government Pleader on behalf of respondent WP(C)
No.25104/2010  6 Nos.2 and 3 in the court below has to be ignored and it
should be taken that there was no appearance for respondent Nos.2 and 3 in the
court below. Here is a case where the suit is instituted against State as well
as its officers and not merely against public officers alone. The Government
Pleader has appeared on behalf of the State and the public officers. Order
XXVII Rule 8 of the Code relied on by learned counsel refers to the procedure
to be followed by a Government Pleader "upon being furnished with authority to
appear and answer the plaint". In Lutfar Rahaman Laskar Haji Kabadali Naskar
v. The State of West Bengal and others (supra) facts of the case would show
that the decision concerned an advocate who was authorised to appear and
answer the plaint on behalf of public officers concerned. The act of that
advocate without complying with Rule 8 of Order XXVII was found to be not done
by an advocate who had authority to do so (on behalf of the public officers).
Though, the above said Rule referred to 'Government Pleader' it was pointed
out from Section 2(7) of the Code that the expression included any pleader
acting under the direction of the Government Pleader. The decision did not
concern the act of a Government Pleader appointed by the Government. The
decision in State of Orissa and others v. Orissa Oil Industries Ltd. and
others (supra) concerned Rule 9 of Order XXVII as amended by the Orissa High
Court. In paragraph No.6 of the decision it is observed that there is no
material that the Government Pleader had authority from the State Government
to appear on behalf of public officers (involved in that case). Rule 22(1)(vi)
of the Rules WP(C) No.25104/2010  7 specifically empowers the Government
Pleader when so instructed by the District Collector or the Government to
appear on behalf of public officers. When the Government Pleader has appeared
on behalf of respondent Nos.2 and 3 (public officers) I must presume that it
was as per the instruction of the District Collector or the Government as the
case may be. Hence contention that in the absence of compliance of Order XXVII
Rule 8 of the Code the Government Pleader could not have appeared on behalf of
respondent Nos.2 and 3 cannot be accepted. At any rate as the Rajasthan High
Court observed in State of Rajasthan v. Chander Singh (AIR 1971 Rajasthan 299)
compliance with Order XXVII Rule 8 of the Code can be made at any stage, even
in appeal.
6\. The next argument is concerning power of the court to receive written
statement beyond the period of 90 days of service of summons. Question for
consideration is whether on the facts and circumstances and on point of law it
was within the power of learned Sub Judge to have accepted the written
statement. (See Kailash v. Nanhku and others and R.N.Jadi & Brothers and
others v. Subhashchandra referred supra). These decisions ofcourse say that
the power to extent time for filing written statement beyond the maximum time
referred to in Order VIII Rule 1 of the Code must be exercised in exceptional
circumstances taking into account the legislative mandate under the said
provision. But these decisions also hold that the time limit under Order VIII
Rule 1 of the Code though couched in a mandatory form is WP(C) No.25104/2010
8 directory in nature and that it does not affect power of the court to extent
time in appropriate cases. It is argued by learned counsel for petitioner that
Section 148 of the Code empowers the court to extent the time only not
exceeding 30 days. I am afraid, that argument cannot be accepted in the light
of the decision in R.N.Jadi & Brothers and others v. Subhashchandra (supra)
where in paragraph No.14, P.K.Balasubramanyan, J. has referred to Section 148
of the Code as well in holding that it is within the power of court to extent
time for filing written statement provided circumstances warranted such a
course of action. Therefore the contention that Section 148 of the Code
limited the power of court to extent time only upto a period of 30 days cannot
be accepted.
7\. Yet another argument learned counsel has advanced is that in Ext.P1,
application the provision of law quoted is Section 151 of the Code and not
Section 148 and Order IX Rule 7 of the Code. In G.K.Prabhakaran & Co.,
Irinjalakuda v. David Traders, Trichur ( AIR 1973 Kerala 1) in paragraph No.3
it is held that no party has a right to insist on the court exercising its
inherent jurisdiction under Section 151 of the Code and that it is the power
of court to pass appropriate orders in the ends of justice. No doubt,
provision of law invoked by respondents in Ext.P1 is Section 151 of the Code.
But a wrong quoting of Section is not a ground to disallow relief if otherwise
parties are entitled to it. Then the question is whether learned Sub Judge was
WP(C) No.25104/2010  9 justified in setting aside the exparte order and
receiving written statement of respondents. Order IX Rule 7 of the code says
what is required is to show "good cause" as against "sufficient cause"
occurring in Order IX Rule 13 of the Code. The degree of proof in the matter
of 'good cause' is lesser than in the matter of "sufficient cause". Here
respondent No.1 is the State and respondent Nos.2 and 3, as already stated are
public officers. They received summons on 11.08.2009. Learned counsel for
petitioner states from the copy of summons served on respondents that
respondent No.3 received it on 13.07.2009. But this aspect was not brought to
the notice of the trial court. Assuming that respondent No.3 had received
summons on 13.07.2009 question is whether exparte order against respondents
could have been set aside and their written statement received. I referred to
Ext.P1, affidavit of respondent No.3 in that regard. Learned counsel states
that there is no mention in the affidavit that it is sworn for and on behalf
of respondent Nos.1 and 2 also. It is true. But one must go through the
affidavit as a whole to understand whether the affidavit is sworn on behalf of
respondent Nos.1 and 2 also. Respondent No.3 in his affidavit refers to the
inability of respondent Nos.1 and 2 also to file written statement within the
prescribed time. Therefore I am inclined to think that the affidavit were
sworn on behalf of respondent Nos.1 and 2 as well. Order XXVII Rule 5 of the
Code as amended in State of Kerala states that the court in fixing the day the
Government is to answer the plaint, shall allow not less than three months
time from the date of summons for necessary communication with the Government
through proper channel and for issue of instructions to the WP(C)
No.25104/2010  10 Government Pleader to appear and answer on behalf of the
Government and that the court may extend the time at its discretion. No doubt
Order VIII Rule 1 of the Code has to be read along with Order XXVII Rule 5 of
the Code. In the matter of granting time to the Government or public officers
to file written statement some laxity is permissible. In the affidavit it is
stated that non-filing of written statement within the stipulated time was on
account of non availability of records and statement of facts. The Government
Pleader has to prepare written statement on receiving statement of facts and
other relevant records from the Departments concerned and get it approved by
the appropriate authority before it is filed in court. It is taking that also
into account that State amendment has been made to Order XXVII Rule 5 of the
Code enabling the Government to get three months time to file written
statement and the court is empowered to extent the time for filing written
statement.
8\. I stated that the decisions on the point say that extension of time for
filing written statement beyond the period of 90 days should not be granted as
a matter of routine and on mere asking. Learned Sub Judge on facts was
satisfied that respondents must be given an opportunity to contest the case. I
find no reason to interfere with the discretion exercised by the learned Sub
Judge.
WP(C) No.25104/2010  11
9\. The last objection is that in one application two reliefs - one to set
aside the exparte order and the other, to receive written statement - are
claimed which is defective. The defect is only concerning the form and if the
required fee is paid on the application, it is not of any fatal consequence.
10\. Having gone through the order under challenge and having heard learned
counsel for petitioner and learned Government Pleader I do not find reason to
interfere with the impugned order. Writ Petition is dismissed.
Learned counsel for petitioner has requested leave of this court to appeal to
the Supreme Court under Article 134A read with Article 133(1)(a) of the
Constitution of India and requests for issue of a certificate. Having regard
to the facts and circumstances of the case I am not satisfied that any
substantial question of law having general importance is involved and hence
the request for issue of certificate is declined.
THOMAS P.JOSEPH, Judge.
cks
a matter of routine and on mere asking. Learned Sub Judge on facts was
satisfied that respondents must be given an opportunity to contest the case. I
find no reason to interfere with the discretion exercised by the learned Sub
Judge.
WP(C) No.25104/2010  11
9\. The last objection is that in one application two reliefs - one to set
aside the exparte order and the other, to receive written statement - are
claimed which is defective. The defect is only concerning the form and if the
required fee is paid on the application, it is not of any fatal consequence.
10\. Having gone through the order under challenge and having heard learned
counsel for petitioner and learned Government Pleader I do not find reason to
interfere with the impugned order. Writ Petition is dismissed.
Learned counsel for petitioner has requested leave of this court to appeal to
the Supreme Court under Article 134A read with Article 133(1)(a) of the
Constitution of India and requests for issue of a certificate. Having regard
to the facts and circumstances of the case I am not satisfied that any
                                 --------------------------------------
                        Dated this the 18th day of August, 2010.
                                           JUDGMENT
This Writ Petition at the instance of the plaintiff is in challenge of Ext.P3,
order dated 22.06.2010 on I.A.No.1479 of 2010 in O.S.No.481 of 2009 setting
aside the exparte order against respondent Nos.1 to 3, the State and its
officials and receiving written statement filed by them beyond 90 days of date
of service of summons on them. In the affidavit in support of I.A.No.1479 of
2010 sworn by respondent No.3, it is stated that respondents were served with
"notice" on 11.08.2009 and the case was adjourned to 24.11.2009 for written
statement but on that day respondents could not file the written statement due
to non- availability of records and statement of facts and hence the matter
was represented to the court. But the court declared respondents/State and its
officials exparte for not filing written statement. It is stated that non-
filing of written statement was not due to any willful laches or negligence of
respondents but only due to the delay in getting statement of facts from
various departments (of the Government). The application was resisted by
petitioner as per Ext.P2, objection where she contended that there is no good
cause shown to set aside the exparte order and receive written statement filed
beyond the period of 90 days. Learned counsel for petitioner states that
a matter of routine and on mere asking. Learned Sub Judge on facts was
satisfied that respondents must be given an opportunity to contest the case. I
find no reason to interfere with the discretion exercised by the learned Sub
Judge.
WP(C) No.25104/2010  11
9\. The last objection is that in one application two reliefs - one to set
aside the exparte order and the other, to receive written statement - are
claimed which is defective. The defect is only concerning the form and if the
required fee is paid on the application, it is not of any fatal consequence.
10\. Having gone through the order under challenge and having heard learned
counsel for petitioner and learned Government Pleader I do not find reason to
interfere with the impugned order. Writ Petition is dismissed.
Learned counsel for petitioner has requested leave of this court to appeal to
the Supreme Court under Article 134A read with Article 133(1)(a) of the
Constitution of India and requests for issue of a certificate. Having regard
to the facts and circumstances of the case I am not satisfied that any
                                 --------------------------------------
                        Dated this the 18th day of August, 2010.
                                           JUDGMENT
This Writ Petition at the instance of the plaintiff is in challenge of Ext.P3,
order dated 22.06.2010 on I.A.No.1479 of 2010 in O.S.No.481 of 2009 setting
aside the exparte order against respondent Nos.1 to 3, the State and its
officials and receiving written statement filed by them beyond 90 days of date
of service of summons on them. In the affidavit in support of I.A.No.1479 of
2010 sworn by respondent No.3, it is stated that respondents were served with
"notice" on 11.08.2009 and the case was adjourned to 24.11.2009 for written
statement but on that day respondents could not file the written statement due
to non- availability of records and statement of facts and hence the matter
was represented to the court. But the court declared respondents/State and its
officials exparte for not filing written statement. It is stated that non-
filing of written statement was not due to any willful laches or negligence of
respondents but only due to the delay in getting statement of facts from
various departments (of the Government). The application was resisted by
petitioner as per Ext.P2, objection where she contended that there is no good
cause shown to set aside the exparte order and receive written statement filed
beyond the period of 90 days. Learned counsel for petitioner states that
a matter of routine and on mere asking. Learned Sub Judge on facts was
satisfied that respondents must be given an opportunity to contest the case. I
find no reason to interfere with the discretion exercised by the learned Sub
Judge.
WP(C) No.25104/2010  11
9\. The last objection is that in one application two reliefs - one to set
aside the exparte order and the other, to receive written statement - are
claimed which is defective. The defect is only concerning the form and if the
required fee is paid on the application, it is not of any fatal consequence.
10\. Having gone through the order under challenge and having heard learned
counsel for petitioner and learned Government Pleader I do not find reason to
interfere with the impugned order. Writ Petition is dismissed.
Learned counsel for petitioner has requested leave of this court to appeal to
the Supreme Court under Article 134A read with Article 133(1)(a) of the
Constitution of India and requests for issue of a certificate. Having regard
to the facts and circumstances of the case I am not satisfied that any
                                 --------------------------------------
                        Dated this the 18th day of August, 2010.
                                           JUDGMENT
This Writ Petition at the instance of the plaintiff is in challenge of Ext.P3,
order dated 22.06.2010 on I.A.No.1479 of 2010 in O.S.No.481 of 2009 setting
aside the exparte order against respondent Nos.1 to 3, the State and its
officials and receiving written statement filed by them beyond 90 days of date
of service of summons on them. In the affidavit in support of I.A.No.1479 of
2010 sworn by respondent No.3, it is stated that respondents were served with
"notice" on 11.08.2009 and the case was adjourned to 24.11.2009 for written
statement but on that day respondents could not file the written statement due
to non- availability of records and statement of facts and hence the matter
was represented to the court. But the court declared respondents/State and its
officials exparte for not filing written statement. It is stated that non-
filing of written statement was not due to any willful laches or negligence of
respondents but only due to the delay in getting statement of facts from
various departments (of the Government). The application was resisted by
petitioner as per Ext.P2, objection where she contended that there is no good
cause shown to set aside the exparte order and receive written statement filed
beyond the period of 90 days. Learned counsel for petitioner states that
Ext.P2, objection was filed in court on 21.06.2010. Learned Sub Judge heard
I.A.No.1479 of 2010 on 22.06.2010 and observing that petitioner has not filed
objection, allowed WP(C) No.25104/2010  2 request of respondents and passed
the impugned order. Learned counsel wanted this Court to consider Ext.P2,
objection also while disposing of this Writ Petition. Learned counsel for
petitioner contends that the impugned order is bad in law for various reasons.
2\. One contention raised is that as there is no compliance with Order XXVII
Rule 8 of the Code, the Government Pleader could not appear in the court below
on behalf of respondent Nos.2 and 3. It is also contended that as per Rule 27
of the Kerala Government Law Officers (Appointment and Conditions of Service)
and Conduct of Cases Rules, 1978 (for short, "the Rules"), the Government
a matter of routine and on mere asking. Learned Sub Judge on facts was
satisfied that respondents must be given an opportunity to contest the case. I
find no reason to interfere with the discretion exercised by the learned Sub
Judge.
WP(C) No.25104/2010  11
9\. The last objection is that in one application two reliefs - one to set
aside the exparte order and the other, to receive written statement - are
claimed which is defective. The defect is only concerning the form and if the
required fee is paid on the application, it is not of any fatal consequence.
10\. Having gone through the order under challenge and having heard learned
counsel for petitioner and learned Government Pleader I do not find reason to
interfere with the impugned order. Writ Petition is dismissed.
Learned counsel for petitioner has requested leave of this court to appeal to
the Supreme Court under Article 134A read with Article 133(1)(a) of the
Constitution of India and requests for issue of a certificate. Having regard
to the facts and circumstances of the case I am not satisfied that any
                                 --------------------------------------
                        Dated this the 18th day of August, 2010.
                                           JUDGMENT
This Writ Petition at the instance of the plaintiff is in challenge of Ext.P3,
order dated 22.06.2010 on I.A.No.1479 of 2010 in O.S.No.481 of 2009 setting
aside the exparte order against respondent Nos.1 to 3, the State and its
officials and receiving written statement filed by them beyond 90 days of date
of service of summons on them. In the affidavit in support of I.A.No.1479 of
2010 sworn by respondent No.3, it is stated that respondents were served with
"notice" on 11.08.2009 and the case was adjourned to 24.11.2009 for written
statement but on that day respondents could not file the written statement due
to non- availability of records and statement of facts and hence the matter
was represented to the court. But the court declared respondents/State and its
officials exparte for not filing written statement. It is stated that non-
filing of written statement was not due to any willful laches or negligence of
respondents but only due to the delay in getting statement of facts from
various departments (of the Government). The application was resisted by
petitioner as per Ext.P2, objection where she contended that there is no good
cause shown to set aside the exparte order and receive written statement filed
beyond the period of 90 days. Learned counsel for petitioner states that
Ext.P2, objection was filed in court on 21.06.2010. Learned Sub Judge heard
I.A.No.1479 of 2010 on 22.06.2010 and observing that petitioner has not filed
objection, allowed WP(C) No.25104/2010  2 request of respondents and passed
the impugned order. Learned counsel wanted this Court to consider Ext.P2,
objection also while disposing of this Writ Petition. Learned counsel for
petitioner contends that the impugned order is bad in law for various reasons.
2\. One contention raised is that as there is no compliance with Order XXVII
Rule 8 of the Code, the Government Pleader could not appear in the court below
on behalf of respondent Nos.2 and 3. It is also contended that as per Rule 27
of the Kerala Government Law Officers (Appointment and Conditions of Service)
and Conduct of Cases Rules, 1978 (for short, "the Rules"), the Government
a matter of routine and on mere asking. Learned Sub Judge on facts was
satisfied that respondents must be given an opportunity to contest the case. I
find no reason to interfere with the discretion exercised by the learned Sub
Judge.
WP(C) No.25104/2010  11
9\. The last objection is that in one application two reliefs - one to set
aside the exparte order and the other, to receive written statement - are
claimed which is defective. The defect is only concerning the form and if the
required fee is paid on the application, it is not of any fatal consequence.
10\. Having gone through the order under challenge and having heard learned
counsel for petitioner and learned Government Pleader I do not find reason to
interfere with the impugned order. Writ Petition is dismissed.
Learned counsel for petitioner has requested leave of this court to appeal to
the Supreme Court under Article 134A read with Article 133(1)(a) of the
Constitution of India and requests for issue of a certificate. Having regard
to the facts and circumstances of the case I am not satisfied that any
