Kerala High Court
R. Bharathan vs Income Tax Officer on 22 June, 1989
Equivalent citations: 1989 180 ITR 356 Ker
Author: K Sreedharan
Bench: K Sreedharan
JUDGMENT K. Sreedharan, J.
1\. The petitioner was an abkari contractor. For the assessment year 1983-84
(accounting year 1982-83) he was running arrack shops and toddy shops in
Kazhakkoottam Excise Range in Trivan-drum district. He filed a return of
income on December 6, 1983, before the Income-tax Officer, D-Ward, Quilon,
offering an income of Rs. 4,64,845. A search under Section 132 of the Income-
tax Act, 1961, hereinafter referred to as "the Act", was conducted at the
arrack depot of the accused at Kazhakkoottam and at the residence of the
accused on March 5, 1985. In the course of search, it is alleged that certain
original books of accounts disclosing sale of arrack at different rates were
found. According to the income-tax authorities, the return of income filed by
the petitioner on December 6, 1983, was incorrect and it was filed by
fabricating and manipulating false accounts. On this allegation, a complaint,
copy of which is marked in this case as annexure-5, was filed before the
Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate's Court (Economic Offences), Ernakulam,
independently on the evidence placed before it. Otherwise, there is a danger
of a contention being advanced that whenever an assessee or any other person
liable under the Act had failed to convince the authorities in the proceedings
under the Act that he has not deliberately made any false statement or that he
has not fabricated any material evidence, the conviction of such person should
invariably follow in the criminal court."
14\. The allegation now made against the petitioner is that he filed false
returns of income and fabricated and manipulated false accounts and other
documents while filing the returns for the assessment year 1983-84 (accounting
year 1982-83). The Tribunal's order and the order of the Commissioner
(Appeals), as stated earlier, have not gone to state that the accounts
produced by the petitioner and the return of income filed by him are correct.
So, the criminal court has to go into the question as to whether the
complainant succeeds in bringing out the offence charged against the
petitioner. The second ground urged by the petitioner is answered accordingly.
15\. The criminal miscellaneous case is disposed of by quashing that part of
Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate's Court (Economic Offences), Ernakulam,
for offences under Sections 276C(1) and 277(i) of the Act and Sections 193,
196 and 415, IPC. That court registered the complaint as C. C. No. 34 of 1987
and issued summons to the petitioner.
2\. The petitioner seeks to quash the proceedings before the court below on
two grounds. First ground is as follows : The petitioner filed a return of
income before the Income-tax Officer, D-Ward, Quilon, on December 6, 1983.
That officer passed the assessment order on February 28, 1986. So the offences
under Sections 193 and 196, IPC, if at all must be taken to have been
committed by the petitioner before the court of the Income-tax Officer,
D-Ward, Quilon. Only that officer or a superior officer to whom that officer
was subordinate could have filed a complaint. The complaint, annexure-5, was
filed by the Income-tax Officer, B-Ward, Trivandrum. That complaint is
incompetent The second ground urged is that the allegation regarding
fabrication and manipulation of false accounts and other documents cannot
stand in view of the decision of the Commissioner of Income-tax (Appeals) in
the appeal filed by the petitioner and by virtue of the order passed by the
Income-tax Appellate Tribunal, Cochin Bench, in I. T. A. No.320 of 1987. I
shall proceed to deal with these grounds in detail.
3\. Offences alleged against the petitioner are those under Sections 276C(1)
and 277(i) of the Act and Sections 193, 196 and 415 of the Indian Penal Code.
The petitioner filed a return of income for the assessment year 1983-84 on
December 6, 1983, before the Income-tax Officer, D-Ward, Quilon. That officer
passed a final order of assessment on February 28, 1986. So it is contended
that the offences under Sections 193 and 196, IPC, if at all committed, must
be taken to have been committed before the Income-tax Officer, D-Ward, Quilon.
Section 136 of the Act provides that any proceeding before the income-tax
authorities shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding for the purpose of
Section 196, IPC, and that every income-tax authority shall be deemed to be a
civil court for the purposes of Section 195 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
So, if an offence under Section 193 or 196 of the IPC has been committed in
respect of a proceeding before the income-tax authority, that authority alone
can file a complaint under Section 195 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. If
that authority is not filing a complaint, then some other authority to which
the first authority is subordinate can initiate proceedings. In the instant
case, the alleged false return of income was filed before the Income-tax
Officer, D-Ward, Quilon. So, the offences under Section 193 or 196, IPC, can
be taken to have been committed before that officer or court. Annexure-5
complaint was not filed by that officer. It was filed by the Income-tax
Officer, B-Ward, Trivandrum. Learned counsel representing the Revenue has no
case that the Income-tax Officer, B-Ward, Trivandrum, is an officer superior
to the Income-tax Officer, D-Ward, Quilon. In other words, the Income-tax
Officer, D-Ward, Quilon, is not subordinate to the Income-tax Officer, B-Ward,
Trivandrum. Therefore, as per Section 195 (1)(b) of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, the complainant is incompetent to file the complaint for
prosecuting the petitioner for offences under Sections 193 and 196, IPC. This
view is supported by the decision in ITO v. Kerala Oil Mills [1986] 162 ITR
292 (Ker) ; [1986] KLT 947.
4\. Learned counsel representing the petitioner contends that the decision in
ITO v. Kerala Oil Mills [1986] 162 ITR 292 ; [1986] KLT 947 is also an
authority for the proposition that the Income-tax Officer before whom the
offences under Sections 193 and 196, IPC, are committed alone can file a
complaint for offences under Section 277 of the Act. I find it difficult to
accept this argument. In that decision, the maintainability of a complaint
filed by an officer of the Income-tax Department as per the provisions of the
Act for an offence under Section 277 of the Act was not considered by this
court. Independent of the charge under Sections 193 and 196, IPC, a
prosecution for violation of the provisions of the Act is maintainable.
Offences under Sections 276C (1) and 277 (i) of the Act are independent of
Sections 193 and 196, IPC. The restriction for initiation of prosecution for
an offence under the Act is that it cannot be initiated except with the
previous sanction of the Commissioner of Income-tax. The complaint in this
case is one filed at the instance of the Commissioner of Income-tax,
Trivandrum, as per his proceedings No. 898/ADI/1987-88 dated January 18,
1988\. The complaint, which is filed with the previous sanction of the
Commissioner, is maintainable in so far as it relates to the offences under
the Act.
5\. From the above discussion, it follows that the complaint against the
petitioner for offences under Sections 193 and 196, IPC, alone is
unsustainable. The complaint in respect of other offences alleged therein is
to be enquired into by the court below. Ground No. 1 raised by the petitioner
is answered in this manner.
6\. The petitioner challenged the order of assessment passed against him for
the assessment year 1983-84 before the Income-tax Appellate Tribunal, Cochin
Bench, in I. T. A. No. 320 of 1987. That appeal was disposed of by the
Tribunal by an order dated September 9, 1988, observing :
"We are, therefore, left with the payments made to the excise authorities,
police and politicians. Taking all these things into account, we are of the
opinion that an addition of Rs. 5 lakhs should be made to the disclosed income
as per the books. This is merely as a matter of estimate and not on the basis
of any suppressed income in the books of account maintained by the assessee."
7\. This order, according to learned counsel appearing for the petitioner,
shows that the petitioner did not file any false return of income by
fabricating or manipulating false accounts or other documents as alleged in
the complaint.
8\. Learned counsel representing the Revenue submits that the Tribunal, after
rejecting the accounts, accepted the concession made by the petitioner's
counsel, Sri C. Kochunni Nair, for adding Rs. 5 lakhs to the income disclosed
as per the books. The Tribunal, in paragraph 16 of the order (annexure IX),
observed:
"We will, therefore, treat it as an ordinary case and go first into the issue
of reasons for rejection of the books of account. Shri Nair had fairly
accepted before us that he would not press for acceptance of book results and
a fair estimate may be made. Therefore, on concession from Shri Nair, we can
treat it as a case where the proviso to Section 145 would be applicable."
9\. Learned counsel appearing for the Revenue went on to submit that the order
of the Tribunal, annexure-IX, brings out the fact that the books of account
produced by the petitioner were rejected. I find much force in this argument.
The accounts produced by the petitioner were not acted upon by the Tribunal.
The Tribunal accepted the concession made by learned counsel representing the
petitioner. So, it cannot be held that the decision rendered by the Tribunal
has the effect of a finding that the accounts were not fabricated or that the
petitioner had not manipulated false accounts. Nor has it the effect of
stating that the accounts produced by the petitioner are correct.
10\. The next argument advanced by learned counsel appearing for the
petitioner is that the penalty imposed by the Income-tax Officer under Section
271(1)(c) of the Act has been cancelled by the Commissioner of Income-tax
(Appeals), Trivandrum,' by order dated October 31, 1988, and hence no
prosecution for manipulation of accounts or for fabricating accounts be
sustained. According to learned counsel appearing for the Revenue, the
Commissioner of Income-tax (Appeals) interfered with the order imposing
penalty solely relying on the Tribunal's order. When the Tribunal refused to
accept the books of account produced by the petitioner as correct and genuine,
the decision on the appeal will not, in any way, alter the situation.
11\. The operative portion of the order of the Commissioner (Appeals) is :
"In the light of the nature of addition made as per the Tribunals order, it is
only a case of estimated addition and even this estimated addition is not
based on any concealment or suppression of sale proceeds or any question of
facts. In view of the foregoing, the charge of concealment of income does not
survive. There is no case for levy of penalty under Section 271 (1)(c) of the
Act. The penalty order is cancelled accordingly."
12\. From this it is evident that the Commissioner of Income-tax (Appeals) was
basing his decision solely on the findings of the Tribunal. Therefore, learned
counsel appearing for the Revenue is well within his province when it is
argued that the order of the Tribunal or of the Commissioner (Appeals) has not
entered a finding that the return of income filed by the petitioner was
correct.
13\. The question whether prosecution for offences punishable under Sections
276C(1) and 277(i) of the Act and under Sections 193 and 196, IPC, instituted
by the Department while reassessment proceedings under the Act are pending,
are liable to be quashed on the ground that they are not maintainable, came up
for consideration before the Supreme Court in P. Jayappan v. S. K. Perumal,
First ITO [1984] 149 ITR 696. Their Lordships observed at page 700 :
"In a criminal case, all the ingredients of the offence in question have to be
established in order to secure the conviction of the accused. The criminal
court no doubt has to give due regard to the result of any proceedings under
the Act having a bearing on the question in issue and in an appropriate case
it may drop the proceedings in the light of an order passed under the Act. It
does not, however, mean that the result of a proceeding under the Act would be
binding on the criminal court. The criminal court has to judge the case
independently on the evidence placed before it. Otherwise, there is a danger
of a contention being advanced that whenever an assessee or any other person
liable under the Act had failed to convince the authorities in the proceedings
under the Act that he has not deliberately made any false statement or that he
has not fabricated any material evidence, the conviction of such person should
invariably follow in the criminal court."
14\. The allegation now made against the petitioner is that he filed false
returns of income and fabricated and manipulated false accounts and other
documents while filing the returns for the assessment year 1983-84 (accounting
year 1982-83). The Tribunal's order and the order of the Commissioner
(Appeals), as stated earlier, have not gone to state that the accounts
produced by the petitioner and the return of income filed by him are correct.
So, the criminal court has to go into the question as to whether the
complainant succeeds in bringing out the offence charged against the
petitioner. The second ground urged by the petitioner is answered accordingly.
15\. The criminal miscellaneous case is disposed of by quashing that part of
the complaint relating to the offences under Sections 193 and 196, IPC. The
other offences alleged are to be enquired into and decided on the basis of
evidence to be let in. The learned Magistrate is directed to dispose of C. C.
No. 36 of 1988 in accordance with law as expeditiously as possible.
independently on the evidence placed before it. Otherwise, there is a danger
of a contention being advanced that whenever an assessee or any other person
liable under the Act had failed to convince the authorities in the proceedings
under the Act that he has not deliberately made any false statement or that he
has not fabricated any material evidence, the conviction of such person should
invariably follow in the criminal court."
14\. The allegation now made against the petitioner is that he filed false
returns of income and fabricated and manipulated false accounts and other
documents while filing the returns for the assessment year 1983-84 (accounting
year 1982-83). The Tribunal's order and the order of the Commissioner
(Appeals), as stated earlier, have not gone to state that the accounts
produced by the petitioner and the return of income filed by him are correct.
So, the criminal court has to go into the question as to whether the
complainant succeeds in bringing out the offence charged against the
petitioner. The second ground urged by the petitioner is answered accordingly.
15\. The criminal miscellaneous case is disposed of by quashing that part of
Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate's Court (Economic Offences), Ernakulam,
for offences under Sections 276C(1) and 277(i) of the Act and Sections 193,
196 and 415, IPC. That court registered the complaint as C. C. No. 34 of 1987
and issued summons to the petitioner.
2\. The petitioner seeks to quash the proceedings before the court below on
two grounds. First ground is as follows : The petitioner filed a return of
income before the Income-tax Officer, D-Ward, Quilon, on December 6, 1983.
That officer passed the assessment order on February 28, 1986. So the offences
under Sections 193 and 196, IPC, if at all must be taken to have been
committed by the petitioner before the court of the Income-tax Officer,
D-Ward, Quilon. Only that officer or a superior officer to whom that officer
was subordinate could have filed a complaint. The complaint, annexure-5, was
filed by the Income-tax Officer, B-Ward, Trivandrum. That complaint is
incompetent The second ground urged is that the allegation regarding
fabrication and manipulation of false accounts and other documents cannot
stand in view of the decision of the Commissioner of Income-tax (Appeals) in
the appeal filed by the petitioner and by virtue of the order passed by the
Income-tax Appellate Tribunal, Cochin Bench, in I. T. A. No.320 of 1987. I
shall proceed to deal with these grounds in detail.
3\. Offences alleged against the petitioner are those under Sections 276C(1)
independently on the evidence placed before it. Otherwise, there is a danger
of a contention being advanced that whenever an assessee or any other person
liable under the Act had failed to convince the authorities in the proceedings
under the Act that he has not deliberately made any false statement or that he
has not fabricated any material evidence, the conviction of such person should
invariably follow in the criminal court."
14\. The allegation now made against the petitioner is that he filed false
returns of income and fabricated and manipulated false accounts and other
documents while filing the returns for the assessment year 1983-84 (accounting
year 1982-83). The Tribunal's order and the order of the Commissioner
(Appeals), as stated earlier, have not gone to state that the accounts
produced by the petitioner and the return of income filed by him are correct.
So, the criminal court has to go into the question as to whether the
complainant succeeds in bringing out the offence charged against the
petitioner. The second ground urged by the petitioner is answered accordingly.
15\. The criminal miscellaneous case is disposed of by quashing that part of
Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate's Court (Economic Offences), Ernakulam,
for offences under Sections 276C(1) and 277(i) of the Act and Sections 193,
196 and 415, IPC. That court registered the complaint as C. C. No. 34 of 1987
and issued summons to the petitioner.
2\. The petitioner seeks to quash the proceedings before the court below on
two grounds. First ground is as follows : The petitioner filed a return of
income before the Income-tax Officer, D-Ward, Quilon, on December 6, 1983.
That officer passed the assessment order on February 28, 1986. So the offences
under Sections 193 and 196, IPC, if at all must be taken to have been
committed by the petitioner before the court of the Income-tax Officer,
D-Ward, Quilon. Only that officer or a superior officer to whom that officer
was subordinate could have filed a complaint. The complaint, annexure-5, was
filed by the Income-tax Officer, B-Ward, Trivandrum. That complaint is
incompetent The second ground urged is that the allegation regarding
fabrication and manipulation of false accounts and other documents cannot
stand in view of the decision of the Commissioner of Income-tax (Appeals) in
the appeal filed by the petitioner and by virtue of the order passed by the
Income-tax Appellate Tribunal, Cochin Bench, in I. T. A. No.320 of 1987. I
shall proceed to deal with these grounds in detail.
3\. Offences alleged against the petitioner are those under Sections 276C(1)
independently on the evidence placed before it. Otherwise, there is a danger
of a contention being advanced that whenever an assessee or any other person
liable under the Act had failed to convince the authorities in the proceedings
under the Act that he has not deliberately made any false statement or that he
has not fabricated any material evidence, the conviction of such person should
invariably follow in the criminal court."
14\. The allegation now made against the petitioner is that he filed false
returns of income and fabricated and manipulated false accounts and other
documents while filing the returns for the assessment year 1983-84 (accounting
year 1982-83). The Tribunal's order and the order of the Commissioner
(Appeals), as stated earlier, have not gone to state that the accounts
produced by the petitioner and the return of income filed by him are correct.
So, the criminal court has to go into the question as to whether the
complainant succeeds in bringing out the offence charged against the
petitioner. The second ground urged by the petitioner is answered accordingly.
15\. The criminal miscellaneous case is disposed of by quashing that part of
Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate's Court (Economic Offences), Ernakulam,
for offences under Sections 276C(1) and 277(i) of the Act and Sections 193,
196 and 415, IPC. That court registered the complaint as C. C. No. 34 of 1987
and issued summons to the petitioner.
2\. The petitioner seeks to quash the proceedings before the court below on
two grounds. First ground is as follows : The petitioner filed a return of
income before the Income-tax Officer, D-Ward, Quilon, on December 6, 1983.
That officer passed the assessment order on February 28, 1986. So the offences
under Sections 193 and 196, IPC, if at all must be taken to have been
committed by the petitioner before the court of the Income-tax Officer,
D-Ward, Quilon. Only that officer or a superior officer to whom that officer
was subordinate could have filed a complaint. The complaint, annexure-5, was
filed by the Income-tax Officer, B-Ward, Trivandrum. That complaint is
incompetent The second ground urged is that the allegation regarding
fabrication and manipulation of false accounts and other documents cannot
stand in view of the decision of the Commissioner of Income-tax (Appeals) in
the appeal filed by the petitioner and by virtue of the order passed by the
Income-tax Appellate Tribunal, Cochin Bench, in I. T. A. No.320 of 1987. I
shall proceed to deal with these grounds in detail.
3\. Offences alleged against the petitioner are those under Sections 276C(1)
and 277(i) of the Act and Sections 193, 196 and 415 of the Indian Penal Code.
The petitioner filed a return of income for the assessment year 1983-84 on
December 6, 1983, before the Income-tax Officer, D-Ward, Quilon. That officer
passed a final order of assessment on February 28, 1986. So it is contended
that the offences under Sections 193 and 196, IPC, if at all committed, must
be taken to have been committed before the Income-tax Officer, D-Ward, Quilon.
Section 136 of the Act provides that any proceeding before the income-tax
authorities shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding for the purpose of
Section 196, IPC, and that every income-tax authority shall be deemed to be a
civil court for the purposes of Section 195 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
So, if an offence under Section 193 or 196 of the IPC has been committed in
independently on the evidence placed before it. Otherwise, there is a danger
of a contention being advanced that whenever an assessee or any other person
liable under the Act had failed to convince the authorities in the proceedings
under the Act that he has not deliberately made any false statement or that he
has not fabricated any material evidence, the conviction of such person should
invariably follow in the criminal court."
14\. The allegation now made against the petitioner is that he filed false
returns of income and fabricated and manipulated false accounts and other
documents while filing the returns for the assessment year 1983-84 (accounting
year 1982-83). The Tribunal's order and the order of the Commissioner
(Appeals), as stated earlier, have not gone to state that the accounts
produced by the petitioner and the return of income filed by him are correct.
So, the criminal court has to go into the question as to whether the
complainant succeeds in bringing out the offence charged against the
petitioner. The second ground urged by the petitioner is answered accordingly.
15\. The criminal miscellaneous case is disposed of by quashing that part of
Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate's Court (Economic Offences), Ernakulam,
for offences under Sections 276C(1) and 277(i) of the Act and Sections 193,
196 and 415, IPC. That court registered the complaint as C. C. No. 34 of 1987
and issued summons to the petitioner.
2\. The petitioner seeks to quash the proceedings before the court below on
two grounds. First ground is as follows : The petitioner filed a return of
income before the Income-tax Officer, D-Ward, Quilon, on December 6, 1983.
That officer passed the assessment order on February 28, 1986. So the offences
under Sections 193 and 196, IPC, if at all must be taken to have been
committed by the petitioner before the court of the Income-tax Officer,
D-Ward, Quilon. Only that officer or a superior officer to whom that officer
was subordinate could have filed a complaint. The complaint, annexure-5, was
filed by the Income-tax Officer, B-Ward, Trivandrum. That complaint is
incompetent The second ground urged is that the allegation regarding
fabrication and manipulation of false accounts and other documents cannot
stand in view of the decision of the Commissioner of Income-tax (Appeals) in
the appeal filed by the petitioner and by virtue of the order passed by the
Income-tax Appellate Tribunal, Cochin Bench, in I. T. A. No.320 of 1987. I
shall proceed to deal with these grounds in detail.
3\. Offences alleged against the petitioner are those under Sections 276C(1)
and 277(i) of the Act and Sections 193, 196 and 415 of the Indian Penal Code.
The petitioner filed a return of income for the assessment year 1983-84 on
December 6, 1983, before the Income-tax Officer, D-Ward, Quilon. That officer
passed a final order of assessment on February 28, 1986. So it is contended
that the offences under Sections 193 and 196, IPC, if at all committed, must
be taken to have been committed before the Income-tax Officer, D-Ward, Quilon.
Section 136 of the Act provides that any proceeding before the income-tax
authorities shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding for the purpose of
Section 196, IPC, and that every income-tax authority shall be deemed to be a
civil court for the purposes of Section 195 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
So, if an offence under Section 193 or 196 of the IPC has been committed in
independently on the evidence placed before it. Otherwise, there is a danger
of a contention being advanced that whenever an assessee or any other person
liable under the Act had failed to convince the authorities in the proceedings
under the Act that he has not deliberately made any false statement or that he
has not fabricated any material evidence, the conviction of such person should
invariably follow in the criminal court."
14\. The allegation now made against the petitioner is that he filed false
returns of income and fabricated and manipulated false accounts and other
documents while filing the returns for the assessment year 1983-84 (accounting
year 1982-83). The Tribunal's order and the order of the Commissioner
(Appeals), as stated earlier, have not gone to state that the accounts
produced by the petitioner and the return of income filed by him are correct.
So, the criminal court has to go into the question as to whether the
complainant succeeds in bringing out the offence charged against the
petitioner. The second ground urged by the petitioner is answered accordingly.
15\. The criminal miscellaneous case is disposed of by quashing that part of
