Supreme Court of India
Commissioner Of Income Tax vs Amalgamation Pvt. Ltd. on 25 April, 1997
Equivalent citations: (1997) 140 CTR SC 313
Author: S C Agrawal
JUDGMENT S. C. AGRAWAL, J. :
These appeals, by certificate of fitness granted by the Madras High Court
under s. 66A(2) of the IT Act, 1922 (hereinafter referred to as the 1922 Act)
and s. 261 of the IT Act, 1961 (hereinafter referred to as 1961 Act) r/w Art.
133 of the Constitution of India, are directed against the judgment of the
said High Court dt. 1st March, 1976 in Tax Cases Nos. 160 of 1969 and 239 of
1971 (References Nos. 52 of 1969 and 1 of 1971). Tax Case No. 160 of 1969
related to the asst. yr. 1958-59, wherein two questions were referred by the
Tribunal for the opinion of the High Court. Tax Case No. 239 of 1971 related
to the asst. yrs. 1958-59 to 1962-63 wherein the Tribunal referred six
questions for the opinion of the High Court. By the impugned judgment both the
questions in Tax Case No. 160 of 1969 and all the questions, except question
No. 3, in Tax Case No. 239 of 1971 were answered by the High Court against the
Revenue and in favour of the assessee question No. 3 in Tax Case No. 239 of
1971 was answered in favour of the Revenue and against the assessee. Civil
Appeals Nos. 139-142 of 1980 have been filed by the Revenue in respect of the
allowable deduction under s. 10(2)(xv) of the 1922 Act. Reliance was placed on
the decision in Tata Sons Ltd. (supra). This was also a case where the profits
of the assessee in the form of managing agency commission were directly linked
to the profits of the managed company which is not the position in the present
case.
14\. The alternative claim by the assessee-company for deduction in respect of
the expenditure incurred by the assessee-company in respect of amounts paid to
its own directors who were also the members of the finance committee has been
rightly rejected by the High Court in view of the resolution passed by the
assessee-company wherein the directors, whether they be the members of the
finance committee or not, have been treated as a class and with reference to
all of them the assessee-company incurred the expenditure only because they
could not be remunerated to that extent by the subsidiary companies. The fact
that they were directors of the assessee-company and members of the finance
committee was not taken into account in taking over the remuneration payable
to them. In the circumstances, Civil Appeals Nos. 7 to 11 of 1980 filed by the
Appeals Nos. 139-142 of 1980 have been filed by the Revenue in respect of the
questions that have been answered against the Revenue and Civil Appeals Nos.
7-11 of 1980 have been filed by the assessee in respect of question No. 3 in
Tax Case No. 239 of 1971 which has been answered against the assessee.
2\. We will first take up Civil Appeals No. 139-142 of 1980 filed by the
Revenue. These appeals can be split up into two parts, one relating to the
answers to the two questions in Tax Case No. 160 of 1969 and questions Nos. 1
and 2 in Tax Case No. 239 of 1971, and the other relating to answers to
questions Nos. 4, 5 and 6 in Tax Case No. 239 of 1971. The two questions in
Tax Case No. 160 of 1969 and questions Nos. 1 and 2 in Tax Case No. 239 of
1971 were as follows :
Tax Case No. 160 of 1969 "(1) Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances
of the case, the Tribunal was right in upholding the basis of valuation
adopted by the ITO for the shares in M/s. Sri Rama Vilas Service (Pvt.) Ltd.
as on 1st January, 1954 ?
(2) Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Tribunal
was right in holding that the proviso to s. 12B(2) has no application in
regard to the sale of shares to M/s. Simpson & Co. Ltd. ?"
Tax Case No. 239 of 1971 "(1) Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances
of the case, the Tribunal was right in holding that the proviso to s. 12B(2)
has no application in regard to the sale of various shares by the assessee-
company to M/s. Simpson & Co. Ltd. through M/s. Simpson & General Finance Co.
(Pvt.) Ltd. and that the assessee was entitled to a capital loss of Rs.
9,47,541 in the asst. yr. 1958-59 ?
(2) Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Tribunal
was right in law in holding that the second proviso to s. 12B(2) had no
application and that the full value of the consideration accounted for by the
assessee should not be altered ?"
3\. These questions arise in the following facts and circumstances.
M/s. Amalgamation Pvt. Ltd. (hereinafter referred to as the assessee-company)
is a company incorporated on 22nd December, 1938 as a private limited company.
The assessee-company held shares in several companies, such as Simpson & Co.
Ltd., Addison & Co. Pvt. Ltd., George Oakes (Pvt.) Ltd., Addison Paints &
Chemicals Pvt. Ltd., India Pistons Pvt. Ltd., etc. Out of the issued capital
of Rs. 7,50,000 shares of Rs. 10 in Simpson & Co. Ltd., the assessee-company
held, at the material time, 7,06,933 ordinary shares. Simpson & Co. Ltd. had a
subsidiary by name Simpson & General Finance Co. (Pvt.) Ltd., carrying on the
business of financing by way of hire purchase transactions to outsiders and by
way of loans and advances to the companies of this group. As on 1st July, 1956
a sum of Rs. 1,85,16,000 was due to Simpson and General Finance Co. (Pvt.)
Ltd. from the assessee-company. Under s. 295 of the Companies Act, 1956, which
came into force on 1st April, 1956, no company could, without obtaining the
previous approval of the Central Government in that behalf, directly or
indirectly, make any loan to a company, which is its holding company. In
sub-s. (3) of s. 295 it was provided that where any loan made by a lending
company and outstanding at the commencement of the Companies Act, 1956, could
not have been made without the previous approval of the Central Government if
that section had then been in force, then the lending company had to, within
six months from the commencement of the Act or such further time not exceeding
six months as the Central Government might grant for that purpose, either
obtain the approval of the Central Government to the transaction or enforce
the repayment of the loan made. The liability of Rs. 1,85,16,000 to Simpson
and General Finance Co. (Pvt.) Ltd., by the assessee-company was affected by
the aforesaid provisions and, therefore, it became necessary for the assessee-
company to liquidate this liability. Simpson and General Finance Co. (Pvt.)
Ltd. owed a sum of Rs. 1,05,21,750 to Simpson & Co. Ltd. The assessee-company
approached the Government of India for necessary approval to put through
certain transactions of sale of shares held by it to Simpson and General
Finance Company (P) Ltd. in liquidation of the liability. Simpson and General
Finance Company (P) Ltd., in its turn, would discharge its liability to
Simpson and Company Ltd. by selling its holdings to Simpson and General
Finance Company (P) Ltd. The assessee-company as well as Simpson and General
Finance Co. (Pvt.) Ltd. proposed to sell the shares at certain specified price
per share and sought the approval of the Central Government for such sale. The
Central Government, in approving the sale, fixed its own prices and stated
that the said fixation was without prejudice to any valuation of shares for
purposes of capital gains. Thereafter the shares held by the assessee-company
in various companies in respect of which approval had been granted by the
Central Government were transferred by the assessee-company to Simpson and
General Finance Co. (Pvt.) Ltd. w.e.f. 13th June, 1957 at the prices fixed by
the Company Law Administration and Simpson and General Finance Co. (Pvt.) Ltd.
sold part thereof to Simpson & Co. Ltd. The transaction between Simpson and
General Finance Co. (Pvt.) Ltd. and Simpson & Co. Ltd. was also at the same
prices.
4\. In submitting its income-tax return for the asst. yr. 1958-59, the
relevant previous year ending 30th June, 1957, the assessee-company claimed a
capital loss of Rs. 4,37,703 in respect of the above transactions. In arriving
at this loss the assessee-company opted for the substitution of the market
value as on 1st June, 1954 in respect of shares in (1) S.R.V.S. (Pvt.) Ltd.,
(2) Addison & Co. Ltd., (3) George Oakes (Pvt.) Ltd., and (4) India Pistons
(Pvt.) Ltd. As regards the rest of the shares, the assessee-company adopted
the cost prices. The ITO, while making the assessment, proceeded on the basis
that the price structure approved by the Department of Company Law
Administration for the transfer of the aforesaid shares was pure and simple on
an ad hoc basis and meant to serve the limited purpose of approval to be given
under s. 273 of the Companies Act, 1956 and that the price at which the sales
took place could not, therefore, be taken to represent the fair market value
of the shares. He took the break up value as on 1st January, 1954 for the
purpose of computation of capital gains and revised the sale prices and
arrived at Rs. 6,95,082 as the net capital gains. Even according to his
computation there were certain capital losses which were adjusted as against
the capital gains determined by him. In the case of S.R.V.S. (Pvt.) Ltd., the
ITO took the break up value as on 1st January, 1954 at Rs. 36,35,350 and their
sale value at Rs. 21,88,395 resulting in the capital loss of Rs. 14,46,955.
The assessee-company appealed against the assessment of the capital gains to
the AAC. While the said appeal was pending, the CIT proceeded under s. 33B of
the 1922 Act as he was of the view that the order of the ITO was erroneous and
prejudicial to the interest of Revenue in so far as he had wrongly allowed the
capital loss amounting to Rs. 14,46,955 on the sale of the shares in S.R.V.S.
(Pvt.) Ltd. After considering the submission of the assessee-company, the CIT
held that the appreciation in value of the shares of Simpson & Co. Ltd. held
by S.R.V.S. (Pvt.) Ltd. should not have been taken into account and if the
value of the shares held by S.R.V.S. (Pvt.) Ltd. in Simpson & Co. Ltd., as on
1st January, 1954, had been Rs. 24,38,578, S.R.V.S. (Pvt.) Ltd. would not have
parted with these shares at cost on 31st July, 1955. The CIT revised the
capital loss of Rs. 14,46,955 allowed by the ITO and considered that there was
capital gain liable for assessment of Rs. 3,91,579. This figure was directed
to be substituted and the assessment of capital gains was revised accordingly.
The assessee-company appealed against the said order of the CIT to the
Tribunal contending that the sale value fixed by the Company Law
Administration represented the correct value of the shares and the
transactions were without any motive to avoid capital gain and they had been
necessitated by the various provisions of the Companies Act which prohibited
inter-company loans and that the method adopted by the ITO, viz., the
secondary valuation, was proper. The said appeal was allowed by the Tribunal
and the order of the CIT was set aside and the method adopted by the ITO of
secondary valuation was held to be proper. The AAC took up the appeals of the
assessee-company for this and other years subsequent to the order of the
Tribunal and following the Tribunals order he worked out the capital loss in
respect of the other shares under consideration and in effect accepted the
assessed-company claim of capital loss of Rs. 4,37,703. The said order led to
appeals both by the assessee-company and the Revenue to the Tribunal. The
assessed-company appeal related to computation of the capital loss of Rs.
4,37,703 as emerging from the order of the AAC instead of Rs. 4,90,244 which
would be the correct figure. The Revenue contested the acceptance of the claim
of the assessee-company with reference to the capital loss of Rs. 4,37,703 as
shown in the returns.
On the first occasion when the matter came before the Tribunal, it remanded
the case to the AAC and called for a specific finding whether the sales under
consideration were effected with the object of avoidance of tax or reduction
of liability to tax and also wanted the full value of consideration to be
worked out, in case the first proviso to s. 12B(2) of the 1922 Act was held to
be applicable. The AAC observed that there was ample evidence to show that the
sale of shares was a forced one and that the assessee-company had no option
but to comply with the statutory provisions and that the evidence produced
clearly established the assessed-company contention that the sale was not
motivated by any desire to avoid capital gains and that the Revenue had not
proved by any conclusive evidence that the motive underlying the transaction
was the avoidance or reduction of the liability to capital gains tax. He
worked out the figures in accordance with the rules framed under the WT Act
and found that the prices fixed by the Company Law Administration were not
very much different from the figures worked out by him. After receiving the
report of the AAC, the Tribunal considered the matter again and held that the
proviso to s. 12B of the 1922 Act could not be invoked in the instant case as
there was no evidence to support the view that the sales were effected with a
view to avoid the provisions of s. 12B. The Tribunal accepted the contention
of the assessee-company and held that the Revenue was not justified in
computing the capital gains and disturbing the figures fixed by the Government
of India. The two questions referred in Tax Case No. 160 of 1969 arise out of
proceedings under s. 33B of the 1922 Act, while questions Nos. 1 and 2
referred in Tax Case No. 239 of 1971 arise out of the order of the Tribunal in
the appeal against the order of the AAC in respect of the asst. yr. 1958-59.
5\. Since the second question in Tax Case No. 160 of 1969 and questions Nos. 1
and 2 in Tax Case No. 239 of 1971 raised more or less the same issue, they
were taken up together by the High Court. After referring to the provisions of
s. 12B(2) and more particularly the first proviso to the said sub-section, the
High Court has observed that the first requisite for the application of the
said proviso, namely, that the person to whom the sale is made should be a
person with whom the assessee is directly or indirectly connected, was
satisfied in the present case because the sale of shares to a subsidiary of a
subsidiary is one to a person with whom the assessee-company is directly or
indirectly connected. As regards the second requirement of the proviso, as to
whether the sale was effected with the object of avoidance or reduction of the
liability of the assessee-company under that section, the High Court has
pointed out that the ITO had not given a finding that the object with which
the transaction was put through was the avoidance or reduction of the
liability to capital gains tax and the only observation that he had made in
his order was that there was a reduction of liability to capital gains.
According to the High Court, such a finding of taking the result as if it was
the object would not satisfy the requirement of the first proviso to s. 12B(2)
of the 1922 Act. The High Court was of the view that the Tribunal had rightly
called for a finding on this point specifically from the AAC. After referring
to the finding recorded by the AAC, which was accepted by the Tribunal, that
the object of the transaction was not to avoid or reduce such liability to
capital gains tax, that the sale was a forced sale since the assessee-company
had no option and that the prices had been fixed by the Company Law
Administration, the High Court held that the first proviso to s. 12B(2) cannot
be attracted to the present case. The High Court did not accept the contention
urged on behalf of the Revenue that the sale price had been fixed by the
Company Law Administration on ad hoc basis and, in this context, it has
observed that the letter dt. 18th May, 1957 (Annexure G. VII.A to the remand
report of the AAC) clearly shows that the Company Law Administration worked
out the figures in consultation with the Central Board of Revenue and when the
assessee-company sold the shares at those prices, it could not be validly
contended that the assessee-company transferred the shares at certain prices
with the object of avoidance or reduction of liability to capital gains. On
that view the High Court answered the second question in Tax Case No. 160 of
1969 and the second question in Tax Case No. 239 of 1971 in the affirmative
and against the Revenue.
As regards the first question in Tax Case No. 160 of 1969 which raises the
question of valuation, the High Court felt that on the view it had taken as
regards the second question it would not survive for consideration because the
question of valuation would be material only if the proviso applied. The High
Court has, however, considered the said question and has indicated the answer
to that question also. The High Court has expressed the view that this is a
case of substantial holding and that there is textual backing to the method
adopted by the ITO and that the CIT had found fault with it without any valid
reason. The High Court, therefore, answered the first question in Tax Case No.
160 of 1969 in affirmative and in favour of the assessee-company.
As regards the first question in T.C. No. 239 of 1971, the High Court felt
that it did not require any independent treatment in view of the answer given
with regard to second question in T.C. No. 160 of 1969 which would answer that
question also. Therefore, that question also was answered in the affirmative
and in favour of the assessee-company.
6\. We have heard Shri K. N. Shukla, the learned senior counsel appearing for
the Revenue in support of the appeals in respect of the answers given by the
High Court to these questions. Having considered the submissions of the
learned counsel, we are of the view that the High Court has rightly construed
the provisions contained in the proviso to s. 12B(2) of the 1922 Act and, in
view of the finding recorded by the AAC, which finding was accepted by the
Tribunal, that the object of the transaction was not to avoid or reduce the
liability to capital gains, the said proviso was not attracted. In our
opinion, the said finding of the High Court does not suffer from any legal
infirmity and there is no ground to interfere with the judgment of the High
Court on this aspect of the case.
7\. We may now take up the appeals of the Revenue in respect of questions Nos.
4, 5 and 6 in Tax Case No. 239 of 1971.
The said questions were as follows :
"(4) Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Tribunal
was right in law in holding that the loss sustained by the assessee on account
of standing guarantee to Sembiam Saw Mills (Pvt.) Ltd. (in voluntary
liquidation) should be allowed in 1962-63 assessment after taking into account
the amounts received from the liquidators during the years 1959-60 to 1962-63
?
(5) Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Tribunal
was right in law in deleting the receipts of Rs. 1,41,000, Rs. 2,29,627, Rs.
1,10,500 and Rs. 4,381 from the liquidators of Sembiam Saw Mills (Pvt.) Ltd.
(in voluntary liquidation), from the assessments for 1959-60, 1960-61, 1961-62
and 1962-63 respectively ?
(6) Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Tribunal
was right in law in holding that an amount of Rs. 4,23,256 representing the
real loss sustained by the assessee on account of standing guarantee of
Sembiam Saw Mills (Pvt.) Ltd. (in voluntary liquidation) should be allowed in
the asst. yr. 1962-63 ?"
8\. There was a company by name Sembiam Saw Mills (Pvt.) Ltd. (for short SSM),
which was originally a subsidiary of Addison & Co. (Pvt.) Ltd. On and from 1st
February, 1954, the assessee-company purchased all the shares of SSM from M/s.
Addison & Co. (Pvt.) Ltd. and SSM thus became the direct subsidiary of the
assessee-company, SSM had borrowed monies from the National Bank of India Ltd.
and the assessee-company had guaranteed the loan to the said company by the
said bank. SSM went into liquidation some time in 1955. For the purpose of
overdraft facilities SSM executed a promissory note in favour of the assessee-
company which was endorsed by the assessee-company to the bank along with a
separate guarantee letter in favour of the bank. When SSM went into
liquidation, the assessee-company, as guarantor, was required to clear those
overdrafts in accordance with the terms of the guarantee. After adjusting the
amount recovered from the liquidators, the sum due to the assessee-company
from the liquidated company on account of the said overdraft was Rs. 9,08,764.
The assessee-company claimed this amount as a loss which arose in the course
of and incidental to its business in the assessment for the year 1958-59.
There were receipts by the assessee-company in the course of the liquidation
of SSM in the later years. The total amount received came to Rs. 4,85,508.28
spread over the relevant accounting years for the asst. yrs. 1959-60 to
1962-63. The assessee-company relied on the clause in the memorandum of
association authorising it to be the guarantor for the loans and contended
that the transactions in question sprang out of normal business transactions
and hence, the loss was an allowable deduction in the assessment for 1958-59.
The ITO held that the loss in question did not arise during the course of or
incidental to the business of the assessee-company and in his view it was at
best a capital loss which did not come within the scope of s. 12B of the 1922
Act. In making the assessments for the years 1959-60 to 1962-63 the ITO
treated the receipts from the liquidator as income as a protective measure. In
appeal, the AAC did not accept the claim of the assessee-company for allowance
of the loss in 1958-59 as he was of the view that it was not a loss which
arose during the course of or was incidental to its business. But the appeals
for the years 1959-60 to 1962-63 were allowed in so far as they related to the
question of the receipts in the respective years from the liquidator. As the
guarantee loss had not been allowed as a deduction in 1958-59, the AAC held
that the subsequent recoveries could not be included in the total income in
the later years. The assessee-company as well as the Revenue preferred appeals
against the said order of the AAC before the Tribunal. The Tribunal held that
the assessee-company had guaranteed the loan in the course of carrying on its
own business and that the loss was clearly admissible as a deduction. But
since the assessee-company had received the last of the payments from the
liquidator in the previous year relevant to the asst. yr. 1962-63, it was held
that the balance of Rs. 4,23,256 remaining unrecoverable represented the real
business loss allowable for the asst. yr. 1962-63. At the instance of the
Revenue the Tribunal referred the aforementioned questions Nos. 4, 5 and 6 for
the opinion of the High Court.
The High Court, while dealing with said questions, has observed that the real
point in issue was whether the guarantee that was executed in favour of the
bank in respect of the loan to SSM, the subsidiary of the assessee-company,
was done in the course of its own business. The High Court has referred to its
earlier judgment in Amalgamations P. Ltd. vs. CIT (1969) 73 ITR 380 (Mad)
wherein the nature of the business of the assessee-company has been considered
and it has been held that the provisions of s. 23A of the 1922 Act were
applicable to the assessee-company since the assessed-company business
includes furnishing guarantee to debts borrowed by subsidiary companies. The
High Court has held that the said finding given in that case is clearly
applicable to the questions under consideration before it and that the
assessee-company had incurred the loss in carrying on its own business which
includes furnishing guarantees to debts borrowed by its subsidiary companies.
According to the High Court, the loss was allowable as a deduction in the year
in which it came to be ascertained and in the instant case the High Court held
that the assessee-company could have ascertained whether there was loss in the
transaction of guarantee only at the stage of final payment by the liquidators
which was received in the relevant previous year for the asst. yr. 1962-63 and
that the Tribunal was right in allowing it in that year. The High Court,
therefore, answered questions Nos. 4, 5 and 6 in the affirmative and against
the Revenue.
9\. After hearing Shri Shukla on the appeals filed by the Revenue in respect
of these questions, we are unable to hold that the judgment of the High Court
in respect of these questions suffers from any legal infirmity. We, therefore,
affirm the answer given by the High Court to questions Nos. 4, 5 and 6
referred to it. In the circumstances, it must be held that Civil Appeals Nos.
139-142 of 1980 filed by the Revenue are liable to be dismissed.
10\. We would now come to Civil Appeals Nos. 7 to 11 of 1980 filed by the
assessee-company in relation to question No. 3 in Tax Case No. 239 of 1971,
which was as under :
"(3) Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Tribunal
was right in law in holding that the sums of Rs. 4,37,066, Rs. 90,896, Rs.
1,08,978, Rs. 1,18,102 and Rs. 1,11,740 are admissible as a deduction in the
assessments of the assessee for the asst. yrs. 1958-59 to 1962-63 respectively
?"
11\. The assessee-company was a bulk shareholder in several companies and in
the relevant year there were sixteen companies. The assessee-company was
rendering certain common services to its subsidiaries by having (1) a finance
committee, (2) a liaison office in Delhi; (3) an export promotion Department;
and (4) an internal audit Department. The expenditure on account of
maintenance of liaison office in Delhi and the Departments of export promotion
and internal audit was borne by the assessee-company and was recovered from
the subsidiaries. The finance committee was working in an advisory capacity to
the various subsidiary companies to help them to carry on their business more
efficiently. All purchase requisitions for the purchase of capital equipment
beyond Rs. 500 of each purchase and Rs. 2,500 with reference to purchase of
raw materials were submitted to the finance committee for their approval. The
purpose of such control was to judiciously use the funds of the company to the
best advantage of each company. Various data were gathered before such
sanction was accorded or refused. Technical matters or other matters of
management were also referred to the members of the finance committee who were
experienced in their respective fields. The finance committee went through the
financial position of each company daily. The directors of the assessee-
company were also directors/managers in the subsidiary companies. As per the
service agreements between them and the concerned subsidiary company they were
entitled to payment of remuneration and also a certain percentage of the
profits as commission. Similar service agreements had been entered by other
directors of the subsidiary companies who were not the directors of the
assessee-company. In view of the provisions of s. 198 of the Companies Act,
1956, fixing a ceiling on the overall managerial remuneration at 11% of the
net profits of the company, it was not possible for the subsidiary companies
to pay the contracted remuneration to the persons concerned. On 4th April,
1959, the Board of Directors of the assessee-company passed a resolution
whereby it was resolved that the remuneration payable to nine directors of the
subsidiary companies would be paid to them in full in accordance with the
terms of the contract respectively entered into by them and the amount in
excess of the maximum amount permissible under the Companies Act, 1956 would
be met by the assessee-company. Out of these nine directors three were
directors of the assessee-company and out of these three directors two were
members of the finance committee. None of the other six directors of the
subsidiary companies was a member of the finance committee. In accordance with
the said resolution the assessee-company paid diverse amounts to the said
directors. The total amounts so paid to the several persons for the different
years are mentioned in question No. 3. The assessee-company claimed the said
amounts as deduction under s. 10(2)(xv) of the 1922 Act for the asst. yrs.
1958-59 to 1961-62 and under s. 37 of the 1961 Act for the asst. yr. 1962-63.
Before the ITO, it was not disputed that these payments were in respect of
services rendered by respective persons to the various subsidiary companies of
which they were directors/managers and that no part of the payment could be
related to any service directly rendered by them to the assessee-company. It
was submitted that though the services were rendered by them to other
companies, they should be deemed to have rendered the service to the assessee-
company in view of the nexus between the holding company and its subsidiaries.
The ITO did not accept this submission and held that the excess remuneration
over and above what was admissible under s. 198 of the Companies Act, which
was not borne by the respective companies, could not be allowed as deduction
under s. 10(2)(xv) of the 1922 Act and s. 37 of the 1961 Act as expenditure
wholly and exclusively incurred for the purpose of the business of the
assessee-company. It was also stressed that the resolution of the Board of
Directors of the assessee-company was passed on 4th April, 1959, after the
previous years relevant to the asst. yr. 1958-59 and 1959-60. On appeal the
AAC took the same view. The matter was remanded by the Tribunal to the AAC for
consideration and submission of report on the points mentioned in the order of
remand. The AAC after taking further evidence submitted his report wherein he
reported that deduction may be allowed in respect of remuneration paid to
persons who were directors of the assessee-company and were members of the
finance committee, but such deduction could not be allowed in respect of
remuneration paid by the assessee-company in respect of persons who were only
directors and employees of the subsidiaries but neither directors of the
assessee-company nor members of the finance committee. The Tribunal was of the
view that looking to the nature of the business of the assessee-company of
holding shares of a number of subsidiary companies and that it was looking
after the interest and welfare of those companies with a view to earn
dividends, the whole of the expenditure referable to the remuneration paid by
the assessee-company was admissible as a deduction.
Rejecting the contention urged on behalf of the Revenue that the assessee-
company was not carrying on any business because merely holding of investments
would not constitute business, the High Court has held that in view of s. 23A
of the 1922 Act holding of investments, in appropriate cases, would equally be
a business as dealing in them and what is required is that there must be a
real, substantial and systematic or organised course of activity or conduct
with the set purpose of earning profit which is the test for a business. The
High Court has observed that the assessee-company is not a mere investor in a
single company but has investments in sixteen companies and had taken active
interest in the business of these companies as is clear from the services that
had been rendered in the shape of export promotion, liaison office at Delhi
and internal audit and it also rendered consultation in respect of finance by
its directors meeting every day with reference to the needs and requirements
of each company and that it is not a case where the assessee-company contented
itself with merely making an investment and looking for the dividend. The High
Court has, therefore, held that there was a business activity in the matter of
holding of investments. While dealing with the question whether the
expenditure that has been incurred was wholly and exclusively laid out for the
purpose of the assessed-company business, the High Court has negatived the
contention that the said question is purely factual because in order to be
deductible the expenditure must satisfy two tests; (i) the expenditure must be
incurred by the assessee in his capacity as a trader; and (ii) it must be
incidental to the carrying on of his business. The High Court was of the view
that there must be a nexus between the expenditure and the business of the
assessee. Applying these tests the High Court has held that the purpose of the
payment in the present case was only to take out the subsidiary from an
inconvenient situation in which it found itself as a result of statutory
change restricting the remuneration payable to its directors and that the
expenditure had not been incurred wholly and exclusively for the business of
the assessee-company and it could not be allowed as deduction. The alternative
claim put forward on behalf of the assessee-company that at any rate the
expenditure incurred by the assessee-company in remunerating its own directors
who were also members of the finance committee should be allowed as deduction
as there is a nexus between the expenditure and the business of the assessee-
company in rendering services to its subsidiaries, was not accepted by the
High Court for the reason that the resolution passed by the assessee-company
does not say that the expenditure was incurred for the purpose of remunerating
its own directors in so far as they rendered services to it as members of the
finance committee. The High Court has observed that the resolution treated the
directors, whether they be the members of the finance committee or not, as a
class and with reference to all of them the assessee-company incurred the
expenditure only because they could not be remunerated to that extent by the
subsidiary companies and the fact that they were directors of the assessee-
company and that they were members of the finance committee had not been taken
into account in taking over the remuneration payable to them. Question No. 3
was, therefore, answered in the negative and against the assessee-company.
The amounts paid by the assessee-company to the directors of its subsidiary
companies can be admissible as a deduction under s. 10(2)(xv) of the 1922 Act
or s. 37(1) of the 1961 Act only if they can be regarded as expenditure "laid
out or expended wholly and exclusively for the purposes of the business" of
the assessee-company. This expression was also used in the IT Act, 1918 in
U.K. In Atherton vs. British Insulated & Helsby Cables Ltd. (1925) 10 Tax
Cases 155 (HL), Viscount Cave, L.C., has thus explained the said expression :
"..... a sum of money expended, not of necessity and with a view to a direct
and immediate benefit to the trade, but voluntarily and on the grounds of
commercial expediency, and in order indirectly to facilitate the carrying on
of the business, may yet be expended wholly and exclusively for the purposes
of the trade."
These observations have been referred to with approval by this Court while
construing s. 10(2)(xv) of the 1922 Act. [See Eastern Investments Ltd. vs. CIT
(1951) 20 ITR 1 (SC) CIT vs. Chandulal Keshavlal & Co. (1960) 38 ITR 601 (SC)
.
In Travancore Titanium Products Ltd. vs. CIT (1966) 60 ITR 277 (SC) this
Court, while construing the expression "for the purpose of business" in s.
10(2)(xv) of the 1922 Act, has said :
"The expenditure must be incidental to the business and must be necessitated
or justified by commercial expediency. It must be directly and intimately
connected with the business and be laid out by the taxpayer in his character
as a trader. To be a permissible deduction, there must be a direct and
intimate connection between the expenditure and the business, i.e., between
the expenditure and the character of the assessee as a trader, and not as
owner of assets, even if they are assets of the business."
In Indian Aluminium Co. Ltd. vs. CIT (1972) 84 ITR 735 (SC) decided by a
Constitution Bench of this Court, the aforementioned test laid down in
Travancore Titanium Products Ltd. vs. CIT (supra), was qualified in these
terms :
"In our view, the test adopted by this Court in Travancore Titanium case that
to be a permissible deduction, there must be a direct and intimate connection
between the expenditure and the business, i.e., between the expenditure and
the character of the assessee as a trader, and not as owner of assets, even if
they are assets of the business needs to be qualified by stating that if the
expenditure is laid out by the assessee as owner-cum-trader, and the
expenditure is really incidental to the carrying on of his business, it must
be treated to have been laid out by him as a trader and as incidental to his
business."
12\. The High Court, in our opinion, has rightly proceeded on the basis that
there must be a nexus between expenditure and business of the assessee.
13\. Shri T. A. Ramachandran, the learned senior counsel appearing for the
assessee-company, has submitted that the said test is satisfied in the present
case since the purpose of the payment of remuneration to the directors of the
subsidiary companies was to enable these companies to earn higher profits
which would be passed on to the assessee-company as and by way of dividends.
The learned counsel has placed strong reliance on the decision of Bombay High
Court in Tata Sons Ltd. vs. CIT (1950) 18 ITR 460 (Bom) and the decision of
the Gujarat High Court in J. R. Patel & Sons (P) Ltd. vs. CIT (1968) 69 ITR
782 (Guj) and has urged that the High Court has committed an error in
distinguishing these cases on the ground that they related to managing agents
whereas the present case relates to a holding company and its subsidiaries.
Shri Ramchandran has contended that the principle laid down in the said
decisions is equally applicable to a case of a holding company.
We are unable to accept this contention. The High Court, in our opinion, has
rightly pointed out that the business of the assessee-company is the holding
of investments and if with reference to the business of holding investments
any expenditure had been incurred that could have been allowed as deduction.
The expenditure incurred in payment of managerial remuneration to the
directors of the subsidiary companies cannot be said to be expenditure
incurred in carrying on the business of the assessee-company of holding its
investments. The assessee-company could hold its investments and earn its
dividends without incurring this expenditure. Since the subsidiary company was
not obliged to distribute by way of dividends the entire profits earned on
account of their managerial remuneration paid by the assessee-company and the
assessee-company was only entitled to dividend from the subsidiary company as
and when declared, it cannot be said that there was a direct and immediate
connection between the expenditure incurred and the business of the assessee-
company. The decisions in Tata Sons Ltd. vs. CIT (supra) and J. R. Patel &
Sons (P) Ltd. vs. CIT (supra), are not applicable in the facts of this case.
In Tata Sons Ltd. vs. CIT (supra) the assessee was the managing agent of
another company and under the managing agency agreement the assessee was to be
paid a commission at a certain rate which was to be computed upon the net
profits of the managed company. During the relevant years the assessee paid
voluntarily certain sums as half share of the bonus which the managed company
paid to some of its officers and it claimed deduction of the said amounts
under s. 10(2)(xv) of the 1922 Act. The Bombay High Court upheld the claim of
the assessee for such a deduction on the view that from the point of view of
commercial principle what the assessee had done was something which had as its
object increasing the profits of the managed company and thereby increasing
its own shares on commission and, therefore, the deduction claimed by the
assessee was wholly and exclusively for the purposes of its business and was
an allowable deduction under s. 10(2)(xv) of the 1922 Act. While dealing with
the contention urged on behalf of the Revenue that the payment had been made
not to the employees of the assessee but to the employees of a managed company
- a different entity altogether - the High Court has observed :
"Here again if it can be shown that there was a very important nexus between
the assessee-company and the managed company which necessitated the assessee-
company making the payment to the employees of the managed company, then again
it would be possible for the assessee-company to satisfy us that the
expenditure was one which fell within the ambit of s. 10(2)(xv). Now, it
cannot be seriously disputed that the bonus was paid by the managed company to
their employees in order to increase the efficiency of the working of the
company. An increased efficiency of that company would incidentally result in
higher and better profits, and the assessee-company would be as much
interested in the working of the managed company being more efficient as the
managed company itself. Whatever tended to increase the profits of the managed
company would also tend to increase the income and profits of the assessee-
company. Therefore, it cannot be suggested that the assessee-company had an
indirect or ulterior motive in making this payment. The only motive by which
it was actuated was a purely commercial and pecuniary one and that was to see
that more profits were made by the managed company so that its own commission
should thereby be increased."
In that case there was a direct nexus between the increased profits of the
managed company and the managerial commission payable to the assessee since
the managing agency commission was a prescribed percentage of the net profits
of the managed company. As indicated earlier, there was no such nexus between
the increased profit of the subsidiary company and the profit earned by the
assessee-company by way of dividend on the shares held by it in the subsidiary
company.
In J. R. Patel & Sons (P) Ltd. vs. CIT (supra), the assessee was the managing
agent and its managing director was also the director of the managed company.
Prior to coming into force of the Companies Act, 1956 on 1st April, 1956, he
was getting monthly salary from the assessee and in addition he was getting
monthly remuneration as technical adviser of the managed company as well as
commission at a prescribed rate on the sale price of healds of reeds
manufactured and sold by the managed company. After the passing of the
Companies Act, 1956, the remuneration that could be received by him was
reduced and he could not also be paid the commission. The assessee, therefore,
increased the emoluments. The said excess payment made by the assessee was
disallowed and the expenditure incurred was restricted to the amount that was
being paid prior to coming into force of the Companies Act, 1956. The Gujarat
High Court held that the assessee had paid extra payment to its managing
director so that the affairs of the managed company could be properly looked
after and that as a result of the remuneration the profits of the managed
company and the share of the commission of the assessee increased and,
therefore, the excess amount paid by the assessee to its managing director was
expended wholly and exclusively for the purpose of its business and was an
allowable deduction under s. 10(2)(xv) of the 1922 Act. Reliance was placed on
the decision in Tata Sons Ltd. (supra). This was also a case where the profits
of the assessee in the form of managing agency commission were directly linked
to the profits of the managed company which is not the position in the present
case.
14\. The alternative claim by the assessee-company for deduction in respect of
the expenditure incurred by the assessee-company in respect of amounts paid to
its own directors who were also the members of the finance committee has been
rightly rejected by the High Court in view of the resolution passed by the
assessee-company wherein the directors, whether they be the members of the
finance committee or not, have been treated as a class and with reference to
all of them the assessee-company incurred the expenditure only because they
could not be remunerated to that extent by the subsidiary companies. The fact
that they were directors of the assessee-company and members of the finance
committee was not taken into account in taking over the remuneration payable
to them. In the circumstances, Civil Appeals Nos. 7 to 11 of 1980 filed by the
assessee-company are also liable to be dismissed.
15\. In the result, Civil Appeals Nos. 139 to 142 of 1980 filed by the Revenue
and Civil Appeals Nos. 7 to 11 of 1980 filed by the assessee-company are
dismissed. No order as to costs.
allowable deduction under s. 10(2)(xv) of the 1922 Act. Reliance was placed on
the decision in Tata Sons Ltd. (supra). This was also a case where the profits
of the assessee in the form of managing agency commission were directly linked
to the profits of the managed company which is not the position in the present
case.
14\. The alternative claim by the assessee-company for deduction in respect of
the expenditure incurred by the assessee-company in respect of amounts paid to
its own directors who were also the members of the finance committee has been
rightly rejected by the High Court in view of the resolution passed by the
assessee-company wherein the directors, whether they be the members of the
finance committee or not, have been treated as a class and with reference to
all of them the assessee-company incurred the expenditure only because they
could not be remunerated to that extent by the subsidiary companies. The fact
that they were directors of the assessee-company and members of the finance
committee was not taken into account in taking over the remuneration payable
to them. In the circumstances, Civil Appeals Nos. 7 to 11 of 1980 filed by the
Appeals Nos. 139-142 of 1980 have been filed by the Revenue in respect of the
questions that have been answered against the Revenue and Civil Appeals Nos.
7-11 of 1980 have been filed by the assessee in respect of question No. 3 in
Tax Case No. 239 of 1971 which has been answered against the assessee.
2\. We will first take up Civil Appeals No. 139-142 of 1980 filed by the
Revenue. These appeals can be split up into two parts, one relating to the
answers to the two questions in Tax Case No. 160 of 1969 and questions Nos. 1
and 2 in Tax Case No. 239 of 1971, and the other relating to answers to
questions Nos. 4, 5 and 6 in Tax Case No. 239 of 1971. The two questions in
Tax Case No. 160 of 1969 and questions Nos. 1 and 2 in Tax Case No. 239 of
1971 were as follows :
Tax Case No. 160 of 1969 "(1) Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances
of the case, the Tribunal was right in upholding the basis of valuation
adopted by the ITO for the shares in M/s. Sri Rama Vilas Service (Pvt.) Ltd.
as on 1st January, 1954 ?
(2) Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Tribunal
was right in holding that the proviso to s. 12B(2) has no application in
regard to the sale of shares to M/s. Simpson & Co. Ltd. ?"
Tax Case No. 239 of 1971 "(1) Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances
of the case, the Tribunal was right in holding that the proviso to s. 12B(2)
allowable deduction under s. 10(2)(xv) of the 1922 Act. Reliance was placed on
the decision in Tata Sons Ltd. (supra). This was also a case where the profits
of the assessee in the form of managing agency commission were directly linked
to the profits of the managed company which is not the position in the present
case.
14\. The alternative claim by the assessee-company for deduction in respect of
the expenditure incurred by the assessee-company in respect of amounts paid to
its own directors who were also the members of the finance committee has been
rightly rejected by the High Court in view of the resolution passed by the
assessee-company wherein the directors, whether they be the members of the
finance committee or not, have been treated as a class and with reference to
all of them the assessee-company incurred the expenditure only because they
could not be remunerated to that extent by the subsidiary companies. The fact
that they were directors of the assessee-company and members of the finance
committee was not taken into account in taking over the remuneration payable
to them. In the circumstances, Civil Appeals Nos. 7 to 11 of 1980 filed by the
Appeals Nos. 139-142 of 1980 have been filed by the Revenue in respect of the
questions that have been answered against the Revenue and Civil Appeals Nos.
7-11 of 1980 have been filed by the assessee in respect of question No. 3 in
Tax Case No. 239 of 1971 which has been answered against the assessee.
2\. We will first take up Civil Appeals No. 139-142 of 1980 filed by the
Revenue. These appeals can be split up into two parts, one relating to the
answers to the two questions in Tax Case No. 160 of 1969 and questions Nos. 1
and 2 in Tax Case No. 239 of 1971, and the other relating to answers to
questions Nos. 4, 5 and 6 in Tax Case No. 239 of 1971. The two questions in
Tax Case No. 160 of 1969 and questions Nos. 1 and 2 in Tax Case No. 239 of
1971 were as follows :
Tax Case No. 160 of 1969 "(1) Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances
of the case, the Tribunal was right in upholding the basis of valuation
adopted by the ITO for the shares in M/s. Sri Rama Vilas Service (Pvt.) Ltd.
as on 1st January, 1954 ?
(2) Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Tribunal
was right in holding that the proviso to s. 12B(2) has no application in
regard to the sale of shares to M/s. Simpson & Co. Ltd. ?"
Tax Case No. 239 of 1971 "(1) Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances
of the case, the Tribunal was right in holding that the proviso to s. 12B(2)
allowable deduction under s. 10(2)(xv) of the 1922 Act. Reliance was placed on
the decision in Tata Sons Ltd. (supra). This was also a case where the profits
of the assessee in the form of managing agency commission were directly linked
to the profits of the managed company which is not the position in the present
case.
14\. The alternative claim by the assessee-company for deduction in respect of
the expenditure incurred by the assessee-company in respect of amounts paid to
its own directors who were also the members of the finance committee has been
rightly rejected by the High Court in view of the resolution passed by the
assessee-company wherein the directors, whether they be the members of the
finance committee or not, have been treated as a class and with reference to
all of them the assessee-company incurred the expenditure only because they
could not be remunerated to that extent by the subsidiary companies. The fact
that they were directors of the assessee-company and members of the finance
committee was not taken into account in taking over the remuneration payable
to them. In the circumstances, Civil Appeals Nos. 7 to 11 of 1980 filed by the
Appeals Nos. 139-142 of 1980 have been filed by the Revenue in respect of the
questions that have been answered against the Revenue and Civil Appeals Nos.
7-11 of 1980 have been filed by the assessee in respect of question No. 3 in
Tax Case No. 239 of 1971 which has been answered against the assessee.
2\. We will first take up Civil Appeals No. 139-142 of 1980 filed by the
Revenue. These appeals can be split up into two parts, one relating to the
answers to the two questions in Tax Case No. 160 of 1969 and questions Nos. 1
and 2 in Tax Case No. 239 of 1971, and the other relating to answers to
questions Nos. 4, 5 and 6 in Tax Case No. 239 of 1971. The two questions in
Tax Case No. 160 of 1969 and questions Nos. 1 and 2 in Tax Case No. 239 of
1971 were as follows :
Tax Case No. 160 of 1969 "(1) Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances
of the case, the Tribunal was right in upholding the basis of valuation
adopted by the ITO for the shares in M/s. Sri Rama Vilas Service (Pvt.) Ltd.
as on 1st January, 1954 ?
(2) Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Tribunal
was right in holding that the proviso to s. 12B(2) has no application in
regard to the sale of shares to M/s. Simpson & Co. Ltd. ?"
Tax Case No. 239 of 1971 "(1) Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances
of the case, the Tribunal was right in holding that the proviso to s. 12B(2)
has no application in regard to the sale of various shares by the assessee-
company to M/s. Simpson & Co. Ltd. through M/s. Simpson & General Finance Co.
(Pvt.) Ltd. and that the assessee was entitled to a capital loss of Rs.
9,47,541 in the asst. yr. 1958-59 ?
(2) Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Tribunal
was right in law in holding that the second proviso to s. 12B(2) had no
application and that the full value of the consideration accounted for by the
assessee should not be altered ?"
3\. These questions arise in the following facts and circumstances.
M/s. Amalgamation Pvt. Ltd. (hereinafter referred to as the assessee-company)
is a company incorporated on 22nd December, 1938 as a private limited company.
allowable deduction under s. 10(2)(xv) of the 1922 Act. Reliance was placed on
the decision in Tata Sons Ltd. (supra). This was also a case where the profits
of the assessee in the form of managing agency commission were directly linked
to the profits of the managed company which is not the position in the present
case.
14\. The alternative claim by the assessee-company for deduction in respect of
the expenditure incurred by the assessee-company in respect of amounts paid to
its own directors who were also the members of the finance committee has been
rightly rejected by the High Court in view of the resolution passed by the
assessee-company wherein the directors, whether they be the members of the
finance committee or not, have been treated as a class and with reference to
all of them the assessee-company incurred the expenditure only because they
could not be remunerated to that extent by the subsidiary companies. The fact
that they were directors of the assessee-company and members of the finance
committee was not taken into account in taking over the remuneration payable
to them. In the circumstances, Civil Appeals Nos. 7 to 11 of 1980 filed by the
Appeals Nos. 139-142 of 1980 have been filed by the Revenue in respect of the
questions that have been answered against the Revenue and Civil Appeals Nos.
7-11 of 1980 have been filed by the assessee in respect of question No. 3 in
Tax Case No. 239 of 1971 which has been answered against the assessee.
2\. We will first take up Civil Appeals No. 139-142 of 1980 filed by the
Revenue. These appeals can be split up into two parts, one relating to the
answers to the two questions in Tax Case No. 160 of 1969 and questions Nos. 1
and 2 in Tax Case No. 239 of 1971, and the other relating to answers to
questions Nos. 4, 5 and 6 in Tax Case No. 239 of 1971. The two questions in
Tax Case No. 160 of 1969 and questions Nos. 1 and 2 in Tax Case No. 239 of
1971 were as follows :
Tax Case No. 160 of 1969 "(1) Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances
of the case, the Tribunal was right in upholding the basis of valuation
adopted by the ITO for the shares in M/s. Sri Rama Vilas Service (Pvt.) Ltd.
as on 1st January, 1954 ?
(2) Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Tribunal
was right in holding that the proviso to s. 12B(2) has no application in
regard to the sale of shares to M/s. Simpson & Co. Ltd. ?"
Tax Case No. 239 of 1971 "(1) Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances
of the case, the Tribunal was right in holding that the proviso to s. 12B(2)
has no application in regard to the sale of various shares by the assessee-
company to M/s. Simpson & Co. Ltd. through M/s. Simpson & General Finance Co.
(Pvt.) Ltd. and that the assessee was entitled to a capital loss of Rs.
9,47,541 in the asst. yr. 1958-59 ?
(2) Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Tribunal
was right in law in holding that the second proviso to s. 12B(2) had no
application and that the full value of the consideration accounted for by the
assessee should not be altered ?"
3\. These questions arise in the following facts and circumstances.
M/s. Amalgamation Pvt. Ltd. (hereinafter referred to as the assessee-company)
is a company incorporated on 22nd December, 1938 as a private limited company.
allowable deduction under s. 10(2)(xv) of the 1922 Act. Reliance was placed on
the decision in Tata Sons Ltd. (supra). This was also a case where the profits
of the assessee in the form of managing agency commission were directly linked
to the profits of the managed company which is not the position in the present
case.
14\. The alternative claim by the assessee-company for deduction in respect of
the expenditure incurred by the assessee-company in respect of amounts paid to
its own directors who were also the members of the finance committee has been
rightly rejected by the High Court in view of the resolution passed by the
assessee-company wherein the directors, whether they be the members of the
finance committee or not, have been treated as a class and with reference to
all of them the assessee-company incurred the expenditure only because they
could not be remunerated to that extent by the subsidiary companies. The fact
that they were directors of the assessee-company and members of the finance
committee was not taken into account in taking over the remuneration payable
to them. In the circumstances, Civil Appeals Nos. 7 to 11 of 1980 filed by the
