Delhi High Court
Wipro Limited vs Beckman Coulter International ... on 11 July, 2006
Equivalent citations: 2006 (3) ARBLR 118 Delhi, 2006 (2) CTLJ 57 Del, 131
(2006) DLT 681
Author: B D Ahmed
Bench: B D Ahmed
JUDGMENT Badar Durrez Ahmed, J.
Page 2674
1\. In this petition under Section 9 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act,
1996 (hereinafter referred to as 'the said Act'), the petitioner is seeking
Page 2675 directions and/or orders restraining the respondent from employing
any person who is, or has been employed with the petitioner, during the
pendency of arbitral proceedings. This prayer emanates from the Canvassing
Representative Agreement said to have been entered into by and between the
petitioner and the respondent in January, 2002. The relationship between the
petitioner and the respondent is that of a distributor and principal and has
subsisted for almost 17 years which has been renewed from time to time. The
last of the documents delineating the relationship between the parties is said
to be the Canvassing Representative Agreement entered into in January, 2002.
This agreement is said to have taken effect on 01.01.2002 and was to operate
other employees of the petitioner. As regards the solicitation already made by
the respondent in the advertisement, the petitioner, if it is able to
substantiate this in the arbitration proceedings, would be entitled to be
compensated by the grant of damages. So, it is not as if a breach of the non-
solicitation clause would leave the petitioner without a remedy. The remedy
lies in the claim for damages and an injunction against solicitation in
future. It does not lie in the grant of an injunction preventing its employees
from resigning and taking up employment with the respondent. Accordingly, this
application under Section 9 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 is
disposed of with the following directions:
1) the respondent is restrained during the pendency of the arbitration
proceedings from taking out any other or further advertisements or to do
anything to solicit, induce or encourage the employees of the petitioner to
leave the petitioner's employment and take up employment of the respondent
and/or its agents and/or representatives and/or competitors;
2) the employees of the petitioner would, however, be free to take up
This agreement is said to have taken effect on 01.01.2002 and was to operate
till 31.12.2002. It is alleged by the petitioner that subsequently, by virtue
of a letter dated 24.05.2004 (Annexure-P-3), the terms and conditions of the
said agreement of 2002 were extended by another two year period commencing
from 01.01.2004 and ending with 31.12.2005. Therefore, according to the
petitioner, the said Canvassing Representative Agreement of January, 2002 was
to continue to operate till 31.12.2005 and this governed the relationship
between the parties. The said agreement contained a document entitled
'Exhibit-D' and and forms part thereof. Clause 5 of the said agreement which
is the bone of contention between the parties, reads as under:
5\. Non-Solicitation of Employees:
Both parties agree that for a period of two (2) years from the date of
termination of the agreement to which this appendix is attached, including
termination by either party with or without cause, either directly or
indirectly solicit, induce or encourage any employee(s) to terminate their
employment with or to accept employment with any competitor, supplier or
customer of the other party, nor shall either party cooperate with any other
in doing or attempting to do so. As used herein, the term 'solicit, induce or
encourage' includes, but is not limited to (a) initiating communications with
an employee relating to possible employment, and/or (b) offering bonuses or
additional compensation to encourage employees to terminate their employment
with and accept employment with a competitor, supplier or customer of the
soliciting party, or (c) referring employees to personnel or agents employed
by competitors, suppliers or customers of the soliciting party. General
advertising of positions and other general means of recruitment shall not be
considered solicitation; and neither party shall be restricted from responding
to unsolicited applicants who are employees of the other party.
2\. It is the contention of the petitioners that the parties had agreed that
for a period of two years after the termination of the agreement, this non-
solicitation of employees clause would be operative. This clause provides that
upon the termination of the agreement, neither party shall solicit, directly
or indirectly or induce or encourage the employees of the other party to leave
and join a competitor or join the other party. There was an exception and that
was that general advertising of posts and other general means of recruitment
were not to be considered as solicitation.
Page 2676
3\. It is the case of the petitioner that it was only the petitioner who, for
the past 17 years, was the exclusive distributor of the respondent's products
in India. It is the petitioner's case that on 01.09.2005, the respondent
informed the petitioner's representative over the telephone that a decision
had been taken to prepare for direct operations in India without
distributorship, such as the one with the petitioner. It was also indicated
that by the end of October, 2005, the respondent would issue to the petitioner
a formal notice for non-renewal of the contract and that shortly thereafter a
communication was also received from the respondent to this effect. It is
submitted by the petitioner that efforts were made with the respondent to work
out a plan for ensuring a smooth transition mainly in the interest of
thousands of customers and installations all over the country where the
products of the respondent were installed and which were hitherto being
exclusively maintained by the petitioner. Some proposed transition documents,
which were not finalised by the parties, are annexed as Annexure-P-6. It is in
this background that in the month of October, 2005 an advertisement was issued
by the respondent in leading English newspapers of India with, inter alia, the
following text:
For all Sales and Marketing and Service and Support positions experience of
working with or having handled Beckman Coulter products and or similar
products would be a distinct advantage.
4\. A copy of one such advertisement is annexed as Annexure-P-7 and is at page
218 of the paper book. It is the petitioner's case that the aforesaid
statement in the said advertisement amounted to solicitation and was in
violation of the non-solicitation of employees clause referred to above. The
counsel for the petitioner submitted that this amounted to solicitation
because reference to experience of working with or having handled Beckman
Coulter Products had reference solely to the employees of the petitioner, who
had hitherto been the exclusive distributors insofar as the respondent's
products in India were concerned. Clearly, therefore, according to the learned
Counsel for the petitioner, the advertisement was directed towards the
employees of the petitioner and since such personnel were to be given a
distinct advantage, it was a clear case of solicitation as contemplated under
clause 5 of Exhibit-D to the Canvassing Representative Agreement of January,
2002. It is in this context that the present petition under Section 9 of the
said Act has been filed because the agreement by virtue of clause 22 thereof
provides for arbitration and, according to the learned Counsel for the
petitioner, the petitioner has already issued a notice to the respondent
raising disputes arising out of the aforesaid act of solicitation of its
employees by the respondent in violation of the non-solicitation of employees
clause contained in the said agreement. As indicated in the petition, the
petitioner apparently raised claims in the arbitral proceedings for declaring
that the respondent's action in issuing the said advertisement and in
soliciting its employees thereby was in violation of the contract expressly
prohibiting solicitation and the petitioner has claimed damages amounting to
Rs.81,400,000/- in respect of employees who have actually submitted their
resignations to the petitioner pursuant to the said solicitation by the
respondent. This, in sum and substance, is the case of the petitioner.
5\. It must be pointed out that when this petition was filed and taken up for
the first time on 19.12.2005, after noticing the aforesaid contentions on
behalf of the petitioner, this Court had passed an ex parte interim order
under Page 2677 Section 9 of the said Act. In the said order, it was, inter
alia, noted that the necessity for asking for interim orders had arisen
because although the agreement had been terminated and the termination is to
take effect from 31.12.2005, the petitioner is still bound by agreements with
various hospitals to provide service and maintenance in respect of the
equipments of the respondent which have already been supplied by the
petitioner to the said organisations. It was also noted that if the personnel
of the petitioner are permitted to join the respondent in pursuance of the
said advertisements, then the petitioner would be unable to meet its
contractual obligations with those medical organisations. It was further noted
that the petitioner was prima facie able to show that 21 persons employed with
the petitioner had already left, being allured by the advertisement of the
respondent. The learned Counsel for the petitioner had also stated on
instructions that the orders which they are seeking would not be to the
disadvantage of those employees who had tendered their resignation and that
the petitioner would be willing to accommodate them in its organisation
without any penalty. Under these circumstances, this Court had arrived at the
prima facie view that the petitioner was entitled to the reliefs prayed for in
this petition and, accordingly, till further orders, the court restrained the
respondent from employing any person who is presently employed with the
plaintiff or who was employed with the plaintiff up to 01.10.2005. Shortly
thereafter, an application being IA No.623/2006 was moved on behalf of the
respondent. On 19.01.2006, notice was issued and it was directed that this
application be heard Along with the present petition. The learned Counsel
appearing for the respondent had sought clarification of the order passed on
19.12.2005. The clarification which he sought was that the said order would
not apply to those employees which the petitioner had overtly released from
its employment. After hearing the counsel for the parties, this Court was of
the opinion that the respondent was entitled to the clarification that those
employees who were overtly released from the employment of the petitioner
would not be covered by the order dated 19.12.2005. It was also indicated that
the order would operate till the matter is finally disposed of and that any
action taken by the respondent would be subject to the final orders which
would be passed in this matter. The parties were directed to complete the
pleadings in the meanwhile.
6\. At the first instance, Mr Arun Mohan, the learned senior counsel,
appearing on behalf of the respondent raised several objections. First of all,
he raised the objection with regard to territorial jurisdiction. Secondly, he
submitted that the advertisement was merely a general advertisement for
recruitment and did not amount to solicitation. Thirdly, he submitted that, in
any event, the non-solicitation clause was not in operation inasmuch as the
Canvassing Representative Agreement of January, 2002 was not extended and that
there was a different agreement in operation, but that agreement did not
contain a non-solicitation clause. Fourthly, he mentioned that any restraint
on employment would be violative of Section 27 of the Indian Contract Act,
1872 and that the ratio of the decision in the case of Pepsi Foods Ltd and
Ors. v. Bharat Coca-Cola Holdings Pvt. Ltd and Ors. Page 2678 would be clearly
applicable wherein this Court had held that the freedom to seek employment
cannot be curtailed and no injunction to such an effect can be granted.
Fifthly, he submitted that the petitioner is not entitled to any relief
inasmuch as the manner in which relevant material has been placed amounts to
suppression and, therefore, the petitioner is disentitled from any relief
whatsoever.
7\. Before these contentions are set out in greater detail, Mr Arun Mohan
invited my attention to the facts as he saw them. He submitted that the
Canvassing Representative Agreement of January, 2002 was w.e.f. 01.01.2002 and
was to expire on 31.12.2002. He submitted that this agreement, in fact,
expired on 31.12.2002. It was substituted by a further agreement as indicated
by the letter dated 21.01.2003 (at page 214 of the paper book) which was
effective from 01.01.2003 to 31.12.2003. As per this letter, which has been
issued by the respondent to the petitioner, the respondent confirmed that the
petitioner was its exclusive agent for its products and related accessories in
the whole of India as per the product list (Annexure-1 thereto). It was also
indicated in the letter of 21.03.2003 that the effective period of the
agreement was from 01.01.2003 to 31.12.2003 unless the termination notice is
given by the respondent 60 days prior to the expiry of the said period from
either side and that this appointment shall be extended for another one year.
This letter of 21.01.2003 also contained the following clauses:
Competitor's Product Wipro Ltd (Biomed Division) shall not import nor sell any
related products of other manufacturers, which they are already dealing with.
Confidentiality All information about sales activities, technical or
scientific details, especially those resulting from product registrations,
remain the property of Beckman Coulter and have to be treated as confidential,
even after termination of this agreement.
Arbitration:
All disputes arising in connection with the present agreement shall be finally
settled under the Rules of Conciliation and Arbitration of the International
Chamber of Commerce by one or more arbitrators appointed in accordance with
the Rules. All proceedings there under shall take place in New Delhi, India.
8\. Mr Arun Mohan submitted that this letter of 21.01.2003 did not contain any
non-solicitation clause. According to Mr Arun Mohan, this letter of 21.01.2003
was deliberately not produced by the petitioner and it is for this reason
alone that the ex parte injunction is liable to be vacated. Mr Arun Mohan
contended that this agreement of 21.01.2003 was signed by the petitioner
before the DGS&D as being the agreement governing the relationship between the
petitioner and the respondent. Mr Arun Mohan submitted that all the elements
of a contract are contained in the letter of 21.01.2003. He then referred to
the rejoinder submitted by the petitioner with reference to this letter of
21.01.2003. In paragraph 73-75 of the rejoinder, the petitioner had contended
that it was wrong on the part of the respondent to hold out that, inter alia,
the letter dated Page 2679 21.01.2003 amounted to a contract or to state that
nothing which is essential for the formation of a contract is missing from
these documents. According to the petitioner, the most essential element that
was missing from the said letter was the signature of the petitioner and as
such, it did not result in a binding contract. Mr Arun Mohan also submitted
that an identical letter dated 10.12.2003 (at page 228) was issued by the
respondent for the period 01.01.2004 to 31.12.2005. This letter also contained
identical clauses to the letter of 21.01.2003. This letter was also not signed
by the petitioner. It is in this context that the petitioner in the rejoinder
stated that the letters of 21.01.2003 and 10.12.2003 did not amount to binding
contracts. The petitioner also mentioned that these documents were actually
letters issued by the respondent so that the same could be submitted at the
office of the Director General of Supplies & Disposals, New Delhi for the
purpose of rate contract registrations. It was submitted that by no stretch of
imagination could such letters be construed as agreements which modified the
original agreement of 2002. In response to these statements contained in the
rejoinder, Mr Arun Mohan submitted that if the fact that there were no
signatures on the two documents on behalf of the petitioner could be taken to
mean that no concluded contract had been arrived at, then the same reasoning
would apply to the agreement of 2002 which also does not contain the
signatures of the petitioner. Therefore, according to Mr Arun Mohan, apart
from signatures, which according to him are not essential, no other essential
features of a contract are missing from the said two documents dated
21.01.2003 and 10.12.2003. He also submitted that it could surely not be the
petitioners argument that these documents, namely, letters dated 21.01.2003
and 10.12.2003 were false documents prepared only to deceive DGS&D.
9\. Mr Arun Mohan then submitted that after these documents dated 21.01.2003
and 10.12.2003, on 03.02.2004 the respondent sent a detailed draft agreement
for the period 01.01.2004 to 31.12.2006. This draft agreement did not contain
any non-solicitation clause. It was then contended by Mr Arun Mohan that while
this draft was under consideration of the petitioner, on 06.04.2004, the
respondent wrote to the petitioner informing that the distributor agreement
was currently under process for renewal and till such time, the existing terms
and conditions would be binding on both the parties. According to him, the
reference to the existing terms and conditions were as contained in the letter
dated 10.12.2003. He submitted that on 17.04.2004, the petitioner sent its
response (objections) to the draft distributor agreement under contemplation.
What is material is that in its objections, the petitioner did not seek the
insertion of any non-solicitation clause. Mr Arun Mohan pointed to page 325
and 326 of the paper book which was a part of the tabulation of suggestions
made by the petitioner on the draft agreement submitted by the respondent.
According to Mr Arun Mohan, there were differences particularly with regard to
clause 16 which spoke of the term and duration. This difference of opinion was
whether the agreement was to terminate on 31.12.2006 or 31.12.2008. Secondly,
whether the contract was terminable by a termination simplicitor with six
months Page 2680 notice or whether it was terminable only if the minimum
quantities were not achieved. It was suggested that the exclusivity clause be
made non-exclusive. The other aspect which is material, according to Mr Arun
Mohan, is that the suggestions did not include the suggestions for inclusion
of a non-solicitation clause. He, however, submitted that subsequently on
07.05.2004, an e-mail (at page 365 of the paper book) was sent by the
petitioner to the respondent indicating that apart from the changes proposed
by the petitioner, it is also necessary to incorporate the 'non hire' clause.
According to Mr Arun Mohan, 'non hire' clause was entirely different from a
non-solicitation clause. In any event, he submitted that in the wake of such
differences between the parties existing in April, May, 2004, how could the
letter of 24.05.2004 be read as extending the earlier agreement of 2002. He
further submitted, with reference to the letter dated 24.05.2004, that after
exchange of drafts as aforesaid, no sane person would by such an informal
letter extend the 2002 contract on the same terms and conditions. According to
him, stated differently, subsequent to an 'offer' and 'counter-offer' process,
to imply extension of the agreement of 2002 in an informal letter is unheard
of. He further submitted that if the letter of 24.05.2005 was by itself an
extension of the 2002 contract, one would have in the normal course expected
the petitioner to at least write a letter proposing that instead of the
terminal date being 31.12.2005, the respondent may make it, if necessary,
2008, as the petitioner had sought, or at least 2006, as the respondent itself
had proposed. According to him, the fact that no communication was sent by the
petitioner asking for signing a formal contract on the same terms and
conditions as the original contract of 2002 was a significant fact.
10\. Mr Raju Ramachandran, the learned senior counsel who appeared on behalf
of the petitioner, submitted that the letter dated 21.01.2003 issued by the
respondent was in response to the e-mail sent by the petitioner to the
respondent (at page 210 of the paper book) on 21.01.2003 itself. As per the
letter dated 21.01.2003 sent by the petitioner, it was indicated that the
petitioner's registration with DGS&D had expired on 31.12.2002 as approved
suppliers to Government customers under CSIR/ICMR. All these customers like
CDRI, NCL, CPCRI etc. insist on the D.G.S.& D. Registration certificate for
placing orders through the petitioner for Beckman Coulter Products. It was
further indicated that there was a change in the format of Letter of
Authorisation/Agreement which was enclosed with the letter. Further, since all
the clauses were standard as per the normal agreement, the respondent was
requested to send the agreement letter as an e-mail attachment and original by
courier. He submitted that the letter dated 21.01.2003 was at best a further
document confirming the relationship between the petitioner and the respondent
and was for the limited purpose of obtaining a DGS&D Registration certificate
and did not cover the entire relationship between the parties exhaustively as
was done by the agreement of 2002 which stood extended by the subsequent
letter of 24.05.2004. Similar is the position with regard to the letter of
10.12.2003. He further submitted that, in any event, these letters are prior
to the letter finally issued by the respondent on 24.05.2004. He further
submitted that the draft agreement sent by the respondent on 03.02.2004 was
not accepted by the petitioner and, in any event, was Page 2681 not signed by
it. Therefore, it did not culminate into a binding contract. He also submitted
that, in any event, various changes were proposed to the draft agreement as
already indicated by the learned Counsel for the respondent. One of the
changes was the requirement to add the 'non hire' clause, which, according to
the learned Counsel for the petitioner, amounted to the same thing as a non-
solicitation clause. Thus, it is the submission of the learned Counsel for the
petitioner that the agreement of January, 2002 which was to initially operate
till 31.12.2002, was extended in its operation by the letter dated 24.05.2004
till 31.12.2005. There was no further renewal of the agreement between the
parties and, therefore, the arrangement and relationship between the parties
terminated on 31.12.2005. The non-solicitation clause, as per clause 5 of
Exhibit-D to the Canvassing Representative Agreement of January, 2002, would
continue to operate for a period of two years after termination, i.e., up to
31.12.2007. He submitted that the letters dated 21.01.2003 and 10.12.2003 as
well as the proposed draft agreement and the proposed changes did not fructify
into a binding contract and could not be regarded as superseding the agreement
of January, 2002 read with the extension letter of 24.05.2004.
11\. Considering the submissions made by the counsel for the parties on the
aspect as to whether the agreement of January, 2002 by virtue of extension
letter of 24.05.2004 was in operation till 31.12.2005, I am in agreement with
the submissions made by the learned Counsel for the petitioner that it was in
operation. The reason being that the letters dated 21.01.2003 and 10.12.2003
were for the purposes of obtaining the DGS&D Registration certificate and
cannot be regarded as exhaustive agreements dealing with the entire
relationship between the parties. Secondly, the letter dated 24.05.2004 was
subsequent in time to these letters and at this juncture, it would be
instructive to set out the first paragraph of the said letter which is
addressed by the respondent to the petitioner:
In line with my communication to you last week and our subsequent
conversation, I am writing to you to confirm that Wipro Biomed will continue
to be the authorised distributor of Beckman Coulter products in the Indian
market through until the end of 2005. This represents an extension of the
normal one-year agreement which Beckman Coulter has habitually contracted with
both Wipro Biomed and the vast majority of its other distributors in the BCISA
area. Effectively, this is a two-year extension to the original canvassing
agreement between our companies and covers the period of 1st January 2004 to
31st December 2005.
The aforesaid extract makes it unequivocally clear that the respondent
confirmed that the petitioner would continue to be the authorised distributor
of the respondent's products in the entire market till the end of 2005. It was
also expressly stated that this represented an extension of the normal one-
year agreement which the respondent had habitually contracted with the
petitioner and the vast majority of its other distributors in the BCISA area.
Most importantly, it was categorically stated that effectively, this was a
two-year extension to the original Canvassing Representative Agreement between
the companies and covered the period 01.01.2004 to Page 2682 31.12.2004.
Therefore, even if letters dated 21.01.2003 and 10.12.2003 are, for the sake
of argument, regarded as contracts, they are clearly superseded by the letter
dated 24.05.2004, which, in categorical terms extends the arrangement not
under the letters dated 21.01.2003 and 10.12.2003, but the original Canvassing
Agreement which was the agreement of January, 2002. The argument advanced by
Mr Arun Mohan that there were no signatures even in the original Canvassing
Agreement of 2002 is of no consequence because the respondent has signed the
same and the petitioner has produced it as a binding agreement. Therefore, the
parties are bound by the said agreement. It would have been a different matter
if the petitioner, relying upon the agreement had produced the same and the
respondent had not signed it. Then, the respondent could have taken up the
plea that there was no consensus ad idem between the parties and, therefore,
there was no binding contract. The situation here is different. The respondent
has admittedly signed the agreement of 2002. The petitioner, who has
apparently not signed the agreement, has produced it as a binding agreement
and has acted upon it. Therefore, the plea advanced by Mr Arun Mohan that this
would in itself not constitute a binding agreement is of no consequence.
12\. With this largely factual issue, out of the way, it will now be necessary
to take up the objection with regard to territorial jurisdiction. Mr Arun
Mohan raised the plea of territorial jurisdiction. He submitted that the
respondent did not have any office or establishment in Delhi. Earlier, a
liaison office of the respondent was operating from Mumbai. Thereafter, the
entire component of the respondent was incorporated at Mumbai. Its registered
office, bank accounts, premises and establishment are all at Mumbai. The all-
India advertisement was also issued from Mumbai. Therefore, according to Mr
Arun Mohan, this Court did not have territorial jurisdiction to entertain the
present petition. He further submitted that the purported letters dated
21.01.2003 and 10.12.2003 referred to above have reference to arbitration
being carried on in Delhi, but because those purported letters do not contain
any non-solicitation clause, no cause of action under those letters could have
accrued in favor of the petitioner. He submitted that as the petitioner places
reliance on the 2002 agreement, the arbitration clause of that agreement will
have to be examined. According to him, clause 22 of the agreement of January
2002, which refers to arbitration, excludes the jurisdiction of this Court. In
other words, according to him, if it is the 2002 contract that is sought to be
relied on, then this Court has no territorial jurisdiction and if reliance is
placed on the contracts of 21.01.2003 and 10.12.2003, then they have no clause
for non-solicitation. Therefore, according to him, in any event, this Court
does not have the territorial jurisdiction to entertain this petition.
13\. Mr Ramachandran, on the other hand, referred to paragraph 26 of the
petition wherein it is stated that pursuant to the said advertisement, 21
employees had tendered their resignation. It is stated that in the Northern
Region, which based in Delhi, there were 4 sales employees and 5 service
employees. It is further stated that after the issuance of the said
advertisement, the strength of the employees of the petitioner has come down
Page 2683 to 5 from 9. According to the learned Counsel for the petitioner,
the cause of action for the petitioner had arisen in all regions since the
effect of the wrongful action of the respondent has been experienced all over
the country. However, a substantial part of the cause of action has also
arisen within the territorial jurisdiction of this Court inasmuch as employees
of the petitioner company working in the Northern Region based at Delhi were
attracted by the advertisement and sought to leave the services of the
petitioner at Delhi. Therefore, a part of the cause of action had arisen
within the territorial jurisdiction of this Court and, therefore, this Court
would have territorial jurisdiction to entertain the present petition.
14\. Considering these arguments, it is clear that the petitioner is founding
its claim on the basis of the contract of January, 2002 and the subsequent
extension letter of 24.05.2004. The petitioner's claim is in no way connected
with the letters of 21.01.2003 and 10.12.2003. Therefore, the question of
territorial jurisdiction would have to be considered in the light of the terms
and conditions contained in the Canvassing Representative Agreement of
January, 2002. Clause 22 of the said agreement which deals with arbitration
reads as under:
22\. Arbitration 22.1. All disputes arising in connection with the present
agreement shall be finally settled under the Rules of Conciliation and
Arbitration of the International Chamber of Commerce by one or more
arbitrators appointed in accordance with the Rules. All proceedings there
under shall take place in Geneva, Switzerland.
22.2 The parties hereto expressly consent to and accept the exclusive
jurisdiction of the courts of Switzerland and of the Territory with respect to
the enforcement of their rights under this arbitration clause, or with respect
to the determination of any claim, dispute, or disagreement which may arise
concerning the interpretation, performance, or breach of this Agreement.
Clause 22.2, reproduced hereinabove, clearly provides that the parties have
expressly consented to and accepted the exclusive jurisdiction of the courts
of Switzerland and of the Territory.... It is well-settled that the parties by
agreement can limit jurisdiction to a court or courts which would otherwise
have jurisdiction. However, the parties by consent cannot confer jurisdiction
on a court or courts which otherwise do not have jurisdiction. The above
clause makes it clear that the courts of Switzerland as well as the courts of
the 'Territory' would have exclusive jurisdiction. Therefore, jurisdiction was
not limited to the courts of Switzerland, but also extended to the courts of
the 'Territory'. The expression 'Territory' has been used in clause 2.1
whereby the Canvassing Representative Agreement has been shown to extend,
inter alia, throughout the Territory described in Exhibit-A [Territory]. In
Exhibit-A to the Canvassing Representative Agreement, 'Territory' has been
defined as under:
TERRItorY:--India, Maldive Islands, Bhutan, and Nepal (Clinical Chemistry and
Life Science Research in Nepal only, Nepal is not included in the territory
for Cellular Analysis Division products )--
15\. Therefore, the parties have expressly consented to and accepted the
exclusive jurisdiction of not only the courts of Switzerland, but also of the
Page 2684 courts of the 'Territory' which includes the courts of India.
Therefore, there is nothing in the Canvassing Representative Agreement which
excludes the jurisdiction of this Court. The only thing that has to be seen is
whether a part of the cause of action has arisen in Delhi or not. The
advertisements were all-India advertisements and the petitioner's employees
all over India have allegedly been allured by the purported solicitation
contained in the advertisements. As indicated by the petitioner, the
petitioner's employees in Delhi have also been affected. Therefore, a part of
the cause of action has arisen within the territorial jurisdiction of this
Court. That being the position, this Court would have territorial jurisdiction
to entertain the present petition.
16\. Mr Arun Mohan next contended that the petitioner has concealed and/or
suppressed many facts from the main petition. He submitted that the letters
dated 21.01.2003 and 10.12.2003 were not mentioned in the body of the
petition. Though, the petitioner annexed copies thereof, the reference to
these documents is very cloaked. Mr Arun Mohan also submitted that the
exchange of drafts in 2004 and, in particular, the proposed draft agreement
and the counter proposals given by the petitioner prior to the letter of
24.05.2004 were not referred to in the petition. He further submitted that the
termination letter of 14.10.2005 was not mentioned and if the same had been
disclosed to the court, then the court would have been able to link this
document with the letter dated 10.12.2003 which, though filed by the
petitioner, was not referred to in the petition. He further submitted that the
petitioner did not disclose the transition facility talks between the
petitioner and the respondent in October"November, 2005, which talks were held
for the purpose that the end users may not be affected by the non-renewal of
the relationship between the respondent and the petitioner. He finally
submitted that the overt act of resignation and the acceptance of resignation
on the part of the employees and the petitioner respectively was not referred
to. He, therefore, submitted that in view of these concealments, the
petitioner disentitled itself to any relief in this petition.
17\. On behalf of the petitioner, it was contended that there was no
concealment or suppression of the material facts. The learned Counsel for the
petitioner submitted that the letters dated 21.01.2003 and 10.12.2003 were
merely letters issued by the respondent at the request of the petitioner for
DGS&D Registration purposes. They were not agreements, as alleged by the
respondent. The learned Counsel submitted that since the pleadings of the
petitioner did not revolve around DGS&D Registration of the respondents
products, it was not deemed necessary to specifically refer to the said
letters in the pleadings. It was further submitted by the learned Counsel for
the petitioner that the exchange of drafts for the proposed contract in the
early part of 2004 was not material inasmuch as it did not fructify into a
contract and the letter dated 24.05.2004 extending the original Canvassing
Representative Agreement of 2002 till 31.12.2005 was the material document
which superseded all these efforts at arriving at a fresh contract. As regards
the allegation that the termination letter of 14.10.2005 was not disclosed,
the learned Counsel for the petitioner pointed out that in paragraph 12 of the
petition, it is mentioned that on 01.09.2005, the respondent informed the
petitioner's representative over the telephone that Page 2685 a decision had
been taken to prepare for direct operations in India without distributorship,
such as the one with the petitioner. It was further pointed out in the said
paragraph that by the end of October, 2005, the respondent had indicated that
it would issue to the petitioner a formal notice for non-renewal of the
contract. It was then stated in the said paragraph that "shortly after this
communication was received from the respondent.... This clearly indicates that
the notice for non-renewal of the contract had been referred to in the
pleadings. So, there was no concealment on the part of the petitioner. Though,
a copy of the letter dated 14.10.2005 had not been filed Along with the
petition. As regards the allegation that the transition facility talks between
the petitioner and the respondent in October"November, 2005 were not
disclosed, Mr Ramachandran, the learned senior counsel appearing for the
petitioner, submitted that this is not correct. There is a clear reference in
paragraph 12 to the meeting between the representatives of the parties and the
attempt to work out a plan for ensuring that a smooth transition takes place
mainly in the interest of thousands of customers and installations all over
the country where the products of the respondent were installed and were being
maintained by the petitioner. The petitioner had also annexed one set of the
proposed transition documents, which were not, however, finalised between the
parties. The same were annexed as Annexure-P-6. As regards the allegation that
the factum of the petitioner's employees having resigned and having been
relieved by the petitioner having been concealed in the petition, Mr
Ramachandran submitted that this is also not correct. He submitted that in
paras 19, 25 and 26 of the petition, the same has been specifically pleaded
and is also reflected from the statement of employees at page 218 of the paper
book. He referred to paragraph 19 to show that the petitioner had pleaded that
after publication of the said advertisement, 21 persons employed by it, and
possessing considerable expertise, and who were very experienced in their
respective areas of specialisation, had submitted their resignations to the
petitioner. Annexure-P-8 is a statement setting out the relevant details of
the employees who had submitted their resignations. The details included the
date of joining, date of tendering resignation, level of experience, area of
specialisation and location, etc. Annexure-P-8 pertains to 21 employees who
had tendered resignation from the employment of the petitioner in November,
December, 2005 and, according to the learned Counsel for the petitioner, these
resignations were all pursuant to the advertisement in question. Similar
averments with regard to the resignation of the employees are also contained
in paragraphs 25 and 26 of the petition. Therefore, the learned Counsel for
the petitioner submitted that the petitioner has not concealed and/or
suppressed any material fact from this Court.
18\. Considering the arguments advanced by the counsel for the parties, I am
of the opinion that it would not be possible to hold that the petitioner has
been guilty of concealment and/or suppression of material facts. Though there
is some substance in what Mr Arun Mohan has submitted, the same at the best
can only be construed as varying degrees of emphasis given to different sets
of facts. While Mr Arun Mohan may have a legitimate grievance in saying that
certain facts were not accorded the degree of emphasis that they required,
that would be a subjective point of view. Call it the advocates ingenuity or
whatever, the same cannot be held to amount to concealment or Page 2686
suppression. Therefore, the petition cannot be thrown out on this ground urged
on behalf of the respondent.
19\. I now come to the question as to whether the advertisement amounted to a
solicitation on the part of the respondent. The arguments and counter-
arguments on this aspect have already been noted above. The material portion
of the advertisement in question has already been set out above, but for the
purpose of facility, the same is being reproduced at in this point also:
For all Sales and Marketing and Service and Support positions experience of
working with or having handled Beckman Coulter products and or similar
products would be a distinct advantage.
From a reading of the above extract, it is abundantly clear that the
respondent has made it known to the public at large that for all sales and
marketing and service and supports positions the experience of working with or
having handled Beckman Coulter products and or similar products would be a
distinct advantage. It is an admitted position that the petitioner was the
only concern which had handled Beckman Coulter products for the past 17 years
in India. This is so because the petitioner was admittedly the exclusive
Canvassing Representative of the respondent in India. Therefore, the
respondent was making it known to the employees of the petitioner that in case
they applied for the positions advertised in the Sales and Marketing and
Service and Support Departments, they, having handled Beckman Coulter
products, would be at a distinct advantage. The indication that such persons
would be at a distinct advantage is an indication that the respondent would,
be interested in employing such individuals. Therefore, there is no manner of
doubt in my mind that this advertisement was, inter alia, directed towards the
employees of the petitioner and it was definitely a solicitation on behalf of
the respondent.
20\. Although it is not material for deciding whether this was a solicitation
or not, it must also be noted that after the advertisement was issued, as
indicated in the reply filed on behalf of the respondent in paragraphs 124
onwards, over 10,000 applications were received. These were shortlisted,
candidates were interviewed and ultimately 48 candidates were accepted. Out of
these 48 persons, 24 were those who had resigned from Wipro (the petitioner
company). Four have returned to Wipro after the grant of ex parte injunction
dated 19.12.2005 leaving 20 employees from Wipro. These facts also disclose
that the employees of the petitioner responded to the advertisement and were
granted employment. Of course, there were others persons who had nothing to do
with the petitioner, who had also responded and some of them were also
employed. The position is clear that on a plain interpretation of the
advertisement in the background of the exclusivity of the agreement between
the petitioner and the respondent, the advertisement was a clear solicitation
of the employees of the petitioner.
21\. I now come to the key question, as to whether clause 5 of Exhibit-D to
the Canvassing Representative Agreement of January, 2002 which has been styled
as "non-solicitation of employees' is enforceable in law or not. The question
as to whether the advertisement amounted to solicitation has already been
examined and I have already concluded that it does amount to solicitation. The
only question that remains is whether the requirement under the said Page 2687
clause 5 of Exhibit-D that, for a period of two years from the date of
termination of the agreement, neither party shall directly or indirectly
induce or encourage any employees to terminate their employment with or to
accept employment with any other competitor, supplier or customer of the other
party, would be hit by Section 27 of the Indian Contract Act as being in
restraint of the trade, business or lawful profession. Section 27 of the
Indian Contract Act, 1872 reads as under:
27\. Agreement in restraint of trade, void.Every agreement by which any one is
restrained from exercising a lawful profession, trade or business of any kind,
is to that extent void.
Exception 1. 'Saving of agreement is not to carry on business of which
goodwill is sold'. One who sells the goodwill of a business may agree with the
buyer to refrain from carrying on a similar business, within specified local
limits, so long as the buyer, or any person deriving title to the goodwill
from him, carries on a like business therein, provided that such limits appear
to the Court reasonable, regard being had to the nature of the business.
22\. Mr Ramachandran submitted on behalf of the petitioner that the negative
covenant that is contained in the non-solicitation clause is a reasonable
restriction that the parties imposed upon themselves for a period of two years
after termination of the agreement because of the peculiar nature of their
relationship spanning over 17 years. He submitted that the petitioner during
this period had, as the exclusive Canvassing Representative of the respondent
in India, submitted to a stipulation that it would refrain from 'promoting,
selling, or offering for sale during the life of this agreement any products
which are competitive with such products' by virtue of clause 3.8 of the
original Canvassing Representative Agreement of January, 2002. In the words of
Mr Ramachandran, this stipulation had effectively barred the petitioner from
promoting its business over and above the respondent's products. It was
further explained by him that it was in this context that the inclusion of
non-solicitation clause had become a necessity. By virtue of the same, the
parties intended, in effect, that the petitioner would be given a fair chance
to develop its business interest for a period of two years after termination
of the agreement with the aid of its specially trained, highly skilled, very
valuable sales, marketing, service and support personnel. In these
circumstances, it was further submitted that the reasonable restriction set
out in the non-solicitation clause, which does not seek to impose a
restriction on the petitioner's employees, has to be enforced. According to Mr
Ramachandran, if the same is not done and the petitioner loses its most
valuable resources, i.e., its sales and marketing and service and support
personnel, its business in the bio-med segment would come to an end. Quite
dramatically, he had submitted that the petitioner would be 'wiped out' from
the market and thereby suffer damage and irreparable harm. It was also
submitted that the petitioner had relieved the employees who had resigned and
has not tried to hold them back. Such employees are free to join any other
company besides the respondent because the respondent is barred from employing
them in terms of the non-solicitation clause. According to Mr Ramachandran,
the non-solicitation clause is a reasonable restriction and is not hit by
Section 27 of Page 2688 the Indian Contract Act, 1872 since the clause does
not impose a restriction on the petitioner's employees from joining any of the
competitors of the petitioner post termination of such employees' contracts.
23\. Mr Arun Mohan on the other hand argued that there is a fundamental
difference and distinction between 'solicitation' and 'employment'. To
restrain solicitation is very different from restraining employment. According
to Mr Arun Mohan, the petitioner wants a restraint on employment in the garb
of a restraint on solicitation. He further submitted that the only act which
the petitioner has termed as amounting to solicitation was the newspaper
advertisement referred to above. According to him, the cause of action for
'non hire' begins on the date of hire and is continuous, but that for
'solicitation' begins and ends on the date of advertisement. According to him,
solicitation, unlike employment, is not a continuous cause of action. The
alleged solicitation, was complete in September, 2005 when the advertisement
was issued. According to Mr Arun Mohan, the petitioner, at best, could have
asked for an injunction to restrain further solicitation of the employees, but
it asked for a much wider injunction Do Not Employ as if: (1) there was a non-
employment (non hire) clause in the agreement; (2) the agreement was
subsisting; and (3) Section 27 of the Contract Act, 1872 was repealed.
24\. Mr Arun Mohan also placed reliance on the following decisions:
i) Superintendence Company of India (P) Ltd v. Sh. Krishan Murgai ;
ii) Electrosteel Castings Ltd v. Saw Pipes Ltd and Ors. ;
iii) R. Babu and Anr. v. TTK LIG Ltd. 2005 (124) Comp Cases 109 (Madras);
iv) Pepsi Foods Ltd and Ors. v. Bharat Coca-Cola Holdings Pvt Ltd and Ors. ;
v) Kores Manufacturing Co. Ltd v. Kolok Manufacturing Co. Ltd. 1957 (3) All
E.R. 158 in appeal 1958 (2) All. ER 65;
vi) Star India Private Ltd v. Laxmiraj Seetharam Nayak and Anr. 2003 (3) Maha
LJ 726;
vii) Jet Airways (I) Ltd. v. Mr Jan Peter Ravi Karnik ;
viii) Ambience India Pvt Ltd v. Naveen Jain: ;
ix) Taprogge Gesellschaft MBH v. IAEC India Ltd: ;
x) Shri Raj Chopra and Anr. v. Shri Narendra Anand and Ors. .
Page 2689
25\. Before considering the case law on the subject of Section 27 of the
Indian Contract Act, 1872, it would be instructive to have another look at the
said non-solicitation clause. A reading of the clause indicates that it has
two components. The first component deals with the aspect of solicitation and
the second component saves general advertising from the purview of
solicitation. The latter component reads as under:
General advertising of positions and other general means of recruitment shall
not be considered solicitation; and neither party shall be restricted from
responding to unsolicited applicants who are employees of the other party.
26\. The underlined portion indicated above gives us a key to understanding
the ambit of the clause. Firstly, solicitation of an employee by the other
party is not permitted for a period of two years from the date of termination
of the agreement. Secondly, there is no restriction on either party employing
erstwhile employees of the other party provided such employees have approached
the other party either in response to a general advertisement or on their own
without any solicitation, inducement or encouragement. Therefore, the clause
read in its proper perspective has two components; one, that neither party
shall solicit and, two, that neither party shall employ any one who has
responded to such solicitation. Thus, there is a prohibition for a period of
two years after the termination of the agreement upon either party from not
only soliciting the other party's employees, but also not hiring them or not
employing them in response to such solicitation. There is, however, no
restriction on the employees of either party leaving on their own and joining
the other party. This is the scope and ambit of the said non-solicitation
clause and it is in the context of this meaning that it has to be considered
as to whether the clause is hit by Section 27 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872
and to what extent.
27\. In Superintendence Company (supra), the Supreme Court took up for
consideration the following term (clause 10) in the contract of employment
between the appellant and the respondent:
That you will not be permitted to join any firm of our competitors or run a
business of your own in similarity as directly and/or indirectly, for a period
of two years at the place of your last posting after you leave the company.
The appellant therein had terminated the services of the respondent, who
subsequently started his own business at Delhi on identical lines to that of
the appellant. The appellant brought an action claiming damages on account of
the breach of the aforesaid negative covenant contained in the said clause 10.
Two concurring opinions were rendered; one by Untwalia and Tulzapurkar, JJ and
the other by A.P. Sen, J. Principally two substantial questions were raised
before the Supreme Court:
(a) whether a post-service restrictive covenant in restraint of trade as
contained in clause (10) of the service agreement between the parties is void
under Section 27 of the Indian Contract Act? and
(b) whether the said restrictive covenant, assuming it to be valid, is on its
terms enforceable at the instance of the appellant-company against the
respondent ?
Page 2690
28\. In the opinion of Tulzapurkar, J (for himself and Untwalia, J), the
appeal was capable of being disposed of on the second question alone and,
therefore, they did not think it necessary to decide or express any opinion on
the first question. By virtue of the said opinion which considered only the
second question, the court had come to the view that the clause would not
operate because the termination on the part of the appellant of the services
of the respondent would not fall within the expression 'after you leave the
company'. However, A.P. Sen, J, in his opinion also took up the first question
for consideration. He observed that:
Agreements of service, containing a negative covenant preventing the employee
from working elsewhere during the term covered by the agreement, are not void
under Section 27 of the Contract Act, on the ground that they are in restraint
of trade. Such agreements are enforceable. The reason is obvious. The doctrine
of restraint of trade never applies during the continuance of a contract of
employment; it applies only when the contract comes to an end. While during
the period of employment, the courts undoubtedly would not grant any specific
performance of a contract of personal service...
It was also noted that in Niranjan Shankar Golikari v. Century Spinning and
Mfg. Co. Ltd: , the Supreme Court drew a distinction between a restriction in
a contract of employment which is operative during the period of employment
and one which is to operate after the termination of employment. After
referring to certain English cases where such distinction had been drawn, the
court observed:
A similar distinction has also been drawn by courts in India and a restraint
by which a person binds himself during the term of his agreement directly or
indirectly not to take service with any other employer or be engaged by a
third party has been held not to be void and not against Section 27 of the
Contract Act.
The court was of the view that 'negative covenants operating during the period
of the contract of employment when the employee is bound to serve his employer
exclusively are generally not regarded as restraint of trade and therefore do
not fall under Section 27 of the Contract Act and that a negative covenant
that the employee would not engage himself in a trade or business or would not
get himself employed by any other master for whom he would perform similar or
substantially similar duties is not therefore a restraint of trade unless the
contract as aforesaid is unconscionable or excessively harsh or unreasonable
or one-sided'. In the opinion of A.P. Sen, J, in Superintendence Co. Ltd
(supra), the question whether an agreement is void under Section 27 must be
decided upon the wording of that section. A contract, which has for its object
a restraint of trade, is prima facie, void. Section 27 of the Contract Act is
general in terms and unless a particular contract can be distinctly brought
within Exception I there is no escape from the prohibition. As observed by
A.P. Page 2691 Sen, J. We have nothing to do with the policy of such a law.
All we have to do is to take the words of the Contract Act and put upon the
meaning which they appear plainly to bear. The observations of Sir Richard
Couch, C.J., in Madhub Chunder v. Raj Coomar Doss: 14 BLR 76 (1874) were noted
as having become the locus classicus on this subject. Those observations were:
The words 'restraint from exercising a lawful profession, trade or business'
do not mean an absolute restriction, and are intended to apply to a partial
restriction, a restriction limited to some particular place, otherwise the
first exception would have been unnecessary.' Moreover, 'in the following
Section (Section 28) the legislative authority when it intends to speak of an
absolute restraint and not a partial one, has introduced the word
'absolutely'.... The use of this word in Section 28 supports the view that in
Section 27 it was intended to prevent not merely a total restraint from
carrying on trade or business, but a partial one. We have nothing to do with
the policy of such a law. All we have to do is to take the words of the
Contract Act, and put upon them the meaning which they appear plainly to bear.
29\. In Superintendence Co. Ltd (supra), it was held that the aforesaid test
laid down in Madhub Chunder (supra), had stood the test of time and had
invariably been followed by all the High Courts in India. Therefore, the
conclusion arrived at was that the agreement in question was not a 'good will
of business' type of contract and, therefore, did not fall within the
exception. If the agreement on the part of the respondent puts a restraint
even though partial, it was void, and, therefore, the contract must be treated
as one which cannot be enforced. A.P. Sen, J also observed, with reference to
a number of English cases which were cited in the context of partial restraint
and the test of reasonableness applied thereto, as under:
52\. Neither the test of reasonableness not the principle that the restraint
being partial or reasonable are applicable to a case governed by Section 27 of
the Contract Act, unless it falls within Exception I. We, therefore, feel that
no useful purpose will be served in discussing the several English decisions
cited at the Bar.
53\. Under Section 27 of the Contract Act, a service covenant extended beyond
the termination of the service is void. Not a single Indian decision has been
brought to our notice where an injunction has been granted against an employee
after the termination of his employment.
30\. In Electrosteel Castings Litd (supra), a Division Bench of the Calcutta
High Court observed as under:
58\. From the said passage it appears that if an employee has a right to
terminate his employment with a month's notice and somebody induces the
employee to serve that month's notice, it is no inducement to commit breach of
contract. The answer as to why this should be so is very simple. A person
inducing an employee in this manner is not inducing him to break the contract
but only inducing him to end it. Such an inducement is not a known tort.
Page 2692
31\. In R. Babu (supra), a Division Bench of the Madras High Court, following
the view expressed by A.P. Sen, J in Superintendence Co. Ltd (supra), observed
that- 'no injunction can be granted against an employee after the termination
of his employment restraining him from carrying on a competitive trade.
32\. In Pepsi Foods Ltd (supra), a learned single Judge of this Court had
denied injunctions to the plaintiffs on, inter alia, the ground that if the
injunction was granted, the same would have the direct impact of curtailing
the freedom of employees for improving their future prospects and service
conditions by changing their employment. It was also observed that: the rights
of an employee to seek and search for better employment cannot be restricted
by an injunction. It was also observed that: an injunction cannot be granted
to create a situation such as "Once a Pepsi employee, always a Pepsi
employee'. It was observed that: "such a situation would amount to 'economic
terrorism' or a situation creating conditions of 'bonded labour''. It was also
observed that: "freedom of changing employment for improving service
conditions is a vital and important right of an employee, which cannot be
restricted or curtailed by a court injunction'. However, it must be noted that
this decision was not one based on contract and was a fight between two soft
drink giants, Pepsi Foods on the one hand and Coca Cola on the other who were
allegedly involved in a battle over their employees. There was no agreement
between the two parties and the entire scope of the decision fell within the
parameters of law of torts, not under the law of contract and definitely not
relating to restrictive covenants of the nature contemplated under Section 27
of the Indian Contract Act, 1872. Therefore, this decision, as rightly pointed
out by Mr Ramachandran, would have no impact on the present case. The decision
in Kores Manufacturing Co. (supra) has been cited by Mr Arun Mohan for
explaining as to what is an agreement in restraint of trade. The said decision
is of the Court of Appeal and is an English case and deals with the question
of reasonableness with regard to the restriction on employees' freedom of
choice of employment as also the question of public policy. However, I need
not spend any further time on this decision inasmuch as the Supreme Court Per
A.P. Sen, J in Superintendence Co. Ltd (supra), has held that neither the test
of reasonableness nor the principle that the restraint being partial or
reasonable are applicable to a case governed by Section 27 of the Contract
Act, unless it falls within exception I. The court specifically observed that
no useful purpose would be served in discussing the several English cases
cited at the bar. Moreover, it was also observed that are not concerned with
the policy of such a law and all that we have to do is to take the words of
the Contract Act and put upon the meaning which they appear plainly to bear.
Therefore, reference to the decision in Kores Manufacturing Co. (supra) would
not be apposite.
33\. The case of Star India Pvt Ltd (supra), which was one decided by a
learned single Judge of the Bombay High Court, dealt with the question of
trade Page 2693 secrets. The court was of the view that anyone in employment
for some period would know certain facts and would come to know certain
information without any special efforts and the same cannot be said to amount
to trade secrets or confidential information. As regards acquisition of
excellence, the court observed that "that is a very long process in the
careers of every person, no one else can have proprietary rights or interest
in such acquisition of excellence'. The court observed that "if the plaintiff
had right to terminate the contract on the ground of misconduct it cannot be
said that the defendant had absolutely no right to resign from the employment
on account of better prospects or other personal reasons. If he finds a better
employment with better remuneration and other service conditions he cannot be
tied down under the terms of the service contract. This decision of the Bombay
High Court pertains to the right of an employee to resign from employment and
to seek employment elsewhere, it is obvious that every employee has a right to
resign and to seek better avenues of employment. Any agreement restraining an
employee post termination from seeking employment elsewhere, as held in
Superintendence Co. Ltd (supra) would be in restraint of trade and would be
hit by Section 27 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872.
34\. In Jet Airways (supra), a learned single Judge of the Bombay High Court
observed with reference to Section 27 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872 as
under:
Whether or not the contract is in restraint of trade would depend upon whether
the contract was unreasonable, unfair or unconscionable. A contract imposing a
general restraint would, in all probability, be void. Partial restraint would
prima facie be valid and, therefore, enforceable. In order for the negative
covenant to be valid, even the partial restraint would have to be reasonable
in the interest of the parties and of the public. In the case of covenants of
restraint between master and servant two question necessarily arise. First
what are the interests of the employer that are to be protected. Second what
is the remedy available to the employer to protect the interest....
35\. In Ambience India Pvt Ltd (supra), a learned single Judge of this Court
observed:
6\. The law is well-settled that all contracts in restraint of trade are void
and hit by Section 27 of the Contract Act. A Judgment of this Court in Krishan
Muragai v. Superintendence Co. of India, succinctly deals with the law on this
point. An employee, particularly, after the cessation of his relationship with
his employer is free to pursue his own business or seek employment with
someone else. However, during the subsistence of his employment, the employee
may be compelled not to get engaged in any other work or not to divulge the
business ' trade secrets of his employer to others and, especially, the
competitors. In such a case, a restraint order may be passed against an
employee because Section 27 of the Indian Contract Act does not get attracted
to such situation. It is also to be added that a trade secret is some
protected and confidential information which the employee has Page 2694
acquired in the course of his employment and which should not reach others in
the interest of the employer. However, routine day-to-day affairs of employer
which are in the knowledge of many and are commonly known to others cannot be
called trade secrets. A trade secret can be a formulae, technical know-how or
a peculiar mode or method of business adopted by an employer which is unknown
to others.
8\. After considering the pleadings of the parties and particularly Clauses
(6), (7) and (8) of the Agreement dated 30th August, 2003, this Court is of
prima facie view that the Agreement between the parties prohibiting the
defendant for two years from taking employment with any present, past or
prospective customer of the plaintiff is void and hit by Section 27 of the
Indian Contract Act. This stipulation was prima facie against public policy of
India and an arm-twisting tactic adopted by an employer against a young man
who was looking for a job. The contract between the plaintiff and M/s. Indigo
Orient Limited has already come to an end and as such no prima facie case
remains in favor of the plaintiff to restrain the defendant from remaining in
the employment of the said Company. The employment contract between the
plaintiff and defendant was determinable in nature and as such the defendant
was entitled to determine the same and seek another employment. Everybody has
a right to strive for progress in career. The restrictions imposed upon the
defendant in the Agreement, therefore, were void and unconscionable.
36\. In Taprogge Gesellschaft (supra), a decision of a learned single Judge of
the Bombay High Court, the facts were that the plaintiff company engaged in
the business of manufacturing cooling water filters and allied products. It
was a German Company and appointed the defendant, an Indian company, as its
agent to sell its goods in India. Under the contract, there was a restriction
to sell the defendants own products. Disputes arose and the contract was
rescinded. The plaintiff claimed an injunction restraining the defendants from
recommending, offering or selling any of the covered products for a period of
five years after the contract was rescinded. The defendant took the plea that
the negative covenant embodied in the clause was in restraint of trade and
therefore void under Section 27 of the Contract Act. The court held that the
negative covenant embodied in the clause of the contract between the parties
to the suit could not be enforced in India. Therefore, it refused to grant
injunction in favor of the plaintiff. The court observed as under:
The distinction between the restraints imposed by a Contract, operative during
the subsistence of the contract and those operative after the lifetime of the
contract is of a fundamental character. The purpose, incidents and
consequences of the two types of restraints need to be borne in mind before
proceeding to determine the validity of the restraint sought to be enforced in
this notice of motion. While guarding jealously the freedom of contract to
engage in any trade, business or profession as one wills, the law abhors
monopoly which prohibit a person from Page 2695 pursing a lawful trade,
business or profession. This being the policy of law, any restraint on the
freedom of trade, business or profession, is considered void. The law enacted
by S. 27 of the Act is founded on the public policy which disapproves and
negates the restraints on trade, business or profession. Though this is the
general rule of law, all corners are not alike, and the restraints imposed by
them are varied in their nature and effect. The contracts between the vendor
and purchaser of business are generally marked by equality of strength and
bargaining power. In the contracts between Master and servant, this may not be
so.
Again, the purpose which a restraint is expected to serve determines the
character of the restraint. For instance the restraints which operate during
the term of the contract have to fulfill one kind of purpose viz. furthering
the contract. On the other hand, the restraints operative after the
termination of the contract strive to secure freedom from competition from a
person who no longer works within the contract. There is, thus, a natural
difference which marks the restraints which tend to further the contract as in
Gaumont British Picture Corporation Ltd. v. Alexander (1963) 2 All ER 1686 or
Brahamaputra Tea Co. v. Scarth (1885) 2nd 11 Cal 545. An implied covenant in
such exclusive agreements preventing an employee from serving anywhere else
during the term of the contract is intended to ensure the fulfillment of the
contract and, therefore is not in restraint of trade, business or profession
Gaumont British Picture Corp. v. Alexander (1936) 2 All ER 1686, unless the
contract is unconscionable, excessively harsh or onesided.
The court also observed that:
15\. ...Generally speaking, the negative covenants operative during the term
of the contract are not hit by S. 27 of the Contract Act because they are
designed to fulfill the contract and not to restrict them. On the other hand,
when a restriction applies after the contract is terminated, the restriction
on freedom of trade, business or profession takes the form of restraint on
trade, business or profession. This distinction which is of a fundamental
nature has to be borne in mind; otherwise the perspective will be lost.
With reference to the issue as to whether there was a conflict between the
Supreme Court decisions rendered in the case of Niranjan Shankar Golikari
(supra) and Krishan Murgai (supra), the learned single Judge observed as
under:
...The judgment of Supreme Court in Niranjan Golikari was in respect of of the
period covered by the contract of employment. The Judgment in Krishan Murgai
arose, on the other hand, out of the facts which show that it applied to the
period after the termination of the contract. The two decisions apply in
different spheres and to different situations. There is no conflict at all
between the two Page 2696 decisions. In Niranjan Golikari's case the Supreme
Court did not hold that the post-employment restrictive covenant was valid.
All that it was concerned was whether the implied negative covenant which
applied during the term of employment could be enforced. Since there is no
conflict at all, the question of choosing one of the two judgments by the
subordinate courts does not arise....
37\. In Raj Chopra (supra), a learned single Judge of this could held as
under:
16\. Under Section 27 of the Contract Act every agreement by which any person
is restrained from exercising a lawful profession, trade or business of any
kind is to that extent void. The 8 kms. restraint clause would appear to be
per se void under Section 27 of the Contract Act as it puts restriction on the
party preventing him from exercising his lawful right of trade or business of
the kind. The exception to the section is inapplicable. There is no question
of sale by one partner to the other of any goodwill. In fact the argument had
been that since the first defendant was given more assets a restriction was
put on him. But the restriction acts on both the partners, and there is
nothing in the agreement (modification deed) to suggest that first defendant
got larger assets. Two lots were prepared of the assets to which this deed
applied. (One partner opted for one lot and the other partner for the second.
It was said that the restraint clause went with the property taken over by the
first defendant and as such it survived even after the dealership of Maruti
vehicles was granted separately to both the erstwhile partners, and since
defendant No.1 was bound by the restrictive covenant, defendant No.1B was also
similarly bound. I have been unable to appreciate this argument. Under Section
27 question of reasonableness of the restriction does not arise. A.P. Sen, J,
in Superintendence Company of India (P) Ltd v. Krishan Murgai , observed that
when a covenant or an agreement was impeached on the ground that it was in
restraint of trade, it was the duty of the court first to interpret the
covenant or agreement itself and to ascertain according to the ordinary rules
of construction what was the fair meaning of the parties. There is no
ambiguity in the present case. The restraint is very much there. Then the
learned Judge observed that while the Contract Act did not profess to be a
complete code dealing with the law relating to contracts, to the extent the
Act dealt with a particular subject, it was exhaustive on the same and it was
not permissible to import the principles of the English Law dehors the
statutory provision unless the statute was such that it could not be
understood without the aid of the English Law. This restraint clause has,
therefore, to be held to be void under Section 27 of the Contract Act.
38\. Apart from the above judgments which were referred to by Mr Arun Mohan,
the learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent, there is Page 2697
need to refer to certain other decisions both of the Supreme Court as well as
of this Court. First of all, I take up the discussion with regard to two
decisions of the Supreme Court in the case of Niranjan Shankar Golikari
(supra) and Gujarat Bottling Company Ltd and Ors. v. Coca Cola Co. and Ors. .
In Niranjan Shankar Golikari (supra), the Supreme Court, referring to
Halsbury's Laws of England (3rd ed.) Vol. 38, at page 15 observed, in the
context of what constitutes restraint of trade, that "it is a general
principle of the common law that a person is entitled to exercise his lawful
trade or calling as and when he wills and the law has always guarded jealously
any interference with trade, even at the risk of interference with freedom of
contract as it is public policy to oppose all restraints upon liberty of
individual action which are injurious to the interests of the State'. It was
further observed that "this principle is not confined to restraint of trade in
the ordinary meaning of the word 'trade' and includes restraints on the right
of being employed'. The court further observed that 'courts take a far
stricter view of the covenants between master and servants than it does of
similar covenants between vendor and purchaser or in partnership agreements.
An employer, for instance, is not entitled to protect himself against
competition on the part of an employee after the employment has ceased but a
purchaser of a business is entitled to protect himself against competition per
se on the part of the vendor'. The Supreme Court observed that 'this principle
is based on the footing that an employer has no legitimate interest in
preventing an employee after he leaves his service from entering the service
of a competitor merely on the ground that he is a competitor' [See: Kores
Manufacturing Co. (supra)]. With a further reference to the principles
summarised in Halsbury's Laws of England (supra), it was noted in the decision
of Niranjan Shankar Golikari (supra) that 'the rule now is that restraints
whether general or partial may be good if they are reasonable. A restraint
upon freedom of contract must be shown to be reasonably necessary for the
purpose of freedom of trade. A restraint reasonably necessary for the
protection of the covenantee must prevail unless some specific ground of
public policy can be clearly established against it'. This aspect of
reasonableness and/or partial restraint has, however, been dealt with by A.P.
Sen, J in Superintendence Co. Ltd (supra) wherein he has observed that these
principles which apply to English Law cannot be imported into the Indian
context. In India, the statutory provision of Section 27 of the Indian
Contract, 1872 alone has to be examined. If a covenant falls within the scope
of that Section as amounting to a restraint of trade, business or profession,
then whether it is partial or general or whether it is reasonable or
unreasonable would not be a material question.
39\. In Niranjan Shankar Golikari (supra), with reference to Fitch v. Dewes:
1921-2 AC 158 at pp. 162-167, it was observed that "a person may be restrained
from carrying on his trade by reason of an agreement voluntarily entered into
by him with that object. In such cases, the general principle of freedom of
trade must be applied with due regard to the principle that public Page 2698
policy requires for men of full age and understanding the utmost freedom of
contract and that it is a public policy to allow a trader to dispose of his
business to a successor by whom it may be efficiently carried on and to afford
to an employer an unrestricted choice of able assistants and the opportunity
to instruct them in his trade and its secrets without fear of their becoming
his competitors'. As noted above, a distinction has been drawn by the courts
in England as well as in India between cases which deal with restrictive
covenants during the term of the agreement and those cases which pertain to
the period post termination. The Supreme Court in Niranjan Shankar Golikari
(supra) observed as under:
A similar distinction has also been drawn by courts in India and a restraint
by which a person binds himself during the term of his agreement directly or
indirectly not to take service with any other employer or be engaged by a
third party has been held not to be void and not against Section 27 of the
Contract Act.
40\. The Supreme Court then referred to the decision in Brahmaputra Tea Co.
Ltd. v. Scarth 1885 2nd 11 Cal 545 and observed that "the conditions under
which the covenantee was partially restrained from competing after the term of
his engagement was over with his former employer was held to be bad but the
condition by which he bound himself during the term, of his agreement, not,
directly or indirectly, to complete with his employer was held good.
41\. After an elaborate discussion of the case law, both English and Indian,
the Supreme Court came to the following conclusion in Niranjan Shankar
Golikari (supra):
17\. The result of the above discussion is that considerations against
restrictive covenants are different in cases where the restriction is to apply
during the period after the termination of the contract than those in cases
where it is to operate during the period of the contract. Negative covenants
operative during the period of the contract of employment when the employee is
bound to serve his employment exclusively are generally not regarded as
restraint of trade and therefore do not fall under Section 27 of the Contract
Act. A negative covenant that the employee would not engage himself in a trade
or business or would not get himself employed by any other master for whom he
would perform similar or substantially similar duties is not therefore a
restraint of trade unless the contract as aforesaid is unconscionable or
excessively harsh or unreasonable or one-sided....
42\. It may be mentioned that the Supreme Court in Niranjan Shankar Golikari
(supra) had already observed: '...there is nothing to prevent the court from
granting a limited injunction to the extent that is necessary to protect the
employer's interests where the negative stipulation is not void'. The court
also observed in the context of the factual matrix of the case before it that
there was also nothing to show that if the negative covenant is enforced, the
appellant would be driven to idleness or would be compelled to go back to the
respondent company. It further observed that it may be that if the appellant
is not permitted to get himself employed in another similar employment, he
might perhaps get a lesser remuneration than the one agreed to by Rajasthan
Rayon. But that is no consideration against enforcing the covenant. The Page
2699 Supreme Court further observed that the appellant cannot be heard to say
that no injunction should be granted against him to enforce the negative
covenant which is not opposed to public policy. In that case, the injunction
issued against the appellant was found by the Supreme Court to be restricted
as to time, the nature of the employment and as to the area and, therefore,
could not be said to be too wide or unreasonable or unnecessary for the
protection of the interests of the respondent company.
43\. Coming now to the decision of the Supreme Court, i.e. of the Gujarat
Bottling (supra), one finds that the Supreme Court embarked upon an extensive
survey to consider whether and, if so, to what extent the law in India differs
from the common law in England. With regard to the position in England, the
court observed as under:
21\. Under the common law in England a man is entitled to exercise any lawful
trade or calling as and where he wills. The law has always regarded zealously
any interference with trade, even at the risk of interference with freedom of
contract, as it is public policy to oppose all restraints upon liberty of
individual action which are injurious to the interests of the State. A person
may be restrained from carrying on his trade by reason of an agreement
voluntarily entered into by him with that object and in such a case the
general principle of freedom of trade must be applied with due regard to the
principles that public policy requires for persons of full age and
understanding the utmost freedom to contract. Traditionally the doctrine of
restraint of trade applied to covenants whereby an employee undertakes not to
compete with his employer after leaving the employer's service and covenants
by which a trader who has sold his business agrees not thereafter to compete
with the purchaser of the business. The doctrine is, however, not confined in
its application to these two categories but covenants falling in these two
categories are always subjected to the test of reasonableness. Since the
doctrine of restraint of trade is based on public policy its application has
been influenced by changing views of what is desirable in the public interest.
The decisions on public policy are subject to change and development with the
change and development of trade and the means of communication and the
evolution of economic thought. The general principle once applicable to
agreements in restraint of trade has consequently been considerably modified
by later decisions in England. In the earliest times all contracts in
restraint of trade, whether general or partial, were void. The severity of
this principle was gradually relaxed, and it became the rule that a partial
restraint might be good if reasonable, although a general restraint was of
necessity void. The distinction between general and partial restraint was
subsequently repudiated and the rule now is that restraints, whether general
or partial, may be good if they are reasonable and any restraint on the
freedom of contract must be shown Page 2700 to be reasonably necessary for the
purpose of freedom of trade. A covenant in restraint of trade must be
reasonable with reference to the public policy and it must also be reasonably
necessary for the protection of the interest of the covenantee and regard must
be had to the interests of the convenator. Contracts in restraint of trade are
prima facie void and the onus of proof is on the party supporting the contract
to show that the restraint goes no further than is reasonably necessary to
protect the interest of the covenantee and if this onus is discharged the onus
of showing that the restraint is nevertheless injurious to the public is on
the party attacking the contract. The court has to decide, as a matter of law,
(i) whether a contract is or is not in restraint of trade, and (ii) whether,
if in restraint of trade, it is reasonable. The court takes a far stricter and
less favorable view of covenants entered into between employer and employee
than it does of similar covenants between vendor and purchaser or in
partnership agreements, and accordingly a restraint may be reasonable as
between employer and employee which would be reasonable as between the vendor
and purchaser of a business. [See: Halsbury's Laws of England, 4th Edn., Vol.
47, paragraphs 9 to 26; Niranjan Shankar Golikari v. Century Spg. and Mfg. Co.
Ltd. ]. Instead of segregating two questions, (i) whether the contract is in
restraint of trade, (ii) whether, if so, it is 'reasonable', the courts have
often fused the two by asking whether the contract is in 'undue restraint of
trade' or by a compound finding that it is not satisfied that this contract is
really in restraint of trade at all but, if if is, it is reasonable. [See:
Esso Petroleum Co. Ltd. v. Harper's Garage (Stourport) Ltd.: 1968 AC 269 :
(1967) 1 All ER 699 : (1967) 2 WLR 871 (AC at p. 331) per Lord Wilberforce.]
With regard to the position in India, the Supreme Court observed that
agreements in restraint of trade are governed by Section 27 of the Indian
Contract Act. It was noted that the said provision (i.e., Section 27 of the
Indian Contract Act) was lifted from Hon. David D. Field's Draft Code for New
York which was based upon the old English doctrine of restraint of trade, as
prevailing in ancient times. The Supreme Court further observed that 'the
adoption of this provision had been severely criticised by Sir Frederick
Pollock who has observed that 'the law of India is tied down by the language
of the section to the principle, now exploded in England, of a hard and fast
rule qualified by strictly limited exceptions'. The Supreme Court further
observed that 'while construing the provisions of Section 27 the High Courts
in India have held that neither the test of reasonableness nor the principle
that the restraint being partial or reasonable are applicable to a case
governed by Section 27 of the Contract Act, unless it falls within the
exception'. The court also observed that 'The Law Commission in its Thirteenth
Report has recommended that the provision should be suitably amended to allow
such restrictions and all contracts in restraint of trade, general or partial,
as were reasonable, in Page 2701 the interest of the parties as well as of the
public. No action has, however, been taken by Parliament on the said
recommendation. [See: Superintendence Co. of India (P Ltd. v. Krishan Murgai:
) per A.P. Sen, J.' Therefore, the position is clear that insofar as the
courts in India are concerned as also indicated by the Supreme Court in
Superintendence Co. Ltd (supra), the test of reasonableness as well as the
principle that the restraint is only partial would not be material
considerations for determining whether an agreement is in restraint of trade,
business or profession and is hit by Section 27 of the Indian Contract Act,
1872. In fact, the Supreme Court in Gujarat Bottling (supra), did not go into
the question whether reasonableness of restraint is outside the purview of
Section 27 of the Contract Act inasmuch as in para 24 of the said decision it
was observed as under:
24\. We do not propose to go into the question whether reasonableness of
restraint is outside the purview of Section 27 of the Contract Act and for the
purpose of the present case we will proceed on the basis that an enquiry into
reasonableness of the restraint is not envisaged by Section 27. On that view
instead of being required to consider two questions as in England, the courts
in India have only to consider the question whether the contract is or is not
in restraint of trade. It is, therefore, necessary to examine whether the
negative stipulation contained in paragraph 14 of the 1993 Agreement can be
regarded as in restraint of trade. This involves the question, what is meant
by a contract in restraint of trade ?
44\. Although the Supreme Court in Gujarat Bottling (supra) had refrained from
entering into the question whether reasonable restraint is outside the purview
of Section 27 of the Contract Act, in my view, this issue has already been
settled in Superintendence Co. Ltd (supra) wherein A.P. Sen, J categorically
observed that 'neither the test of reasonableness nor the principle that the
restraint being partial or reasonable are applicable to a case governed by
Section 27 of the Contract Act, unless it falls within exception I. We,
therefore feel that no useful purpose will be served in discussing the several
English decisions cited at the bar'. It would be fruitful to reiterate that in
that decision [Superintendence Co. Ltd (supra)], A.P. Sen, J also observed
that 'under Section 27 of the Contract, a service covenant extending beyond
the termination of the service is void'. It was also observed that not a
single decision had been brought to the notice of their Lordships where an
injunction had been granted against an employee after the termination of his
employment. However, what is of significance in the decision of Gujarat
Bottling (supra) is the consideration that a stipulation in a contract which
is intended for advancement of trade ought not to be regarded as being in
restraint of trade. The Supreme Court referred to the decision in Esso
Petroleum Co. Ltd v. Harper's Garage (Stourport) Ltd: 1968 AC 269= 1967 (1)
All ER 699 wherein the question Page 2702 whether the agreement under
consideration was a mere agreement for promotion of trade and not an agreement
in restraint of it, was answered in the following manner by Lord Pearce:
Somewhere there must be a line between those contracts which are in restraint
of trade and whose reasonableness can, therefore, be considered by the courts,
and those contracts which merely regulate the normal commercial relations
between the parties and are, therefore, free from doctrine.
* * * The doctrine does not apply to ordinary commercial contracts for the regulation and promotion of trade during the existence of the contract, provided that any prevention of work outside the contract viewed as a whole is directed towards the absorption of the parties' services and not their sterilisation. Sole agencies are a normal and necessary incident of commerce, and those who desire the benefits of a sole agency must deny themselves the opportunities of other agencies. 
The Supreme Court then reiterated the conclusion in Niranjan Shankar Golikari
(supra) and Superintendence Co. Ltd (supra) to that effect that 'except in
cases where the contract is wholly one sided, normally the doctrine of
restraint of trade is not attracted in cases where the restriction is to
operate during the period the contract is subsisting and it applies in respect
of a restriction which operates after the termination of the contract'. It was
contended before the Supreme Court that these observations must be confined
only to contracts of employment and this principle would not apply to other
contracts. The Supreme Court repelled this contention by holding:
We are unable to agree. We find no rational basis for confining this principle
to a contract for employment and excluding its application to other contracts.
The underlying principle governing contracts in restraint of trade is the same
and as a matter of fact the courts take a more restricted and less favorable
view in respect of a covenant entered into between an employer and an employee
as compared to a covenant between a vendor and a purchaser or partnership
agreements.
45\. As regards the courts' power to grant an injunction in the case of a
negative covenant, the Supreme Court observed as under:
In India, Section 42 of the Specific Relief Act, 1963 prescribes that
notwithstanding anything contained in clause (e) of Section 41, where a
contract comprises an affirmative agreement to do a certain act, coupled with
a negative agreement shall not preclude it from granting an injunction to
perform the negative agreement. This is subject to the proviso that the
plaintiff has not failed to perform the contract so far as it is binding on
him. The Court is, however, not bound to grant an injunction in every case and
an injunction to enforce a negative covenant would be refused if it would
indirectly compel the employee either to idleness or to serve the employer.
[See: Ehrman v. Bartholomew: 1898 (1) Ch 671: 1895-99 All ER Rep Ext 1680;
N.S. Golikari: ].
Page 2703 This concludes the discussion of the Supreme Court decisions.
46\. I now take up the decisions of this Court. In M/s Interlink Services Pvt.
Ltd v. Shri S.P. Bangera Sole Prop. , this Court reiterated the principle
mentioned above that the doctrine of restraint as contained in Section 27 of
the Indian Contract Act, 1872, would not apply during the period the contract
is subsisting, but would apply when the contract comes to an end. In IEC
School of Art & Fashion v. Mr Gursharan Goyal and Ors. , the court observed
that there are different kinds of restraint clauses which form part of
contracts in the present day. These different kinds are clauses which relate
to:
(a) Goodwill;
(b) Competitive business during the term of contract, franchise/collaboration
agreement in a specified area during the period of contract;
(c) The partnership agreements providing for restraint of trade after
dissolution of the partnership;
(d) restrictions put on employees during the course of employment in another
business;
(e) Restraint of using information acquired during employment, after
employment, etc.' It was also observed that 'the liberalisation and
globalisation is likely to bring in numerous shades of such restrictions'.
However, in the context of the case before it, the Court observed that the
contract had indisputably come to an end and, therefore, the question of
unreasonableness cannot be seen in view of the observations of the Supreme
Court in Gujarat Bottling (supra). The Court observed that 'when a contract
only ties the parties during the continuance of the contract, and the negative
ties are only those which are incidental and normal to the positive commercial
arrangements at which the contract aims, even though those ties exclude all
dealings with others, there is no restraint of trade within the meaning
meaning of the doctrine and no question of reasonableness arises. If, however,
the contract ties the trading activities of either party after its
determination, it is a restraint of trade'. The court observed that 'in other
words, the doctrine of restraint in trade never applies during continuance of
the contract of employment (or collaboration or franchise agreement); it
applies only when the contract comes to an end. The Courts, therefore, view
with disfavor a restrictive covenant by an employee not to engage in a
business similar to or competitive with that of the employer after termination
of contract of his employment. [See Superintendence Company of India (P) Ltd.
v. Krishan Murgai (supra) Pr. 62]
47\. After a review of all the decisions of the Supreme Court and the High
Courts, including this Court, the following points become clear:
1) Negative covenants tied up with positive covenants during the subsistence
of a contact be it of employment, partnership, commerce, Page 2704 agency or
the like, would not normally be regarded as being in restraint of trade,
business of profession unless the same are unconscionable or wholly one-sided;
2) Negative covenants between employer and employee contracts pertaining to
the period post termination and restricting an employee's right to seek
employment and/or to do business in the same field as the employer would be in
restraint of trade and, therefore, a stipulation to this effect in the
contract would be void. In other words, no employee can be confronted with the
situation where he has to either work for the present employer or be forced to
idleness;
3) While construing a restrictive or negative covenant and for determining
whether such covenant is in restraint of trade, business or profession or not,
the courts take a stricter view in employer-employee contracts than in other
contracts, such as partnership contracts, collaboration contracts, franchise
contracts, agency/distributorship contracts, commercial contracts. The reason
being that in the latter kind of contracts, the parties are expected to have
dealt with each other on more or less an equal footing, whereas in employer-
employee contracts, the norm is that the employer has an advantage over the
employee and it is quite often the case that employees have to sign standard
form contracts or not be employed at all;
4) The question of reasonableness as also the question of whether the
restraint is partial or complete is not required to be considered at all
whenever an issue arises as to whether a particular term of a contract is or
is not in restraint of trade, business or profession.
48\. In the light of these principles which have been culled out from the
decisions with regard to the scope and ambit of the provisions of Section 27
of the Indian Contract Act, it remains to be considered as to whether the non-
solicitation clause in question amounts to a restraint of trade, business or
profession. Two things are material. First of all, the contract in which the
non-solicitation clause appears is a contract between the petitioner and the
respondent whereby the petitioner was appointed as the sole and exclusive
Canvassing Representative/Distributor of the respondent for its products in
India. Secondly, it is not a contract between an employer and an employee. If
one considers the non-solicitation clause, it becomes apparent that the
parties are restrained for a period of two years from the date of termination
of the agreement, from soliciting, inducing or encouraging any employees of
the other party to terminate his employment with or to accept employment with
any competitor, supplier or customer of the other party. It is a covenant
which essentially prohibits either party from enticing and/or alluring each
other's employees away from their respective employments. It is a restriction
cast upon the contracting parties and not on the employees. The later part of
the non-solicitation which deals with the exception with regard to general
advertising of positions makes it clear that there is no bar on the employees
of the petitioner leaving its employment and joining the respondent and vice
versa. The bar or restriction is on the petitioner and the respondent from
offering inducements to the other's employees to give up employment and join
them. Therefore, the clause by itself does not put any restriction on the
employees. The restriction is put on the petitioner and the respondent and,
Page 2705 therefore, has to be viewed more liberally than a restriction in an
employer-employee contract. In my view, therefore, the non-solicitation clause
does not amount to a restraint of trade, business or profession and would not
be hit by Section 27 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872 as being void.
49\. However, the question that arises is what happens when the respondent has
solicited and/or induced or encouraged employees of the petitioner to leave
and/or resign from such employment and join the respondent. Can an injunction
be granted restraining the respondent from giving employment to such employees
? There are only two possible situations. The first is that an injunction is
granted and, the second is that an injunction is not granted. If an injunction
is granted, it would imply that the respondent cannot employ such employees
who have responded to the advertisement which I have already held to be a
solicitation. But it would also mean that employees who did not have any such
restrictive covenant in their employment contracts, would be barred from
taking up employment with the respondent. In other words, we would be reading
into their employment contracts a negative covenant that they would not seek
employment after termination of their present employment, with the respondent.
If such a term were to be introduced in their employment contracts, then, it,
in view of the settled legal principles indicated above, would be void being
in restraint of trade. Consequently, when such employees cannot be restrained
from directly seeking the employment of the respondent, they cannot be
restrained indirectly by preventing the respondent from employing them.
Therefore, an injunction cannot be granted restraining the respondent from
employing even those employees of the petitioner company who were allured by
the solicitation held out by the respondent in the said advertisement. But,
the respondent can be injuncted and restrained from making any such or other
solicitation in future during the period of two years w.e.f. 31.12.2005 to any
other employees of the petitioner. As regards the solicitation already made by
the respondent in the advertisement, the petitioner, if it is able to
substantiate this in the arbitration proceedings, would be entitled to be
compensated by the grant of damages. So, it is not as if a breach of the non-
solicitation clause would leave the petitioner without a remedy. The remedy
lies in the claim for damages and an injunction against solicitation in
future. It does not lie in the grant of an injunction preventing its employees
from resigning and taking up employment with the respondent. Accordingly, this
application under Section 9 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 is
disposed of with the following directions:
1) the respondent is restrained during the pendency of the arbitration
proceedings from taking out any other or further advertisements or to do
anything to solicit, induce or encourage the employees of the petitioner to
leave the petitioner's employment and take up employment of the respondent
and/or its agents and/or representatives and/or competitors;
2) the employees of the petitioner would, however, be free to take up
employment with the respondent, even in response to the said advertisement
which has prima facie been held to be solicitation, but, the respondent would
be liable to compensate the petitioner for such breach of the non-solicitation
clause, if so established in the pending arbitration proceedings.
other employees of the petitioner. As regards the solicitation already made by
the respondent in the advertisement, the petitioner, if it is able to
substantiate this in the arbitration proceedings, would be entitled to be
compensated by the grant of damages. So, it is not as if a breach of the non-
solicitation clause would leave the petitioner without a remedy. The remedy
lies in the claim for damages and an injunction against solicitation in
future. It does not lie in the grant of an injunction preventing its employees
from resigning and taking up employment with the respondent. Accordingly, this
application under Section 9 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 is
disposed of with the following directions:
1) the respondent is restrained during the pendency of the arbitration
proceedings from taking out any other or further advertisements or to do
anything to solicit, induce or encourage the employees of the petitioner to
leave the petitioner's employment and take up employment of the respondent
and/or its agents and/or representatives and/or competitors;
2) the employees of the petitioner would, however, be free to take up
This agreement is said to have taken effect on 01.01.2002 and was to operate
till 31.12.2002. It is alleged by the petitioner that subsequently, by virtue
of a letter dated 24.05.2004 (Annexure-P-3), the terms and conditions of the
said agreement of 2002 were extended by another two year period commencing
from 01.01.2004 and ending with 31.12.2005. Therefore, according to the
petitioner, the said Canvassing Representative Agreement of January, 2002 was
to continue to operate till 31.12.2005 and this governed the relationship
between the parties. The said agreement contained a document entitled
'Exhibit-D' and and forms part thereof. Clause 5 of the said agreement which
is the bone of contention between the parties, reads as under:
5\. Non-Solicitation of Employees:
Both parties agree that for a period of two (2) years from the date of
termination of the agreement to which this appendix is attached, including
termination by either party with or without cause, either directly or
indirectly solicit, induce or encourage any employee(s) to terminate their
employment with or to accept employment with any competitor, supplier or
customer of the other party, nor shall either party cooperate with any other
in doing or attempting to do so. As used herein, the term 'solicit, induce or
encourage' includes, but is not limited to (a) initiating communications with
an employee relating to possible employment, and/or (b) offering bonuses or
other employees of the petitioner. As regards the solicitation already made by
the respondent in the advertisement, the petitioner, if it is able to
substantiate this in the arbitration proceedings, would be entitled to be
compensated by the grant of damages. So, it is not as if a breach of the non-
solicitation clause would leave the petitioner without a remedy. The remedy
lies in the claim for damages and an injunction against solicitation in
future. It does not lie in the grant of an injunction preventing its employees
from resigning and taking up employment with the respondent. Accordingly, this
application under Section 9 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 is
disposed of with the following directions:
1) the respondent is restrained during the pendency of the arbitration
proceedings from taking out any other or further advertisements or to do
anything to solicit, induce or encourage the employees of the petitioner to
leave the petitioner's employment and take up employment of the respondent
and/or its agents and/or representatives and/or competitors;
2) the employees of the petitioner would, however, be free to take up
This agreement is said to have taken effect on 01.01.2002 and was to operate
till 31.12.2002. It is alleged by the petitioner that subsequently, by virtue
of a letter dated 24.05.2004 (Annexure-P-3), the terms and conditions of the
said agreement of 2002 were extended by another two year period commencing
from 01.01.2004 and ending with 31.12.2005. Therefore, according to the
petitioner, the said Canvassing Representative Agreement of January, 2002 was
to continue to operate till 31.12.2005 and this governed the relationship
between the parties. The said agreement contained a document entitled
'Exhibit-D' and and forms part thereof. Clause 5 of the said agreement which
is the bone of contention between the parties, reads as under:
5\. Non-Solicitation of Employees:
Both parties agree that for a period of two (2) years from the date of
termination of the agreement to which this appendix is attached, including
termination by either party with or without cause, either directly or
indirectly solicit, induce or encourage any employee(s) to terminate their
employment with or to accept employment with any competitor, supplier or
customer of the other party, nor shall either party cooperate with any other
in doing or attempting to do so. As used herein, the term 'solicit, induce or
encourage' includes, but is not limited to (a) initiating communications with
an employee relating to possible employment, and/or (b) offering bonuses or
other employees of the petitioner. As regards the solicitation already made by
the respondent in the advertisement, the petitioner, if it is able to
substantiate this in the arbitration proceedings, would be entitled to be
compensated by the grant of damages. So, it is not as if a breach of the non-
solicitation clause would leave the petitioner without a remedy. The remedy
lies in the claim for damages and an injunction against solicitation in
future. It does not lie in the grant of an injunction preventing its employees
from resigning and taking up employment with the respondent. Accordingly, this
application under Section 9 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 is
disposed of with the following directions:
1) the respondent is restrained during the pendency of the arbitration
proceedings from taking out any other or further advertisements or to do
anything to solicit, induce or encourage the employees of the petitioner to
leave the petitioner's employment and take up employment of the respondent
and/or its agents and/or representatives and/or competitors;
2) the employees of the petitioner would, however, be free to take up
This agreement is said to have taken effect on 01.01.2002 and was to operate
till 31.12.2002. It is alleged by the petitioner that subsequently, by virtue
of a letter dated 24.05.2004 (Annexure-P-3), the terms and conditions of the
said agreement of 2002 were extended by another two year period commencing
from 01.01.2004 and ending with 31.12.2005. Therefore, according to the
petitioner, the said Canvassing Representative Agreement of January, 2002 was
to continue to operate till 31.12.2005 and this governed the relationship
between the parties. The said agreement contained a document entitled
'Exhibit-D' and and forms part thereof. Clause 5 of the said agreement which
is the bone of contention between the parties, reads as under:
5\. Non-Solicitation of Employees:
Both parties agree that for a period of two (2) years from the date of
termination of the agreement to which this appendix is attached, including
termination by either party with or without cause, either directly or
indirectly solicit, induce or encourage any employee(s) to terminate their
employment with or to accept employment with any competitor, supplier or
customer of the other party, nor shall either party cooperate with any other
in doing or attempting to do so. As used herein, the term 'solicit, induce or
encourage' includes, but is not limited to (a) initiating communications with
an employee relating to possible employment, and/or (b) offering bonuses or
additional compensation to encourage employees to terminate their employment
with and accept employment with a competitor, supplier or customer of the
soliciting party, or (c) referring employees to personnel or agents employed
by competitors, suppliers or customers of the soliciting party. General
advertising of positions and other general means of recruitment shall not be
considered solicitation; and neither party shall be restricted from responding
to unsolicited applicants who are employees of the other party.
2\. It is the contention of the petitioners that the parties had agreed that
for a period of two years after the termination of the agreement, this non-
solicitation of employees clause would be operative. This clause provides that
upon the termination of the agreement, neither party shall solicit, directly
other employees of the petitioner. As regards the solicitation already made by
the respondent in the advertisement, the petitioner, if it is able to
substantiate this in the arbitration proceedings, would be entitled to be
compensated by the grant of damages. So, it is not as if a breach of the non-
solicitation clause would leave the petitioner without a remedy. The remedy
lies in the claim for damages and an injunction against solicitation in
future. It does not lie in the grant of an injunction preventing its employees
from resigning and taking up employment with the respondent. Accordingly, this
application under Section 9 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 is
disposed of with the following directions:
1) the respondent is restrained during the pendency of the arbitration
proceedings from taking out any other or further advertisements or to do
anything to solicit, induce or encourage the employees of the petitioner to
leave the petitioner's employment and take up employment of the respondent
and/or its agents and/or representatives and/or competitors;
2) the employees of the petitioner would, however, be free to take up
This agreement is said to have taken effect on 01.01.2002 and was to operate
till 31.12.2002. It is alleged by the petitioner that subsequently, by virtue
of a letter dated 24.05.2004 (Annexure-P-3), the terms and conditions of the
said agreement of 2002 were extended by another two year period commencing
from 01.01.2004 and ending with 31.12.2005. Therefore, according to the
petitioner, the said Canvassing Representative Agreement of January, 2002 was
to continue to operate till 31.12.2005 and this governed the relationship
between the parties. The said agreement contained a document entitled
'Exhibit-D' and and forms part thereof. Clause 5 of the said agreement which
is the bone of contention between the parties, reads as under:
5\. Non-Solicitation of Employees:
Both parties agree that for a period of two (2) years from the date of
termination of the agreement to which this appendix is attached, including
termination by either party with or without cause, either directly or
indirectly solicit, induce or encourage any employee(s) to terminate their
employment with or to accept employment with any competitor, supplier or
customer of the other party, nor shall either party cooperate with any other
in doing or attempting to do so. As used herein, the term 'solicit, induce or
encourage' includes, but is not limited to (a) initiating communications with
an employee relating to possible employment, and/or (b) offering bonuses or
additional compensation to encourage employees to terminate their employment
with and accept employment with a competitor, supplier or customer of the
soliciting party, or (c) referring employees to personnel or agents employed
by competitors, suppliers or customers of the soliciting party. General
advertising of positions and other general means of recruitment shall not be
considered solicitation; and neither party shall be restricted from responding
to unsolicited applicants who are employees of the other party.
2\. It is the contention of the petitioners that the parties had agreed that
for a period of two years after the termination of the agreement, this non-
solicitation of employees clause would be operative. This clause provides that
upon the termination of the agreement, neither party shall solicit, directly
other employees of the petitioner. As regards the solicitation already made by
the respondent in the advertisement, the petitioner, if it is able to
substantiate this in the arbitration proceedings, would be entitled to be
compensated by the grant of damages. So, it is not as if a breach of the non-
solicitation clause would leave the petitioner without a remedy. The remedy
lies in the claim for damages and an injunction against solicitation in
future. It does not lie in the grant of an injunction preventing its employees
from resigning and taking up employment with the respondent. Accordingly, this
application under Section 9 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 is
disposed of with the following directions:
1) the respondent is restrained during the pendency of the arbitration
proceedings from taking out any other or further advertisements or to do
anything to solicit, induce or encourage the employees of the petitioner to
leave the petitioner's employment and take up employment of the respondent
and/or its agents and/or representatives and/or competitors;
2) the employees of the petitioner would, however, be free to take up
