Delhi High Court
F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd. And Anr. vs Cipla Limited on 19 March, 2008
Equivalent citations: 148 (2008) DLT 598, MIPR 2008 (2) 35
Author: S R Bhat
Bench: S R Bhat
JUDGMENT S. Ravindra Bhat, J.
This order disposes of IA 642/2008, an application seeking ad-interim
injunction, restraining the defendant from manufacturing, offering for sale,
selling and exporting the drug Erlotinib, for which the plaintiff holds a
patent. Emergent notice was issued, and the parties filed their pleadings as
well as documents in support of their contentions, in the suit and the
interlocutory proceedings. The application was heard finally for disposal.
I The suit
1\. The Plaintiffs in this suit seek permanent injunction restraining
infringement of their patent rights in the drug Erlotinib, rendition of
accounts, damages and delivery up of the infringing goods.
2\. The first Plaintiff is a company organized and existing under the laws of
Switzerland and has its principal office at Grenzacherstrasse, 124 CH 4070,
Basel Switzerland. The second Plaintiff is a company organized and
incorporated under the laws of the United States with its registered office at
87\. The result of the above discussion is that the plaintiff is not entitled
to claim an ad-interim injunction, in the terms sought. However,This Court is
not unmindful of the fact that if no equitable balancing order protecting its
interest is made at this stage, there is a likelihood of the plaintiff being
prejudiced at the final stage. Therefore, the defendant is hereby directed to:
i) Furnish an undertaking toThis Court , within two weeks, to pay damages in
the event of the suit being decreed. A director or other person, on behalf of
the Defendant duly authorized by a specific resolution of its Board of
Directors, shall execute the undertaking. The undertaking shall also include a
stipulation that it would continue to bind the Defendant, regardless of its
change in composition.
ii) Towards effectuating direction (i) above, maintain faithful accounts of
its sale of the product Erlocip and file quarterly accounts inThis Court ,
supported by the affidavit of one of its Directors, affirming about the
veracity of the same;
iii) File an annual statement of the sales figures, of Erlocip, duly
incorporated under the laws of the United States with its registered office at
41, Pinelawn Road, Melville, New York 11747, USA. It jointly owns a patent
with Pfizer Products Inc. in respect of a small drug molecule, medically
termed as a 'Human Epidermal Growth Factor Type-1/Epidermal Growth Factor
Receptor' (Her/Egfr) inhibitor, popularly known as 'Erlotinib'. It is claimed
that this drug marked a major breakthrough and innovation in the treatment of
cancer; it is used to destroy some types of cancer cells while causing little
harm to normal human cells. This drug is administered in the form of a tablet.
The tablet formulation of Erlotinib is sold by the plaintiff under the
trademark and name of 'Tarceva', which is registered in the name of the first
plaintiff. It is averred that the drug Erlotinib and its formulation 'Tarceva'
has been approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration in the year 2004
and thereafter by the European Union in the year 2005.
3\. The second Plaintiff, along with M/s. Pfizer Products, Inc had applied for
grant of a patent in respect of Erlotinib and its process by application No.
537/Del/1996 on 13.3.1996. The Controller General of Patents, Trademarks and
Designs, New Delhi granted a certificate bearing Patent No. 196774 dated
23.02.2007, which was recorded in the Register of Patents on 06.07.2007. The
molecular name of patent is 'A Novel [6,7-BIS(2-Methoxyethoxy)
Quinazolin-4-YL] (3-Ethynylphenyl) Amine Hydrochloride'. The drug as well as
the process of its manufacture is patented according to provisions of the
Patent Act, 1970 (hereafter 'the Act'). The Central Drug Standard Control
Organisation, Directorate General of Health Services, Central Government
registered Tarceva, by Registration certificate dated 23.12.2005 in the name
of the first Plaintiff. It is alleged that on 8.1.2001, under Section 68 of
the Act, 1970 the Plaintiffs had entered into a Development Collaboration and
Licensing Agreement, through which the first Plaintiff has a license to use,
sell and offer for sale, ' the licensed products including the drug Erlotinib
marketed as Tarceva. It is also submitted that the first plaintiff is further
licensed and authorized to cause enforcement of any intellectual property
rights for any of their products. The first Plaintiff is actively engaged in
the manufacture, marketing and sale of the innovative drug Tarceva in various
countries including India and it introduced Tarceva in India sometime in April
2006.
4\. The Defendant, CIPLA, is the second biggest pharmaceutical company in
India. It is incorporated under the Indian Companies Act, 1956; it has its
registered office at Mumbai. In December 2007 and January 2008, various news
reports appeared in the print as well as the electronic media about the
defendant's plans to launch a generic version of Erlotinib in India and also
for exporting it to various countries. One such report appeared on 11.1.2008
in an English daily 'Mint' published by the Hindustan Times Group. The
Plaintiffs claim their knowledge of the Defendant's plans to infringe their
rights in the patent, from such reports. They have filed the present action
seeking permanent injunction and damages.
5\. It is averred by the Plaintiffs that Erlotinib was developed after long,
sustained and substantial research, and after incurring enormous expenditure
for the tests, mandatorily conducted to establish its efficacy and safety. It
is submitted that this innovation is duly protected under the provisions of
law and no person except those authorized to exercise the legal rights
associated with the patented drug can be allowed or permitted to copy/simulate
and/or re-create it in any manner or in any other name. They allege that the
Defendant is following an illegal course to offer a generic version of the
patented drug; firstly, in an unlawful manner by infringing the legal rights
of the plaintiffs, and secondly, in a manner that may pose a serious hazard to
the lives of the patients. They submit that they would suffer serious and
irretrievable prejudice in case the Defendant is not restrained as prayed for.
They further claim that the actions of the Defendant may cause a serious and
grave hazard to the lives of the cancer patients.
6\. The plaintiffs rely on a copy of the license issued by the Directorate
General of Health Services, Central Government registering Tarceva; they also
rely on a copy of the patent certificate, and the order if its grant, dated
6-7- 2007. The Controller of Patents had, by his order, rejected a pre-grant
opposition to the plaintiff's patent application. The plaintiff also relies
upon the documents permitting it to import the drug into India, in support of
its claim about the drug's presence in the Indian market. It has relied on the
press reports, mentioned in the plaint, to allege that the defendant is likely
to indulge in infringement of its (the Plaintiff's) products. The plaintiffs,
through additional documents, filed after the filing of the suit, produced a
copy of the claim; they also averred, in an additional affidavit that the
sales of Tarceva in India were to the tune of Rs. 13.2 crores. II TheWritten
Statement and Counter-claim
7\. In its written statement, the Defendant alleges that it applied for the
drug approval for its Erlotinib tablet in May 2007, which was granted in
October 2007. It also submitted that approval from the Government of Goa was
received, for manufacturing of the said tablet, in various pack sizes of 30,
60, 100, 500, 1000. Further, the Defendant claim to have been marketing and
selling the product since December, 2007 under the brand 'Erlocip'. It alleges
that the Plaintiffs had not filed the complete patent specification before
this Court, without which the latter could not have filed a suit for
infringement. It also alleged that the Patent specification being a public
document under the Act, the Plaintiffs cannot claim confidentiality over them
and will have to produce the same. Consequently, the specification was brought
on record by the Plaintiffs.
8\. The Defendant also contends that under the Act only a Patentee or a person
deriving the title in the patent can sue for infringement; the first
Plaintiff, who has not submitted any document that establishes its right in
the present patent, cannot therefore sue for infringement. The Defendant
submits that patent is a new one and as such no presumption of validity must
be attached to it. It submits that under Section 11A, normally all patents,
date back to the date of application after they are granted. However, in the
case of patent applications filed under Section 5(2) the rights of a patentee
accrue only from the date of grant of patent by virtue of the second proviso
to Section 11A(7). Thus, the right under the alleged patent accrues from date
of grant and would thus be a 'new patent'. It is further submitted that in
terms of Section 13(4) of the Act, there is no presumption of validity of
patents. The defendant submits that the Legislature has thought it fit to
permit scrutiny of the patent at several different stages. Examination/
opposition at the patent office are just the first stage. The patent is
subject to scrutiny at several higher levels, unlike in the case of
trademarks. The Patent Act, provides that even after a patent is granted,
post-grant opposition can be filed under Section 25(2) for a period of one
year. This is obviously because, in relation to patents that are recent, a
higher scrutiny is necessary. Thereafter, an appeal lies under Section 117A to
the intellectual Property Appellate Board. Parallel revocation proceedings are
also maintainable either before the Appellate Board or before a court in which
a suit for infringement of the patent is filed. Moreover, they submit that a
patent, which is recent in nature and is yet to undergo the scrutiny of time,
no injunction would be granted on alleged infringement. Therefore, the patent
under Section 11A being barely six months old, no prima facie presumption of
validity can be attributed to it.
9\. The Defendant, relying on a joint reading of Sections 107 and 64, alleges
about its entitlement to use the grounds mentioned in Section 64 in defense
against an action of infringement. It has consequently filed a counter claim
for the revocation of the patent in question, where it seeks to establish that
patent is invalid.
10\. The defendant firstly, contends that the plaintiff's patent claim lacks
an inventive step. It is alleged that the patent is liable to be revoked as
Erlotinib, being a Quinazolin derivative, only seeks to improve from the
existing prior Article It would be obvious for a person skilled in the art
that quinazolin compounds are known to inhibit growth and proliferation of
mammalian cells and have been used in cancer treatment. Various quinazolin
derivatives are available in the market for treatment of different types of
cancer. The patented compound of the Plaintiffs is a quinazolin derivative
used for the treatment of cancer therefore, a derivative of a known compound
and hence not patentable under Section 3(d) of the Act.
11\. It is next contended that the patent does not reveal any obvious
inventive step. In support, the Defendant avers about existence of at least
three European patents, which date back to 1993 that disclose quinazolin
derivatives. One such patent discloses the exact Chemical structure contained
in the Plaintiffs' patent except for one substitution, which is obvious to any
person skilled in the Article Apart from this, the defendant alleges that the
plaintiff has miserably failed in proving that there is any improved efficacy
of the said drug and that no tables or comparative data are provided in
support of such claim. Drawing from the summary of the invention in the patent
specifications of the plaintiff, the Defendant submits that the Plaintiffs
have admitted that the Erlotinib was a quinazolin derivate. It is alleged that
in the absence of proven enhancement in efficacy in terms of Section 3(d) no
patent can even be considered, let alone granted. The defendant alleges that
Erlotinib is just a derivative from Gefitinib of Astra Zeneca for which patent
was refused in India, on the ground that the said product was already in prior
use and was in the public domain. Under such circumstances, the Defendant
submits, the patent office ought not to have granted a patent for Erlotinib.
It alleges that the Plaintiffs' attempt to protect Erlotinib (which is nothing
but a derivative of Gefitinib), establishes that the plaintiff is indulging in
evergreening. Evergreening, it is submitted is contrary to public policy,
against the statutory language employed in Section 3(d) of the Act and in the
context of the pharmaceutical industry against national interests. The
defendant places reliance in this regard on the ruling of the Madras High
Court in Novartis v. Union of India , where the Court extensively relied on
legislative debates in this regard.
12\. The Defendant, in the counter claim, relied on the following grounds for
the revocation of the plaintiff's patent;
a) that the invention, so far as claimed in any claim of the complete
specification, was claimed in a valid claim of earlier priority date contained
in the complete specification of another patent granted in India;
b) that the subject of any claim of the complete specification is not an
invention within the meaning of this Act;
c) that the invention so far as claimed in any claim of the complete
specification is not new, having regard to what was publicly known or publicly
used in India before the priority date of the claim or to what was published
in India or elsewhere in any of the documents referred to in Section 13;
d) that the invention so far as claimed in any claim of the complete
specification is obvious or does not involve any inventive step, having regard
to what was publicly known or publicly used in India or what was published in
India or elsewhere before the priority date of the claim;
e) that the complete specification does not sufficiently and fairly describe
the invention and the method by which it is to be performed, that is to say,
that the description of the method or the instructions for the working of the
invention as contained in the complete specification are not by themselves
sufficient to enable a person in India possessing average skill in, and
average knowledge of that art to which the invention relates, to work the
invention, or that it does not disclose the best method of performing it which
was known to the applicant for the patent and for which he was entitled to
claim protection;
f) that the scope of any claim of the complete specification is not
sufficiently and clearly defined or that any claim of the complete
specification is not fairly based on the matter disclosed in the
specification;
g) that the patent was obtained on a false suggestion or representation;
h) that the subject of any claim of the complete specification is not
patentable under this Act;
i) that the applicant for the patent has failed to disclose to the Controller
the information required by Section 8 or has furnished information which in
any material particular was false to his knowledge;
j) the drug was known or is at best a pre-1995 derivative of an invention for
which no product patent can be granted in India as it does not have any added
efficacy.
13\. The Defendant also adverted to the alleged non-working of the patent. It
is averred that the working of a recent patent is an absolute precondition for
grant of injunction. In the present case the plaintiff does not manufacture
the product in India. Though it applied for patent in 1996, it got an approval
for importing and selling the drug only in December 2005. Even now, the
product, due to its high pricing, is not easily available on a commercial
scale in India. This is obvious, according to the defendant, from the fact
that no sales figures or even a single invoice for the product specifically
for India have been given in the plaint or the attached documents. It is
alleged that the law at that time in India permitted the plaintiff to apply
for Exclusive Marketing Rights (EMR) for selling the product in India, yet, it
never chose to obtain an EMR, which clearly establishes that the Patentee was
not in a position to market or sell the product. Even the US FDA approval was
obtained in 2004 that establishes that the Product and the patent are new and
to be treated as such. It is new patent, less than 6 years old and not
commercially worked in India thus dis- entitled to exclusive protection. Thus
the plaintiff is not entitled to an injunction.
14\. It is alleged that apart from the defendant, it is in the interest of the
patients that no injunction should be granted. The plaintiff's capsule costs
Rs. 4,800/- per tablet and the equivalent tablet of the defendant costs Rs.
1,600/-. Thus, a month's dosage for a patient undergoing treatment for cancer
is Rs. 1.4 lakh whereas the equivalent cost of the defendant would be Rs.
46,000/-. It is alleged that in the area of life saving drugs, it in the
public interest of the general public and patients suffering from diseases
like cancer that medicines are made available at cheap and affordable prices
so long as the defendant is not a 'fly-by- night' operator. In such cases, an
injunction ought not to be granted due to the overwhelming interest of
society. III Submissions of the Plaintiff
15\. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi, leaned counsel for the Plaintiffs submitted
that the materials clearly justify the plaintiff's entitlement for interim
relief. The relied on the copy of the Controller of Patent's order dated
04.07.2007, the FDA approval, magazines to show the effectiveness of Tarceva,
and the other approvals secured by the Plaintiffs, to submit that there is a
strong prima facie case. He drew the attention of the Court to the fact that a
patent under the Act is granted after scrutiny at three levels; first, under
Sections 11A, 12 and 14, then at the stage of pre-grant opposition under
Section 25(1) and finally, under Section 43 when the patent is granted subject
to satisfaction of the two pre-conditions. Given that in the present case the
patent has been granted after elaborate technical verification, it cannot be
summarily and certainly not at the stage of arguments on interim injunction be
held as invalid. Further, it would not be appropriate that the remedy of
injunction prescribed under Section 108 of the Act is denied to the Plaintiff
merely because the Defendant as raised a defense of invalidity of the patent.
16\. It is urged that Erlotinib is not a derivative of a known substance.
Counsel argued that the standard imposed in amended Section 3(d) is not
country specific and that the explanation to it is merely declaratory about
the required inventive step necessary for patentability of any product. In any
event, relying on the medical literature he submits that Erlotinib satisfies
the test of enhanced efficacy. Moreover, the question of non-patentability
under Section 3(d) specifically raised by NATCO at the stage pre-grant
opposition, based on documents now relied by the Defendant, was negatived by
the Assistant Controller General of Patents in his order dated 4th July 2007.
Counsel contended that the Defendant has not shown that there is any
similarity between Gefitinib and Erlotinib, and the Assistant Controller
General of Patents has dealt with the plea that both are derivatives of
Quinazolin.
17\. Without prejudice to his other pleas, he submitted that Erlotinib was not
the derivative of any compound. That the name Quinazolin Derivative is a term
for a class of compounds and it is not a derivative in terms Section 3(d). The
Plaintiffs patent is for a new compound, and has an ethynyl group instead of
the methyl group. He submits that none of the prior art, indicated by the
Defendant discloses the presence of an ethynyl group particularly substituted
at metha position of Phenyl ring. Therefore, this group and its position make
the Plaintiff's compound inventive over the prior art documents. In the
absence of a prior art teaching of metha substitution of the phenyl moiety by
an alkynyl such as the ethynyl group, a person skilled in the art would not
arrive at the invention in an obvious manner. It was urged that the
Defendant's position about availability of post grant opposition pointing to
dilution of prior stages including scrutiny and pre-grant or their being
irrelevant is erroneous. He submitted that post grant opposition does not
efface the validity of scrutiny.
18\. It was next contended that there is no distinction between an 'Old'
patent and a 'New' patent under the provisions of the Act. In fact, the kind
of opposition available under the Act is different from what existed earlier.
Previously, there was no post-grant opposition. The only a provision of
challenge by a third party was a pre-grant challenge under Section 25(1) as it
then stood. Therefore, the Courts had evolved the rule of caution as the
patent had not faced any challenge at the hands of the third parties. There is
however a radical shift, due to incorporation of Section 25(2) where a third
party is granted the right to challenge the patent after its grant. The
grounds of challenge under Section 25(1) are identical to Section 25(2). In
fact, Section 25(1) is broader than 25(2) as the latter is available only to a
'person aggrieved'. The ground that the patent is new is hardly relevant; it
has to be afforded protection, through an appropriate injunction in an action
for infringement, wherever the plaintiff can establish its case. In this
context, learned Counsel also argued that the nature of changes brought in by
amendment in 2005, affording multiple challenges shows that the previous rule,
evolved by courts ' one of caution, ungrounded on any principle, that is,
about working of patents for 6 years, cannot now be applied while deciding
whether to grant interim injunction, as it would seriously impinge on the
period of patent itself.
19\. It was contended that by virtue of Section 53, the term of a patent is
reckoned from the date of the application. The provision in Section 11A is,
therefore, inapplicable to the present case as clarified by its proviso. A
patent holder will enforce his rights only after grant but he can claim for
entire period after the date of publication. For mailbox applications alone
the enforcements and claim of damages starts after the date of grant. This
does not mean that Plaintiff's patent becomes valid for 20 years after the
date of application. This period is counted from the date of application.
20\. The patent in this case was granted after due application of mind. The
application was made on 13.03.1996; the certificate was issued on 23.2.2007.
The objector, NATCO filed its pre-grant opposition on 10.4.2007. The
application was heard on 27.6.2007 and Order rejecting pre-grant opposition
was made on 4.7.2007. The patent was recorded in register on 06.07.2007. This
peculiar situation was because NATCO's objection was filed post grant but
treated as pre 'grant opposition.
21\. It is submitted that the two documents, EP 0566226 and EP 0635507
referred to in the counter claim of the Defendant were already cited in the
pre- grant opposition proceedings as prior art and decided, by the Patent
Office. On efficacy, it is urged that the plaintiffs' application was filed in
1996 when Section 3(d) and its Explanation did not exist. All literature
discussed regarding efficacy were filed by the plaintiff in 2006 and 2007
prior to commencement of pre-grant opposition hearing. All materials regarding
efficacy were available in all the 2007 hearings. Hence, the Defendant's
contentions in this regard are irrelevant and misleading.
22\. The Plaintiff contends that the plea that Erlotinib would be an isostere
of known compounds is a speculation. A person skilled in the art knows that
the smallest change in a molecule can have dramatic effects and can totally
change the efficacy of a molecule. Many examples in the pharmaceutical
industry show that a small change in an active molecule can lead to an
inactive or toxic molecule. Thus, changing the smallest Chemical group or a
molecule cannot be seen as obvious. The person skilled in the art a priori
never considers that it would have been obvious to change a Chemical group for
another. The Defendant's argument, the Plaintiff contends, is artificial and
can only be the result of an ex post facto analysis. In the case of
pharmaceutical products such 'reverse engineering' is employed with great
effect. 'Inventive step' must be examined at the time of filing of the Tarceva
patent. At that time and without the knowledge of Erlotinib, there was no
motivation to replace the methyl group by a C=N group either in the general
formula or in the specific formulae of EP 0566 226. The suggestion that that
the Plaintiff used the Methyl prior art, progressed to the Cyano state (i.e.
C=N) and then arrived at the Ethynyl stage, is pure speculation and false. The
simple point is that prior art is Methyl and Gefitinib used the Methyl route.
The defendant, contends the plaintiff, suggested the Cyano route in the
Gefitinib patent. However, the plaintiffs have simply used the Ethynyl model
and not the Methyl model. Indeed, all these arguments have already been taken
into account in the pre grant opposition proceedings and the patent was
granted nonetheless by the Indian patent office. The defendant does not bring
any new prior art document or argument in this respect.
23\. Dr. Singhvi contended that Erlotinib is patentable over the cited prior
art under Section 3(d). It cannot be considered as derivative of known
compounds under Section 3(d). Section 3(d) of the Act makes clear that 'a
derivative of a known substance' does not include a new Chemical molecule, but
includes only different forms of a known active substance. All the examples
given of derivatives, i.e. salts, esters, polymorphs, particle size, mixture
of isomers, etc., are variations where the active part of the therapeutic
molecule remains the same. This is clearly not the case here: Erlotinib is
clearly not 'salts, esters, polymorphs, particle size, mixture of isomers,
etc' of a known substance'. The defendant has not supported its allegation in
this respect. Erlotinib is a novel compound, which fact has been acknowledged
twice by the Indian patent office. It was also argued that Erlotinib is not a
polymorph of a known compound. Counsel explained that in column paragraph 45,
US6900221 discloses that the hydrochloride compound disclosed in the US Pat.
No. 5,747,498 actually comprised a mixture of the polymorphs A and B, which,
because of its partially reduced stability (i.e. from the polymorph A
component) was not more preferred for tablet from the mesylsate salt form. The
patent discloses Erlotinib which was a novel compound, i.e. a new Chemical
entity.
24\. Learned Counsel submitted that Erlotinib is not a salt, ester, polymorph
or isomer any known compound. This statement was made in US 6900221 filed in
1999. This is well after the priority dated (30.03.1995) of the Tarceva patent
in India US 6900221, it is not part of the prior art opposable to the Tarceva
patent. The consequence is that US 6900221 cannot be used to examine the
novelty or inventive step of the Tarceva patent. The hydrochloride Erlotinib
made under the conditions disclosed in the US 5747498 actually comprised a
mixture of the polymorphs A and B was found after the discovery of Erlotinib.
And this fact was first disclosed upon the filing US 6900221 in 1999. This
fact could not have been taken into account in 1995. Novelty and inventive
step therefore, should be examined at the time of filing of the invention i.e.
1995 not 1999.
25\. It was submitted that Erlotinib hydrochloride has the following
structure: the Chemical name is [6,7-bis (2 methoxy 'ethoxy) quinazolin '
4-yl]- (3-ethynyl-phenyl)-amine hydrochloride and common name is Erlotinib
hydrochloride. This compound is clearly novel because its specific structure
is not disclosed in the prior Article In other words, no prior art documents
discloses this very specific structure. Erlotinib hydrochloride is not a salt,
ester, polymorph or isomer of any compound known at the time the patent was
filed. Prior to the Tarceva patent, erlotinib hydrochloride was unknown. Hence
its polymorphs were also unknown. Therefore, Defendant's argument that
erlotinib hydrochloride is a polymorph of a known compound is unsound.
26\. Learned Counsel argued that the US 6900221 was relied upon during the
pre-grant opposition proceedings and properly dealt with as appears in the
order of the Asst. Controller. He also submitted that patents for Erlotinib
have been filed worldwide in about 80 countries and are so far granted in over
50 countries including India, USA, European countries, China and Japan. It is
hence to be understood that over 50 countries in the world recognized the
patentability of Erlotinib. No opposition was filed in Europe, further
evidencing the patentability of Erlotinib. Further, to Plaintiffs knowledge,
the patent is only currently challenged in India and nowhere else in the
world. Also, FDA approval date for Tarceva is November 19, 2004 for lung
cancer.
27\. Dr. Singhvi submitted that the argument that Gefitinib, an existing drug,
inspired Erlotinib and therefore the latter did not involve any inventive step
is unfounded as they are composed of different compounds, different properties
and Erlotinib is more efficacious. It is submitted in the context that Astra
Zeneca, the owner of EP 566226, did not select the methyl compound as a drug
candidate. Instead, it selected Gefitinib to proceed in further clinical
trials to test its safety and efficacy for use in humans. Presumably, that
meant that Gefitinib has better properties than the methyl compound, otherwise
the methyl compound would have been selected as the drug candidate. Tarceva,
on the other hand, has been shown to have much better properties than
Gefitinib. Indeed, Tarceva is the first and only HER 1/ EGFR targeted therapy
to demonstrate improved survival in a Phase III trial in second and third line
setting of advanced NSCLS. Since Tarceva is better than Gefitinib, which in
turn is better than the methyl compound, logically Tarceva must have better
properties than the methyl compound as well. The ethynyl group is not a
derivative of a methyl. Indeed, what may appear to be even minor changes in
substituents between structurally similar compounds may result in significant
differences in their suitability as a drug for use in humans, as is
overwhelmingly demonstrated in the clinical outcomes reported for Erlotinib.
28\. It was therefore contended that the plaintiff had established that the
claimed invention is novel, inventive and has industrial application. The
claimed invention was never used in India or elsewhere in the world before
date of patent. And therefore the requirement of Section 2(1)(j) and 2(1) was
duly met by the patentee. It was further urged that the submission that the
specification contains irrelevant and misleading information is unmerited.
Although originally, an application was made for patent of 27 claims, during
the examination proceedings, the Plaintiff restricted it to two claims and
patent was granted with the two restricted claims that were fully supported by
the original specification. Learned Counsel also submitted that the plaintiff
did not deliberately withhold any material information by not disclosing of US
Patent No. 6900 221. The Plaintiffs' patent was filed on 13th March 1996
whereas cited US Patent was filed on 9th November 2000. According to Section
59(1) of Patents Act no amendment of application for patent or complete
specification can be allowed, the effect of which would be that the
specification as amended would claim or describe a matter not in substance
disclosed or shown in specification before the amendment. Therefore, the
Plaintiff was not allowed to amend the specification of its patent claim, to
include any subsequent invention.
29\. Counsel for the plaintiff relied upon the decision in Telemecanique and
Controls (I) Limited v. Schneider Electric Industries 2002 (24) PTC 632(Del)
(DB) [hereafter referred to as Schneider], where it was held that a patent
creates a statutory monopoly protecting the patentee against any unlicensed
user of the patented device, and that once violation is established in case of
a registered patent(subject to its being used), it cannot be contended that
the patentee is not entitled to injunction and that a monopoly of the patent
is the reward of the inventor. He also relied on the judgment reported as
Hindustan Lever Ltd. v. Lalit Wadhwa 2007 (35) PTC 377. He also quoted from an
older English judgment, in Proctor v. Bayley 1889 (42) Ch 390, about the
advisability of grant of temporary injunction, to secure interests of the
patentee.
30\. Dr. Singhvi next relied upon Dunlop Pneumatic Tyre Co. Ltd v. Neal 1899
(1) Ch. D. 807. In that decision it was held that the purchaser of a patented
article can carry out repairs to it; however, he cannot manufacture a new
article and claim that he had not infringed the patent because in the
manufacture he had used an article derived from a patented article sold by its
patentee. It was contended that the defendants cannot similarly claim, by
process of 'reverse engineering' that their products were new and invented
goods. They were clearly inspired by the plaintiff's products and after
purchasing them, copied the main elements; their effort was an act of
infringement, which had to be injuncted.
31\. Learned Counsel relied heavily on the decision reported as American
Cyanamid Co -v- Ethicon Ltd, 1975 (1) All. ER 504 to say what are the guiding
principles which courts have to adopt in cases involving infringement of
patent and copyright cases. Learned Counsel submitted, by placing reliance on
the decision of the Supreme Court in Midas Hygiene Industries (P) Ltd v.
Sudhir Bhatia , that in cases of infringement either of trade mark or of
copyright, normally an injunction must follow. Mere delay in bringing action
is not sufficient to defeat grant of injunction in such cases. The grant of
injunction becomes necessary if it prima facie appears that the adoption of
the mark was itself dishonest.
32\. It was contended next by Dr. Singhvi that the amendments to the Act
deleted Section 5 of the Act, which had specified that only methods or
processes of manufacture are patentable for certain inventions, so as to allow
product patent protection in all fields of technology including areas of
foods, medicines and drugs. The compulsion for amendments to the Act was
primarily to introduce product patents for all inventions as mandated by the
TRIPS Agreement. Therefore, ifThis Court were to refuse granting injunction,
even after a clear case of infringement and prima facie merits for relief were
made out, the legislative will, and the country's resolve to integrate with a
global patent friendly regime, affording protection to inventions would be
thwarted.
33\. Dr. Singhvi submitted that the arguments sought to be raised, about
comparative cost of the product, are dangerous. This would render Section 108,
nugatory. The Defendant's argument that the Plaintiff's drug costs more and
therefore balance of convenience would lie in refusing injunction is
'jingoistic'; it is also unacceptable in view of the country's signaling
acceptance of the TRIPS mandated patent regime, through the new amendments to
the Patent Act. The Plaintiff's drug, inclusive of the cost of research and
development and clinical trials, is marketed at Rs. 3,200/- while the
Defendant's drug is marketed at Rs. 1,600/- without these costs. It is also to
be noted that plaintiff price for patented drug includes the import duty of
32% (i.e. approx 850/- which is included in Rs. 3200/-). To include the price
as a criterion for denial of injunction would mean that any generic producer
would successfully avoid the injunction by offering a lower price. Thus, Dr.
Singhvi submitted that the lower price of an infringing drug is irrelevant, in
an action for infringement of a pharmaceutical patent.
34\. Learned Counsel submitted, in the context of balance of convenience, that
the working of a patent only means 'accessibility' of the invention to its
customers and its use in the territory. The drug is available in India and has
been used since April 2006. No Indian law mandates that patents can be only
worked thorough manufacture in the territory; it can equally be used through
imports. An identical argument about non-working of patent in the context of
import of the product, was repelled by the Division Bench in Schneider
(supra). IV Submissions of the Defendant
35\. Mr. Arun Jaitley, learned senior counsel for the defendant contends that
the patent was wrongly granted to the plaintiff and is liable to be revoked.
He submitted that the test of Section 3(d) has not been satisfied as all
documents of efficacy relied upon by plaintiff are post 2002 and it is not
clear as to whether the drug dealt with in those publications is as per U.S.
5747498 or 6900221. It was also submitted that the invention claimed in patent
No. 196774 is obvious to persons skilled in the art and the patent lacks an
inventive step.
36\. According to counsel, two elements attaching to any patent can invalidate
it, that is,
i) Obviousness and Lack of inventive step.
ii) Section 3(d) Under Section 3(d) of the Patent Act, the applicant for a
patent for a derivative substance has to show significant differences in
properties with regard to efficacy. In this case, he contends that:
a) The patent specification of the plaintiff is silent on efficacy.
b) There is no in-house data or statistics given to show efficacy of the
patented product over the closet prior Article
c) There is no material placed on record in relation to efficacy over the
known drug Gefitinib which led to the filing of the specification.
d) Lack of materials, on the record in relation to efficacy over the known
drug Gefitinib which led to the filing of the specification.
e) According to the plaintiff itself the test of efficacy has to be satisfied
on the basis of the date of filing of the patent and no material of a later
date can be entertained to prove efficacy.
f) The materials relating to efficacy are three or publications in medical
journals which are of 2004 There articles do not clarify as to whether the
product being talked of is Polymorph B From or mixture a of A and B forms of
Erlotinib. Normally, it is the duty of every patent applicant to show that the
product is efficacious over the prior Article
g) In the present case, another earlier product which is also a derivative for
treating Cancer, namely, Gefitinib has been refused patent protection in India
with the following reasons:
Based on my finding under the ground of obviousness and lack of inventive step
wherein I concluded that the claim of the applicant that the compound of the
present invention are 4 to 16 times more potent than the prior art compounds,
are not persuasive, I conclude that all the compounds claimed in the present
invention do not significantly differ in efficacy compared to the prior art
which is the explicit requirement under Section 3(d) and therefore is not
patentable under Section 3(d) of the Patent Act.
It is claimed that by this test Erlotinib also could not have been protected.
37\. It was also submitted that all the publications relied upon by the
plaintiff to prove efficacy were of dates in 2005 (The Oncologist of October,
2005; The New England Journal of 14th July 2005; the Journal of Clinical
Oncology, 10th August 2005 and the Journal of Oncology dated 20th May 2007).
These were all post 1996 and also publications subsequent to the second patent
of the plaintiff in the US, and India for the Polymorph B Form made in the
years 1999 and 2002 respectively. Mr. Jaitley submitted that efficacy was not
established by the plaintiff, inter alia, because of the following reasons:
a) No data has been mentioned in the patent specification.
b) No comparative tables have been provided comparing the efficacy of the
invention with the closest prior art i.e. EP 0566 226 A 1 in its patent
application during prosecution or during opposition proceedings and not even
during the present proceedings in this Court.
c) No data in the form of research done by the plaintiff has been placed on
record.
d) All the articles and publications are post 2000 and thus there is no
clarity as to whether the said research relates to original Form as claimed in
US Patent No. 5747498 or Polymorph B from US Patent No. 6900221. Since the US
FDA lists both the patents in orange book and the subsequent patent being of a
better product as per the Plaintiffs itself, it has to be presumed that all
the articles and publications relate to the subsequent product and not the
suit patent.
38\. The various patents filed by the Plaintiff in the U.S. and in India, it
is contended, show that TARCEVA, marketed in India is the subject matter of US
Patent No. 6900221. Learned Counsel submitted that the plaintiff's action is
based on a recent patent; it is barely six months old and according to well
settled law a patent cannot be presumed to be valid unless it is more than six
years old. The patent is new one and also granted under peculiar and
suspicious circumstances and thus no injunction ought to be granted as per the
settled law. He relied on the judgments reported as Franz Xaver Humer v. New
Yash Engineers 2nd (1996) 2 Del 791, N.R.D. Corporation of India v. D.C.andG.
Mills Co. AIR 1980 Delhi 132, Boots Pure Drug and Co. (India) v. May and Baker
Ltd. 52 (Cal. W.N. 253) which was followed by the Madras High Court in Manicka
Thevar v. Star Plough Works and the judgment ofThis Court in Standipack Pvt.
Ltd. and Ors. v. Oswal Trading Co. Ltd. and Ors. .
39\. Learned Counsel relied on the judgment reported as Bishwanath Prasad
Radhey Shyam v. Hindustan Metal Industries and submitted that the proper way
to construe a specification is not to read the claims first and then see what
the full description of the invention is, but first to read the description of
the invention, in order that the mind may be prepared for what it is, that the
invention is to be claimed, for the patentee cannot claim more than he desires
to patent. He next relied on the judgment of the Supreme Court in Monsanto Co.
v. Coramandal Indag Products (P) Ltd. for the proposition that under Section
64(1)(d), a patent may be revoked on the ground that the subject of any claim
of the complete specification is not an invention within the meaning of the
Act. A patent can be revoked if the invention so far as claimed in any claim
of the complete specification is not new, having regard to what was publicly
known and publicly used in India before the date of the claim, and also if the
invention so far as claimed in any claim of the complete specification is
obvious or does not involve any inventive step having regard to what was
publicly known or publicly used in India or what was published in India before
the priority date of the claim. The court had then held that to satisfy the
requirement of being publicly known as used in clauses (e) and (f) of Section
64(1), it is not necessary that it should be widely used to the knowledge of
the consumer public. It is sufficient if it is known to the persons who are
engaged in the pursuit of knowledge of the patented product or process either
as men of science or men of commerce or consumers.
40\. It was next contended that the question of efficacy as well as
inventiveness had to be seen in the context of comparative data; no such
materials were forthcoming, in support of the plaintiff's claim. Reliance was
placed on the judgment of the Madras High Court in Novartis (supra).
Similarly, reliance was placed on the judgment reported as Godrej Soaps Ltd.
v. Hindustan Lever Ltd. PTC Suppl. (1) Cal 501.
41\. Learned Counsel submitted that even if the plaintiff's assertions were to
be assumed, though not admitted, the court cannot grant an injunction
automatically and has to be further satisfied that the balance of convenience
would be in its favor, for granting the relief. It was contended that apart
from the Defendant, it is in the interest of cancer patients that no
injunction be granted since the product is an anti-cancer, therefore a life
saving drug. One of the Plaintiff's capsule costs Rs. 4,800/- and the
equivalent tablet of the defendant costs Rs. 1,600/-. Thus, a one month dosage
for a patient undergoing treatment for cancer is Rs. 1.4 lakh whereas the
equivalent cost of the Defendant's tablets would be Rs. 46,000/-. It is urged
that patients in India can ill-afford such high priced imported versions of
the drug and the Plaintiffs also do not have the manufacturing facility to
produce the said drug whereas the Defendant has a state of the arts
international standard manufacturing facility. In the area of life-saving
drugs, it is thus in the interest of the general public and patients suffering
from diseases like cancer that medicines are made available at cheap and
affordable prices so long as the defendant is not a fly- by-night operator. If
the defendant is restrained from manufacturing and marketing their anti-cancer
drug in the market it would cause great prejudice to public health and public
interest and create a grave public health crisis with disastrous consequences.
In such cases, where the balance of convenience is heavily tilted towards the
defendant an injunction ought not to be granted due to the overwhelming
interest of society. The Plaintiff justifies the huge price of Tarceva on the
ground that it includes huge customs duties by the plaintiff. Counsel submits
that Defendant also pays huge excise duties on the drugs manufactured by it
and thus the price differential is extremely high despite the said duties paid
by parties. In support of this contention, reliance is placed on the judgment
of the Bombay High Court, reported as Novartis AG and Anr. v. Mehar Pharma
2005 (30) PTC (Bom).
42\. Learned Counsel submitted that the plaintiff's patent was wrongly granted
and is liable to be revoked because of obviousness and lack of inventive step.
The product for which patent had been granted has a molecular structure which
is similar to one of the disclosed molecules in the European Patent 0566226.
Counsel relied on the documents, and written note of submissions to submit,
that
a) Claim 1 of the impugned patent claims is compound having a described
formula. It is submitted that EP 0566226 A1 discloses a compound having the
formula with a slight variation. This is coupled with the fact that the methyl
substitute is in the third position. The defendant's argument is that the
above substitution is obvious to a person skilled in the art; counsel submits
that this has not been answered by the plaintiff and that the plaintiff merely
argues that the said substitution is not contained in many documents relied
upon by the defendant and hence the patent is not bad. This counsel submits,
is a response to an anticipation argument, which is different from the
objection of obviousness. It is the submission of the defendant that the
patent therefore lacks inventive step and is obvious.
b) Counsel contends that there is non-disclosure of various patents filed by
the plaintiff in the US and in India. The drug Tarceva in India is subject
matter of US patent No. 6900221. The plaint is silent on the various patent
applications which have been filed by the plaintiff for Erlotinib. The plaint
ought to have disclosed the fact that a subsequent patent has been filed for
the Polymorph B From being subject matter of US patent No. 6900221. The plaint
is conspicuously also silent on the two further applications filed by the
plaintiffs in India which include:
i) Application No. IN/PCT/2002/00507/DEL
ii) Application No. IN/PCT/2002/00497/DEL
43\. According to the defendant, the mere statement that the product is
Erlotinib has no meaning as such because Erlotinib as per the plaintiff itself
in various documents has different forms. Therefore in the absence of the
details of the product, a bald reference to Erlotinib is wholly insufficient.
In US Patent No. 6900221, the plaintiff made a categorical statement that the
suit patent is a mixture of Polymorph A and B with reduced stability which
necessitated the filing of the subsequent patent for the Polymorph B from of
Erlotinib being US Patent No. 6900221. The corresponding Indian application to
this US Patent of the Polymorph B Form is still pending, according to the
Defendant's counsel. The drug being sold by the plaintiffs in India is the
Polymorph B Form of Erlotinib. Reliance in this regard is placed by the
Defendant on an expert's affidavit.
44\. Learned Counsel for the defendant submitted that the amendments to the
Act brought into force in 2005, for the first time, ushered a regime whereby
product patent is permissible in respect of pharmaceuticals and drugs.
Parliament consciously enacted and added, to the pre-existing requirements of
every claim, the disclosure of non-obviousness and the necessity of an
inventive step significantly the list of what are not inventions, under
Section 3(d), was also changed by stating that the mere discovery of a new
form of a known substance which does not result in the enhancement of the
known efficacy of that substance or the mere discovery of any new property or
new use for a known substance or of the mere use of a known process, machine
or apparatus unless such known process results in a new product or employs at
least one new reactant are unpatentable. The explanation further amplified
this intention; it excluded salts, esters, ethers, polymorphs, metabolites,
pure form, particle size, isomers, mixtures of isomers, complexes,
combinations and other derivatives of known substance shall be considered to
be the same substance, unless they differ significantly in properties with
regard to efficacy. Erlotinib is admittedly a quinazolin derivative and a
polymorph. The Defendant has every right, therefore to seek its revocation,
under Section 64, in defense.
Counsel contended that the inclusion of Section 3(d) and the explanation was
with a specific objective to exclude monopolies in known compounds and life
saving drugs, unless the substance differed significantly in properties with
regard to efficacy. For this reason too, the Plaintiff cannot seek an ad-
interim injunction.
45\. Learned Counsel also urged that the nature of presumption that can be
drawn in cases of patent infringement is limited. The court can ask the
defendant in the case of infringement action involving process patent, to
prove or disprove any fact, prescribed, under Section 104A. The absence of
such condition in relation to product patents was a significant omission. This
had to be viewed with the opening expression in Section 48 'subject to
provisions of the Act' to mean that unlike in the case of trademarks and
copyrights, the grant itself did not guarantee per se protection. The Act,
after amendment, envisions scrutiny of the patent at five different stages
such as before the Controller, a pre-grant opposition, post grant opposition;
application for rectification to the Appellate Board and defense, under
Section 107, read with Section 64, in an action for infringement. V Analysis
and Findings A. Provisions of the Patent Act
46\. Section 2 of the Patent Act is the definition clause; it inter alia,
defines, inventions, inventive step, new invention, and patent, as follows:
2\. (j) ``invention'` means a new product or process involving an inventive
step and capable of industrial application;
(ja) ``inventive step'` means a feature of an invention that involves
technical advance as compared to the existing knowledge or having economic
significance or both and that makes the invention not obvious to a person
skilled in the art;
(l) ``new invention'` means any invention or technology which has not been
anticipated by publication in any document or used in the country or elsewhere
in the world before the date of filing of patent application with complete
specification, i.e., the subject matter has not fallen in public domain or
that it does not form part of the state of the art;
(m) ``patent'` means a patent for any invention granted under this Act;'
Section 3 defines what are not inventions; it reads as follows:
3\. WHAT ARE NOT INVENTIONS The following are not inventions within the
meaning of this Act,-
(a) an invention which is frivolous or which claims anything obviously
contrary to well established natural laws;
(b) an invention the primary or intended use or commercial exploitation of
which could be contrary public order or morality or which causes serious
prejudice to human, animal or plant life or health or to the environment;
(c) the mere discovery of a scientific principle or the formulation of an
abstract theory or discovery of any living thing or non-living substances
occurring in nature;
(d) the mere discovery of a new form of a known substance which does not
result in the enhancement of the known efficacy of that substance or the mere
discovery of any new property or new use for a known substance or of the mere
use of a known process, machine or apparatus unless such known process results
in a new product or employs at least one new reactant. Explanation. - For the
purposes of this clause, salts, esters, ethers, polymorphs, metabolites, pure
form, particle size, isomers, mixtures of isomers, complexes, combinations and
other derivatives of known substance shall be considered to be the same
substance, unless they differ significantly in properties with regard to.
efficacy;
(e) a substance obtained by a mere admixture resulting only in the aggregation
of the properties of the components thereof or a process for producing such
substance;
(f) the mere arrangement or re-arrangement or duplication of known devices
each functioning independently of one another in a known way;
(h) a method of agriculture or horticulture;
(i) any process for the medicinal, surgical, curative, prophylactic diagnostic
therapeutic or other treatment of human beings or any process for a similar
treatment of animals to render them free of disease or to increase their
economic value or that of their products.
(j) plants and animals in whole or any part thereof other than micro-organisms
but including seeds, varieties and species and essentially biological
processes for production or propagation of plants and animals;
(k) a mathematical or business method or a computer program per se or
algorithms;
(l) a literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work or any other aesthetic
creation whatsoever including cinematographic works and television
productions;
(m) a mere scheme or rule or method of performing mental act or method of
playing game;
(n) a presentation of information;
(o) topography of integrated circuits;
(p) an invention which in effect, is traditional knowledge or which is an
aggregation or duplication of known properties of traditionally known
component or components.
47\. The application of anyone desirous of seeking patent has to contain
specifications that are to conform to the requirements of Section 10. The
claim should fully and particularly describe the invention and its operation
or use and the method by which it is to be performed. It should also disclose
the best method of performing the invention, which is known to the applicant
and for which he is entitled to claim protection; and end with a claim or
claims defining the scope of the invention for which protection is claimed.
48\. The procedure for grant involves:
a) Publication of the application under Section 11A(3) subject to the terms of
the Act and request for its examination under Section 11B;
b) Examination of the application by the Patent Office, under Section 12,
including search for anticipation by previous application, under Section 13
and report of the patent examiner;
c) Various options with the Controller, under Sections 14 to 21.
d) Where an application for patent is published, any person may, in writing,
represent by way of opposition to the Controller against the grant of patent
on the grounds specified under Section 25(1)(a) to (k).
e) If the application is found to be acceptable and in order, the Controller
can grant the patent, and enter it in the Register, under Section 43.
f) Within one year any person interested may give notice of opposition to the
Controller in the prescribed manner about his opposition to the patent, under
Section 25(2) on any of the grounds mentioned in clauses (a) to (k). In such
event, the Controller has to constitute an Opposition Board, and give notice
to the patentee. The Board will then examine the opposition, under Section
25(3). Under Section 25(4) the Controller shall order either to maintain or to
amend or to revoke the patent, on the basis of the Board's recommendations.
49\. Before the Appellate Board, or on a counter-claim in a suit for
infringement of the patent, the High Court, a patent granted under the Act can
be revoked on any ground enumerated in Section 64(1)(a) to (q). These grounds
broadly coincide with the grounds of pre-grant opposition (by any person) and
grounds for post grant opposition (by persons interested). Under Section
45(1), subject to the other provisions contained in the Act, every patent
shall be dated as of the date on which the application for patent was filed.
In terms of Section 11A(7), on and from the date of publication of the
application for patent and until the date of its grant, the applicant has the
like privileges and rights as if a patent for the invention had been granted
on the date of publication of the application. The first proviso however,
prohibits the applicant from instituting any proceedings for infringement
until the patent has been granted. The second proviso enacts, importantly that
the rights of a patentee in respect of applications made under Sub-section (2)
of Section 5 before the 1st day of January, 2005 shall accrue from the date of
grant of the patent.
50\. Section 48(a) enacts inter alia, that subject to other provisions
contained in the Act and the conditions specified in Section 47, a patent
granted shall confer upon the patentee, where the subject matter of the patent
is a product, the exclusive right to prevent third parties, who do not have
his consent, from the act of making, using, offering for sale, selling or
importing for those purposes that product in India. B. Nature of patent rights
51\. The expression 'patent' connotes a right granted to anyone who invents or
discovers a new and useful process, product, article or machine of
manufacture, or composition of matter, or any new and useful improvement of
any of those. It is not an affirmative right to practice or use the invention;
it is a right to exclude others from making, using, importing, or selling
patented invention, during its term. It is a property right, which the state
grants to inventors in exchange with their covenant to share its details with
the public. The precursor to the present Patent Act was an enactment of 1911,
which had consolidated the pre-existing law.
52\. It is not the object of this order to trace the changes to the Patent
Act. However, some salient features, which have changed the regime, require to
be noticed, for a proper understanding of the topic. India is a signatory to
the agreement, in 1994 establishing the World Trade Organisation (WTO). The
agreement on Trade Related Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS) is a part of
the WTO that India had ratified. In terms of these international regimes, the
Act had to be amended, once the transition period of 10 years for developing
countries expired on 31st December 2004, in terms of the TRIPS agreement, so
as to extend product patent protection for inventions in the fields of food,
Chemicals and pharmaceuticals. The Patent (Third) Amendment also provided for
deletion of provisions relating to Exclusive Marketing Rights (which became
redundant) and sought to streamline the system by having both pre-grant and
post-grant opposition to patents. The amendment came into force on 1-1-2005.
53\. The amendment, apart from enacting multiple challenge layers, to question
grant of patents, also changed the definition of invention. Previously,
Section 2(j) defined invention as any new and useful art, process, method or
manner of manufacture; machine, apparatus or other article; and substance
produced by manufacture. Now, 'invention' is defined as a new product or
process involving an inventive step and capable of industrial application.
More crucially, an inventive step was, by the amendment of 2002, defined as a
step that makes the invention not obvious to a person skilled in the Article
By further amendment, in 2005, 'inventive step' has now been defined to mean
'a feature of an invention that involves technical advance as compared to the
existing knowledge or having economic significance or both and that makes the
invention not obvious to a person skilled in the Article '
54\. Thus, an invention, in order to be patentable, should
a) involve an inventive step capable of industrial application;
b) which should involve technical advance as compared to the existing
knowledge, or having economic significance or both; and
c) be not obvious to a person skilled in the Article
55\. Section 3 outlines various situations where an invention (properly so
called) can yet be not patentable. Section 3(d), as existing before 2005,
after the previous amendment of 2002, read as follows:
(d) the mere discovery of a new property or new use for a known substance or
of a mere use of a known process, machine or apparatus, unless such known
process results in a new product or employs at least one new reactant;
Section 3(d), and its explanation, (as amended with effect from 1-1-2005), now
prescribe a class of discovery which cannot be subject matter of patent; it
reads as follows:
(d) the mere discovery of a new form of a known substance which does not
result in the enhancement of the known efficacy of that substance or the mere
discovery of any new property or new use for a known substance or of the mere
use of a known process, machine or apparatus unless such known process results
in a new product or employs at least one new reactant. Explanation. - For the
purposes of this clause, salts, esters, ethers, polymorphs, metabolites, pure
form, particle size, isomers, mixtures of isomers, complexes, combinations and
other derivatives of known substance shall be considered to be the same
substance, unless they differ significantly in properties with regard to.
efficacy;
The change, in 2005, is not without significance; it has introduced the
concept of need for the discovery of a new form of a known substance (or a
derivative, which is deemed to be a substance) to differ significantly in
properties with regard to the known efficacy.
56\. The amended explanation was considered by a judgment of the Division
Bench of the Madras High Court, in Novartis AG v. Union of India 2007 (4) MLJ
1153. The court held that:
in sum and substance what the amended section with the Explanation prescribes
is the test to decide whether the discovery is an invention or not is that the
Patent applicant should show the discovery has resulted in the enhancement of
the known efficacy of that substance and if the discovery is nothing other
than the derivative of a known substance, then, it must be shown that the
properties in the derivatives differ significantly with regard to efficacy. As
we stated earlier, due to the advanced technology in all fields of science, it
is possible to show by giving necessary comparative details based on such
science that the discovery of a new form a of known substance had resulted in
the enhancement of the known efficacy of the original substance and the
derivative so derived will not be the same substance, since the properties of
the derivatives differ significantly with regard to efficacy.
57\. It may be gathered from the above discussion that the test of
patentability has become more precise and specific, with inclusion of concepts
such as 'non-obviousness' of a process or substance, to a person skilled in
the Article These concepts were not new; in the field of patent law, the test
of obviousness had been evolved, and existed in the United States and was
incorporated in 1952 into the enactment. Apart from this shift in the
requirement of inventive ingenuity to entitle a patent applicant for a grant,
the Indian Parliament also added to the list of what cannot be patented, the
discovery of a new form of a known substance which does not result in the
enhancement of the known efficacy of that substance or the mere discovery of
any new property or new use for a known substance, unless it results in
efficacy of use of the substance (Section 3(d)). The Explanation says that
esters, ethers, polymorphs, metabolites, pure form, particle size, isomers,
mixtures of isomers, complexes, combinations and other derivatives of known
substance shall be considered to be the same substance, unless they differ
significantly in properties with regard to the known efficacy.
58\. In the absence of any legislative history, and the two amendments to the
Patents Act, it could possibly have been argued that the essence of
patentability, in pharmaceuticals and Chemicals, is inventive ingenuity,
novelty and existence of industrial application or economic significance of
the new product or process. However, the background of the amendments and the
two stage change (2002 and 2005) brought about to the Act cannot be
overlooked. A sound canon of statutory interpretation is that all provisions
of a statute are to be given effect to; a statute is to be construed as a
whole and that no words in a statute are presumed to be superfluous; also the
court should avoid a construction which reduces any provision a dead letter.
(Ref. Tribhuwan Prakash Nayyar v. Union of India ; East India Hotels Ltd. v.
Union of India AIR 2001 SC 231; Mohammed Hussain Khan v. Mohd. Shafi ). In
view of the above discussion, and the settled position regarding statutory
interpretation, it is not possible forThis Court to accept the Plaintiff's
contention that Section 3(d) and its explanation are merely clarificatory of
the pre-existing law. The Parliament consciously enacted the standard of non-
obviousness as a condition for patentability; it also excluded some matter,
i.e., derivatives of substances which are known to exist, unless they differ
in properties, significantly, in the known efficacy. Thus, it has to be
concluded that the test of non-obviousness of an invention and discovery of
existence of significant enhancement in the known efficacy of a substance are
pre-requisites of patentability. In other words, even if non-obviousness of an
invention in the pharmaceutical or Chemical industry are established, the
applicant should also prove that if the invention claimed is the derivative of
a known substance, it does not fall within the excepted category, in the
Explanation to Section 3(d) as it comprehends a discovery of significant
enhancement in known efficacy of such known substance. C. The cancer condition
59\. The human body has a complex system of signaling between cells; the
duplication of genes is a normal part of the process.'Proteins called growth
factors signal other cells to initiate replication, towards beneficial
duplication or repairs in the cells.' Malfunctions in such growth factors are
a part of cancer, as growth factors prompt excessive duplication.' A separate
type of gene called a tumor suppressor gene regulates and restricts growth,
sending signals to stop duplication or initiate apoptosis, an orderly system
of'cell death.'A model of cancer suggests that it is a product of abnormal
growth factors prompting duplication of cells and the failure of tumor
suppressor genes to properly regulate them.'The Epidermal Growth Factor (EGF)
plays a role in normal human development helping to repair damaged tissue.'EGF
is expressed in many tumors. 'To initiate cell reproduction, a growth factor
links with an associated receptor, like a lock and key.' EGF links with EGFR,
the epidermal growth factor receptor.' According to recent research, the
receptor rather than the growth factor itself has become the target of new
drugs.''
60\. The receptor'has two basic p Articles Apparently, its activity results in
what is termed as the tyrosine kinase (an enzyme that can transfer a phosphate
group from ATP to a tyrosine residue in a protein) activity of phosphorylated
EGFR in cancer cells, which results in the phosphorylation (addition of a
phosphate (PO4) group to a protein molecule or a small molecule) of downstream
proteins. These incite cell proliferation, invasion, metastasis (spread of
cancer) and inhibition of apoptosis (a form of programmed cell death).'Cancer
drugs, it is said work in two basic ways. They try to prevent binding at the
ligand-binding domain,'or prevent autophosphorylation in the tyrosine kinase.'
The existence of two separate functions means that drugs may later be
combined.' Cells both give and receive signals.' A particular growth factor is
involved both by receiving abnormal signals from other cells and giving them.'
VI Principles applicable in the case of interlocutory claims for injunction in
patent infringement cases and their application to facts of this case.
61\. The Plaintiff, as well as the Defendant, relied upon the celebrated
English decision reported as American Cyanamid Co v. Ethicon Ltd 1975 (1) All.
ER 504 to say what are the guiding principles which courts have to adopt in
cases involving infringement of patent and copyright cases. The Court had in
that case enumerated the salient considerations which weigh with a court while
granting or refusing interim injunction, in actions complaining infringement
of patents; it was held as follows:
As to that, the governing principle is that the court should first consider
whether, if the plaintiff were to succeed at the trial in establishing his
right to a permanent injunction, he would be adequately compensated by an
award of damages for the the loss he would have sustained as a result of the
defendant's continuing to do what was sought to be en joined between the time
of the application and the time of the trial. If damages in the measure
recoverable at common law would be adequate remedy and the defendant would be
in a financial position to pay them, no interlocutory injunction should
normally be granted, however strong the plaintiff's claim appeared to be at
that stage.
If, on the other hand, damages would not provide an adequate remedy for the
plaintiff in the event of his succeeding at the trial, the court should then
consider whether, on the contrary hypothesis that the defendant were to
succeed at the trial in establishing his right to do that which was sought to
be enjoined, he would be adequately compensated under the plaintiff's
undertaking as to damages for the loss he would have sustained by being
prevented from doing so between the time of the application and the time of
the trial. If damages in the measure recoverable under such an undertaking
would be an adequate remedy and the plaintiff would be in a financial position
to pay them, there would be no reason upon this ground to refuse an
interlocutory injunction.
It is where there is doubt as to the adequacy of the respective remedies in
damages available to either party or to both, that the question of balance of
convenience arises. It would be unwise to attempt even to list all the various
matters that may need to be taken into consideration in deciding where the
balance lies, let alone to suggest the relative weight to be attached to them.
These will vary from case to case.
Where other factors appear to be evenly balanced it is a counsel of prudence
to take such measures as are calculated to preserve the status quo. If the
defendant is enjoined temporarily from doing something that he has not done
before, the only effect of the interlocutory injunction in the event of his
succeeding at the trial is to postpone the date at which he is able to embark
upon a course of action which he has not previously found it necessary to
undertake; whereas to interrupt him in the conduct of an established
enterprise would cause much greater inconvenience to him since he would have
to start again to establish it in the event of his succeeding at the trial.
Save in the simplest cases, the decision to grant or to refuse an
interlocutory injunction will cause to whichever party is unsuccessful on the
application some disadvantages which his ultimate success at the trial may
show he ought to have been spared and the disadvantages may be such that the
recovery of damages to which he would then be entitled either in the action or
under the plaintiff's undertaking would not be sufficient to compensate him
fully for all of them. The extent to which the disadvantages to each party
would be incapable of being compensated in damages in the event of his
succeeding at the trial is always a significant factor in assessing where the
balance of convenience lies, and if the extent of the un-compensatable
disadvantage to each party would not differ widely, it may not be improper to
take into account in tipping the balance the relative strength of each party's
case as revealed by the affidavit evidence adduced on the hearing of the
application. This, however, should be done only where it is apparent upon the
facts disclosed by evidence as to which there is no credible dispute that the
strength of one party's case is disproportionate to that of the other party.
The court is not justified in embarking upon anything resembling a trial of
the action upon conflicting affidavits in order to evaluate the strength of
either party's case.
The above formulation has been followed in several later decisions; the
Supreme Court of India too has approved and applied those principles (See
Ramdev Food Products Ltd v. Arvindbhai Rambhai Patel and Ors. ).
62\. In several judgments in India, including judgments ofThis Court , it has
been consistently held that where the patent is of recent origin and its
validity has not been tested, the courts should not grant injunctions where
infringement is alleged; it has also been held that if the defendant alleges
that the patent cannot be sustained, the injunction should be refused (See
Manicka Thevar v. Star Ploro Works ; Ram Narain v. Ambassador Industries )
Surendra Lal Mahendra v. Jain Galzers 1981 PTC 112; National Research and
Development Corporation of India v. Delhi Cloth and General Mills AIR 1980 Del
132; Standipack Pvt. Ltd. and Ors. v. Oswal Trading Co. Ltd. and Ors. . This
rule, or practice, which appears to have been consistently followed stems from
the English decision in Smith v. Grigg Ld. (1924) 41 RPC 149(1).This Court has
also indicated, in National Research and Development Corporation's case
(supra) that if the patent is not less than six years old, injunction should
not be granted as a matter of course. The recent judgment ofThis Court in
Bilcare 'vs- Amartara Pvt. Ltd. 2007 (34) PTC 419 (Del) has also commented
that mere grant of a patent does not guarantee its validity; in case an
opposition is filed by the defendant and that if the counter claim of the
defendant is based on that opposition, there cannot be any presumption in
favor of the validity of the patent. Recently, after the judgment was reserved
in this case, the Delhi High Court, in M. Mitra Co. (Pvt) Ltd., v. Kesar
Medicaments and Anr. (decided on 22.02.2008 in CS (OS) 2020/2006, reported as
Manu/DE/0306/2008) the Court considered an application for ad-interim
injunction in a suit alleging patent infringement. The patent was in respect
of a device for detection of antibodies to HepatIT is C Virus in human serum
and plasma. The patent was granted on 22.09.2006. The Court held (in para 51)
that the order of grant of patent, or rejecting pre-grant opposition cannot
itself give rise to a presumption of validity of the patent, and the Court
would have to look into the merits of the case of the plaintiff as well as the
defense put forth by the defendant. The court, in Para 102, held, after
discussing the rival contentions, that it would be impermissible for the
defendant to rely on different documents disclosing different features of the
product, that the product of the patent is known. Such 'mosaicing' is not a
valid defense. The decision rejected the defenses, and on prima facie
determination of validity of the patent, granted interlocutory injunction. The
court did not however, discuss whether the patented product or the infringing
goods had any life saving or such like element; it was not concerned with the
interpretation of Section 3(d). Crucially, the question of balance of
convenience was considered as enuring in favor of the plaintiff, since a prima
facie case was established, and the patent was for a limited period. The
plaintiff's contention, in the above circumstances, that a mere showing of
prima facie existence of merits, being sufficient to injunct the defendant,
cannot be adopted as a general rule. The reliance on Midas Hygene, in the
opinion ofThis Court is not apt, since that was a case concerning trademark
infringement; the Supreme Court expressly did not mention the approach
concerning patent infringement. Similarly, the Division Bench ruling in
Schneider affirmed the refusal by the Single Judge, who had noted that the
defendant did not dispute the patent, or challenge it. The main argument,
repelled by the affirming judgment of the Division Bench, was that non-
manufacture of the product in India, and its import did not disentitle the
plaintiff to injunction, if other factors were to be established. The correct
approach, of appreciating all the factors, and not merely the prima facie
merits, is too well established in regard to grant of temporary injunction;
specifically in the field of patent infringement, this was re-stated by a
Division Bench in Franz Zaver Huemer v. New Yash Engineers .
63\. One must confess bafflement at the 'six-year' rule preventing courts in
India from granting interim injunction. No provision of law or rule was
brought to the notice of the court in support of this practice. The six-year
rule appears to have crept in Manicka Thevar, and subsequently picked up in
other judgments to be developed into a universal rule. The rule can be
explained as one cautioning the courts that patent infringement actions stand
on a slightly different footing, (from other cases) where the courts should
not automatically grant injunction on prima facie satisfaction of
infringement, since patents can be challenged, even in defense. It has to be
seen as a rule of caution and prudence rather than a rigid, ritualistic
formula of mathematical application. In the context of the amended Act, where
no less than five layers of scrutiny are inbuilt, what can be said is that the
courts should examine the claim for interlocutory injunction with some degree
of circumspection, even while applying all the tests that normally have to be
satisfied when granting (or refusing) such relief. This view accords with the
trend in the United States, where in eBay v. MercExchange 547 US 388 (2006)
the Supreme Court of United States rendered a significant judgment relevant in
the present context. eBay was found to be infringing a patent held by
MercExchange. The latter sought to enjoin eBay from using its product. Under
the Federal Circuit rulings prevailing at the time, an injunction was granted
automatically once infringement was discerned. Courts used to refuse it in
exceptional circumstances, holding that injury could be presumed if prima
facie case was established. The Supreme Court in an appeal by eBay, (against
which injunction was issued), however, held that courts should consider the
traditional four- factor test for issuance of an injunction, (i.e existence of
prima facie case, balance of convenience, irreparable injury and public
interest) and should not issue injunctions automatically. Such an approach has
been also favored by two decisions ofThis Court , i.e Franz Zaver Huemer and
Standipack Pvt. Ltd. The Calcutta High Court too has endorsed this view, in
Godrej Soaps Ltd.
64\. What then is the correct approach where a defendant challenges the
validity of a patent' Here too, decided cases provide valuable guidance. At
the stage of considering an application for interlocutory injunction, the
defendant has to show that its challenge is a genuine one and not vexatious or
set up to merely play for time: (Ref TJ Smith and Nephew Ltd. v. 3M United
Kingdom PLC (1983) RPC 92 and Quantel v. Shima Seiki 1990 (RPC) 436). An
almost identical line of reasoning, i.e. existence of a substantial question,
raised by the Defendant, during interlocutory proceedings, has been favored in
the United State Courts, exemplified in the following extract of a recent
judgment by Rader, J, speaking for the US Court of Appeals for the Federal
Circuit in Erico International Corporation v. DOC's Marketing Corporation 2008
U.S. App. Lexis 3439 (19.2.2008) 'Validity challenges during preliminary
injunction proceedings can be successful, that is, they may raise substantial
questions of invalidity, on evidence that would not suffice to support a
judgment of invalidity at trial.' Amazon.com, Inc., 239 F.3d at 1358. In other
words, a defendant need not prove actual invalidity. On the contrary, a
defendant must put forth a substantial question of invalidity to show that the
claims at issue are vulnerable. Thus, a showing of [ 11] a substantial
question of invalidity requires less proof than the clear and convincing
standard to show actual invalidity.Id.'
65\. To summarize, on the issue of interlocutory injunctions:
(i) In patent infringement actions, the courts should follow the approach
indicated in American Cyanamid, by applying all factors;
(ii) The courts should follow a rule of caution, and not always presume that
patents are valid, especially if the defendant challenges it;
(iii) The standard applicable for a defendant challenging the patent is
whether it is a genuine one, as opposed to a vexatious defense. Only in the
case of the former will the court hold that the defendant has an arguable
case.
66\. The first aspect to be considered is whether the Plaintiff's case is
arguable. In support, the Plaintiff relies heavily on the grant of patent, on
6- 7-2007; the order of the Controller's office, rejecting the pre-grant
opposition on 4-7-2007, the Food and Drug Administration approval of the
United States, the copy of an article on Tarceva, published by the Canadian
Online Pharmacy; copy of the journal 'Oncologist'; copy of the New England
Journal of Medicine; and copies of the Journal of Clinical Oncology. The
Plaintiff also relies on the documents issued in its favor permitting import
of the drug, Tarceva, into India. It avers, in an affidavit about its sales
having been made since 2006, and such sales being to an extent of Rs. 13.2
crores. It has also produced a copy of the claim with complete specification.
67\. The plaintiff in its application with complete specification for grant of
the patent 'Quinazoline Derivatives Compounds and Composition Thereof' filed a
total of 27 claims. These claims were later amended and 25 claims were
dropped. The corrected version of the claim of the plaintiff stood as 'A novel
[6,7-bis(2-methoxyethoxy) quinazolin-4-yl]-3-ethynylphenyl)amine hydrochloride
and a process for preparing the same'. The request for examination of the
claim was made on 16.8.2004 and the application was published on 11.3.2005.
The first examination report was issued on 22.2.2006 and thereafter eleven
objections were listed. The case was placed for examination on 23.2.2007. In
the claim the plaintiff finally claimed as follows:
1) a novel [6,7-bis(2-methoxyethoxy) quinazolin-4-yl]-3- ethynylphenyl)amine
hydrochloride compound of the formula 'A' novel [6,7 bids
(2-methoxyedthoxy)quinazolin-4-yl] (3-ethynylphenyl) amine hydrochloride
compound of the formula A
2) A process for preparing the compound as claimed in claim 1, wherein: a) the
stated compounds react in the presence of isopropanol and pyridine under an
inert atmosphere of dry nitrogen and under conditions more specifically
described; and b) the obtained product is isolated from the reaction mixture.
The summary of the invention which is a part of the body of the claim
describes it interalia as directed to pharmaceutical compositions for treating
a hyperproliferative disease in mammals which comprise a hyperproliferative
disease treating amount of a compound of the Formula I and a pharmaceutically
acceptable carrier. The summary of the invention also states that it is
directed to 4-(substituted phenylamino) quinazoline derivative of a described
formula and pharmaceutically acceptable salts and products thereof (page 2 of
the claim)
68\. During the hearing it was emphasized that the Plaintiffs' claimed
compound has an 'ethynyl group' present at metha position of phenyleniol group
at a specific position, namely, position 3- i.e. metha position. It was
claimed that the prior art indicated by the compound in the pre grant hearing,
nowhere discloses the presence of such ethynyl group particularly substituted
at metha position of phenyl ring. On this basis the plaintiff claimed that
there was no prior art teaching indicative the above substitution and its
effects and that a person skilled in the art would not arrive at this
invention in an obvious manner.
69\. The office of the Controller of Patents found that sometimes the
modification in the prior art technologies, which seem minor, can bring great
revolutions in the world never otherwise predicted by the society of
intellectuals. He concluded as follows:
A substitution of Group alkynl at metha position of phenyl moiety of known
basic compound (i.e. substitute phenyl aminoquinazolines derivative) has
brought revolution in the treatment of NSCLC and Pancreatic Cancers and proved
its efficacy as compared to the drugs available in the prior Article The
Journal clinical oncology, Volume 25 No. 15, May 2007, volume 24, No. 24,
August, 2006 may be referred to look into all the facts. The compound appears
to be much more effective as compared to the compounds for the similar
purpose. None of the prior art citations therefore are able to establish any
motivating factors to the persons skilled in the art by looking into the prior
art and their appears no possibility of anticipation of such a great
improvement in the properties of the invention and invented new derivative
compounds. The same thing appears to the allegation of compounds about the
structure of the new derivative compound. Such a structural similarity as
deduced by far a compound having great medicine value may not be accepted to
establish the new derivative as obvious.
I rely on the decision issued by.... Therefore, I hereby held that the product
as claimed in claim I and the process as claimed in claim 2 both are
innovative and non obvious. Moreover, the patent office of various advanced
countries have examined this invention for novelty and inventions are found.
Presence of inventiveness and novelty in the invention (sic). These countries
have issued the patent on this invention. Form ' 3 filed in patent office
discloses this fact.' As to whether the invention was in respect of a
derivative that disclosed significant enhancement in efficacy, the patent
office, in the said order observed as follows:
The opponent during the hearing raised the issue that the present compounds
fall under Section 3(d) of the Indian Patents Act as the claimed compounds are
obvious variants of prior art compounds and do not significantly differ in
therapeutic efficacy over the compounds of prior Article This issue was not
taken in their representation. The applicants submit that the providing of
efficacy data at filing was not possible. However, the same has been given as
and when asked by Controller. The data regarding survival rate increase has
been significantly increased as indicated in the Journal the Oncologist,
5.2.2007. In view of the fact that the opponents have not substantiated and
elaborated this ground of objection further once the invention has been found
inventive the invention cannot be patentable under Section 3(d) of the Patents
Act. Moreover, the opponents have not properly established this ground.
Therefore ,I held that the invention cannot be held non-patentable under
Section 3(d) of the Patents Act, 1970. (sic)
70\. The Defendant alleges that the claim does not sufficiently describe the
inventive step, a vital pre-condition for the grant of a valid patent. They
have contrasted the order of grant with another order of the Patent Office
declining grant in the case Gefitinib. They also seek comparison of the claim
of the Plaintiffs' claim with its subsequent claim made in US Patent No.
6900221 to submit that an exhaustive description of the prior art is absent.
More crucially, it is contended in the defense that the Plaintiff underplayed
and the patent office ignored, the presence of ethynyl substitution, suggested
in a prior patent, that is, EP 0635507 of 1995. A copy of that European
Patient has been produced. It is contended that the product for which the
patent had been granted has a molecular structure similar to what is disclosed
in EP 0566226. The Defendant has set out two structures of that patent in its
counter claim and contended that the ethynyl substitute claimed by the
Plaintiff is in the third position of a published compound of formula in
respect of a known- compound. It is, therefore, argued that the substance is
obvious to a person skilled in the Article The Defendant urges that this
aspect is, left without any explanation by the plaintiff. The Plaintiff's
position on this is that the substitution with the Ethynyl element is not
contained in any document.
71\. From the above discussion a few distinctive factors require to be prima
facie considered byThis Court. Firstly, whether the Plaintiff's claim and the
patent as granted, involves an inventive step; and, whether it satisfies the
test of non-obviousness and further, whether the patent for Erlotinib even if
it is a Quinazolin derivative can nevertheless be patentable as there is
significant enhancement in known efficacy. Here, the factors which weigh in
favor of the plaintiffs claim for prima facie merits or that it has an
arguable case, are that it's claim received the patent office's examination at
two levels i.e. before the grant of patent and during the pre-grant position;
a series of medical and Oncological publications which credited Erlotinib with
some degree of success in treatment of NSCLS. Some of the publications
indicated that the patients had an increased potentiality of survival, of 6.7
months in the case of Erlotinib, as opposed to 4.7 months in the case of
placebos. These were, however, after 2005. The drug has also been admittedly
produced. There is no serious dispute in that regard; it can therefore be said
to have industrial application.
72\. In the above background what has to be considered is whether the
Defendants have been able to outline a credible or arguable challenge to the
Plaintiff's patent. The Defendant's objections are principally twofold, that
is, that the product was obvious to a person skilled in the prior art and that
since Erlotinib is a derivative of a known compound, the Plaintiff had to
necessarily establish a significant enhancement in its known efficacy for its
claims under Section 3(d).
73\. In the United Kingdom, the Court of Appeal in, Windsurfing International
Inc. v. Tabur Marine (GB) Ltd. [1985] RPC 59, required the following steps to
be taken into account while determining patentability:
1\. Identifying the inventive concept embodied in the patent;
2\. Imputing to a normally skilled but unimaginative addressee what was common
general knowledge in the art at the priority date;
3\. Identifying the differences if any between the matter cited and the
alleged invention; and
4\. Deciding whether those differences, viewed without any knowledge of the
alleged invention, constituted steps that would have been obvious to the
skilled man or whether they required any degree of invention.
74\. The U.S. Supreme Court in Grahametal. v. John Deere Co. of Kansas City et
al. 383 U.S. 1 (1966) held that obviousness should be determined by looking at
1.the scope and content of the prior art; 2.the level of ordinary skill in the
prior art; 3.the differences between the claimed invention and the prior art;
and 4.objective evidence of non-obviousness. In addition, the Court outlined
factors that show ``objective evidence of non- obviousness'`. They are:
1\. commercial success;
2\. long-felt but unsolved needs; and
3\. failure of others.
75\. There is a certain amount of elusiveness in what is obvious (or not
obvious, depending on what one is looking at). Obviousness, as a concept, said
Justice Learned Hand, was 'as fugitive, impalpable, wayward and vague a
phantom as exists in the whole paraphernalia of legal concepts.' Courts in
England have also recognized the danger in too liberal an approach to
obviousness, on the one hand, and too strict an approach on the other. Pumfrey
J in Glaxo Group Ltd's Patent [2004] RPC 843 observed as follows:
``Both the Scylla of considering nothing obvious except that to which the
skilled man is driven and the Charybdis of considering every invention obvious
that can be decomposed into a sequence of obvious steps must be avoided. The
former is unfair to industry because it stifles natural development. The
latter is unfair to inventors and not countenanced by English patent law.'`
76\. The United States Supreme Court recently re-visited, in KSR International
Co v. Teleflex 550 US 1,(2007), the test of obviousness. The US Supreme Court
dealt with the test of obviousness being followed in a series of decisions
consistently for the past two decades or so and popularly known as 'TSM' i.e.
Teaching Suggestion and Motivation. The court held that such a test was
restrictive, and emphasized the need to make an expansive and searching
scrutiny as to whether the claim (for which patent is claimed or granted, or
where infringement is complained) suffers from obviousness, in the following
terms:
The obviousness analysis cannot be confined by a formalistic conception of the
words teaching, suggestion and motivation or by overemphasis on the importance
of published articles and the explicit content of issued patents. The
diversity of inventive pursuits and of modern technology counsels against
limiting the analysis in this way. In many fields it may be that there is
little discussion of obvious techniques or combinations and it often may be
the case that market demand rather than scientific literature will drive
design trends. Granting patent protection to advances that would occur in the
ordinary course without real innovation retards progress and may in the case
of patents combining previously known elements deprive prior inventions of
their value or utility.' A hint of this TSM method appears to have crept in
the examination of the plaintiff's claim, in the Controller's order,
particularly at page 22, where he appears to have proceeded to rule out any
motivational factors to the persons skilled in the art- by looking into the
prior art for finding out or predicting the improvement in the properties of
the quinazolin derivative compound. The plaintiff too appears to be
emphasizing this since its argument is that the prior art does not contain
description of a similar compound. The Controller's order, besides not
examining the objection about obviousness, as presented, appears to have mixed
up the aspect of efficacy, a vital component required to be satisfied after
the 2005 amendment; it has noted that documents about efficacy of the drug
were not available as on the date of the application, but made available
whenever required. In the facts of this case, the plaintiff also had to
establish that the product is one differing significantly in properties with
regard to efficacy. This was necessary since the compound is a derivative, and
deemed to be part of a known compound. Though the defendants made a strong
argument about the non application of mind by the Controller, since the patent
certificate was issued on 23-2-2007, yet, the pre-grant order was made on 4-7-
2007 (also imputing that the pre-grant application was not maintainable)
however, the court will not go into that aspect at this stage.
77\. One cannot lose sight of the fact that the court at this stage is not
making a detailed, in depth scrutiny of the merits of the patent. The endeavor
here is only to consider, since the plaintiff has an arguable case, whether
the Defendant has raised an arguable case or has it has made a palpably
unfounded claim. The test of obviousness cannot be that the material or
formula was published, but that having regard to the existing state of prior
art or the published material, was it possible to a normal but unimaginative
person skilled in the art to discern the step on the basis of the general
common knowledge of the art at the priority date. The other deciding factor is
whether the differences between the prior art would, without knowledge of the
alleged invention, constitute steps which could have been obvious to the
skilled man or whether they required any degree of invention. If this is the
correct way, the Patent office order appears to have accepted non-obviousness
readily, in the context of the plaintiff's submission that no prior art
publication contained the structure of the compounds and the steps claimed by
it. The inventive step should be such as could not have been discernable to
the unimaginative person skilled in the art and not something which was
published in the prior Article As extracted from the claim itself, the
plaintiff had stated that the product is directed to 4-(substituted
phenylamino) quinazoline derivative. The inventive step claimed is the methyl
substitute is in the third position. The defendant's argument is that the
above substitution is obvious to a person skilled in the art; and that this
has not been answered by the plaintiff, who merely argues that the said
substitution is not contained in documents relied upon by the defendant and
hence the patent is not bad. There is something to be said in the argument
that this is a response to an anticipation argument, which is different from
the objection of obviousness. There is also some merit in the plea that
comparative data regarding efficacy of the plaintiff's drug, with existing
drugs, was not independently shown at the time of examination of the claim, to
establish difference, significantly in regard to its efficacy from the known
substance or derivative. One contention of the plaintiff, that the defendant's
goods are inferior, being unpatented, is irrelevant; it has received the drug
license for sale in India. Likewise, the argument that the plaintiff's
products have been patented in several countries, and have remained
unchallenged, the present action being the exception, is not of much
consequence. The patent regimes of each country differ; crucially, the
municipal laws of the respective legal systems would determine the timing and
scope of challenge.
78\. On a conspectus of all the factors, the defendant's contention does not
appear implausible. This is not to say that there is merit in its contentions;
it is, not also meant to be reflective of the strength of such contentions.
Any comment by the court, in that regard would be unfair to the plaintiff. The
court should refrain from conducting a mini trial as to the strength of the
parties, at the interlocutory stage. All that can be therefore said is that
the plaintiff's case though arguable and though disclosing prima facie merit,
has to answer a credible challenge to the patent, raised by the defendant.
79\. The application of the American Cyanamid principles would then, at this
stage, mean that the court should, in such cases, proceed to decide on the
question of balance of convenience. This is necessary because the plaintiff
has made out an arguable case; at the same time, the defendant's challenge is
genuine. Even otherwise the aspect of balance of convenience should be gone
into, if the plaintiff has a case on the merits. The House of Lords had with
remarkable prescience refrained from attempting to list all the various
matters which need to be taken into consideration and deciding where the
balance of convenience lies, let alone to suggest the relative weight to them;
those factors would vary from case to case. While considering the issue of
balance of convenienceThis Court has to consider the following factors:
I) The extent to which disadvantages to each party would be incapable of being
compensated in damages in the event of his succeeding at the trial;
ii) The nature of the product and its use
iii) The timing of the action
iv) If the balance is approximately equal, the court may consider the relative
strength of each party's case only where it is apparent by undisputed evidence
that the strength of one party's case is disproportionate to that of the other
party.
80\. It would now be relevant to consider the various factual aspects other
than the patent claims of the plaintiff. It is asserted on its behalf that the
drug has been made available since the year 2006 by it and has till date
recorded sales worth Rs. 13.2 crores. The plaintiff does not have a
manufacturing facility in India; it imports Tarceva. It is unclear -- since no
claim in that regard has been made, as to the marketing arrangements of the
plaintiff for its product or its advertisement and other incidental expenses
for Tarceva. The plaintiff asserts that one of its tablet costs Rs. 3200/- and
that the effective treatment with the drug involves its use for two months,
the patient taking the tablet once a day. The Defendant contests this and has
produced packaging of the plaintiff and copies of bills disclosing the
particulars of Tarceva, as costing Rs. 48,000/- per strip of 10 tablets. It
has also produced bills from three pharmacists in different cities i.e.
Chennai, Ahmedabad and Mumbai showing that the maximum retail price of its
product Erlocip is Rs. 1600/- per tablet. The defendant has also produced a
copy of the Central Government Standard Drug Control Organization permission
in Form 46 under the Trade and Cosmetics Act, dated 19.10.2007 permitting it
to manufacturing Erlocip for the treatment of non-small lung cancer.
81\. As observed in a preceding part of this judgment the consistent trend of
courts in deciding applications seeking interim injunction, involving claims
for infringement of patents have been to be proceed with caution. As noticed
earlier, this is more a rule of prudence than one of principle. Thus, unlike
in cases involving infringement of other products, the Courts have to tread
with care whether pharmaceutical products and more specifically life saving
drugs are involved. In such cases, the balancing would have to factor in
imponderables such as the likelihood of injury to unknown parties and the
potentialities of risk of denial of remedies.
82\. In a luminous decision, reported as Roussel Uclaf v. G.D. Sarle and
Company Ltd. 1977 FSR 25, the Court of Appeal observed that even a limited
injunction ensuring that a patient already on the drug in question should be
continued to be supplied, as a condition for interlocutory restraint of the
defendant, could prove inadequate. The court further said that such a
limitation cannot deal with the issue where members of the public, whether
they are already patients on the drug or not, should be deprived of the
benefit of it. The court went on to observe that in such cases the onus must
be on the plaintiffs to show that there is little if any likelihood of the
public being injured, 'by their inability to obtain the drug in question when
necessary. A life-saving drug is in an exceptional position. There are often
cases where a number of drugs exist alongside each other and are in general
all equally efficacious for a particular ailment or disease. If the evidence
shows it to be the fact that there may well be cases where it would make
little, if any, difference to the public, apart from satisfying personal
preference, whether a particular drug was no longer available or not, then in
such a case it may well be proper to grant an injunction. At the other end of
the scale, however, there is the unique life- saving drug where, in my
judgment, it is at least very doubtful if the court in its discretion ever
ought to grant an injunction and I cannot at present think of any
circumstances where it should. There are infinite variations between these two
limits.'
83\. The above approach is not alien to Courts in our country. Although the
Bombay High Court did not notice the decision in Uclaf, yet in Novartis AG
(Supra) the Court held, in that case that if interim injunction were granted
to the plaintiff, the manufacturing network of the defendant so far as drug is
concerned would be dismantled and if due to any problem the plaintiffs could
not make available the drug in required quantity in India it would be
disastrous for patients. The aspect of price difference between the product of
the plaintiff and defendants also influenced the Court.This Court too, in
Franz Zaver Heumer voiced identical concerns in the following terms:
37\. Balance of convenience has also an important role to play. Stultification
of defendants' investment, loss of employment, public interest in the product
(such a life saving drug), product quality coupled with price, or the
defendant being smaller in size, may go against the plaintiff.
84\. The plaintiff's counsel had at some stage argued eloquently about the
country's entry into the TRIPS regime and its commitment to integrate with the
global patent regime. He discounted the price differential between the
plaintiffs Tarceva and the defendant's product Erlotinib as being 'dangerous'
and 'jingoistic'. As noticed with reference to the two judgments cited above,
price differential in the case of a life saving drug -- or even a life
improving drug in the case of a life threatening situation, is an important
and critical factor which cannot be ignored by the court. The materials before
the Court in the form of documents undoubtedly show that the plaintiff does
not have any manufacturing unit in India, for producing Tarceva. The
defendant, on the other hand, manufactures and markets it. The plaintiff has
not - apart from blandly asserting in its affidavit about the volume of sales
being Rs. 13.2 crores - disclosed by any independent, objective material about
its sales. Even if, its assertions are accepted, roughly 1000 patients have
perhaps benefited from its drug on a rough conclusion so far. This is on the
basis that the cost of the monthly doses being Rs. 1.28 lakhs; the course of
treatment involving two months as against the total sale figure claimed as to
be 13.2 crores. The defendant's product Erlotinib, on the other hand, is
marketed at a third of the cost of Tarceva; it costs Rs. 1600/- per tablet.
85\. Undoubtedly, India entered into the TRIPS regime, and amended her laws to
fulfilll her international obligations, yet the court has to proceed and apply
the laws of this country, which oblige it to weigh all relevant factors. In
this background the Court cannot be unmindful of the right of the general
public to access life saving drugs which are available and for which such
access would be denied if the injunction were granted. The degree of harm in
such eventuality is absolute; the chances of improvement of life expectancy;
even chances of recovery in some cases would be snuffed out altogether, if
injunction were granted. Such injuries to third parties are un-compensatable.
Another way of viewing it is that if the injunction in the case of a life
saving drug were to be granted, the Court would in effect be stifling Article
21 so far as those would have or could have access to Erloticip are concerned.
It is precisely this consideration that was emphasized as a relevant and
significant factor in American Cyanamid and Roussel Uclaf. Even the United
States Supreme Court was not unmindful of such considerations when recently it
disavowed the liberal practice, of granting injunctions, and underlining the
necessity of weighing relevant factors, including public interest, in eBay
(Supra). In another decision, Cordis Corporation v. Boston Scientific
Corporation 2004 US App. LEXIS 11557, the US Court of Appeals for Federal
Circuit affirmed the refusal to enjoin the defendant, in a patent infringement
action where the product was a drug-eluting stent. The court held that such
injunction would inhibit a broad choice of availability of such stents. The
court compared the public interest in protection of the patentee's right with
the broader public interest in availability of the product, and held:
While crediting the validity of this point,This Court also acknowledges that
it cannot control in every case, without obliterating the public interest
component of the preliminary injunction inquiry. Thus, for good reason, the
courts have refused to permanently enjoin activities that would injure the
public health.
86\. The last and also significant factor that has to be examined is the
question of irreparable hardship. Strangely, the plaintiff did not even
address the court on this issue - presumably on its assumption that an
injunction would follow once a prima facie case was established. As discussed
earlier, in the section concerning balance of convenience, irreparable
hardship is a separate distinct head which the Court of necessity has to
examine and be satisfied about, while considering interlocutory applications
for injunction. The crucial aspect here is whether refusal of injunction would
cause such irreparable hardship to the plaintiff as cannot be later
compensated in mandatory terms. The suit itself contains the averment that the
defendant is a pharmaceutical giant in India. The plaintiff too claims to be
holding a large number of patents for a wide variety of drugs, particularly
life saving drugs. Neither party has produced any evidence as to the number of
patients suffering from small cell lung cancer. Yet in one of the Newspaper
articles produced by the plaintiff, states that about 90,000 men and 79,000
women in India suffer annually from lung cancer. The National Cancer Registry
Report released by the Indian Medical Council in 2007 states that every hour
50 persons are diagnosed of cancer in the country. The same report states that
24% of all cancer incidents, are in relation to lung cancer. The figures of
those suffering from the ailment that Tarceva and Erlocip seek to alleviate
therefore, are significant. There is no empirical material, or statistical
method by which the Court can deduce the numbers of such patients who would be
using the plaintiff's product if injunction is refused; on the other hand, it
is plain that a large number of them would be deprived of access to a life
saving drug if injunction is granted. Therefore, this Court is of the opinion
that as between the two competing public interests, that is, the public
interest in granting an injunction to affirm a patent during the pendency of
an infringement action, as opposed to the public interest in access for the
people to a life saving drug, the balance has to be tilted in favor of the
latter. The damage or injury that would occur to the plaintiff in such case is
capable of assessment in monetary terms. However, the injury to the public
which would be deprived of the defendant's product, which may lead to
shortening of lives of several unknown persons, who are not parties to the
suit, and which damage cannot be restituted in monetary terms, is not only
uncompensatable, it is irreparable. Thus, irreparable injury would be caused
if the injunction sought for is granted.
87\. The result of the above discussion is that the plaintiff is not entitled
to claim an ad-interim injunction, in the terms sought. However,This Court is
not unmindful of the fact that if no equitable balancing order protecting its
interest is made at this stage, there is a likelihood of the plaintiff being
prejudiced at the final stage. Therefore, the defendant is hereby directed to:
i) Furnish an undertaking toThis Court , within two weeks, to pay damages in
the event of the suit being decreed. A director or other person, on behalf of
the Defendant duly authorized by a specific resolution of its Board of
Directors, shall execute the undertaking. The undertaking shall also include a
stipulation that it would continue to bind the Defendant, regardless of its
change in composition.
ii) Towards effectuating direction (i) above, maintain faithful accounts of
its sale of the product Erlocip and file quarterly accounts inThis Court ,
supported by the affidavit of one of its Directors, affirming about the
veracity of the same;
iii) File an annual statement of the sales figures, of Erlocip, duly
authenticated by its chartered accountants, on the basis of its records,
including the Sales tax and Excise returns.
88\. IA 642/2008 is accordingly dismissed, subject to the directions in the
preceding paragraph. Order dusty in addition.
87\. The result of the above discussion is that the plaintiff is not entitled
to claim an ad-interim injunction, in the terms sought. However,This Court is
not unmindful of the fact that if no equitable balancing order protecting its
interest is made at this stage, there is a likelihood of the plaintiff being
prejudiced at the final stage. Therefore, the defendant is hereby directed to:
i) Furnish an undertaking toThis Court , within two weeks, to pay damages in
the event of the suit being decreed. A director or other person, on behalf of
the Defendant duly authorized by a specific resolution of its Board of
Directors, shall execute the undertaking. The undertaking shall also include a
stipulation that it would continue to bind the Defendant, regardless of its
change in composition.
ii) Towards effectuating direction (i) above, maintain faithful accounts of
its sale of the product Erlocip and file quarterly accounts inThis Court ,
supported by the affidavit of one of its Directors, affirming about the
veracity of the same;
iii) File an annual statement of the sales figures, of Erlocip, duly
incorporated under the laws of the United States with its registered office at
41, Pinelawn Road, Melville, New York 11747, USA. It jointly owns a patent
with Pfizer Products Inc. in respect of a small drug molecule, medically
termed as a 'Human Epidermal Growth Factor Type-1/Epidermal Growth Factor
Receptor' (Her/Egfr) inhibitor, popularly known as 'Erlotinib'. It is claimed
that this drug marked a major breakthrough and innovation in the treatment of
cancer; it is used to destroy some types of cancer cells while causing little
harm to normal human cells. This drug is administered in the form of a tablet.
The tablet formulation of Erlotinib is sold by the plaintiff under the
trademark and name of 'Tarceva', which is registered in the name of the first
plaintiff. It is averred that the drug Erlotinib and its formulation 'Tarceva'
has been approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration in the year 2004
and thereafter by the European Union in the year 2005.
3\. The second Plaintiff, along with M/s. Pfizer Products, Inc had applied for
grant of a patent in respect of Erlotinib and its process by application No.
537/Del/1996 on 13.3.1996. The Controller General of Patents, Trademarks and
Designs, New Delhi granted a certificate bearing Patent No. 196774 dated
23.02.2007, which was recorded in the Register of Patents on 06.07.2007. The
molecular name of patent is 'A Novel [6,7-BIS(2-Methoxyethoxy)
Quinazolin-4-YL] (3-Ethynylphenyl) Amine Hydrochloride'. The drug as well as
87\. The result of the above discussion is that the plaintiff is not entitled
to claim an ad-interim injunction, in the terms sought. However,This Court is
not unmindful of the fact that if no equitable balancing order protecting its
interest is made at this stage, there is a likelihood of the plaintiff being
prejudiced at the final stage. Therefore, the defendant is hereby directed to:
i) Furnish an undertaking toThis Court , within two weeks, to pay damages in
the event of the suit being decreed. A director or other person, on behalf of
the Defendant duly authorized by a specific resolution of its Board of
Directors, shall execute the undertaking. The undertaking shall also include a
stipulation that it would continue to bind the Defendant, regardless of its
change in composition.
ii) Towards effectuating direction (i) above, maintain faithful accounts of
its sale of the product Erlocip and file quarterly accounts inThis Court ,
supported by the affidavit of one of its Directors, affirming about the
veracity of the same;
iii) File an annual statement of the sales figures, of Erlocip, duly
incorporated under the laws of the United States with its registered office at
41, Pinelawn Road, Melville, New York 11747, USA. It jointly owns a patent
with Pfizer Products Inc. in respect of a small drug molecule, medically
termed as a 'Human Epidermal Growth Factor Type-1/Epidermal Growth Factor
Receptor' (Her/Egfr) inhibitor, popularly known as 'Erlotinib'. It is claimed
that this drug marked a major breakthrough and innovation in the treatment of
cancer; it is used to destroy some types of cancer cells while causing little
harm to normal human cells. This drug is administered in the form of a tablet.
The tablet formulation of Erlotinib is sold by the plaintiff under the
trademark and name of 'Tarceva', which is registered in the name of the first
plaintiff. It is averred that the drug Erlotinib and its formulation 'Tarceva'
has been approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration in the year 2004
and thereafter by the European Union in the year 2005.
3\. The second Plaintiff, along with M/s. Pfizer Products, Inc had applied for
grant of a patent in respect of Erlotinib and its process by application No.
537/Del/1996 on 13.3.1996. The Controller General of Patents, Trademarks and
Designs, New Delhi granted a certificate bearing Patent No. 196774 dated
23.02.2007, which was recorded in the Register of Patents on 06.07.2007. The
molecular name of patent is 'A Novel [6,7-BIS(2-Methoxyethoxy)
Quinazolin-4-YL] (3-Ethynylphenyl) Amine Hydrochloride'. The drug as well as
87\. The result of the above discussion is that the plaintiff is not entitled
to claim an ad-interim injunction, in the terms sought. However,This Court is
not unmindful of the fact that if no equitable balancing order protecting its
interest is made at this stage, there is a likelihood of the plaintiff being
prejudiced at the final stage. Therefore, the defendant is hereby directed to:
i) Furnish an undertaking toThis Court , within two weeks, to pay damages in
the event of the suit being decreed. A director or other person, on behalf of
the Defendant duly authorized by a specific resolution of its Board of
Directors, shall execute the undertaking. The undertaking shall also include a
stipulation that it would continue to bind the Defendant, regardless of its
change in composition.
ii) Towards effectuating direction (i) above, maintain faithful accounts of
its sale of the product Erlocip and file quarterly accounts inThis Court ,
supported by the affidavit of one of its Directors, affirming about the
veracity of the same;
iii) File an annual statement of the sales figures, of Erlocip, duly
incorporated under the laws of the United States with its registered office at
41, Pinelawn Road, Melville, New York 11747, USA. It jointly owns a patent
with Pfizer Products Inc. in respect of a small drug molecule, medically
termed as a 'Human Epidermal Growth Factor Type-1/Epidermal Growth Factor
Receptor' (Her/Egfr) inhibitor, popularly known as 'Erlotinib'. It is claimed
that this drug marked a major breakthrough and innovation in the treatment of
cancer; it is used to destroy some types of cancer cells while causing little
harm to normal human cells. This drug is administered in the form of a tablet.
The tablet formulation of Erlotinib is sold by the plaintiff under the
trademark and name of 'Tarceva', which is registered in the name of the first
plaintiff. It is averred that the drug Erlotinib and its formulation 'Tarceva'
has been approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration in the year 2004
and thereafter by the European Union in the year 2005.
3\. The second Plaintiff, along with M/s. Pfizer Products, Inc had applied for
grant of a patent in respect of Erlotinib and its process by application No.
537/Del/1996 on 13.3.1996. The Controller General of Patents, Trademarks and
Designs, New Delhi granted a certificate bearing Patent No. 196774 dated
23.02.2007, which was recorded in the Register of Patents on 06.07.2007. The
molecular name of patent is 'A Novel [6,7-BIS(2-Methoxyethoxy)
Quinazolin-4-YL] (3-Ethynylphenyl) Amine Hydrochloride'. The drug as well as
the process of its manufacture is patented according to provisions of the
Patent Act, 1970 (hereafter 'the Act'). The Central Drug Standard Control
Organisation, Directorate General of Health Services, Central Government
registered Tarceva, by Registration certificate dated 23.12.2005 in the name
of the first Plaintiff. It is alleged that on 8.1.2001, under Section 68 of
the Act, 1970 the Plaintiffs had entered into a Development Collaboration and
Licensing Agreement, through which the first Plaintiff has a license to use,
sell and offer for sale, ' the licensed products including the drug Erlotinib
marketed as Tarceva. It is also submitted that the first plaintiff is further
licensed and authorized to cause enforcement of any intellectual property
rights for any of their products. The first Plaintiff is actively engaged in
87\. The result of the above discussion is that the plaintiff is not entitled
to claim an ad-interim injunction, in the terms sought. However,This Court is
not unmindful of the fact that if no equitable balancing order protecting its
interest is made at this stage, there is a likelihood of the plaintiff being
prejudiced at the final stage. Therefore, the defendant is hereby directed to:
i) Furnish an undertaking toThis Court , within two weeks, to pay damages in
the event of the suit being decreed. A director or other person, on behalf of
the Defendant duly authorized by a specific resolution of its Board of
Directors, shall execute the undertaking. The undertaking shall also include a
stipulation that it would continue to bind the Defendant, regardless of its
change in composition.
ii) Towards effectuating direction (i) above, maintain faithful accounts of
its sale of the product Erlocip and file quarterly accounts inThis Court ,
supported by the affidavit of one of its Directors, affirming about the
veracity of the same;
iii) File an annual statement of the sales figures, of Erlocip, duly
incorporated under the laws of the United States with its registered office at
41, Pinelawn Road, Melville, New York 11747, USA. It jointly owns a patent
with Pfizer Products Inc. in respect of a small drug molecule, medically
termed as a 'Human Epidermal Growth Factor Type-1/Epidermal Growth Factor
Receptor' (Her/Egfr) inhibitor, popularly known as 'Erlotinib'. It is claimed
that this drug marked a major breakthrough and innovation in the treatment of
cancer; it is used to destroy some types of cancer cells while causing little
harm to normal human cells. This drug is administered in the form of a tablet.
The tablet formulation of Erlotinib is sold by the plaintiff under the
trademark and name of 'Tarceva', which is registered in the name of the first
plaintiff. It is averred that the drug Erlotinib and its formulation 'Tarceva'
has been approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration in the year 2004
and thereafter by the European Union in the year 2005.
3\. The second Plaintiff, along with M/s. Pfizer Products, Inc had applied for
grant of a patent in respect of Erlotinib and its process by application No.
537/Del/1996 on 13.3.1996. The Controller General of Patents, Trademarks and
Designs, New Delhi granted a certificate bearing Patent No. 196774 dated
23.02.2007, which was recorded in the Register of Patents on 06.07.2007. The
molecular name of patent is 'A Novel [6,7-BIS(2-Methoxyethoxy)
Quinazolin-4-YL] (3-Ethynylphenyl) Amine Hydrochloride'. The drug as well as
the process of its manufacture is patented according to provisions of the
Patent Act, 1970 (hereafter 'the Act'). The Central Drug Standard Control
Organisation, Directorate General of Health Services, Central Government
registered Tarceva, by Registration certificate dated 23.12.2005 in the name
of the first Plaintiff. It is alleged that on 8.1.2001, under Section 68 of
the Act, 1970 the Plaintiffs had entered into a Development Collaboration and
Licensing Agreement, through which the first Plaintiff has a license to use,
sell and offer for sale, ' the licensed products including the drug Erlotinib
marketed as Tarceva. It is also submitted that the first plaintiff is further
licensed and authorized to cause enforcement of any intellectual property
rights for any of their products. The first Plaintiff is actively engaged in
87\. The result of the above discussion is that the plaintiff is not entitled
to claim an ad-interim injunction, in the terms sought. However,This Court is
not unmindful of the fact that if no equitable balancing order protecting its
interest is made at this stage, there is a likelihood of the plaintiff being
prejudiced at the final stage. Therefore, the defendant is hereby directed to:
i) Furnish an undertaking toThis Court , within two weeks, to pay damages in
the event of the suit being decreed. A director or other person, on behalf of
the Defendant duly authorized by a specific resolution of its Board of
Directors, shall execute the undertaking. The undertaking shall also include a
stipulation that it would continue to bind the Defendant, regardless of its
change in composition.
ii) Towards effectuating direction (i) above, maintain faithful accounts of
its sale of the product Erlocip and file quarterly accounts inThis Court ,
supported by the affidavit of one of its Directors, affirming about the
veracity of the same;
iii) File an annual statement of the sales figures, of Erlocip, duly
