Income Tax Appellate Tribunal - Delhi
Inchcape India Private Limited vs Acit on 25 February, 2004
Bench: K Singhal, G Pannu
JUDGMENT K. C. Singhal, J.M.
1\. The only issue arising in this appeal relates to levy of penalty of Rs.
1,87,57,142/- u/s 271(1)(c).
2\. At the outset, the learned counsel for the assessee Mr. Dinodia has
challenged the validity of the penalty proceedings by contending that no
satisfaction was recorded by the AO as contemplated u/s 271(1)(c). It has been
contended by him that even there is no whisper in the entire assessment order
which may reveal that the AO was satisfied to the effect that the assessee had
concealed any particulars of income or furnished inaccurate particulars of
income. Therefore, in the absence of such satisfaction, the entire penalty
proceedings was void ab initio in view of the judgment of jurisdictional High
Court in the case of Ram Commercial Enterprises Ltd.,
(2003-TAXINDIAONLINE-69-HC-DEL-IT) 246 ITR 568. On other hand, the learned DR
has relied on the decisions of Supreme Court in the case of Jeevan Lal Sah,
(2002-TAXINDIAONLINE-189-SC-IT) 205 ITR 244 and in the case of B.A.
Balasubramanian & Bros., (2002-TAXINDIAONLINE-191-SC-IT) 236 ITR 977 for
proposition that after the insertion of Explanation 1 to Section 271 (1) (c),
the same being spelt out by the order of the assessing authority. Even at the
risk of repetition we would like to state that the assessment order does not
record the satisfaction as warranted by section 271 for initiating the penalty
proceedings."
The above view has been re-affirmed by the jurisdictional High Court in the
case of Super Metal Re Roller P. Ltd. In the present case, no such
satisfaction has been recorded by the AO and the DR also has not been able to
point out about recording of such satisfaction. Therefore, following the
binding decision of the Hon'ble Delhi High Court, it is held that penalty
proceedings were void ab initio. The judgments relied upon by the learned DR
are entirely on different issues and those decisions are not authority on the
issue arising in the present appeal. In the case of Jeevan Lal Sah (supra),
the Hon'ble Supreme Court held that after the amendment the decision of
Supreme Court in the case of Anwar Ali, (2002-TAXINDIAONLINE-190-SC-IT) 76 ITR
696 is no longer valid. Similar position was re-affirmed in the other cases
relied upon by the DR. Hence, the Supreme Court's decisions relied upon by the
proposition that after the insertion of Explanation 1 to Section 271 (1) (c),
AO is not required to record the satisfaction.
3\. We have considered the rival submissions of the parties. In our view, the
issue is squarely covered by the judgment of Hon'ble Delhi High Court in the
case of Ram Commercial Enterprises Ltd. (supra) wherein it was held as under:
"A bare reading of the provisions of Section 271 and the law laid down by the
Supreme Court makes its clear that it is the assessing authority which has to
form its own opinion and record its satisfaction before initiating the penalty
proceedings. Merely because the penalty proceedings have been initiated, it
cannot be assumed that such a satisfaction was arrived at in the absence of
the same being spelt out by the order of the assessing authority. Even at the
risk of repetition we would like to state that the assessment order does not
record the satisfaction as warranted by section 271 for initiating the penalty
proceedings."
The above view has been re-affirmed by the jurisdictional High Court in the
case of Super Metal Re Roller P. Ltd. In the present case, no such
satisfaction has been recorded by the AO and the DR also has not been able to
point out about recording of such satisfaction. Therefore, following the
binding decision of the Hon'ble Delhi High Court, it is held that penalty
proceedings were void ab initio. The judgments relied upon by the learned DR
are entirely on different issues and those decisions are not authority on the
issue arising in the present appeal. In the case of Jeevan Lal Sah (supra),
the Hon'ble Supreme Court held that after the amendment the decision of
Supreme Court in the case of Anwar Ali, (2002-TAXINDIAONLINE-190-SC-IT) 76 ITR
696 is no longer valid. Similar position was re-affirmed in the other cases
relied upon by the DR. Hence, the Supreme Court's decisions relied upon by the
learned DR are quite distinguishable and not on the point of issue. In view of
the above discussion, the order of CIT(A) is set aside and the penalty
sustained by him is hereby cancelled.
4\. In the result, appeal of the assessee is allowed.
the same being spelt out by the order of the assessing authority. Even at the
risk of repetition we would like to state that the assessment order does not
record the satisfaction as warranted by section 271 for initiating the penalty
proceedings."
The above view has been re-affirmed by the jurisdictional High Court in the
case of Super Metal Re Roller P. Ltd. In the present case, no such
satisfaction has been recorded by the AO and the DR also has not been able to
point out about recording of such satisfaction. Therefore, following the
binding decision of the Hon'ble Delhi High Court, it is held that penalty
proceedings were void ab initio. The judgments relied upon by the learned DR
are entirely on different issues and those decisions are not authority on the
issue arising in the present appeal. In the case of Jeevan Lal Sah (supra),
the Hon'ble Supreme Court held that after the amendment the decision of
Supreme Court in the case of Anwar Ali, (2002-TAXINDIAONLINE-190-SC-IT) 76 ITR
696 is no longer valid. Similar position was re-affirmed in the other cases
relied upon by the DR. Hence, the Supreme Court's decisions relied upon by the
proposition that after the insertion of Explanation 1 to Section 271 (1) (c),
AO is not required to record the satisfaction.
3\. We have considered the rival submissions of the parties. In our view, the
issue is squarely covered by the judgment of Hon'ble Delhi High Court in the
case of Ram Commercial Enterprises Ltd. (supra) wherein it was held as under:
"A bare reading of the provisions of Section 271 and the law laid down by the
Supreme Court makes its clear that it is the assessing authority which has to
form its own opinion and record its satisfaction before initiating the penalty
proceedings. Merely because the penalty proceedings have been initiated, it
cannot be assumed that such a satisfaction was arrived at in the absence of
the same being spelt out by the order of the assessing authority. Even at the
risk of repetition we would like to state that the assessment order does not
record the satisfaction as warranted by section 271 for initiating the penalty
proceedings."
The above view has been re-affirmed by the jurisdictional High Court in the
case of Super Metal Re Roller P. Ltd. In the present case, no such
satisfaction has been recorded by the AO and the DR also has not been able to
point out about recording of such satisfaction. Therefore, following the
binding decision of the Hon'ble Delhi High Court, it is held that penalty
proceedings were void ab initio. The judgments relied upon by the learned DR
the same being spelt out by the order of the assessing authority. Even at the
risk of repetition we would like to state that the assessment order does not
record the satisfaction as warranted by section 271 for initiating the penalty
proceedings."
The above view has been re-affirmed by the jurisdictional High Court in the
case of Super Metal Re Roller P. Ltd. In the present case, no such
satisfaction has been recorded by the AO and the DR also has not been able to
point out about recording of such satisfaction. Therefore, following the
binding decision of the Hon'ble Delhi High Court, it is held that penalty
proceedings were void ab initio. The judgments relied upon by the learned DR
are entirely on different issues and those decisions are not authority on the
issue arising in the present appeal. In the case of Jeevan Lal Sah (supra),
the Hon'ble Supreme Court held that after the amendment the decision of
Supreme Court in the case of Anwar Ali, (2002-TAXINDIAONLINE-190-SC-IT) 76 ITR
696 is no longer valid. Similar position was re-affirmed in the other cases
relied upon by the DR. Hence, the Supreme Court's decisions relied upon by the
proposition that after the insertion of Explanation 1 to Section 271 (1) (c),
AO is not required to record the satisfaction.
3\. We have considered the rival submissions of the parties. In our view, the
issue is squarely covered by the judgment of Hon'ble Delhi High Court in the
case of Ram Commercial Enterprises Ltd. (supra) wherein it was held as under:
"A bare reading of the provisions of Section 271 and the law laid down by the
Supreme Court makes its clear that it is the assessing authority which has to
form its own opinion and record its satisfaction before initiating the penalty
proceedings. Merely because the penalty proceedings have been initiated, it
cannot be assumed that such a satisfaction was arrived at in the absence of
the same being spelt out by the order of the assessing authority. Even at the
risk of repetition we would like to state that the assessment order does not
record the satisfaction as warranted by section 271 for initiating the penalty
proceedings."
The above view has been re-affirmed by the jurisdictional High Court in the
case of Super Metal Re Roller P. Ltd. In the present case, no such
satisfaction has been recorded by the AO and the DR also has not been able to
point out about recording of such satisfaction. Therefore, following the
binding decision of the Hon'ble Delhi High Court, it is held that penalty
proceedings were void ab initio. The judgments relied upon by the learned DR
the same being spelt out by the order of the assessing authority. Even at the
risk of repetition we would like to state that the assessment order does not
record the satisfaction as warranted by section 271 for initiating the penalty
proceedings."
The above view has been re-affirmed by the jurisdictional High Court in the
case of Super Metal Re Roller P. Ltd. In the present case, no such
satisfaction has been recorded by the AO and the DR also has not been able to
point out about recording of such satisfaction. Therefore, following the
binding decision of the Hon'ble Delhi High Court, it is held that penalty
proceedings were void ab initio. The judgments relied upon by the learned DR
are entirely on different issues and those decisions are not authority on the
issue arising in the present appeal. In the case of Jeevan Lal Sah (supra),
the Hon'ble Supreme Court held that after the amendment the decision of
Supreme Court in the case of Anwar Ali, (2002-TAXINDIAONLINE-190-SC-IT) 76 ITR
696 is no longer valid. Similar position was re-affirmed in the other cases
relied upon by the DR. Hence, the Supreme Court's decisions relied upon by the
proposition that after the insertion of Explanation 1 to Section 271 (1) (c),
AO is not required to record the satisfaction.
3\. We have considered the rival submissions of the parties. In our view, the
issue is squarely covered by the judgment of Hon'ble Delhi High Court in the
case of Ram Commercial Enterprises Ltd. (supra) wherein it was held as under:
"A bare reading of the provisions of Section 271 and the law laid down by the
Supreme Court makes its clear that it is the assessing authority which has to
form its own opinion and record its satisfaction before initiating the penalty
proceedings. Merely because the penalty proceedings have been initiated, it
cannot be assumed that such a satisfaction was arrived at in the absence of
the same being spelt out by the order of the assessing authority. Even at the
risk of repetition we would like to state that the assessment order does not
record the satisfaction as warranted by section 271 for initiating the penalty
proceedings."
The above view has been re-affirmed by the jurisdictional High Court in the
case of Super Metal Re Roller P. Ltd. In the present case, no such
satisfaction has been recorded by the AO and the DR also has not been able to
point out about recording of such satisfaction. Therefore, following the
binding decision of the Hon'ble Delhi High Court, it is held that penalty
proceedings were void ab initio. The judgments relied upon by the learned DR
are entirely on different issues and those decisions are not authority on the
issue arising in the present appeal. In the case of Jeevan Lal Sah (supra),
the Hon'ble Supreme Court held that after the amendment the decision of
Supreme Court in the case of Anwar Ali, (2002-TAXINDIAONLINE-190-SC-IT) 76 ITR
696 is no longer valid. Similar position was re-affirmed in the other cases
relied upon by the DR. Hence, the Supreme Court's decisions relied upon by the
learned DR are quite distinguishable and not on the point of issue. In view of
the above discussion, the order of CIT(A) is set aside and the penalty
sustained by him is hereby cancelled.
4\. In the result, appeal of the assessee is allowed.
the same being spelt out by the order of the assessing authority. Even at the
risk of repetition we would like to state that the assessment order does not
record the satisfaction as warranted by section 271 for initiating the penalty
proceedings."
The above view has been re-affirmed by the jurisdictional High Court in the
case of Super Metal Re Roller P. Ltd. In the present case, no such
satisfaction has been recorded by the AO and the DR also has not been able to
point out about recording of such satisfaction. Therefore, following the
binding decision of the Hon'ble Delhi High Court, it is held that penalty
proceedings were void ab initio. The judgments relied upon by the learned DR
are entirely on different issues and those decisions are not authority on the
issue arising in the present appeal. In the case of Jeevan Lal Sah (supra),
the Hon'ble Supreme Court held that after the amendment the decision of
Supreme Court in the case of Anwar Ali, (2002-TAXINDIAONLINE-190-SC-IT) 76 ITR
696 is no longer valid. Similar position was re-affirmed in the other cases
relied upon by the DR. Hence, the Supreme Court's decisions relied upon by the
proposition that after the insertion of Explanation 1 to Section 271 (1) (c),
AO is not required to record the satisfaction.
3\. We have considered the rival submissions of the parties. In our view, the
issue is squarely covered by the judgment of Hon'ble Delhi High Court in the
case of Ram Commercial Enterprises Ltd. (supra) wherein it was held as under:
"A bare reading of the provisions of Section 271 and the law laid down by the
Supreme Court makes its clear that it is the assessing authority which has to
form its own opinion and record its satisfaction before initiating the penalty
proceedings. Merely because the penalty proceedings have been initiated, it
cannot be assumed that such a satisfaction was arrived at in the absence of
the same being spelt out by the order of the assessing authority. Even at the
risk of repetition we would like to state that the assessment order does not
record the satisfaction as warranted by section 271 for initiating the penalty
proceedings."
The above view has been re-affirmed by the jurisdictional High Court in the
case of Super Metal Re Roller P. Ltd. In the present case, no such
satisfaction has been recorded by the AO and the DR also has not been able to
point out about recording of such satisfaction. Therefore, following the
binding decision of the Hon'ble Delhi High Court, it is held that penalty
proceedings were void ab initio. The judgments relied upon by the learned DR
are entirely on different issues and those decisions are not authority on the
issue arising in the present appeal. In the case of Jeevan Lal Sah (supra),
the Hon'ble Supreme Court held that after the amendment the decision of
Supreme Court in the case of Anwar Ali, (2002-TAXINDIAONLINE-190-SC-IT) 76 ITR
696 is no longer valid. Similar position was re-affirmed in the other cases
relied upon by the DR. Hence, the Supreme Court's decisions relied upon by the
learned DR are quite distinguishable and not on the point of issue. In view of
the above discussion, the order of CIT(A) is set aside and the penalty
sustained by him is hereby cancelled.
4\. In the result, appeal of the assessee is allowed.
the same being spelt out by the order of the assessing authority. Even at the
risk of repetition we would like to state that the assessment order does not
record the satisfaction as warranted by section 271 for initiating the penalty
proceedings."
The above view has been re-affirmed by the jurisdictional High Court in the
case of Super Metal Re Roller P. Ltd. In the present case, no such
satisfaction has been recorded by the AO and the DR also has not been able to
point out about recording of such satisfaction. Therefore, following the
binding decision of the Hon'ble Delhi High Court, it is held that penalty
proceedings were void ab initio. The judgments relied upon by the learned DR
are entirely on different issues and those decisions are not authority on the
issue arising in the present appeal. In the case of Jeevan Lal Sah (supra),
the Hon'ble Supreme Court held that after the amendment the decision of
Supreme Court in the case of Anwar Ali, (2002-TAXINDIAONLINE-190-SC-IT) 76 ITR
696 is no longer valid. Similar position was re-affirmed in the other cases
relied upon by the DR. Hence, the Supreme Court's decisions relied upon by the
