Delhi District Court
Sunil Kumar ...Complainant vs . on 8 April, 2009
Author: Sh. Dig Singh
            IN THE COURT OF SH. DIG VINAY SINGH, ADDITIONAL CHIEF METROPOLITAN 
                                                  MAGISTRATE­03 (IPR), ROHINI, DELHI
                In re:                                 
                 SUNIL KUMAR                                       ...COMPLAINANT
                VS.
                MUKESH KUMAR                                       ...convict
                CC NO.155/1/2008    
                U/s.138 N.I. ACT                                                                                              
                P.S. ADARSH NAGAR 
                                                       ORDER ON SENTENCE
                 08.4.2009
                         Pr.   Mr. Jagjit Singh, Adv. Proxy Counsel for the complainant is present with 
                               complainant.
                               Convict Mukesh Kumar is present on bail with counsel Mr. Rajender Yadav, 
                               Adv.
                 1.
Convict has been found guilty for the offence u/s.138 of N.I. Act by this
be liable for a further imprisonment for a period of 45 days S.I. In the case
of Hari Singh Vs. Sukhbir Singh, 1988(4)SCC 511 and also in the case of
Suganthi Suresh Kumar Vs. Jagdishan, 2002 Cr.LJ 1003=2002 AIR SC 681, Hon'ble
Supreme Court has held that In default of compensation, imprisonment can be
ordered.
5\. The earlier personal bond/surety bond of the convict are cancelled. He is
ordered to be taken into custody for serving of the sentence. Copy of the
judgement and sentence be supplied to the convict free of cost immediately.
( DIG VINAY SINGH ) ACMM­03(IPR) ROHINI/DELHI/08.4.2009 File is again taken up
as an application u/s.389 Cr.PC is filed by the convict for suspension of
sentence.
                  Pr.         Counsel Mr. Rajender Yadav, Adv. is present.
                  1.Offence   is   bailable.     Convict   did   not   misuse   the   liberty   of   bail.     Till   filing   of 
appeal/till expiry of 30 days from today, whichever is earlier, the convict is
admitted to bail on furnishing personal bond and surety bond in the sum of
Rs.20,000/­ with one surety in like amount. Bonds tendered and accepted till
Convict has been found guilty for the offence u/s.138 of N.I. Act by this
Court vide judgement dated 04.4.2009.
2\. Arguments on sentence heard. Ld. Counsel for the convict requests for a
lenient view on the ground that the convict is suffering from 'Fistula' and
that he is to be operated upon soon. It is also claimed that convict has four
children, who all are dependent on him besides the parents of convict. On this
ground, it is claimed that a lenient view may be taken against the convict.
3\. In this case, the convict has been found guilty for the dishonour of
cheque for an amount of Rs.44,000/­. There is no previous conviction of the
convict brought to the knowledge of this Court. Keeping in view all the facts
and circumstances and the grounds taken by the counsel for convict for a
lenient view, in my considered view, following punishment shall meet the ends
of justice. Request of probation is declined since cases of dishonour of
cheque are on the rise drastically. The functioning of the criminal Courts in
Delhi, is literally crumbled by the rise of such cases. As per an estimate, in
Delhi out of 7.5 lacs criminal cases, around 4.5 lacs cases are only
pertaining to dishonour of cheque. Sufficient deterrent punishment needs to be
given in such offences which can act as deterrent not only to the convict, but
also to other offenders. In the case of Suganthi Suresh Kumar Vs. Jagdishan,
2002 Cr.LJ 1003=2002 AIR SC 681, it is held by Hon'ble Supreme Court that
adequate punishment needs to be Order on sentence in SUNIL VS. MUKESH/CC
NO.155/1/08/U.S.138N.I.ACT/CONVITED/08.04.2009/Page 1 of 2 given in the cases
of dishonour of cheque and grossly inadequate punishment is improper.
4\. Accordingly, the convict is sentenced to a period of six months S.I. No
fine is imposed. Besides imprisonment of six months S.I., the convict is also
directed to pay compensation to the complainant u/s.357(3) of Cr.PC. The
cheque in question is dated 04.11.2008, which was dishonoured i.e. six months
time has been passed from the date of cheque. Besides this, the complainant
must have incurred some expenses in prosecution of this complaint and it must
have also led to unnecessary harassment. Therefore, in my considered view,
convict shall pay a compensation amount of Rs.65,000/­ u/s.357(3) of Cr.PC
within 45 days from the last day of appeal, failing which, the convict shall
be liable for a further imprisonment for a period of 45 days S.I. In the case
of Hari Singh Vs. Sukhbir Singh, 1988(4)SCC 511 and also in the case of
Suganthi Suresh Kumar Vs. Jagdishan, 2002 Cr.LJ 1003=2002 AIR SC 681, Hon'ble
Supreme Court has held that In default of compensation, imprisonment can be
ordered.
5\. The earlier personal bond/surety bond of the convict are cancelled. He is
ordered to be taken into custody for serving of the sentence. Copy of the
judgement and sentence be supplied to the convict free of cost immediately.
( DIG VINAY SINGH ) ACMM­03(IPR) ROHINI/DELHI/08.4.2009 File is again taken up
as an application u/s.389 Cr.PC is filed by the convict for suspension of
sentence.
                  Pr.         Counsel Mr. Rajender Yadav, Adv. is present.
                  1.Offence   is   bailable.     Convict   did   not   misuse   the   liberty   of   bail.     Till   filing   of 
appeal/till expiry of 30 days from today, whichever is earlier, the convict is
admitted to bail on furnishing personal bond and surety bond in the sum of
Rs.20,000/­ with one surety in like amount. Bonds tendered and accepted till
08.5.2009. Bonds will be listed separately on 08.5.2009. The present file be
consigned to Record Room. ANNOUNCED IN OPEN COURT ON 08.4.2009. ( DIG VINAY
SINGH ) ACMM­03(IPR) ROHINI/DELHI/08.4.2009 Order on sentence in SUNIL VS.
MUKESH/CC NO.155/1/08/U.S.138N.I.ACT/CONVITED/08.04.2009/Page 2 of 2
be liable for a further imprisonment for a period of 45 days S.I. In the case
of Hari Singh Vs. Sukhbir Singh, 1988(4)SCC 511 and also in the case of
Suganthi Suresh Kumar Vs. Jagdishan, 2002 Cr.LJ 1003=2002 AIR SC 681, Hon'ble
Supreme Court has held that In default of compensation, imprisonment can be
ordered.
5\. The earlier personal bond/surety bond of the convict are cancelled. He is
ordered to be taken into custody for serving of the sentence. Copy of the
judgement and sentence be supplied to the convict free of cost immediately.
( DIG VINAY SINGH ) ACMM­03(IPR) ROHINI/DELHI/08.4.2009 File is again taken up
as an application u/s.389 Cr.PC is filed by the convict for suspension of
sentence.
                  Pr.         Counsel Mr. Rajender Yadav, Adv. is present.
                  1.Offence   is   bailable.     Convict   did   not   misuse   the   liberty   of   bail.     Till   filing   of 
appeal/till expiry of 30 days from today, whichever is earlier, the convict is
admitted to bail on furnishing personal bond and surety bond in the sum of
Rs.20,000/­ with one surety in like amount. Bonds tendered and accepted till
Convict has been found guilty for the offence u/s.138 of N.I. Act by this
Court vide judgement dated 04.4.2009.
2\. Arguments on sentence heard. Ld. Counsel for the convict requests for a
lenient view on the ground that the convict is suffering from 'Fistula' and
that he is to be operated upon soon. It is also claimed that convict has four
children, who all are dependent on him besides the parents of convict. On this
ground, it is claimed that a lenient view may be taken against the convict.
3\. In this case, the convict has been found guilty for the dishonour of
cheque for an amount of Rs.44,000/­. There is no previous conviction of the
convict brought to the knowledge of this Court. Keeping in view all the facts
and circumstances and the grounds taken by the counsel for convict for a
lenient view, in my considered view, following punishment shall meet the ends
of justice. Request of probation is declined since cases of dishonour of
cheque are on the rise drastically. The functioning of the criminal Courts in
Delhi, is literally crumbled by the rise of such cases. As per an estimate, in
Delhi out of 7.5 lacs criminal cases, around 4.5 lacs cases are only
pertaining to dishonour of cheque. Sufficient deterrent punishment needs to be
given in such offences which can act as deterrent not only to the convict, but
also to other offenders. In the case of Suganthi Suresh Kumar Vs. Jagdishan,
2002 Cr.LJ 1003=2002 AIR SC 681, it is held by Hon'ble Supreme Court that
be liable for a further imprisonment for a period of 45 days S.I. In the case
of Hari Singh Vs. Sukhbir Singh, 1988(4)SCC 511 and also in the case of
Suganthi Suresh Kumar Vs. Jagdishan, 2002 Cr.LJ 1003=2002 AIR SC 681, Hon'ble
Supreme Court has held that In default of compensation, imprisonment can be
ordered.
5\. The earlier personal bond/surety bond of the convict are cancelled. He is
ordered to be taken into custody for serving of the sentence. Copy of the
judgement and sentence be supplied to the convict free of cost immediately.
( DIG VINAY SINGH ) ACMM­03(IPR) ROHINI/DELHI/08.4.2009 File is again taken up
as an application u/s.389 Cr.PC is filed by the convict for suspension of
sentence.
                  Pr.         Counsel Mr. Rajender Yadav, Adv. is present.
                  1.Offence   is   bailable.     Convict   did   not   misuse   the   liberty   of   bail.     Till   filing   of 
appeal/till expiry of 30 days from today, whichever is earlier, the convict is
admitted to bail on furnishing personal bond and surety bond in the sum of
Rs.20,000/­ with one surety in like amount. Bonds tendered and accepted till
Convict has been found guilty for the offence u/s.138 of N.I. Act by this
Court vide judgement dated 04.4.2009.
2\. Arguments on sentence heard. Ld. Counsel for the convict requests for a
lenient view on the ground that the convict is suffering from 'Fistula' and
that he is to be operated upon soon. It is also claimed that convict has four
children, who all are dependent on him besides the parents of convict. On this
ground, it is claimed that a lenient view may be taken against the convict.
3\. In this case, the convict has been found guilty for the dishonour of
cheque for an amount of Rs.44,000/­. There is no previous conviction of the
convict brought to the knowledge of this Court. Keeping in view all the facts
and circumstances and the grounds taken by the counsel for convict for a
lenient view, in my considered view, following punishment shall meet the ends
of justice. Request of probation is declined since cases of dishonour of
cheque are on the rise drastically. The functioning of the criminal Courts in
Delhi, is literally crumbled by the rise of such cases. As per an estimate, in
Delhi out of 7.5 lacs criminal cases, around 4.5 lacs cases are only
pertaining to dishonour of cheque. Sufficient deterrent punishment needs to be
given in such offences which can act as deterrent not only to the convict, but
also to other offenders. In the case of Suganthi Suresh Kumar Vs. Jagdishan,
2002 Cr.LJ 1003=2002 AIR SC 681, it is held by Hon'ble Supreme Court that
be liable for a further imprisonment for a period of 45 days S.I. In the case
of Hari Singh Vs. Sukhbir Singh, 1988(4)SCC 511 and also in the case of
Suganthi Suresh Kumar Vs. Jagdishan, 2002 Cr.LJ 1003=2002 AIR SC 681, Hon'ble
Supreme Court has held that In default of compensation, imprisonment can be
ordered.
5\. The earlier personal bond/surety bond of the convict are cancelled. He is
ordered to be taken into custody for serving of the sentence. Copy of the
judgement and sentence be supplied to the convict free of cost immediately.
( DIG VINAY SINGH ) ACMM­03(IPR) ROHINI/DELHI/08.4.2009 File is again taken up
as an application u/s.389 Cr.PC is filed by the convict for suspension of
sentence.
                  Pr.         Counsel Mr. Rajender Yadav, Adv. is present.
                  1.Offence   is   bailable.     Convict   did   not   misuse   the   liberty   of   bail.     Till   filing   of 
appeal/till expiry of 30 days from today, whichever is earlier, the convict is
admitted to bail on furnishing personal bond and surety bond in the sum of
Rs.20,000/­ with one surety in like amount. Bonds tendered and accepted till
Convict has been found guilty for the offence u/s.138 of N.I. Act by this
Court vide judgement dated 04.4.2009.
2\. Arguments on sentence heard. Ld. Counsel for the convict requests for a
lenient view on the ground that the convict is suffering from 'Fistula' and
that he is to be operated upon soon. It is also claimed that convict has four
children, who all are dependent on him besides the parents of convict. On this
ground, it is claimed that a lenient view may be taken against the convict.
3\. In this case, the convict has been found guilty for the dishonour of
cheque for an amount of Rs.44,000/­. There is no previous conviction of the
convict brought to the knowledge of this Court. Keeping in view all the facts
and circumstances and the grounds taken by the counsel for convict for a
lenient view, in my considered view, following punishment shall meet the ends
of justice. Request of probation is declined since cases of dishonour of
cheque are on the rise drastically. The functioning of the criminal Courts in
Delhi, is literally crumbled by the rise of such cases. As per an estimate, in
Delhi out of 7.5 lacs criminal cases, around 4.5 lacs cases are only
pertaining to dishonour of cheque. Sufficient deterrent punishment needs to be
given in such offences which can act as deterrent not only to the convict, but
also to other offenders. In the case of Suganthi Suresh Kumar Vs. Jagdishan,
2002 Cr.LJ 1003=2002 AIR SC 681, it is held by Hon'ble Supreme Court that
adequate punishment needs to be Order on sentence in SUNIL VS. MUKESH/CC
NO.155/1/08/U.S.138N.I.ACT/CONVITED/08.04.2009/Page 1 of 2 given in the cases
of dishonour of cheque and grossly inadequate punishment is improper.
4\. Accordingly, the convict is sentenced to a period of six months S.I. No
fine is imposed. Besides imprisonment of six months S.I., the convict is also
directed to pay compensation to the complainant u/s.357(3) of Cr.PC. The
cheque in question is dated 04.11.2008, which was dishonoured i.e. six months
time has been passed from the date of cheque. Besides this, the complainant
must have incurred some expenses in prosecution of this complaint and it must
have also led to unnecessary harassment. Therefore, in my considered view,
convict shall pay a compensation amount of Rs.65,000/­ u/s.357(3) of Cr.PC
be liable for a further imprisonment for a period of 45 days S.I. In the case
of Hari Singh Vs. Sukhbir Singh, 1988(4)SCC 511 and also in the case of
Suganthi Suresh Kumar Vs. Jagdishan, 2002 Cr.LJ 1003=2002 AIR SC 681, Hon'ble
Supreme Court has held that In default of compensation, imprisonment can be
ordered.
5\. The earlier personal bond/surety bond of the convict are cancelled. He is
ordered to be taken into custody for serving of the sentence. Copy of the
judgement and sentence be supplied to the convict free of cost immediately.
( DIG VINAY SINGH ) ACMM­03(IPR) ROHINI/DELHI/08.4.2009 File is again taken up
as an application u/s.389 Cr.PC is filed by the convict for suspension of
sentence.
                  Pr.         Counsel Mr. Rajender Yadav, Adv. is present.
                  1.Offence   is   bailable.     Convict   did   not   misuse   the   liberty   of   bail.     Till   filing   of 
appeal/till expiry of 30 days from today, whichever is earlier, the convict is
admitted to bail on furnishing personal bond and surety bond in the sum of
Rs.20,000/­ with one surety in like amount. Bonds tendered and accepted till
Convict has been found guilty for the offence u/s.138 of N.I. Act by this
Court vide judgement dated 04.4.2009.
2\. Arguments on sentence heard. Ld. Counsel for the convict requests for a
lenient view on the ground that the convict is suffering from 'Fistula' and
that he is to be operated upon soon. It is also claimed that convict has four
children, who all are dependent on him besides the parents of convict. On this
ground, it is claimed that a lenient view may be taken against the convict.
3\. In this case, the convict has been found guilty for the dishonour of
cheque for an amount of Rs.44,000/­. There is no previous conviction of the
convict brought to the knowledge of this Court. Keeping in view all the facts
and circumstances and the grounds taken by the counsel for convict for a
lenient view, in my considered view, following punishment shall meet the ends
of justice. Request of probation is declined since cases of dishonour of
cheque are on the rise drastically. The functioning of the criminal Courts in
Delhi, is literally crumbled by the rise of such cases. As per an estimate, in
Delhi out of 7.5 lacs criminal cases, around 4.5 lacs cases are only
pertaining to dishonour of cheque. Sufficient deterrent punishment needs to be
given in such offences which can act as deterrent not only to the convict, but
also to other offenders. In the case of Suganthi Suresh Kumar Vs. Jagdishan,
2002 Cr.LJ 1003=2002 AIR SC 681, it is held by Hon'ble Supreme Court that
adequate punishment needs to be Order on sentence in SUNIL VS. MUKESH/CC
NO.155/1/08/U.S.138N.I.ACT/CONVITED/08.04.2009/Page 1 of 2 given in the cases
of dishonour of cheque and grossly inadequate punishment is improper.
4\. Accordingly, the convict is sentenced to a period of six months S.I. No
fine is imposed. Besides imprisonment of six months S.I., the convict is also
directed to pay compensation to the complainant u/s.357(3) of Cr.PC. The
cheque in question is dated 04.11.2008, which was dishonoured i.e. six months
time has been passed from the date of cheque. Besides this, the complainant
must have incurred some expenses in prosecution of this complaint and it must
have also led to unnecessary harassment. Therefore, in my considered view,
convict shall pay a compensation amount of Rs.65,000/­ u/s.357(3) of Cr.PC
be liable for a further imprisonment for a period of 45 days S.I. In the case
of Hari Singh Vs. Sukhbir Singh, 1988(4)SCC 511 and also in the case of
Suganthi Suresh Kumar Vs. Jagdishan, 2002 Cr.LJ 1003=2002 AIR SC 681, Hon'ble
Supreme Court has held that In default of compensation, imprisonment can be
ordered.
5\. The earlier personal bond/surety bond of the convict are cancelled. He is
ordered to be taken into custody for serving of the sentence. Copy of the
judgement and sentence be supplied to the convict free of cost immediately.
( DIG VINAY SINGH ) ACMM­03(IPR) ROHINI/DELHI/08.4.2009 File is again taken up
as an application u/s.389 Cr.PC is filed by the convict for suspension of
sentence.
                  Pr.         Counsel Mr. Rajender Yadav, Adv. is present.
                  1.Offence   is   bailable.     Convict   did   not   misuse   the   liberty   of   bail.     Till   filing   of 
appeal/till expiry of 30 days from today, whichever is earlier, the convict is
admitted to bail on furnishing personal bond and surety bond in the sum of
Rs.20,000/­ with one surety in like amount. Bonds tendered and accepted till
