Madras High Court
New Hope Food Industries (P) ... vs Pioneer Bakeries (P) Limited on 20
December, 2007
     IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT MADRAS
    DATED  :  20 .12.2007
    CORAM
    THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE P.K. MISRA
     AND 
    THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE K.K. SASIDHARAN
    O.S.A.Nos.266 to 268 of 2007
    New Hope Food Industries (P) Limited
    rep.by its Managing Director
    Mr.A.Raja	
    Chinnasadayampalaym
    Moolapalayam (P.O.)
    Erode-638 002.						 ..Appellant
    						Vs.
    1.Pioneer Bakeries (P) Limited
      52, Chettipalayam Cross
      Poondurai Road
53\. We make it clear that the finding given on facts as above, are only for
the purpose of deciding the issue regarding grant of interlocutory injunction
and those findings will not come in the way of the learned Single Judge to
decide the suit along with the two earlier suits on its own merits without in
any way being influenced by the observations made above.
54\. In the result, all the appeals are allowed by setting aside the order
dated 7.9.2007 of the learned Single Judge and consequently O.A.Nos.708 to 710
of 2007 in C.S.No.504 of 2007 are allowed as prayed for subject to the above
observations. No costs.
    							(P.K.M.,J)       (K.K.S.,J) 								       20 .12.2007
    Index   : Yes / No
    Internet: Yes / No
    Tr/
    P.K. MISRA, J   
    and       
    K.K. SASIDHARAN, J  
      Poondurai Road
      Erode-638 002.
    2. Mr.K.Jayakrishnan					..Respondents				   
     For Appellant   	:  Mr.Arvind P.Dattar, SC
    				for M/s.A.A.Mohan
     For Respondents      :  Ms.P.S.Raman, SC
    			        Mr.P.H.Arvind Pandian		
    - - -
    J U D G E M E N T 
K.K.SASIDHARAN, J These original side appeals are directed against the common
order dated 7.9.2007 in O.A.Nos.708 to 710 of 2003 in C.S.No.504 of 2007
whereby the learned Single Judge rejected the prayer for injunction pending
suit.
2\. The appellant herein filed a suit in C.S.No.504 of 2007 against the
respondents for the following reliefs.
"(a) A permanent injunction restraining the defendants by themselves, their
associate companies, heirs, legal representatives, successors in business,
assigns, servants, agents, transporters, distributors, printers, stockists,
wholesalers, dealers, retailers or any one claiming through or under them from
committing acts of infringement of plaintiff's registered trade mark "MILKA
WONDER CAKE" by use of trade mark "MILKA" or any other mark similar thereto in
respect of cakes.
(b) A permanent injunction restraining the defendants by themselves, their
directors, heirs, legal representatives, successors in business, assigns,
servants, agents, transporters, distributors, printers, stockists,
wholesalers, dealers, retailers or any one claiming through or under them from
committing acts of infringement of copyright of plaintiff's artistic work in
the capsule shaped device and the trade mark "MILKA" depicted thereon by use
of an almost identical and nearly similar capsule shaped device and the
trademark "MILKA" depicted thereon amounting to substantial reproduction of
the plaintiff's copyright or in any manner whatsoever.
(c) A permanent injunction restraining the defendants by themselves, their
directors, heirs, legal representatives, successors in successors in business,
assigns, servants, agents, transporters, distributors, printers, stockists,
wholesalers, dealers, retailers advertisers or nay one claiming through or
under them from manufacturing, distributing, marketing, selling, offering for
sale, advertising or in any manner dealing in cakes, chat items, snacks or
items other than breads by using the name "MILKA" which is identical to the
plaintiff's mark "MILKA" either as a trade mark or trade name or trading style
amounting to passing off their products as and for the plaintiff's products or
in any other manner whatsoever.
(d) The defendants be ordered to deliver up for destruction all the wrappers,
pouches, cartons, labels, packaging materials, advertisement materials, seals,
dies, blocks, screen prints, pamphlets, name boards, brouchers, trade
literatures and such other materials bearing the trademark "MILKA" which is
identical to the plaintiff's trade mark "MILKA".
(e) The defendants be ordered to pay a sum of Rs.10,05,000/- being
compensatory and punitive damage for committing acts of infringement of
copyright and passing off in various manner as narrated in the plaint.
(f) A preliminary decree be passed in favour of the plaintiff to render true
and faithful accounts of profits earned by the defendants by sale of cakes and
food items other than breads using the trademark "MILKA" and a final decree be
passed in favour of the plaintiff for the amount of profits thus found to have
been made by the defendants after the latter have rendered accounts."
3\. In the said suit, the appellant filed O.A.Nos.708 to 710 of 2007 for
interlocutory injunction.
4\. The appellant preferred O.A.No.708 of 2007 for injunction restraining the
respondents from committing acts of infringement in respect of their trade
mark "MILKA WONDER CAKE" by using the trademark "MILKA" or any other mark
similar thereto in respect of cakes.
5\. In O.A.No.709 of 2007,the appellant prayed for injunction against the
respondents pertaining to infringement of copyright in respect of their
artistic work MILA WONDER CAKE wrapper/pouch and the trade mark "MILKA"
depicted thereon.
6\. In O.A.No.710 of 2007 the appellant prayed for injunction in respect of
cakes, chat items, snacks or items other than bread by using the name "MILKA"
by the respondents.
7\. The case of the appellant as highlighted in the affidavit filed in support
of the injunction are as follows:-
8\. The appellant company was incorporated in the year 1996 with the main
object of dealing in cakes, biscuits and other confectionary items and bakery
products and they are in the business of manufacturing and marketing cakes
since the year 1997 under the trade names "MILKA" and "MILKA WONDER CAKE".
They have been using the trade mark continuously since then in respect of
cakes. The appellant is the owner of the copy right in the artistic work Milka
and Milka Wonder Cake wrapper/pouch having distinctive colour scheme, get up,
lay out and artistic features and the same was registered with the Registrar
of Copyrights under No.54521/97 dated 30.12.1997 and as such all the rights,
title and interest in the said artistic work vested exclusively with the
appellant. The appellant is also the registered proprietor of trade mark
"MILKA WONDER CAKE" under No.1242328 dated 9th October, 2003 in class No.30 in
respect of cake and the trade mark "MILKA WONDER CAKE" is also registered
under No.732507 dated 30th December, 1996 in class 30 in respect of cakes,
biscuits and other confectionary items. It is the further case of the
appellant that they have made extensive sale of cakes bearing the trade marks
"MILKA" and "MILKA WONDER CAKE" in distinctive wrapper/pouch all over the
country since the year 1997. The cakes sold by the appellant under the said
trade mark have captured huge market resulted in acquiring immense reputation
and goodwill. The appellant has also shown their sales turn over for cakes
under the trade marks "MILKA" and "MILKA WONDER CAKE" from 1996-97 onwards
till 2004-2005. The appellant also claims that they have spent substantial
amount towards sales promotion, advertisement and publicity for marketing
cakes under the trade mark "MILKA" and "MILKA WONDER CAKE" in distinctive
wrapper/pouch and by virtue of the long, continuous, extensive use and wide
publicity, the appellant has acquired exclusive right to use the trade marks
"MILKA" and "MILKA WONDER CAKE". The appellant contended that the use of any
such similar trade mark and artistic work for cakes is bound to cause
confusion and deception and amounts to misuse. According to the appellant the
trade mark "MILKA" is exclusively identified by the trade and public with the
cakes marketed by them.
9\. The appellant further submitted that one Mr.V.M.Joseph, Mr.A. Arumugham
and the second respondent were the founder promoters of the first respondent
company, which was incorporated in the year 1989 and Mr.V.M.Joseph was the
Managing Director of the said company and the first respondent company has all
along being engaged in the business of manufacturing and marketing breads
only. In the year 1997 the said V.M.Joseph in his individual capacity had
applied for registration of the trade mark "MILKA" as per application
NO.759880 and "WONDER" as per application No.759879, both dated 8.7.1997 in
respect of cakes included in class 30. Mr.V.M.Joseph had also applied for
registration of the trade mark MILKA WONDER CAKE label as per application
No732507 dated 30.12.1996 in class 30 in respect of cakes, biscuits and
confectionary items, cooked dishes for human consumption etc., falling in
class 30. The said registration has been assigned to the appellant as per
agreement dated 30.11.2000 and in the said document the second respondent was
an attesting witness. The appellant thus became the proprietor of the
aforesaid trade marks "MILKA", "WONDER" and "MILKA WONDER CAKE" in respect of
cakes.
10\. The appellant contended that until the year 2003 all the promoters were
together and Mr.V.M.Joseph was the Managing Director of the group companies
and there was no dispute at all. Subsequently Mr.V.M.Joseph fell ill and there
was re-organisation of management. Accordingly a Memorandum of Understanding
was prepared on 19.6.2003 in and by which it was agreed that the appellant is
entitled to use the trade mark "MILKA" for cakes and another company by name
Milka Nutriments Private Limited is entitled to use the trade mark "MILKA" for
biscuits and the respondents to manufacture breads using the trade mark
"MILKA". The said Memorandum of Understanding was handed over to respondent
No.2 for his signature but he did not sign the same and retained with him.
Difference of opinion aggravated between the parties which resulted in filing
C.S.No.361 of 2004 by the appellant herein and C.S.No.790 of 2004 by the
respondents herein against each other and the said suits are still pending. It
is the further case of the appellant that the respondents started
manufacturing cakes in the year 2007 which resulted in filing the present suit
in as much as the respondent committed acts of infringement of appellant's
registered trade mark "MILKA WONDER CAKE" by using the trade mark "MILKA."
11\. Along with the suit the appellant also filed O.A.Nos.708 to 710 of 2007
for interim injunction pending disposal of the suit and in the affidavit filed
in support of the injunction application the appellant has narrated the course
of events which resulted in filing the suit as well as the interlocutory
applications.
12\. The second respondent as the Managing Director of the first respondent
company filed a common counter affidavit in the interlocutory applications and
opposed the prayer. According to the respondents, the appellant was granted
the limited licence to use the artistic work "MILKA" under the agreement dated
1.11.1996 so as to enable them to manufacture breads and the said agreement
did not permit the appellant to use the trade mark "MILKA" for the purpose of
manufacturing and selling cakes and other bakery products. It is the case of
the respondents that the first respondent is manufacturing cakes since the
year 2004 and they continued to manufacture, market and sell the cakes in the
name and style "MILKA TALENT CAKE" and they are the prior user of trade mark
"MILKA" and the artistic work contained therein. The respondents also alleged
collusion between the appellant and Mr.V.M.Joseph and as according to the
respondents in the earlier suit there was no interim order in favour of the
appellant and both the learned Single Judge as well as the Division Bench
negatived the prayer made for injunction at the instance of the appellant.
Therefore the respondents prayed for dismissing the applications as well as
the main suit.
13\. The appellant has filed a reply affidavit in answer to the common counter
affidavit filed by the respondents wherein he contended that the appellant is
a user and registered proprietor of the trade mark "MILKA" in respect of
cakes.
14\. The learned Single Judge having found that there is no prima facie case
in favour of the appellant dismissed the applications, against which the
unsuccessful petitioners in O.A.Nos.708 to 710 of 2007 have preferred these
appeals.
15\. In the above factual matrix, we have heard Mr.Aravind P.Datrar, learned
Senior Counsel for the appellant and Mr.P.S.Raman, learned Senior Counsel for
the respondents.
16\. The learned Senior Counsel for the appellant took us through the entire
pleadings and contended that the finding of the learned Single Judge in the
applications for interim injunction is perse erroneous and as such it is
necessarily to be set aside in these appeals. The learned Senior Counsel
further contended that in the face of the trade mark registration obtained by
the appellants in class No.30 under No.732507 dated 30.12.1996 and trade mark
number 1242328 dated 9.10.2003 both in respect of cakes under class 30, the
learned Single Judge should have considered the prima facie case in favour of
the appellant. It is the further contention of the learned Senior Counsel that
the agreement dated 1.11.1996 relied on by the learned Single Judge to reject
the prayer for injunction is in fact relates to bread only and it has nothing
to do with cakes and the learned Single Judge failed to consider the factum of
production of cakes by the appellant right from 1997. Ultimately the learned
Senior Counsel sought interference in the order impugned in these appeals and
according to the learned Senior Counsel the finding of the learned Judge is
perverse and capricious.
17\. The learned Senior Counsel for the respondents supported the order of the
learned Single Judge and contended that temporary injunction being purely an
equitable relief to be granted keeping in view the balance of convenience,
existence of prima facie case and irreparable injury and as the appellant
failed to prove these fundamental factors, the learned single Judge was
perfectly correct in rejecting the prayer for injunction. By placing reliance
on the certificate dated 2.9.1997 issued by the Assistant Registrar of Trade
Marks, Mumbai, the learned Senior Counsel contended that the appellant played
fraud on the authorities as in the copy right application they have given
intimation that New Hope Industries and Pioneer Bakeries Limited are one and
the same and accordingly got the copy right registered. With respect to the
trade mark obtained by the appellant for cakes in class 30, learned Senior
Counsel submitted that the respondents have already initiated proceedings for
rectification and the same is now pending before the Intellectual Property
Appellate Tribunal, Chennai. The learned Senior Counsel also took us through
the earlier order of this court dated 16.7.2004 rejecting the similar prayer
sought by the appellant in O.A.Nos.360 and 361 of 2004 in C.S.No.361 of 2004,
which was confirmed in appeal as per judgment dated 1.12.2004 in O.S.A.Nos.267
to 270 of 2004.
18\. The action for infringement is a remedy provided by the statute on a
registered holder of the trade mark in case of any violation of his right to
use his trade mark exclusively for his goods. Therefore when the plaintiff
comes to the court with a complaint of infringement by the defendant and if it
is found that the defendant is using the plaintiff's trade mark, an injunction
will be issued in favour of the plaintiff restraining the defendant from using
the trade mark. However Section 34 is an exception to this, inasmuch as
registration of trade mark cannot be used against a trader taking shelter
under the concept of prior user. Of course prior user must be continuous or
not intermittent or seasonal. Therefore prior user assumes significance in an
action for infringement.
19\. However disposal of suit for injunction often takes time, given the
pendency of cases in courts and as such the suit for permanent injunction in
respect of infringement of trade mark invariably accompanied by an application
for temporary injunction pending disposal of the main suit. The grant of
injunction being an equitable remedy provided under the Specific Relief Act is
governed by the principles of prima facie case, balance of convenience and
irreparable injury.
20\. In the case of SEEMA ARSHAD ZAHEER & ORS v. MUNICIPAL CORPORATION OF
GREATER MUMBARI & ORS. (2006(5) Scale 263) the Apex Court laid down the
salient principles governing the grant of injunction thus:-
"The discretion of the court is exercised to grant a temporary injunction only
when the following requirements are made out by the plaintiff: (i) existence
of a prima facie case as pleaded, necessitating protection of plaintiff's
rights by issue of a temporary injunction; (ii) when the need for protection
of plaintiff's right is compared with or weighed against the need for
protection of defendant's right or likely infringement of defendant's rights,
the balance of convenience tilting in favour of plaintiff; and (iii) clear
possibility of irreparable injury being caused to plaintiff if the temporary
injunction is not granted. In addition, temporary injunction being an
equitable relief, the discretion to grant such relief will be exercised only
when the plaintiff's conduct is free from blame and he approaches the court
with clean hands."
21\. In the case of RAMDEV FOOD PRODUCTS PVT. LTD. v. ARVINDBHAI RAMBHAI PATEL
& OTHERS (2006(8) Scale 631), the Apex Court considered the question of prima
facie case and balance of convenience and held as follows:-
"116. Registration of a trade mark and user thereof per se may lead to the
conclusion that the plaintiff has a prima facie case, however, existence
thereof would also depend upon the determination of the defences raised on
behalf of the respondents. The appellant has raised a triable issue. The same
by itself although may not be sufficient to establish a prima facie case but
in view of our findings aforementioned, we are satisfied that the appellant
has been able to establish existence of a legal right in itself and violation
of the registered trade mark on the part of the respondents. We have also
considered the comparable strength of the cases of the parties and are of the
opinion that the case of the plaintiff-appellant stands on a better footing
than the defendants-respondents.
117\. A question as regards the matter relating to grant of injunction has
been dealt in S.M.Dvechem Ltd.v. Cadbury (India) Ltd. 2000(5) SCC 573) wherein
upon noticing a large number of decisions including Colgate Palmolive (India)
Ltd. v. Hindustan Lever Limited ((1999) 7 S.C.C. 1) as also the subsequent
distinction made in respect of the decision of the House of Lords in American
Cyanamid v. Ethicon Ltd. ((1975 1 ALL ER 853), it was stated:
"....Therefore, in trademark matters, it is now necessary to go into the
question of "comparable strength" of the cases of either party, apart from
balance of convenience.
118\. In M/s Transmission Corporation of A.P.Ltd., v. M/s. Lanco Kondapalli
Power Pvt.Ltd. (JT 2005(10) SC 542), it was held:
"The interim direction ordinarily would precede finding of a prima facie case.
When existence of a prima facie case is established, the Court shall consider
the other relevant factors, namely, balance of convenience and irreparable
injuries. The High Court in its impugned judgment although not directly but
indirectly has considered this aspect of the matter when on merit it noticed
that the Appellant has raised a dispute as regard payment of an excess amount
of Rs.35 crores although according to the Respondent a sum of Rs.132 crores is
due to it from the Appellant and the Appellant had been paying the amount for
the last two years as per the contract.
Conduct of the parties is also a relevant factor. If the parties had been
acting in a particular manner for a long time upon interpreting the terms and
conditions of the contract, if pending determination of the lis, an order is
passed that the parties would continue to do so, the same would not render the
decision as an arbitrary one, as was contended by Mr.Rao. Even the Appellant
had prayed for adjudication at the hands of the Commission in the same manner.
Thus, it itself thought that the final relief would be granted only by the
Arbitrator."
121\. Relief by way of interlocutory injunction would be material in a suit
for infringement of trade mark. Balance of convenience, however would have a
vital role to play.
123\. Kerly's Law of Trade Marks and Trade Names, Thirteenth Edition states as
under about the general test for grant of an interim injunction.
"In trade-mark infringement causes irreparable damage, in this sense, is
relatively easily shown, since infringement may easily destroy the value of a
mark or at least nullify expensive advertising in a way that is hard to
quantify for the purposes of an inquiry into damages. This has more recently
come to be referred to, in cases where the defendant's conduct is not directly
damaging but merely reduces the distinctive character of the claimant's mark,
as "dilution"....
.....In particular, although it is usually neither necessary nor appropriate
to assess the degree of probability of success which the claimant's action has
(provided that it is arguable, and subject to the principle of American
Cyanamid that the merits may be resorted to as a 'tie-breaker' if the balance
of convenience is very even) in trade mark and passing off cases, it is very
hard to avoid doing so, since the better the claimant's case on the likelihood
of deception (frequently the major issue) the greater the harm which he is
likely to suffer. Accordingly, in appropriate cases, where the state of the
evidence permits it, the court may seek to weigh up the merits in deciding
whether to grant interim relief."
124\. Thus, when a prima facie case is made out and balance of convenience is
in favour of the appellant, it may not be necessary to show more than loss of
goodwill and reputation to fulfil the condition of irreparable injury. In
fact, if the first two pre-requisites are fulfilled, in trade mark actions
irreparable loss can be presumed to have taken place.
125\. The expression "irreparable injury" is that sense would have established
injury which the plaintiff is likely to suffer."
22\. Keeping in view the principles laid down by the Supreme Court in the
matter of temporary injunction by exercise of discretion we have perused the
order of the learned Single Judge impugned in these appeals.
23\. The learned single Judge negatived the prayer for injunction mainly on
the following reasons:-
"(a) As per agreement dated 1.11.1996 the appellant was granted permission
only to manufacture breads. Therefore the appellant is not right in their
contention that they are manufacturing cakes also from the year 1997.
(b) The registration now obtained by the appellant does not enable the
appellant to get over the inhibition that were pointed out in the earlier
orders of this court in C.S.No.361 of 2004 and O.S.A.Nos.267 to 270 of 2004.
(c) In the copy right registration application there is an indication that
both the companies namely, appellant and first respondent are one and the same
and as such the very registration is tainted with malafides.
(d) When the sale deed of unregistered trade mark executed by Mr.V.M.Joseph in
favour of the appellant on 30.11.2000 is considered in the face of the
agreement dated 1.11.1996 between the appellant and the first respondent,
serious doubt exist about the agreement dated 30.11.2000.
24\. In view of the rival submissions at the Bar, the only question that falls
for our consideration is whether the learned single Judge exercised the
discretion properly and in accordance with the principles governing the grant
of interlocutory injunction.
25\. It is an admitted case of the parties that in the year 1989 Mr.V.M.Joseph
established the company by name "Pioneer Bakeries Private Limited" in
association with the second respondent, Mr.A.Arumugam and two others. In the
year 1996, the appellant company was formed by Mr.V.M.Joseph along with
Mr.Raja, the Managing Director of the Appellant Company and three others.
Similarly in the year 1997 "Milka Nutriments Private Limited was also
established.
26\. The first respondent herein applied for the trademark "MILKA" under
No.513603B in respect of bread in class 30 and obtained the same under the
provisions of the Trade and Merchandise Marks Act, 1958. Similarly the first
respondent also obtained the registration of copy rights in the artistic work
in the wrapper as per NO.5212 of 1992 in accordance with the provisions of the
Copy Rights Act,1957. While so the first respondent found that M/s.New Star
Food Products, Kerala were manufacturing and selling bakery products under the
trade mark "MILKA". Therefore they filed C.S.No.891 of 1998 before this court
against M/s.New Star Food Products for injunction. In the plaint in C.S.No.891
of 1998, the first respondent has stated that they are manufacturing breads
under the trade mark "MILKA" and registered the trade mark "MILKA" in respect
of bread in class 30. No where it is stated in the plaint that the
registration of trade mark "MILKA" as per class 30 for bread covers cakes or
other bakery products evident thereby that the first respondent has been
manufacturing only breads and their registration was only in respect of
breads.
27\. The appellant also filed a suit against M/s New Star Food Products in
C.S.No.896 of 1998 before this court and in the plaint there is a clear
recital that the appellant conceived and adopted the trade mark "MILKA WONDER
CAKE" in the year 1989 and they have been using the said trade mark
continuously, openly and without any interruption ever since 1989. It is also
stated in the plaint that the appellant had applied for registration of the
trade mark "WONDER CAKE" and the same is pending before the trade marks
Registrar. Both the suits viz., C.S.NO.891 of 1998 and 896 of 1998 were filed
by Mr.V.M.Joseph in his capacity as the Managing Director of both the
companies. In both the suits injunction was granted as per dated 17.08.1989.
The averments in C.S.NO.891 of 1998 and 896 of 1998 prima facie discloses that
the appellant has been manufacturing cakes under the trade name "MILKA WONDER
CAKE" and the respondents have been manufacturing breads and as such the
appellant is the prior user in respect of cakes. As per sale deed of
unregistered trade mark and copy right dated 30.11.2000 Mr.V.M.Joseph applied
for trade marks "MILKA","MILKA WONDER CAKE" and "WONDER" as per application
numbers 759880,732507 and 759879 dated 08.07.1997,30.12.1996 and 08.07.1997
respectively and assigned the said unregistered trade marks in favour of the
appellant for consideration and in the said agreement the second respondent
admittedly signed as an attesting witness. Such an agreement is legally valid
in view of Sec 39 of the Trade Marks Act 1939\.
28\. Mr.P.S.Raman, learned Senior Counsel argued that the agreement was
attested by the second respondent at the instance of Mr.V.M.Joseph and he
signed the same without knowing the contents of the document and as such, the
learned Senior Counsel contended that the second respondent is not in the know
of things so far as the agreement dated 30.11.2000 is concerned.
29\. Admittedly the second respondent is also a person involved in the MILKA
venture and as all the companies were functioning smoothly, it cannot be said
atleast on a prima facie view that the second respondent has signed the
document without knowing the contents. The circumstances under which the
second respondent signed the document are all matters for evidence during
trial but prima facie it has to be accepted that the agreement was executed
with the knowledge of the second respondent.
30\. Based on the agreement dated 30.11.2000 the appellant obtained
registration of the trade marks "MILKA and "WONDER CAKE" in numbers 732507 and
1242328 both in class 30. Under Section 31 of the Trade Marks Act 1999 in all
legal proceedings relating to a trade mark registered under this act, the
original registration of trade mark and all subsequent assignments and
transmissions of the trademark shall be prima facie evidence of the validity
thereof. Therefore the registration of trade marks "MILKA" and "WONDER CAKE"
in the name of appellant are prima facie evidence of the valid trade marks and
the legal presumption could be rebutted only in a proceeding for
rectification. We are informed by the learned Senior Counsel for the
respondents that they have already initiated proceedings for rectification and
the same is now pending. Of course exclusive right obtained by registration
cannot operate against the prior user in view of Section 34 of the Trade Marks
Act.
31\. In the case of Ruston & Hornsby Ltd. v. Zamindara Engineering Co. (AIR
1970 Supreme Court 1649) the Apex Court observed that the action for
infringement is a statutory right and it is dependent upon the validity of the
registration and subject to other restrictions laid down in Sections 30, 34
and 35 of the Trade Marks Act.
32\. In the present suit Mr.V.M.Joseph the former Managing Director of the
first respondent company had sworn to an affidavit where in he had narrated
the working arrangement adopted in the respondent's company and in the sister
companies and according to the said affidavit the appellant was permitted to
manufacture cakes. The affidavit of another director of the first respondent
company by name Mr.A.Arumugam having 18% of the share in the company is also
on record. According to Mr.A. Arumugam there is no Board resolution of the
first respondent company permitting manufacture of cakes. The said deponent
also do not support the case of the respondents. Though the second respondent
attributed malafides against Mr.V.M.Joseph, nothing is stated about
Mr.A.Arumugam and as such prima facie the affidavit of Mr.A. Arumugam has to
be taken as correct.
33\. In the common counter affidavit filed by the respondents there is a clear
admission in para 8 to the effect that though the appellant was granted
limited license to use the artistic work "MILKA" in its products viz., bread
only, but he was using the same for cakes also. The respondents have also
stated in para 30 of the counter that they are having the licence to
manufacture cakes with effect from 2004, which is also a pointer to show that
the appellant is the prior user of "MILKA" for cakes as evident by the
Certificate of Registration as well as the averments in the earlier suit. The
main ground of attack of the respondents relates to the so called fraud played
by the appellant in getting the registration as according to the respondents,
it is only by misrepresenting the fact that the appellant and the first
respondent are one and the same, they obtained the registration. However on a
perusal of the said communication of the Assistant Registrar of trade mark
reveals that the application referred to in the said proceedings relates to
No.732507 which was assigned by Mr.V.M.Joseph to the appellants as per
agreement dated 30.11.2000 and No.513603 relates to the respondent's company.
Prima facie we are satisfied that the appellant is not guilty of false
representation since earlier both the companies were managed by the same set
of Directors.
34\. The Observations as contained in O.A.Nos.360 and 361 of 2004 and
O.S.A.Nos.267 to 270 of 2004 were only for deciding the injunction petition
and in the judgement in the appeal preferred against the order of the learned
Single Judge, the Division Bench in para 7 of the judgment has observed that
the finding in the order of the learned single judge is only for the purpose
of disposal of the application for the interim prayer and as such the same
cannot be relied on in any other proceedings against the appellant. Therefore
in view of the judgment dated 1.12.2004 in O.S.A.Nos.267 to 270 of 2004 the
finding of learned judge to the effect that the registration now obtained by
the appellant does not enable them to get over the inhibition they have
pointed out in the earlier orders in the suits filed by the appellant, is
clearly unsustainable.
35\. In the earlier suits filed by both the parties herein against each other,
there is no injunction in favour of either party and those suits are now
reported to be posted for trial.
36\. The appellant having obtained registration of trade mark, got a statutory
right for manufacturing cakes by using the trade mark "MILKA". Therefore prima
facie the use of trade mark "MILKA" by the respondents for the manufacture of
cakes amounts to infringement. Prima facie we are also satisfied that the
marks involved and goods involved are identical.
37\. Prima facie case in favour of the appellant as indicated above appears to
have been overlooked while exercising the discretion in the matter of
interlocutory injunction.
38\. We are conscious of the legal position that the appellate court normally
will not interfere with the discretionary order of the trial court unless such
orders are made totally disregarding the salient principles governing the law
of injunction.
39\. In the case of Wander Ltd. v. Antox India (P) Ltd., (1990 (Supp) SCC 727)
the Supreme Court in para 14 of the judgement observed thus:
"14. The appeals before the Division Bench were against the exercise of
discretion by the Single Judge. In such appeals, the appellate court will not
interfere with the exercise of discretion of the court of first instance and
substitute its own discretion except where the discretion has been shown to
have been exercised arbitrarily, or capriciously or perversely or where the
court had ignored the settled principles of law regulating grant or refusal of
interlocutory injunctions. An appeal against exercise of discretion is said to
be an appeal on principle. Appellate court will not reassess the material and
seek to reach a conclusion different from the one reached by the court below
if the one reached by that court was reasonably possible on the material. The
appellate court would normally not be justified in interfering with the
exercise of discretion under appeal solely on the ground that if it had
considered the matter at the trial stage it would have come to a contrary
conclusion. If the discretion ha s been exercised by the trial court
reasonably and in a judicial manner the fact that the appellate court would
have taken a different view may not justify interference with the trial
courts exercise of discretion. After referring to these principles
Gajendragadkar, J. in Printers (Mysore) Private Ltd. v. Pothan Joseph 1 : (SCR
721) ... These principles are well established, but as has been observed by
Viscount Simon in Charles Osenton & Co. v. Jhanaton 2 ...the law as to the
reversal by a court of appeal of an order made by a judge below in the
exercise of his discretion is well established, and any difficulty that arises
is due only to the application of well settled principles in an individual
case. The appellate judgment does not seem to defer to this principle."
40\. In the case of RAMDEV FOOD PRODUCTS v. ARVINDBHAI RAMBHAI PATEL (2006 (8)
scale 631) the Apex Court considered the issue regarding the appellate court's
jurisdiction to interfere with the discretionary order of the trial Judge and
held thus:-
"127. We are not oblivious that normally the appellate court would be slow to
interfere with the discretionary jurisdiction of the trial court.
128\. The grant of an interlocutory injunction is in exercise of discretionary
power and hence, the appellate courts will usually not interfere with it.
However appellate courts will substitute their discretion if they find that
discretion has been exercised arbitrarily, capriciously, perversely, or where
the court has ignored settled principles of law regulating the grant or
refusal of interlocutory injunctions. This principle has been stated by this
court time and time again.(see for example Wander Ltd. v. Antox India P.Ltd.
(1990 Supp.SCC 727, Lakshmikant v. Patel V.Chetan Bhai Shah (2202) 2 SCC 65
and Seema Arshad Zaheer v. MC of Greater Mumbai 2006(5) SCALE 263)
129\. The appellate court may not reassess the material and seek to reach a
conclusion different from the one reached by the court below if the one
reached by that court was reasonably possible on the material. The appellate
court would normally not be justified in interfering with the exercise of
discretion under appeal solely on the ground that if it had considered the
matter at the trial stage it would have come to a contrary conclusion.
130\. However, in this case the courts below proceeded on a prima facie
misconstruction of documents. They adopted and applied wrong standards. We,
therefore, are of the opinion that a case fro interference has been made out."
41\. In 2006(5) Scale 263 cited supra the Apex Court pointed out the instances
where the Appellate Court would be justified in interfering with the
discretionary order of the trial Judge and held as follows:-
"31. Where the lower court acts arbitrarily, capriciously or perversely in the
exercise of its discretion, the appellate court will interfere. Exercise of
discretion by granting a temporary injunction where there is "no material", or
refusing to grant a temporary injunction by ignoring the relevant documents
produced, are instances of action which are termed as arbitrary, capricious or
perverse. When we refer to acting on "no material" (similar to "no evidence)",
we refer not only to cases where there are total dearth of material, but also
to cases where there is no relevant material or where the material, taken as a
whole, is not reasonably capable of supporting the exercise of discretion. In
this case, there was "no material" to make out a prima facie case and
therefore, the High Court in its appellate jurisdiction, was justified in
interfering in the matter and vacating the temporary injunction granted by the
trial court."
42\. Having considered the pleadings and documents on record and the
respective contentions of the parties, we are convinced that the trial court
failed to consider the pleadings and documents in their proper perspective and
as such there was an improper exercise of discretion warranting interference
in these appeals.
43\. We venture to point out the materials produced by the appellant to show
the prima facie case in their favour.
"(a) C.S.No.896 of 1998 was filed by the appellant through the then Managing
Director Mr.V.M.Joseph. In the plaint in C.S.No.896 of 1998 it is clearly
stated that the appellant is manufacturing cakes from 1997 using the trade
name "MILKA". Similarly in C.S.No.891 of 1998 filed by the first respondent,
the contention is that the said respondent is manufacturing only bread. It is
to be noted here that at that point of time there were no disputes between the
parties and they were fighting against the common enemy. The above referred to
plaint averments shows that the appellant has been manufacturing cakes under
the trade name "MILKA" from 1997.
(b) The then Managing Director of the appellant as well as the first
respondent company Mr.Joseph made applications under Nos.759880, 759879 and
732507 for registration of trade marks "MILKA", "WONDER" and "MILKA WONDER
CAKE" respectively. The said applications were subsequently assigned to the
appellant as per document dated 30.11.2000 and the attesting witness to the
said document is none other than the second respondent/the managing director
of the first respondent company. The said assignment is permitted in law in
view of Section 39 of the Trade Marks Act.
(c) Based on the applications for registration of trade mark applied by
Mr.Joseph and the subsequent assignment in favour of the appellant as per
agreement dated 30.11.2000, the appellant obtained the registration of trade
marks and the registration so obtained is prima facie evidence of its validity
as provided under Section 28 of the Trade Marks Act.
(d) The registration of the trade mark produced by the respondents under class
30 as per No.513602B relates to bread only.
(e) In the affidavit filed by Mr.Arumugam, who is stated to be holding 18% of
the shares in the first respondent company, it is stated that the appellant
has been using the trade mark "MILKA" and "MILKA WONDER CAKE" in respect of
cakes since 1997; that in 2003 the respondents started manufacturing cakes
which was subsequently discontinued and again in February, 2007 the respondent
started manufacturing cakes using the trade mark "MILKA" and that there is no
Board Resolution of the first respondent company for the purpose of
manufacturing cakes and majority of the share holders have not approved such
an act on the part of the second respondent. The respondents have not
countered the said averments as contained in the affidavit of Mr.Arumugam and
as such, prima facie the said affidavit has to be taken to decide the issue
relating to temporary injunction.
(f) The respondents themselves admitted in para 18 of the counter about the
factum of manufacturing cakes by the appellant using the trade mark "MILKA".
(g) The finding of the learned Single Judge in the interlocutory application
in the suit filed by the appellant herein cannot be relied on now, in view of
the observations of the Division Bench in O.S.A.Nos.266 to 270 of 2007 to the
effect that those observations are only for the purpose of deciding the
interlocutory application and the same cannot be relied on subsequently for
any purpose.
44\. The learned Single Judge rejected the prayer for injunction mainly on two
grounds.
"(a) The appellant was permitted to manufacture only breads under the artistic
work "MILKA" as per agreement dated 1.11.1996.
(b) The artistic work Milka Wonder Cake wrapper was registered in the name of
the appellant by obtaining no objection certificate from the Registrar of
Trade Marks falsely representing that both the appellant and the first
respondent are one and the same."
45\. Prima facie, the reasoning given by the learned single Judge while
answering the two points referred to above appears to be factually incorrect.
The licence agreement dated 1.11.1996 was confined to bread alone. The said
agreement produced in page 41 of the paper book in volume 3 shows that the
agreement was only for copy right for the artistic work "MILKA" for breads and
the agreement is silent with regard to copy right for the word "MILKA" for
cakes. Trade mark "MILKA" was not the subject matter of the said agreement.
Similarly the said agreement do not make mention of cakes.
46\. The other contention with regard to misrepresentation made before the
Registrar of Trade Marks by using alias name loses it significance for the
reason that both the companies were managed by Mr.V.M.Joseph during the
material time. The application made by both the appellant as well as first
respondent finds place in the said certificate dated 2.9.1997 which is evident
from the registration of trade mark obtained by both the appellant and the
first respondent.
47\. 52. As observed by the Apex Court in the judgment reported in 2002(3)
S.C.C. 65 ( Laxmikant V. Patel v. Chetanbhai Shah,) . Refusal to grant
injunction in spite of the availability of facts, which are prima facie
established by overwhelming evidence and material available on record
justifying the grant thereof, occasion a failure of justice and such injury to
the plaintiff would not be capable of being undone at a later stage.
48\. We do not wish to comment more about the validity of the appellant's
trade mark in the present appeals as it would have a bearing on the same
issue, which is stated to be pending before the Intellectual Board in the
proceedings initiated by the respondents for rectification.
49\. While considering the question of balance of convenience, the possible
confusion that may cause in the mind of an ordinary person of average memory
and imperfect recollection along with the possibility of difficulties and loss
that may be caused to a party complaining infringement, has to be taken note
of. In the case on hand, the product is cake and it will not be possible for
an ordinary person to identify a particular product as both the products are
found to be more or less identical. Therefore it would definitely cause
confusion among the customers. The appellant has stated in so many words about
the investment and the amount spent by him for sales promotion. Considering
the prima facie evidence produced by the appellant and the balance of
convenience, we are convinced that the appellant is entitled for an order of
injunction pending disposal of the suit.
50\. In view of the reasons given above, we are of the considered view that
the learned Single Judge over looked the relevant documents produced in the
matter with regard to the prayer for injunction and as such failed to exercise
the discretion in accordance with the principles regulating the grant of
injunction by way of interlocutory injunction, pending disposal of the suit.
Therefore a case for our interference is made out in the matter and as such
the appeals deserve to be allowed.
51\. We are concerned with the interest of both parties during the
interlocutory stage pending disposal of the main suit. Therefore while
granting the relief of injunction in favour of the appellant as prayed for in
their applications for interlocutory injunction, we direct the appellant to
deposit a sum of Rs.20 lakhs every year to the credit of the suit in
C.S.No.504 of 2007 and the first of such deposit has to be made on or before
15.2.2008. If for any reason the suit is pending beyond 2008, the appellant
shall deposit at the rate of Rs.20 lakhs on or before 15th February every year
and such amount has to be deposited in Fixed Deposit in Indian Bank High Court
Branch initially for a period of three years. The appellant shall also
maintain true and correct accounts of the transactions in respect of their
sale of cakes and such accounts shall be produced once in three months before
the trial court.
52\. We are also informed that the earlier suits filed by both the parties are
now ripe for trial. It is in the interest of both the parties that the present
suit also to be tagged with the earlier suits and to be tried by the learned
Single Judge to avoid any conflicting decisions in the matter. We request the
learned single Judge to dispose the suits as expeditiously as possible and
preferably by the end of December, 2008.
53\. We make it clear that the finding given on facts as above, are only for
the purpose of deciding the issue regarding grant of interlocutory injunction
and those findings will not come in the way of the learned Single Judge to
decide the suit along with the two earlier suits on its own merits without in
any way being influenced by the observations made above.
54\. In the result, all the appeals are allowed by setting aside the order
dated 7.9.2007 of the learned Single Judge and consequently O.A.Nos.708 to 710
of 2007 in C.S.No.504 of 2007 are allowed as prayed for subject to the above
observations. No costs.
    							(P.K.M.,J)       (K.K.S.,J) 								       20 .12.2007
    Index   : Yes / No
    Internet: Yes / No
    Tr/
    P.K. MISRA, J   
    and       
    K.K. SASIDHARAN, J  
    Tr/
    PRE-DELIVERY JUDGMENT
    IN O.S.A.Nos.266 to 268 of 2007
    20.12.2007
53\. We make it clear that the finding given on facts as above, are only for
the purpose of deciding the issue regarding grant of interlocutory injunction
and those findings will not come in the way of the learned Single Judge to
decide the suit along with the two earlier suits on its own merits without in
any way being influenced by the observations made above.
54\. In the result, all the appeals are allowed by setting aside the order
dated 7.9.2007 of the learned Single Judge and consequently O.A.Nos.708 to 710
of 2007 in C.S.No.504 of 2007 are allowed as prayed for subject to the above
observations. No costs.
    							(P.K.M.,J)       (K.K.S.,J) 								       20 .12.2007
    Index   : Yes / No
    Internet: Yes / No
    Tr/
    P.K. MISRA, J   
    and       
    K.K. SASIDHARAN, J  
      Poondurai Road
      Erode-638 002.
    2. Mr.K.Jayakrishnan					..Respondents				   
     For Appellant   	:  Mr.Arvind P.Dattar, SC
    				for M/s.A.A.Mohan
     For Respondents      :  Ms.P.S.Raman, SC
    			        Mr.P.H.Arvind Pandian		
    - - -
    J U D G E M E N T 
K.K.SASIDHARAN, J These original side appeals are directed against the common
order dated 7.9.2007 in O.A.Nos.708 to 710 of 2003 in C.S.No.504 of 2007
whereby the learned Single Judge rejected the prayer for injunction pending
suit.
2\. The appellant herein filed a suit in C.S.No.504 of 2007 against the
respondents for the following reliefs.
"(a) A permanent injunction restraining the defendants by themselves, their
associate companies, heirs, legal representatives, successors in business,
assigns, servants, agents, transporters, distributors, printers, stockists,
wholesalers, dealers, retailers or any one claiming through or under them from
committing acts of infringement of plaintiff's registered trade mark "MILKA
53\. We make it clear that the finding given on facts as above, are only for
the purpose of deciding the issue regarding grant of interlocutory injunction
and those findings will not come in the way of the learned Single Judge to
decide the suit along with the two earlier suits on its own merits without in
any way being influenced by the observations made above.
54\. In the result, all the appeals are allowed by setting aside the order
dated 7.9.2007 of the learned Single Judge and consequently O.A.Nos.708 to 710
of 2007 in C.S.No.504 of 2007 are allowed as prayed for subject to the above
observations. No costs.
    							(P.K.M.,J)       (K.K.S.,J) 								       20 .12.2007
    Index   : Yes / No
    Internet: Yes / No
    Tr/
    P.K. MISRA, J   
    and       
    K.K. SASIDHARAN, J  
      Poondurai Road
      Erode-638 002.
    2. Mr.K.Jayakrishnan					..Respondents				   
     For Appellant   	:  Mr.Arvind P.Dattar, SC
    				for M/s.A.A.Mohan
     For Respondents      :  Ms.P.S.Raman, SC
    			        Mr.P.H.Arvind Pandian		
    - - -
    J U D G E M E N T 
K.K.SASIDHARAN, J These original side appeals are directed against the common
order dated 7.9.2007 in O.A.Nos.708 to 710 of 2003 in C.S.No.504 of 2007
whereby the learned Single Judge rejected the prayer for injunction pending
suit.
2\. The appellant herein filed a suit in C.S.No.504 of 2007 against the
respondents for the following reliefs.
"(a) A permanent injunction restraining the defendants by themselves, their
associate companies, heirs, legal representatives, successors in business,
assigns, servants, agents, transporters, distributors, printers, stockists,
wholesalers, dealers, retailers or any one claiming through or under them from
committing acts of infringement of plaintiff's registered trade mark "MILKA
53\. We make it clear that the finding given on facts as above, are only for
the purpose of deciding the issue regarding grant of interlocutory injunction
and those findings will not come in the way of the learned Single Judge to
decide the suit along with the two earlier suits on its own merits without in
any way being influenced by the observations made above.
54\. In the result, all the appeals are allowed by setting aside the order
dated 7.9.2007 of the learned Single Judge and consequently O.A.Nos.708 to 710
of 2007 in C.S.No.504 of 2007 are allowed as prayed for subject to the above
observations. No costs.
    							(P.K.M.,J)       (K.K.S.,J) 								       20 .12.2007
    Index   : Yes / No
    Internet: Yes / No
    Tr/
    P.K. MISRA, J   
    and       
    K.K. SASIDHARAN, J  
      Poondurai Road
      Erode-638 002.
    2. Mr.K.Jayakrishnan					..Respondents				   
     For Appellant   	:  Mr.Arvind P.Dattar, SC
    				for M/s.A.A.Mohan
     For Respondents      :  Ms.P.S.Raman, SC
    			        Mr.P.H.Arvind Pandian		
    - - -
    J U D G E M E N T 
K.K.SASIDHARAN, J These original side appeals are directed against the common
order dated 7.9.2007 in O.A.Nos.708 to 710 of 2003 in C.S.No.504 of 2007
whereby the learned Single Judge rejected the prayer for injunction pending
suit.
2\. The appellant herein filed a suit in C.S.No.504 of 2007 against the
respondents for the following reliefs.
"(a) A permanent injunction restraining the defendants by themselves, their
associate companies, heirs, legal representatives, successors in business,
assigns, servants, agents, transporters, distributors, printers, stockists,
wholesalers, dealers, retailers or any one claiming through or under them from
committing acts of infringement of plaintiff's registered trade mark "MILKA
WONDER CAKE" by use of trade mark "MILKA" or any other mark similar thereto in
respect of cakes.
(b) A permanent injunction restraining the defendants by themselves, their
directors, heirs, legal representatives, successors in business, assigns,
servants, agents, transporters, distributors, printers, stockists,
wholesalers, dealers, retailers or any one claiming through or under them from
committing acts of infringement of copyright of plaintiff's artistic work in
the capsule shaped device and the trade mark "MILKA" depicted thereon by use
of an almost identical and nearly similar capsule shaped device and the
trademark "MILKA" depicted thereon amounting to substantial reproduction of
the plaintiff's copyright or in any manner whatsoever.
53\. We make it clear that the finding given on facts as above, are only for
the purpose of deciding the issue regarding grant of interlocutory injunction
and those findings will not come in the way of the learned Single Judge to
decide the suit along with the two earlier suits on its own merits without in
any way being influenced by the observations made above.
54\. In the result, all the appeals are allowed by setting aside the order
dated 7.9.2007 of the learned Single Judge and consequently O.A.Nos.708 to 710
of 2007 in C.S.No.504 of 2007 are allowed as prayed for subject to the above
observations. No costs.
    							(P.K.M.,J)       (K.K.S.,J) 								       20 .12.2007
    Index   : Yes / No
    Internet: Yes / No
    Tr/
    P.K. MISRA, J   
    and       
    K.K. SASIDHARAN, J  
      Poondurai Road
      Erode-638 002.
    2. Mr.K.Jayakrishnan					..Respondents				   
     For Appellant   	:  Mr.Arvind P.Dattar, SC
    				for M/s.A.A.Mohan
     For Respondents      :  Ms.P.S.Raman, SC
    			        Mr.P.H.Arvind Pandian		
    - - -
    J U D G E M E N T 
K.K.SASIDHARAN, J These original side appeals are directed against the common
order dated 7.9.2007 in O.A.Nos.708 to 710 of 2003 in C.S.No.504 of 2007
whereby the learned Single Judge rejected the prayer for injunction pending
suit.
2\. The appellant herein filed a suit in C.S.No.504 of 2007 against the
respondents for the following reliefs.
"(a) A permanent injunction restraining the defendants by themselves, their
associate companies, heirs, legal representatives, successors in business,
assigns, servants, agents, transporters, distributors, printers, stockists,
wholesalers, dealers, retailers or any one claiming through or under them from
committing acts of infringement of plaintiff's registered trade mark "MILKA
WONDER CAKE" by use of trade mark "MILKA" or any other mark similar thereto in
respect of cakes.
(b) A permanent injunction restraining the defendants by themselves, their
directors, heirs, legal representatives, successors in business, assigns,
servants, agents, transporters, distributors, printers, stockists,
wholesalers, dealers, retailers or any one claiming through or under them from
committing acts of infringement of copyright of plaintiff's artistic work in
the capsule shaped device and the trade mark "MILKA" depicted thereon by use
of an almost identical and nearly similar capsule shaped device and the
trademark "MILKA" depicted thereon amounting to substantial reproduction of
the plaintiff's copyright or in any manner whatsoever.
53\. We make it clear that the finding given on facts as above, are only for
the purpose of deciding the issue regarding grant of interlocutory injunction
and those findings will not come in the way of the learned Single Judge to
decide the suit along with the two earlier suits on its own merits without in
any way being influenced by the observations made above.
54\. In the result, all the appeals are allowed by setting aside the order
dated 7.9.2007 of the learned Single Judge and consequently O.A.Nos.708 to 710
of 2007 in C.S.No.504 of 2007 are allowed as prayed for subject to the above
observations. No costs.
    							(P.K.M.,J)       (K.K.S.,J) 								       20 .12.2007
    Index   : Yes / No
    Internet: Yes / No
    Tr/
    P.K. MISRA, J   
    and       
    K.K. SASIDHARAN, J  
