Delhi High Court
Federation Of Ashok Vihar ... vs Union Of India And Ors. on 27 May, 1994
Equivalent citations: 1994 IAD Delhi 227, 55 (1994) DLT 62, 1994 (29) DRJ 473
Author: K S Bhat
Bench: K Bhat
JUDGMENT K. Shivashankar Bhat, J.
(1) Civil writ petitions are filed challenging the conversion fee fixed for
the purpose of converting the lease hold interest into free hold in Delhi.
There is no dispute that all the lands involved in these writ petitions
belonged to the President of India and these lands were allotted to several
persons either directly or through Group Housing Societies or-Delhi
Development Authority. The allottees had to execute lease deeds. The lease
period is 99 years. Under the lease deed certain restrictions are imposed
about the manner in which the land should be utilised. There is also
restriction regarding the alienation of the lease hold property by the lessee.
Except in the case of the allottees under the Rehabilitation Scheme, whenever
the original allottee alienates his interest 50% of the unearned increase
shall have to be paid to the Lesser (Union of India). In respect of subsequent
alienations also this requirement continues. In other words, whenever there is
alienation of the leasehold interest by the allottees or the subsequent
    (30) As per the above Article of the Constitution, matters with respect to entries 1,2 & 18 of the State List and entries 64,65 & 66 of that List insofar as they relate to the said Entries 1,2 &18 are not matters on which the Delhi State could make any law. The subject matter covered by those entries are still continuing to vest in the Parliament. Entry 18 reads thus:-    "18.Land, that is to say, right in or over land, land tenures including the relation of landlord and tenant, and the collection of rents; transfer and alienation of agricultural land; land improvement and agricultural loans; colonization."  
    From the above it is clear that the subject relating to the right in or over land and land tenures including the relation of landlord and tenant is a matter within the exclusive jurisdiction of the Parliament. The State Assembly is not given the competence to legislate over the said matter. If so, the executive power of the Union Government extends to the said subject.   
    (31) Mr. Bhandari contended that Entry 45 of the Second List in the 7th Schedule as well as Entry 49 thereof shall have to be read together so as to confer a Power in the State to make a law or exercise its executive power in respect of the conversion of the lease hold interest in the free hold.   
    (32) Any other interpretation, according to Mr. Bhandari will defeat the democratic structure of the State. The learned counsel contended that the Parliament consists of members representing the people all over India while the State Assembly comprises of the representatives of the people of Delhi alone. Therefore, the latter should, be given the power to make any law which affects the people of Delhi.   
    (33) This court is concerned with the constitutional provision. The constitution, as it stands now, has given the relevant power to the Parliament and the Union Government. It is not for this court to examine the wisdom of retaining these powers with the Parliament. Parliament also is a democratically elected body. Therefore, it is not possible for me to accept the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner.   
(34) For the reasons stated above, I hold that the Scheme is defective,
insofar as the areas referred as Ashok Vihar and Wazirpur and a clarification
or rectification in that regard shall have to be done by the respondent within
the time stipulated in this order. It is also declared that the scheme is
defective and is violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India in so
far as the scheme for conversion impugned in these writ petitions fail to
classify the original allottees who are in possession of the allotted lands
under the rehabilitation schemes, separately and provide them a reduced rate
of conversion fee. The respondents are directed to take steps to remove the
defects so that the scheme could be implemented to realise its objects
properly.
alienation of the leasehold interest by the allottees or the subsequent
transferees the Union of India will be getting 50% of the unearned increase.
However, in the case of an allottee under the Rehabilitation Scheme (of
refugees) the first transfer by the allottee is not governed by this
requirement of paying 50% of the unearned increase to the Union of India. It
is only the subsequent transfers that are governed by this requirement. In the
case of the persons governed by the rehabilitation scheme the original
allotment is made after collecting the cost of the land and the development
charges from the allottee and the allottee shall have to pay an yearly ground
rent of Rs.l.00 per 100Sq.Yards. In the case of other allottees the allotments
were made on the basis of the premium arrived at, at the auctions or
otherwise. In most of the cases these allotments were made on the basis of
auctions conducted. Another type of allottees are the persons who purchased
'63 apartments in which the superstructure vested in the allottee but the land
continued to vest in the government for which separate ground rent is charged.
All these petitioners have welcomed the proposal to permit the conversion of
the lease hold into freehold. But they are aggrieved by the conversion fee
which is fixed under the scheme. For the purpose of arriving at the conversion
fee payable certain formula are stated in the scheme. The basis for the
conversion fee is the market rate of the land as on 1.4.1987. The scheme
exempts up to 50 Sq.Yds. from the levy of conversion fee. The exemption
continues to operate a tall stages. In other words, even when the land
measures say about 200 Sq.Yds., the conversion fee payable is calculated with
reference to 150 Sq.Yds., having regard to the slab found in the scheme. Delhi
is divided into several zones and different rates are fixed for different
zones having regard to their relative advantages. Similarly,additional
conversion fee shall have to be paid if a part of the premises is used for
commercial purposes. The scheme has been made optional subsequently, though
initially it was made compulsory.
(2) Several contentions are urged on be half of the petitioners. The tenor of
all these arguments is to point out that the slab rate is arbitrary. In the
case of the allottees governed by the rehabilitation scheme, it was contended
that no conversion fee should believed a tall. Alternatively it was contended
that the uniform rate applied to the original allottees as well as the
subsequent transfers and others renders the scheme arbitrary since the scheme
fails to classify the allottees properly.
(3) The respondents contended that the conversion fee levied is a very
moderate sum. The conversion fee payable has been co-related to the value of
the residuary rights of the Lesser.
(4) In addition to these respective contentions the respondents of Ashok
Vihar/Wazirpur area have challenged the market rate fixed for computing the
conversion fee. In C.W.P. 146/1993 it is contended that initially Rs.l,510.00
per Sq.Mtr. was the land rate notified for the members covered by Wazirpur
Residential Scheme, but the brochure under which the scheme is announced
mentions the land rate as Rs.3,225.00 . According to the petitioner, this land
rate of Rs.3,225.00 was a mistaken rate, obviously referable to the industrial
plots. It is further contended that the respondents are now trying to make a
distinction between Wazirpur and AshokVihar when in fact both of them referred
to the same locality or area. In this writ petition it is also contended that
in the case of a land having more than one apartment/flats the conversion fee
payable by each flat owner is fixed without reference to the actual share of
the flat owner in the land. It was contended in case a land has a building of
2 flats, the conversion fee will be Rs.18,000.00 being @ Rs.9,000.00 ) while
under the identical situation if the land has three flats the total conversion
fee payable by the three flat owners will beRs.27,000.00 .
(5) I may straightaway deal with this contention instead of postponing the
same. The respondents have pointed out that higher the member of flats, the
extent of land to be set apart for any purposes will be more and this aspect
has been taken note of while fixing the conversion fee. The respondents have
pointed out that the case of a land having 2 flats cannot be compared with the
case of land on which there are more than 2 apartments. The explanation, on
the face of it, looks to be reasonable and therefore, I think it unnecessary
to go into this aspect further.
(6) It was also contended in this context that the benefit of the exemption
from 50 Sq. Yds. should have been calculated with reference to each flat owner
and if so in several cases a flat owner may not be required to pay any
conversion fee. As anillustration, it was pointed out that in case there are
three apartments built on a land measuring 150 Sq. Yds., the share of each
apartment owner will be 50 Sq. Yds., which is exempted from the levy of
conversion fee. I do not think,I can accept this contention because in the
illustration given the land is incapable of being partitioned. All the flat
owners could be considered as joint owners or co-owners and each one of them
has a proprietary interest in every particle of the eye of law until a
partition takes place.
(7) This apart, the benefit of 50 Sq. Yds. is given from the total extent, as
is clear from the several slab rates. Another contention based on a comparison
of 2 contiguous areas wherein one part has several flats while the other part
has a limited number of houses does not also require further consideration.
The vast extent of common areas to be kept for the uses like Post Office,
Schools, Parks, etc. shall have to be taken note of while fixing the value of
these lands. It is always very easy to find error in any scheme of the
Government, but the courts are not concerned with the possible errors while
evaluating the price of a commodity or a land. It is necessary to remember
that valuation of a land or a right therein is not in an exact science, there
are more than one methods which could be adopted and each method may lead to a
different result. Only because of such different results, it cannot be held
that the scheme providing for a particular method to be adopted is arbitrary
or discriminatory. As pointed out in an American Decision Metropolis Theatre
Company Vs. State of Chicago: (1913)52 Law Ad 730, mere errors of Government
are not subject to our judicial review. It is only its palpably arbitrary
exercises which can be declared void. In the matter of calculations it has
been held that the courts do not expect an exact division of subjects on
scientific lines because it is a practical impossibility. Further the State is
not expected to resort to microscopic classification. In a vast scheme like
the present one, it may not be possible to evolve a formula judgment leading
to an exact identical result in every case. In such a situation the test ought
to be whether the scheme applies a uniform principle and whether the subjects
are treated fairly and reasonably or whether the effect of the scheme results
in hostile discrimination. When I say the discrimination as hostile, it does
not mean that the maker of the scheme is guilty of any particular motive. The
hostility is inferred by the gravity of the inequality. If the discrimination
is patent the working of the scheme would result in palpable injustice and
hardship, it can be said that the scheme causes hostile discrimination.
(8) The reply filed on behalf of the respondents in , 146/1993 itself
indicates that land rate notified for Wazirpur and Ashok Vihar requires
clarification. The petitioner has placed ample material to show that there was
some confusion in referring to these two areas. The petitioner also has
produced sufficient material to show that the names Wazirpur and Ashok Vihar
overlap for each other. In the circumstances the respondents shall have to
take steps to clarify the matter and issue an appropriate notification fixing
the I and race for the purpose of fixing the conversion fee for these areas
referred either as Ashok Vihar or Wazirpur.
(9) Undoubtedly, the President of India has a residuary interest which is
quite valuable. The petitioners cannot expect that the said interest should be
released in their favor without the petitioners paying a reasonable amount
which is relatable to the value of the residuary interest. None of the
petitioners is able to explain as to how the conversion fee arrived at is
arbitrary. The conversion fee is payable in 5 yearly Installments bearing an
interest of 12% per annum. As already noted the land rate of the year 1987 is
made the basis which by itself is a great concession having regard to the
prevailing land rate. Further the' scheme itself is optional and there is no
compulsion that any of the allottees should resort to the scheme and have the
lease hold converted into free hold. In the circumstances it is not. possible
on this ground alone to hold that the conversion fee is arbitrary or
discriminatory.
(10) There was a contention that conversion is not permitted in the case of
lands measuring 500Sq. Mtrs.and above. Learned Counsel for the respondent
submitted that these lands are larger in extent and stand on a different
footing from others. The learned counsel also submitted that the Government is
seriously considering whether the lessees of such lands also should be
permitted to convert the lease hold into free hold. In view of these factors I
do not think that the scheme could be held vitiated only because lands
measuring larger extent arc outside the present scheme.
(11) According to the respondents the conversion fee is co-related to the
residuary rights of the Lesser. If so, it necessarily follows that the
conversion fee payable should vary according to the value of the residuary
right of the Lesser. It is also a settled principle that the principle of
valuation is to award to the owner the equivalent of his property with its
existing advantages and its potentialities. The principle of valuation should
result in providing proper payment to the owner for what he has lost including
the benefit of advantages present as well as future, without taking into
account the urgency involved in the transactions, the disinclination of the
owner to part with the property (vide R.C.Kooper Vs. Union of India; ). The
allottees under the rehabilitation scheme for refugees contended that under
the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act (Act for short),
the land should have been allotted to them absolutely and under compulsion of
circumstances prevailing at the time the allottees agreed to execute the lease
deeds and the said Lease Deeds should be treated as Sale Deeds or conversion
should be now permitted without charging any conversion fee. It is unnecessary
to go into the several provisions of the said Act because all the allottees
have executed lease deeds. It is too late for them to question the title of
the Lesser. They are bound by the terms of the leasedeed. Both the parties
have acted upon the terms of the lease deed. It is also clear that no premium
was collected from any of such allottees but only the cost of the land and the
development charges. The government did not levy the real price as a
consideration for the allotment. In such a situation it cannot be held that
the levy of conversion fee which reflects the value of the residuary rights of
the government is arbitrary or unwarranted. It is also a recognised principle
that the State or its instrumentalities may fix the price bearing in mind the
commercial value of the goods or the property to be sold. .
(12) However, one fact remains to be considered. Admittedly, the original
allottee of the plot covered by the rehabilitation scheme is still in
possession of the property. Such an allottee need not part with 50% of the
unearned income in case he sells his interest in the lease hold. The term
'allottee' here could include his legal representatives also. Therefore, as
against the original allottee under this rehabilitation scheme the value of
the residuary rights of the government cannot be the same as the value of the
residuary right against others. On the face of it there is a difference
between the two kinds of the residuary rights. The scheme nowhere makes any
exception in respect of these original allottees. There is no provision to
reduce the conversion fee payable by the original allottees in such a
situation.
(13) All allottees no doubt belong to one class or group. But that does not
mean that every kind of allottee may be treated in the same manner as other
allottees of the plot, when there is a real difference between one set of
allottees and another.
(14) In the State of'Andhra Pradesh and another- Vs. Nanda Raj Reddy and
Others; , the Supreme Court held: "A statutory provision may offend Article 14
of the Constitution both by finding differences where there is none and by
making no difference where there is one. Decided cases laid down tests to
ascertain whether a classification is permissible or not, viz. (i) the
classification must be founded on an intelligible differentia which
distinguishes persons or things that are grouped together from others left out
of the group; and (ii) that the differentia must have a rational relation to
the object sought to be achieved by the statute in question."
(15) While applying the said principle, I have also considered the vast
latitude given to the State in the matter of grouping the people or persons
for any particular purpose. In this connection, in the case of State of
Gujarat Vs. Shri Ambica Mills; , the Supreme Court observed at page 1313 - "A
reasonable classification is one which includes all who are similarly situated
and none who are not. The question then is: What docs the phrase 'similarly
situated' mean? The answer to the question is that we must look beyond the
classification to the purpose of the law. A reasonable classification is one
which includes all persons who are similarly situated with respect to the
purpose of the law. The purpose of a law may be either the elimination of a
public mischief or the achievement of some positive public good. A
classification is under-inclusive when all who are included in the class are
tainted with the mischief but there are others also tainted whom the
classification does not include. In other words,a classification is bad as
under-inclusive when a State benefits or burdens persons in a manner that
furthers a legitimate purpose but does not confer the same benefit or place
the same burden on others who are similarly situated. A classification is
over-inclusive when it includes not only those who are similarly situated with
respect to the purpose but others who are not so situated as well. In other
words, this type of classification imposes a burden upon a wider range of
individuals than are included in the class of those attended with mischief at
which the law aims. Herod ordering the death of all male children born on a
particular day because one of them would some day bring about his downfall
employed such a classification."
Again the Supreme Court pointed out that the problem of legislative
classification is a perennial one, admitting of no doctrinaire definition. The
Supreme Court further observed: "THE legislation is directed to practical
problems, that the economic mechanism is highly sensitive and complex, that
many problems are singular and contingent, that laws arc not abstract
propositions and do not relate to abstract units and are not to be measured by
abstract symmetry, that exact wisdom and nice adaptation of remedies cannot
berequired, that judgment is largely a prophecy based on meagre and
uninterrupted experience, should stand as reminder that in this area the Court
does not take the equal protection requirement in a pedagogic manner."
(16) The instant case before me reveals that irrespective of the nature of the
residuary right of the State and its value as against the lessee,a uniform
conversion fee is levied, payable by all the allottees. Admittedly, there is a
difference on the face of it between the original allottees who are in
possession of the lands under the rehabilitation scheme, and others. When such
a patent and manifest difference is shown to exist, it was imperative that a
proper classification should have been done and a different treatment should
have been meted out to such original allottees. The scheme has failed to
achieve this object.
(17) No doubt, if a scheme violates the provisions of Article 14 of the
Constitution the same shall have to be declared as invalid and void. I do not
think that such a course should be adopted in all such cases when the result
of striking down the scheme will deprive a large number of people from the
beneficial provisions of the scheme. Admittedly, there is a clamour for
conversion of the lease hold into free hold. The Government has come forward
with a scheme to satisfy the demands of the people in this regard. But in
formulating the scheme some error of judgment seems to have been committed.
The error could be erased and the defect rectified by a proper measure. This
court no doubt, cannot formulate a scheme to replace the impugned scheme. It
is ultimately for the Government to consider as to how the distinction pointed
out in this order should be brought out in the scheme and to what extent the
provisions could be made for collecting a reduced conversion fee from the
original allottees under the rehabilitation scheme. The manner of quantifying
the conversion fee and the formula to be adopted for the said purpose are
matters for the experts to examine and thereafter the same have to be
incorporated in the scheme.
(18) I have also noted already that the scheme reflects an error regarding
Wazirpur/ Ashok Vihar area. This also requires clarification or rectification.
Instead of striking down the entire scheme only because of these defects, I am
of the view that the implementation of the scheme can be postponed for a few
months to enable the respondents to remove the defects pointed out, failing
which it can be declared that the scheme is incapable, of being enforced.
(19) It was strongly contended on behalf of the respondents that the scheme is
purely optional and if any of the allottees is not satisfied with the scheme
he need not claim conversion at all.
(20) The argument no doubt is quite attractive but it should be remembered
that the scheme in question affects a large number of persons in Delhi. Though
the scheme is made optional, the very purpose of giving the option may be
defeated by compelling a substantial number of persons from taking the benefit
of the scheme. In other words, a person who desires to opt for conversion is
made incapable of exercising such an option because of a patent illegality in
the scheme. Here is a case where the discrimination is writ large amongst the
persons who are likely to opt for the conversion, by not classifying the
original allottees under the rehabilitation scheme and others who are holding
the lands.
(21) It was then contended that courts should not interfere with policy
matters, especially, the subjects concerning economic matters.
(22) It is true that a very large latitude is given to the Government to
formulate its policy, it is not for the courts to interfere with it nor direct
the government to evolve a policy considered best by the court. The Government
is faced with diverse and complex problems and the court has neither the
expertise nor all the materials to formulate any particular policy. Government
is answerable to the people and many a times political compulsions contribute
in the formulation of a policy. In the context of testing the constitutional
validity of an enacted law, the Supreme Court had pointed out the need to have
judicial restraint before proceeding to strike down a law and to a large
extent the same principle would govern the approach of the courts while
examining the validity of any scheme framed by the Executive. In State of
Madras Vs. V.G.Row; the classical statement is found in the following words,
at page 200: "IT is important in this context to bear in mind that the test of
reasonableness, wherever prescribed, should be applied to each individual
statute impugned, and no abstract standard, or general pattern of
reasonableness can be laid down as applicable to all cases. The nature of the
right alleged to have been infringed, the underlying purpose of the
restrictions imposed, the extent and urgency of the evil sought to be remedied
thereby, the disproportion of the imposition, the prevailing conditions at the
time, should all enter into the judicial verdict. In evaluating such elusive
factors and forming their own conception of what is reasonable, in all the
circumstances of a given case, it is inevitable that the social philosophy and
the scale of values of the Judges participating in the decision should play an
important part, and the limit to their interference with legislative judgment
in such cases can only be dictated by their sense of responsibility and self-
restraint and the sobering reflection that the Constitution is meant not only
for people of their way of thinking but for all, and that the majority of the
elected representatives of the people have, in authorising the imposition of
the restrictions considered them to be reasonable."
(23) In State of Madhya Pradesh Vs. Nand Lal; , the Supreme Court after
referring to an earlier decision in R.K.Gargi case (AIR 1981 Sc 2138) quoted
American decision in Morey Vs. Dond (1957) 354 Us 457 as follows: "IN the
utilities, tax and economic regulation cases, there are good reasons for
judicial deference to legislative judgment. The legislature after all has the
affirmative responsibility. The courts have only the power to destroy, not to
reconstruct. When these arc added to the complexity of economic regulation,
the uncertainty, the liability to error, the bewildering conflict of the
experts, and the number of times the judges have been overruled by events -
self limitation can be seen to be the path to judicial wisdom and
institutional prestige and stability."
Then the Supreme Court proceeded to observe: LEGISLATION relating to economic
matters must apply equally in regard to executive actions in the field of
economic activities, though the executive decision may not be placed on as
high a pedestal as legislative judgment in so far as judicial deference is
concerned. We must not forget that in complex economic matters every decision
is necessarily empiric and it is based on experimentation or what one may call
'trial and error method' and, therefore, its validity cannot be tested on any
rigid 'a priori' considerations or on the application of any strait jacket
formula. The court must while adjudging the constitutional validity of an
executive decision relating to economic matters grant a certain measure of
freedom or 'play' in the "joints" to the executive. "The problem of
Government" as pointed out by the Supreme Court of the United States in
Metropolis Theatre Company Vs. State of Chicago, (1912) 57 L ed 730 'are
practical ones and may justify, if they do not require, rough accommodations,
illogical, it may be, and unscientific. But even such criticism should not be
hastily expressed. What is best is not discernible, the wisdom of any choice
may be disputed or condemned. Mere errors of Government are not subject to our
judicial review. It is only its palpably arbitrary exercise which can be
declared void". The Govemment,as was said in Permian Basin Area Rate Cases,
(1968) 20 Led(2d) 312, is entitled to make pragmatic adjustments which may be
called for by particular circumstances. The Court cannot strike down a policy
decision taken by the State Government merely because it feels that another
policy decision would have been fairer or wiser or more scientific or logical.
The Court can interfere only if the policy decision is patently arbitrary,
discriminatory or malafide. It is against the background of these observations
and keeping them in mind that we must now proceed to deal with the contention
of the petitioners based on Article 14 of the Constitution".
(24) This approach is reflected in another decision of the Supreme Court in
G.B.Mahajan & others Vs. The Jalgaon Municipal Council and othcrs; , where the
Supreme Court was considering the reasonableness of an executive action. At
page 1163 the Court quoted Prof. Wade: "THE doctrine that powers must be
exercised reasonably has to be reconciled with the no less important doctrine
that the Court must not usurp the discretion of the public authority which
Parliament appointed to take the decision. Within the bounds of legal
reasonableness is the area in which the deciding authority has genuinely free
discretion, If it passes those bounds, it acts ultra vires. The Court must
therefore resist the temptation to draw the bounds too tightly, merely
according to its own oppnion. It must strive to apply an objective standard
which leaves to the deciding authority the full range of choice' which the-
legislature is presumed to have intended. Decisions which are extravagant or
capricious cannot be legitimate. But if the decision is within the confines of
reasonableness, it is no part of the Court's function to look further into its
merits. 'With the question whether a particular policy is wise or foolish the
Court is not concerned; it can only interfere if to pursue it is beyond the
powers of the authority' .......".
Thereafter the court proceeded to say:
"IN the arguments there is some general misapprehension of the scope of the
"reasonableness" test in administrative law. By whose standards of
reasonableness that a matter is to be decided? Some phrases which pass from
one branch of law to another - as did the expressions 'void' and voidable'
from private law areas to public law situations - carry over with them
meanings that may be in a oposite in the changed context. Some such thing has
happened to the words 'reasonable', 'reasonableness' etc."
At page 1165 it was pointed out:
".....a thing Is not unreasonable in the legal sense merely because the Court
thinks it is unwise"
(25) The need to have restraint and the fact that more than two views arc
possible on a particular subject, are factors to be borne in mind by the Court
always, while discharging its constitutional responsibility. If the impugned
action of the State is arbitrary, unreasonable or unconstitutional for any
reason, this Court has a duty to set at naught or make an appropriate order to
have the defects rectified.
(26) There was an argument that facilities given to power of attorney holder
for conversion, results in favoritism. A number of transfers are made in the
guise of executing. Power of Attorney, and the P.A. holder is permitted
conversion by paying the normal conversion fee plus 33-1/3% of the said fee.
This ignores the unearned increase which was not paid by the real transferors
and transferees, who resort to this device of transferring the land by
executing the Power of Attorney.
(27) This contention over looks the fact that a surcharge is levied in the
case of a Power of Attorney holder. To estimate the number of transfers
undergone already by this device of creating Power of Attorney holders and
then estimating the unearned increase would create practical problems of
administration. In the circumstances, the respondents have evolved a simpler
mode of permitting the conversion by collecting an additional sum by way of
surcharge. The factum of administrative difficulties is a relevant factor
justifying a special treatment to any particular class.
(28) The contentions that the erstwhile displaced persons are entitled to be
treated is absolute owners and the lease deeds executed by them should be
equated to sale deeds and that no conversion fee should be charged even if
they seek the conversion, ignore the basic rule that a lessee is estopped from
denying the and lord's title during the period of the lease and until the
lessee surrenders his possession obtained under the lease and further, all
these years for over 30 years these allottees conducted themselves as the
lessees and were abiding by the terms of the lease deeds. The Displaced
Persons (Compensation & Rehabilitation) Act and the Rules made there under in
no way barred the allotments of plots by way of leases. All those lessees were
allottees with plots only at cost price inclusive of development charges) and
not at the market rate. In these circumstances, the elaborate arguments
addressed on this aspect need not be considered in detail.
(29) Mr. Mohit Bhandari, learned counsel appearing for one of the writ
petitioners raised an interesting contention to the effect that the Government
has no competence at all to collect the conversion fee. The learned counsel
contended that there is a democratically elected State Government and the
question of conversion should have been adopted in the State Assembly so that
the views of the people could be properly considered by the representatives of
the people. The learned counsel also contended that Article 239Aa(3) of the
Constitution shall have to be read as not depriving the State Assembly of its
powers to deal with the questions pertaining to the lands.
    (30) As per the above Article of the Constitution, matters with respect to entries 1,2 & 18 of the State List and entries 64,65 & 66 of that List insofar as they relate to the said Entries 1,2 &18 are not matters on which the Delhi State could make any law. The subject matter covered by those entries are still continuing to vest in the Parliament. Entry 18 reads thus:-    "18.Land, that is to say, right in or over land, land tenures including the relation of landlord and tenant, and the collection of rents; transfer and alienation of agricultural land; land improvement and agricultural loans; colonization."  
    From the above it is clear that the subject relating to the right in or over land and land tenures including the relation of landlord and tenant is a matter within the exclusive jurisdiction of the Parliament. The State Assembly is not given the competence to legislate over the said matter. If so, the executive power of the Union Government extends to the said subject.   
    (31) Mr. Bhandari contended that Entry 45 of the Second List in the 7th Schedule as well as Entry 49 thereof shall have to be read together so as to confer a Power in the State to make a law or exercise its executive power in respect of the conversion of the lease hold interest in the free hold.   
    (32) Any other interpretation, according to Mr. Bhandari will defeat the democratic structure of the State. The learned counsel contended that the Parliament consists of members representing the people all over India while the State Assembly comprises of the representatives of the people of Delhi alone. Therefore, the latter should, be given the power to make any law which affects the people of Delhi.   
    (33) This court is concerned with the constitutional provision. The constitution, as it stands now, has given the relevant power to the Parliament and the Union Government. It is not for this court to examine the wisdom of retaining these powers with the Parliament. Parliament also is a democratically elected body. Therefore, it is not possible for me to accept the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner.   
(34) For the reasons stated above, I hold that the Scheme is defective,
insofar as the areas referred as Ashok Vihar and Wazirpur and a clarification
or rectification in that regard shall have to be done by the respondent within
the time stipulated in this order. It is also declared that the scheme is
defective and is violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India in so
far as the scheme for conversion impugned in these writ petitions fail to
classify the original allottees who are in possession of the allotted lands
under the rehabilitation schemes, separately and provide them a reduced rate
of conversion fee. The respondents are directed to take steps to remove the
defects so that the scheme could be implemented to realise its objects
properly.
(35) The respondents are granted time till the end of September, 1994, to
rectify the defects stated above, failing which the scheme is declared as
inoperative and unenforceable for all purposes. The writ petitions are
disposed of accordingly.
    (30) As per the above Article of the Constitution, matters with respect to entries 1,2 & 18 of the State List and entries 64,65 & 66 of that List insofar as they relate to the said Entries 1,2 &18 are not matters on which the Delhi State could make any law. The subject matter covered by those entries are still continuing to vest in the Parliament. Entry 18 reads thus:-    "18.Land, that is to say, right in or over land, land tenures including the relation of landlord and tenant, and the collection of rents; transfer and alienation of agricultural land; land improvement and agricultural loans; colonization."  
    From the above it is clear that the subject relating to the right in or over land and land tenures including the relation of landlord and tenant is a matter within the exclusive jurisdiction of the Parliament. The State Assembly is not given the competence to legislate over the said matter. If so, the executive power of the Union Government extends to the said subject.   
    (31) Mr. Bhandari contended that Entry 45 of the Second List in the 7th Schedule as well as Entry 49 thereof shall have to be read together so as to confer a Power in the State to make a law or exercise its executive power in respect of the conversion of the lease hold interest in the free hold.   
    (32) Any other interpretation, according to Mr. Bhandari will defeat the democratic structure of the State. The learned counsel contended that the Parliament consists of members representing the people all over India while the State Assembly comprises of the representatives of the people of Delhi alone. Therefore, the latter should, be given the power to make any law which affects the people of Delhi.   
    (33) This court is concerned with the constitutional provision. The constitution, as it stands now, has given the relevant power to the Parliament and the Union Government. It is not for this court to examine the wisdom of retaining these powers with the Parliament. Parliament also is a democratically elected body. Therefore, it is not possible for me to accept the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner.   
(34) For the reasons stated above, I hold that the Scheme is defective,
insofar as the areas referred as Ashok Vihar and Wazirpur and a clarification
or rectification in that regard shall have to be done by the respondent within
the time stipulated in this order. It is also declared that the scheme is
defective and is violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India in so
far as the scheme for conversion impugned in these writ petitions fail to
classify the original allottees who are in possession of the allotted lands
under the rehabilitation schemes, separately and provide them a reduced rate
of conversion fee. The respondents are directed to take steps to remove the
defects so that the scheme could be implemented to realise its objects
properly.
alienation of the leasehold interest by the allottees or the subsequent
transferees the Union of India will be getting 50% of the unearned increase.
However, in the case of an allottee under the Rehabilitation Scheme (of
refugees) the first transfer by the allottee is not governed by this
requirement of paying 50% of the unearned increase to the Union of India. It
is only the subsequent transfers that are governed by this requirement. In the
case of the persons governed by the rehabilitation scheme the original
allotment is made after collecting the cost of the land and the development
charges from the allottee and the allottee shall have to pay an yearly ground
rent of Rs.l.00 per 100Sq.Yards. In the case of other allottees the allotments
were made on the basis of the premium arrived at, at the auctions or
otherwise. In most of the cases these allotments were made on the basis of
auctions conducted. Another type of allottees are the persons who purchased
'63 apartments in which the superstructure vested in the allottee but the land
continued to vest in the government for which separate ground rent is charged.
All these petitioners have welcomed the proposal to permit the conversion of
the lease hold into freehold. But they are aggrieved by the conversion fee
which is fixed under the scheme. For the purpose of arriving at the conversion
fee payable certain formula are stated in the scheme. The basis for the
conversion fee is the market rate of the land as on 1.4.1987. The scheme
    (30) As per the above Article of the Constitution, matters with respect to entries 1,2 & 18 of the State List and entries 64,65 & 66 of that List insofar as they relate to the said Entries 1,2 &18 are not matters on which the Delhi State could make any law. The subject matter covered by those entries are still continuing to vest in the Parliament. Entry 18 reads thus:-    "18.Land, that is to say, right in or over land, land tenures including the relation of landlord and tenant, and the collection of rents; transfer and alienation of agricultural land; land improvement and agricultural loans; colonization."  
    From the above it is clear that the subject relating to the right in or over land and land tenures including the relation of landlord and tenant is a matter within the exclusive jurisdiction of the Parliament. The State Assembly is not given the competence to legislate over the said matter. If so, the executive power of the Union Government extends to the said subject.   
    (31) Mr. Bhandari contended that Entry 45 of the Second List in the 7th Schedule as well as Entry 49 thereof shall have to be read together so as to confer a Power in the State to make a law or exercise its executive power in respect of the conversion of the lease hold interest in the free hold.   
    (32) Any other interpretation, according to Mr. Bhandari will defeat the democratic structure of the State. The learned counsel contended that the Parliament consists of members representing the people all over India while the State Assembly comprises of the representatives of the people of Delhi alone. Therefore, the latter should, be given the power to make any law which affects the people of Delhi.   
    (33) This court is concerned with the constitutional provision. The constitution, as it stands now, has given the relevant power to the Parliament and the Union Government. It is not for this court to examine the wisdom of retaining these powers with the Parliament. Parliament also is a democratically elected body. Therefore, it is not possible for me to accept the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner.   
(34) For the reasons stated above, I hold that the Scheme is defective,
insofar as the areas referred as Ashok Vihar and Wazirpur and a clarification
or rectification in that regard shall have to be done by the respondent within
the time stipulated in this order. It is also declared that the scheme is
defective and is violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India in so
far as the scheme for conversion impugned in these writ petitions fail to
classify the original allottees who are in possession of the allotted lands
under the rehabilitation schemes, separately and provide them a reduced rate
of conversion fee. The respondents are directed to take steps to remove the
defects so that the scheme could be implemented to realise its objects
properly.
alienation of the leasehold interest by the allottees or the subsequent
transferees the Union of India will be getting 50% of the unearned increase.
However, in the case of an allottee under the Rehabilitation Scheme (of
refugees) the first transfer by the allottee is not governed by this
requirement of paying 50% of the unearned increase to the Union of India. It
is only the subsequent transfers that are governed by this requirement. In the
case of the persons governed by the rehabilitation scheme the original
allotment is made after collecting the cost of the land and the development
charges from the allottee and the allottee shall have to pay an yearly ground
rent of Rs.l.00 per 100Sq.Yards. In the case of other allottees the allotments
were made on the basis of the premium arrived at, at the auctions or
otherwise. In most of the cases these allotments were made on the basis of
auctions conducted. Another type of allottees are the persons who purchased
'63 apartments in which the superstructure vested in the allottee but the land
continued to vest in the government for which separate ground rent is charged.
All these petitioners have welcomed the proposal to permit the conversion of
the lease hold into freehold. But they are aggrieved by the conversion fee
which is fixed under the scheme. For the purpose of arriving at the conversion
fee payable certain formula are stated in the scheme. The basis for the
conversion fee is the market rate of the land as on 1.4.1987. The scheme
    (30) As per the above Article of the Constitution, matters with respect to entries 1,2 & 18 of the State List and entries 64,65 & 66 of that List insofar as they relate to the said Entries 1,2 &18 are not matters on which the Delhi State could make any law. The subject matter covered by those entries are still continuing to vest in the Parliament. Entry 18 reads thus:-    "18.Land, that is to say, right in or over land, land tenures including the relation of landlord and tenant, and the collection of rents; transfer and alienation of agricultural land; land improvement and agricultural loans; colonization."  
    From the above it is clear that the subject relating to the right in or over land and land tenures including the relation of landlord and tenant is a matter within the exclusive jurisdiction of the Parliament. The State Assembly is not given the competence to legislate over the said matter. If so, the executive power of the Union Government extends to the said subject.   
    (31) Mr. Bhandari contended that Entry 45 of the Second List in the 7th Schedule as well as Entry 49 thereof shall have to be read together so as to confer a Power in the State to make a law or exercise its executive power in respect of the conversion of the lease hold interest in the free hold.   
    (32) Any other interpretation, according to Mr. Bhandari will defeat the democratic structure of the State. The learned counsel contended that the Parliament consists of members representing the people all over India while the State Assembly comprises of the representatives of the people of Delhi alone. Therefore, the latter should, be given the power to make any law which affects the people of Delhi.   
    (33) This court is concerned with the constitutional provision. The constitution, as it stands now, has given the relevant power to the Parliament and the Union Government. It is not for this court to examine the wisdom of retaining these powers with the Parliament. Parliament also is a democratically elected body. Therefore, it is not possible for me to accept the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner.   
(34) For the reasons stated above, I hold that the Scheme is defective,
insofar as the areas referred as Ashok Vihar and Wazirpur and a clarification
or rectification in that regard shall have to be done by the respondent within
the time stipulated in this order. It is also declared that the scheme is
defective and is violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India in so
far as the scheme for conversion impugned in these writ petitions fail to
classify the original allottees who are in possession of the allotted lands
under the rehabilitation schemes, separately and provide them a reduced rate
of conversion fee. The respondents are directed to take steps to remove the
defects so that the scheme could be implemented to realise its objects
properly.
alienation of the leasehold interest by the allottees or the subsequent
transferees the Union of India will be getting 50% of the unearned increase.
However, in the case of an allottee under the Rehabilitation Scheme (of
refugees) the first transfer by the allottee is not governed by this
requirement of paying 50% of the unearned increase to the Union of India. It
is only the subsequent transfers that are governed by this requirement. In the
case of the persons governed by the rehabilitation scheme the original
allotment is made after collecting the cost of the land and the development
charges from the allottee and the allottee shall have to pay an yearly ground
rent of Rs.l.00 per 100Sq.Yards. In the case of other allottees the allotments
were made on the basis of the premium arrived at, at the auctions or
otherwise. In most of the cases these allotments were made on the basis of
auctions conducted. Another type of allottees are the persons who purchased
'63 apartments in which the superstructure vested in the allottee but the land
continued to vest in the government for which separate ground rent is charged.
All these petitioners have welcomed the proposal to permit the conversion of
the lease hold into freehold. But they are aggrieved by the conversion fee
which is fixed under the scheme. For the purpose of arriving at the conversion
fee payable certain formula are stated in the scheme. The basis for the
conversion fee is the market rate of the land as on 1.4.1987. The scheme
exempts up to 50 Sq.Yds. from the levy of conversion fee. The exemption
continues to operate a tall stages. In other words, even when the land
measures say about 200 Sq.Yds., the conversion fee payable is calculated with
reference to 150 Sq.Yds., having regard to the slab found in the scheme. Delhi
is divided into several zones and different rates are fixed for different
zones having regard to their relative advantages. Similarly,additional
conversion fee shall have to be paid if a part of the premises is used for
commercial purposes. The scheme has been made optional subsequently, though
initially it was made compulsory.
(2) Several contentions are urged on be half of the petitioners. The tenor of
all these arguments is to point out that the slab rate is arbitrary. In the
    (30) As per the above Article of the Constitution, matters with respect to entries 1,2 & 18 of the State List and entries 64,65 & 66 of that List insofar as they relate to the said Entries 1,2 &18 are not matters on which the Delhi State could make any law. The subject matter covered by those entries are still continuing to vest in the Parliament. Entry 18 reads thus:-    "18.Land, that is to say, right in or over land, land tenures including the relation of landlord and tenant, and the collection of rents; transfer and alienation of agricultural land; land improvement and agricultural loans; colonization."  
    From the above it is clear that the subject relating to the right in or over land and land tenures including the relation of landlord and tenant is a matter within the exclusive jurisdiction of the Parliament. The State Assembly is not given the competence to legislate over the said matter. If so, the executive power of the Union Government extends to the said subject.   
    (31) Mr. Bhandari contended that Entry 45 of the Second List in the 7th Schedule as well as Entry 49 thereof shall have to be read together so as to confer a Power in the State to make a law or exercise its executive power in respect of the conversion of the lease hold interest in the free hold.   
    (32) Any other interpretation, according to Mr. Bhandari will defeat the democratic structure of the State. The learned counsel contended that the Parliament consists of members representing the people all over India while the State Assembly comprises of the representatives of the people of Delhi alone. Therefore, the latter should, be given the power to make any law which affects the people of Delhi.   
    (33) This court is concerned with the constitutional provision. The constitution, as it stands now, has given the relevant power to the Parliament and the Union Government. It is not for this court to examine the wisdom of retaining these powers with the Parliament. Parliament also is a democratically elected body. Therefore, it is not possible for me to accept the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner.   
(34) For the reasons stated above, I hold that the Scheme is defective,
insofar as the areas referred as Ashok Vihar and Wazirpur and a clarification
or rectification in that regard shall have to be done by the respondent within
the time stipulated in this order. It is also declared that the scheme is
defective and is violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India in so
far as the scheme for conversion impugned in these writ petitions fail to
classify the original allottees who are in possession of the allotted lands
under the rehabilitation schemes, separately and provide them a reduced rate
of conversion fee. The respondents are directed to take steps to remove the
defects so that the scheme could be implemented to realise its objects
properly.
alienation of the leasehold interest by the allottees or the subsequent
transferees the Union of India will be getting 50% of the unearned increase.
However, in the case of an allottee under the Rehabilitation Scheme (of
refugees) the first transfer by the allottee is not governed by this
requirement of paying 50% of the unearned increase to the Union of India. It
is only the subsequent transfers that are governed by this requirement. In the
case of the persons governed by the rehabilitation scheme the original
allotment is made after collecting the cost of the land and the development
charges from the allottee and the allottee shall have to pay an yearly ground
rent of Rs.l.00 per 100Sq.Yards. In the case of other allottees the allotments
were made on the basis of the premium arrived at, at the auctions or
otherwise. In most of the cases these allotments were made on the basis of
auctions conducted. Another type of allottees are the persons who purchased
'63 apartments in which the superstructure vested in the allottee but the land
continued to vest in the government for which separate ground rent is charged.
All these petitioners have welcomed the proposal to permit the conversion of
the lease hold into freehold. But they are aggrieved by the conversion fee
which is fixed under the scheme. For the purpose of arriving at the conversion
fee payable certain formula are stated in the scheme. The basis for the
conversion fee is the market rate of the land as on 1.4.1987. The scheme
exempts up to 50 Sq.Yds. from the levy of conversion fee. The exemption
continues to operate a tall stages. In other words, even when the land
measures say about 200 Sq.Yds., the conversion fee payable is calculated with
reference to 150 Sq.Yds., having regard to the slab found in the scheme. Delhi
is divided into several zones and different rates are fixed for different
zones having regard to their relative advantages. Similarly,additional
conversion fee shall have to be paid if a part of the premises is used for
commercial purposes. The scheme has been made optional subsequently, though
initially it was made compulsory.
(2) Several contentions are urged on be half of the petitioners. The tenor of
all these arguments is to point out that the slab rate is arbitrary. In the
    (30) As per the above Article of the Constitution, matters with respect to entries 1,2 & 18 of the State List and entries 64,65 & 66 of that List insofar as they relate to the said Entries 1,2 &18 are not matters on which the Delhi State could make any law. The subject matter covered by those entries are still continuing to vest in the Parliament. Entry 18 reads thus:-    "18.Land, that is to say, right in or over land, land tenures including the relation of landlord and tenant, and the collection of rents; transfer and alienation of agricultural land; land improvement and agricultural loans; colonization."  
    From the above it is clear that the subject relating to the right in or over land and land tenures including the relation of landlord and tenant is a matter within the exclusive jurisdiction of the Parliament. The State Assembly is not given the competence to legislate over the said matter. If so, the executive power of the Union Government extends to the said subject.   
    (31) Mr. Bhandari contended that Entry 45 of the Second List in the 7th Schedule as well as Entry 49 thereof shall have to be read together so as to confer a Power in the State to make a law or exercise its executive power in respect of the conversion of the lease hold interest in the free hold.   
    (32) Any other interpretation, according to Mr. Bhandari will defeat the democratic structure of the State. The learned counsel contended that the Parliament consists of members representing the people all over India while the State Assembly comprises of the representatives of the people of Delhi alone. Therefore, the latter should, be given the power to make any law which affects the people of Delhi.   
    (33) This court is concerned with the constitutional provision. The constitution, as it stands now, has given the relevant power to the Parliament and the Union Government. It is not for this court to examine the wisdom of retaining these powers with the Parliament. Parliament also is a democratically elected body. Therefore, it is not possible for me to accept the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner.   
(34) For the reasons stated above, I hold that the Scheme is defective,
insofar as the areas referred as Ashok Vihar and Wazirpur and a clarification
or rectification in that regard shall have to be done by the respondent within
the time stipulated in this order. It is also declared that the scheme is
defective and is violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India in so
far as the scheme for conversion impugned in these writ petitions fail to
classify the original allottees who are in possession of the allotted lands
under the rehabilitation schemes, separately and provide them a reduced rate
of conversion fee. The respondents are directed to take steps to remove the
defects so that the scheme could be implemented to realise its objects
properly.
