Supreme Court of India
Chowdarapu Raghunandan vs State Of Tamil Nadu & Others on 15 March, 2002
Author: Raju
Bench: Doariswamy Raju
               CASE NO.:
    Writ Petition (crl.) 218  of  2001
    PETITIONER:
    CHOWDARAPU RAGHUNANDAN
    	Vs.
    RESPONDENT:
    STATE OF TAMIL NADU & OTHERS
    DATE OF JUDGMENT:	15/03/2002
    BENCH:
    Doariswamy Raju
    JUDGMENT:
RAJU, J.
I am in respectful agreement with the judgment of my esteemed and learned
brother that the impugned order of detention in this case need be quashed and
the Writ Petition be allowed by releasing the detenu. But, I would like to
confine the ground for the same on the question of non-application of mind to
is still pending and has not concluded so far. If the baggage really belonged
to another person as was stated to have been registered, it necessarily
follows that the petitioner cannot be the owner of the very same baggage. The
seriously doubtful position about the elementary and basic fact regarding the
ownership of the baggage and the admitted inconclusive stage of the
investigation in this regard could not legitimately help the authorities to
pass any order of detention against the petitioner on the perfunctory and
inchoate materials relied upon. Apart from the absence of any positive or
concrete materials to connect the baggage in question with the petitioner, the
nature of stand disclosed in the counter affidavit filed on behalf of the 1st
respondent on this aspect does not really help the Authority to prove that the
said material and such vitally relevant aspect was either adverted to or
really considered before passing the order of detention. Consequently, the
impugned order suffers the vice of total non-application of mind to a relevant
and vital material touching question of the culpability as well as the
necessity to order the detention of the petitioner. The impugned order of
confine the ground for the same on the question of non-application of mind to
all the relevant facts than make any observations on the general principles of
law, which, in my view, are well and firmly settled.
The petitioner has been ordered to be detained by the orders of the Government
of Tamil Nadu in G.O. No. SR.I/531-7/2001 Public (SC) Dept. dated 28.5.2001 in
exercise of the powers under Section 3(1)(i) of the Conservation of Foreign
Exchange and Prevention of Smuggling Activities Act, 1974 [hereinafter
referred to as "The Act"] and kept in custody in the Central Prison, Chennai.
From the grounds on which the said order came to be made, it could be seen
that the incident said to have occurred on 30.3.2001 when the petitioner
arrived from Singapore by IC 556 at Chennai Anna International Airport was the
main basis. The allegation against the petitioner is that though he brought in
his baggage (a) Panasonic GD92 Cell phones with accessories 100 Nos; (b) Nokia
3310 Cell phone with accessories 50 Nos; (c) Siemens C35 Cell phones with
accessories 50 Nos; (d) Nokia Cell phone adapter 100 Nos; (e) Nokia 5110 Cell
phone batteries 100 Nos without having any valid document for their lawful
import, not only he grossly mis-declared the value of the goods in his
possession, but after completing immigration formalities and collection of his
baggage and moving towards the Exit Gate when intercepted by Customs
Intelligence Officer and asked, the petitioner gave a negative reply as if he
is not in possession of any dutiable goods in trade quantity. After opening
the baggage, the above-referred goods were said to have been found in his
baggage and seized after following the required procedure. Beside the same, he
was also arrested on 31.3.2001 and lodged in prison after following the
procedure therefor. On the above materials, the petitioner was considered to
have committed violations justifying action under Section 111 (d) (i) (1), &
(m) of the Customs Act, 1962 read with Foreign Trade (Development and
Regulation) Act, 1992 in addition to rendering himself to be proceeded against
for committing an offence punishable under Sections 132 and 135 of the Customs
Act. The CIF value of the goods seized was said to be Rs.13,90,000/- and the
market value of the same was Rs.20,85,000/- on the date of the seizure.
It is on the above materials, in addition to the adjudication proceedings and
prosecution to be pursued further against the petitioner, the Detaining
Authority was said to have been satisfied that it was necessary to detain the
petitioner under the Act with a view to prevent the petitioner from indulging
in smuggling goods in future. On that view of the matter, the impugned
detention order came to be passed and the same is challenged by means of the
above Writ Petition under Article 32 of the Constitution of India, for the
alleged violation of his fundamental rights.
Heard Shri A.T.M. Sampath, learned counsel for the petitioner, and Shri Mukul
Rohtagi, learned Additional Solicitor General for respondents No. 2 & 3 and
Shri S. Balakrishnan, Senior Advocate for the State of Tamil Nadu. The extreme
stand taken for the petitioner as a ground based on law that a solitary
incident, even if it be true, though the involvement of the petitioner in the
occurrence is seriously questioned, cannot be the basis for invoking the
powers of detention necessarily obligated the learned Additional Solicitor
General also to take a contra stand to the other extreme. Though, several
decided cases have been brought to our notice, including the latest decision
since reported in VC Mohan vs Union of India & Others [JT 2002(2) SC 365], I
consider it unnecessary to deal with every one of them.
The decision rendered in Attorney General for India& Ors. vs Amratlal
Prajivandas & Ors. by a Constitution Bench of 9 Judges reported in [1994 (5)
SCC 54], has laid down the law on the said aspect succinctly and conclusively
in the following terms:
"48. Now, it is beyond dispute that an order of detention can be based upon
one single ground. Several decisions of this Court have held that even one
prejudicial act can be treated as sufficient for forming the requisite
satisfaction for detaining the person. In Debu Mahato v. State of W.B. It was
observed that while ordinarily speaking one act may not be sufficient to form
the requisite satisfaction, there is no such invariable rule and that in a
given case one act may suffice. That was a case of wagon-breaking and having
regard to the nature of the Act, it was held that one act is sufficient. The
same principle was reiterated in Anil Dey v. State of W.B. It was a case of
theft of railway signal material. Here too one act was held to be sufficient.
Similarly, in Israil SK v. District Magistrate of West Dinajpur and Dharua
Kanu v. State of W.B. single act of theft of telegraph copper wires in huge
quantity and removal of railway fish-plates respectively was held sufficient
to sustain the order of detention. In Saraswathi Seshagiri v. State of Kerala,
a case arising under COFEPOSA, a single act, viz., attempt to export a huge
amount of Indian currency was held sufficient. In short, the principle appears
to be this: Though ordinarily one act may not be held sufficient to sustain an
order of detention, one act may sustain an order of detention if the act is of
such a nature as to indicate that it is an organized act or a manifestation of
organized activity. The gravity and nature of the act is also relevant. The
test is whether the act is such that it gives rise to an inference that the
person would continue to indulge in similar prejudicial activity. That is the
reason why single acts of wagon-breaking, theft of signal material, theft of
telegraph copper wires in huge quantity and removal of railway fish-plates
were held sufficient. Similarly, where the person tried to export huge amount
of Indian currency to a foreign country in a planned and premeditated manner,
it was held that such single act warrants an inference that he will repeat his
activity in future and, therefore, his detention is necessary to prevent him
from indulging in such prejudicial activity. If one looks at the acts the
COFEPOSA is designed to prevent, they are all either acts of smuggling or of
foreign exchange manipulation.
These acts are indulged in by persons, who act in concert with other persons
and quite often such activity has international ramifications. These acts are
preceded by a good amount of planning and organization. They are not like
ordinary law and order crimes. If, however, in any given case a single act is
found to be not sufficient to sustain the order of detention that may well be
quashed but it cannot be stated as a principle that one single act cannot
constitute the basis for detention. On the contrary, it does. In other words,
it is not necessary that there should be multiplicity of grounds for making or
sustaining an order of detention."
In the above context, what is required to be seen is as to whether on the
materials placed on record, it could reasonably be said to indicate any
organized act or manifestation of organized activity or give room for an
inference that the petitioner would continue to indulge in similar prejudicial
activity warranting or necessitating the detention of the person to ensure
that he does not repeat his activity in future. So far as the facts on record
in this case are concerned, it is seen that a stand has been taken for the
petitioner, at any rate, from the time of filing the bail application on
18.4.2001, that the baggage in question did not belong to him, that the
earlier statement obtained was under threat, coercion and undue influence and
that those baggage did not contain any tag also to connect the same with him.
That apart the specific stand taken for the petitioner is also that the
baggage containing the goods in question were in the name of one Babu with his
ticket number and address and no action could be taken against him before
recording a finding properly and deciding on the basis of any concrete
material the ownership of the disputed baggage. All the more so when the
Department itself has been after the said person also and the matter has not
reached to any final conclusion. As for the grievance that these relevant
materials have not been adverted to or considered by the Detaining Authority
before ordering the detention of the petitioner, in the counter affidavit
filed on behalf of the 1st respondent Detaining Authority, it is admitted that
investigation is still pending to ascertain the involvement and role of the
other person but that may not have any significance or relevance in the teeth
of the admission contained in the confessional statement of the petitioner and
that at any rate the Detaining Authority was very much aware of those facts
when the order of detention came to be passed.
Though, no doubt Courts exercising powers of judicial review do not consider
the challenge to an order of detention, as if on an appeal re-appreciating the
materials, yet since an order of detention in prison involves the fundamental
rights of citizen, freedom of movement and pursuit of normal life and liberty,
no absolute immunity can be claimed by the respondents as to the decision
arrived and it is open to the Courts to see whether there has been due and
proper application of mind and that all the relevant and vital materials for
the purpose have been noticed, adverted to and considered. So far as the facts
of the present case are concerned, the plea on behalf of the petitioner is not
that someone else also is concerned with the offending act but that he has
nothing to do with it and that the baggage containing the contraband really
belonged to such other person. Such plea cannot be also brushed aside in this
case as one merely invented in the air but seem to have necessary basis from
the fact that baggage ticket Nos. 0021777 and 0021771 were registered in the
name of one Babu and that concedingly action and investigation in this regard
is still pending and has not concluded so far. If the baggage really belonged
to another person as was stated to have been registered, it necessarily
follows that the petitioner cannot be the owner of the very same baggage. The
seriously doubtful position about the elementary and basic fact regarding the
ownership of the baggage and the admitted inconclusive stage of the
investigation in this regard could not legitimately help the authorities to
pass any order of detention against the petitioner on the perfunctory and
inchoate materials relied upon. Apart from the absence of any positive or
concrete materials to connect the baggage in question with the petitioner, the
nature of stand disclosed in the counter affidavit filed on behalf of the 1st
respondent on this aspect does not really help the Authority to prove that the
said material and such vitally relevant aspect was either adverted to or
really considered before passing the order of detention. Consequently, the
impugned order suffers the vice of total non-application of mind to a relevant
and vital material touching question of the culpability as well as the
necessity to order the detention of the petitioner. The impugned order of
detention, therefore, has been rightly quashed and the writ petitioner ordered
to be released from detention in prison.
J.
[ Doraiswamy Raju ] March 15, 2002.
is still pending and has not concluded so far. If the baggage really belonged
to another person as was stated to have been registered, it necessarily
follows that the petitioner cannot be the owner of the very same baggage. The
seriously doubtful position about the elementary and basic fact regarding the
ownership of the baggage and the admitted inconclusive stage of the
investigation in this regard could not legitimately help the authorities to
pass any order of detention against the petitioner on the perfunctory and
inchoate materials relied upon. Apart from the absence of any positive or
concrete materials to connect the baggage in question with the petitioner, the
nature of stand disclosed in the counter affidavit filed on behalf of the 1st
respondent on this aspect does not really help the Authority to prove that the
said material and such vitally relevant aspect was either adverted to or
really considered before passing the order of detention. Consequently, the
impugned order suffers the vice of total non-application of mind to a relevant
and vital material touching question of the culpability as well as the
necessity to order the detention of the petitioner. The impugned order of
confine the ground for the same on the question of non-application of mind to
all the relevant facts than make any observations on the general principles of
law, which, in my view, are well and firmly settled.
The petitioner has been ordered to be detained by the orders of the Government
of Tamil Nadu in G.O. No. SR.I/531-7/2001 Public (SC) Dept. dated 28.5.2001 in
exercise of the powers under Section 3(1)(i) of the Conservation of Foreign
Exchange and Prevention of Smuggling Activities Act, 1974 [hereinafter
referred to as "The Act"] and kept in custody in the Central Prison, Chennai.
From the grounds on which the said order came to be made, it could be seen
that the incident said to have occurred on 30.3.2001 when the petitioner
arrived from Singapore by IC 556 at Chennai Anna International Airport was the
main basis. The allegation against the petitioner is that though he brought in
his baggage (a) Panasonic GD92 Cell phones with accessories 100 Nos; (b) Nokia
3310 Cell phone with accessories 50 Nos; (c) Siemens C35 Cell phones with
accessories 50 Nos; (d) Nokia Cell phone adapter 100 Nos; (e) Nokia 5110 Cell
phone batteries 100 Nos without having any valid document for their lawful
import, not only he grossly mis-declared the value of the goods in his
possession, but after completing immigration formalities and collection of his
baggage and moving towards the Exit Gate when intercepted by Customs
Intelligence Officer and asked, the petitioner gave a negative reply as if he
is still pending and has not concluded so far. If the baggage really belonged
to another person as was stated to have been registered, it necessarily
follows that the petitioner cannot be the owner of the very same baggage. The
seriously doubtful position about the elementary and basic fact regarding the
ownership of the baggage and the admitted inconclusive stage of the
investigation in this regard could not legitimately help the authorities to
pass any order of detention against the petitioner on the perfunctory and
inchoate materials relied upon. Apart from the absence of any positive or
concrete materials to connect the baggage in question with the petitioner, the
nature of stand disclosed in the counter affidavit filed on behalf of the 1st
respondent on this aspect does not really help the Authority to prove that the
said material and such vitally relevant aspect was either adverted to or
really considered before passing the order of detention. Consequently, the
impugned order suffers the vice of total non-application of mind to a relevant
and vital material touching question of the culpability as well as the
necessity to order the detention of the petitioner. The impugned order of
confine the ground for the same on the question of non-application of mind to
all the relevant facts than make any observations on the general principles of
law, which, in my view, are well and firmly settled.
The petitioner has been ordered to be detained by the orders of the Government
of Tamil Nadu in G.O. No. SR.I/531-7/2001 Public (SC) Dept. dated 28.5.2001 in
exercise of the powers under Section 3(1)(i) of the Conservation of Foreign
Exchange and Prevention of Smuggling Activities Act, 1974 [hereinafter
referred to as "The Act"] and kept in custody in the Central Prison, Chennai.
From the grounds on which the said order came to be made, it could be seen
that the incident said to have occurred on 30.3.2001 when the petitioner
arrived from Singapore by IC 556 at Chennai Anna International Airport was the
main basis. The allegation against the petitioner is that though he brought in
his baggage (a) Panasonic GD92 Cell phones with accessories 100 Nos; (b) Nokia
3310 Cell phone with accessories 50 Nos; (c) Siemens C35 Cell phones with
accessories 50 Nos; (d) Nokia Cell phone adapter 100 Nos; (e) Nokia 5110 Cell
phone batteries 100 Nos without having any valid document for their lawful
import, not only he grossly mis-declared the value of the goods in his
possession, but after completing immigration formalities and collection of his
baggage and moving towards the Exit Gate when intercepted by Customs
Intelligence Officer and asked, the petitioner gave a negative reply as if he
is still pending and has not concluded so far. If the baggage really belonged
to another person as was stated to have been registered, it necessarily
follows that the petitioner cannot be the owner of the very same baggage. The
seriously doubtful position about the elementary and basic fact regarding the
ownership of the baggage and the admitted inconclusive stage of the
investigation in this regard could not legitimately help the authorities to
pass any order of detention against the petitioner on the perfunctory and
inchoate materials relied upon. Apart from the absence of any positive or
concrete materials to connect the baggage in question with the petitioner, the
nature of stand disclosed in the counter affidavit filed on behalf of the 1st
respondent on this aspect does not really help the Authority to prove that the
said material and such vitally relevant aspect was either adverted to or
really considered before passing the order of detention. Consequently, the
impugned order suffers the vice of total non-application of mind to a relevant
and vital material touching question of the culpability as well as the
necessity to order the detention of the petitioner. The impugned order of
confine the ground for the same on the question of non-application of mind to
all the relevant facts than make any observations on the general principles of
law, which, in my view, are well and firmly settled.
The petitioner has been ordered to be detained by the orders of the Government
of Tamil Nadu in G.O. No. SR.I/531-7/2001 Public (SC) Dept. dated 28.5.2001 in
exercise of the powers under Section 3(1)(i) of the Conservation of Foreign
Exchange and Prevention of Smuggling Activities Act, 1974 [hereinafter
referred to as "The Act"] and kept in custody in the Central Prison, Chennai.
From the grounds on which the said order came to be made, it could be seen
that the incident said to have occurred on 30.3.2001 when the petitioner
arrived from Singapore by IC 556 at Chennai Anna International Airport was the
main basis. The allegation against the petitioner is that though he brought in
his baggage (a) Panasonic GD92 Cell phones with accessories 100 Nos; (b) Nokia
3310 Cell phone with accessories 50 Nos; (c) Siemens C35 Cell phones with
accessories 50 Nos; (d) Nokia Cell phone adapter 100 Nos; (e) Nokia 5110 Cell
phone batteries 100 Nos without having any valid document for their lawful
import, not only he grossly mis-declared the value of the goods in his
possession, but after completing immigration formalities and collection of his
baggage and moving towards the Exit Gate when intercepted by Customs
Intelligence Officer and asked, the petitioner gave a negative reply as if he
is not in possession of any dutiable goods in trade quantity. After opening
the baggage, the above-referred goods were said to have been found in his
baggage and seized after following the required procedure. Beside the same, he
was also arrested on 31.3.2001 and lodged in prison after following the
procedure therefor. On the above materials, the petitioner was considered to
have committed violations justifying action under Section 111 (d) (i) (1), &
(m) of the Customs Act, 1962 read with Foreign Trade (Development and
Regulation) Act, 1992 in addition to rendering himself to be proceeded against
for committing an offence punishable under Sections 132 and 135 of the Customs
Act. The CIF value of the goods seized was said to be Rs.13,90,000/- and the
market value of the same was Rs.20,85,000/- on the date of the seizure.
is still pending and has not concluded so far. If the baggage really belonged
to another person as was stated to have been registered, it necessarily
follows that the petitioner cannot be the owner of the very same baggage. The
seriously doubtful position about the elementary and basic fact regarding the
ownership of the baggage and the admitted inconclusive stage of the
investigation in this regard could not legitimately help the authorities to
pass any order of detention against the petitioner on the perfunctory and
inchoate materials relied upon. Apart from the absence of any positive or
concrete materials to connect the baggage in question with the petitioner, the
nature of stand disclosed in the counter affidavit filed on behalf of the 1st
respondent on this aspect does not really help the Authority to prove that the
said material and such vitally relevant aspect was either adverted to or
really considered before passing the order of detention. Consequently, the
impugned order suffers the vice of total non-application of mind to a relevant
and vital material touching question of the culpability as well as the
necessity to order the detention of the petitioner. The impugned order of
confine the ground for the same on the question of non-application of mind to
all the relevant facts than make any observations on the general principles of
law, which, in my view, are well and firmly settled.
The petitioner has been ordered to be detained by the orders of the Government
of Tamil Nadu in G.O. No. SR.I/531-7/2001 Public (SC) Dept. dated 28.5.2001 in
exercise of the powers under Section 3(1)(i) of the Conservation of Foreign
Exchange and Prevention of Smuggling Activities Act, 1974 [hereinafter
referred to as "The Act"] and kept in custody in the Central Prison, Chennai.
From the grounds on which the said order came to be made, it could be seen
that the incident said to have occurred on 30.3.2001 when the petitioner
arrived from Singapore by IC 556 at Chennai Anna International Airport was the
main basis. The allegation against the petitioner is that though he brought in
his baggage (a) Panasonic GD92 Cell phones with accessories 100 Nos; (b) Nokia
3310 Cell phone with accessories 50 Nos; (c) Siemens C35 Cell phones with
accessories 50 Nos; (d) Nokia Cell phone adapter 100 Nos; (e) Nokia 5110 Cell
phone batteries 100 Nos without having any valid document for their lawful
import, not only he grossly mis-declared the value of the goods in his
possession, but after completing immigration formalities and collection of his
baggage and moving towards the Exit Gate when intercepted by Customs
Intelligence Officer and asked, the petitioner gave a negative reply as if he
is not in possession of any dutiable goods in trade quantity. After opening
the baggage, the above-referred goods were said to have been found in his
baggage and seized after following the required procedure. Beside the same, he
was also arrested on 31.3.2001 and lodged in prison after following the
procedure therefor. On the above materials, the petitioner was considered to
have committed violations justifying action under Section 111 (d) (i) (1), &
(m) of the Customs Act, 1962 read with Foreign Trade (Development and
Regulation) Act, 1992 in addition to rendering himself to be proceeded against
for committing an offence punishable under Sections 132 and 135 of the Customs
Act. The CIF value of the goods seized was said to be Rs.13,90,000/- and the
market value of the same was Rs.20,85,000/- on the date of the seizure.
is still pending and has not concluded so far. If the baggage really belonged
to another person as was stated to have been registered, it necessarily
follows that the petitioner cannot be the owner of the very same baggage. The
seriously doubtful position about the elementary and basic fact regarding the
ownership of the baggage and the admitted inconclusive stage of the
investigation in this regard could not legitimately help the authorities to
pass any order of detention against the petitioner on the perfunctory and
inchoate materials relied upon. Apart from the absence of any positive or
concrete materials to connect the baggage in question with the petitioner, the
nature of stand disclosed in the counter affidavit filed on behalf of the 1st
respondent on this aspect does not really help the Authority to prove that the
said material and such vitally relevant aspect was either adverted to or
really considered before passing the order of detention. Consequently, the
impugned order suffers the vice of total non-application of mind to a relevant
and vital material touching question of the culpability as well as the
necessity to order the detention of the petitioner. The impugned order of
