Central Government Act
Section 9(1)(vi) in The Income- Tax Act, 1995
(vi) income by way of royalty payable by-
(a) the Government; or
(b) a person who is a resident, except where the royalty is payable in respect
of any right, property or information used or services utilised for the
purposes of a business or profession carried on by such person outside India
or for the purposes of making or earning any income from any source outside
India; or
(c) a person who is a non- resident, where the royalty is payable in respect
of any right, property or information used or services utilised for the
purposes of a business or profession carried on by such person in India or for
the purposes of making or earning any income from any source in India:
Provided that nothing contained in this clause shall apply in relation to so
much of the income by way of royalty as consists of lump sum consideration for
the transfer outside India of, or the imparting of information outside India
in respect of, any data, documentation, drawing or specification relating to
any patent, invention, model, de sign, secret formula or process or trade mark
or similar property, if such income is payable in pursuance of an agreement
made before the 1st day of April, 1976 , and the agreement is approved by the
based equipment under any scheme approved under the Policy on Computer
Software Export, Software Development and Training, 1986 of the Government of
India.] Explanation 1-For the purposes of the 2 first] proviso, an agreement
made on or after the 1st day of April, 1976 , shall be deemed to have been
made before that date if the agreement is made in accordance with proposals
approved by the Central Government before that date; so, however, that, where
the recipient of the income by way of royalty is a foreign company, the
agreement shall not be deemed to have been made before that date unless,
before the expiry of the time allowed under sub- section (1) or sub- section
(2) of section 139 (whether fixed originally or on extension) for furnishing
the return of income for the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of
April, 1977 , or the assessment year in respect of which such income first
becomes chargeable to tax under this Act, whichever assessment year is later,
the company exercises an option by furnishing a declaration in writing to the
3 Assessing] Officer (such option being final for that assessment year and for
every subsequent assessment year) that the agreement may be regarded as an
made before the 1st day of April, 1976 , and the agreement is approved by the
Central Government:
1\. Inserted by the Finance Act, 1983, w. r. e. f. 1- 4- 1979.
2\. Clauses (v), (vi) and (vii) inserted by the Finance Act, 1976, w. e. f. 1-
6- 1976.
1 Provided further that nothing contained in this clause shall apply in
relation to so much of the income by way of royalty as consists of lump sum
payment made by a person, who is a resident, for the transfer of all or any
rights (including the granting of a licence) in respect of computer software
supplied by a nonresident manufacturer along with a computer or computer-
based equipment under any scheme approved under the Policy on Computer
Software Export, Software Development and Training, 1986 of the Government of
India.] Explanation 1-For the purposes of the 2 first] proviso, an agreement
made on or after the 1st day of April, 1976 , shall be deemed to have been
made before that date if the agreement is made in accordance with proposals
approved by the Central Government before that date; so, however, that, where
the recipient of the income by way of royalty is a foreign company, the
agreement shall not be deemed to have been made before that date unless,
before the expiry of the time allowed under sub- section (1) or sub- section
(2) of section 139 (whether fixed originally or on extension) for furnishing
the return of income for the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of
April, 1977 , or the assessment year in respect of which such income first
becomes chargeable to tax under this Act, whichever assessment year is later,
the company exercises an option by furnishing a declaration in writing to the
3 Assessing] Officer (such option being final for that assessment year and for
every subsequent assessment year) that the agreement may be regarded as an
agreement made before the 1st day of April, 1976 . Explanation 2.- For the
purposes of this clause," royalty" means consideration (including any lump sum
consideration but excluding any consideration which would be the income of the
recipient chargeable under the head" Capital gains") for-
based equipment under any scheme approved under the Policy on Computer
Software Export, Software Development and Training, 1986 of the Government of
India.] Explanation 1-For the purposes of the 2 first] proviso, an agreement
made on or after the 1st day of April, 1976 , shall be deemed to have been
made before that date if the agreement is made in accordance with proposals
approved by the Central Government before that date; so, however, that, where
the recipient of the income by way of royalty is a foreign company, the
agreement shall not be deemed to have been made before that date unless,
before the expiry of the time allowed under sub- section (1) or sub- section
(2) of section 139 (whether fixed originally or on extension) for furnishing
the return of income for the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of
April, 1977 , or the assessment year in respect of which such income first
becomes chargeable to tax under this Act, whichever assessment year is later,
the company exercises an option by furnishing a declaration in writing to the
3 Assessing] Officer (such option being final for that assessment year and for
every subsequent assessment year) that the agreement may be regarded as an
made before the 1st day of April, 1976 , and the agreement is approved by the
Central Government:
1\. Inserted by the Finance Act, 1983, w. r. e. f. 1- 4- 1979.
2\. Clauses (v), (vi) and (vii) inserted by the Finance Act, 1976, w. e. f. 1-
6- 1976.
1 Provided further that nothing contained in this clause shall apply in
relation to so much of the income by way of royalty as consists of lump sum
payment made by a person, who is a resident, for the transfer of all or any
rights (including the granting of a licence) in respect of computer software
supplied by a nonresident manufacturer along with a computer or computer-
based equipment under any scheme approved under the Policy on Computer
Software Export, Software Development and Training, 1986 of the Government of
India.] Explanation 1-For the purposes of the 2 first] proviso, an agreement
made on or after the 1st day of April, 1976 , shall be deemed to have been
made before that date if the agreement is made in accordance with proposals
approved by the Central Government before that date; so, however, that, where
the recipient of the income by way of royalty is a foreign company, the
agreement shall not be deemed to have been made before that date unless,
before the expiry of the time allowed under sub- section (1) or sub- section
(2) of section 139 (whether fixed originally or on extension) for furnishing
based equipment under any scheme approved under the Policy on Computer
Software Export, Software Development and Training, 1986 of the Government of
India.] Explanation 1-For the purposes of the 2 first] proviso, an agreement
made on or after the 1st day of April, 1976 , shall be deemed to have been
made before that date if the agreement is made in accordance with proposals
approved by the Central Government before that date; so, however, that, where
the recipient of the income by way of royalty is a foreign company, the
agreement shall not be deemed to have been made before that date unless,
before the expiry of the time allowed under sub- section (1) or sub- section
(2) of section 139 (whether fixed originally or on extension) for furnishing
the return of income for the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of
April, 1977 , or the assessment year in respect of which such income first
becomes chargeable to tax under this Act, whichever assessment year is later,
the company exercises an option by furnishing a declaration in writing to the
3 Assessing] Officer (such option being final for that assessment year and for
every subsequent assessment year) that the agreement may be regarded as an
made before the 1st day of April, 1976 , and the agreement is approved by the
Central Government:
1\. Inserted by the Finance Act, 1983, w. r. e. f. 1- 4- 1979.
2\. Clauses (v), (vi) and (vii) inserted by the Finance Act, 1976, w. e. f. 1-
6- 1976.
1 Provided further that nothing contained in this clause shall apply in
relation to so much of the income by way of royalty as consists of lump sum
payment made by a person, who is a resident, for the transfer of all or any
rights (including the granting of a licence) in respect of computer software
supplied by a nonresident manufacturer along with a computer or computer-
based equipment under any scheme approved under the Policy on Computer
Software Export, Software Development and Training, 1986 of the Government of
India.] Explanation 1-For the purposes of the 2 first] proviso, an agreement
made on or after the 1st day of April, 1976 , shall be deemed to have been
made before that date if the agreement is made in accordance with proposals
approved by the Central Government before that date; so, however, that, where
the recipient of the income by way of royalty is a foreign company, the
agreement shall not be deemed to have been made before that date unless,
before the expiry of the time allowed under sub- section (1) or sub- section
(2) of section 139 (whether fixed originally or on extension) for furnishing
based equipment under any scheme approved under the Policy on Computer
Software Export, Software Development and Training, 1986 of the Government of
India.] Explanation 1-For the purposes of the 2 first] proviso, an agreement
made on or after the 1st day of April, 1976 , shall be deemed to have been
made before that date if the agreement is made in accordance with proposals
approved by the Central Government before that date; so, however, that, where
the recipient of the income by way of royalty is a foreign company, the
agreement shall not be deemed to have been made before that date unless,
before the expiry of the time allowed under sub- section (1) or sub- section
(2) of section 139 (whether fixed originally or on extension) for furnishing
the return of income for the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of
April, 1977 , or the assessment year in respect of which such income first
becomes chargeable to tax under this Act, whichever assessment year is later,
the company exercises an option by furnishing a declaration in writing to the
3 Assessing] Officer (such option being final for that assessment year and for
every subsequent assessment year) that the agreement may be regarded as an
made before the 1st day of April, 1976 , and the agreement is approved by the
Central Government:
1\. Inserted by the Finance Act, 1983, w. r. e. f. 1- 4- 1979.
2\. Clauses (v), (vi) and (vii) inserted by the Finance Act, 1976, w. e. f. 1-
6- 1976.
1 Provided further that nothing contained in this clause shall apply in
relation to so much of the income by way of royalty as consists of lump sum
payment made by a person, who is a resident, for the transfer of all or any
rights (including the granting of a licence) in respect of computer software
supplied by a nonresident manufacturer along with a computer or computer-
based equipment under any scheme approved under the Policy on Computer
Software Export, Software Development and Training, 1986 of the Government of
India.] Explanation 1-For the purposes of the 2 first] proviso, an agreement
made on or after the 1st day of April, 1976 , shall be deemed to have been
made before that date if the agreement is made in accordance with proposals
approved by the Central Government before that date; so, however, that, where
the recipient of the income by way of royalty is a foreign company, the
agreement shall not be deemed to have been made before that date unless,
before the expiry of the time allowed under sub- section (1) or sub- section
(2) of section 139 (whether fixed originally or on extension) for furnishing
the return of income for the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of
April, 1977 , or the assessment year in respect of which such income first
becomes chargeable to tax under this Act, whichever assessment year is later,
the company exercises an option by furnishing a declaration in writing to the
3 Assessing] Officer (such option being final for that assessment year and for
every subsequent assessment year) that the agreement may be regarded as an
agreement made before the 1st day of April, 1976 . Explanation 2.- For the
purposes of this clause," royalty" means consideration (including any lump sum
consideration but excluding any consideration which would be the income of the
recipient chargeable under the head" Capital gains") for-
based equipment under any scheme approved under the Policy on Computer
Software Export, Software Development and Training, 1986 of the Government of
India.] Explanation 1-For the purposes of the 2 first] proviso, an agreement
made on or after the 1st day of April, 1976 , shall be deemed to have been
made before that date if the agreement is made in accordance with proposals
approved by the Central Government before that date; so, however, that, where
the recipient of the income by way of royalty is a foreign company, the
agreement shall not be deemed to have been made before that date unless,
before the expiry of the time allowed under sub- section (1) or sub- section
(2) of section 139 (whether fixed originally or on extension) for furnishing
the return of income for the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of
April, 1977 , or the assessment year in respect of which such income first
becomes chargeable to tax under this Act, whichever assessment year is later,
the company exercises an option by furnishing a declaration in writing to the
3 Assessing] Officer (such option being final for that assessment year and for
every subsequent assessment year) that the agreement may be regarded as an
made before the 1st day of April, 1976 , and the agreement is approved by the
Central Government:
1\. Inserted by the Finance Act, 1983, w. r. e. f. 1- 4- 1979.
2\. Clauses (v), (vi) and (vii) inserted by the Finance Act, 1976, w. e. f. 1-
6- 1976.
1 Provided further that nothing contained in this clause shall apply in
relation to so much of the income by way of royalty as consists of lump sum
payment made by a person, who is a resident, for the transfer of all or any
rights (including the granting of a licence) in respect of computer software
supplied by a nonresident manufacturer along with a computer or computer-
based equipment under any scheme approved under the Policy on Computer
Software Export, Software Development and Training, 1986 of the Government of
India.] Explanation 1-For the purposes of the 2 first] proviso, an agreement
made on or after the 1st day of April, 1976 , shall be deemed to have been
made before that date if the agreement is made in accordance with proposals
approved by the Central Government before that date; so, however, that, where
the recipient of the income by way of royalty is a foreign company, the
agreement shall not be deemed to have been made before that date unless,
before the expiry of the time allowed under sub- section (1) or sub- section
(2) of section 139 (whether fixed originally or on extension) for furnishing
the return of income for the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of
April, 1977 , or the assessment year in respect of which such income first
becomes chargeable to tax under this Act, whichever assessment year is later,
the company exercises an option by furnishing a declaration in writing to the
3 Assessing] Officer (such option being final for that assessment year and for
every subsequent assessment year) that the agreement may be regarded as an
agreement made before the 1st day of April, 1976 . Explanation 2.- For the
purposes of this clause," royalty" means consideration (including any lump sum
consideration but excluding any consideration which would be the income of the
recipient chargeable under the head" Capital gains") for-
based equipment under any scheme approved under the Policy on Computer
Software Export, Software Development and Training, 1986 of the Government of
India.] Explanation 1-For the purposes of the 2 first] proviso, an agreement
made on or after the 1st day of April, 1976 , shall be deemed to have been
made before that date if the agreement is made in accordance with proposals
approved by the Central Government before that date; so, however, that, where
the recipient of the income by way of royalty is a foreign company, the
agreement shall not be deemed to have been made before that date unless,
before the expiry of the time allowed under sub- section (1) or sub- section
(2) of section 139 (whether fixed originally or on extension) for furnishing
the return of income for the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of
April, 1977 , or the assessment year in respect of which such income first
becomes chargeable to tax under this Act, whichever assessment year is later,
the company exercises an option by furnishing a declaration in writing to the
3 Assessing] Officer (such option being final for that assessment year and for
every subsequent assessment year) that the agreement may be regarded as an
