Customs, Excise and Gold Tribunal - Delhi
Pilco Pharma vs Collector Of Central Excise on 12 March, 1987
Equivalent citations: 1987 (12) ECR 8 Tri Delhi, 1987 (29) ELT 523 Tri Del
ORDER K.L. Rekhi, Member (T)
1\. The appellants manufactured patent and proprietary medicines at Kanpur. In
dispute in this appeal is the question as to what was the normal price for
assessment of their goods to Central excise duty.
2\. The adjudicating Collector has held them guilty of short-payment of duty
through fraudulent mis-declaration of the value of their goods, and ordered
them to pay the differential duty of Rs. 1,73,269.28 Under Rule 9(2) of the
Central Excise Rules, 1944 for the period of 5 years (1978-79 to 1982-83) and
has further imposed a penalty of Rs. 4 lakhs on them Under Rule 173Q of the
same Rules.
3\. During the hearing before us, the appellants first raised a couple of
legal pleas, namely;
(1) that there was violation of the principles of natural justice inasmuch as
the 60 and odd retailers whose statements were relied on by the department
against them were not produced for cross examination by the appellants even
though asked for at the stage of adjudication, and (2) the demand for
differential duty, though made Under Rule 9(2), was, in fact, a demand for the
the distributor firm were closely related to the partners of the manufacturing
firm but there were additional circumstances also in the form of the
manufacturing firm giving its motor vehicles free to the distributor firm and
the distributor firm incurring expenses on advertisement of the goods produced
by the manufacturing firms.
14\. While we confirm the basis of valuation as adopted by the Collector, the
calculations of the demand for duty would appear to require another look by
the Collector. The appellants stated before us that such obvious deductions as
central excise duty and sales tax had not been allowed from the gross sale
price of M/s Gulati Traders. If it is really so, it is a violation of the
specific provision of Section 4(4)(d)(ii) and the Collector Should set it
right immediately.
15\. While imposition of the penalty on the appellants Under Rule 17sc was
legal and fully justified by the facts of the case, the amount of penalty of
Rs. 4 lakhs is excessive as it is more than double the amount of the duty
sought to be evaded even according to the calculations already made. We reduce
differential duty, though made Under Rule 9(2), was, in fact, a demand for the
duty allegedly short-paid for the recovery of which a specific provision
existed under Section 11A of the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944 and hence
Rule 9(2) was inapplicable; under Section 11 A, the Assistant Collector alone
was competent to adjudicate upon a demand for short levy and the impugned
adjudication order passed by the Collector in so far as it related to the
demand for short levy, was out of jurisdiction.
However, in the same breath, the appellants added that they did not desire a
remand of the matter. They requested that we should decide the case on merits.
4\. Thereupon, we took up consideration of the merits of the case and heard
both sides on merits. We have since given our earnest consideration to the
submissions made by both sides and the record of the case. The material facts,
on which the decision of the point in dispute depends, have come out as
under:-
(1) Most of the 60 and odd retailers, whom the appellants claimed to have sold
the goods at the factory gate, have, in their statements recorded by the
departmental officers, denied having purchased any medicines manufactured by
the appellants. A few of them admitted having purchased such medicines but
from M/s Gulati Traders of Kanpur and not from the appellants.
(2) For Delhi area, all sales of the appellants' medicines were made to M/s
K.K. Traders of Delhi. The Collector has held that this firm was an
independent party in the sense that it was not a 'related person' of the
appellants within the meaning of Section 4(4)(c) of the Central Excises and
Salt Act, 1944. Yet, the Collector held that the sale, price charged by the
appellants from M/s K.K. Traders could not be the normal price on the ground
that the sales to this firm were negligible (about 1% only) and were only a
facade of "independent sales" created to enable the appellants to depress the
assessable value of their goods and thereby evade payment of a part of the
Central Excise duty. The learned representative of the department reiterated
this contention and placed reliance on the Karnataka High Court judgment at,
1978 ELT (J564). State of Karnataka v. Union of India & others and the Supreme
Court judgment at 1985 (59) S.T.C. 277 - McDowell and Company.
(3) The remaining sales (about 99%) of the appellants' medicines were made to
or through M/s Gulati Traders of Kanpur. This firm sold the medicines
manufactured by the appellants alone and of no other manufacturer. This firm
was the sole distributor of the appellants' medicines for the whole of India
except Delhi area. All the four partners of the firm were close relatives of
the appellant firm and they came within the definition of 'relative' as in the
Companies Act, 1956. The Collector held that M/s Gulati Traders of Kanpur were
a 'related person' of the appellants within the meaning of both parts of
Section 4(4)(c). For the first part of the definition, the Collector held
existence of mutual business interest of the two firms as proved on the ground
that the appellants had made over two Matador Vans to M/s Gulati Traders for
use in the latter's sales activity. The appellants stated before us, but no
such fact is recorded in the impugned order-in-original, that they had
collected rentals for the vans for three out of the five years for which the
Collector has issued the duty demand. In the Show Cause Notice, besides the
vans, two other grounds of mutual business interest had been set out, namely,
(i) employment of three agents by M/s Gulati Traders for procuring sales
orders for the appellants' medicines, and (ii) expenses incurred by M/s Gulati
Traders on advertisements of the appellants' medicines. However, during the
adjudication the Collector dropped these two other grounds holding that these
two activities promoted the sales of M/s Gulati Traders also with a view to
giving them larger profits. The Collector further held that the second part of
the definition of 'related person' was also proved because, all the partners
of M/s Gulati Traders being close relatives of the partners of the appellant
firm, M/s Gulati Traders were both "a relative and a distributor of the
assessee". The Collector rejected the argument of the appellants that the two
firms should have been related to each other and not the individual partners
of the firm. The Collector held that a partnership firm was nothing but a sum
total of its partners and that it was not a legal person like a limited
company. Secondly, the Collector held, the firm not being a person or human
being could not have relatives; the partners alone could have relatives.
Before us, the appellants relied on the judgment of this Tribunal at 1983 ELT
1994 - G.D. Industrial Engineers - in which two partnership firms with
identical partners had been held as two separate persons (their shares in the
two firms varied). The appellants also placed reliance on 1978 ELT 317 (SC) -
Assistant Collector of Central Excise & Customs v. Shri J.C. Shah and Ors. and
- 1986 (24) ELT 186 (SC) - Deputy Commissioner of Sales Tax (Law) v. K.
Kelukutty \- which has been cited in this Tribunal's judgment at 1987 (27) ELT
477 (Tribunal) - Minichem India.
5\. The appellants further contended that the duty demand had been inflated as
the department had not allowed even the obvious deductions of central excise
duty and sales tax from the sale price of M/s Gulati Traders.
6\. No other plea was pressed before us by the appellants.
7\. We find that the issue before us is not whether M/s Pilco Pharma, Kanpur
and M/s Gulati Traders, Kanpur were one firm or two separate firms or whether
one worked by or on behalf of the other. The Supreme Court judgments in the
cases of J.C. Shah and K. Kelukutty and this Tribunal's judgment in the case
of Minichem India aforesaid, relied on by the appellants, are, therefore, not
relevant for disposal of the instant appeal. The issue before us is whether
M/s Gulati Traders were 'related person' of the appellants or not. The
Collector has held that they were a related person and he has, consequently,
ordered assessment on the basis of the sale price of the related person, i.e.,
M/s Gulati Traders, in terms of proviso (iii) to Section 4(1Xa). This proviso
reads as under:-
"(iii) where the assessee so arranges that the goods are generally not sold by
him in the course of wholesale trade except to or through a related person,
the normal price of the goods sold by the assessee to or through such related
person shall be deemed to be the price at which they are ordinarily sold by
the related person in the course of wholesale trade at the time of removal, to
dealers (not being related persons) or where such goods are not sold to such
dealers, to dealers (being related persons) who sell such goods in retail;"
8\. Two conditions must be satisfied before the above proviso can be invoked -
(a) the assessee's buyer should be a related person and
(b) the assessee should be selling his goods generally to or through such
related person.
As regards the first condition, the Act itself defines as to who is a related
person. We reproduce below the relevant section 4(4)(c) and also the
definition of "relative" as in the Companies Act, 1956:-
(c) 'related person means a person who is so associated with the assessee that
they have interest, directly or indirectly, in the business of each other and
includes a holding company, a subsidiary company, a relative and a distributor
of the assessee and any sub-distributor of such distributor.
Explanation. - In this Clause 'holding company', 'subsidiary company' and
'relative' have the same meanings as in the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956)."
EXTRACTS FROM THE COMPANIES ACT, 1956 "2. In this Act, unless the context
otherwise requires -
x x x x (4) 'relative' means, with reference to any person, any one who is
related to such person in any of the ways specified in section 6, and no
others;
    x     x   x
    6. MEANING OF RELATIVE - A person shall be deemed to be a relative of another if, and only if,
    (a)  they are members of a Hindu Undivided family; or
    (b)  they are husband and wife; or
    (c)  the  one  is  related  to  the other  in the manner indicated in Schedule 1A                   x   x   x   x
    SCHEDULE 1A 
     [See Section 6(c)] 
    LIST OF RELATIVES
    1.    Father
    2.    Mother (including step mother)
    3.    Son (including step son)
    4.   Son's wife
    5.    Daughter
    6.   Father's father
    7.   Father's mother
    8.    Mother's mother
    9.    Mother's father
    10.    Son's son
    11.    Son's    son's wife
    12.    Son's daughter
    13.    Son's daughter's husband
    14.    Daughter's husband
    15.    Daughter's son
    16.   Daughter's Son's wife
    17.    Daughter's daughter
    18.    Daughter's daughter's husband
    19.    Brother (including step brother)
    20.    Brother's wife
    21.    Sister (including step sister)
    22.    Sister's husband."
9\. It was not contested by the appellants before the Collector, nor before
us, that all the partners of M/s Gulati Traders were relatives of the partners
of M/s Pilco Pharma within the meaning of the term as in the Companies Act.
Now, it is clear that when one talks of father, mother, son, daughter or
brother etc. with reference to human affairs, the reference is to relationship
between human beings, A firm cannot be the father or mother of another firm.
To insist that two firms should be so related and no the individual partners
comprising them, as the appellants do, is to ask for the impossible. That
would render the later part of section 4(4)(c) nugatory except in relation to
two proprietory units. We find no warrant for saying that two units owned by
father and son, respectively, are 'relatives' but two firms owned by father
and mother, on the one hand, and by mother and son, on the other, are not
'relatives'. The relationship of father, mother, son, brother etc. has got to
be determined in relation to the individual partners comprising the two firms,
as the Collector has done. By that test, we hold, M/s Gulati Traders were a
'relative' of the assessee, M/s Pilco Pharma.
10\. It is no longer in dispute that M/s Gulati Traders were the appellants'
distributor for the whole of India except Delhi area. They were, therefore, "a
relative and a distributor of the assessee" within the meaning of section
4(4)(c).
11\. We find that the facts of the case justify classification of M/s Gulati
Traders as a 'related person' of the appellants even according to the test
laid down in the first part of the definition in section 4(4)(c) inasmuch as
there was financial involvement of the two firms in the business of each
other. The appellants had given their two Matador vans to M/s Gulati Traders
for which, even according to the appellants themselves, no rental was charged
for atleast two out of the five years under dispute. On the other side, M/s
Gulati Traders incurred expenses on advertisement of the appellants' products.
Advertisement and publicity are activities which rightly belong to the
manufacturer as they make his goods marketable and promote their sales. On
that ground, the Supreme Court have held that advertisement expenses are
includible in the assessable value of the goods 1983 ELT 1896 (SC) - Bombay
Tyre International]. Mutuality of interest between the two firms was there,
beyond doubt.
12\. Coming to the second condition of proviso (iii) to Section 4(1 )(a) now,
the Collector has found that 99% of the appellants' goods were sold to or
through M/s Gulati Traders. He has held after investigations that the gate
passes and invoices made by the appellants in the name of 60 and odd retailers
were fake and were a feverish attempt on the part of the appellants to create
a facade of independent sales at the factory gate so as to get away with a
lower assessable value. The appellants were supplied with copies of the
statements given by these 60 and odd retailers to the departmental officers.
The appellants have a grievance that these retailers were not produced for
cross-examination by them before the Collector. At the same time, they do not
want a remand of the matter to the Collector for a fresh adjudication but want
us to decide it on merits. In the circumstances, when all the retailers, with
one voice, deny having purchased any medicines from the appellants, we cannot
brush their statements aside. Even assuming, for the sake of argument, that
the appellants did make direct sales to these retailers at the same price at
which they sold their products to M/s Gulati Traders and M/s K.K. Traders, the
quality sold by them to these retailers, 'according to their own statement
before us, was no more than 15%. It would only mean that they sold about 84%
of their goods to or through the related person, M/s Gulati Traders, and no
99%. That would make no difference to the conclusion that their goods were
generally sold in wholesale to or through the related person only. Both the
conditions of proviso (iii) to section 4(1)(a) were thus satisfied and the
Collector was justified in determining the assessable value under this
proviso. The proviso does not require that all the hundred percent sales
should be to or through the related person. It is enough if they are
generally" so, the small number of independent sales notwithstanding.
13\. We feel fortified in our conclusions by the Supreme Court judgment at
1986 (23) E.L.T. 3 (SC) - Mohan Lal Maganlal Bhavsar and others v. Union of
India and others which was cited by the learned representative of the
department. In that case, there were to separate partnership firms the
manufacturing firm and the chief distributor firm. The three partners of the
manufacturing firm along with a son of each of them were also the partners of
the chief distributor firm. From this fact, the Supreme Court observed that
there was "identity of interest" between the two firms. There were certain
additional circumstances also in that case. The chief distributor firm had
their offices in the same premises as the manufacturing firm and the sons of
the three partners of the manufacturing firm were to share only in the profits
of the chief distributor firm but not to be liable for any losses. The Supreme
Court concluded that the two firms could not said to be at arm's length or
independent parties and the prices at which the goods were sold by the
manufacturing firm to the chief distributor firm could not be taken to be the
real value of the goods. In the case before us also, not only the partners of
the distributor firm were closely related to the partners of the manufacturing
firm but there were additional circumstances also in the form of the
manufacturing firm giving its motor vehicles free to the distributor firm and
the distributor firm incurring expenses on advertisement of the goods produced
by the manufacturing firms.
14\. While we confirm the basis of valuation as adopted by the Collector, the
calculations of the demand for duty would appear to require another look by
the Collector. The appellants stated before us that such obvious deductions as
central excise duty and sales tax had not been allowed from the gross sale
price of M/s Gulati Traders. If it is really so, it is a violation of the
specific provision of Section 4(4)(d)(ii) and the Collector Should set it
right immediately.
15\. While imposition of the penalty on the appellants Under Rule 17sc was
legal and fully justified by the facts of the case, the amount of penalty of
Rs. 4 lakhs is excessive as it is more than double the amount of the duty
sought to be evaded even according to the calculations already made. We reduce
the penalty to Rs. 1 lakh only.
16\. But for the reduction in the amount of penalty as ordered in the
preceding paragraph and the possible re-calculation of the duty demand as
ordered in paragraph 14 above, the appeal is otherwise dismissed.
the distributor firm were closely related to the partners of the manufacturing
firm but there were additional circumstances also in the form of the
manufacturing firm giving its motor vehicles free to the distributor firm and
the distributor firm incurring expenses on advertisement of the goods produced
by the manufacturing firms.
14\. While we confirm the basis of valuation as adopted by the Collector, the
calculations of the demand for duty would appear to require another look by
the Collector. The appellants stated before us that such obvious deductions as
central excise duty and sales tax had not been allowed from the gross sale
price of M/s Gulati Traders. If it is really so, it is a violation of the
specific provision of Section 4(4)(d)(ii) and the Collector Should set it
right immediately.
15\. While imposition of the penalty on the appellants Under Rule 17sc was
legal and fully justified by the facts of the case, the amount of penalty of
Rs. 4 lakhs is excessive as it is more than double the amount of the duty
sought to be evaded even according to the calculations already made. We reduce
differential duty, though made Under Rule 9(2), was, in fact, a demand for the
duty allegedly short-paid for the recovery of which a specific provision
existed under Section 11A of the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944 and hence
Rule 9(2) was inapplicable; under Section 11 A, the Assistant Collector alone
was competent to adjudicate upon a demand for short levy and the impugned
adjudication order passed by the Collector in so far as it related to the
demand for short levy, was out of jurisdiction.
However, in the same breath, the appellants added that they did not desire a
remand of the matter. They requested that we should decide the case on merits.
4\. Thereupon, we took up consideration of the merits of the case and heard
both sides on merits. We have since given our earnest consideration to the
submissions made by both sides and the record of the case. The material facts,
on which the decision of the point in dispute depends, have come out as
under:-
(1) Most of the 60 and odd retailers, whom the appellants claimed to have sold
the goods at the factory gate, have, in their statements recorded by the
departmental officers, denied having purchased any medicines manufactured by
the appellants. A few of them admitted having purchased such medicines but
from M/s Gulati Traders of Kanpur and not from the appellants.
(2) For Delhi area, all sales of the appellants' medicines were made to M/s
the distributor firm were closely related to the partners of the manufacturing
firm but there were additional circumstances also in the form of the
manufacturing firm giving its motor vehicles free to the distributor firm and
the distributor firm incurring expenses on advertisement of the goods produced
by the manufacturing firms.
14\. While we confirm the basis of valuation as adopted by the Collector, the
calculations of the demand for duty would appear to require another look by
the Collector. The appellants stated before us that such obvious deductions as
central excise duty and sales tax had not been allowed from the gross sale
price of M/s Gulati Traders. If it is really so, it is a violation of the
specific provision of Section 4(4)(d)(ii) and the Collector Should set it
right immediately.
15\. While imposition of the penalty on the appellants Under Rule 17sc was
legal and fully justified by the facts of the case, the amount of penalty of
Rs. 4 lakhs is excessive as it is more than double the amount of the duty
sought to be evaded even according to the calculations already made. We reduce
differential duty, though made Under Rule 9(2), was, in fact, a demand for the
duty allegedly short-paid for the recovery of which a specific provision
existed under Section 11A of the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944 and hence
Rule 9(2) was inapplicable; under Section 11 A, the Assistant Collector alone
was competent to adjudicate upon a demand for short levy and the impugned
adjudication order passed by the Collector in so far as it related to the
demand for short levy, was out of jurisdiction.
However, in the same breath, the appellants added that they did not desire a
remand of the matter. They requested that we should decide the case on merits.
4\. Thereupon, we took up consideration of the merits of the case and heard
both sides on merits. We have since given our earnest consideration to the
submissions made by both sides and the record of the case. The material facts,
on which the decision of the point in dispute depends, have come out as
under:-
(1) Most of the 60 and odd retailers, whom the appellants claimed to have sold
the goods at the factory gate, have, in their statements recorded by the
departmental officers, denied having purchased any medicines manufactured by
the appellants. A few of them admitted having purchased such medicines but
from M/s Gulati Traders of Kanpur and not from the appellants.
(2) For Delhi area, all sales of the appellants' medicines were made to M/s
the distributor firm were closely related to the partners of the manufacturing
firm but there were additional circumstances also in the form of the
manufacturing firm giving its motor vehicles free to the distributor firm and
the distributor firm incurring expenses on advertisement of the goods produced
by the manufacturing firms.
14\. While we confirm the basis of valuation as adopted by the Collector, the
calculations of the demand for duty would appear to require another look by
the Collector. The appellants stated before us that such obvious deductions as
central excise duty and sales tax had not been allowed from the gross sale
price of M/s Gulati Traders. If it is really so, it is a violation of the
specific provision of Section 4(4)(d)(ii) and the Collector Should set it
right immediately.
15\. While imposition of the penalty on the appellants Under Rule 17sc was
legal and fully justified by the facts of the case, the amount of penalty of
Rs. 4 lakhs is excessive as it is more than double the amount of the duty
sought to be evaded even according to the calculations already made. We reduce
differential duty, though made Under Rule 9(2), was, in fact, a demand for the
duty allegedly short-paid for the recovery of which a specific provision
existed under Section 11A of the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944 and hence
Rule 9(2) was inapplicable; under Section 11 A, the Assistant Collector alone
was competent to adjudicate upon a demand for short levy and the impugned
adjudication order passed by the Collector in so far as it related to the
demand for short levy, was out of jurisdiction.
However, in the same breath, the appellants added that they did not desire a
remand of the matter. They requested that we should decide the case on merits.
4\. Thereupon, we took up consideration of the merits of the case and heard
both sides on merits. We have since given our earnest consideration to the
submissions made by both sides and the record of the case. The material facts,
on which the decision of the point in dispute depends, have come out as
under:-
(1) Most of the 60 and odd retailers, whom the appellants claimed to have sold
the goods at the factory gate, have, in their statements recorded by the
departmental officers, denied having purchased any medicines manufactured by
the appellants. A few of them admitted having purchased such medicines but
from M/s Gulati Traders of Kanpur and not from the appellants.
(2) For Delhi area, all sales of the appellants' medicines were made to M/s
K.K. Traders of Delhi. The Collector has held that this firm was an
independent party in the sense that it was not a 'related person' of the
appellants within the meaning of Section 4(4)(c) of the Central Excises and
Salt Act, 1944. Yet, the Collector held that the sale, price charged by the
appellants from M/s K.K. Traders could not be the normal price on the ground
that the sales to this firm were negligible (about 1% only) and were only a
facade of "independent sales" created to enable the appellants to depress the
assessable value of their goods and thereby evade payment of a part of the
Central Excise duty. The learned representative of the department reiterated
this contention and placed reliance on the Karnataka High Court judgment at,
1978 ELT (J564). State of Karnataka v. Union of India & others and the Supreme
the distributor firm were closely related to the partners of the manufacturing
firm but there were additional circumstances also in the form of the
manufacturing firm giving its motor vehicles free to the distributor firm and
the distributor firm incurring expenses on advertisement of the goods produced
by the manufacturing firms.
14\. While we confirm the basis of valuation as adopted by the Collector, the
calculations of the demand for duty would appear to require another look by
the Collector. The appellants stated before us that such obvious deductions as
central excise duty and sales tax had not been allowed from the gross sale
price of M/s Gulati Traders. If it is really so, it is a violation of the
specific provision of Section 4(4)(d)(ii) and the Collector Should set it
right immediately.
15\. While imposition of the penalty on the appellants Under Rule 17sc was
legal and fully justified by the facts of the case, the amount of penalty of
Rs. 4 lakhs is excessive as it is more than double the amount of the duty
sought to be evaded even according to the calculations already made. We reduce
differential duty, though made Under Rule 9(2), was, in fact, a demand for the
duty allegedly short-paid for the recovery of which a specific provision
existed under Section 11A of the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944 and hence
Rule 9(2) was inapplicable; under Section 11 A, the Assistant Collector alone
was competent to adjudicate upon a demand for short levy and the impugned
adjudication order passed by the Collector in so far as it related to the
demand for short levy, was out of jurisdiction.
However, in the same breath, the appellants added that they did not desire a
remand of the matter. They requested that we should decide the case on merits.
4\. Thereupon, we took up consideration of the merits of the case and heard
both sides on merits. We have since given our earnest consideration to the
submissions made by both sides and the record of the case. The material facts,
on which the decision of the point in dispute depends, have come out as
under:-
(1) Most of the 60 and odd retailers, whom the appellants claimed to have sold
the goods at the factory gate, have, in their statements recorded by the
departmental officers, denied having purchased any medicines manufactured by
the appellants. A few of them admitted having purchased such medicines but
from M/s Gulati Traders of Kanpur and not from the appellants.
(2) For Delhi area, all sales of the appellants' medicines were made to M/s
K.K. Traders of Delhi. The Collector has held that this firm was an
independent party in the sense that it was not a 'related person' of the
appellants within the meaning of Section 4(4)(c) of the Central Excises and
Salt Act, 1944. Yet, the Collector held that the sale, price charged by the
appellants from M/s K.K. Traders could not be the normal price on the ground
that the sales to this firm were negligible (about 1% only) and were only a
facade of "independent sales" created to enable the appellants to depress the
assessable value of their goods and thereby evade payment of a part of the
Central Excise duty. The learned representative of the department reiterated
this contention and placed reliance on the Karnataka High Court judgment at,
1978 ELT (J564). State of Karnataka v. Union of India & others and the Supreme
the distributor firm were closely related to the partners of the manufacturing
firm but there were additional circumstances also in the form of the
manufacturing firm giving its motor vehicles free to the distributor firm and
the distributor firm incurring expenses on advertisement of the goods produced
by the manufacturing firms.
14\. While we confirm the basis of valuation as adopted by the Collector, the
calculations of the demand for duty would appear to require another look by
the Collector. The appellants stated before us that such obvious deductions as
central excise duty and sales tax had not been allowed from the gross sale
price of M/s Gulati Traders. If it is really so, it is a violation of the
specific provision of Section 4(4)(d)(ii) and the Collector Should set it
right immediately.
15\. While imposition of the penalty on the appellants Under Rule 17sc was
legal and fully justified by the facts of the case, the amount of penalty of
Rs. 4 lakhs is excessive as it is more than double the amount of the duty
sought to be evaded even according to the calculations already made. We reduce
