Kerala High Court
P.K. Damodaran Unni vs State Of Kerala And Anr. on 21 June, 1982
Equivalent citations: AIR 1982 Ker 358
Author: B Nair
Bench: V Khalid, B Nair
JUDGMENT Balagangadharan Nair, J.
1\. The order covers only the maintainability of the appeal in this Court, an
objection that was raised by the learned Government Pleader in the course of
the hearing. The plaintiff who is the appellant purchased a power tiller under
hire purchase on a loan of Rs. 9,822.47 granted by the State Government to be
repaid in ten half-yearly instalments. To secure the loan the plaintiff
executed a simple mortgage. The instalments fell into arrears and when
coercive steps were started for realising the money the plaintiff brought the
suit (A) to declare as void the hire-purchase agreement being viliated by
mistake of fact or alternatively to cancel it being vitiated by
misrepresentation, (B) to rescind the hire-purchase agreement as the
Government had committed breach thereof, (C) to allow the plaintiff, as a
consequence, to realise Rs. 5,038-77 as consideration that had failed or as
compensation with future interest, (D) to declare as a consequence that the
mortgage is extinguished, (E) to restrain the Government by a permanent
in this suit as it does not fall within any specific different provision.
Again as 1967 Ker LR 656 has, with respect, correctly explained, the words "a
suit as to whose value" in Section 53 (1) and the words "value of the subject
matter of the suit" in Section 13, Civil Courts Act connote the same thing.
The plaintiff had to value and did value the plaint according to the real
value of the subject matter and there is no question of redetermining the real
value for the purpose of the appeal as the appellant in 1967 Ker LR 656
attempted to do. The doctrine of 'approbate or reprobate' as pointed out in
AIR 1931 Cal 417 and as settled in AIR 1964 SC 164 applies where the real or
market value has been fixed in the plaint; it ceases to apply only where the
plaint is allowed or required to be valued upon some other basis. The
appellant, as we observed above, cannot be allowed to overvalue the suit now
as he had correctly valued the subject matter and had not merely valued it for
fiscal purpose on some other basis. The decisions quoted by the appellant
have, in our view, no application and as for AIR 1963 Him Pra 9, on which
particular reliance was placed, the actual decision or the reasoning will not
mortgage is extinguished, (E) to restrain the Government by a permanent
injunction from recovering the hire amount under the Revenue Recovery Act, and
(F) to grant other incidental and consequential reliefs. As for valuation, the
plaintiff stated that A and B reliefs were valued at Rs. 9,822,50 being the
market value of the liller and that the other reliefs being ancillary do not
require separate court-fees. He thus put the total valuation for all the
reliefs at Rs. 9,822.50 and paid a court-fee of Rs. 963 ad valorem. Consistent
with this valuation the suit was instituted in the Subordinate Judge's Court.
After trial the suit was dismissed and the plaintiff has brought this appeal.
In the memorandum of appeal he put the valuation at Rs. 9,822/- as in the
Court below and paid a court-fee of Rs. 963/-, though he added at the foot of
the memorandum : "The subject matter of the suit is over Rs. 10,000/-",
without indicating its basis.
2\. Under Section 13 (1), Civil Courts Act "Appeals from the decrees and
orders of a Munsiff's Court and where the amount on value of the subject
matter of the suit does not exceed ten thousand rupees from the original
decrees and orders of a Subordinate Judge's Court shall, when such appeals are
allowed by law, He to the District Court". In order to sustain the appeal in
this Court, counsel for the appellant contended that irrespective of the
valuation in the plaint, the "amount or value of the subject matter of the
suit" exceeds Rs. 10,000/- and that the appeal is therefore competent. In aid
of this contention he cited a number of decisions where the question of
valuation of the subject matter for leave to appeal to the Privy Council,
Federal Court and Supreme Court arose. We shall presently note these decisions
but before doing so and considering their impact, we must point out that the
plaint nowhere states that the amount or value of the subject matter is above
Rupees 10,000/- and all that the memorandum of appeal contains is the bald
statement about the subject matter noticed above. The subject matter of the
suit was avoidance or cancellation of the hire-purchase agreement of which the
consideration was Rs. 9,822/-which the plaintiff received as loan from the
Government for purchasing the tiller. About this value there is no doubt or
dispute. If on the other hand it is less than the real or market value, then
on the authority of kunju Kesavan v. M. M. Philip, AIR 1964 SC 164 :
"A plaintiff, who sets a lower value on a claim which he is required to value
according to the real or market value, cannot be permitted to change it
subsequently, because this would amount to approbation and reprobation."
This means that the appellant is disentitled to overvalue the subject now.
3\. Turning to the cases, the earliest of them Lagandeo Prosad v. Reid, AIR
1919 Cal 118, was concerned with applications for leave to appeal to the Privy
Council. One of the conditions for the leave was that the subject matter of
the suit in the Court of first instance wag Rs. 10,000/- or upwards and the
amount or value of the subject matter in dispute on appeal to the Privy
Council was of the same value or upwards. So far as relevant, the value of the
subject matter which was in dispute oo appeal was whether the plaintiff was
entitled to Rupees 5,000/- as damages and also whether he was entitled to a
declaration of certain rights as a riparian owner. When both the matters were
taken into consideration, the value of the subject matter of the suit and of
the appeal was upwards of Rs. 10,000/-. As the test was satisfied leave was
granted. The decision is hardly of any assistance to the appellant.
4\. Haramani Devi v. Balaram Panda, AIR 1957 Orissa 109 and Brindaban v. Kali-
pada, AIR 1966 Cal 205 (FB), arose on applications for certificate to the
Supreme Court under Article 133 (1) (a) or Section 110, C. P. C. or both
together, as they then stood. The suits were for specific performance and one
of the questions was whether the value for the purpose of the certificate was
the consideration fixed in the agreement of sale or the real or market value
of the property. It was held -- the Orissa decision was one of the cases
followed by the Calcutta High Court -- that while court-fee need he paid only
cm the consideration the Teal or market value would govern the question of
certificate
5\. Mitrabhanu v. Kamal, AIR 1968 Orissa 60, also arose on an application for
certificate to the Supreme Court under Article 133 (1) (a) and (c) in a suit
for declaration of title and possession over a property valued at Rs. 5,100/-.
Although certificate was refused on the ground that the valuation fell below
the mark, the Court observed that what is meant by "value of the subject
matter" as contemplated under Article 133 (1) is the real or market value and
not any value which may have been stated in the plaint for the requirements of
the Court-fees Act or the Suits Valuation Act. This does not imply that the
valuation in the plaint can in all cases be reprobated by the plaintiff.
6\. Counsel also relied upon Molugu Lakshminarasimhacharyulu v. Marisetti Rat-
nam, AIR 1949 Mad 739 (FB) concerning applications for certificate to appeal
to the Federal Court and Kuppanna v. Peruma, AIR 1961 Mad 511 (FB) which was
concerned with a like application for leave to appeal to the Supreme Court.
These decisions held that such an applicant can show that the real value of
the subject matter is higher than the value adopted in the plaint. Although
the nature of the suits and the mode of valuation in the two decisions are not
quite clear both of them related to immovable properties.
7\. The last of the cases cited was Sarju Singh v. Gurdwara, AIR 1963 Him Pra
9, a decision of the Judicial Commissioner's Court. Under the Himachal Pradesh
(Courts) Order 1948 a second appeal was competent if the value of the suit was
Rs. 1,000/- or upwards or the decree of the District Court involved directly
some claim to or question respecting property of like value. The order defined
'value' as meaning the amount or value of the subject matter of the suit. The
plaintiff-appellant had valued the suit which was for a permanent injunction
to restrain the respondents from interfering with his possession at Rs. 140/-.
Obviously in order to sustain the second appeal he stated, without any basis,
that the value of the subject mutter of the suit was Rs. 1,000/-. After
holding that one arbitrary valuation cannot be substituted by another
arbitrary valuation for the purpose of the appeal, the Court explained that
the expression 'subject matter of suit' sometimes refers to the concrete
property to which the writ relates and sometimes to the title which is
asserted in the suit and at others to the relief claimed. It was further added
that the expression as used in the order appears to refer (a) in a money suit
to the amount claimed and (b) in a suit re'ating to property to the right or
title of the plaintiff alleged to have been infringed.
8\. We might refer to Neelechikunnummal Pathu v. Katheesa, 1967 Ker LR 656,
where Raman Nayar J. held that the words "value of the subject matter of the
suit" in Section 13 of the Civil Courts Act and the words "a suit as to whose
value" in Section 53 (1) of the Court-fees and Suits Valuation Act connote the
same thing so that the valuation of a suit for the purpose of jurisdiction
under Section 13 of the Civil Courts Act has to be done in accordance with
Section 53 (1) of the Court-fees and Suits Valuation Act, where specific
provision is not otherwise made under the latter Act or under any other law
and where Section 53 (2) has no application since the court-fee payable is not
a fixed fee. In that case the value of the suit for purposes of court-fee was
only Rs. 7,912.50 and although this was shown in the plaint and memorandum of
appeal, the valuation was shown as Rs. 10,567.50 -- in excess of Rs. 10,000/-
-- which was arrived at by adding two alternative reliefs even though only the
higher should be taken into account. In order to maintain the appeal in the
High Court it was attempted to show that the market value of the property
which was in excess of Rs. 10,000/- governs the matter and it was also pointed
out that for the purpose of Section 110, C. P. C. the value of the subject
matter of the suit is the market value. The learned Judge rejected the
contention holding that it was only where no special provision exists
"valuation" means "market value" and that where special provision exists for
valuation for purposes of jurisdiction, valuation has to be according to that
provision.
9\. In Mahendranarayan v. Janakinath, AIR 1931 Cal 417, Rankin, C. J. held (C.
C. Ghose J. concurring):
"It is I think clear that the value referred to in Section 110 of the Code is
the real or market value and that where, under the Court-fees Act or
otherwise, a plaint or memorandum of appeal is not required to be valued
according to the real or market value, but is allowed or required to be valued
upon some other basis, the doctrine of 'approbate and reprobate' does not
apply."
18\. We find it unable to accept counsel's contention. As prescribed by
Section 53 (1), Court-fees and Suits Valuation Act and as explained in 1967
Ker LR 656 the value for the purpose of computing court-fee should be the same
in this suit as it does not fall within any specific different provision.
Again as 1967 Ker LR 656 has, with respect, correctly explained, the words "a
suit as to whose value" in Section 53 (1) and the words "value of the subject
matter of the suit" in Section 13, Civil Courts Act connote the same thing.
The plaintiff had to value and did value the plaint according to the real
value of the subject matter and there is no question of redetermining the real
value for the purpose of the appeal as the appellant in 1967 Ker LR 656
attempted to do. The doctrine of 'approbate or reprobate' as pointed out in
AIR 1931 Cal 417 and as settled in AIR 1964 SC 164 applies where the real or
market value has been fixed in the plaint; it ceases to apply only where the
plaint is allowed or required to be valued upon some other basis. The
appellant, as we observed above, cannot be allowed to overvalue the suit now
as he had correctly valued the subject matter and had not merely valued it for
fiscal purpose on some other basis. The decisions quoted by the appellant
have, in our view, no application and as for AIR 1963 Him Pra 9, on which
particular reliance was placed, the actual decision or the reasoning will not
help the appellant as he had correctly valued the plaint.
We uphold the objection of the learned Government pleader and direct that the
appeal memorandum be returned to the appellant for presentation to the proper
Court.
in this suit as it does not fall within any specific different provision.
Again as 1967 Ker LR 656 has, with respect, correctly explained, the words "a
suit as to whose value" in Section 53 (1) and the words "value of the subject
matter of the suit" in Section 13, Civil Courts Act connote the same thing.
The plaintiff had to value and did value the plaint according to the real
value of the subject matter and there is no question of redetermining the real
value for the purpose of the appeal as the appellant in 1967 Ker LR 656
attempted to do. The doctrine of 'approbate or reprobate' as pointed out in
AIR 1931 Cal 417 and as settled in AIR 1964 SC 164 applies where the real or
market value has been fixed in the plaint; it ceases to apply only where the
plaint is allowed or required to be valued upon some other basis. The
appellant, as we observed above, cannot be allowed to overvalue the suit now
as he had correctly valued the subject matter and had not merely valued it for
fiscal purpose on some other basis. The decisions quoted by the appellant
have, in our view, no application and as for AIR 1963 Him Pra 9, on which
particular reliance was placed, the actual decision or the reasoning will not
mortgage is extinguished, (E) to restrain the Government by a permanent
injunction from recovering the hire amount under the Revenue Recovery Act, and
(F) to grant other incidental and consequential reliefs. As for valuation, the
plaintiff stated that A and B reliefs were valued at Rs. 9,822,50 being the
market value of the liller and that the other reliefs being ancillary do not
require separate court-fees. He thus put the total valuation for all the
reliefs at Rs. 9,822.50 and paid a court-fee of Rs. 963 ad valorem. Consistent
with this valuation the suit was instituted in the Subordinate Judge's Court.
After trial the suit was dismissed and the plaintiff has brought this appeal.
In the memorandum of appeal he put the valuation at Rs. 9,822/- as in the
Court below and paid a court-fee of Rs. 963/-, though he added at the foot of
the memorandum : "The subject matter of the suit is over Rs. 10,000/-",
without indicating its basis.
2\. Under Section 13 (1), Civil Courts Act "Appeals from the decrees and
orders of a Munsiff's Court and where the amount on value of the subject
matter of the suit does not exceed ten thousand rupees from the original
decrees and orders of a Subordinate Judge's Court shall, when such appeals are
allowed by law, He to the District Court". In order to sustain the appeal in
this Court, counsel for the appellant contended that irrespective of the
valuation in the plaint, the "amount or value of the subject matter of the
in this suit as it does not fall within any specific different provision.
Again as 1967 Ker LR 656 has, with respect, correctly explained, the words "a
suit as to whose value" in Section 53 (1) and the words "value of the subject
matter of the suit" in Section 13, Civil Courts Act connote the same thing.
The plaintiff had to value and did value the plaint according to the real
value of the subject matter and there is no question of redetermining the real
value for the purpose of the appeal as the appellant in 1967 Ker LR 656
attempted to do. The doctrine of 'approbate or reprobate' as pointed out in
AIR 1931 Cal 417 and as settled in AIR 1964 SC 164 applies where the real or
market value has been fixed in the plaint; it ceases to apply only where the
plaint is allowed or required to be valued upon some other basis. The
appellant, as we observed above, cannot be allowed to overvalue the suit now
as he had correctly valued the subject matter and had not merely valued it for
fiscal purpose on some other basis. The decisions quoted by the appellant
have, in our view, no application and as for AIR 1963 Him Pra 9, on which
particular reliance was placed, the actual decision or the reasoning will not
mortgage is extinguished, (E) to restrain the Government by a permanent
injunction from recovering the hire amount under the Revenue Recovery Act, and
(F) to grant other incidental and consequential reliefs. As for valuation, the
plaintiff stated that A and B reliefs were valued at Rs. 9,822,50 being the
market value of the liller and that the other reliefs being ancillary do not
require separate court-fees. He thus put the total valuation for all the
reliefs at Rs. 9,822.50 and paid a court-fee of Rs. 963 ad valorem. Consistent
with this valuation the suit was instituted in the Subordinate Judge's Court.
After trial the suit was dismissed and the plaintiff has brought this appeal.
In the memorandum of appeal he put the valuation at Rs. 9,822/- as in the
Court below and paid a court-fee of Rs. 963/-, though he added at the foot of
the memorandum : "The subject matter of the suit is over Rs. 10,000/-",
without indicating its basis.
2\. Under Section 13 (1), Civil Courts Act "Appeals from the decrees and
orders of a Munsiff's Court and where the amount on value of the subject
matter of the suit does not exceed ten thousand rupees from the original
decrees and orders of a Subordinate Judge's Court shall, when such appeals are
allowed by law, He to the District Court". In order to sustain the appeal in
this Court, counsel for the appellant contended that irrespective of the
valuation in the plaint, the "amount or value of the subject matter of the
in this suit as it does not fall within any specific different provision.
Again as 1967 Ker LR 656 has, with respect, correctly explained, the words "a
suit as to whose value" in Section 53 (1) and the words "value of the subject
matter of the suit" in Section 13, Civil Courts Act connote the same thing.
The plaintiff had to value and did value the plaint according to the real
value of the subject matter and there is no question of redetermining the real
value for the purpose of the appeal as the appellant in 1967 Ker LR 656
attempted to do. The doctrine of 'approbate or reprobate' as pointed out in
AIR 1931 Cal 417 and as settled in AIR 1964 SC 164 applies where the real or
market value has been fixed in the plaint; it ceases to apply only where the
plaint is allowed or required to be valued upon some other basis. The
appellant, as we observed above, cannot be allowed to overvalue the suit now
as he had correctly valued the subject matter and had not merely valued it for
fiscal purpose on some other basis. The decisions quoted by the appellant
have, in our view, no application and as for AIR 1963 Him Pra 9, on which
particular reliance was placed, the actual decision or the reasoning will not
mortgage is extinguished, (E) to restrain the Government by a permanent
injunction from recovering the hire amount under the Revenue Recovery Act, and
(F) to grant other incidental and consequential reliefs. As for valuation, the
plaintiff stated that A and B reliefs were valued at Rs. 9,822,50 being the
market value of the liller and that the other reliefs being ancillary do not
require separate court-fees. He thus put the total valuation for all the
reliefs at Rs. 9,822.50 and paid a court-fee of Rs. 963 ad valorem. Consistent
with this valuation the suit was instituted in the Subordinate Judge's Court.
After trial the suit was dismissed and the plaintiff has brought this appeal.
In the memorandum of appeal he put the valuation at Rs. 9,822/- as in the
Court below and paid a court-fee of Rs. 963/-, though he added at the foot of
the memorandum : "The subject matter of the suit is over Rs. 10,000/-",
without indicating its basis.
2\. Under Section 13 (1), Civil Courts Act "Appeals from the decrees and
orders of a Munsiff's Court and where the amount on value of the subject
matter of the suit does not exceed ten thousand rupees from the original
decrees and orders of a Subordinate Judge's Court shall, when such appeals are
allowed by law, He to the District Court". In order to sustain the appeal in
this Court, counsel for the appellant contended that irrespective of the
valuation in the plaint, the "amount or value of the subject matter of the
suit" exceeds Rs. 10,000/- and that the appeal is therefore competent. In aid
of this contention he cited a number of decisions where the question of
valuation of the subject matter for leave to appeal to the Privy Council,
Federal Court and Supreme Court arose. We shall presently note these decisions
but before doing so and considering their impact, we must point out that the
plaint nowhere states that the amount or value of the subject matter is above
Rupees 10,000/- and all that the memorandum of appeal contains is the bald
statement about the subject matter noticed above. The subject matter of the
suit was avoidance or cancellation of the hire-purchase agreement of which the
consideration was Rs. 9,822/-which the plaintiff received as loan from the
Government for purchasing the tiller. About this value there is no doubt or
in this suit as it does not fall within any specific different provision.
Again as 1967 Ker LR 656 has, with respect, correctly explained, the words "a
suit as to whose value" in Section 53 (1) and the words "value of the subject
matter of the suit" in Section 13, Civil Courts Act connote the same thing.
The plaintiff had to value and did value the plaint according to the real
value of the subject matter and there is no question of redetermining the real
value for the purpose of the appeal as the appellant in 1967 Ker LR 656
attempted to do. The doctrine of 'approbate or reprobate' as pointed out in
AIR 1931 Cal 417 and as settled in AIR 1964 SC 164 applies where the real or
market value has been fixed in the plaint; it ceases to apply only where the
plaint is allowed or required to be valued upon some other basis. The
appellant, as we observed above, cannot be allowed to overvalue the suit now
as he had correctly valued the subject matter and had not merely valued it for
fiscal purpose on some other basis. The decisions quoted by the appellant
have, in our view, no application and as for AIR 1963 Him Pra 9, on which
particular reliance was placed, the actual decision or the reasoning will not
mortgage is extinguished, (E) to restrain the Government by a permanent
injunction from recovering the hire amount under the Revenue Recovery Act, and
(F) to grant other incidental and consequential reliefs. As for valuation, the
plaintiff stated that A and B reliefs were valued at Rs. 9,822,50 being the
market value of the liller and that the other reliefs being ancillary do not
require separate court-fees. He thus put the total valuation for all the
reliefs at Rs. 9,822.50 and paid a court-fee of Rs. 963 ad valorem. Consistent
with this valuation the suit was instituted in the Subordinate Judge's Court.
After trial the suit was dismissed and the plaintiff has brought this appeal.
In the memorandum of appeal he put the valuation at Rs. 9,822/- as in the
Court below and paid a court-fee of Rs. 963/-, though he added at the foot of
the memorandum : "The subject matter of the suit is over Rs. 10,000/-",
without indicating its basis.
2\. Under Section 13 (1), Civil Courts Act "Appeals from the decrees and
orders of a Munsiff's Court and where the amount on value of the subject
matter of the suit does not exceed ten thousand rupees from the original
decrees and orders of a Subordinate Judge's Court shall, when such appeals are
allowed by law, He to the District Court". In order to sustain the appeal in
this Court, counsel for the appellant contended that irrespective of the
valuation in the plaint, the "amount or value of the subject matter of the
suit" exceeds Rs. 10,000/- and that the appeal is therefore competent. In aid
of this contention he cited a number of decisions where the question of
valuation of the subject matter for leave to appeal to the Privy Council,
Federal Court and Supreme Court arose. We shall presently note these decisions
but before doing so and considering their impact, we must point out that the
plaint nowhere states that the amount or value of the subject matter is above
Rupees 10,000/- and all that the memorandum of appeal contains is the bald
statement about the subject matter noticed above. The subject matter of the
suit was avoidance or cancellation of the hire-purchase agreement of which the
consideration was Rs. 9,822/-which the plaintiff received as loan from the
Government for purchasing the tiller. About this value there is no doubt or
in this suit as it does not fall within any specific different provision.
Again as 1967 Ker LR 656 has, with respect, correctly explained, the words "a
suit as to whose value" in Section 53 (1) and the words "value of the subject
matter of the suit" in Section 13, Civil Courts Act connote the same thing.
The plaintiff had to value and did value the plaint according to the real
value of the subject matter and there is no question of redetermining the real
value for the purpose of the appeal as the appellant in 1967 Ker LR 656
attempted to do. The doctrine of 'approbate or reprobate' as pointed out in
AIR 1931 Cal 417 and as settled in AIR 1964 SC 164 applies where the real or
market value has been fixed in the plaint; it ceases to apply only where the
plaint is allowed or required to be valued upon some other basis. The
appellant, as we observed above, cannot be allowed to overvalue the suit now
as he had correctly valued the subject matter and had not merely valued it for
fiscal purpose on some other basis. The decisions quoted by the appellant
have, in our view, no application and as for AIR 1963 Him Pra 9, on which
particular reliance was placed, the actual decision or the reasoning will not
