Madras High Court
R.L. Narasimhan (Deceased By ... vs State Of Tamil Nadu And Anr. on 29
October, 1985
Bench: V Ratnam
ORDER
1\. In these writ petitions, the Petitioners, though different, have prayed
for the issue of writs of certiorari to quash the orders dt. 23-5-1979,
16-10-1980 and 30-10-1980 passed by the second respondent herein in Cases Nos.
15/1385/Tambaram, 16/1385/ Tambaram and 17/1385/Tambaram respectively. The
facts giving rise to these writ petitions may be briefly stated as under :
All the petitioners own lands in No. 166, Tambaram village. The Petitioner in
W.P. No. 2569 of 1979 owned a total extent of 42 grounds and 1131 sq. ft.
situate in Survey Nos. 330/2C, 331/2C, 274/2 and 274/7 and comprised in Patta
No. 778. An extent of 42 grounds and 694 sq. ft. was owned by the petitioner
in W.P. No. 6395 of 1980 in four survey numbers 274/3, 274/6, 330/2D and
331/21) in Patta No. 779.42 grounds and 1130 sq. ft. comprised in Survey Nos.
274/4,330/2B and 331/2A were owned by the petitioners in W.P. No. 6919 of 1980
in Patta No. 780. All, these lands owned by the petitioners are registered as
dry lands in the revenue records. The provisions of the Tamil Nadu Urban Land
Tax Act, 1966 (hereinafter referred to as the Act) were made applicable to the
to the effect that the petitioners have not exhausted their remedies by way of
any appeal as well as a revision available under the provisions of the Act
and, therefore, this Court ought not to be exercising its jurisdiction under
Art. 226 of the Constitution. This argument might have been accepted at the
time when the Court was considering the question of entertaining the writ
petitions; but after the expiry of a period of nearly six years after the
filing of the writ petitions and the statutory remedies, having, in the
meanwhile, become totally barred, it would not be just or equitable that the
writ petitions should be thrown out on the ground of the availability of an
alternative remedy.
13\. Since it has been earlier held that the petitioners will be entitled to
establish the availability of exemption to them from the~ provisions of the
Act under the proviso inserted by G. O. Ms. No. 1525, Revenue Department
dt.17-7-1979, the orders of assessment passed against the petitioners are
quashed and the matters are remitted to the second respondent to be dealt with
and disposed of in accordance With the observations and directions given in
Tax Act, 1966 (hereinafter referred to as the Act) were made applicable to the
area where the lands of the petitioners are situate on and from 1-7-1975 as
per S. I-A of the Act. The petitioners submitted a return as required under S.
7-C of the Act and since the returns so filed were found to be defective in
respect of valuation, an enquiry was held under S. 10(2) of the Act. In the
course of the enquiry the petitioners claimed that the classification of the
lands as dry in the village accounts was incorrect as crops had been grown on
these lands and as such, the provisions of the Act will not apply to the lands
in question. Thereupon, the petitioners were granted time to produce extracts
from the adangal for five faslis prior to 1385 to establish that the lands
were under cultivation prior to the application of the Act with effect from
1-7-1975. Certain adangal extracts for faslis 1381 to 1385 issued by the
Tahsildar, Saidapet, were also produced by the petitioners to establish that
the lands in question were under cultivation and therefore fell outside the
scope of the provisions of the Act. Some objections were also raised by, the
petitioners to some of the entries found in the adangal extracts. An account
book was also relied upon to establish the incurring of expenses in connection
with the agricultural operations carried on in the lands in question. An
objection was raised that as the municipality had not levied property tax and
vacant land tax, the lands had to be treated as having been used for
agricultural purposes. The second respondent, while proceeding to consider the
aforesaid objections raised by the petitioners, held that (i) the lands in
question had not been cultivated for a period of five years before the
commencement of the Act and proved to be continued to be so cultivated and
entered as such in the Government accounts as per G.O.Ms. No. 3526, Revenue
Department, dt. 15th June, 1973 as the adangal entries showed that there was
no cultivation during Faslis 1382, 1383 and 1384 and therefore the lands will
not qualify for exemption from the levy of Urban Land Tax and (ii) that the
value of the Urban land could be justly and reasonably fixed at Rs. 4,000/-
per ground for Survey Nos. 330/2c, 330/2D, 331/2D, 330/2B and 331/2A and at
Rs. 800/- per ground for Survey Nos. 274/2, 274/3, 274/4, 274/6 and 274/7. On
the conclusions arrived at as aforesaid, the first respondent proceeded to
levy Urban Land Tax on the petitioners at the prescribed rates. It is the
correctness of these orders of assessment so passed by the second respondent
that is questioned in these writ petitions.
2\. During the pendency of W.P. Nos. 2569 of 1979 and 6395 of 1980, the
petitioners therein died and their legal representatives have been brought on
record by orders dt. 7-7-1983 in W.M.P. No. 1962/1982 and 8-3-1984 in W.M.P.
No. 1959 of 1983 respectively.
3\. In support of these writ petitions, the learned counsel for the
petitioners first contended, drawing attention to the definition of "Urban
Land" under S. 2(13) of the Act, that both wet lands and dry lands would be
agricultural lands and that the exclusion of wet lands only from the scope of
the definition of 'Urban Land" would be discriminatory. The learned counsel
also submitted that the same class of property viz., agricultural land
similarly situate is subjected to a differential treatment for purposes of the
Act, in that, the wet lands alone are excluded from the purview of the Act,
while dry lands are taken in. Reliance was placed in this connection by the
learned counsel upon certain observations in the decision of the Supreme Court
in Kunna that Thathunni Moopil Nair v. State of Kerala, . Attention in this
connection was also drawn to the decision in T. Sarojini Devi v. T. Sri
Krishna, AIR 1944 Mad 401 and Commr. of Wealth-tax, Madras 11 v. P. Sankaran
Nair 103 ITR 366: (1976 Tax LR 1030) (Mad). On the other hand, the learned
Additional Government Pleader submitted that though wet and dry lands may both
fall under the head "agricultural lands", yet, there is a well marked
distinction between the two types of lands and that would justify the
exclusion of one kind of agricultural land from the operation of the
provisions of the Act and not the other. It was also further submitted that
the Act being a taxation law, the State has a .wide discretion in selecting
the persons or objects and such a statute is not open to attack on the ground
that it taxes dry lands and not wet lands. Reliance in this connection was
placed on the decisions of the Supreme Court in Raja Jagannath Baksh Singh v.
State of Utter Pradesh, , East India Tobacco Co. v. State of Andhra Pradesh, ,
Asst. Commr. of Urban Land Tax, Madras v. Buckingham and Carnatic Co. Ltd.,
and Jaipur Hosiery Mills (P) Ltd. v. State of Rajasthan, . It was also
contended that a taxing enactment is not open to challenge merely on the
ground that the tax is harsh or excessive and reference was made in this
connection to Hari Krishna Bhargav v. Union of India, .
4\. Under S. 2(13) of the Act, "Urban Land"' includes any land used or capable
of being used as a building-site and includes garden or grounds, if any,
appurtenant to a building, but does not include any land which is registered
as wet in the revenue accounts of the Government and used for the cultivation
of wet crops. Ordinarily, the expression "Agricultural land" would include
both wet as well as dry lands; but it cannot be disputed that they are
different and distinct, even as lands. Wet lands have ordinarily a source of
irrigation which is a registered source, while dry lands do not have such a
source. It is common knowledge that dry lands remain uncultivated, except when
there are rains. There being no registered source for the irrigation of dry
lands; this is but natural. Again, there is also a difference in the rate of
assessment for wet and dry lands. Normally the assessment for wet lands is
higher than that for dry lands. The -uses to which wet lands and dry lands can
be put are also different. Wet cultivation takes in the growing of crops like
paddy etc. There is no paddy cultivation on a dry land; but occasionally some
crops are raised depending upon the rains. Plantations are grown on dry lands.
It is therefore evident that though wet lands and dry lands can be brought
under the broad classification of agricultural lands, they are distinct and
separate. Bearing this in mind and the nature of the measure viz. taxing
measure, it is seen that the Legislature has got the widest amplitude in
subjecting certain kinds of agricultural land for purposes of urban land tax
levy and not others. That is the justification for one class of agricultural
lands being taken outside the purview of the Act, while another. class of
lands is brought within it. The exclusion of wet lands from urban land and the
inclusion of dry lands within urban land under S. 2(13) of the Act is thus
based upon a rational classification with reference to the nature and
incidence of the particular type of land. There can, therefore, be no valid
objection to the exclusion of the wet lands from the definition of "Urban
Land" under S. 2(13), of the Act.
5\. This is also justifiable with reference to the well established principles
relating to taxing statutes. Considering the question whether it is open to
the Legislature to decide on what to levy tax and at what rate, it has been
pointed out by the Supreme Court in Raja Jagannath Baksh Singh v. State of
Uttar Pradesh, that it is not for the Court to consider whether some other
objects should have been taxed or whether a different rate should have been
prescribed for the tax; but that it is for the Legislature to classify persons
or properties into different categories and tax them differently and if the
classification made is rational, the statute cannot be challenged merely
because different rates of taxation have been prescribed for different.
categories of persons or objects. Similarly, in East India Tobacco Co. etc. v.
State of Andhra Pradesh, it was again reiterated that in deciding whether a
taxation law is discriminatory or not, it is necessary to bear in mind that
the State has a wide discretion in selecting the persons or objects it will
tax, and that a statute is not open to attack on the ground that it taxes some
persons or objects and not others. It has also been laid down that it is only
when within the range of its selection, the law operates unequally, and that
cannot be justified on the basis of any valid classification that it would be
violative of Art. 14. It would be relevant in this connection to refer to the
observations of the Supreme Court in Asst. Commr. of Urban Land Tax, Madras v.
Buckingham and Carnatic Co. Ltd., wherein the validity of the Act was
challenged and upheld. .At P. 618 of ITR : (at P.178 of AIR), the Supreme
Court observed thus:
".....The objects to be taxed, the quantum of tax to be levied, the conditions
subject to which it is le vied and the social and economic policies which a
tax is designed to subserve are all matters of political character and these
matters have been entrusted to the Legislature and not to the Courts. In
applying the test of reasonableness it is also essential attribute of
sovereignty and constitutional provisions relating to the power of taxation
are regarded not as grant of power but as limitation upon the power which
would otherwise be practically without limit."
To similar effect is the decision of the Supreme Court in Jaipur Hosiery Mills
(P) Ltd. v. State of Rajasthan, . There also it has been pointed out that
although a taxing statute can be challenged on the ground of infringement of
Art. 14 of the Constitution, in deciding whether the law challenged is
discriminatory, it has to be borne in mind that in matters of taxation the
Legislature possesses the largest freedom in the matter of classification and
wide discretion can be exercised in selecting person or objects which will be
taxed and the statute is not open to attack on the mere ground that it taxes
some persons or objects and not others. The Supreme Court has also further
pointed out that when within the range of the selection the law operates
unequally and cannot be justified on the basis of a valid classification,
then, there would be a violation of Art. 14. Thus, on a consideration of the
well marked distinction between the wet lands and dry lands justifying their
classification as two distinct or different entities and applying the
aforesaid principles laid down by the Supreme Court in the decisions referred
to above, it follows that no objection can be taken-to the exclusion of wet
lands alone from the scope of urban land as opposed to dry lands, though both
kinds of land would fall under the description of agricultural lands. The
reliance placed by the learned counsel for the petitioner upon the
observations in the decision of the Supreme Court in Kunnathat Thathunni
Moopil Nair v. State of Kerala, does not in any manner advance the case of the
petitioners. It is seen there from that inequality resulting from the
properties of the same class similarly situated being subjected to an
incidence of taxation is objectionable as creating an inequality amongst the
holders of the same kind of property. Wet and dry lands, though comprised in
agricultural lands, cannot be stated to be the same class of property.
Besides, there is no question of any inequality arising from the incidence of
taxation with reference to the same class of property similarly situated,
being held by different persons in this case. As noticed earlier, those who
held the wet lands are treated alike by excluding such holdings from the
definition of "Urban Land" under the Act. But all dry lands are included.
There is no differential treatment meted out to owners of wet lands in that
all of them alike are taken out of the provisions of the Act and all dry lands
are covered by the Act without exception. In the decision in T. Sarojini Devi
v. T, Sri Kristna, AIR 1944 Mad 401, the-, question that arose for decision
Was whether a mango grove is agricultural land in Lists 11 and III of Schedule
7, Government of India Act, and it was held that agricultural lands must be
taken to include lands used or capable of being used for raising valuable
plants or trees and the Mango grove would be agricultural land. This decision
would not in any manner help the petitioners, for the Court there was
concerned with the question of a Mango grove falling within the general
description of agricultural lands with reference to the entries mentioned
above. That case therefore does not support the contention of the learned
counsel for the petitioners that wet lands and dry lands have been
discriminatorily treated under S. 2(13) of the Act. The decision in Cornmr. of
wealth-tax, Madras II v. P. Sankaran Nair, 103 ITR 366: (1976 Tax LR 1030)
(Mad) also cannot lend any support, for, there the question that arose was
whether the lands were agricultural lands or not and, not whether a
distinction between wet lands and dry lands could be utilised for subjecting
one category to tax leaving out the other. This decision also does not support
the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioners. For the aforesaid
reasons, the first contention of the learned counsel for the petitioners
cannot be accepted.
6\. The learned counsel for the petitioners next contented that there is
indication even in the provisions of the Act to show that what is contemplated
by its provisions is only building sites whose area is also referred to in
terms of grounds and not dry lands in connection with which the expression
"acre" is ordinarily used. This, according to the learned counsel, would also
indicate that the Act did not contemplate dry lands, but only building sites.
On the other hand, the learned Additional Government Pleader submitted that
the use of the expression "ground" in some of the provisions of the Act is
only to refer to a specified area but that is not indicative that even dry
lands, which can fall under "building sites" are! not within the contemplation
of the provisions of the Act. Under S. 2(8-A) of the Act, "ground" has been
defined as meaning an area comprising of 223 square metres (2400 square feet).
Obviously, therefore, that word refers to an area and not the character of the
land, either as building,: site or as dry land. There is therefore, no
substance in this contention of the learned counsel for the petitioners.
7\. The learned counsel for the petitioners next contended that realising the
unjust inclusion of dry lands within the definition of "Urban Land" in the
Act, in the exercise of powers under S. 27 of the Act, the Government had
directed the grant of exemption in respect of dry lands but subject to
establishing continuous cultivation of such dry lands for a period of five
years prior to. 1-7-175 to be made out by revenue records only and his,
according to the learned counsel enacts a role of evidence contrary to the
provisions of the Evidence Act. On the other hand the learned Additional
Government Pleader invited attention to G. O. Ms. No. 3526, Revenue
Department, dt. 13-2-1976, and G. O. Ms. No. 1525, Revenue Department, dt.
17-7-1979 and contended that being in the nature of an exemption, any person
claiming the benefit of such exemption, has to establish for the grant of such
exemption and he, therefore, cannot be heard to say that he would not fulfil
the conditions, but should nevertheless be given the benefit of such
exemption.
8\. By reason of the exclusion of wet lands alone from the scope of 'Urban
Land' as defined under S. 2(13) of the Act, dry lands held by the petitioners
would ordinarily full within the scope of the Act. Realising that there may be
cases where lands, though classified as dry lands, might be under wet
cultivation, the Government, in the exercise of powers under S. 27 of the Act,
granted the benefit of exemption to certain lands, from he payment of Urban
Land Tax. In G.O. Ms. No. 3526, Revenue Department, dt. 15-6,1973, such
exemption was granted to registered dry lands cultivated with wet or dry crops
for five fasli years prior to the date of coming into force of the Act in the
City of Madras, Madurai and Municipal towns of Coimbatore, Salem and
Tiruchirapalli and which continued to be under cultivation as per the revenue
accounts. This exemption would not apply to the area where the dry lands of
the petitioners are situate. G. O. Ms. No. 288, Revenue Department, dt.
13-2-1976 exempted urban lands registered as house sites, but under
cultivation with wet or dry crops for not less than five years prior to the
date of coming into force of the Act (1-7-75) in the city of Madras and belt
area, city of Madurai and the Municipal towns of Coimbatore, Salem and
Tiruchirapalli and which continues to be under cultivation as per revenue
accounts. If at all, the petitioners can have the benefit of exemption under
G. O. Ms. No. 288, Revenue Department, dt. 13-2-1976, treating the dry lands
as house sites. But even for securing the benefit of such exemption, the
petitioners have to satisfy the authorities under the Act that the dry lands
or house sites were under cultivation with wet or dry crops for not less than
five years prior to 1-7-1975 and continue to be under cultivation as per
revenue accounts. It was subsequently brought to the notice of the Government
that it may not always be possible to satisfy the condition of continuous
cultivation for five faslis prior to 1-7-1975 as non-cultivation during that
period might have been owing to circumstances beyond control of the owner of
the land such as fire, flood, drought etc. With a view to give the benefit of
exemption from the provisions of the Act even in a case where the area of
urban land had remained uncultivated, owing to drought, fire, flood and other
similar causes, a proviso was inserted to G. O. Ms. No. 288, Revenue dt.
13-2-1976 to that effect and if any of those circumstances, which prevented
the owner from cultivating the lands was established, then, that will not be
construed as break in cultivation. Being in the nature of ark exemption, it is
for the person claiming that benefit to make out that he has satisfied the
conditions upon which the exemption could be granted and therefore, he is
entitled to it. If the exemption can be made available only upon proof of
cultivation for five faslies prior to 1-7-1975 with reference to the revenue
records, then, the petitioners have to establish that as a fact, as otherwise,
they would not have fulfilled one of the conditions upon which they can claim
the benefit of the exemption. That is not the same thing as prescribing a rule
of evidence with reference to the grant of exemption only by the production of
revenue records. However, in this case, the petitioners did rely upon not only
the entries in the adangal, but also some other evidence in the shape of
account book showing the incurring of expenditure in connection with the
agricultural operations. The second respondent had proceeded to reject the
adangal entries on the only ground that it shows cessation of cultivation for
three faslis during the period of five fasli years prior to 1-7-1975. At that
time, G. O. Ms. No. 1525, Revenue Department, dt. 17-7-1979 had not been
issued. Thereunder, it would be open to owners of land to establish that on
account of one of the circumstances mentioned in the proviso, there had been
cessation of cultivation and that would not make any difference to the grant
of exemption. In my view, there is no justification whatever for denying the
petitioners an opportunity to establish whether there was a cessation of
cultivation on any of the grounds mentioned in the proviso in G. O. Ms. No.
1525, Revenue Department, dt. 17-7-1979, especially when the returns filed by
the petitioners had also adverted to the drought conditions prevailing. In any
event, since the adangals produced also showed that there was no cultivation
for some years, that might have been due to one of the circumstances mentioned
in the proviso introduced by G. O. Ms. No. 1525, Revenue Department, dt.
17-7-1979. The claim being one for exemption, if the petitioners are able to
sustain their case for exemption on the basis of the proviso inserted in G. O.
Ms. No. 1525, Revenue Department, dt. 17-7-1979, they cannot be deprived of
the same. It is true that G. O. Ms. No. 1525, Revenue Department, dt.
17-7-1979 came to be issued only after the orders were passed by the second
respondent; but the orders had not attained the finality in the sense that the
writ petitions have been preferred to this Court and they have been pending
and G. O. Ms. No. 1525, Revenue Department, dt. 17-7-1979 had been issued
during the pendency of the writ petitons, the benefit of which can certainly
be availed of by the petitioners. On that ground, this Court is inclined to
grant an opportunity to the petitioners for establishing that they are
entitled to the benefit of the proviso introduced by G.O.Ms. No. 1525, Revenue
Department, dt. 17-7-1979.
8A. The learned counsel for the petitioner next contended that entries in the
adangal are not made to the knowledge of the pattadars and in contrast to the
procedure laid down under S. 165 of the Estates Land Act, no rules have been
laid down regarding the method and manner in which the entries in adangals
should be made and this leads to wrong entries being made in the adangals with
no possibility of correction, thus prejudicing the claim for exemption made.
It is true that the entries in the adangal are not made after notice to the
pattadars but only after an inspection by the concerned village officials. The
possibility of some mistake creeping in cannot also be totally ruled out. Even
so, with reference to the entries in adangal extracts, it would still be open
to the pattadars to make out that any particular entry is an erroneous one by
drawing attention of the authorities and praying to have the same rectified.
So long as that has not been done, there cannot be any assumption that any
particular entry is an erroneous entry and that had caused prejudice to person
claiming exemption. In this case, it was pointed out that the entries showed
that houses had been built when there were none. However, that an entry is an
erroneous one, has also to be established in the course of the enquiry before
the concerned officer functioning under the Act. It was submitted that a
request for examining the village officer was made, but that was not granted.
There is nothing in the record to support the same. Even so, when the case of
the petitioners is that some wrong entries have been made in the adangal, in
fairness, they should have been given an opportunity to establish whether
those entries were wrong entries as claimed by them. Denial of an Opportunity
to the petitioners in that regard has also resulted in the refusal of the
claim for exemption made by them.
9\. The learned counsel next contended that the non-levy of property tax by
the municipality is a clear indication that the lands were used for
agricultural purposes. Likewise, the non-levy of vacant land tax was also
pressed into service to claim that the lands belonging to the petitioners were
being used for agricultural purposes. I am of the view that there is no
substance in this contention, Municipal property tax is based on the annual
letting value. The charge under the Act is on the market value of the urban
land. Thus, the basis of the two taxes are very different. The non-levy of
Municipal tax is therefore not decisive of the user of the lands for
agricultural purposes.
10\. Lastly, the learned counsel for the Petitioners contended that the second
respondent had clubbed large extents in separate survey numbers for purposes
of fixation of the market value of the land without considering the advantages
and disadvantages of the extent in each survey number and, therefore, the
fixation of the market value in the manner done had prejudiced the
petitioners. Reliance in this connection was also placed. by the learned
counsel for the petitioners upon the decision in Sarada Binding Works v. Asst.
Commr. of Urban Land Tax, North Madras, Madras 84,1979 TLNJ 253. On the other
hand, the learned Additional Government Pleader submitted that with reference
to the data lands near about the lands belonging to the petitioners the market
value had been fixed and, therefore, no exception can be taken to it.
11\. There is no substance in this objection ,raised by the learned counsel
for the petitioners, for, even in the very decision relied, on, it has been
pointed out that the definition under S. 2(6) of the Act of "each urban land"
d9es not mandate the taking of each survey number or sub division as the basis
or unit for the purposes of valuation. It is also further pointed out that the
urban land% held by the 'owner in each survey number will have to be taken as
a unit for the purposes of valuation and not the entire holding. This is also
illustrated with reference to the example of a person owning urban land
situate in ten different survey numbers in which case there would be
difficulty in determining the value of the land in each one of the survey
numbers and it is only with a view to avoid this, the definition "each urban
land" had been introduced to enable the authorities to treat the land situate
in a survey number as a unit for the purposes of valuation. The method adopted
in these cases does not appear to be contrary to the principle laid down in
the decision referred to above. Therefore, this contention of the learned
counsel for the petitioners is also rejected.
12\. A faint objection was raised by the learned Additional Government Pleader
to the effect that the petitioners have not exhausted their remedies by way of
any appeal as well as a revision available under the provisions of the Act
and, therefore, this Court ought not to be exercising its jurisdiction under
Art. 226 of the Constitution. This argument might have been accepted at the
time when the Court was considering the question of entertaining the writ
petitions; but after the expiry of a period of nearly six years after the
filing of the writ petitions and the statutory remedies, having, in the
meanwhile, become totally barred, it would not be just or equitable that the
writ petitions should be thrown out on the ground of the availability of an
alternative remedy.
13\. Since it has been earlier held that the petitioners will be entitled to
establish the availability of exemption to them from the~ provisions of the
Act under the proviso inserted by G. O. Ms. No. 1525, Revenue Department
dt.17-7-1979, the orders of assessment passed against the petitioners are
quashed and the matters are remitted to the second respondent to be dealt with
and disposed of in accordance With the observations and directions given in
this judgment. Consequently, the rule nisi is made absolute and the writ
petitions are allowed to the extent indicated above. There will, however, be
no order as to costs.
14\. Order accordingly.
to the effect that the petitioners have not exhausted their remedies by way of
any appeal as well as a revision available under the provisions of the Act
and, therefore, this Court ought not to be exercising its jurisdiction under
Art. 226 of the Constitution. This argument might have been accepted at the
time when the Court was considering the question of entertaining the writ
petitions; but after the expiry of a period of nearly six years after the
filing of the writ petitions and the statutory remedies, having, in the
meanwhile, become totally barred, it would not be just or equitable that the
writ petitions should be thrown out on the ground of the availability of an
alternative remedy.
13\. Since it has been earlier held that the petitioners will be entitled to
establish the availability of exemption to them from the~ provisions of the
Act under the proviso inserted by G. O. Ms. No. 1525, Revenue Department
dt.17-7-1979, the orders of assessment passed against the petitioners are
quashed and the matters are remitted to the second respondent to be dealt with
and disposed of in accordance With the observations and directions given in
Tax Act, 1966 (hereinafter referred to as the Act) were made applicable to the
area where the lands of the petitioners are situate on and from 1-7-1975 as
per S. I-A of the Act. The petitioners submitted a return as required under S.
7-C of the Act and since the returns so filed were found to be defective in
respect of valuation, an enquiry was held under S. 10(2) of the Act. In the
course of the enquiry the petitioners claimed that the classification of the
lands as dry in the village accounts was incorrect as crops had been grown on
these lands and as such, the provisions of the Act will not apply to the lands
in question. Thereupon, the petitioners were granted time to produce extracts
from the adangal for five faslis prior to 1385 to establish that the lands
were under cultivation prior to the application of the Act with effect from
1-7-1975. Certain adangal extracts for faslis 1381 to 1385 issued by the
Tahsildar, Saidapet, were also produced by the petitioners to establish that
the lands in question were under cultivation and therefore fell outside the
scope of the provisions of the Act. Some objections were also raised by, the
petitioners to some of the entries found in the adangal extracts. An account
book was also relied upon to establish the incurring of expenses in connection
with the agricultural operations carried on in the lands in question. An
objection was raised that as the municipality had not levied property tax and
vacant land tax, the lands had to be treated as having been used for
to the effect that the petitioners have not exhausted their remedies by way of
any appeal as well as a revision available under the provisions of the Act
and, therefore, this Court ought not to be exercising its jurisdiction under
Art. 226 of the Constitution. This argument might have been accepted at the
time when the Court was considering the question of entertaining the writ
petitions; but after the expiry of a period of nearly six years after the
filing of the writ petitions and the statutory remedies, having, in the
meanwhile, become totally barred, it would not be just or equitable that the
writ petitions should be thrown out on the ground of the availability of an
alternative remedy.
13\. Since it has been earlier held that the petitioners will be entitled to
establish the availability of exemption to them from the~ provisions of the
Act under the proviso inserted by G. O. Ms. No. 1525, Revenue Department
dt.17-7-1979, the orders of assessment passed against the petitioners are
quashed and the matters are remitted to the second respondent to be dealt with
and disposed of in accordance With the observations and directions given in
Tax Act, 1966 (hereinafter referred to as the Act) were made applicable to the
area where the lands of the petitioners are situate on and from 1-7-1975 as
per S. I-A of the Act. The petitioners submitted a return as required under S.
7-C of the Act and since the returns so filed were found to be defective in
respect of valuation, an enquiry was held under S. 10(2) of the Act. In the
course of the enquiry the petitioners claimed that the classification of the
lands as dry in the village accounts was incorrect as crops had been grown on
these lands and as such, the provisions of the Act will not apply to the lands
in question. Thereupon, the petitioners were granted time to produce extracts
from the adangal for five faslis prior to 1385 to establish that the lands
were under cultivation prior to the application of the Act with effect from
1-7-1975. Certain adangal extracts for faslis 1381 to 1385 issued by the
Tahsildar, Saidapet, were also produced by the petitioners to establish that
the lands in question were under cultivation and therefore fell outside the
scope of the provisions of the Act. Some objections were also raised by, the
petitioners to some of the entries found in the adangal extracts. An account
book was also relied upon to establish the incurring of expenses in connection
with the agricultural operations carried on in the lands in question. An
objection was raised that as the municipality had not levied property tax and
vacant land tax, the lands had to be treated as having been used for
to the effect that the petitioners have not exhausted their remedies by way of
any appeal as well as a revision available under the provisions of the Act
and, therefore, this Court ought not to be exercising its jurisdiction under
Art. 226 of the Constitution. This argument might have been accepted at the
time when the Court was considering the question of entertaining the writ
petitions; but after the expiry of a period of nearly six years after the
filing of the writ petitions and the statutory remedies, having, in the
meanwhile, become totally barred, it would not be just or equitable that the
writ petitions should be thrown out on the ground of the availability of an
alternative remedy.
13\. Since it has been earlier held that the petitioners will be entitled to
establish the availability of exemption to them from the~ provisions of the
Act under the proviso inserted by G. O. Ms. No. 1525, Revenue Department
dt.17-7-1979, the orders of assessment passed against the petitioners are
quashed and the matters are remitted to the second respondent to be dealt with
and disposed of in accordance With the observations and directions given in
Tax Act, 1966 (hereinafter referred to as the Act) were made applicable to the
area where the lands of the petitioners are situate on and from 1-7-1975 as
per S. I-A of the Act. The petitioners submitted a return as required under S.
7-C of the Act and since the returns so filed were found to be defective in
respect of valuation, an enquiry was held under S. 10(2) of the Act. In the
course of the enquiry the petitioners claimed that the classification of the
lands as dry in the village accounts was incorrect as crops had been grown on
these lands and as such, the provisions of the Act will not apply to the lands
in question. Thereupon, the petitioners were granted time to produce extracts
from the adangal for five faslis prior to 1385 to establish that the lands
were under cultivation prior to the application of the Act with effect from
1-7-1975. Certain adangal extracts for faslis 1381 to 1385 issued by the
Tahsildar, Saidapet, were also produced by the petitioners to establish that
the lands in question were under cultivation and therefore fell outside the
scope of the provisions of the Act. Some objections were also raised by, the
petitioners to some of the entries found in the adangal extracts. An account
book was also relied upon to establish the incurring of expenses in connection
with the agricultural operations carried on in the lands in question. An
objection was raised that as the municipality had not levied property tax and
vacant land tax, the lands had to be treated as having been used for
agricultural purposes. The second respondent, while proceeding to consider the
aforesaid objections raised by the petitioners, held that (i) the lands in
question had not been cultivated for a period of five years before the
commencement of the Act and proved to be continued to be so cultivated and
entered as such in the Government accounts as per G.O.Ms. No. 3526, Revenue
Department, dt. 15th June, 1973 as the adangal entries showed that there was
no cultivation during Faslis 1382, 1383 and 1384 and therefore the lands will
not qualify for exemption from the levy of Urban Land Tax and (ii) that the
value of the Urban land could be justly and reasonably fixed at Rs. 4,000/-
per ground for Survey Nos. 330/2c, 330/2D, 331/2D, 330/2B and 331/2A and at
Rs. 800/- per ground for Survey Nos. 274/2, 274/3, 274/4, 274/6 and 274/7. On
to the effect that the petitioners have not exhausted their remedies by way of
any appeal as well as a revision available under the provisions of the Act
and, therefore, this Court ought not to be exercising its jurisdiction under
Art. 226 of the Constitution. This argument might have been accepted at the
time when the Court was considering the question of entertaining the writ
petitions; but after the expiry of a period of nearly six years after the
filing of the writ petitions and the statutory remedies, having, in the
meanwhile, become totally barred, it would not be just or equitable that the
writ petitions should be thrown out on the ground of the availability of an
alternative remedy.
13\. Since it has been earlier held that the petitioners will be entitled to
establish the availability of exemption to them from the~ provisions of the
Act under the proviso inserted by G. O. Ms. No. 1525, Revenue Department
dt.17-7-1979, the orders of assessment passed against the petitioners are
quashed and the matters are remitted to the second respondent to be dealt with
and disposed of in accordance With the observations and directions given in
Tax Act, 1966 (hereinafter referred to as the Act) were made applicable to the
area where the lands of the petitioners are situate on and from 1-7-1975 as
per S. I-A of the Act. The petitioners submitted a return as required under S.
7-C of the Act and since the returns so filed were found to be defective in
respect of valuation, an enquiry was held under S. 10(2) of the Act. In the
course of the enquiry the petitioners claimed that the classification of the
lands as dry in the village accounts was incorrect as crops had been grown on
these lands and as such, the provisions of the Act will not apply to the lands
in question. Thereupon, the petitioners were granted time to produce extracts
from the adangal for five faslis prior to 1385 to establish that the lands
were under cultivation prior to the application of the Act with effect from
1-7-1975. Certain adangal extracts for faslis 1381 to 1385 issued by the
Tahsildar, Saidapet, were also produced by the petitioners to establish that
the lands in question were under cultivation and therefore fell outside the
scope of the provisions of the Act. Some objections were also raised by, the
petitioners to some of the entries found in the adangal extracts. An account
book was also relied upon to establish the incurring of expenses in connection
with the agricultural operations carried on in the lands in question. An
objection was raised that as the municipality had not levied property tax and
vacant land tax, the lands had to be treated as having been used for
agricultural purposes. The second respondent, while proceeding to consider the
aforesaid objections raised by the petitioners, held that (i) the lands in
question had not been cultivated for a period of five years before the
commencement of the Act and proved to be continued to be so cultivated and
entered as such in the Government accounts as per G.O.Ms. No. 3526, Revenue
Department, dt. 15th June, 1973 as the adangal entries showed that there was
no cultivation during Faslis 1382, 1383 and 1384 and therefore the lands will
not qualify for exemption from the levy of Urban Land Tax and (ii) that the
value of the Urban land could be justly and reasonably fixed at Rs. 4,000/-
per ground for Survey Nos. 330/2c, 330/2D, 331/2D, 330/2B and 331/2A and at
Rs. 800/- per ground for Survey Nos. 274/2, 274/3, 274/4, 274/6 and 274/7. On
to the effect that the petitioners have not exhausted their remedies by way of
any appeal as well as a revision available under the provisions of the Act
and, therefore, this Court ought not to be exercising its jurisdiction under
Art. 226 of the Constitution. This argument might have been accepted at the
time when the Court was considering the question of entertaining the writ
petitions; but after the expiry of a period of nearly six years after the
filing of the writ petitions and the statutory remedies, having, in the
meanwhile, become totally barred, it would not be just or equitable that the
writ petitions should be thrown out on the ground of the availability of an
alternative remedy.
13\. Since it has been earlier held that the petitioners will be entitled to
establish the availability of exemption to them from the~ provisions of the
Act under the proviso inserted by G. O. Ms. No. 1525, Revenue Department
dt.17-7-1979, the orders of assessment passed against the petitioners are
quashed and the matters are remitted to the second respondent to be dealt with
and disposed of in accordance With the observations and directions given in
