Bombay High Court
Balsara Hygiene Products Ltd. And ... vs D.S. Saxena And Another on 15 July,
1993
Equivalent citations: 1994 (2) BomCR 164, 1994 208 ITR 623 Bom
Author: M Pendse
Bench: A Shah, M Pendse
JUDGMENT M.L. Pendse J.
1\. By this petition filed under article 226 of the Constitution of India, the
petitioners are seeking a declaration that the amendment made to section 37 of
the Income-tax Act, 1961, by section 17(b) of the Finance Act, 1983, by
inserting sub-sections (3A) to (3D) is bad in law, illegal, invalid and
violative of the petitioners' fundamental rights. The facts which gave rise to
the filing of the petition are as follows :
Petitioner No. 1 was incorporated as a public limited company on April 29,
1978. Prior to its incorporation, the business was carried on by a
partnership-firm known as Balsara Hygiene Products. The partnership-firm was
engaged in the business of manufacture and sale of air purifiers, water
filters, lavatory cleansers and mosquito repellent cream. In the year 1978,
the partnership-firm entered the filed of dental hygiene with the introduction
of a new tooth paste called "Promise". It is the claim of the petitioners that
merely to expenditure incurred on advertisements but also to the running and
maintenance of aircrafts and motor cars and payments made to hotels. The
Speech of the Finance Minister cannot be limited only to the expenditure
incurred on advertisements and, reading it in its proper perspective, it is
obvious that the fiscal levy is not a restraint on the speech and expression
of the advertiser in publishing the advertisements.
19\. While examining the complaint of restraint on advertisements, it is not
possible to equate the right to publish advertisements with the freedom of
speech guaranteed to newspapers. The complaint of Shri Chinoy that the
restriction on the advertiser in view of the provisions of sub-section (3A) of
section 37 of the Act would indirectly affect the revenue of the newspaper
leading to the decrease in circulation and, therefore, impinges on the freedom
of speech guaranteed to the newspapers cannot be accepted. The claim is far-
fetched and of remote conscience as there is no restriction on the assessee to
incur expenditure beyond Rs. 1,00,000 on advertisements and, consequently, the
complaint that the freedom of press will be violated is imaginary. In our
of a new tooth paste called "Promise". It is the claim of the petitioners that
the tooth paste earned high acclaim and won many awards on account of quality
and price. From the year 1980, the business of the partnership-firm was taken
over by the company. The petitioners' claim that from the year 1981, sales of
the tooth paste have gone up dramatically and the company exports large
quantities abroad and the earnings of the company run into crores of rupees.
The company spends large amounts on advertisement, publicity and sales
promotion to compete with the tooth pastes marketed by multinational
manufacturers. The sale of tooth paste climbed from Rs. 557 lakhs in the year
1981 to Rs. 1,077 lakhs in the year 1983. The expenses on advertisements,
promotion, etc., in respect of the sale of tooth paste also jumped from Rs.
116 lakhs in the year 1981 to Rs. 138 lakhs in the year 1983. For the year
ending June 30, 1983, the company incurred expenditure on advertisement,
publicity and sales promotion totalling Rs. 197 lakhs and out of this amount
Rs. 138 lakhs were spent on advertisement in newspapers, films, television and
radio.
2\. The petitioners' claim that expenditure incurred on advertisement,
publicity and sales promotion was allowed as a deduction in the computation of
its income subject to certain small disallowances under rule 6D of the Income-
tax Rules, 1962, made pursuant to section 37(3) of the Act. In the year 1978,
section 37 of the Act was amended by the Finance Act, 1978, by inserting sub-
sections (3A) to (3D). The effect of the amendment was to disallow a portion
of the expenses incurred by an assessee on advertisement, publicity and sales
promotion in excess of Rs. 40,000. Representations were made by various
associations and small scale industries to the Central Board of direct Taxes
against these amended provisions and, consequently, the amended provisions
were withdrawn by the Finance (No. 2) Act, 1980, with effect from April 1,
1981.
3\. Parliament by the Finance Act, 1983, again amended section 37 by inserting
sub-sections (3A) to (3D) and, inter alia, provided that 20 per cent. of the
expenditure incurred on advertisement, publicity and sales promotion, running
and maintenance of aircraft and motor cars and payments made to hotels would
be disallowed if the expenditure exceeded Rs. 1,00,000. It is necessary to set
out the amended provisions which are under challenge :
"(3A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where the
expenditure or, as the case may be, the aggregate expenditure incurred by an
assessee on any one or more of the items specified in sub-section (3B) exceeds
one hundred thousand rupees, twenty per cent. of such excess shall not be
allowed as deduction in computing the income chargeable under the head
'Profits and gains of business or profession'.
(3B) The expenditure referred to in sub-section (3A) is that incurred on -
(i) advertisement, publicity and sales promotion; or
(ii) running and maintenance of aircraft and motor cars; or
(iii) payments made to hotels.
Explanation. - For the purposes of sub-sections (3A) and (3B), -
(a) the expenditure specified in clause (i) to clause (iii) of sub-section
(3B) shall be the aggregate amount of expenditure incurred by the assessee as
reduced by so much of such expenditure as is not allowed under any other
provision of this Act;
(b) expenditure on advertisement, publicity and sales promotion shall not
include remuneration paid to employees of the assessee engaged in one or more
of the said activities;
(c) expenditure on running and maintenance of aircraft and motor cars shall
include, -
(i) expenditure incurred on chartering any aircraft and expenditure on hire
charges for engaging cars plied for hire;
(ii) conveyance allowance paid to employees and, where the assessee is a
company, conveyance allowance paid to its directors also.
(3C) Nothing contained in sub-section (3A) shall apply in respect of
expenditure incurred by an assessee, being a domestic company as defined in
clause (2) of section 80B, or a person (other than a company) who is resident
in India in respect of expenditure incurred wholly and exclusively on -
(i) advertisement, publicity and sales promotion outside India in respect of
the goods, services or facilities which the assessee deals in or provides in
the course of his business;
(ii) running and maintenance of motor cars in any branch, office or agency
maintained outside India, for the promotion of the sale outside India of such
goods, services or facilities.
(3D) No disallowance under sub-section (3A) shall be made -
(i) in the case of an assessee engaged in the business of operation of
aircraft, in respect of expenditure incurred on running and maintenance of
such aircraft;
(ii) in the case of an assessee engaged in the business of running motor cars
on hire, in respect of expenditure incurred in running and maintenance of such
motor cars."
4\. The petitioners claimed that for the years ended June 30, 1983, the gross
receipts of the company amounted to Rs. 16,94,77,023 whereas the total
expenditure for the same period amounted to Rs. 16,96,92,618. The petitioners
claimed that the loss as per the books of account for the year ended June 30,
1983, was Rs. 2,15,595, but the loss to be computed under the provisions of
the Income-tax Act would work out to Rs. 5,74,457. The petitioners claim that
there was no liability for payment of income-tax or surtax under the Companies
(Profits) Surtax Act, 1964, in the absence of the impugned amendments.
However, on account of the impugned amendments, the total amounts to be
disallowed will be Rs. 40,23,123 and the break-up of the disallowed amounts is
Rs. 39,49,089 on advertisement and business promotion, Rs. 44,036 on motor car
expenses and Rs. 30,000 on hotel payment. The petitioners apprehended that on
assessment, the company will be liable to pay income-tax of about Rs.
19,45,000 and surtax of about Rs. 20,000. The petitioners, therefore,
challenged the amendment made to section 37 by section 17(b) of the Finance
Act, 1983, claiming that the amended sections are violative of the fundamental
rights guaranteed under articles 14 and 19 of the Constitution of India. The
challenge in the petition is no the ground of violation of articles 14,
19(1)(a) and 19(1)(g) of the Constitution of India. Counsel for the
petitioners did not press the challenge based on articles 14 and 19(1)(g) of
the Constitution in view of the decision of the Division Bench of the
Karnataka High Court in Mysore Kirloskar Ltd. v. Union of India (1986) 160 ITR
50. The decision of the Karnataka High Court was challenged before the Supreme
Court but the special leave petition was dismissed by a Bench consisting of
Chief Justice Pathak and Justice Venkatachaliah, as he then was, by order
dated November 10, 1987.
5\. Shri Chinoy, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioners,
submitted that the amended provisions are violative of article 19(1)(a) of the
Constitution of India and are liable to be struck down as the fundamental
rights of the shareholders of the company are assailed by the State action.
Learned counsel urged that freedom of speech and expression includes the right
of a businessman to advertise, publicise and promote sales of his products and
which is popularly referred to as "commercial speech". It was urged that the
impugned amendments constitute an unreasonable restriction on the petitioners'
right of freedom of commercial speech and the direct and inevitable effect of
the amendments is to curtail or restrict the petitioners' fundamental rights.
Shri Chinoy submitted that commercial speech results in the education of the
citizens of this country endowing them with sufficient choice in their
consumption pattern, and the amendment seeks to limit the circulation of
information to which citizens are entitled by virtue of the constitutional
guarantee. It was further contended that the main source of income for the
newspapers is from advertisement and the direct and inevitable effect of the
impugned amendments would be to reduce the advertisements and, thereby, to
curtail the circulation of the newspapers, which would directly affect the
freedom of the press. Shri Jetly, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the
Department, on the other hand, contended that the challenge to the amended
provisions as violative of article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution of India is
not correct. It was submitted that the assumption of the petitioners that
there is a restraint on commercial speech and the direct and inherent effect
of the amendments would affect the freedom of the press is not accurate.
Learned counsel urged that the amendments provide for denial of exemption to
large business houses who incur expenditure over the sum of Rs. 1,00,000 on
advertisements and running and maintenance of aircraft, motor cars and payment
made to hotels. It was submitted that denial of 20 per cent. of excess tax
over one hundred thousand rupees while computing the deduction on the income
chargeable can by no stretch of imagination be violative of article 19(1)(a)
as there is no absolute immunity to the advertisements from taxation. It was
urged that the fiscal statute cannot be struck down when the direct and
inevitable effect of the impugned amendment is not to curtail or to restrict
the right to advertisements but merely to regulate them. In view of the rival
submissions, the question which requires answer is whether the amended
provisions are violative of the protection guaranteed under article 19(1)(a)
of the Constitution.
6\. Article 19(1)(a) of the constitution of India provides that all citizens
shall have the right to freedom of speech and expression. Article 19(2)
provides that nothing in sub-clause (a) of clause (1) shall affect the
operation of any existing law, or prevent the State from making any law, in so
far as such law imposes reasonable restrictions on the exercise of the right
conferred by the sub-clause provided it is in the interest of the sovereignty
and integrity of India, the security of the State. Friendly relations with
foreign States, etc. Shri Chinoy submitted that while introducing the Finance
Bill, the reasons given by the Finance Minister in support of the impugned
amendments were as follows (see [1983] 140 ITR (St.) 31) :
"Honourable members must be aware of lavish and wasteful expenditure by trade
and industry, particularly on travelling, advertisement and the like. With a
view to inculcating a climate of austerity and providing a disincentive to
non-productive, avoidable and ostentatious spending by trade and industry, I
propose to provide that 20 per cent. of such expenditure will be disallowed in
computing the taxable profits."
7\. Learned counsel urged that the intention of carrying out the amendment is
not to levy tax but to prevent non-productive, avoidable and ostentatious
spending by the trade. It was suggested that from the speech of the Finance
Minister, an inference is inevitable that the amendments were introduced with
a view to curtail or restrain commercial speech. Learned counsel placed strong
reliance upon the decisions of the Supreme Court in Indian Express Newspapers
(Bombay) P. Ltd. v. Union of India [1986] 159 ITR 856; Sakal Papers (P.) Ltd.
v. Union of India, and Hamdard Dawakhana v. Union of India, , in support of
the submission. Before adverting to the decisions relied upon and to determine
whether the amended provisions directly put a restraint upon commercial speech
or the freedom of speech and expression on businessmen to advertise, it is
necessary to refer to the exact ambit of the amended provisions under
challenge.
8\. Section 37 of the Income-tax Act provides that any expenditure not being
expenditure of the nature described in sections 30 to 36 and not being in the
nature of capital expenditure or personal expenses of the assessee, laid out
or expended wholly and exclusively for the purposes of the business or
profession shall be allowed in computing the income chargeable under the head
"Profits and gains of business or profession". To the general rule, the
exception is carved out by the amended provisions of sub-section (3A) of
section 37. The sub-section provides that where the expenditure incurred by
the assessee on any one or more of the items specified in sub-section (3B)
exceeds one hundred thousand rupees, twenty per cent. of such excess shall not
be allowed as deduction in computing the income chargeable under the head
"Profits and gains of business or profession". The items specified in sub-
section (3B) are :
(a) advertisement, publicity and sales promotion; or
(b) running and maintenance of aircraft and motor cars; or
(c) payments made to hotels.
Sub-sections (3C) and (3D) are not relevant for the challenge raised by the
petitioners. A perusal of the amended provisions makes it clear that normally
sub-sections (3A) and (3B) would come into play in case of large business
houses who incur expenditure of more than Rs. 1,00,000 on advertisement,
running and maintenance of aircraft and motor cars and payments made to
hotels. It is unlikely that the expenditure would cross the limits of Rs.
1,00,000 unless the turnover of the assessee is far in excess of a lakh of
rupees.
9\. The gravamen of the complaint urged on behalf of the petitioners is that
commercial advertisements constitute speech and expression as contemplated
under article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution of India. The petitioners claim
that speech and expression cannot be curtailed or restricted because the
Government considers such speech and expression to be socially unproductive.
It is further claimed that tax or other fiscal measures cannot be imposed for
the purpose of curtailing or restricting the volume of expression or for
controlling its content and any fiscal measure taken for such purposes must
necessarily be unconstitutional unless protected by article 19(2) of the
Constitution. Shri Chinoy submitted that a perusal of the Finance Minister's
speech establishes the object of the levy and the situation it was sought to
remedy and, therefore, the impugned fiscal levy directly seeks to curtail the
volume of advertising on the ground that the Government considers such
expenditure/activity wasteful and unproductive. Shri Chinoy submitted that the
decision of the Supreme Court in Hamdard Dawakhana v. Union of India, ,
indicated that commercial advertising would not fall within the expression
"speech and expression" under article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution of India
but the subsequent decisions in Sakal Papers (P.) Ltd. v. Union of India, and
Indian Express Newspapers (Bombay) Private Ltd. v. Union of India, [1986] 159
ITR 856 (SC) clearly establish that commercial speech can also come within the
ambit of article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution of India.
10\. At this stage, it would be convenient to make a reference to the
decisions cited by Shri Chinoy in support of the submission. In the case of
State of Bombay v. F. N. Balsara [1951] SCR 682 : AIR 1951 SC 318, the Supreme
Court examined the expression "commending" in section 23(a) and section
24(1)(a) of the Bombay Prohibition Act to determine whether the expression
"commending" intoxicant are said to conflict with the fundamental right
guaranteed by article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution of India. The Supreme Court
observed that there can be no doubt that the prohibition against "commending"
intoxicant is a curtailment of the right guaranteed and it can be supported
only if it is saved by clause (2) of article 19 of the constitution of India.
The next decision referred to is Hamdard Dawakhana v. Union of India, where
the question of the constitutionality of the Drugs and Magic Remedies
(Objectionable Advertisements) Act, 1954, arose for consideration. The Supreme
Court in paragraph 17 of the judgment observed that an advertisement is no
doubt a form of speech but its true character is reflected by the object of
the promotion of which it is employed. It assumes the attributes and elements
of the activity under article 19(1)(a) which it seeks to aid by bringing it to
the notice of the public. When it takes the form of a commercial advertisement
which has an element of trade or commerce, it no longer falls within the
concept of freedom of speech for the object is not propagation of ideas -
social, political or economic or furtherance of literature or human though,
but the commendation of the efficacy value and importance of certain goods.
Shri Chinoy suggested that the decision in Hamdard's case, , indicates that
commercial advertisement will not attract article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution
of India. The submission is not accurate because the Supreme Court observed in
paragraph 18 of the judgment (at page 563) :
"It cannot be said therefore that every advertisement is a matter dealing with
freedom of speech nor can it be said that it is an expression of ideas. In
every case, one has to see what is the nature of the advertisement and what
activity falling under article 19(1) it seeks to further."
10\. From the above observations, it is obvious that the Supreme Court never
intended to lay down a principle that commercial advertising does not
constitute speech and expression within article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution
of India. The next decision replied upon is Sakal Papers (P.) Ltd. v. Union of
India, . The constitutional validity of the Daily Newspaper (Price and Page)
Order, 1960, came up for consideration. The effect of the Act and the impugned
order was to regulate the number of pages according to the price charged,
prescribe the number of supplements to be published and prohibit the
publication and sale of newspapers in contravention of any order made under
section 3 of the Act. The Act also provided for regulating the size and area
of advertising matter in relation to other matters contained in a newspaper.
Mr. Justice Mudholkar, speaking for the Bench, observed (at page 313) :
"It may well be within the power of the State to place, in the interest of the
general public, restrictions upon the right of a citizen to carry on business
but it is not open to the State to achieve this object by directly and
immediately curtailing any other freedom of that citizen guaranteed by the
Constitution and which is not susceptible of abridgment on the same grounds as
are set out in clause (6) of article 19. Therefore, the right of freedom of
speech cannot be taken away with the object of placing restrictions on the
business activities of a citizen. Freedom of speech can be restricted only in
the interests of the security of the State, friendly relations with foreign
States, public order, decency or morality or in relation to contempt of court,
defamation or incitement to an offence. It cannot, like the freedom to carry
on business, be curtailed in the interest of the general public. If a law
directly affecting it is challenged, it is no answer that the restrictions
enacted by it are justifiable under clauses (3) to (6). For the scheme of
article 19 is to enumerate different freedoms separately and then to specify
the extent of restrictions to which they may be subjected and the objects for
securing which this could be done. A citizen is entitled to enjoy each and
every one of the freedoms together and clause (1) does not prefer one freedom
to another. That is the plain meaning of this clause. It follows from this
that the State cannot make a law which directly restricts one freedom even for
securing the better enjoyment of another freedom. All the greater reason,
therefore, for holding that the State cannot directly restrict one freedom by
placing an otherwise permissible restriction on another freedom."
11\. The next decision in Bennett Coleman and Co. Ltd. v. Union of India,
where the import policy for newsprint for the year April, 1972, to March,
1973, was challenged on the ground of infringement of the fundamental right
guaranteed under article 19(1)(a). The Supreme Court observed that the tests
of pith and substance of the subject-matter and of the direct and incidental
effect of the legislation are relevant to questions of legislative competence
but they are irrelevant to the question of infringement of fundamental rights.
It was them observed in paragraph 39 of the judgment that the true test is
whether the effect of the impugned action is to take away or abridge
fundamental rights. It was further observed (at page 119) :
"If it be assumed that the direct object of the law or action has to be direct
abridgment of the right of free speech by the impugned law or action, it is to
be related to the directness of effect and not to the directness of the
subject-matter of the impeached law or action. The action may have a direct
effect on a fundamental right although its direct subject-matter may be
different."
12\. The last decision of the Supreme Court to which reference was made is
Indian Express Newspapers (Bombay) P. Ltd. v. Union of India [1986] 159 ITR
856. The challenge was to the validity of the imposition of import duty on
newsprint imported from abroad under section 12 of the Customs Act and the
levy of auxiliary duty under the Finance Act. The Supreme Court, after
exhaustively setting out the importance of the freedom of speech and
expression which includes the freedom of the press proceeded to consider
whether it is open to the Government to levy any tax on any of the aspects of
the press and the question posed was "Do newspapers have immunity from
taxation ?" After exhaustive consideration of the subject, the Supreme Court
held that newspapers cannot claim immunity from taxation. As to whether the
tax levied on the newspaper industry transgresses into the field of freedom of
expression and stifles that freedom, the Supreme Court observed (at page 893)
:
"As long as it is within reasonable limits and does not impede freedom of
expression, it will not be contravening the limitations of article 19(2). The
delicate task of determining when it crosses from the area of profession,
occupation, trade, business or industry into the area of freedom of expression
and interferes with that freedom is entrusted to the courts."
13\. The Supreme Court then examined the earlier decisions in Sakal Papers
(P.) Ltd.'s case, and Bennett Coleman and Co.'s case, , and observed that the
impugned provisions have the direct consequence of the curtailment of
advertisements. The freedom is violated by placing a restraint upon the
integral part of the freedom or by placing a restraint upon something which is
the essential part of the freedom.
14\. Shri Chinoy referred to the decision of the United States Supreme Court
in Virginia State Board of Pharmacy v. Virginia Citizens Consumer Council,
Inc. 48 US SCR 346. The question examined was whether protection of the First
Amendment is available for "commercial speech". The issue arose as the
pharmacists published the advertisement of prescription drug prices and the
nature of advertisement was summarised in the following words :
"The 'idea' he wishes to communicate is simply this : "I will sell you the X
prescription drug at the Y price."
15\. The Supreme Court examined whether this communication is wholly outside
the protection of the First Amendment. After taking into consideration various
decisions, it was held that the communication is not outside the protection of
the First Amendment. The decisions referred to on behalf of the petitioners do
establish that commercial advertising constitutes speech and expression within
article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution of India.
16\. The real question which requires determination is whether the impugned
amendments in section 37 of the Income-tax Act restrains or curtails
commercial speech. In the decisions in Express Newspapers (P.) Ltd. v. Union
of India , the question arose as to whether the wage board specifying the
wages and conditions of service of working journalists and imposing a certain
financial burden was an infringement of the right of freedom of the press and
Bhagwati J., speaking for the Bench, observed (at page 620 of AIR 1958 SC and
page 285 of 14 FJR) :
"Unless these were the direct or inevitable consequences of the measures
enacted in the impugned Act, it would not be possible to strike down the
legislation as having that effect and operation. A possible eventuality of
this type would not necessarily be the consequence which could be in the
contemplation of the Legislature while enacting a measure of this type for the
benefit of the workmen concerned."
17\. The Supreme Court referred with approval to the decision in Grosjean v.
American Press Co. [1935] 297 US 233 for the proposition that a statute
imposing a tax on the business of publishing advertisements would be void if
it was found to be a deliberate and calculated device in the guise of a tax to
limit the circulation of information to which the public was entitled by
virtue of the constitutional guarantees.
18\. Bearing this principle in mind, it is necessary to examine whether the
provisions of section 37(3A) of the Income-tax Act put a restraint or curtail
the right of the advertiser to publish commercial advertisements so as to
attract the prohibition contained in article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution of
India. In our judgment, it is impossible to accede to the submission that
Parliament had found deliberate and calculated device in the guise of the tax
to limit the right of advertisers of commercial speech. It is also difficult
to accede to the submission that the enactment of sub-sections (3A) and (3B)
of section 37 of the Income-tax Act has the direct inevitable consequence of
infringing upon the protection guaranteed under article 19(1)(a) of the
Constitution of India. As mentioned hereinabove, sub-section (3A) prescribes
that when the aggregate expenditure incurred by the assessee exceeds one
hundred thousand rupees, then 20 per cent. of such excess shall not be allowed
as deduction in computing the income chargeable under the head "Profits and
gains of business or profession". It is necessary to bear in mind that there
is no restriction whatsoever on the expenses which an assessee can incur on
advertisement, publicity and sales promotion or running and maintenance of
aircraft and motor cars or payments made to hotels. The Legislature has
provided for levy of tax by prescribing that 20 per cent. of the excess shall
not be allowed as deduction in the cases where the aggregate expenditure
exceeds one hundred thousand rupees. The Supreme Court in the case of Indian
Express Newspapers (Bombay) P. Ltd. [1986] 159 ITR 856 held that even
newspapers are not immune from taxation. In the present case, we are concerned
not with the taxation in regard to newspapers but taxation of assessees who
incur expenditure in excess of one hundred thousand rupees in respect of items
specified in sub-section (3B) of section 37 of the Income-tax Act and which,
inter alia, refers to the expenses in regard to advertisement, publicity and
sales promotion. The principle that even though the commercial speech falls
within the ambit of article 19(1)(a) is accepted, that would not give immunity
to an assessee from payment of taxes in respect of advertisements. In this
connection, it is interesting to note that earlier by the Finance Act, 1978,
sub-sections (3A) to (3D) were inserted in section 37 of the Act and those
sub-sections were omitted by the Finance Act, 1980. In those sub-sections, the
aggregate expenditure which was in excess of Rs. 40,000 was not allowed
deduction at a certain percentage depending upon the turnover. The Legislature
in its wisdom raised the limit of aggregate expenditure of one hundred
thousand rupees before depriving 20 per cent. of such expenses from deduction
in computing the income chargeable. In our judgment, the contention of the
petitioners that the tax or the fiscal measure under sub-section (3A) and sub-
section (3B) was imposed for the purpose of curtailing or restricting or
controlling commercial speech is not correct. The sub-sections do not curtail
or restrict the expenditure which an assessee desires to incur, nor do they
restrict the contents of such advertisements but merely provide that in case
the assessee exceeds a particular limit, then 20 per cent, of such excess
shall not be allowed as deduction. In our judgment, the provisions of sub-
sections (3A) and (3B) of section 37 of the Income-tax Act do not have the
consequence of transgressing the freedom of publishing advertisements either
directly or even remotely. It is well-settled that unless the impugned
provisions have the direct or inevitable consequence of transgressing upon the
freedom of speech, it is not possible to strike down the legislation as having
that effect and operation. The reliance by Shri Chinoy on the speech of the
Finance Minister at the time of introduction of the Finance Act cannot lead to
the conclusion that the fiscal levy seeks to curtail the volume of advertising
on the ground that such expenditure is wasteful and unproductive. The speech
of the Finance Minister must be read in its proper context and it cannot be
overlooked that the provisions of sub-section (3B) of section 37 do not refer
merely to expenditure incurred on advertisements but also to the running and
maintenance of aircrafts and motor cars and payments made to hotels. The
Speech of the Finance Minister cannot be limited only to the expenditure
incurred on advertisements and, reading it in its proper perspective, it is
obvious that the fiscal levy is not a restraint on the speech and expression
of the advertiser in publishing the advertisements.
19\. While examining the complaint of restraint on advertisements, it is not
possible to equate the right to publish advertisements with the freedom of
speech guaranteed to newspapers. The complaint of Shri Chinoy that the
restriction on the advertiser in view of the provisions of sub-section (3A) of
section 37 of the Act would indirectly affect the revenue of the newspaper
leading to the decrease in circulation and, therefore, impinges on the freedom
of speech guaranteed to the newspapers cannot be accepted. The claim is far-
fetched and of remote conscience as there is no restriction on the assessee to
incur expenditure beyond Rs. 1,00,000 on advertisements and, consequently, the
complaint that the freedom of press will be violated is imaginary. In our
judgment, the challenge to the provisions of sub-sections (3A) to (3D) of the
Section 37 of the Income-tax Act as introduced by section 17(b) of the Finance
Act, 1983, is without any merit and the petition must fail.
20\. Accordingly, rule is discharged with costs.
merely to expenditure incurred on advertisements but also to the running and
maintenance of aircrafts and motor cars and payments made to hotels. The
Speech of the Finance Minister cannot be limited only to the expenditure
incurred on advertisements and, reading it in its proper perspective, it is
obvious that the fiscal levy is not a restraint on the speech and expression
of the advertiser in publishing the advertisements.
19\. While examining the complaint of restraint on advertisements, it is not
possible to equate the right to publish advertisements with the freedom of
speech guaranteed to newspapers. The complaint of Shri Chinoy that the
restriction on the advertiser in view of the provisions of sub-section (3A) of
section 37 of the Act would indirectly affect the revenue of the newspaper
leading to the decrease in circulation and, therefore, impinges on the freedom
of speech guaranteed to the newspapers cannot be accepted. The claim is far-
fetched and of remote conscience as there is no restriction on the assessee to
incur expenditure beyond Rs. 1,00,000 on advertisements and, consequently, the
complaint that the freedom of press will be violated is imaginary. In our
of a new tooth paste called "Promise". It is the claim of the petitioners that
the tooth paste earned high acclaim and won many awards on account of quality
and price. From the year 1980, the business of the partnership-firm was taken
over by the company. The petitioners' claim that from the year 1981, sales of
the tooth paste have gone up dramatically and the company exports large
quantities abroad and the earnings of the company run into crores of rupees.
The company spends large amounts on advertisement, publicity and sales
promotion to compete with the tooth pastes marketed by multinational
manufacturers. The sale of tooth paste climbed from Rs. 557 lakhs in the year
1981 to Rs. 1,077 lakhs in the year 1983. The expenses on advertisements,
promotion, etc., in respect of the sale of tooth paste also jumped from Rs.
116 lakhs in the year 1981 to Rs. 138 lakhs in the year 1983. For the year
ending June 30, 1983, the company incurred expenditure on advertisement,
publicity and sales promotion totalling Rs. 197 lakhs and out of this amount
Rs. 138 lakhs were spent on advertisement in newspapers, films, television and
radio.
2\. The petitioners' claim that expenditure incurred on advertisement,
publicity and sales promotion was allowed as a deduction in the computation of
its income subject to certain small disallowances under rule 6D of the Income-
tax Rules, 1962, made pursuant to section 37(3) of the Act. In the year 1978,
merely to expenditure incurred on advertisements but also to the running and
maintenance of aircrafts and motor cars and payments made to hotels. The
Speech of the Finance Minister cannot be limited only to the expenditure
incurred on advertisements and, reading it in its proper perspective, it is
obvious that the fiscal levy is not a restraint on the speech and expression
of the advertiser in publishing the advertisements.
19\. While examining the complaint of restraint on advertisements, it is not
possible to equate the right to publish advertisements with the freedom of
speech guaranteed to newspapers. The complaint of Shri Chinoy that the
restriction on the advertiser in view of the provisions of sub-section (3A) of
section 37 of the Act would indirectly affect the revenue of the newspaper
leading to the decrease in circulation and, therefore, impinges on the freedom
of speech guaranteed to the newspapers cannot be accepted. The claim is far-
fetched and of remote conscience as there is no restriction on the assessee to
incur expenditure beyond Rs. 1,00,000 on advertisements and, consequently, the
complaint that the freedom of press will be violated is imaginary. In our
of a new tooth paste called "Promise". It is the claim of the petitioners that
the tooth paste earned high acclaim and won many awards on account of quality
and price. From the year 1980, the business of the partnership-firm was taken
over by the company. The petitioners' claim that from the year 1981, sales of
the tooth paste have gone up dramatically and the company exports large
quantities abroad and the earnings of the company run into crores of rupees.
The company spends large amounts on advertisement, publicity and sales
promotion to compete with the tooth pastes marketed by multinational
manufacturers. The sale of tooth paste climbed from Rs. 557 lakhs in the year
1981 to Rs. 1,077 lakhs in the year 1983. The expenses on advertisements,
promotion, etc., in respect of the sale of tooth paste also jumped from Rs.
116 lakhs in the year 1981 to Rs. 138 lakhs in the year 1983. For the year
ending June 30, 1983, the company incurred expenditure on advertisement,
publicity and sales promotion totalling Rs. 197 lakhs and out of this amount
Rs. 138 lakhs were spent on advertisement in newspapers, films, television and
radio.
2\. The petitioners' claim that expenditure incurred on advertisement,
publicity and sales promotion was allowed as a deduction in the computation of
its income subject to certain small disallowances under rule 6D of the Income-
tax Rules, 1962, made pursuant to section 37(3) of the Act. In the year 1978,
merely to expenditure incurred on advertisements but also to the running and
maintenance of aircrafts and motor cars and payments made to hotels. The
Speech of the Finance Minister cannot be limited only to the expenditure
incurred on advertisements and, reading it in its proper perspective, it is
obvious that the fiscal levy is not a restraint on the speech and expression
of the advertiser in publishing the advertisements.
19\. While examining the complaint of restraint on advertisements, it is not
possible to equate the right to publish advertisements with the freedom of
speech guaranteed to newspapers. The complaint of Shri Chinoy that the
restriction on the advertiser in view of the provisions of sub-section (3A) of
section 37 of the Act would indirectly affect the revenue of the newspaper
leading to the decrease in circulation and, therefore, impinges on the freedom
of speech guaranteed to the newspapers cannot be accepted. The claim is far-
fetched and of remote conscience as there is no restriction on the assessee to
incur expenditure beyond Rs. 1,00,000 on advertisements and, consequently, the
complaint that the freedom of press will be violated is imaginary. In our
of a new tooth paste called "Promise". It is the claim of the petitioners that
the tooth paste earned high acclaim and won many awards on account of quality
and price. From the year 1980, the business of the partnership-firm was taken
over by the company. The petitioners' claim that from the year 1981, sales of
the tooth paste have gone up dramatically and the company exports large
quantities abroad and the earnings of the company run into crores of rupees.
The company spends large amounts on advertisement, publicity and sales
promotion to compete with the tooth pastes marketed by multinational
manufacturers. The sale of tooth paste climbed from Rs. 557 lakhs in the year
1981 to Rs. 1,077 lakhs in the year 1983. The expenses on advertisements,
promotion, etc., in respect of the sale of tooth paste also jumped from Rs.
116 lakhs in the year 1981 to Rs. 138 lakhs in the year 1983. For the year
ending June 30, 1983, the company incurred expenditure on advertisement,
publicity and sales promotion totalling Rs. 197 lakhs and out of this amount
Rs. 138 lakhs were spent on advertisement in newspapers, films, television and
radio.
2\. The petitioners' claim that expenditure incurred on advertisement,
publicity and sales promotion was allowed as a deduction in the computation of
its income subject to certain small disallowances under rule 6D of the Income-
tax Rules, 1962, made pursuant to section 37(3) of the Act. In the year 1978,
section 37 of the Act was amended by the Finance Act, 1978, by inserting sub-
sections (3A) to (3D). The effect of the amendment was to disallow a portion
of the expenses incurred by an assessee on advertisement, publicity and sales
promotion in excess of Rs. 40,000. Representations were made by various
associations and small scale industries to the Central Board of direct Taxes
against these amended provisions and, consequently, the amended provisions
were withdrawn by the Finance (No. 2) Act, 1980, with effect from April 1,
1981.
3\. Parliament by the Finance Act, 1983, again amended section 37 by inserting
sub-sections (3A) to (3D) and, inter alia, provided that 20 per cent. of the
expenditure incurred on advertisement, publicity and sales promotion, running
merely to expenditure incurred on advertisements but also to the running and
maintenance of aircrafts and motor cars and payments made to hotels. The
Speech of the Finance Minister cannot be limited only to the expenditure
incurred on advertisements and, reading it in its proper perspective, it is
obvious that the fiscal levy is not a restraint on the speech and expression
of the advertiser in publishing the advertisements.
19\. While examining the complaint of restraint on advertisements, it is not
possible to equate the right to publish advertisements with the freedom of
speech guaranteed to newspapers. The complaint of Shri Chinoy that the
restriction on the advertiser in view of the provisions of sub-section (3A) of
section 37 of the Act would indirectly affect the revenue of the newspaper
leading to the decrease in circulation and, therefore, impinges on the freedom
of speech guaranteed to the newspapers cannot be accepted. The claim is far-
fetched and of remote conscience as there is no restriction on the assessee to
incur expenditure beyond Rs. 1,00,000 on advertisements and, consequently, the
complaint that the freedom of press will be violated is imaginary. In our
of a new tooth paste called "Promise". It is the claim of the petitioners that
the tooth paste earned high acclaim and won many awards on account of quality
and price. From the year 1980, the business of the partnership-firm was taken
over by the company. The petitioners' claim that from the year 1981, sales of
the tooth paste have gone up dramatically and the company exports large
quantities abroad and the earnings of the company run into crores of rupees.
The company spends large amounts on advertisement, publicity and sales
promotion to compete with the tooth pastes marketed by multinational
manufacturers. The sale of tooth paste climbed from Rs. 557 lakhs in the year
1981 to Rs. 1,077 lakhs in the year 1983. The expenses on advertisements,
promotion, etc., in respect of the sale of tooth paste also jumped from Rs.
116 lakhs in the year 1981 to Rs. 138 lakhs in the year 1983. For the year
ending June 30, 1983, the company incurred expenditure on advertisement,
publicity and sales promotion totalling Rs. 197 lakhs and out of this amount
Rs. 138 lakhs were spent on advertisement in newspapers, films, television and
radio.
2\. The petitioners' claim that expenditure incurred on advertisement,
publicity and sales promotion was allowed as a deduction in the computation of
its income subject to certain small disallowances under rule 6D of the Income-
tax Rules, 1962, made pursuant to section 37(3) of the Act. In the year 1978,
section 37 of the Act was amended by the Finance Act, 1978, by inserting sub-
sections (3A) to (3D). The effect of the amendment was to disallow a portion
of the expenses incurred by an assessee on advertisement, publicity and sales
promotion in excess of Rs. 40,000. Representations were made by various
associations and small scale industries to the Central Board of direct Taxes
against these amended provisions and, consequently, the amended provisions
were withdrawn by the Finance (No. 2) Act, 1980, with effect from April 1,
1981.
3\. Parliament by the Finance Act, 1983, again amended section 37 by inserting
sub-sections (3A) to (3D) and, inter alia, provided that 20 per cent. of the
expenditure incurred on advertisement, publicity and sales promotion, running
merely to expenditure incurred on advertisements but also to the running and
maintenance of aircrafts and motor cars and payments made to hotels. The
Speech of the Finance Minister cannot be limited only to the expenditure
incurred on advertisements and, reading it in its proper perspective, it is
obvious that the fiscal levy is not a restraint on the speech and expression
of the advertiser in publishing the advertisements.
19\. While examining the complaint of restraint on advertisements, it is not
possible to equate the right to publish advertisements with the freedom of
speech guaranteed to newspapers. The complaint of Shri Chinoy that the
restriction on the advertiser in view of the provisions of sub-section (3A) of
section 37 of the Act would indirectly affect the revenue of the newspaper
leading to the decrease in circulation and, therefore, impinges on the freedom
of speech guaranteed to the newspapers cannot be accepted. The claim is far-
fetched and of remote conscience as there is no restriction on the assessee to
incur expenditure beyond Rs. 1,00,000 on advertisements and, consequently, the
complaint that the freedom of press will be violated is imaginary. In our
