Delhi High Court
State (Delhi Admn.) vs Shiv Shankar on 9 March, 2010
Author: V. K. Jain
    *     IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
    +                     Crl.A.No.436/2005
    %                     Reserved on:     03rd March, 2010
                          Date of Decision: 09th March, 2010
    #     STATE (DELHI ADMN.)                       ..... Appellant
    !                  Through:        Mr. Jaideep Malik, APP
                          versus
    $     SHIV SHANKAR                              ..... Respondent
    ^                 Through:         Mr. M.L. Alwadhi, Adv.
    *     CORAM:
          HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE V.K. JAIN
          1.    Whether the Reporters of local papers
                may be allowed to see the judgment?              Yes
          2.    To be referred to the Reporter or not?           Yes
          3.    Whether the judgment should be
                reported in the Digest?                          Yes
    : V.K. JAIN, J.
paneer, to which formalin has been added in the quantity that was used in this
case, will lose its fat contents with the passage of time and if so, what
would be the percentage of decrease in the fat content, between 31st December,
1992 when the sample was taken and the date on which the sample was examined
by the Central Food Laboratory. While examining the Director, Central Food
Laboratory, it will also be open to the trial court to obtain his opinion as
to whether the method of taking sample adopted in this case, which comprised
cutting the brick of paneer into smallest pieces with a clean and dry knife
and then mixing them with the help of a clean and dry spoon, followed by
rotating them in all possible directions, was a proper method of taking
sample, for the purpose of analysis, or not.
22\. The parties are directed to appear before the trial court at 10.00 a.m.
on 22nd of March, 2010. The trial court will examine Director, Central Food
Laboratory within two months of the parties appearing before it and will
decide the matter afresh within in one month thereafter after hearing both the
parties. Both the parties will be given opportunity to cross-
    : V.K. JAIN, J.
1\. This is an appeal filed by the State against the Judgment dated 2nd April,
2004, whereby the respondent was acquitted of the charge under Section 16 of
Prevention of Food and Adulteration Act, 1954.
Crl.A.No.436/2005 Page 1 of 22
2\. On 31st December, 1992, Food Inspector Surender Kumar Sharma purchased,
for analysis, a sample of paneer, a food article, from the respondent who was
running business under the name and style of M/s Kumar Dairy, 6/33 Moti Nagar,
New Delhi. Paneer was found stored in the shop of the respondent for the
purpose of sale. The case of the complainant is that the sample of paneer
purchased by the Food Inspector, weighing about 750 gms., was cut into small
pieces with the help of clean and dry knife in a clean and dry aluminum tray
and was mixed with the help of clean and dry steel spoons. The sample was then
divided into three equal parts each of which was kept in a separate clean and
dry bottle and 20 drops of formalin was added to each bottle. After packing,
fastening, marking and sealing the sample as per PFA Act & Rules, signatures
of the respondent were obtained on the paper slip and wrapper of the bottle.
One counterpart of the sample was sent to Public Analysis, whereas the
remaining two samples were deposited with the Local Health Authority. It was
reported by the Public Analyst that the sample did not conform to prescribe
standard, as the milk fat in paneer was less than the prescribed minimum
standard of 50%. Crl.A.No.436/2005 Page 2 of 22
3\. On receipt of summons, the respondent appeared before the Trial Court and
on his request, the second counterpart of the sample was sent to Director,
Central Food Laboratory for analysis. It was reported by Director, Food
Laboratory that the sample did not conform the prescribed standard of paneer
as the fat contained was below the minimum specified limit of 50%.
4\. During trial, the appellant/complainant examined three witnesses.
5\. PW-3 Shri S.K. Sharma, Food Inspector stated that on 31st December, 1992,
he alongwith Inspector Rajesh Kumar and other staff of department visited M/s
Kumar Dairy, 6/33 Moti Nagar, New Delhi under the supervision of LHA Mr. R.K.
Ahuja. The appellant Shiv Shankar was found conducting business there and
having stored paneer, butter, milk, etc. for sale for human consumption. He
purchased 750 gms paneer which was in the form of a brick lying in the
refrigerator. The paneer brick was cut into smallest pieces with the help of a
clean and dry knife in a clean and dry aluminum tray. The pieces so cut were
properly mixed by a clean and dry spoon, by rotating them in all possible
directions, i.e., clockwise, anti- Crl.A.No.436/2005 Page 3 of 22 clockwise,
upward and downward, many times. The sample was then equally divided into
three parts which were put in three clean and dry glass bottles. Twenty drops
of formalin were added to each counterpart of the sample, while shaking them
for proper dispersion of formalin in each sample. Each counterpart was packed,
fastened, marked and sealed as per PFA Act and Rules and slips of Shri
R.K.Ahuja bearing his code number and signatures were affixed on each of them.
The respondent also signed each counterpart in such a manner that part of his
signatures came on the wrapper and the part on LHA slip. On 31st December,
1992, one counterpart of the sample along with Form VII and one Form VII which
had been separately sealed, were deposited in the office of Public Analyst
vide receipt Ex.PW-3/A. On the same day, two counterparts with two From VII
were deposited with LHA vide receipt Ex.PW-1/D under intimation that one
counterpart had already been deposited in the office of Public Analyst. All
the copies of Form VII were affixed with specimen seal that was used for
sealing the sample.
6\. PW-1, Shri R.K.Ahuja, is the LHA, who accompanied PW-3 to the place of the
respondent. He has fully corroborated Crl.A.No.436/2005 Page 4 of 22 the
testimony of PW-3. PW-2, FI Rajesh Kumar, is a Food Inspector, who had
accompanied PW-1 and PW-3 to the place of respondent on 31st December, 1992.
He also has corroborated their testimony. PW-1, Shri R.K.Ahuja, has also
stated that each counterpart of the sample was properly shaken by the Food
Inspector after adding formalin, so as to mix it throughout the paneer. PW-2,
Rajesh Kumar, has also deposed to the same effect.
7\. In his statement under Section 313 Cr.P.C., the respondent admitted that
on 31st December, 1992 PW-1 to PW- 3 visited Kumar Dairy where he was
conducting business and that he had stored paneer in that premises for sale
for human consumption. He also admitted that 750 gms. Panner which was in a
brick form was purchased from him, though he claimed that no money was paid to
him for the paneer. He denied cutting of paneer into smallest pieces and
claimed that the fat was unevenly distributed in the brick which was cut into
pieces without first bringing it to room temperature. He did not dispute that
formalin was added to each counterpart of the sample but claimed that formalin
was not of proper grade and excessive quantity was added. He admitted that
each Crl.A.No.436/2005 Page 5 of 22 counterpart of the sample was packed,
fastened, marked and sealed as per PFA Act and Rules and he also had signed
the paper slip that was affixed on it, in such a manner that part of his
signature came on the wrapper and part on LHA slip. As regards the report of
Director, Central Food Laboratory, he claimed that analysis was carried out
after about five months and that formalin cannot preserve paneer for more than
two months. He also claimed that though the sample may appear to be wholesome,
it indicates chemical changes due to hyponetic action of eyzymes. He stated
that paneer was spongy and formalin could not be distributed and some fat got
stuck with knife and tray.
8\. The respondent produced one Mr.D.N.Mathur, Joint Director in National
Dairy Research Institute, Karnal, which is a body carrying out research and
providing consultancy to dairy projects. He stated that one Dr.K.R.Haridas had
conducted a research in National Dairy Research Institute regarding shelf life
of paneer to which formalin had been added as a preservative and the result of
research was published in a Journal, copy of which is Ex.DW-1/A. According to
him, it was found in research that even after addition of formalin
Crl.A.No.436/2005 Page 6 of 22 chemical changes in paneer start after six days
and it becomes mouldy and nytrozen content gets reduced. He opined that if two
analysts examine a sample of same paneer with a time gap of about five months,
the analysis which is nearner to the data of sample needs to be preferred. He
stated that though a sample may be fit for analysis, it may not be fit for
accurate analysis since its values may go down with lapse of time. During
cross-examination, he admitted that his deposition in the court was based on
above referred research paper.
9\. The trial court has acquitted the respondent on the grounds that: (1)
paneer was not thawed or brought to room temperature and a wrong technique was
used for taking sample as neither the paneer brick was drilled nor chunks were
taken from its different parts; and (2) the samples were not kept under
refrigeration and there was no mention in the complaint and the documents that
the refrigerator of the respondent was not working. Another consideration
which weighed with the trial court in acquitting the respondent was that
according to PW-1 and PW-3, the weight of the brick of paneer was 750 gms.,
whereas according to PW-2, it was one kilogram and there was contradiction in
the testimony of Crl.A.No.436/2005 Page 7 of 22 witnesses on the question as
to whether the refrigerator of the respondent was working or not. It was
further noticed that date of expiry of formalin had not been given by the
witnesses.
10\. In my view, the contradictions noted by the learned Metropolitan
Magistrate are absolutely insignificant and irrelevant. The respondent himself
has admitted in his statement under Section 313 Cr.P.C. that cheese weighing
750 gms. was taken as sample from him. The same is the weight shown in the
documents prepared on the spot, including the Panchnama, Ex.PW-1/C and vender
receipt Ex.PW-1/A. In view of the contemporaneous documentary evidence
produced by the complainant, coupled with the fact that the respondent himself
has admitted the weight of the paneer taken from him as sample, it is
absolutely immaterial that one of the witnesses has given its weight as one
kilogram. In fact, there is no dispute between the parties as regards quantity
of the paneer taken by the Food Inspector from the respondent. Therefore, the
learned Metropolitan Magistrate was not at all justified in referring to the
testimony of PW-2 as regards the weight of the paneer.
11\. In my view, it is absolutely immaterial whether the Crl.A.No.436/2005
Page 8 of 22 refrigerator of the respondent was working or not. In any case,
the complainant was under no obligation to state in the complaint itself as to
whether the refrigerator was working or not at the time of taking sample. A
complaint is not an encyclopedia, so as to contain even minute details. Only
material facts need to be pleaded in the complaint. It is just too much to
expect the complainant to state in the complaint as to whether the
refrigerator in which paneer was stored was in working condition or not when
the offence alleged to have been committed by him is not being attributed to
his refrigerator, not being in working condition. The respondent has been
prosecuted for storing, for sale, paneer which did not conform to the
prescribed standard, as the milk fat in it was found to be less than the
minimum percentage prescribed under the rules and not for selling paneer
without keeping it in refrigerator. Irrespective of whether his refrigerator
was working or not, the respondent would be guilty, if the paneer stored by
him, for sale, did not conform to the prescribed standard. Therefore, as far
as the charge against the respondent is concerned, nothing really turns on as
to whether the refrigerator of the respondent was in working condition or
Crl.A.No.436/2005 Page 9 of 22 not.
12\. It is an admitted case that the samples were not kept under
refrigeration. However, there is absolutely no expert opinion to show that
sample of paneer, even after adding formalin to it, would become unfit for
analysis, if it is not kept under refrigeration. Even DW-1, Dr.B.N.Mathur, has
not stated so before the trial court. The court needs to appreciate that
paneer, though a milk product, is not milk as such, and, therefore, what is
true to milk may not necessarily be true in respect of paneer. The most
important aspect in this regard is that when the sample of paneer was analysed
by Central Food Laboratory, it was not found unfit for analysis. If the sample
of paneer, to which formalin had been added, remained fit for analysis even
after five months, that by itself is sufficient to show that it did not
necessarily require refrigeration, at least for five months. Therefore, in my
view, the trial court was not correct in acquitting the respondent on this
ground.
13\. As regards the method of taking samples, as noted earlier, according to
witnesses, the paneer was cut into smallest possible pieces which were
properly mixed using clean and dry spoon and were then rotated in all possible
Crl.A.No.436/2005 Page 10 of 22 directions, i.e., clockwise, anti-clockwise,
upward and downward, and this process was undertaken a number of times. There
was no expert opinion before the trial court which would show that the sample
of paneer, in the manner taken in the present case is not a proper method of
sampling this product. Drawing chucks from portions of the brick with the help
of a cheese drawer may be a proper method of taking sample of paneer, but may
not necessarily be the only proper method to be adopted for this purpose. In
the absence of an expert opinion, the trial court was not justified in holding
that cutting of paneer into smallest pieces with the help of a clean and dry
knife and then mixing them with a dry spoon and rotating them a number of
times in all possible directions was not a proper method of sampling. It has
to be kept in mind that no particular method of taking samples has been
prescribed in PFA Act or Rules framed thereunder. Therefore, in the absence of
an expert opinion, the trial court was not justified in insisting upon a
particular method of taking sample of paneer. It would be relevant to note
here that extract noted by the trial court from the book „Food Chemistry‟
pertains to frozen food and the paneer (cottage cheese) which
Crl.A.No.436/2005 Page 11 of 22 the respondent was found having stored for
sale cannot be said to be a frozen food. „Frozen Food‟ is a food article,
which is exposed to extreme cold and is preserved by refrigeration below
freezing point. Paneer, as we all know, is not exposed to such extreme cold
and is stored at a temperature below freezing point. Also, there was no expert
opinion before the trial court to take a view that the sample of paneer needs
to be necessarily thawed or brought to room temperature before cutting it into
smallest pieces and then mixing those pieces with the help of a spoon. It
would, therefore, be difficult to say that the paneer taken from the
respondent was necessarily required to be brought to room temperature or that
it was obligatory for the Food Inspector to take pieces of samples by drilling
or taking chunks from different parts of the package and then subject them to
thawing. The trial court has ignored the fact that the whole of the brick
taken from the respondent was cut into pieces and then mixed properly before
dividing it into three counterparts. Therefore, the fat content of the entire
sample must have necessarily gone into the samples sent to the Public Analyst
and Central Food Laboratory.
14\. In my view, it was too much on the part of the trial Crl.A.No.436/2005
Page 12 of 22 court to expect the witnesses to remember the date of expiry of
formalin added to the sample. Before using formalin or any other chemical,
Food Inspector is not expected to note down the date of its expiry. It is
sufficient if he is using the chemical which has not expired. According to
PW-1, the formalin used in the present case was almost fresh and was of BDH
Company. In fact, according to him, the date of expiry was not mentioned at
all on the bottle of formalin. This is not the case of the respondent that the
formalin used by the Food Inspector was expired one. This was not his case
that the date of expiry is mentioned on the bottle of formalin. During his
statement under Section 313 Cr.P.C., the respondent claimed that the formalin
used by the Food Inspector was not of proper grade and excessive quantity of
formalin was used. He did not claim that the formalin used by the Food
Inspector had expired. Therefore, the trial court was not justified in
disbelieving the case of the complainant on the ground that the expiry date of
formalin could not be given by the witnesses when they were examined in the
court.
15\. It was contended by the learned counsel for the respondent that the
consent has not been duly proved by the Crl.A.No.436/2005 Page 13 of 22
complainant as neither the Consenting Authority has been produced in the
witness box nor does PW-1 say that he was conversant with the signature of
Consenting Authority, Shri M.P.Tyagi. I find that the consent Ex.PW-1/F was
exhibited in the deposition of PW-1 without any objection from the respondent.
Had the respondent objected to the consent being exhibited in the deposition
of PW-1 without his claiming that he was conversant with the signature of Shri
M.P.Tyagi, the complainant could have produced either the Consenting Authority
himself or some other person conversant with his signature to prove the
signature on the consent Ex.PW-1/F. By not objecting to the consent being
exhibited in the deposition of PW-1, the respondent is deemed to have
dispensed with the requirement of proving the signature of Shri M.P.Tyagi
either by summoning him or by producing a person who would be conversant with
his signature. Hence, no benefit, at this stage, accrues to the respondent on
this ground.
16\. It was also contended by the learned counsel for the respondent that
there was no evidence of the sample and the specimen seal impressions having
been sent by PW-3 to the Crl.A.No.436/2005 Page 14 of 22 Public Analyst and,
consequently, there was breach of Rule 17(a) and Rule 18 of PFA Rules. In my
view, there is no merit in the contention. A perusal of the report of Public
Analyst, Ex.PW-1/E, would show that not only the sample which had been
properly sealed and fastened with seals intact on it was received by him, the
specimen impressions of the seal were also separately sent to him by the Food
Inspector and on comparison by him, the specimen impressions of the seal
tallied with the seal impressions on the sample. Though Ex.PW-1/3 has been
prepared on a printed proforma after typing relevant particulars at proper
places, that, to my mind, would make no difference for the simple reason that
had the sample received by the Public Analyst not been properly sealed and
fastened or had the seals on the sample not been intact and unbroken, he would
have deleted that portion of the proforma which referred to the condition of
the sample and the seals on it. The fact that the Public Analyst did not
delete this portion of the proforma leaves no reasonable doubt that the sample
received by him was properly sealed and fastened the seals on it were
unbroken. Similarly, had the Food Inspector not sent the specimen impressions
of the seal separately to Crl.A.No.436/2005 Page 15 of 22 him, the Public
Analyst would have deleted that portion of the proforma which pertained to
companies‟ seals on the container and outer cover of the sample with the
specimen impressions of the seal separately sent by the Food Inspector. In
fact, had the inspector not sent specimen seal impressions to him or had the
seal impressions on the container not tallied with the specimen impressions
sent separately to him, the Public Analyst would have intimated the Local
Authority about the same and would have sent requisition to him for sending
second part of the sample as provided in the proviso to Rule 7 of PFA Rules,
which enjoined a duty upon him to compare the seals on the containers and the
outer cover with the specimen impressions received separately and to note the
condition of the seal thereon. I, therefore, find no merit in this contention.
17\. It was also contended by the learned counsel for the respondent that
there is breach of Section 11(1)(C) of PFA Act as the Food Inspector instead
of sending one counterpart of sample directly to the Public Analyst, deposited
with the Sample Officer of the Department. In my view, there is no merit in
the contention. It was not necessary for the Food Inspector to send the sample
directly to the Public Analyst. He Crl.A.No.436/2005 Page 16 of 22 could as
well have used the services of Sample Officer or some other official for this
purpose. Rule 17 of PFA Rules which prescribes the manner of dispatching
containers of samples, to the extent it is relevant, reads as under:
> "17. Manner of dispatching containers of samples.--The containers of the
> sample shall be dispatched in the following manner, namely:--
> (a) The sealed container of one part of the sample for analysis and a
> memorandum in Form VII shall be sent in a sealed packet to the public
> analyst immediately but not later than the succeeding working day by any
> suitable means;
(b) .........."
18\. The Food Inspector, therefore, could have adopted any suitable means for
sending sample as well as specimen impressions of the seal to the Public
Analyst and there was nothing wrong in availing the services of an official of
the Department for this purpose.
19\. During the course of arguments, the learned counsel for the respondent
emphasized upon the result of the research stated to have been carried out by
Dr.K.B.Haridas under the aegis of National Dairy Research Institute, Karnal,
and contended that since, paneer loses its fat content with the
Crl.A.No.436/2005 Page 17 of 22 passage of time, as established during the
research carried out by Dr.K.B.Haridas and the analysis by Central Food
Laboratory was carried out after more than five months of taking the sample,
there was a strong possibility of the fat content in the paneer taken from the
respondent, having gone down with the passage of time. In other words, the
contention is that there was a reasonable possibility of the fat content in
the paneer being more than 50% when the sample was taken on 31st of December,
1992 and its percentage having got reduced in a period of about five months
during which the sample was lying in the office of LHA. According to him, on
account of delay in filing of complaint and, consequent, delay in carrying out
of analysis by Director, Central Food Laboratory, it could not remain possible
for the respondent to show that at the time the sample of paneer was taken
from him the fat in the paneer were more than 50% and the report of Public
Analyst was not correct. The report of Director, Central Food Laboratory
supersedes the report of Public Analyst as provided in Section 13(3) of
Prevention of Food Adulteration Act. No doubt, if the respondent is able to
satisfy the court that even after addition of formalin to it, sample of
Crl.A.No.436/2005 Page 18 of 22 paneer loses its fat contents to such an
extent that within a period of about five months, the percentage of fat may go
down by more than 16%, that would show that there was a reasonable possibility
of the paneer taken from the respondent having fat content of more than 50% at
the time the sample was taken. It is, therefore, necessary for the court to
find out, whether the percentage of fat in sample of paneer, goes down with
the passage of time and if so, to what extent it would go down in a period of
about five months, despite addition of formalin to it. In the research stated
to have been carried out by Dr.H.K.Haridas, it was found that the percentage
of decrease in fat content of the preserved sample for storage period of 7, 14
and 21 days varied from 0 to 1.8, 2.4 to 5.7 and 5.4 to 9.0. There is no
finding as regrd decrease in fat content if the sample is preserved for a
period of about five months. If the maximum decreased in fat content, noticed
by Dr.H.K.Haridas, is taken into account, the percentage of fat content in the
paneer taken from the respondent would still fall short of the prescribed
standard. But, then the study relates to the sample stored for a maximum of 21
days and there is no finding as regards the paneer stored for more than
Crl.A.No.436/2005 Page 19 of 22 five months. It would, therefore, be necessary
for the court to ascertain, from a reliable expert as to how much, if any,
would be the loss of fat content after five months in a sample of paneer to
which formalin has been added in the quantity that was added in the present
case.
20\. It is true that Director, Central Food Laboratory did not find the sample
analysed by him to be unfit for analysis. It is also quite possible that since
the date of taking sample was known to Director, Central Food Laboratory, the
same having been written on the container itself, had it been possible for the
fat content to go down by as much as 16% or more, the Director himself may
have noted so in his report. But, considering the fact that the Director,
Central Food Laboratory was not examined by either party and the research
carried out by Dr.H.K.Haridas shows loss of 9% of fat in a period of about 21
days, it would be necessary for the court to go further into this aspect and
seek an authentic expert opinion on the decrease in fat content in a period of
about five months.
21\. For the reasons given in the preceding paragraphs, the impugned order is,
hereby, set aside and the trial court is directed to summon and examine the
Director, Central Food Crl.A.No.436/2005 Page 20 of 22 Laboratory as a court
witness and obtain his opinion, on the question as to whether a sample of
paneer, to which formalin has been added in the quantity that was used in this
case, will lose its fat contents with the passage of time and if so, what
would be the percentage of decrease in the fat content, between 31st December,
1992 when the sample was taken and the date on which the sample was examined
by the Central Food Laboratory. While examining the Director, Central Food
Laboratory, it will also be open to the trial court to obtain his opinion as
to whether the method of taking sample adopted in this case, which comprised
cutting the brick of paneer into smallest pieces with a clean and dry knife
and then mixing them with the help of a clean and dry spoon, followed by
rotating them in all possible directions, was a proper method of taking
sample, for the purpose of analysis, or not.
22\. The parties are directed to appear before the trial court at 10.00 a.m.
on 22nd of March, 2010. The trial court will examine Director, Central Food
Laboratory within two months of the parties appearing before it and will
decide the matter afresh within in one month thereafter after hearing both the
parties. Both the parties will be given opportunity to cross-
Crl.A.No.436/2005 Page 21 of 22 examine the Director of Central Food
Laboratory. Trial Court Record be sent back, with a copy of this judgment, for
compliance.
(V.K.JAIN) JUDGE MARCH 09, 2010 RS/ Crl.A.No.436/2005 Page 22 of 22
paneer, to which formalin has been added in the quantity that was used in this
case, will lose its fat contents with the passage of time and if so, what
would be the percentage of decrease in the fat content, between 31st December,
1992 when the sample was taken and the date on which the sample was examined
by the Central Food Laboratory. While examining the Director, Central Food
Laboratory, it will also be open to the trial court to obtain his opinion as
to whether the method of taking sample adopted in this case, which comprised
cutting the brick of paneer into smallest pieces with a clean and dry knife
and then mixing them with the help of a clean and dry spoon, followed by
rotating them in all possible directions, was a proper method of taking
sample, for the purpose of analysis, or not.
22\. The parties are directed to appear before the trial court at 10.00 a.m.
on 22nd of March, 2010. The trial court will examine Director, Central Food
Laboratory within two months of the parties appearing before it and will
decide the matter afresh within in one month thereafter after hearing both the
parties. Both the parties will be given opportunity to cross-
    : V.K. JAIN, J.
1\. This is an appeal filed by the State against the Judgment dated 2nd April,
2004, whereby the respondent was acquitted of the charge under Section 16 of
Prevention of Food and Adulteration Act, 1954.
Crl.A.No.436/2005 Page 1 of 22
2\. On 31st December, 1992, Food Inspector Surender Kumar Sharma purchased,
for analysis, a sample of paneer, a food article, from the respondent who was
running business under the name and style of M/s Kumar Dairy, 6/33 Moti Nagar,
New Delhi. Paneer was found stored in the shop of the respondent for the
purpose of sale. The case of the complainant is that the sample of paneer
purchased by the Food Inspector, weighing about 750 gms., was cut into small
pieces with the help of clean and dry knife in a clean and dry aluminum tray
and was mixed with the help of clean and dry steel spoons. The sample was then
divided into three equal parts each of which was kept in a separate clean and
dry bottle and 20 drops of formalin was added to each bottle. After packing,
fastening, marking and sealing the sample as per PFA Act & Rules, signatures
of the respondent were obtained on the paper slip and wrapper of the bottle.
One counterpart of the sample was sent to Public Analysis, whereas the
remaining two samples were deposited with the Local Health Authority. It was
reported by the Public Analyst that the sample did not conform to prescribe
paneer, to which formalin has been added in the quantity that was used in this
case, will lose its fat contents with the passage of time and if so, what
would be the percentage of decrease in the fat content, between 31st December,
1992 when the sample was taken and the date on which the sample was examined
by the Central Food Laboratory. While examining the Director, Central Food
Laboratory, it will also be open to the trial court to obtain his opinion as
to whether the method of taking sample adopted in this case, which comprised
cutting the brick of paneer into smallest pieces with a clean and dry knife
and then mixing them with the help of a clean and dry spoon, followed by
rotating them in all possible directions, was a proper method of taking
sample, for the purpose of analysis, or not.
22\. The parties are directed to appear before the trial court at 10.00 a.m.
on 22nd of March, 2010. The trial court will examine Director, Central Food
Laboratory within two months of the parties appearing before it and will
decide the matter afresh within in one month thereafter after hearing both the
parties. Both the parties will be given opportunity to cross-
    : V.K. JAIN, J.
1\. This is an appeal filed by the State against the Judgment dated 2nd April,
2004, whereby the respondent was acquitted of the charge under Section 16 of
Prevention of Food and Adulteration Act, 1954.
Crl.A.No.436/2005 Page 1 of 22
2\. On 31st December, 1992, Food Inspector Surender Kumar Sharma purchased,
for analysis, a sample of paneer, a food article, from the respondent who was
running business under the name and style of M/s Kumar Dairy, 6/33 Moti Nagar,
New Delhi. Paneer was found stored in the shop of the respondent for the
purpose of sale. The case of the complainant is that the sample of paneer
purchased by the Food Inspector, weighing about 750 gms., was cut into small
pieces with the help of clean and dry knife in a clean and dry aluminum tray
and was mixed with the help of clean and dry steel spoons. The sample was then
divided into three equal parts each of which was kept in a separate clean and
dry bottle and 20 drops of formalin was added to each bottle. After packing,
fastening, marking and sealing the sample as per PFA Act & Rules, signatures
of the respondent were obtained on the paper slip and wrapper of the bottle.
One counterpart of the sample was sent to Public Analysis, whereas the
remaining two samples were deposited with the Local Health Authority. It was
reported by the Public Analyst that the sample did not conform to prescribe
paneer, to which formalin has been added in the quantity that was used in this
case, will lose its fat contents with the passage of time and if so, what
would be the percentage of decrease in the fat content, between 31st December,
1992 when the sample was taken and the date on which the sample was examined
by the Central Food Laboratory. While examining the Director, Central Food
Laboratory, it will also be open to the trial court to obtain his opinion as
to whether the method of taking sample adopted in this case, which comprised
cutting the brick of paneer into smallest pieces with a clean and dry knife
and then mixing them with the help of a clean and dry spoon, followed by
rotating them in all possible directions, was a proper method of taking
sample, for the purpose of analysis, or not.
22\. The parties are directed to appear before the trial court at 10.00 a.m.
on 22nd of March, 2010. The trial court will examine Director, Central Food
Laboratory within two months of the parties appearing before it and will
decide the matter afresh within in one month thereafter after hearing both the
parties. Both the parties will be given opportunity to cross-
    : V.K. JAIN, J.
1\. This is an appeal filed by the State against the Judgment dated 2nd April,
2004, whereby the respondent was acquitted of the charge under Section 16 of
Prevention of Food and Adulteration Act, 1954.
Crl.A.No.436/2005 Page 1 of 22
2\. On 31st December, 1992, Food Inspector Surender Kumar Sharma purchased,
for analysis, a sample of paneer, a food article, from the respondent who was
running business under the name and style of M/s Kumar Dairy, 6/33 Moti Nagar,
New Delhi. Paneer was found stored in the shop of the respondent for the
purpose of sale. The case of the complainant is that the sample of paneer
purchased by the Food Inspector, weighing about 750 gms., was cut into small
pieces with the help of clean and dry knife in a clean and dry aluminum tray
and was mixed with the help of clean and dry steel spoons. The sample was then
divided into three equal parts each of which was kept in a separate clean and
dry bottle and 20 drops of formalin was added to each bottle. After packing,
fastening, marking and sealing the sample as per PFA Act & Rules, signatures
of the respondent were obtained on the paper slip and wrapper of the bottle.
One counterpart of the sample was sent to Public Analysis, whereas the
remaining two samples were deposited with the Local Health Authority. It was
reported by the Public Analyst that the sample did not conform to prescribe
standard, as the milk fat in paneer was less than the prescribed minimum
standard of 50%. Crl.A.No.436/2005 Page 2 of 22
3\. On receipt of summons, the respondent appeared before the Trial Court and
on his request, the second counterpart of the sample was sent to Director,
Central Food Laboratory for analysis. It was reported by Director, Food
Laboratory that the sample did not conform the prescribed standard of paneer
as the fat contained was below the minimum specified limit of 50%.
4\. During trial, the appellant/complainant examined three witnesses.
5\. PW-3 Shri S.K. Sharma, Food Inspector stated that on 31st December, 1992,
he alongwith Inspector Rajesh Kumar and other staff of department visited M/s
Kumar Dairy, 6/33 Moti Nagar, New Delhi under the supervision of LHA Mr. R.K.
paneer, to which formalin has been added in the quantity that was used in this
case, will lose its fat contents with the passage of time and if so, what
would be the percentage of decrease in the fat content, between 31st December,
1992 when the sample was taken and the date on which the sample was examined
by the Central Food Laboratory. While examining the Director, Central Food
Laboratory, it will also be open to the trial court to obtain his opinion as
to whether the method of taking sample adopted in this case, which comprised
cutting the brick of paneer into smallest pieces with a clean and dry knife
and then mixing them with the help of a clean and dry spoon, followed by
rotating them in all possible directions, was a proper method of taking
sample, for the purpose of analysis, or not.
22\. The parties are directed to appear before the trial court at 10.00 a.m.
on 22nd of March, 2010. The trial court will examine Director, Central Food
Laboratory within two months of the parties appearing before it and will
decide the matter afresh within in one month thereafter after hearing both the
parties. Both the parties will be given opportunity to cross-
    : V.K. JAIN, J.
1\. This is an appeal filed by the State against the Judgment dated 2nd April,
2004, whereby the respondent was acquitted of the charge under Section 16 of
Prevention of Food and Adulteration Act, 1954.
Crl.A.No.436/2005 Page 1 of 22
2\. On 31st December, 1992, Food Inspector Surender Kumar Sharma purchased,
for analysis, a sample of paneer, a food article, from the respondent who was
running business under the name and style of M/s Kumar Dairy, 6/33 Moti Nagar,
New Delhi. Paneer was found stored in the shop of the respondent for the
purpose of sale. The case of the complainant is that the sample of paneer
purchased by the Food Inspector, weighing about 750 gms., was cut into small
pieces with the help of clean and dry knife in a clean and dry aluminum tray
and was mixed with the help of clean and dry steel spoons. The sample was then
divided into three equal parts each of which was kept in a separate clean and
dry bottle and 20 drops of formalin was added to each bottle. After packing,
fastening, marking and sealing the sample as per PFA Act & Rules, signatures
of the respondent were obtained on the paper slip and wrapper of the bottle.
One counterpart of the sample was sent to Public Analysis, whereas the
remaining two samples were deposited with the Local Health Authority. It was
reported by the Public Analyst that the sample did not conform to prescribe
standard, as the milk fat in paneer was less than the prescribed minimum
standard of 50%. Crl.A.No.436/2005 Page 2 of 22
3\. On receipt of summons, the respondent appeared before the Trial Court and
on his request, the second counterpart of the sample was sent to Director,
Central Food Laboratory for analysis. It was reported by Director, Food
Laboratory that the sample did not conform the prescribed standard of paneer
as the fat contained was below the minimum specified limit of 50%.
4\. During trial, the appellant/complainant examined three witnesses.
5\. PW-3 Shri S.K. Sharma, Food Inspector stated that on 31st December, 1992,
he alongwith Inspector Rajesh Kumar and other staff of department visited M/s
Kumar Dairy, 6/33 Moti Nagar, New Delhi under the supervision of LHA Mr. R.K.
paneer, to which formalin has been added in the quantity that was used in this
case, will lose its fat contents with the passage of time and if so, what
would be the percentage of decrease in the fat content, between 31st December,
1992 when the sample was taken and the date on which the sample was examined
by the Central Food Laboratory. While examining the Director, Central Food
Laboratory, it will also be open to the trial court to obtain his opinion as
to whether the method of taking sample adopted in this case, which comprised
cutting the brick of paneer into smallest pieces with a clean and dry knife
and then mixing them with the help of a clean and dry spoon, followed by
rotating them in all possible directions, was a proper method of taking
sample, for the purpose of analysis, or not.
22\. The parties are directed to appear before the trial court at 10.00 a.m.
on 22nd of March, 2010. The trial court will examine Director, Central Food
Laboratory within two months of the parties appearing before it and will
decide the matter afresh within in one month thereafter after hearing both the
parties. Both the parties will be given opportunity to cross-
