Income Tax Appellate Tribunal - Delhi
Slocum Investment P. Ltd. (Now ... vs The Deputy Commissioner Of Income ... on
24 March, 2006
Bench: P Jagtap, N Vasudevan
ORDER PER BENCH
1\. IT(SS) A. No. 411/Del/04 is an appeal by the assessee and IT(SS) A. No.
45/Del/05 is an appeal by the Revenue. Both these appeals arise out of the
order of learned CIT(A)-III, New Delhi dated 30/11/2004. They are being
disposed of by this consolidated order.
2\. First we shall take up the Assessee's appeal i.e. IT(SS) A. No: 411/Del/04
for consideration. The facts and circumstances giving rise to the appeal by
the Assessee are as follows. The Assessee is a company. M/s HCL Corporation
Ltd., (hereinafter referred to as 'M/s HCLCL'), M/s Shiv Nadar Investment
Pvt.Ltd. (hereinafter referred to as 'M/s SNIPL') and the assessee company
were promoters of a company by name, M/s HCL Consulting Ltd. The main objects
of these three companies were making investments in various companies. The
investments are in the form of contribution to share capital of various
companies. They promote companies and hold shares of companies promoted. The
shares are held by these companies in order to have power to control and
manage the companies, which they promote. The assessee, M/s HCLCL and M/s
indicate the involvement of the assessee or the two other companies in
arranging for funds to M/s VSIPL (M). The second document also refers to
disbursement of funds by and not to any flow of funds to VSIPL(M). Therefore,
the basic assumption of the Id.DR that there was an out flow of funds from
India from the assessee and the two other companies to VSIPL(M) which was used
for purchasing of shares is found to be not correct. In the circumstances, we
are doubtful as to how the provisions of Section 93 could be invoked by the
Revenue. We do not wish to (SIC) further on this issue for the reason that we
have already held that this new plea should not be permitted to be raised by
the Revenue for the first time before the Tribunal. For the reasons stated
above, we are of the view that the CIT(A) was fully justified in deleting the
addition made by the Assessing Officer and consequently his order is confirmed
and this ground of appeal by the Revenue is dismissed.
183\. The second ground of appeal by the Revenue does not call for any
adjudication as the additions made by the Assessing Officer have been deleted.
Consequently the question of levy of surcharge is academic calling for no
manage the companies, which they promote. The assessee, M/s HCLCL and M/s
SNIPL sold 41,00,000, 14,50,000 and 14,50,000 shares respectively of M/s HCL
Consulting Ltd. to one Overseas Corporate Body (OCB) i.e. M/s Wintech
Investment Pvt.Ltd., Mauritius (hereinafter referred to as 'M/s WIPL') at Rs.
50/- per share. All the three transactions took place in June, 1999. The three
companies passed a Board Resolution all dated 3.6.99 offering shares held by
them in the capital of M/s HCL Consulting Ltd., to M/s WIPL. M/s WIPL by Board
resolution dated 4.6.99 agreed to buy the shares in question subject to the
required Governmental approvals. The RBI granted in principle approval on
23.9.99 and final approval on 23.10.99. The assessee, M/s SNIPL and HCLCL
received the sale proceeds on 13.10.99, 14.10.99 and 12.10.99 respectively in
the form of remittances in foreign exchange duly evidenced by the Foreign
Exchange Remittance Certificates. Therefore, there was a completed sale of the
shares in the P.Y. relevant to A.Y. 2000-2001, i.e., Financial Year 99-2000,
by the Assessee, SNIPL & HCLCL respectively. Prior to this sale, M/s WIPL was
holding 20,00,000 shares of M/s HCL Consulting Ltd. and after acquiring
70,00,000 shares from the aforesaid three companies, it sold 4,15,000 shares
leaving with it 85,85,000 shares of M/s HCL Consulting Ltd. of the face value
of Rs. 10/- per share. Subsequently, M/s HCL Consulting Ltd. capitalized part
of its free reserves/profit by issuing bonus shares. Each shareholder was
issued one equity share of Rs. 10/- as bonus for every two shares held in M/s
HCL Consulting Ltd. Thus M/s WIPL held 1,28,77,500 shares of M/s HCL
Consulting Ltd. after such issue of bonus shares. The share capital of M/s HCL
Consulting Ltd. was consolidated and shares of the face value of Rs. 10 each
were sub-divided into shares of face value of Rs. 4/- each in November, 1999.
Accordingly, 1,28,77,500 shares of the face value of Rs. 10/- each held by M/s
Wintech Investment Pvt.Ltd. became 3,21,93,750 shares of the face value of Rs.
4/- each. Such consolidation and sub-division happened in the month of
November 1999. This holding by M/s WIPL in M/s HCL Consulting Ltd. represented
a controlling interest in the said company. Meanwhile, the name of M/s HCL
Consulting Ltd. was changed to M/s HCL Technologies Ltd. on 6/10/1999 and in
this new name, the said company came up with an Initial Public Offer (IPO) of
shares in the month of November 1999.
3\. The Assessee filed its return of income for the Assessment Year 2000-2001
on 30.11.2000. A copy of the acknowledgement of filing return of income for
the Assessment Year 2000-01 on 30.11.2000 is placed at page 358 of the
assessee's paper book. A copy of computation of total income is at page 359 of
assessee's paper book. In the computation of income under the head long-term
capital gain the assessee has shown to have made a gain as per annexure-1
attached to the statement of taxable income. In annexure 1, the assessee has
reflected sale of 14,50,000/- shares of M/S. HCL Consulting Ltd. A capital
loss (long term) on sale of these shares has been reflected in annexure-1.
This long term capital loss has however been set off against the capital gain
on sale of certain other shares and the net capital gain has been shown in the
statement of taxable income under the head "long term capital gains". The
return of income so filed by the assessee was subjected to an assessment by
the Assessing Officer and an order dated 27.3.2003 was passed by the Assessing
Officer under Section 143(3) of the Act. A copy of order of assessment is at
page 362 to 372 of assessee's paper book (volume 1).
4\. Similarly, M/s HCLCL had also disclosed the transaction of sale of shares
of M/s HCL Consulting Ltd. to M/s WIPL in their returns filed for A.Y.2000-01.
This company filed its return of income for the Assessment Year 2000-2001 on
27.11.2000. In the computation of income (copy at page-384) under the head
"Capital Gain", a long-term capital loss has been returned as per details in
annexure-A to the said return. In annexure-A, sale of 41,00,000/- equity
shares of HCL Consulting Ltd. has been declared.
5\. Similarly, M/s SNIPL had also disclosed the transaction of sale of shares
of M/s HCL Consulting Ltd. to M/s WIPL in their returns filed for A.Y.
2000-01. This company has filed its return of income for Assessment Year
2000-2001 on 30.11.2000. A copy of the return of income for AY 00-01 filed by
this company is at page 400 of Assessee's paper book. Under the head "Capital
gain", long term capital gain has been declared by the Assessee as per
annexure-1 to the said computation. In Annexure-1, 14,50,000 shares of HCL
Consulting Ltd. has been shown to have been sold by the Assessee. On such sale
long-term capital loss has been declared by the Assessee. An intimation under
Section 143(1) of the Act has been issued by the Assessing Officer in Feb.
2002.
6\. M/s SNIPL and M/s HCLCL proposed to amalgamate with the Assessee w.e.f.
1.4.2000. The scheme of Amalgamation, in so far as the same is relevant for
the present case, provides as follows.
"Appointed Date" for the purposes of the Scheme means the 1st Day of April,
2000 or such other date(s) as the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi may direct.
"Effective Date" shall be the last of the following dates or such other dates
as the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi may direct, namely:
(i)the date on which the last of all the consents, approvals, permissions,
resolutions, sanctions and/or orders as are necessary have been obtained or
passed; and
(ii)the date on which certified copies of the orders of the Court under
Section 391, 392 and 394 of the said Act are filed with the Registrar of
Companies, National Capital Territory of Delhi and Haryana.
TRANSFER OF ASSETS AND LIABILITIES Transfer of assets, rights, Title etc: With
effect from the Appointed Date and subject to the provisions of the Scheme
including in relation to the mode of vesting, the undertaking and the entire
business of the Transferor Companies including all the movable and immovable
properties, tangible and intangible properties, assets, buildings, offices,
investments of all kinds, lease and hire purchase contracts, lending
contracts, benefit of any security arrangements, reversions, powers,
authorities, allotments, approvals, consents, licenses, registrations,
contracts, agreements, engagements, arrangements of all ;kind, rights,;
titles, interests, benefits, easements, and privileges of whatsoever nature
and wherever situate belonging to or in the ownership, power or possession and
in the control of or vested in or granted in favour of or enjoyed by the
Transferor Companies, including but without being limited to trade names and
other intellectual property rights of any nature whatsoever, permits,
approvals, authorizations, rights to use telephones, telexes, ;facsimile
connections and installations, utilities, electricity and other services,
reserves, provisions, funds, benefits of all agreements and all other
interests or benefits whatsoever shall be and stand vested in and/or be deemed
to be and stand vested in the Transferee Company under the provisions of
Section 394 of the said Act so as to amend from the Appointed Date, the
estate, assets, rights, interests of the transferee Company.
In respect of such of the said Assets of the respective transferor companies
on and from the Appointed Date, as are movable in nature are otherwise capable
of transfer by mutual delivery or by endorsement and delivery, the same may be
so transferred by the respective Transferor Companies and shall, with effect
from the Effective Date become the property of the Transferee Company in
pursuance of the provisions of Section 394 of the said Act.
In respect of such of the said Assets of the respective Transferor Companies
on and from the Appointed Date other than those referred to in 4.2 above, the
same, shall, without any further act, instrument of deed, with effect from the
Effective Date be transferred to and vested in the Transferee Company on the
Appointed Date pursuant to the provisions of Section 394 of the said Act.
Upon the Scheme becoming effective, the accounts of the Transferor Companies
with the National Securities Depository Limited and Central Depository
Services Limited through which they hold securities in other companies shall
be consolidated and transferred in favour of the Transferee Company.
Transfer of debts, liabilities etc.:
Upon the coming into effect of the Scheme and with effect from the Appointed
Date:
(a) All secured and unsecured debts, liabilities including contengent
liabilities, whether disclosed or undisclosed, duties, taxes and obligations
of the Transferor Companies along with any charge, encumbrance, lien or
security thereon (hereinafter referred to as the 'said liabilities') shall
also be vested or be deemed to be and stand vested, without any further act,
instrument or deed, to the Transferee Company, pursuant to the provisions of
Section 394 of the said Act so as to become the debts, liabilities, duties and
obligations of the Transferee Company, and further that it shall not be
necessary to obtain the consent of any third party or other person who is a
party to any contract or arrangement by virtue of which such debts,
liabilities, duties , litigations have arisen in order to give effect to the
provisions of this Clause.
Activities pending approval:
With effect from the Appointed Date up to and including the Effective Date:
(a) the Transferor Companies shall carry on and shall be deemed to have
carried on all their business and activities and shall hold and stand
possessed of and shall be deemed to have held and stood possessed of all their
assets for and on account of, and in trust for, the Transferee Company.
7\. The Hon'ble High Court of Delhi by Order dated 27.8.2001 sanctioned the
scheme. The operative portion of the order reads as follows:
This Court doth hereby sanction the Scheme of Amalgamation set forth in
Schedule-I hereto and doth hereby declare the same to be binding on all the
shareholders and creditors of the Transferor companies and Transferee company
and all concerned and doth approve the said scheme of amalgamation from the
appointed date i.e., 1.4.2000.
A further direction in the side order is as follows:
that the said Transferor Companies do within 30 days after the date of this
order cause a certified copy of this order to be delivered to the Registrar of
Companies for registration and on such certified copy being so delivered, the
transferor companies shall be dissolved without the process of winding up and
the Registrar of Companies shall place all documents related to the transferor
companies and registered with him on the file kept by him in relation to the
transferee company and the files relating to the said transferor companies and
transferee company shall be consolidated accordingly.
(Underlining by us for emphasis)
8\. A certified copy of the Order of the Hon'ble Delhi High Court was filed
with the Registrar of Companies (ROC) on 8.11.2001. Thus on 8.11.2001 M/s
SNIPL and M/s HCLCL ceased to exist. On registration of this fact with the
Registrar of Companies (ROC), it would be notice to one and all that these two
companies cease to exist.
9\. A search under Section 132 (4 times) (1) was conducted on 24.1.02 at the
business premises of the assessee and residential premises of some of its
employees, Directors etc. Each of the warrant of search was in the joint names
of 4 entities. They are:
(i) HCL Corporation Ltd.
(ii) Shiv Nadar Investment (P) Ltd.
(iii) Slocum Investment (P) Ltd.
(iv) HCL Technologies (P) Ltd.
10\. As on the date of search, M/s HCLCL and M/s SNIPL as entities did not
exist. After conclusion of search, a notice under Section 158 BC was issued to
the assessee, M/s SNIPL and M/s HCLCL calling upon them to file Return of
income for the 'Block Period'. By letter dated 2.12.02, the counsel for the
assessee, informed the Assessing Officer that M/s HCLCL has already been
amalgamated with the assessee w.e.f. 1.4.2000 and ceased to exist and called
upon the Assessing Officer to examine the validity of proceeding against M/s
HCLCL. Similarly in the case of M/s SNIPL by letter dated 16.1.2004, the
Counsel for the Assessee informed the Assessing Officer about the non-
existence of M/s SNIPL.
11\. The Assessing Officer however proceeded to make assessment of alleged
undisclosed income of the two other companies (hereinafter called the
Amalgamating Company) also in the hands of the Assessee. The Assessing Officer
referred to the decisions of Hon'ble Madras High Court in the case of Union
Services Pvt.Ltd. reported in (1975) Comp. Cas. 146 as well as the case of CIT
v. T.V. Sundaram Iyengar & Sons Pvt.Ltd. reported in 238 ITR 228 wherein the
proceedings against Amalgamated Company for tax liability of Amalgamating
Company for the period prior to Amalgamation was held to be valid. The
Assessing Officer also made a reference to the relevant portion of the scheme
of amalgamation of M/s HCLCL and M/s SNIPL with the assessee company as
approved by the Hon'ble Delhi High Court regarding transfer of debt
liabilities etc. as well as the relevant provisions of the Companies Act,
1956, and held that the undisclosed income of the amalgamating companies, i.e.
M/s HCLCL and M/s SNIPL for the part of block period when they were in
existence, is liable to be assessed in the hands of the assessee being the
amalgamated company.
12\. After concluding as above, the AO proceeded to determine the undisclosed
income of Assessee, M/s SNIPL & M/s HCLCL, in the assessment framed in the
case of Assessee. During the course of search conducted in the case of the
assessee as well as in the case of M/s HCLCL and M/s SNIPL, certain books of
account and documents were found and seized. According to the Assessing
Officer, the said seized material revealed certain facts which led to an
inescapable conclusion that the transfer of 70 lakhs shares of M/s HCL
Consulting Ltd. by the Assessee, M/s HCLCL & M/s SNIPL to M/s WIPL was not
made at arms length price resulting into evasion of tax as envisaged in
Section 92. Section 92 of the Income Tax Act, as it stood at the relevant
point of time when the shares of M/s HCL Consulting Ltd. were sold by the
assessee, M/s HCLCL & M/s SNIPL to M/s WIPL, provides as follows.
Section 92: Income from transactions with non-residents, how computed in
certain cases.
Where a business is carried on between a resident and a non-resident and it
appears to the Assessing Officer that, owing to the close connection between
them, the course of business is so arranged that the business transacted
between them produces to the resident either no profits or less than the
ordinary profits which might be expected to arise in that business, the
Assessing Officer shall determine the amount of profits which may reasonably
be deemed to have been derived there from and include such amount in the total
income of the resident.
13\. (a) One of such seized document identified as page No. 155 of Annexure
A-5 of Party P-2 was a communication received by Mr. A.S.T. Rajan from Mr.
Anil Chanana, a senior executive in the HCL group. In this communication dated
20/1/1997, it was stated inter-alia by Shri Anil Chanana that share of M/s HCL
Consulting Ltd. even today could be valued between Rs. 200 to Rs. 400 assuming
that the share price is taken at multiples of 2.5 times to 5 times the sales
revenue.
(b) A seized document identified as Page Nos. 52, 53 and 54 of Annexure A-2 of
Party P-2 also was a communication sent by Shri Anil Chanana to Shri A.S.T.
Rajan on 25/2/1997 stating that the evaluation of IPO in the case of M/s HCL
Consulting Ltd. was being done by Alex Brown and Sons, a leading investment
bankers for technology stocks. A table was also given by Shri Anil Chanana in
the said letter containing data about the share value of different group
companies stated to be worked out on the average of the low and high possible
based on Imputed Market Rates (IMR) stock performance. In the value so given,
market imputed rate of HCL Consulting Ltd. was indicated as Rs. 300/- per
share.
(c) Page No. 13 of Annexure A-1 of Party P-6 was a fax message sent by Shri
Neelesh Agarwal, the senior executive in the HCL group to Ms. Priscille Koeing
in reply to a fax dated 19.6.1998 referring to one Board resolution passed for
purchase of 20 lakhs shares of HCL Consulting Ltd. by Varna Sundari Investment
Pvt.Ltd. from Slocum Investment Pvt. Ltd. for a total consideration of INR 500
million (i.e. Rs. 250/- per share) and informing that the same transaction
could not happen as the idea to purchase was dropped at the moment.
14\. Having regard to all the aforesaid documents found and seized during the
course of search indicating higher market rates of the shares of HCL
Consulting Ltd., the Assessing Officer formed an opinion that the assessec
company M/s HCLCL and M/s SNIPL were well aware on 10.6.1999 i.e. the dale on
which they transferred the shares of HCL Consulting Ltd. to M/s WIPL that the
value of the said shares was much more than Rs. 50/- each. According to him,
the relevant seized documents also clearly indicated that all the affairs of
the entire HCL group were being managed by Shri Shiv Nadar, the chief promoter
and major shareholder in several companies belonging to the HCL group of
companies of which the assessee, M/s HCLCL and M/s SNIPL also belonged. The
Assessing Officer also found that the valuation of HCL Consulting Ltd.'s
shares adopted by the assessee company M/s HCLCL & M/s SNIPL at Rs. 50/- each
as sale price was supported by the valuation report of M/s Purushothaman
Bhutani & Co. who did not have any expertise in valuing the technology stocks.
He also found that for getting the similar valuation done in respect of other
transactions such as transactions with Arjun Malhotra group, the assessee
company had availed the services of expert valuers whereas when it came to
transfer of shares to a foreign company controlled by the brother of Shri Shiv
Nadar i.e. M/s WIPL, M/s Purushothaman Bhutani & Co. was chosen in order to
manage the lower valuation of shares to suit their requirements. In this
regard, it may be relevant to point out that the HCL Group was controlled by
two groups namely Malhotra group and Shiv Nadar group. There was a proposal in
January 1998 that Malhtora group would exit from the HCL group by selling all
the shares to Shiv Nadar group. An agreement had been signed between Malhotra
Group and Shiv Nadar group dated 27.1.1998. This agreement apart from the
shares of other group companies of HCL also included shares of HCL Consulting
Ltd. In this agreement the shares of HCL Consulting Ltd. had not been
specifically valued and lump sum consideration had been agreed between the
parties. The valuation of shares which were subject matter of transfer under
this Agreement had been done by internationally acclaimed Valuers. This
agreement dated 27.1.1998 was however superseded by an agreement dated
3.4.1999, a copy of which is placed at page 1302-1309 of the assessee's paper
book. In this agreement the shares of HCL Consulting Ltd., held by Malhotra
group were agreed to be transferred to Shiv Nadar group at a price of Rs. 50
per share. According to the assessee, this price of Rs. 50/- per share for HCL
Consulting Ltd.'s shares at or about the time when the shares were sold to M/s
WIPL, was an evidence of arms length price. This was an instance of evidence
of sale between willing buyer and willing seller at or about the time when the
assessee and the two other companies wanted to sell shares of HCL Consulting
Ltd. to M/s WIPL. The plea of the assessee in this regard was not accepted by
the Assessing Officer. He was of the view that the entire exercise carried out
by the assessee company was a well planned one in order to evade the capital
gain tax in India by following the modus operandi as given below:
(i) To manage the valuation of shares of HCL Consulting Ltd. done at a lower
value to ensure that no capital gains is attracted at the time of transfer of
shares to Mauritius based associated company.
(ii) Since the incidence of capital gains tax is absent in Mauritius, no
capital gains tax would be attracted whenever the shares are further
transferred or sold at the higher market value in future.
(iii) In effect to transfer its holdings to an associated company at a low
value without incidence of tax in India and without losing control over M/s
HCL Consulting Ltd. thereby taking advantage of Direct Tax Avoidance Agreement
between India and Mauritius.
15\. In view of the above, the Assessing Officer was of the opinion that the
provisions of Section 92 are apparently applicable to the facts of the present
case and the actual gain arising from the transaction of transfer of shares
can be brought to tax in India taking into consideration the arm's length
price. Accordingly, he confronted his various findings/observations based on
the relevant seized material to the assessee company requiring it to offer
explanation in the matter. In particular the Assessing Officer wanted to know
as to how the issue price of shares of M/s HCL Consulting Ltd. when these
shares were offered for Public Subscription in Nov. 99 were valued at Rs.
580/- per share of a face value of Rs. 4/- per share when the same shares were
sold at Rs. 50/- per share of face value of Rs. 10/- in the month of June, 99
to M/s WIPL. Secondly, the AO referred to Page No. 22 of Annexure-4 Party P4 a
document sized in the course of search which is an E-mail from one Anil
Channana, employee in HCL Group to Mr. Shiv Nadar dt. 23.9.99 in which Mr.
Anil Channana had opined that shares of face value of Rs. 10/- of HCL
Consulting Ltd., would be at Rs. 1807/= per share. Thirdly, page 155 of
Annex-1A Party-2 according to the Assessing Officer suggested that Anil
Channana referred to a price of Rs. 200/- to Rs. 400/- each to Mr. AST Rajan
as the price of HCL Consulting Ltd. as on 20.1.97. Fourthly, Assessing Officer
referred to Page 52,53 &54 of Annex. A-2 Party-2 dt. 26.2.97 wherein in a
letter by Anil Channana to Mr. AST Rajan HCL Consulting Ltd.'s shares were
valued at Rs. 300/- per share by valuers M/s Alex Brown & Sons.
16\. In reply, detailed submissions were made on behalf of the assessee
company raising mainly the following contentions:
(i) The income proposed to be added by invoking the provisions of Section 92
cannot be considered as its undisclosed income under Chapter XIV-B.
(ii) The sale consideration received by it from M/s Wintech Investment
Pvt.Ltd. was only to the extent of Rs. 50/- per share of HCL Consulting Ltd.
and no amount over and above the said consideration was received by it, which
could be treated as its undisclosed income liable to tax under Chapter XIV-B.
(iii) Reliance was placed on the decision of Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case
of K.P. Verghese v. ITO 131 ITR 597 wherein it was held that the Assessing
Officer cannot substitute the market value of the assets sold for the
consideration declared by the assessee unless it is proved by him that there
was any under-statement or concealment by the assessee.
17\. In addition to the aforesaid contentions, the contents of various seized
documents were also explained by the assessee company stating mainly that the
indications of share price given therein were based on assumptions and
presumptions worked out in connection with the possibility of a public issue
that was contemplated by some of the group companies and not essentially M/s
HCL Consulting Ltd. The relevance of such indications for this limited purpose
was also explained on behalf of the assessee company and it was also pointed
out that such higher indications given by the employees of the group were not
accepted by the expert in the field. Some of the seized documents relied upon
by the Assessing Officer were also stated to be not found from the premises of
the assessee company. It was also submitted that most of the other documents
found and seized were undated and unsigned which could not be relied upon to
draw any definite or concrete inference against the assessee. As regards the
security purchase agreement dated 27.1.98 found and seized during the course
of search, it was submitted that the same was drawn to facilitate acquisition
of the entire shareholdings of Mr. Arjun Malhotra for various operating and
non-operating companies by Shiv Nadar, but having regard to unrealistic prices
of such shares indicated therein, the same was never given effect to.
Documents evidencing contemporaneous transactions of purchase and sale of
shares of HCL Consulting Ltd. at Rs. 50/- per share between various companies
including those owned by Mr. Arjun Malhotra including Agreement dt. 3.4.99
were also placed on record by the assessee company to point out that the value
of Rs. 50/- shown therein was accepted by the Department in the regular
assessments of Mr. Arjun Malhotra. It was contended on behalf of the assessee
company that Shri Arjun Malhotra or his company would not have sold these
shares carrying substantial voting rights at Rs. 50/- per share while he was
completely disinvesting from HCL Consulting Ltd.
18\. The aforesaid submissions made on behalf of the assessee company,
however, were not found to be acceptable by the AO for the following reasons
given in paragraph No. 7.4.5 of his assessment order:
a. At point No. iii, Mr. A.S.T. Rajan has not replied to the letter of Mr.
Anil Chanana in which he has suggested the market price of each share of HCL
Consulting Pvt.Ltd. should be Rs. 1807/-. [Reference is to Page-22 of A-4 P-4
seized at the time of search] b. At point No. iv, the contention of the
assessee is again not correct. Though this paper was seized from the residence
of Ms. Rita Gupta, but Ms. Rita Gupta is or has been a director in M/s HCL
Holdings Pvt.Ltd., M/s HCL Investment Pvt.Ltd., M/s IT Con Investment
Pvt.Ltd., M/s Varna Sundari Investment Pvt.Ltd., M/s Orient Cartons Ltd., M/s
Net Investment Pvt.Ltd., M/s HCL Networking Software Ltd., M/s Balfour
Holdings Ltd., M/s Bees Holdings Ltd. and M/s Benley Investment Ltd., apart
from being a director in some of the Indian companies related with HCL group.
She has been the authorized signatory for banking purposes or for giving
instructions for the purchase/sale of shares in India by these OCBs.
Some of the papers related with the financial transactions of some OCBs have
been found in her possession during search and seizure operation.
The transactions of sale and purchase of shares, for these OCBs, have been
carried out by M/s Front Line Capital Services Ltd. and the instructions for
the same has been given to them by Ms. Rita Gupta and not by the OCBs
directly.
Some of the minutes of proceedings of the board meeting of the OCBs, as
furnished by the assessee during the assessment proceedings, indicate that the
assessee Ms. Rita Gupta who was to take necessary action for disposal of the
shares held by the OCBs and was to keep the board informed and updated. As per
the same resolution, she was to keep Sh. Shiv Nadar updated.
Hence, finding of this papers at the residence of Ms. Rita Gupta is not out of
context and definitely relate to the transactions and activities of the
assessee company. [The AO here wants to highlight that the overseas corporate
body were under the control and supervision of HCL group from India] c. The
contention of the assessee that mere bald allegation would not serve to
discharge the onus/burden placed on him, especially in view of the Supreme
Court decision in the case of K.P. Varghese v. ITO 131 ITR 597 wherein their
Lordships held in the context of Section 52(2) of the Act, that the assessing
officer cannot substitute the market value of the assets sold for the
consideration declared by the assessee and that the aforesaid section can be
invoked only where full value of the consideration in respect of the transfer
is shown at a lesser figure than that actually received by the assessee. There
is no dispute on this issue as this decision is valid when transaction takes
place between the residents as defined in IT Act, 1961. But, when transaction
takes place between resident and non resident, then Section 92 of the IT Act,
1961 is invoked, where Assessing Officer has to determine whether transaction
was at arm's length or not.
d. The contention of the assessee that department is having shifting stand on
valuation of shares is again not correct. The assessee was specifically asked
vide order sheet entry dated 17.02.2004 why valuation of shares of HCL
Consulting Pvt.Ltd. should not be done at Rs. 1807/- per share based on seized
material.
19\. The Assessing Officer once again referred to the various documents found
and seized during the course of search giving higher indications of the market
value of the shares of HCL Consulting Ltd. at the relevant time and came to a
conclusion based thereon that the management of HCL group was aware of the
fact that the market value of the shares of HCL Consulting Ltd. was much
higher than Rs. 50/- per share and transfer of these shares at such a higher
value would have given rise to a substantial capital gain chargeable to tax in
India. According to him, the management was also aware of the fact that the
said shares are going to be listed in the stock exchange following the IPO at
a higher value and it is only before such IPO that the shares could have been
transferred at a suitable value and parked in a tax heaven without losing
control over the HCL Consulting Ltd. In order to serve this purpose, not only
prices of shares but also date of transfer were managed and arranged in such a
manner so as to avoid paying any capital gain tax and the shares were parked
with a Mauritius company so that the control can be retained on the one hand
and shares also could be sold in the open market at a higher value without
incidence of any capital gain tax in India. In this regard, the Assessing
Officer pointed out from the relevant seized documents the extraordinary
urgency in which the entire process of transfer of shares of HCL Consulting
Ltd. from the assessee company to M/s Wintech Investment Pvt.Ltd., Mauritius
was completed. He also relied on the relevant seized documents identified as
page Nos. 15, 16 & 17 of Annexure A-4 of Party P-4 wherein the price of Rs.
50/- per share was stated to be taken to complete the transaction tax neutral.
He concluded that the price of Rs. 50/- thus was taken to be a tax neutral
price and the valuation was arranged or managed just to substantiate the same.
The Assessing Officer also relied on a letter found and seized during the
course of search as page Nos. 156 & 157 of Annexure A-1 of Party P-2 which was
written by Mr. Anil Chanana to Mr. Shiv Nadar on 5.6.98 indicating clearly
that once HCLT goes public, it would become almost impossible to do the
externalization of HCL Consulting shares as discussed and decided earlier. As
regards the transfer of shares of HCL Consulting Ltd. by Shri Arjun Malhotra
and his companies at the same price of Rs. 50/- each during the relevant
period, the Assessing Officer held that such a price, in any case, was
suitable to the said transferors in order to avoid the payment of capital
gains tax.
20\. To sum up, the Assessing Officer held that the main idea behind the
entire exercise of transfer of shares of HCL Consulting Ltd. by the assessee
M/s HCLCL and M/s SNIPL to M/s Wintech Investment Pvt.Ltd, Mauritius was to
avoid payment of capital gains tax and it was a well-planned, discussed,
consulted, understood and executed exercise with the clear picture in mind
that in the atmosphere of strong sentiments towards the technology shares, the
IPO of HCL Consulting Ltd. will fetch a very good price and after IPO, it will
be literally impossible to transfer the shares of HCL Consulting Ltd. at a
price lower than the market price. He found support for this inference from
the fact that M/s HCL Holdings Pvt.Ltd., Mauritius (formerly M/s Wintech
Investment Pvt.Ltd., Mauritius) had subsequently sold 15,82,430 shares of M/s
HCL Technologies Ltd. (formerly HCL Consulting Pvt.Ltd.) in the Indian capital
market at a very high price of about Rs. 104 crores as against the effective
cost price of Rs. 1.34 crores paid to the assessee M/s HCLCL and M/s SNIPL
resulting in the long term capital gain of Rs. 102.66 crores without any
incidence of tax in India. Accordingly, the Assessing Officer held that the
transaction of transfer of shares of HCL Consulting Ltd. by the assessee M/s
HCLCL and M/s SNIPL to the Mauritius company was not done at arm's length
price and thus the said transaction attracted the provisions of Section 92
empowering him to compute the income from the said transactions between a
resident and Q non-resident company having regard to arm's length price. He
then proceeded to ascertain the arm's length price of shares of HCL Consulting
Ltd. at the relevant time and recorded the following findings/observations
based on the relevant seized documents in this regard:
(i) In the letter dated 25.2.97 (page No. 52, 53 and 54 of Annexure A-2 of
Party P-2) addressed to Mr. A.S.T. Rajan, Mr. Anil Chanana, the senior
executive in the HCL group had worked out the market imputed rate of the
shares of HCL consulting Ltd. at Rs. 300/- whereas such rate of the shares of
NUT was worked out by him at Rs. 320/- based on the discussion with Alex Brown
& Sons, the leading investment bankers for technology stocks. Subsequently,
the shares of NUT were listed on the stock exchange and the same were quoted
at Rs. 2709/- on NSC as on 23.9.99 as against the valuation of Rs. 320/- done
by Shri Anil Chanana. Since such valuation of HCL Consulting shares made by
Shri Anil Chanana simultaneously was Rs. 300/-, the corresponding price of HCL
Consulting Ltd. as on 23.9.99 should normally be Rs. 2540/- per share (2,709 x
300/320)
(ii) The valuation of shares of HCL Consulting Ltd. at Rs. 300/- was
apparently done by Shri Anil Chanana on the basis of discussions with Alex
Brown & Sons and as per the latest balance sheet as on 30.6.96 available then,
the profit after tax of HCL Consulting Ltd. was Rs. 1067.38 lakhs. Such
profit, after tax, for the year ending 30.6.99, however, was stood at Rs.
10,096.80 lakhs which gives the effective value of each share of HCL
Consulting Ltd. at Rs. 2838/- (300 x 10,096.80/1067.38).
(iii) As per the fax message sent by Shri Neelesh Agarwal, the senior
executive in the HCL group to Ms. Priscillc Koeing of M/s Varna Sundari
Investment Pvt.Ltd. (page No. 13 of Annexure A-1 of Party P-6), the shares of
HCL Consulting Ltd. had been agreed to be sold by the assessee company to M/s
Varna Sundari Investment Pvt.Ltd. at Rs. 250/- per share as on 19.6.98 and if
the rise in profits after tax at Rs. 10,096.80 lakhs in the year ending
30.6.99 from Rs. 1,039.28 in the year ending 30.6,97 is to be considered, it
gives the effective value of each share of HCL Consulting Ltd. at Rs. 2,429/-
(250 x 10,096.80/1039.28).
(iv) In the fax message sent by Shri Anil Chanana to Shri Shiv Nadar on
23.9.99 (page No. 22 of Annexure A-4 of Party P-4), the price of each share of
Rs. 10/- each of HCL Technologies Ltd. was indicated at Rs. 1,807/- assuming a
market cap of Rs. 6,000 crores. It was also stated in the said message that in
order to keep the share price of IPO between Rs. 450/- and Rs. 500/- each,
bonus shares in the ratio of one share for every two shares held would be
required to be declared and after such bonus, the stock will have to be split
in the ratio of 2.5 : 1 by reducing the face value of each share from Rs. 10/-
to Rs. 4/-. Subsequently, bonus was declared and even the shares were split in
the ratio of 2.5 : 1 and the shares of the face value of Rs. 4/- per share,
after bonus and split, were issued to the public and such issue was closed at
Rs. 580/- per share as per the understanding and conviction expressed by Mr.
Anil Chanana in the fax message sent to Mr. Shiv Nadar dated 23.9.99 wherein
the value of share of the face value of Rs. 10/- before bonus and split was
estimated at Rs. 1,807/- each.
21\. Keeping in view the aforesaid observations, the Assessing Officer adopted
the price of Rs. 1,807/- being the lowest of the above as the arm's length
price of the shares of HCL Consulting Ltd. at the relevant time and computed
the income of the assessee from capital gain on sale of the said shares to a
Mauritius company at Rs. 254,76,50,000/-(14,50,000 x 1757). This income was
treated by him as the undisclosed income of the assessee and addition was made
to that extent in the assessment completed under Section 158BC. Similarly,
capital gain arising from the transfer of shares by M/s HCLCL and by M/s SNIPL
to a Mauritius company was determined by him as per Section 92 at Rs.
720,37,00,000/- and Rs. 254,76,50,000/- respectively and the same was assessed
in the hands of the assessee company as its undisclosed income in the block
assessment since both these companies had already merged in the assessee
company as per the scheme of amalgamation approved by the High Court.
Accordingly, a total addition of Rs. 1229,90,00,000/- was made by the
Assessing Officer to the undisclosed income of the assessee company in the
block assessment by invoking the provisions of Section 92 and relying on the
decision of Calcutta Bench of ITAT in the case of ITO v. Kusum Products Ltd. 7
ITD 557.
22\. Aggrieved by the aforesaid assessment made by the Assessing Officer under
Section 158BC, appeal was preferred by the assessee before the learned CIT(A)
challenging inter-alia the additions of Rs. 1,229 crores made by applying the
provisions of Section 92. During the course of appellate proceedings before
the learned CIT(A), the validity of the block assessment made by the Assessing
Officer under Section 158BC was also challenged by the assessee on various
grounds. The first contention raised on behalf of the assessee before the
learned CIT(A) in this regard was that the search action undertaken against it
under Section 132 was invalid. However, having regard to the evidence found as
a result of search, the learned CIT(A) found no merits in this contention
raised on behalf of the assessee. Further, relying on the decision of Delhi
Bench of ITAT in the case of Virinder Bhatia v. DCIT 79 ITD 340 and that of
Cochin Bench of ITAT in the case of S. Gopal Kumar v. ACIT 76 TTJ 709, he held
that adjudicating question regarding validity of search is beyond the powers
of the AO and the same, therefore, could not be challenged even before him.
23\. It was also contended on behalf of the assessee before the learned CIT(A)
that the capital gains/loss on sale of shares of M/s HCL Consulting Ltd. to
M/s Wintech Investment Pvt.Ltd., Mauritius was duly disclosed in its return of
income for A.Y. 2000-01 filed prior to the date of search and the same having
been accepted by the AO in the assessment completed Under Section 143(3), any
addition on account of the said transactions was beyond the scope of block
assessment under Chapter XIV-B especially when no evidence was found as a
result of search to prove that the assessee had received any sum over and
above the agreed consideration of Rs. 50/- per share. This contention of the
assessee, however, was rejected by the learned CIT(A) observing that on the
basis of evidence gathered as a result of search, even the declared
transaction may partake the character of yielding "undisclosed income" on
account of their falsity. He held that the regular assessment in the present
case was completed on the basis of entries disclosed in the books of account
whereas the block assessment was framed on the basis of evidence found as a
result of search. According to him, the position emanating from the relevant
seized documents revealing the planning of the assessee to transfer the shares
of HCL Consulting Ltd. to Mauritius company at a price which is tax neutral
was further fortified from the fact that all these 70 lakhs shares of HCL
Consulting Ltd. held by the assessee and the merged companies were sold to
Mauritius company at a price equivalent to the cost of acquisition. He
accordingly concluded that the transactions to transfer the shares of M/s HCL
Consulting Ltd. to M/s Wintech Investment Pvt.Ltd., Mauritius at Rs. 50/-per
share (effectively Rs. 13.33 per share after bonus and split) as against the
fair market value of about Rs. 576/- per share known to the assessee company,
as evidenced by the seized material, were clandestinely and surreptitiously
undertaken to evade capital gains tax and there was no legal infirmity in the
block assessment completed by the Assessing Officer Under Section 158BC
bringing to tax the same as undisclosed income of the assessee by invoking the
provisions of Section 92. The various objections raised by the assessee
challenging the validity of notice issued by the Assessing Officer Under
Section 158BC were also held to be unsustainable by the learned CIT(A) for the
reasons given in his impugned order. Even the contention of the assessee about
the inadequate opportunity afforded by the AO to it of being heard was also
found to be unacceptable by the learned CIT(A). Accordingly, he concluded that
the search undertaken against the assessee Under Section 132 as well as the
block assessment framed Under Section 158BC consequent to the said search was
valid in the eye of law having regard to the factual and legal position and
there was no infirmity as alleged by the assessee.
24\. As regards the addition of Rs. 1,229.90 crores made by the Assessing
Officer by applying the provisions of Section 92 on account of income from
sale of shares of HCL Consulting Ltd. to M/s Wintech Investment Pvt.Ltd.,
Mauritius, the following contentions were mainly raised by the assessee before
the learned CIT(A):
(1) M/s Wintech Investment P.Ltd. has not sold any of the 70,00,000 shares
acquired from the appellant and the erstwhile companies. Even the shares sold
by that company, out of shares acquired by it from other sources, as shown in
the assessment order, constitutes a miniscule percentage of that company's
total holding of M/s HCL Consulting Ltd. As such, the allegation of the A.O.
regarding evasion of capital gains tax in India under the India-Mauritius Tax
Treaty is baseless and factually incorrect. Had there been any intention to
evade capital gains tax, as alleged by the A.O., then M/s Wintech Investment
P.Ltd. would have immediately sold the shares in the Indian market.
(2) This seems to be an attempt to create a fictitious income and tax the
same. The facts relating to sale of shares to M/s Wintech Investment P.Ltd.,
Mauritius, listing of shares of M/s HCL Technologies Ltd. and movement of
prices of the shares in the secondary market after listing, were also narrated
by the appellant.
(3) No share of M/s HCL Technologies Ltd. was issued to M/s Wintech Investment
P.Ltd., Mauritius by the appellant or the other companies out of promoter's
quota and the sale price was determined according to the valuation of shares
of M/s HCL Consulting Ltd. (a closely held unlisted company) carried out by
M/s. Purushothaman Bhutani & Co., Chartered Accountant vide their certificate
dated 21.5.1999. The fair value of shares of M/s HCL Consulting Ltd. was
determined at Rs. 50 per share as the average of Net Asset Value and Profit
Earning Capacity Value. This valuation was done in accordance with the CCI's
Guidelines because the RBI required the price of shares proposed to be sold to
a foreign company to be determined as per the said CCI's guidelines.
(4) The valuation as per Rule 10-D of the Wealth-tax Rules provides lower
value based on the last financial results available as, undertaken in the case
of unlisted companies. If the shares were to be valued on 4th June, 1999,
viz., the date of the transaction, as per Rule 10-D of the Wealth Tax Rules,
the basis of the last available balance sheet was at 30th June, 1998, then the
fair market value of these shares would be much lower than Rs. 50/- per share.
(5) The appellant and the erstwhile companies had applied vide letter dated
4.6.1999 to the Secretariat for Industrial Approvals (SIA) seeking permission
for sale of shares of M/s HCL Consulting Ltd. of Rs. 10/-face value, to M/s
Wintech Investment P.Ltd., Mauritius at the rate of Rs. 50 per share. The
valuation report was also submitted to the SIA. Pursuant to the said
application, separate sale deeds were executed by the appellant and the other
companies with M/s Wintech Investment P.Ltd., Mauritius on 26.7.1999. In the
meanwhile, the Mauritius company was permitted by the SIA vide approval letter
dated 2.7.1999, as modified by their letter dated 21.9.1999, to invest in
India by acquiring an aggregate of 70,00,000 shares of M/s HCL Consulting Ltd.
from the appellant and the other companies.
25\. On the basis of the aforesaid contentions, the case of the assessee
before the learned CIT(A) was that the transfer of shares of M/s HCL
Consulting Ltd. to M/s Wintech Investment Pvt.Ltd., Mauritius was at a fair
value determined in accordance with the erstwhile CCI Guidelines which was
duly informed to and approved by the Government of India. The attention of the
learned CIT(A) was also invited to the evidence found during the course of
search itself showing independent contemporaneous transactions to point out
that the same was sufficient to show that the sale of shares to M/s Wintech
Investment Pvt.Ltd., Mauritius was at arm's length price. It was contended on
behalf of the assessee that such arm's length price could not be linked to the
speculative prices prevailing in the stock market for shares of an altogether
different company at a subsequent date and under different circumstances. It
was also contended that the onus to prove to the contrary was on the Assessing
Officer who had alleged that the apparent was not real.
26\. The aforesaid submissions made on behalf of the assessee, however, did
not find favour with the learned CIT(A). According to him, it was something
unbelievable that a share which was quoted in the market at Rs. 2,200/- each
in January, 2000 was sold by the assessee at Rs. 50/- each in June, 1999 i.e.
just six months earlier and such price was the arm's length price. He also
found substance in the observations of the AO that the assessee having agreed
to sell the shares of M/s HCL Consulting Ltd. to M/s Varna Sundari Investment
Pvt.Ltd. Mauritius on 19.6.1999 at Rs. 250/- per share as indicated in the
relevant seized document based on the audited accounts as on 30.6.1997, would
have sold the same shares at Rs. 50/- each in June, 1999 when the profit as
per the latest balance sheet as on 30.6.1998 was on the higher side than that
of 30.6.1997. He also found the objection raised by the AO regarding the
valuation of shares got done by the assessee company from Purushothaman
Bhutani & Co., Chartered Accountants to be sustainable and having regard to
the observations recorded by the AO in this regard, the learned CIT(A)
concurred with the AO's conclusion that the same was got done by the assessee
company as per its wish and convenience to ensure that the transaction of
transfer of shares to M/s Wintech Investment Pvt.Ltd., Mauritius is without
any tax incidence/burden. Accordingly, the learned CIT(A) held that the said
transfer was not done at arm's length price and since this understatement of
selling price was detected as a result of evidence found during the course of
search, the addition made by the Assessing Officer on account of income
adopting the arm's length price in the block assessment under chapter XIV-B
was fully justified.
27\. Before the learned CIT(A), the following arguments were also advanced on
behalf of the assessee challenging the addition of Rs. 1,229.90 crores made to
its total income on merits:
(1) As per the valuation report, the fair value of shares of M/s HCL
Consulting Ltd. was determined at Rs. 50 per share after taking the Average of
Net Asset Value and Profit Earning Capacity Value. This valuation was in
accordance with the guidelines of CCI, which was also submitted to Secretariat
for Industrial Approval (SIA). Accordingly, the appellant and other companies
executed separate sale deeds with M/s Wintech Investment (P) Ltd., Mauritius
on 26-7-1999.
Permission of SIA was received vide letter dated 2-7-1999, as modified by
their letter dated 21-9-1999 giving approval to invest in India by acquiring
70,00,000 shares of M/s HCL Consulting Ltd.
(2) At the time of transfer of shares to M/s Wintech Investment (P) Ltd.,
there was no such plan for M/s HCL Consulting Ltd. to go public in India.
(3) M/s HCL Technologies Pvt.Ltd. was merged with M/s HCL Consulting Ltd. vide
Delhi High Court's order dated 30-8-1999 and, thereafter, its name was changed
to M/s HCL Technologies Ltd. w.e.f. 6-10-1999. With a view to make M/s HCL
Technologies a global technology and software services company, vide Board's
meeting of M/s HCL Consulting Ltd. dated 13-9-1999, it was decided to make it
a widely held limited company. Accordingly, an offer document was issued
inviting bids for the IPO, which opened on 16-11-1999. For determining the
price for its IPO, M/s HCL Technologies Ltd. adopted a book building process
i.e. the company estimated the prices that its shares are likely to fetch in
the market, based upon its financially position and market performance as well
as the prevalent market conditions and perceptions about the company among the
investors. Since there was no guideline or restriction for valuation of shares
for the purpose of determining the premium, the company informed the investor
and advised them to make their own judgment about investment prior to making a
bid or application in the issue.
(4) There was tremendous surge in the valuation of listed shares of
Information Technology companies in the last quarter of 1999. Encouraged by
the market movement, which kept on climbing from August, 1999 onwards, bidding
prices of M/s HCL Technologies Ltd. was estimated at Rs. 450/- to Rs. 580/-,
which was also submitted to the regulatory authorities in November, 1999.
(5) The shares of M/s HCL Technologies Ltd., on the first day at NSE was
quoted at Rs. 1,550/-, climbed upto Rs. 1,725/- and fell to a low of Rs.
1,492/-. Later on, the price of this share declined upto Rs. 105/-per share.
(6) The appellant is a promoter company and not a speculator. After sale of
shares of M/s HCL Consulting Ltd., the appellant has not sold even a single
share of M/s HCL Technologies Ltd. from its listing. The document relied upon
by the A.O. (page-22 of Annexure A-4 of party P-4), which is e-mail by an
employee of M/s HCL Technologies Ltd. to its Chairman dated 23-9-1999,
contemplating the public issue refers to an assumption of prices that could be
resulted in a market capitalization of Rs. 6,000 crores, looking at the number
of shares of the company. Subsequent portion of the same e-mail clearly
indicate that it was stated that price of Rs. 1,807/- was not achievable and
suggested lower prices with enhancement of number of shares. Therefore, sum of
Rs. 1,807/- can not be adopted to the value of a transaction that was settled
on 4-6-1999.
(7) In response to the above communication, Mr. AST Rajan has faxed letter to
Mr. Anil Chanana on 21-1-1997 (page 156 of Annexure A-5 of party P-2) wherein
he has categorically, on the basis of audited account of M/s HCL Consulting
Ltd., stated that the said share should have a market price of Rs. 23.76.
(8) Page-52 of Annexure A-2 of party P-2 is not a valuation report of shares
of M/s HCL Consulting Ltd. by Alex Brown & Sons or any other party but appears
to be a table showing the total number of issues shares of various companies
and the imputed rate thereof.
(9) The Security purchase agreement dated 27-1-1998 between Mr. Shiv Nadar and
Arjun Malhotra group was never given effect to. This agreement was drawn to
facilitate acquisition of the entire share holdings of Mr. Arjun Malhotra for
various operating and non-operating companies by Mr. Shiv Nadar. Mr. Arjun
Malhotra had accepted a certain level of prices to be paid in respect of the
shares of different companies to be acquired by Mr. Nadar. These prices were
however, not realistic and the transactions could not be completed as per this
agreement.
(10) The transaction of purchase and sale of shares of M/s HCL Consulting Ltd.
@ Rs. 50 per share between various companies have already been accepted in
regular assessments of purchasers/sellers of these shares. Had the prices of
shares of M/s HCL Consulting Ltd. been either Rs. 102 or 255 or 200-400 or 250
or 300 or 450-580 or 1500 or 1807 or 2500, as arbitrarily suggested in the
various notices/letters sent to the appellant during block assessment then Mr.
Arjun Malhotra/his companies would not have sold these shares carrying
substantial voting rights @ Rs. 50 per shares while he was completely
disinvesting from this company.
(11) The date of contract for transfer of shares if 4.6.1999 on which date,
M/s Wintech Investment P.Ltd. irrevocably committed to purchase the shares of
M/s HCL Consulting Ltd. @ Rs. 50/- per share. It is on this date that an
enforceable agreement came into existence between the parties. However, later
on vide its letter dated 27.8.2004, on the basis of opinions of some eminent
persons, the appellant submitted the date of transfer of shares was 26.7.1999
i.e. the date on which a sale deed was executed to record the understanding of
the parties.
(12) The price comparison methodology involving NUT, as adopted by the A.O. is
merely a simplistic projection and is completely invalid, especially since,
share prices depend upon innumerable other factors and cannot be a direct
proportion of the profits of the company. As such, the formula adopted by the
A.O. is totally incorrect and contrary to the rudiments of stock market and
price behavior.
28\. In addition to the aforesaid contentions, it was also pleaded on behalf
of the assessee before the learned CIT(A) that the transaction of sale of
shares of M/s HCL Consulting Ltd. to M/s Wintech Investment Pvt.Ltd. was duly
disclosed by it in the audited accounts for the year ended 31.3.2000 and the
capital gains/loss on the said sale offered in the return of income for A.Y.
2000-01 was accepted by the AO in the regular assessment completed on
27.3.2003 Under Section 143(3). It was pointed out that before relying on the
communication stated to be sent by Shri Anil Chanana to Shri Shiv Nadar to
draw an inference about the possible market price of M/s HCL Technologies Ltd.
at Rs. 1,807/-, the Assessing Officer neither chose to examine Shri Anil
Chanana nor any specific question was asked to Shri Shiv Nadar in this regard
in his statement recorded on oath. The action of the Assessing Officer in
invoking the provisions of Section 92 was also challenged by the assessee
before the learned CIT(A) submitting that the said provisions, as applicable
to the year under consideration, sought to cover only the business
transactions between a resident and a non-resident and did not cover any
transaction on capital account. A reference in this regard was made to Rule 11
of the Income Tax Rules, 1962 providing for the method of determination of
income for the purpose of Section 92 wherein emphasis was given on profits and
gains derived from business without any machinery provisions for the
computation of income arising through transfer of a capital asset. It was also
contended on behalf of the assessee before the learned CIT(A) that the price
of M/s HCL Consulting Ltd. shares was determined by the events prior to the
date of sale i.e. 4.6.1999 and the events subsequent to that date could not be
said to have any bearing on the said price. Specific instances/incidences were
pointed out by the assessee in this regard to justify that the price of Rs.
50/- was the arm's length price. An attempt was also made on behalf of the
assessee company to point out the errors/fallacies in the price comparisons
and computations made by the AO while adopting the price of Rs. 1,807/- as
arm's length price in place of Rs. 50/- shown by the assessee. It was
contended that the sale to Mauritius company, having been made after obtaining
the necessary approval of Government/Regulatory Authorities, could not be
found fault with merely on the basis of the possibility of any exemption from
capital gains arising in the future to the buyers of the shares. The assessee
also tried to rebut various allegations made by the AO by filing elaborate
written submissions before finally praying that the impugned addition of Rs.
1,229.90 crores made by the AO to its income alleging the suppression of
capital gains was not sustainable either in law or on facts and the same being
outside the purview of Chapter XIV-B, deserves to be deleted. The written
submissions filed by the assessee were forwarded by the learned CIT(A) to the
Assessing Officer and the remand report obtained thereon from him was also
confronted by him to the assessee with an opportunity to file a rejoinder
which the assessee availed.
29\. After taking into consideration all the material available before him
including the submissions made by the assessee, remand report submitted by the
Assessing Officer as well as the assessee's rejoinder, the learned CIT(A)
proceeded to confirm the addition of Rs. 1,229.90 crores for the various
reasons/observations recorded elaborately in his impugned order, which are
summarized below in brief:
(i) The valuation of M/s HCL Consulting Ltd. shares made by Purushothaman
Bhutani & Co. at Rs. 50/- each was incorrectly made without fully applying the
CCI Guidelines to suit the assessee's convenience and in order to arrive at
the desired price which was tax neutral.
(ii) There was sufficient evidence available on record to show that the IPO
was proposed much earlier and despite the fact that the same was known well
before the transfer of shares to M/s Wintech Investment Pvt.Ltd., it was not
taken into consideration in calculating the net asset value as required by
Clause 6.2(b) of the CCI Guidelines.
(iii) Many points emphasized by the assessee company to justify the valuation
of Rs. 50/- per share made by Purushothaman Bhutani & Co. during the appellate
proceedings were contradictory with the justification of amalgamation adopted
by the assessee before the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi. Even the amalgamation
of M/s HCL Technologies Ltd. into M/s HCL Consulting Ltd. initiated at the
beginning of May, 1999 was done with the public issue in mind.
(iv) Even though the so-called sale deeds of shares were executed on
26.7.1999, the financial results for the year ending 30.6.1999 showing higher
profits were purposely ignored especially when as per the CCI Guidelines, if
the profits are rising consistently from year to year at a steady ratio and
there are reasons to believe that the rising trend will be maintained, the
average profit was expected to be calculated on a weighted basis giving a
weightage of 3 for the latest year, 2 for the middle year and 1 for this year
for applying price earning capacity value method. Accordingly, if the net
asset value is recalculated on the basis of the latest financial results as
well as the widened capital base, the value per share comes to Rs. 75/- as per
the net value asset method according to CCI Guidelines.
(v) Similarly, the correct value of share as per the profit earning capacity
value method according to CCI Guidelines works out to Rs. 254/- on the basis
of improved financial results available for the latest years upto 30.6.1999.
This price of Rs. 254/- per share of Rs. 10/- face value comes to Rs. 1,430/-
per share of Rs. 4/- face value after the bonus issue and split.
(vi) The valuation of the shares of M/s HCL Consulting Ltd. as done by M/s
Purushothaman Bhutani & Co. thus was not the real value and the same was not
the arm's length price. Such valuation claimed to be made as per the
guidelines of CCI, in any case, could not be misdirected or misinterpreted to
justify a wrong doing. Even in the letter dated 2.7.1998 issued by the RBI and
found during the course of search as page No. 58 of Annexure A-14 of Party
A-6, it was clarified by the RBI that the question of valuation of shares
proposed to be transferred for tax purposes such as income tax, capital gains
tax etc. is liable to be considered by the Income Tax Authorities
independently.
30\. As regards the contemporaneous transactions cited by the assessee
involving transfer of shares of M/s HCL Consulting Ltd. at Rs. 50/- during the
relevant period, the learned CIT(A) observed that all such transactions had
taken place only among the HCL group of companies and with Arjun Malhotra
group of companies and such transfers having been effected with a specific
purpose among the related parties as is evident from the amalgamation scheme,
the price of Rs. 50/- per share shown therein could not be said to be the
arm's length price. As regards the transactions of transfer of shares
involving Arjun Malhotra group of companies, the learned. CIT(A) held that the
sequence of events was sufficient to suggest that it was mandatory for the
assessee company to first oust the Arjun Malhotra group for which the share
price was intentionally kept tax neutral for mutual benefit. In this regard,
he relied on the relevant noting found to be made on page No. 15 of Annexure
A-4 of Party P-4 after giving the share holding pattern of M/s HCL Consulting
Ltd. as on 13.9.1999 specifying alternative actions to be taken either to
transfer the shares to the company A, B & C directly from AM(Arjun Malhotra)
and if not, such transfer to take place at any price which is tax neutral by
putting the consideration at Rs. 50/- per share. According to the learned
CIT(A), this noting found recorded in the relevant seized document was
conclusive to establish that the price per share was intentionally adopted at
Rs. 50/- to ward off the burden of capital gain tax. He also noted that all
these transactions amongst the group companies and with Arjun Malhotra group
were made at Rs. 50/- per share without obtaining any valuation report either
from Purushothaman Bhutani & Co. or any other consulting firm. He held that
the report of Purushothaman Bhutani & Co. showing the valuation of the shares
of M/s HCL Consulting Ltd. at Rs. 50/- obtained subsequently was only a
managed report just to give genuineness to the transactions. He, therefore,
rejected the contention of the assessee that the transaction of 1.08 crores
shares of M/s HCL Consulting Ltd., being at arm's length price, was backed by
any corroboratory evidence.
31\. The learned CIT(A) also discussed the various documents found during the
course of search and relied upon by the Assessing Officer to come to a
conclusion that the price of the shares of M/s HCL Consulting Ltd. was much
more than Rs. 50/- as shown by the assessee while transferring the shares to
M/s Wintech Investment Pvt.Ltd., Mauritius. He held that the conclusion drawn
by the AO as regards the said price being not at arm's length thus was based
on evidence/information found as a result of search from the relevant seized
documents and the confrontation of the same to the assessee could not be
termed as in the nature of roving and fishing enquiries as sought to be argued
by the assessee. He also referred to the substantial increase in the stock
prices of some of the information technology shares during the period from
June 1999 to January 2000 and based on the unprecedented hike noted therein,
he held that the price taken by the AO of the shares of M/s HCL Consulting
Ltd. as on 4.6.1999 was the actual arm's length price. He, therefore, held
that the transfer of shares of M/s HCL Consulting Ltd. by the assessee and
other two merged companies to M/s Wintech Investment Pvt.Ltd., Mauritius at
the understated price of Rs. 50/- per share was a colorable device to park the
said shares with the overseas group company situated in Mauritius to avoid
payment of any capital gain tax in India. For this conclusion, he relied on
the decision of Calcutta Bench of ITAT in the case of Classic Finance Ltd. v.
DCIT (2000) 112 Taxman 155 (Magazine) and in the case of Unique India Limited
v. ACIT 74 ITD 43. He also held that the decision of Hon'ble Supreme Court in
the case of McDowell & Co. Ltd. 154 ITR 148 is applicable to the facts of the
assessee's case.
32\. As regards the contention of the assessee that the impugned transactions
of sale of shares being related to sale of investment and not the business
transactions, the provisions of Section 92 are not applicable, the learned
CIT(A) relied on the provisions of Rule 10 to hold that the scope of Section
92 is not restricted only to the transactions related to the business
undertaken. He held that the relevance is of the transaction generating income
and not the character of income and if income is arising from any business
connection, property or from whatever source, the powers under Sub-clause (3)
of Rule 10 are wide enough to compute such income on which tax is sought to be
evaded or avoided as contemplated in Section 92. He observed that the assessee
company as well as other two companies were undisputedly engaged in the
business of trading, investing and underwriting shares and securities and
there being no business other than that of the investment company undertaken
by them, the transactions in question involving transfer of shares to M/s
Wintech Investment Pvt.Ltd., Mauritius were in the nature of business
transactions undertaken by them. Relying on the various judicial
pronouncements discussed in his impugned order, the learned CIT(A) held that
even a single transaction of purchase and sale may constitute an adventure in
the nature of trade and accordingly, he rejected the contention of the
assessee that the relevant transactions could not be termed as business
transactions. He, therefore, held that the provisions of Section 92 were
clearly applicable to the impugned transaction of sale of shares and since
such application, according to him, was based on the evidence found as a
result of search, he held that the addition of Rs. 1,229.90 crores made by the
Assessing Officer to the undisclosed income of the assessee on this issue was
within the scope and ambit of the block assessment under Chapter XIV-B.
Aggrieved by the order of CIT(A), the assessee has preferred the present
appeal before the Tribunal.
33\. The learned Counsel for the Assessee and the learned Special Counsel for
the Department were heard at length. The following propositions, as put forth
by the Learned Counsel for the assessee, arise for our consideration out of
the grounds raised in the grounds of appeal filed by the assessee before the
Tribunal.
(A) General proposition (1) Can a search be conducted on a non existent
company and Can a Section 158 BC notice, be issued to non-existent companies?
(2) Can an assessment of alleged undisclosed income or income generally of HCL
Corporation Ltd. and Shiv Nadar Investment Private Ltd. be made in the hands
of the assessee?
(3) Are the conditions necessary for invoking Section 92 of the Act satisfied
in the present case?
(B) Particular proposition referable to block assessment.
(1) Can a disclosed transaction give rise to undisclosed income especially
when it is not alleged that any amount over and above what has been disclosed
has in fact passed? As a corollary to the question the following question will
arise for consideration: (i)Can a disclosed transaction assessed in regular
assessment be at all assessed in the block period?
(2) Can invocation of Section 92 which gives rise to notional income be
classified as undisclosed income?
(3) Can the successor be at all assessed for a block period referable to the
predecessor? When a regular assessment cannot be made in such a situation can
a block assessment be so made? Can there be block period at all for the
companies, which ceased to exist?
(4) Is the search at all valid because conditions Under Section 132(1)(c) are
not satisfied?
(5) If notice Under Section 158BC is defective can a valid assessment be made?
33A. The following arguments were advanced by Mr. Dastur, learned Counsel for
the assessee with reference to General Proposition 1 and 2 which reads as
follows:
(1) Can a search be conducted on a non existent company and Can a Section 158
BC notice, be issued to non-existent companies?
(2) Can an assessment of alleged undisclosed income or income generally of HCL
Corporation Ltd. and Shiv Nadar Investment Private Ltd. be made in the hands
of the assessee?
The arguments are also valid for Proposition-3 referable to Block Assessment,
which reads as follows:
(3) Can the successor be at all assessed for a block period referable to the
predecessor? When a regular assessment cannot be made in such a situation can
a block assessment be so made? Can there be block period at all for the
companies, which ceased to exist?
34\. The learned Counsel for the assessee Shri S.E. Dastur firstly submitted
that the block period in the present case is from 1.4.1995 to 24.1.2002. He
drew our attention to the fact that 70 lakhs shares in the company called HCL
Consulting Ltd. were sold to company called Wintech Investment Private Ltd
(i.e. M/s WIPL). The sale was in June 1999. He brought our attention, that
prior to the sale of the shares by the aforesaid three companies, the shares
were got value by one Purushottam Bhutani & Company, Chartered Accountants.
The valuation was done by the Chartered Accountant on the basis of the
guidelines issued by the Controller of Capital Issues (CCI]. He also brought
to our notice that the Reserve Bank of India had accorded its approval to the
sale of these shares by the aforesaid three persons in favour of M/s WIPL who
is a overseas corporate body (OCB). Our attention was drawn to the approval of
the RBI, copy of which is placed at page No. 1294 of the assessee's paper book
(Vol. 4) the approval of RBI is dated 23.9.1999 and has been granted pursuant
to the provisions of Section 29 (1) (b) of the Foreign Exchange Regulation
Act, 1973. The said permission was a provisional permission and later on by
another letter, dated 23.10.1999, the RBI had granted final approval for the
proposed sale of shares.
35\. The learned Counsel drew our attention to the fact that these shares,
which were sold by the three companies to M/s WIPL were shown as "investments
- non-trading" in their books of account. It was also submitted by him that a
company such as the assessee, M/s HCLCL and M/s SNIPL, which hold shares of
other companies to control and manage other companies, can hold some of the
shares as stock-in-trade or as a capital asset. He highlighted the fact that
the shares which were sold were held by all the three companies as investments
i.e. as a capital asset and not as stock-in-trade. He also emphasized the
accounting treatment given by the three companies in it's books of account and
the conclusiveness of such accounting treatment of the intention of these
three companies in holding the shares which were sold as capital asset. Our
attention was drawn to the various documents to highlight the fact that even
prior to the search, the assessee and M/s HCLCL and M/s SNIPL had duly filed
their returns of income for A.Y. 2000-01 duly disclosing the transaction of
sale of shares of M/s HCL Consulting Ltd. by them to M/s WIPL. These details
and documents have already been referred to by us at paragraphs 3 to 5 of this
order and are not being repeated here.
36\. On the first general proposition, the learned Counsel for the assessee
highlighted the sequence of events and submitted that the assessee in its
return of income field had duly highlighted the fact that M/s HCLCL and M/s
SNIPL ceased to exist on amalgamation with the assessee for the Assessment
Year 2001-02. Our attention was drawn to Schedule XX to the balance sheet for
the year ended 31.3.2001 a copy of the same is at page-973 of the assessee's
paper book, wherein the fact that by the order dated 27.8.2001 of the
Honorable High Court, sanctioning the scheme of amalgamation of M/s HCLCL and
M/s SNIPL with the Assessee, M/s HCLCL and M/s SNIPL have been merged with the
assessee company has been highlighted in the return of income for the
Assessment Year 2001-02. The return of income for Assessment Year 2001-02
along with the audited accounts in which the above fact has been highlighted
has been field by the assessee on 29.11.2001. The learned Counsel for the
assessee submitted that the revenue could be presumed to have knowledge about
the fact regarding the non-existence of M/s HCLCL and M/s SNIPL. It was also
pointed out that with the filing the certified copies of the Court's order
with the Registrar of Companies on 8.11.2001 read with the order of the Court
sanctioning the scheme of amalgamation, the two companies, in law, would cease
to exist w.e.f. 8.11.2001.
37\. The learned Counsel drew our attention to page 59 of assessee paper book,
which contains a copy of Panchnama drawn by the authorized officers. The
Panchnama makes a reference to the warrant in the case of M/s HCLCL, M/s SNIPL
besides the assessee and Anr. company by name HCL Technologies Ltd. The
Panchnama refers to the warrant of authorization dated 23.1.2002 issued Under
Section 132 of the Income-tax Act. It was queried by the learned Counsel for
the assessee that when the person sought to be searched was non-existent on
23.1.2002 and when such fact is within the knowledge of the Revenue, can a
warrant of authorization be issued in their names and a Panchnama be drawn
showing the name of two non-existent companies as having been subjected to a
search? He drew our attention to the decision of the Hon'ble Delhi High Court
in the case of R.C. Jain v. CIT 273 ITR 384 (DEL). The facts in the aforesaid
case were that the residential premise of one Romesh Chand Jain was searched
pursuant to warrant of authorization issued on 12.2.2001. Shri R.C. Jain died
on 27.11.2001. A show cause notice dated 6.2.2002 was issued by the CIT, Delhi
for transfer of files of the assessee from Delhi to Kolkata. The legal heir of
R.C. Jain namely R.K. Jain informed the Commissioner, that R.C. Jain had died
on 27.11.2001. Thereafter, the commissioner took no action. After period of
one year i.e., on February 10, 2003 a notice Under Section 158 BC was sent in
the name of the deceased R.C. Jain calling upon him to file return of income
for block period. Later on, an order of assessment for the block period came
to be passed on 28th February 2003, Under Section 158 BC of the Act, in the
name of the deceased. The legal heir of R.C. Jain, filed writ petition for
quashing the order of assessment. On such writ petition, the Hon'ble Dehli
High Court held that the Revenue having had knowledge about the death of R.C.
Jain, proceeded to make an assessment against a dead person. The order of
block assessment was held to be not valid in law having been passed in the
name of a dead person (Assessee), after having knowledge about the death of
the assessee. Our attention was also drawn to the commentary by Kanga and
Palkhivala on the law and practice of Income-tax 8th addition page 1260
wherein the learned authors had expressed the view that Under Section 159(2)
of the Act, in respect of proceedings taken after the death of an Assessee, it
was incumbent on the Assessing Officer to take proceedings only against the
legal representative of a deceased person.
38\. Our attention was also drawn to the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court
in the case of CIT v. Amarchand N. Shroff 48 ITR 59 (SC) wherein the Hon'ble
Supreme Court has held that an assessee under the Act has ordinarily to be a
living person and could not be a dead person because his legal personality
ceases on his death. The Court, therefore, concluded that no assessment can be
made on a dead person.
39\. It was submitted by him that in the present case the Revenue has full
knowledge about dissolution without winding up of M/s HCLCL and M/s SNIPL, yet
it has chose to issue warrant of authorization in the name of a non existent
person. According to him, a search cannot take place in the case of a non-
existent company. Even if it is contended by the Revenue that the warrant of
authorization is a Joint Warrant or individually different warrants on the
three companies, yet in law the same would not make any difference and the
warrant of authorization deserves to be held to be not valid in law. It was
pointed out by him that it is not the case of the Revenue that the warrants
are in the name of the Assessee as successor of the 2 other companies.
According to him, the search is a condition precedent for making an order of
assessment for the block period. Section 158BB refers to a search in the case
of a person, which contemplates that the person searched should be existing as
on the date of search not a non existent company. According to him, as will be
highlighted later, even making assessment on the Assessee as successor of the
two companies was also not possible.
40\. Reliance was placed on the decision of the Delhi Bench of ITAT in the
case of Impsat (P) Ltd. v. ITO 91 ITD 354 (Del). The facts of the said case
were that an assessee, a limited company was incorporated to implement a
project in the country, in collaboration with the foreign company. The
assessee received some money from a foreign collaborator in Assessment Year
1995-96 and 1996-97. The assessee due to heavy losses abandoned the project.
The collaborators thought it fit to waive refund of the share application
money and wrote a letter dated 24.10.2000 waiving their claims. The assessee
companies name was struck off the Register by the ROC on 18.9.2001 pursuant to
an application by the assessee Under Section 560 of the Companies Act, 1956.
The assessee however, later in point of time, filed a ROI for Assessment Year
2001-02 declaring loss. The revenue treated the waiver of share application
money by the foreign collaborator as giving rise to a casual and non-recurring
income in the hands of the assessee. In the appeal before the Tribunal one of
the question that arose for consideration was as to whether a company whose
name was struck off the Register by ROC Under Section 560 of Companies Act,
1956 and therefore, stood dissolved, could be assessed to tax after
dissolution? The Tribunal held that existence of the person sought to be taxed
at the point of making the assessment is a condition for the validity of the
assessment. The Tribunal referred to the decision of the Hon'ble Bombay High
Court in the case of Patiala State Bank, In Re 9 ITR 95 (Bom) wherein it was
held that tax is not imposed on income generally. It is imposed on the income
of a person, natural or artificial, as defined in Section 3. The Tribunal
thereafter, referred to the various provisions in the Income-tax Act, 1961,
for initiating proceedings for assessment of income in the case of death of
different assesses. In the case of a company which is in liquidation the
provisions of Section 178 of the Act providing for assessment in the hands of
a liquidator, was referred to. The Tribunal then referred to the distinction
in law between liquidation and winding up and ultimately concluded that there
was no provision under the Income-tax Act to assess a company which is
dissolved and that there was a lacunae in the Act in this regard. The Tribunal
ultimately held that the order of assessment passed on the assessee company
was a nullity.
41\. The learned Counsel also referred to the provisions of Section 170 of the
Act and submitted that in the case of succession to business, the predecessor
was to be assessed in respect of income up to the date of succession and the
successor has to be assessed in respect of income after the date of
succession. Sub-section (2) of Section 170 contemplates a situation where
predecessor cannot be found and even in such a case, only in respect of income
of the P.Y. in which succession took place up to the date of succession and
the P.Y. preceding that year can an assessment be made on the successor. He
further submitted even in such a case a separate assessment for the period
referred to in Sub-section (2) of Section 170 has to be made showing assessee
as successor in business of the predecessor and an assessment on the successor
individually, cannot be made. According to him the above procedure is to be
adopted since the expression used in Sub-section (2) of Section 170 is "in the
like manner and to the same extent as it would be made on the predecessor". In
any event an Assessment cannot be made in the name of the successor
individually as has been done in the present case. The reason for this rule
according to him is that while allowing set off and carry forward of loss or
unabsorbed depreciation in the hands of the successor assessee, such set off
cannot be allowed against the income of the predecessor assessee and vice
versa. Therefore, the assessment can only be as "successor of a predecessor"
and not on the successor individually.
42\. His alternative submission was that in any event, the provisions of
Section 170 would not apply to a block assessment proceeding under chapter
XIV-B of the Act. In this regard, he drew our attention to the fact Section
158BA(1) provides that a block assessment order on a person who is subjected
to a search after 30.6.1995 has to be made in accordance with the provisions
of chapter XIV-B of the Act. The block period has been defined in Section
158B(a) as a period comprising of previous years relevant to 6 Assessment
Years preceding the previous year in which a search is conducted Under Section
132 and a period up to the date of commencement of search. The block period
cannot be split and if Section 170 were to be invoked, the same would mean
splitting the block period. Therefore, according to him, it was not possible
to apply Section 170 to a block assessment proceeding. There is no other
provision specifically making the provisions of Section 170 applicable to
block assessment proceedings in chapter XIV-B of the Act.
43\. According to him even the provisions of Section 158BH, which provides
that all other provisions of the Act shall apply to assessment made under this
chapter (Chapter-XIV-B), will not enable the Assessing Officer to invoke the
provisions of Section 170(1) & (2) of the Act. It was submitted by him that
the provisions of Section 158 BH are only intended to enable recovery
proceedings in respect of tax assessed on an assessment already made,
determining undisclosed income. The expression "Assessment made under this
chapter" used in Section 158 BH clearly implies that the said provisions will
come into play only after block assessment order is passed.
44\. Reference was also made by him to the provisions of Section 246A(1)(k) of
the Act which provides for a specific right of appeal before the CIT(A)
against the order of assessment made for the block period. This according to
him clearly shows the intention of the legislature to treat the block
assessment proceedings as a distinct class by itself not falling within the
ambit of regular assessment made under the other provisions of the Act.
45\. He also drew our attention to page 20 of PB-I of assessee and submitted
that no doubt the scheme of amalgamation provides that the liabilities of the
two other companies will stand vested in the assessee, the transferee company,
but these liabilities can relate only to liabilities which in law can so stand
vested and not in respect of liabilities which law does not envisage as
capable being vested on a transferee company. Since, there are no such
provision in the Income-tax Act, it was argued by him that the liability
cannot stand vested with the assessee.
46\. The learned Counsel for the assessee drew our attention to page 38 and 39
of the order of Assessing Officer wherein the Assessing Officer has determined
income of HCL Corporation Ltd. M/s. Shiv Nadar Investments (P) Ltd. and the
assessee separately but concluded by assessing the three different incomes in
the hands of the assessee giving the following reasons:
As concluded in para 6.4, the UDI in the hands of M/s. HCL Corporation Ltd. &
M/s. Shiv Nadar Investment (P) Ltd. has to be assessed in the hands of M/s.
Slocum Investments (P) Ltd on substantive basis.
47\. It was submitted by the learned Counsel that the expression "Substantive
Assessment" is always used in contradistinction to "Protective Assessment" and
when there is no protective assessment the assessment on a substantive basis
is without any purpose and not valid in law. It was thus submitted by him that
the order of assessment deserves to be quashed in the present case.
48\. Mr. S.D. Kapila, the ld.counsel for the revenue at the outset submitted
that M/s SNIPL and M/s HCLCL ceased to exist on 1.4.00. In this regard the
ld.counsel brought to our notice the scheme of amalgamation, (which was
approved by the Hon'ble Delhi High Court by its order dt. 27.8.01) wherein it
has been provided that the appointed date for the purpose of the scheme means
1.4.00 or such other date as the Hon'ble Delhi High Court may direct. He
pointed out that in the order dt. 27.8.01 the Hon'ble High Court has approved
the scheme as such and has not given any other appointed date for the purpose
of the scheme. His submission was that the two companies viz., M/s HCLCL and
M/s SNIPL would cease to exist on the appointed date i.e. 1.4.00. His
submissions was that though the order of the Court (certificate copy) was
filed with the ROC on 8.11.01 that can not be deemed to be the date on which
the companies will cease to exist. In this regard the Id. counsel drew our
attention to the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Marshal
Sons and Co. (India) Ltd. v. ITO 223 ITR 809 (S.C.) wherein it has been held
that every scheme of amalgamation of companies has necessarily to provide a
date with effect from which the amalgamation shall take place and that it is
open to the Court sanctioning the scheme to modify the said date and prescribe
a different date of amalgamation as the Court thinks appropriate. If the Court
does not prescribe any specific date but merely sanctions the scheme presented
to it, the date of amalgamation is the date specified in the scheme as the
transfer date and not any other date.
49\. The further submissions of the Id. counsel for the Revenue on the search
and assessment having been made on a non existent company was that the name of
M/s Slocum Investments Pvt.Ltd. (SIPL) was found in the warrant of search and
since this company continued to exist at all material point of time, it is
enough to uphold the validity of search. According to him the fact that the
names of two other companies find place in the warrant of search can be
ignored as irrelevant. According to him the notice Under Section 158 BC on the
Assessee was therefore a valid notice and is deemed to have been issued on the
Amalgamating Companies also. According to him the real question that should be
taken up for consideration is as to whether the notice issued Under Section.
158 BC can embrace the two amalgamating companies also. According to him the
provisions of Section 170 are relevant and can be pressed into service.
50\. With regard to the applicability of the provisions of Section 170 of the
Act, the IdDR drew our attention to the provisions of Section 159(5) Section
161 and Section 168 and submitted that the liability of a legal
representative, a representative assessee and executors have been laid down in
those sections. Drawing our attention to the provisions of Section 170, the
ldDR submits that on an amalgamation the amalgamated company loses its
identity and gets merged with the amalgamating company, and, therefore, an
assessment in respect of all the companies could be made in the hands of the
assessee. According to him, the provisions of Section 170(2) are clearly
applicable in the present case. Reliance was also placed by the Id. DR in this
regard on the decision of the Hon'ble Madras High Court in the case of CIT v.
Express Newspapers Ltd. 40 ITR 38 (Mad.) and the decision of the Madras High
Court in the case of CIT v. TV Sundaram Ayyangar and Sons 238 ITR 328. In the
case of Express News Papers Ltd. (supra), it has been held by the Madras High
Court that a successor in business can be assessed in respect of the profits
earned by the predecessor. In the case of T.V. Sundaram Aiyengar & Sons
(supra), the Hon'ble Madras High Court has held that it is not open to an
amalgamated company which has taken over all assets and liabilities of the
amalgamating company to claim that it is not in any way liable for the tax
payable by the amalgamating company even though the order Under Section 104 of
the I.T. Act 1961 came to be made after the order of amalgamation and after
dissolution of the amalgamating company but on account of acts of omission and
commission committed by the amalgamating company and its failure to carry out
the obligations which were required to be carried out. The Court further held
that the fact that the liability had not crystallized and the charge had not
been created would not entitle the amalgamated company to avoid the payment of
the tax Under Section 104 that would have been payable if the amalgamating
company had continued to exist. The Id. DR also brought to our notice that the
Hon'ble Madras High Court has distinguished the decision of the Hon'ble Delhi
High Court in the case of Birla Cotton Spinning and Weaving Mills Ltd. v. CIT
123 ITR 354 (Del). The Madras High Court has pointed out that in the said
judgment the Court held that it was not competent to hear the reference
application and that jurisdiction lay only with the Hon'ble Rajasthan High
Court. One of the Judges however expressed opinion on the validity of
proceedings against a dissolved company. The opinion was not necessary to
decide the controversy involved in the reference and for this reason the same
should not be considered as good in law. In conclusion on this issue the Id.
DR submitted that an assessment in the hands of the assessee in respect of the
undisclosed income of M/s HCLCL and M/s SNIPL was valid and no three separate
assessments need to be framed as contended by the Id. counsel for the
assessee. Drawing attention to the decision of the Delhi High Court in the
case of R.C. Jain (supra) the Id. counsel for the assessee submitted that the
said decision supports the case of the revenue rather than that of the
assessee. He pointed out that the notice in the said case was issued in the
name of the deceased and that was the reason why the Court held that the
proceedings were not valid. It was submitted that in the present case, the
name of the Assessee is found in the notice issued Under Section 158 BC, and,
therefore, the objection of the Id. counsel for the assessee cannot be
sustained. Referring to the decision of the Bombay High Court in the case
Amarchand Shroff (supra) the Id.DR submitted that it was a case where income
was received by the L.R. after the death of the assessee and, therefore,
distinguishable on facts. It was thus submitted by the Id.DR that on and from
1.4.00 order of assessment could be made in the name of the assessee in
respect of undisclosed income of M/s HCLCL and M/s SNIPL.
51\. With regard to the contention of the Ld.counsel for the assessee that a
Block period can not be split, the Id. DR referred to the provisions of
Section 158B(a) defining Block period and submitted that the Section starts
with the words "unless the context otherwise requires". According to him the
present case was a case which requires the word "Block period" to be
restricted to the year of Sale of shares as there was no other undisclosed
income of the two other companies.
52\. With regard to the contention of the Id. counsel for the assessee that by
reason of the provisions of Section 158 BH, the other provisions of this Act
will apply only in respect of an assessment already made and not while making
a block assessment, the Id.DR submitted that the expression "assessment made"
has to be read in the context of the opening words of Section 158 BH which
uses the expression "save, otherwise provided in this Chapter". According to
the Id.DR the aforesaid expression only means that all other provisions which
are excluded specifically alone do not apply while making block assessment and
all other provisions not so specifically excluded will apply while making
computation of undisclosed income under Chapter XIV B. The Id.DR drew
attention to the fact that the provisions of Section 131 have not been
specifically referred to in Chapter XIV B and this should not be taken to mean
that an Assessing Officer can not issue summons for examination of persons
while making a block assessment. According to the Id. DR the expression "made"
used in Section 158 BH does not refer to only an assessment already made.
Reference was made to the decision of the Kolkata Bench of ITAT in the case of
W.C. Shaw (P) Ltd. v. ACIT 93 ITD 169 wherein it has been held that provisions
of Section 158 BH make the other provisions of the Act applicable while making
a Block Assessment. Drawing our attention to the arguments of the Id. counsel
for the assessee that the other provisions of the Act are made applicable only
after the completion of an assessment under Chapter XIV B of the Act for the
purpose of recovery tax due on the undisclosed income, the Id. DR submitted
that such a provision is not required for recovery. In this regard the Id. DR
drew our attention to provisions of Section 156 where a notice of demand could
be issued pursuant to any order passed under the Act. Reference was also made
to the provisions of Section 220 of the Act where pursuant to a notice of
demand not being complied with, within 30 days of service, provision for
levying penalty and interest have been prescribed. According to him after
completion of a block assessment proceedings there are provisions to enable
recovery of tax due on an undisclosed income and such recovery is not
dependent only on the provisions of Section 158 BH as contended by the Id.
counsel for the assessee. In this regard our attention was also drawn to the
decision of the Hon'ble Madras High Court in the case of M/s M.G. pictures
(Madras) Ltd. v. ACIT, 263 ITR 83(Mad.) wherein it has been held by the
Hon'ble Madras High Court that except provisions which are specifically made
inapplicable, all other provisions of the Act are applicable to block
assessment by virtue of provisions of Section 158 BH of the Act.
53\. In rejoinder, Shri Dastur submitted that the proper course for the
Assessing Officer to have adopted, was to have made three separate Assessments
(a) on Slocum I. (P) Ltd. i.e. the Assessee separately; (b) The Assessee as
successor of SNIPL; (c) The assessee as successor of HCLCL: for the period
after 1.4.2000 and 3 separate assessments on the Assessee, M/s SNIPL and M/s
HCLCL for periods upto 1.4.2000. This procedure was in conformity with the
provisions of Section 170. He highlighted the need for making separate
assessment for reasons like applicability of rates of taxes could be different
for Amalgamating and Amalgamated Companies or one of the Company could be an
Industrial Company warranting a different treatment of it's income. He them
pointed out that even assuming that the provisions of Section 170(2) are
applicable in the present case, the same can not be pressed into service for
the reasons that the 'Block period' can not be split. In this regard our
attention was drawn to the provisions of Section 158 BB (2) of the Act which
provides that when computing undisclosed income for the Block period, the
provisions of Section 68 to 69 C shall, so far as may be, apply and reference
to Financial Year in those sections shall be construed as reference to the
relevant Previous Year falling within the Block period including the P.Y.
ending with the date of search. According to him but for this deeming
provision, the provisions of Section 68 to 69-C, cannot be invoked in block
assessment proceedings. He pointed out that there is no such deeming provision
making provisions of Section 170 applicable to block assessment proceedings
and restricting the period referred to in Section 170(2) in lieu of the block
period as defined in Section 158 B(a). He submitted that even provisions of
Section 158 BII will not come to (he rescue of the Revenue because, the
provisions of Section 170(2) and the 'Block period' as defined in Section 158
B (a) are contradictory and to the extent the provisions in Chapter XIV-B of
the Act provide otherwise, the other provisions of the Act, will not apply to
Block Assessment proceedings. Further reliance was placed on the decision of
the Mumbai Bench of the Tribunal in the case of Western India Bakers (P) Ltd.
v. DCIT 87 ITD 607 (Mum.) wherein the Mumbai Bench had held that provisions of
Section 147 of the Act can not be invoked to make a reassessment of
undisclosed income for Block period.
54\. We have considered the rival submissions. We shall for the purpose of
clarity recapitulate the sequence of events leading to the present Assessment
in the hands of the Assessee. The assessment in the hands of the Assessee
relates to a transaction of sale of shares of M/s HCL Consulting Ltd., by the
assessee and the other Companies by name M/s SNIPL and M/s HCLCL to an
Overseas Corporate body M/s WIPL of Mauritius. All the 3 transactions had
taken place in June, 1999. The three companies passed a Board Resolution all
dated 3.6.99 offering for sale of shares of M/s HCL Consulting Ltd. held by
them to M/s WIPL. M/s WIPL by Board resolution dt. 4.6.99 agreed to buy the
shares in question subject to the required Governmental approvals. The RBI
granted in principle approval on 23.9.99 and final approval on 23.10.99. The
sale proceeds were received by the Assessee, M/s SNIPL and HCLCL on 13.10.99,
14.10.99 and 12.10.99 respectively in the form of remittances in foreign
exchange duly evidenced by the Foreign Exchange Remittance Certificates.
Therefore, there was a completed sale of the shares in the P.Y. relevant to
A.Y. 2000-2001, i.e., Financial Year 1999-2000, by M/s SNIPL, SNIPL & HCLCL
respectively.
55\. The assessee as well as M/s HCLCL and M/s SNIPL had filed their returns
of income for A.Y. 2000-01 prior to the search. The details of the filing of
returns have already been narrated in paragraphs 3 to 5 of this order.
56\. M/s SNIPL and HCLCL proposed to amalgamate with the assessee. The
provisions of the scheme of Amalgamation in so far as the same is relevant for
the present case have already been set out in Para-6 of this Order. In short,
the assets of the Amalgamating Companies stood vested with the Amalgamated
Company on and from the appointed date i.e. 1.4.2000 and so were the
liabilities.
57\. The Hon'ble High Court of Delhi by Order dt. 27.8.2001 sanctioned the
scheme. A certified copy of the Order of the Hon'ble Delhi High Court was
filed with the Registrar of Companies on 8.11.2001. Thus on 8.11.2001 M/s
SNIPL and HCLCL ceased to exist. On registration of this fact with the ROC, it
would be notice to one and all that these two companies cease to exist.
58\. A search Under Section 132 (1) was conducted on 24.1.02 at the business
premises of the Assessee SIPL and residential premises of some of its
employees, Directors etc. Each of the warrant of search was in the joint names
of 4 entities. They are:
(i) HCL Corporation Ltd.
(ii) Shiv Nadar Investment (P) Ltd.
(iii) Slocum Investment (P) Ltd.
(iv) HCL Technologies (P) Ltd.
59\. Thus, as on the date of search, M/s HCLCL and M/s SNIPL as entities did
not exist. After conclusion of search, notice Under Section 158 BC was issued
to the Assessee, M/s SNIPL and M/s HCLCL. By letter dt. 2.12.02, the counsel
for the Assessee, informed the Assessing Officer that M/s HCLCL had
amalgamated with the assessee w.e.f. 1.4.2000 and ceased to exist and called
upon the Assessing Officer to examine the validity of proceeding against
HCLCL. Similarly in the case of M/s SNIPL by letter dt. 16.1.2004, the Counsel
for the Assessee informed the Assessing Officer about the non-existence of M/s
SNIPL.
60\. The Assessing Officer however proceeded to make assessment of income of
the two other companies (hereinafter called the Amalgamating Company) also in
the hands of the Assessee (hereinafter called the Amalgamated Company.) The
Assessing Officer placed reliance on the decision of the Hon'ble Madras High
Court in the case of CIT v. T.V. Sundaram Iyengar and Sons (P) Ltd. (supra).
The question before the Hon'ble Madras High Court was as to whether for the
failure of the Amalgamating Company to distribute the statutorily prescribed
portion of undistributed profits Under Section 104 of the Act, the proceedings
could be initiated against the amalgamated company. The plea of the
Amalgamated Company was that since the liability did not accrue to the
amalgamating company, prior to amalgamation, the same could not be fastened on
the amalgamated company. Another plea of the Amalgamated Company was that
since the amalgamating Company was not in existence when the order Under
Section 104 was passed proceeding cannot be initiated against the amalgamated
company. The Hon'ble Madras High Court did not agree with the submission on
behalf of the amalgamated company and it held as follows:
It is not open to the amalgamated company which has taken over all the assets
and liabilities of the amalgamating company to claim that it is not in any way
liable for the tax payable by the amalgamating company, even though the order
Under Section 104 came to be made after the order of amalgamation and after
the dissolution of the amalgamating company, but on account of acts of
omission and commission committed by the amalgamating company, and its failure
to carry out the obligation which were required to be carried out. The fact
that the liability had not crystallised and the charge had not been created
would not entitle the amalgamated company to avoid the payment of the tax
Under Section 104 that would have been payable if the amalgamating company had
continued to exist.
Notice in this case was given by the Income-tax Officer rightly to the
amalgamated company as the amalgamating company had been dissolved by the time
the notice was issued and the liability, after amalgamation, was that of the
amalgamated company. Under the terms of amalgamation, the amalgamated company
had taken over the obligation to pay and discharge "all liabilities, debts and
obligations of whatsoever nature" of the amalgamating company. The liability
of the amalgamating company to pay tax Under Section 104 of the Act, became
the liability or obligation of the amalgamated company which had taken over
all liabilities, duties and obligations of the amalgamating company in terms
of the order of amalgamation.
61\. The Hon'ble Madras High Court also dissented from the view expressed by
the Hon'ble Delhi HC in the case of Birla Cotton Spinning & Weaving Mills Ltd.
v. CIT 123 ITR 354 (Mad.). The Hon'ble Delhi HC in the aforesaid decision was
dealing with a case of proceedings against Amalgamating Companies, which
ceases to exist. The facts in the said case were as follows. There were two
companies carrying on business in Jaipur known as M/s. Merchandise and Stores
Ltd., and M/s. Rajputana General Dealers Ltd. By an order dated April 22,
1960, the Rajasthan High Court sanctioned a scheme of arrangement bringing
about the amalgamation of the above two companies with the Birla Cotton
Spinning and Weaving Mills Ltd., Delhi (hereinafter referred to as "the Birla
company"). As a result with effect from some date in June, 1960, when the
order of court dissolving the two companies were filed with the Registrar of
Companies, the two amalgamating companies stood dissolved without a winding
up. For the assessment year 1960-61, M/s. Merchandise and Stores Ltd., had
been assessed to income-tax on a total income of Rs. 1,45,143 and the
Rajputana General Dealers Ltd., had been assessed to Income-tax on a total
income of Rs. 1,14,417. Later on, the ITO found that the two companies had not
declared any dividends and he was of opinion that proceedings had to be
initiated against these companies Under Section 23 A of the Indian I.T. Act,
1922, for the assessment year 1960-61. He therefore, proceeded to issue
notices in the names of the two companies and in reply thereto a chartered
accountant appeared and objected to the proceedings on the merits. However,
after hearing the representative who appeared, the ITO passed an order dated
March 2, 1965, in the case of M/s Merchandise and Stores Ltd., demanding an
additional super-tax of Rs. 40,135 Under Section 23A. On the same date, he
similarly determined the additional super-tax payable by the other company,
i.e., M/s. Rajputana General Dealers Ltd., at Rs. 31,465. In both the orders,
the names of the assessee were given as M/s. Merchandise and Stores Ltd., and
M/s. Rajputana General Dealers Ltd., respectively. One of the question for
consideration before the Court was as to whether Delhi HC was competent to
hear the reference. The two Hon'ble Judges held that Delhi HC had no
territorial jurisdiction to hear the reference. One of the Hon'ble Judges
expressed the following opinion:
Therefore, the position would be that the orders passed Under Section 23A(1)
by the ITO purportedly against these companies were invalid orders of
assessment. However, the validity of the orders would have no effect on these
companies since they did not exist at the time of the orders. In a case, where
an assessee exists and the order of assessment is null and void for some
reason, the assessee would be aggrieved and would and should file an appeal to
get rid of the invalid order. But where the assessee is non-existent and
consequently can have no grievance against the assessment order there is no
question of its preferring any appeals against the said order. The appeals
preferred before the AAC in the first instance and thereafter before the
Appellate Tribunal purportedly on behalf of these companies were manifestly
incompetent appeals. It does not need much argument to say that an appeal
preferred by a non-existing person must be treated as non est. In other words,
there were no appeals at all, in the eye of law, before the AAC or before the
Appellate Tribunal. Consequently, there could be no competent reference to
this Court out of the orders passed by the Tribunal on such appeals.
The other Judge, however, expressed opinion that in view of lack of
territorial jurisdiction it was not necessary to express any opinion on
merits.
62\. As can be seen from the facts of the said case, the Assessment was made
in the name of two non-existing companies. In the present case, the assessment
was made in the case of Amalgamated Company, as was made in the case of T.V.
Sundaram Iyengar & Sons, (supra). The ratio laid down therein is therefore
squarely applicable to the facts of the present case. Apart from the above,
the decision of the Hon'ble Delhi High Court is divided on this issue, one
Judge not expressing any opinion on the issue. The issue was not argued at all
and has to be regarded as a precedent sub-silentio and without any argument on
this issue. The said decision is therefore of no help to plea of the Assessee
on this issue. In the case of Marshall Sons & Co. (India) Ltd. (Supra), the
Hon'ble S.C. has held that proceedings against Amalgamating Company cannot be
initiated after the effective date mentioned in a Scheme of Amalgamation where
the Court approves such scheme without modifying the effective date of
Amalgamation. In the said decision, question was raised on behalf of the
Revenue as to a situation where the Court refuses to sanction a scheme of
amalgamation. The Court answered the same as follows:
Counsel for the Revenue contended that if the aforesaid view is adopted then
several complications will ensue in case the Court refuses to sanction the
scheme of amalgamation. We do not see any basis for this apprehension.
Firstly, an assessment can always be made and is supposed to be made on the
transferee company taking into account the income of both the transferor and
transferee companies. Secondly, and probably the more advisable course from
the point of view of the Revenue would be to make one assessment on the
transferee company taking into account the income of both of transferor or
transferee companies and also to make separate protective assessments on both
the transferor and transferee companies separately. There may be a certain
practical difficulty in adopting this course in as much as separate balance
sheets may not be available for the transferor and transferee companies. But
that may not be an insuperable problem inasmuch as assessment can always be
made, on the available material, even without a balance sheet. In certain
cases, best judgment assessment may also be resorted to. Be that as it may, we
need not pursue this line of enquiry because it does not arise for
consideration in these cases directly.
(underlining by us for emphasis)
63\. The above observations of the Hon'ble Supreme Court suggest that the
course adopted by the AO in the present case was proper. In the present case,
we have already noticed that while sanctioning the scheme of Amalgamation of
M/s HCLCL and M/s SNIPL with the assessee, the Hon'ble Delhi High Court did
not specify any other date as the 'transfer date'. Consequently, the transfer
date would be 1.4.2000 as mentioned in the scheme of Amalgamation. In the
present case, notices were issued Under Section 158 BC to M/s SNIPL and M/s
HCLCL sometime in December, 2002. There were replies received from the Counsel
who represented the Assessee, to the effect that M/s SNIPL and M/s HCLCL
ceased to exist on their Amalgamation with the Assessee, In the circumstances,
the Assessing Officer proceeded to make assessment in the hands of the
Assessee in respect of income of both M/s SNIPL and M/s HCLCL the Amalgamating
Companies even prior to the transfer date.
64\. We may clarify here that the income in question arising as a result of
transfer of shares, is in respect of A.Y.2000-01, since the transfer of shares
had taken place during the P.Y. relevant to A.Y.2000-01. The contention by the
Ld. counsel for the assessee has been that in a case of amalgamation where one
entity takes over the business of two other entities, the same would be a case
of succession to business otherwise on death and therefore the provisions of
Section 170 of the Act would apply. The provisions of Section 170 reads as
follows:
170\. SUCCESSION TO BUSINESS OTHERWISE THAN ON DEATH.
(1) Where a person carrying on any business or profession (such person
hereinafter in this section being referred to as the predecessor) has been
succeeded therein by any other person (hereinafter in this section referred to
as the successor) who continues to carry on that business or profession, -
(a) the predecessor shall be assessed in respect of the income of the previous
year in which the succession took place up to the date of succession;
(b) the successor shall be assessed in respect of the income of the previous
year after the date of succession.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in Sub-section (1), when the
predecessor cannot be found, the assessment of the income of the previous year
in which the succession took place up to the date of succession and of the
previous year preceding that year shall be made on the successor in like
manner and to the same extent as it would have been made on the predecessor,
and all the provisions of this Act shall, so far as may be, apply accordingly.
(3) When any sum payable under this section in respect of the income of such
business or profession for the previous year in which the succession took
place upto the date of succession or for the previous year preceding that
year, assessed on the predecessor, cannot be recovered from him, the [1630a
Assessing Officer 1630a] shall record a finding to that effect and the sum
payable by the predecessor shall thereafter be payable by and recoverable from
the successor, and the successor shall be entitled to recover from the
predecessor any sum so paid.
(4) Where any business or profession carried on by a Hindu undivided family is
succeeded to, and simultaneously with the succession or after the succession
there has been a partition of the joint family property between the members or
groups of members, the tax due in respect of the income of the business or
profession succeeded to, up to the date of succession, shall be assessed and
recovered in the manner provided in Section 171, but without prejudice to the
provisions of this section.
Explanation : For the purposes of this section, "income" includes any gain
accruing from the transfer, in any manner whatsoever, of the business or
profession as a result of the succession.
According to him applying the provisions i.e. Section 170(1)(a) the
predecessor (i.e. the Amalgamating Company) has to be assessed in respect of
income up to the date of succession. His submission was that there is no other
provision in the Act by which the Assessing Officer can proceed to assess the
income of a predecessor in business (i.e. the Amalgamating Company) in the
hands of a successor in business (i.e. the Amalgamated Company). He admits of
one exception provided by Section 170(2) where a predecessor is not found,
successor can be assessed for a period comprising of previous year in which
succession took place up to the date of succession and the previous year
preceding such previous year. The above argument of the learned Counsel for
the assessee was without prejudice to the argument that provisions of Chapter
XV of the Act dealing with "Liability in special cases" do not apply while
making a block assessment. We shall first deal with the argument regarding
applicability of Chapter XV of the Act while making block assessments.
65\. To resolve this controversy, a reference may be made to provisions of
chapter XIV-B of the Act. Section 158 BA provides that on or after 30.6.95 if
a search is initiated Under Section 132 of the Act, the Assessing Officer
shall proceed to assess the undisclosed income in accordance with the
provisions of Chapter XIV-B of the Act dealing with "Special procedure for
Assessment of search cases". The said section starts with a non-obstante
Clause "Not withstanding anything contained in any other provisions of the
Act". Thus applicability of other provisions of the Act is excluded. Section
158 BB(1) however provides that undisclosed income of the block period shall
be aggregate of the total income of the P.Y. falling within the block period
"computed in accordance with the provisions of this Act", on the basis of
evidence found as a result of search. Thus other provisions of the Act in
relation to computation of Total Income are made applicable while making
assessment under Chapter XIV-B of the Act. These are contained in Chapter IV
to Chapter XII-G of the Act. Prior to Finance Act, 2002, amending Section 158
BB(1) with retrospective effect from 1.7.95 only provisions of Chapter IV were
applicable while computing Undisclosed Income. That is why Section 158 BB(2)
provided for applicability of Section 68 to 69-C while computing Undisclosed
Income. The reasons for introduction of the amendment have been explained as
follows in the circular issued by the CBDT:
Circular No. 8/02 dt 27-8-02 of CBDT explained the reasons for this amendment
as follows:
61.7 The existing provision of Explanation to Section 158BB provides that the
total income of the block period for the purpose of aggregation is to be
computed without giving effect to set off of brought forward losses under
Chapter VI or unabsorbed depreciation Under Section 32(2). In many cases it is
being claimed by the assessees that the deduction allowable under Chapter VI-A
for any previous year should also be computed on the total income before
giving effect to set off of brought forward losses, and depreciation. In such
cases the amount of deduction under Chapter, VI-A admissible in computing
aggregate total income comes out to be more than the deduction actually
allowed in regular assessments resulting in underassessment of undisclosed
income for the block period. It has also been noted that the computation of
aggregate total income Under Section 158BB is required to be made in
accordance with the provisions of Chapter IV of the Act. This has given rise
to doubts as to whether deductions under Chapter VI-A are to be allowed in
computing the aggregate total income.
61.7.1 The Finance Act, 2002 has carried out amendments to clarify that the
aggregate total income is to be computed in accordance with the provisions of
the Act including the provisions of Chapter VI-A, and that for the purpose of
computing deductions under Chapter VI-A, effect shall be given to set off of
brought forward losses or unabsorbed depreciation.
66\. Thus the manner of computation of undisclosed income is set out in
Section 158 BB. Now we have to see the procedure for making block assessment.
These are contained in Section 158 BC of the Act. The procedure prescribed
therein is to call upon assessee to furnish return of income. Provisions of
Section 142, Section 143(2) and 142(3), 144 and 145 of the Act applicable to
the usual Assessment procedure under the Act are made applicable to block
assessment proceedings also. Section 158 BC provides for time limit to pass a
block assessment order Section 158 BF & BFA provides for levy of interest and
penalty. Section 158 BH provides that save or otherwise provided in Chapter
XIV B of the Act, the other provisions of the Act shall apply to assessment
made under this Chapter. Section 158 BH of the Act reads as follows:
Section 158 BH : Save as otherwise provided in this Chapter, all other
provisions of this Act shall apply to assessments made under this chapter.
From the above, it is clear that other provisions of the Act are applicable
only to the extent indicated above. One of the arguments of the learned
Counsel for the Assessee has been that other provisions of the Act like
Section 170 are not applicable while making Block Assessment because Section
158 BH makes other provisions of the Act applicable only to assessments
already made and not while making on assessment under chapter XIV. This is
because of the past tense "Assessment made", used in Section 158 BH of the
Act. The argument of the learned Counsel for the Assessee was that the
procedure for making block assessment is set out in Section 158 BC. The
provisions akin to Section 158 BH if it were to be made applicable while
making block assessment, then they ought to have been incorporated in Section
158 BC itself. The fact that the provisions of Section 158 BC are set after
the prescription of limitation for making block assessment, levy of penalty,
interest etc. also suggests that they are to be applied post block assessment
order. He agues that the chronological setting of the provisions also suggests
that the provisions of Section 158BH apply only to post assessment order for
the block period. These provisions are meant to ensure recovery of tax
determined on undisclosed income and that the other provisions of Section
158BA(1) excludes all other provisions of the Act while making block
assessment. The provisions of Section 156 empowering Assessing Officer to
issue notice of demand and thereafter enforce recovery of tax can not be
invoked by the Assessing Officer but for Section 158 BH and the purpose of
Section 158 BH is only to enable such recovery meaning thereby that they come
into effect after an order of block assessment is made and not when a block
assessment is sought to be made. The learned D.R. however has relied on the
decision of the Hon'ble Madras High Court in the case of M.G. Pictures
(supra). The said case was a case regarding applicability of Section 40A(3) to
block assessment proceedings. The contention of the assessee was that if as a
result of search some genuine expenses are found to have been incurred by an
assessee, which is not disclosed in the books, then they cannot be considered
as undisclosed income. The Court rejected this argument and also made a
reference to the provisions of Section 158 BH and held that other provisions
of the Act were applicable. Let us assume a case where the person searched
dies after search and during assessment proceedings, can it be said that the
Assessing Officer can not proceed to make a block assessment because
provisions of Ch.XV dealing with liability of legal representative is not
applicable to block assessment proceedings. Similarly, can it be said that
Chapter XII-B dealing with jurisdiction of Officers empowered to make an
assessment do not apply to Block Assessment proceedings. Similarly, can it be
said that Chapter XIII-C dealing with powers of AO regarding discovery,
production of evidence etc., do not apply to Block Assessment proceedings.
Therefore the argument of the learned Counsel for the Assessee that "other
provisions of the Act" are not applicable while making a block assessment
except the computation provisions contained in Chapter-IV to Chapter-XII-G and
the Provisions of Section 142 to 145 of the Act, being procedure for making
assessment, cannot be accepted. By virtue of the provisions of Section 158-BH
all other provisions of the Act, including Chapter XV dealing with liability
in special cases are applicable while making Block Assessment proceedings and
not after a block Assessment order is made.
67\. We may mention here that if we apply Section 170(2), then the income from
transfer of shares by M/s SNIPL and M/s HCLCL (Amalgamating
Companies/Predecessor Companies) can be assessed in the hands of the Assessee
(the successor company/Amalgamated company) because the transfer had taken
place in the Previous Year preceding the year in which succession took place
i.e. A.Y. 2000-2001. The learned Counsel for the Assessee contends that an
assessment made on a successor in respect of income of a predecessor has to be
made in the same manner in which an assessment would be made on predecessor.
This is because of the expression used in Section 170(2) "in like manner and
to the same extent as it would have been made on the predecessor". This is the
reason he contends that three assessments ought to have been made. The first
assessment in the name of the Assessee. The second assessment in the name of
the Assessee as successor of M/s SNIPL. The third assessment in the name of
the assessee as successor of M/s HCLCL. He contends that in the present case
the assessment is being made under Chapter XIV B of the Act and therefore the
concept of block period will come in the way of making an assessment even by
invoking Section 170(2) in the hands of the Assessee (Amalgamated Company.) He
points out that the search in the present case had taken place on 24.1.02.
Section 158 BC provides that where a search has been conducted Under Section
132, the Assessing Officer has to determine income for the block period.
Section 158 B defines block period as period comprising of P.Ys relevant to 6
A.Ys preceding the P.Y. in which the search was conducted Under Section 132
and ending up to the date of commencement of search. The Id. counsel for the
assessee contends that applicability of other provisions of the Act to Block
Assessment under Chapter XIV-B is specifically excluded by the provisions of
Section 158 BA of the Act and therefore one can not apply the provisions of
Section 170(2) also as they are contrary to the provisions of Section 158 B
defining 'block period'. In this case the P.Ys relevant to 6 A.Ys preceding
the P.Y. in which search took place would be from A.Y. 1995-96 to 2000-2001
and further upto 24.1.2002, i.e. the date of commencement of search. The Id.
counsel for the assessee submits that even applying Section 170(2) one can
make assessment of income of M/s SNIPL and M/s HCLCL in the hands of assessee
only for A.Y. 99-2000 and not any A.Y. prior to that. To this extent he
contends that Section 170(2) and 158 B read with Section 158 BB and Section
158 BC of the Act are contrary.
68\. Having held that other provisions of the Act including Chapter XV dealing
with "Liability in Special Cases", are applicable while making a Block
Assessment, let us now examine as to whether provisions of Section 170
contained in Chapter XV of the Act, have been properly applied in this case.
Firstly, it is noticed that one assessment has been made in which undisclosed
income of the Assessee and the two other amalgamating companies have also been
included. We have already referred to the provisions of Section 170(2), which
mandate that an assessment made on a successor in respect of income of a
predecessor has to be made in the same manner in which an assessment would be
made on predecessor. This is because of the expression used in Section 170(2)
" in like manner and to the same extent as it would have been made on the
predecessor". Therefore three separate assessments have to be made, the First
assessment in the name of the Assessee, the Second assessment in the name of
the Assessee as successor of M/s SNIPL and the third assessment in the name of
the Assessee as successor of M/s HCLCL. The reasons for doing so could be
because of difference in rates of taxes. The nature of business might warrant
a special treatment of income like the predecessor being an Industrial company
or a company the profits of which are to be considered as speculative,
warranting special treatment. Secondly, Section 158 BH excludes applicability
of other provisions of the Act to the extent they are inconsistent with the
provisions of Chapter XIV-B. Section 158 BA provides that on or after 30.6.95
if a search is initiated Under Section 132 of the Act, the Assessing Officer
shall proceed to assess the undisclosed income for the block period in
accordance with the provisions of Chapter XIV-B of the Act dealing with
"Special procedure for Assessment of search cases". Section 158B defines block
period as follows:
158B DEFINITIONS.
In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, -
(a) "block period" means the period comprising previous years relevant to six
assessment years preceding the previous year in which the search was conducted
Under Section 132 or any requisition was made Under Section 132A and also
includes the period up to the date of the commencement of such search or date
of such requisition in the previous year in which the said search was
conducted or requisition was made:
69\. The period of Assessment to be made in a Block Assessment under Chapter
XIV-B and the period for which an assessment can be made on successor of
business in respect of predecessor's income prior to the succession as
provided in Section 170(2) are contrary and therefore to that extent the
provisions of Section 170 (2) are not applicable in the present case. The
expression "unless the context otherwise requires" found in Section 158 B is
not intended to cover cases as the present one. It can be properly applied
only in cases where a company/ a firm, which is subjected to a search was
incorporated/formed just two years prior to search. In such cases Block period
can be only from the date of incorporation of the company and a period of 6
P.Y.'s prior to the previous year in which search was conducted cannot apply.
In fact the very purpose of introduction of Special procedure for assessment
of search cases has been explained for the reason that Searches conducted by
the Income-tax Department are important means for unearthing black money.
However, under the present scheme, valuable time is lost in trying to relate
the undisclosed incomes to the different years. Tax-evaders generally manage
to divert the focus to procedural and legal issues and often invent new
evidence to explain undisclosed income. By the time search-related assessments
are completed, the effect of the search is considerably diluted. Legal battles
continue for many years to decide which income is assessable in which
assessment year. No finality is reached and the seized assets remain with the
Department for a long time. In order to make the procedure of assessment of
search cases cost-effective, efficient and meaningful, a new scheme has been
introduced for the assessment of undisclosed income determined as a result of
search Under Section 132 or requisition Under Section 132A. Under this scheme,
the undisclosed income detected as a result of any search initiated, or
requisition made, after 30th June, 1995, shall be assessed separately as
income of a block of years. Even the purpose of the special procedure in
search cases prescribed in Chapter-XIV-B does not contemplate splitting of the
Block period.
70\. The Block Period in the present case would be a period of 6 previous
years preceding the previous year in which search took place i.e., from 1-4-95
to 31-3-2001 and includes the period from 1-4-2001 till the date of search
viz., 24.1.02. Up to 31.3.2000 M/s SNIPL & M/s HCLCL existed and therefore the
Block period cannot be restricted in their case only from 1-4-2000 to 24.1.02.
There being no other provision in the Act to make an assessment on the
successor in business in respect of predecessor's income prior to succession,
the assessment of undisclosed income of SNIP & HCLCL in the hands of the
assessee cannot be sustained.
71\. Now reverting to the issue whether a search can be conducted on a non-
existent company and can a Section 158 BC notice, be issued to non-existent
companies, we find that the provisions of Chapter XV deal with liability in
special cases. The charge to tax on undisclosed income is provided Under
Section 158 BA. It is in the hands of the person who was subjected to a search
Under Section 132 or in respect of whom a requisition is made Under Section
132-A of the Act. Section 158 BD however provides for exceptions and even in
the case of a person not searched Under Section 132 assessment can be made and
liability to tax enforced. For applicability of Section 158-BC, it is
necessary that the person searched must be in existence on the date of search.
In the case of Section 158-BD, if the documents or material found in the
course of search relate to some other person, then the AO can proceed against
that other person. In the first case the existence of the person on the date
of search is necessary. In the second case existence of the person proceeded
against Under Section 158 BD, on the date of the search or issue of notice
Under Section 158BD is not necessary. In the present case both M/s SNIPL and
M/s HCLCL ceased to exist w.e.f. 8.11.2001 on the certified copy of Court's
Order dissolving these two companies without the process of winding up, being
filed with the Registrar of Companies. The search was conducted on 24.1.02.
Therefore no search could have been conducted on these two companies nor could
a Notice Under Section 158 BC be issued in their case on or after 8.11.2001.
But in the present case each of the Warrant of search was in the name of 4
different entities jointly. The plea of the D.R. has been that the names of
M/s SNIPL and M/s HCLCL appearing in the warrant of search can be ignored. His
further plea was that the notice issued Under Section 158 BC to the Assessee
could be considered as having been issued to include the two Amalgamating
Companies also. In our opinion, separate notices ought to be issued in respect
of assessment on a Successor in respect of income of the predecessor prior to
succession. In the case of CIT v. Express Newspapers Ltd. 40 ITR 38 (Madras)
the Hon'ble Madras High Court has held that there can be no assessment on
companies which ceased to exist after being struck off the Register of
Companies with the ROC. Even in that case notice to the successor was issued
as "Express newspapers Ltd." Successor to the Free Press of India (Madras)
Ltd."(See at Page 44 Para 12 of the Report). In the present case the Assessing
Officer does not rely on the Notice issued Under Section. 158 BC to M/s SNIPL
and M/s HCLCL to sustain assessment of the Undisclosed Income of the two
entities in the hands of the Assessee. Nor has the Assessing Officer relied on
the search conducted in the case of M/s SNIPL and M/s HCLCL to make assessment
of their incomes in the hands of the Assessee.
72\. We are of the view that even the Provisions of Section 292-B of the Act
cannot cure the illegality that has crept in the procedure adopted in the
present case. The procedure prescribed Under Section 170(2) is intended to
ensure proper determination of tax liability of a predecessor. By not
following such procedure the Assessing Officer violates the intent and purpose
of the Act. If the AO seeks to split the block period, that would tantamount
to adopting a convenient course rather than the correct course open to him in
law. It cannot be said that there was only a mistake, defect or omission in
the notice or assessment. If the Revenue is allowed to plead validity of
proceedings on the basis of Section 292-B in a case like this then that would
render the procedure and the purpose behind procedure contemplated by the Act
redundant.
73\. In the light of the above discussion, the following are the conclusions
on the issues set out in Paragraph 33A:
(a) A search cannot be conducted on a non-existent company nor can a Section
158BC notice be issued to a non-existing company.
(b) An assessment of undisclosed income for a block period under Chapter XIV-B
in respect of a predecessor of a business cannot be made in the hands of the
successor in such business because a successor's liability to tax in respect
of a predecessor's income cannot be beyond the period specified in Section
170(2) viz., the previous year in which the succession took place up to the
date of succession and the previous year immediately preceding such previous
year, provided the predecessor cannot be found. Whereas in the case of a
search conducted Under Section 132 after 30.6.95, an assessment has to be made
in respect of undisclosed income of a block period as contemplated by Section
158BA of the Act and such assessment has to be in accordance with provisions
of Chapter XIV-B of the Act. The block period has been defined as a period
comprising of six assessment years immediately preceding the P.Y. in which the
search was conducted and up to the date of search. In view of the clear
contradiction between the provisions of Section 170(2) and Section 158BA read
with Section 158B(a), the provisions of Section 170(2) also cannot be applied
to bring to tax income of a predecessor in the hands of a successor for a
block period. Though Section 158BH makes other provisions of the Act
applicable to a block assessment made under Chapter XIV-B of the Act, to the
extent the other provisions of the Act are contrary to the provisions of
Chapter XIV-B of the Act, these provisions will not apply while making a block
assessment. There is no other provision in the Act by which a predecessor's
income for a block period can be brought to tax in the hands of the successor
in business. There is a lacuna in the Act in this regard.
(c) There cannot be a block period for companies which ceases to exist.
Therefore, a successor in business cannot be assessed for a block period in
respect of undisclosed income of a predecessor.
(d) That assessment of alleged undisclosed income of M/s HCLCL and M/s SNIPL
cannot be made in the hands of the assessee.
(e) That even in the case of making an assessment of income of a predecessor
in business in the hands of a successor Under Section 170(2) of the Act,
separate assessment has to be made in the hands of the successor. The process
of assessment including issue of notices and the order of assessment has to be
framed in the hands of the successor captioned "Successor of Predecessor".
This is because of the provisions of Section 170(2) which provide that such
assessment has to be made "in the same manner and to the same extent as it
would have been made on the predecessor".
(f) In the present case, the question whether a non-existent company can be
subjected to a search and as to whether notice Under Section 158BC can be
issued is purely academic for the reason that the Assessing Officer does not
rely on the notice issued to M/s SNIPL and M/s HCLCL to sustain assessment of
the Undisclosed Income of the two entities in the hands of the Assessee. Nor
has the Assessing Officer relied on the search conducted in the case of M/s
SNIPL and M/s HCLCL to make assessment of their incomes in the hands of the
Assessee.
74\. The next issue to be considered is the third general proposition viz.,
Are the conditions necessary for invoking Section 92 of the Act satisfied in
the present case?
75\. The learned Counsel for the assessee contended that the conditions
necessary for invoking Section 92 did not exist in the present case. In this
regard, it was submitted by him that there is no dispute that the assessee
received only a sum of Rs. 50 per share on sale and shares of M/s. HCL
Consulting Ltd. It was also submitted by him that this amount was offered to
tax under the head capital gain and was also accepted by the Revenue. He
brought to our notice the fact these shares were held as investments and were
therefore, capital asset in the hands of the assessee. He drew our attention
to the provisions of Section 92 as it existed prior to 1.4.2002 which reads as
follows:
Income from transactions with non-residents, how computed in certain cases.
92\. Where a business is carried on between a resident and a non-resident and
it appears to the Assessing Officer that, owing to the close connection
between them, the course of business is so arranged that the business
transacted between them produces to the resident either no profits or loss
than the ordinary profits which might be expected to arise in that business,
the Assessing Officer shall determine the amount of profits which may
reasonably be deemed to have been derived there from and include such amount
in the total income of the resident.
76\. First, he submitted that these provisions, contemplate a business being
carried on between the resident and non-resident. In the light of the fact
that the transaction of sale of shares of M/s. HCL Consulting Ltd. was not a
business transaction there was no question applying Section 92 to the case of
the assessee. Secondly, even assuming without admitting that the transaction
of sale of shares was a business transaction, he submitted that since the
provisions contemplate business transaction, a single or isolated transaction
of sale between the assessee, HCL Corporation Ltd. and M/s. Shiv Nadar
Investments Private Ltd. on the one hand and M/s. WIPL on the other hand
cannot be said to be a business transaction. Thirdly it was pointed out that
provisions contemplate that there should be a close connection between the
resident and the non-resident. It was submitted that neither the assessee nor
the two other companies owned any shares in M/s. WIPL and vice-versa. Except
the fact that Mr. Shiv Nadar, the promoters of the three companies and who
owns major shares in these companies and the person holding the major shares
in WIPL, the non-resident company, were brothers. According to him the fact
that the promoters of Indian company and the major shareholder controlling the
overseas corporate body are related as brothers, will not result in a close
connection. Fourthly it was submitted that a singular instance of sale cannot
be said to be a course of business. Drawing attention to the provision of
Section 92, it was submitted by him that the provisions of the said section
talks about "arrangement of course of business" which element is absent in the
present case. Fifthly it was submitted while applying the provision of Section
92 it is always the duty of the Assessing Officer, to consider the transaction
and thereafter determine the profit, which a resident could have earned in the
transaction with a non-resident, and such income has to be included in the
total income. It was submitted by him that these were deeming provisions and
the assessee is not expected to make any disclosure in this regard. A reading
of the provisions of the Section 92 by its very nature would show that it was
only the duty of the assessee to disclose the income from transaction with
non-resident and it was up to the Assessing Officer to estimate such income
subject to the fulfillment of conditions laid down in Section 92 and there was
no duty on the part of the assessee to disclose any thing in this regard. As a
corollary to the above submission it was submitted that, an assessee can never
disclose the income, which the AO has to determine by applying the provision
of Section 92 and consequently such income cannot be said to be undisclosed
income. He also drew attention to the new provisions of Section 92 as they
exist from 1.4.2002, whereby the assessee was obliged to make certain
disclosure regarding the arm's length price in an international transaction.
It was pointed out by him under the new provisions, there is also a duty to
file a report of Auditor.
77\. It was submitted by him that in the case of determination of income from
transaction with non-residents, as per provisions of Rule-11, the provisions
of Rule 10 had to be applied. Rule 10 refers to a case where income cannot
definitely be ascertained and in such an event it talks of applying a
percentage of turnover, which the Assessing Officer himself considers
reasonable, or a proportion of the total of profit and gain of business. He
submitted that going by the provisions of Rule 10 it cannot be applied to
transaction of sale of shares, since adopting a percentage of turn over or
proportion of total profits cannot be done, in the matter of ascertaining
capital gains on sale of shares. The residuary rule under Rule 10(iii) also
refers only to determination of income in respect of transactions mentioned in
Rule-10, viz., from (i) any business connection in India or through or from
any property in India or (ii) through or from any asset or source of income in
India or (iii) through or from any money lent at interest and brought into
India in cash or in kind which cannot be definitely ascertained. According to
him, the provisions of Rule 10(iii) also cannot be applied in the present
case, as the transaction in question does not fall within any of the
categories mentioned in the first part of Rule 10.
78\. He also drew our attention to page 36 of the assessing officer's order
where the Assessing Officer has made a reference to diversion of income
without overriding title. He also referred to the fact that the Assessing
Officer has concluded that the purpose of sale of shares by the assessee to
other companies was to avoid tax which would be payable on further sale of
shares. It was submitted that the purpose behind enactment of Section 92 was
not to cover such cases. Similar reasons have been given by the CIT(A) also.
79\. He drew attention to the decision of the Hon'ble Calcutta High Court in
the case of CIT v. Kusum Products Ltd. Vol.71 Taxman 611, the Hon'ble Calcutta
High Court wherein the provisions of Section 92 of the Act as it existed prior
to 1.4.2002 were explained in the following words:
On analysis of Section 92 it will appear that there are five ingredients of
this section which are as follows:
(i) The transaction may be between a resident and a non-resident.
(ii) It should be a business transaction.
(iii) The business may be with the motive of profit.
(iv) The profit earned by the assessee may not be fair due to the close
relation.
(v) The ITO in such a situation may estimate the fair profit.
80\. The learned Counsel also emphasized the need for the existence of a close
relationship between the resident and the non-resident. He submitted that the
assessee and WIPL were distinct entities in the eye of law and the mere fact
that a close relationship exist between the promoters of the two companies
will not give rise to a close connection between the assessee and WIPL. He
also submitted that provisions of Section 92 do not lay down any criteria for
determining the existence of relationship between two persons. He drew our
attention to provisions of Section 40A(2) of the Act where the legislature has
provided guidelines for determination of the existence of a close relation in
the context of disallowance of expenditure incurred by an assessee, where
payment for such expenditure is made to a persons standing in certain
relationship with the Assessee. In the absence of any such guidelines laid
down in Section 92 as it existed prior to 1.4.2002, according to him, it was
not possible to say that there was existence of close relationship between
promoters of the assessee and WIPL and that close connection would result in a
close connection between the assessee and WIPL. Doing so would amount to
ignoring corporate personality of the Assessee and the two other companies and
WIPL.
81\. He further highlighted the fact that Section 192 talks of a situation
where the course of business is arranged in such a way that the business
transaction produces to the resident no profit. He drew our attention to
paragraph 1 and 2 of page 38 of the order of the Assessing Officer wherein the
Assessing Officer has given the following finding:
Now, in the light of the above discussion, one can observe all the ingredients
as listed by the Hon'ble ITAT is completely met in the present case. It has
been established from analysis of seized document that the assessee has with
willful intent to avoid capital gains tax that may arise in future,
transferred its shares to associate foreign company at a tax neutral price.
Section 92 of the IT Act, 1961 governing this transactions is, therefore,
clearly attracted in this case. This entire gamut of facts would never have
been known but for the incriminating papers seized during the search and
therefore clearly falls within the meaning of "undisclosed income" defined in
chapter XIV of the IT Act, 1961.
82\. The learned Counsel submitted even as per the Assessing Officer the
transfer of shares by the assessee to the non-resident was with the view to
avoid capital gain tax that may arise in future. If this was the conclusion of
the Assessing Officer, it can than safely be said that Section 92 could not be
applicable to such transaction since these provisions are intended to cover a
different type of transaction. The learned Counsel further brought to our
notice that ultimately the Assessing Officer substituted the sale price of
shares from Rs. 50 to Rs. 1807 per share. Section 92 does not contemplate
substitution of sale price. The provisions only empowers the Assessing Officer
to determine the amount of profit which in his opinion the assessee has
reasonably derived from a business transaction carried on with the non-
resident. Mere substitution of sale price of shares is not determining profits
which the Assessee had reasonably derived from a business transaction carried
on with a non resident. In this connection he also drew our attention to the
explanatory notes while introducing the new provisions of Section 92 w.e.f.
1.4.2002. These explanatory notes are placed at page No. 1621 of the
assessee's paper book. Circular No. 14 of 2001 explaining the new provisions
of Section 92 w.e.f. 1.4.2002 also says that the old provisions were very
vague and indefinite and hence the new provisions were being introduced. The
following have been mentioned in the aforesaid circular:
New Legislation to curb tax avoidance by abuse of transfer pricing.
55.1 The increasing participation of multi-national groups in economic
activities in the country has given rise to new and complex issues emerging
from transactions entered into between two or more enterprises belonging to
the same multi-national group. The profits derived by such enterprises
carrying on business in India can be controlled by the multi-national group,
by manipulating the prices charged and paid in such intra-group transactions,
thereby, leading to erosion of tax revenues.
55.2 Under the existing Section 92 of the Income-tax Act, which was the only
section dealing specifically with cross border transactions, an adjustment
could be made to the profits of a resident arising from a business carried on
between the resident and a non-resident, if it appeared to the Assessing
Officer that owing to the close connection between them, the course of
business was so arranged so as to produce less than expected profits to the
resident. Rule 11 prescribed under the section provided a method of estimation
of reasonable profits in such cases. However, this provision was of a general
nature and limited in scope. It did not allow adjustment of income in the case
of non-residents. It referred to a "close connection" which was undefined and
vague. It provided for adjustment of profits rather than adjustment of prices,
and the rule prescribed for estimating profits was not scientific. It also did
not apply to individual transactions such as payment of royalty, etc., which
are not part of a regular business carried on between a resident and a non-
resident. There were also no detailed rules prescribing the documentation
required to be maintained.
83\. Our attention was drawn to the explanation given in the aforesaid portion
of the circular whereby it is mentioned that the old provisions provided for
adjustment of profits rather than adjustment of prices and the rules for
estimating profits were not scientific. The further reference in the aforesaid
circular is to the fact that the old provisions did not apply to individual
transactions such as payment of royalty etc., which are not part of regular
business carried on between resident and non-resident. The learned Counsel
emphasized the fact that even the circular of the Board recognized the fact
that the old provisions apply only to a business transaction carried on
between the resident and nonresident. His further submission was that, this
circular of the CBDT was binding on the revenue authorities and in this regard
he relied on the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of UCO Bank
v. CIT 237 ITR 889 (SC). He drew our attention to the submission of the
assessee before the revenue authorities. In the submissions made before the
CIT(A) dated 31.5.2004 in page 83 of the said submission the assessee had
specifically highlighted the fact that the transaction and sale of shares of
M/s HCL Consulting Ltd., to WIPL, were held as investment by the assessee and
the two other companies and that the transaction in question was an isolated
transaction. Our attention was also invited to the additional submissions
dated 27.8.2004 filed before the CIT(A) wherein a reference was made by the
assessee to circular No. 14 of 2004. Despite the aforesaid submissions, the
CIT(A) while deciding the appeal of the assessee, did not make any reference
to the aforesaid submissions. On the other hand the CIT(A) at page 180 of his
order referred to the new provisions of Section 92, which were not applicable
to the case at all. The CIT(A) has presumed that there was a duty on the part
of the assessee to furnish details and documentary evidence to justify the
transaction between itself and the non-resident and that the assessee had
deliberately avoided furnishing of such details. Thereafter, the CIT(A) has
referred to the power of the revenue to compute the current arms length price
in accordance with the rules read with Section 92 C of the Income-tax Act. He
thus submitted that the action of the revenue authorities in invoking the
provisions of Section 92 was highly unjustified.
84\. Shri Kapila, the learned Special Counsel for the Revenue submitted that
all the conditions required for application of Section 92 were duly satisfied
in the present case since all the required ingredients were present in the
transaction of transfer/sale of shares in question. He submitted that evidence
found during the course of search was sufficient to bring out the close
connection between the assessee company and M/s WIPL inasmuch as names of both
these companies were appearing in the document found during the course of
search showing Dollar cash flow of the HCL group (copy at page 23 of the
Revenue's paper book No. I) as well as in the document showing shareholding of
promoter group companies (copy at page 16 of the Revenue's paper book No. I).
He also invited our attention to page Nos. 8 to 12 of the Revenue's paper book
No. IV giving details of shareholding and directorships of Shri Shiv Nadar and
his wife and various group companies to point out that they both were
directors in the assessee company as well as M/s Varna Sundari Investments
Pvt.Ltd. He also invited our attention to the offer document issued by M/s HCL
Technologies Ltd. placed at page Nos. 9 to 14 of the Revenue's paper book to
point out that M/s WIPL was shown as an entity belonging to the promoter
group. Our attention was also drawn to the copy of proforma of CA's
certificate found and seized during the course of search placed at page No. 61
of the Revenue's paper book No. I to show that M/s Varna Sundari Investments
Pvt.Ltd., a company belonging to the assessee's group was holding substantial
interest in M/s WIPL through another company i.e. M/s I.T. CON Investments
Pvt.Ltd. Mr. Kapila contended that this documentary evidence as well as the
specific replies given by Shiva Prasad Shiva Subrahmanya Nadar, brother of
Shri Shiv Nadar in his statement recorded on oath was sufficient to show that
the assessee company and M/s WIPL were closely connected. He also contended
that even the e-mail and fax messages found and seized during the course of
search further established that these two companies belonged to one group and
they were being controlled and managed by Shri Shiv Nadar.
85\. As regards the nature of the transaction involving the sale of shares in
question being a business transaction of the assessee company, Shri Kapila
placed heavy reliance on the decision of Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of
Mazagaon Dock Ltd. wherein it was held that the word "business" must be
construed in a broad manner rather than in a restricted sense in fiscal
statutes. He submitted that the exact nature of the assessee's business is
required to be appreciated to ascertain whether the transaction of shares in
question was a business transaction or not. In this regard, he invited our
attention to the statement of Shri Shiv Nadar recorded during the course of
search (copy placed at pages 23 to 32 of the Revenue's paper book No. II) and
pointed out that the business of the assessee company was explained by Shri
Shiv Nadar himself as that of investment planning and investment monitoring.
He also took us through the written submissions filed by the assessee company
during the course of regular proceedings for A.Y. 1998-99 before the Assessing
Officer as well as before the learned CIT(A) placed in Revenue's paper book
No. III to show that the business of the assessee company was explained
therein as making of investments including investment being made in the equity
shares of various companies. He also pointed out that the main object of the
assessee company as per its memorandum of association is to carry on the
business of the investment company and to buy, invest, underwrite, acquire
shares/other securities. He contended that even the shares held as investment
by the assessee company in various group companies were with the intention of
retaining the controlling stake of the said companies and one of the business
activities of the assessee company being that of retaining such controlling
stakes, the investment in shares of M/s HCL Technologies Ltd. was made by the
assessee company for the purpose of its business and sale thereof to M/s WIPL
represented its business transaction as contemplated in Section 92. He also
contended that even if the profit/loss arising from the said sale was
chargeable under the head "capital gains", the character of transaction of
sale of shares was purely a business transaction in the hands of the assessee
company. Shri Kapila also invited our attention to the findings recorded by
the learned CIT(A) in his appellate order for A.Y. 2000-01 placed at page Nos.
67 to 96 of his paper book No. III and pointed out that as per the finding so
recorded by the learned CIT(A) accepting the submissions made on behalf of the
assessee company before him, the investment made in shares of the group
companies was for the purpose of assessee's normal business. He contended that
the sale of the said shares thus was nothing but the transaction entered into
by the assessee company in the normal course of his business and, therefore,
the provisions of Section 92 were clearly attracted to the said transaction.
He also contended that the stand now being taken by the assessee is clearly
contradictory to the stand taken in the regular assessment proceedings and
urged that the same, therefore, should not be accepted. He also contended that
even a single transaction can constitute the business and since the
transaction of sale of shares in question was effected between the assessee
company and M/s WIPL during the course of its normal business, all the
conditions required to invoke the provisions of Section 92 were duly
satisfied.
86\. In the rejoinder, Shri S.E. Dastur pointed out that neither the Assessing
Officer nor the learned CIT(A) has recorded any finding in their orders to the
effect that the transaction of sale/transfer of shares in question was
adventure in the nature of trade. He submitted that the Department having
accepted the said shares as investment made by the assessee on capital account
as shown in the regular assessment, it cannot treat the same differently in
the block assessments. Referring to page 234 of Volume-1 of Commentary by
Kanga & Palkhivala, he contended that if income is held to be taxable under
the head "capital gains", Section 92 cannot have an application to the
corresponding transactions giving rise to such capital gain. Relying on the
decision of Hon'ble Bombay High Court in the case of Mazagaon Dock Ltd.
(supra), he contended that even for establishing a business connection,
continuity of the business transactions between the concerned parties is must.
His contention, therefore, was that a single transaction of sale of shares as
involved in the present case was not sufficient to establish such business
connection as contemplated in Section 92.
87\. We have considered the rival submissions in the light of material
available on record and the case laws cited at the bar. In order to ascertain
the conditions required to be satisfied for application of Section 92, it
would be relevant to consider the provisions of the said Section which, as
applicable to the year under consideration, are reproduced below:
92\. Where a business is carried on between a resident and a non-resident and
it appears to the Assessing Officer that, owing to the close connection
between them, the course of business is so arranged that the business
transacted between them produces to the resident cither no profits or loss
than the ordinary profits which might be expected to arise in that business,
the Assessing Officer shall determine the amount of profits which may
reasonably be deemed to have been derived there from and include such amount
in the total income of the resident.
88\. In the case of CIT v. Kusum Products Ltd. (supra) cited by the learned
Counsel for the assessee, Hon'ble Calcutta High Court has characterized the
following ingredients which are necessary for applying the provisions of
Section 92:
(i) The transaction may be between a resident and a non-resident.
(ii) It should be a business transaction.
(iii) The business may be with the motive of profit.
(iv) The profit earned by the assessee may not be fair due to the close
relation.
(v) The ITO in such a situation may estimate the fair profit.
89\. Keeping in view the aforesaid ingredients characterized by Hon'ble
Calcutta High Court and having regard to the express language used in the
provisions of Section 92, we feel that the conditions to be satisfied for
application of Section 92 can also be outlined in the following manner:
(i) There should be a business carried on between a resident and a non-
resident.
(ii) There should be a close connection between the resident and a non-
resident.
(iii) Owing to such close connection between them, the course of business is
so arranged that the business transactions between them produces to the
resident either no profits or less than the ordinary profits which might be
expected to arise in that business.
If all the aforesaid conditions are satisfied in a given case, the Assessing
Officer shall be entitled to determine the amount of profits which may
reasonably be deemed to have been derived from the relevant transactions
between a resident and a non-resident and include such amount in the total
income of the resident-assessee.
90\. In the light of the aforesaid ingredients as characterized by the Hon'ble
Calcutta High Court in the case Kusum Products Ltd. (supra) and the conditions
outlined by us on the basis of relevant provisions of law, it would be
necessary to consider and appreciate as to whether all the ingredicnts were
present in the transactions in question involved in the present case and
whether the conditions precedent were satisfied so as to empower the Assessing
Officer to invoke the said provisions and make the additions as have been made
by him.
91\. There is no dispute about the fact that the transaction involving
sale/transfer of shares of M/s HCL Consulting Ltd. was between the assessee
company and the other two companies which subsequently merged with the
assessee company on the one hand and M/s Wintech Investments Pvt.Ltd.,
Mauritius on the other hand and their residential status was resident and non-
resident respectively. It was thus a transaction of sale of shares between a
resident and a non-resident and this condition was duly satisfied.
92\. As regards the issue as to whether there was any close connection between
the said two entities, it is observed that the term "close connection" used in
Section 92 has not been defined expressly in the Statute as rightly pointed
out by the learned Counsel for the assessee. Since the term "close connection"
has not been defined or explained in the relevant provisions, it should be
understood in the popular sense having regard to the meaning assigned to the
said term in common parlance as well as the meaning/definition given in the
Statute elsewhere of the similar term or in the similar context. It is,
therefore, necessary to appreciate the facts of the case on hand in the light
of material available on record to ascertain as to whether these two entities
i.e. the assessee company and M/s WIPL were closely connected at the relevant
time going by the expression "close connection" as commonly understood.
93\. During the course of search, a proforma of Chartered Accountant
certificate was found and seized and a perusal of copy thereof placed at page
61 of the Revenue's paper book No. l shows that the paid up value of shares of
M/s Wintech Investments Pvt.Ltd. as on 1.4.1999 was US$ 3 and the same was
fully held by M/s I.T.CON Investments Pvt.Ltd. It was also shown in the said
certificate that the paid up share capital of US$ 2 of M/s I.T.CON Investments
Pvt.Ltd. as on 1.4.1999 was fully held by M/s Vamasundari Investments Pvt.Ltd.
M/s Vamasundari Investments Pvt.Ltd. was shown as the group concern in the
Dollar cash flow found and seized during the course of search (copy placed at
page 23 of the Revenue's paper book No. I). The said company was also shown as
promoter company alongwith other companies belonging to HCL group in the
details of shareholding of promoter group found to be given in the relevant
seized document placed at page No. 16 of Revenue's paper book No. I. As per
the list of shareholding of Shri Shiv Nadar, a key person of the assessee
company given at page Nos. 10 & 11 of the Revenue's paper book, the contents
of which have remained unrebutted, Shri Shiv Nadar and his wife were shown to
be the shareholders as well as directors of M/s Vamasundari Investments
Pvt.Ltd. but they were also directors of the said company. In both these
documents found and seized during the course of search which are placed at
page No. 16 of the Revenue's paper book, M/s Wintech Investments Pvt.Ltd. was
also shown as an OCB belonging to promoter group i.e. HCL group alongwith the
other companies including the assessee company. In the offer document issued
by M/s HCL Technologies Ltd. in connection with public issue of new equity
shares (copy placed at page Nos. 9 to 14 of the Revenue's paper book No. II),
M/s Wintech Investments Pvt.Ltd. was shown as an entity belonging to promoter
group and the transactions involving purchase of shares by it from the
assessee company as well as two other companies were shown therein, as
required. A statement of Shri Shiva Prasad Shiva Subrahmanyam Nadar, brother
of Shri Shiv Nadar was recorded Under Section 131 on 5.1.2004 and in the said
statement, he accepted that he himself as well as his brother Shri Balakrishna
Nadar are the director in M/s Vamasundari Investments Pvt.Ltd., Mauritius.
Further, details of companies belonging to HCL group and their directors are
given on page No. 8 of the Revenue's paper book No. 4 which show that Shri
Shiv Nadar, Mrs. Kiran Nadar and Shri Subroto Bhattacharya, directors of the
assessee company were also the directors of M/s Vamasundari Investments
Pvt.Ltd. which was having controlling interest in M/s Wintech Investments
Pvt.Ltd. All these facts arising from the material available on record clearly
show that the assessee company and M/s Wintech Investments Pvt.Ltd. both were
belonging to the HCL group, one being the resident company and the other being
an OCB and having regard to their respective shareholding as well as common
directorships through M/s Varna Sundari Investments Pvt.Ltd., they were
closely associated with each other. In these circumstances, we are of the view
that it can reasonably be concluded that there was a close connection between
the assessee company and M/s WIPL as commonly understood and this condition
stipulated in Section 92 was also satisfied in the present case. The meaning
of "associated enterprises" given in Section 92A, although inserted in the
statute w.e.f. 1.4.2002, to elaborate/explain such close connection also
supports our conclusion since the assessee company and M/s WIPL would clearly
be the "associated enterprises" within the meaning so given.
94\. Having held that the transaction of transfer/sale of shares involved in
the present case was between a resident and a non-resident who were closely
connected, the next aspect which is required to be seen is whether the said
transaction represented the business transaction as envisaged in Section 92
which contemplates, having regard to the express language used, a business
carried on between a resident and a non-resident and the arrangement of the
course of such business that the business transacted between them produces to
the resident either no profits or less than ordinary profits which might be
expected to arise in that business. The transaction covered by Section 92 thus
is not a business transaction simplicitor but it envisages a business carried
on between the two parties as well as the arrangement of the course of
business in a particular manner with a particular purpose.
95\. It is no doubt true that the word "business" is one of wide import and as
held by Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Mazagaon Dock Ltd. v. CIT (supra)
relied upon by the learned DR, it must be construed in a broad manner rather
than a restricted sense in fiscal statutes. However, when it comes to the
facts of the present case, the transactions are basically in the shares and
the provisions sought to be invoked are the deeming provisions of Section 92
which apply only to the specific business transactions as contemplated
therein. The question which is, therefore, always relevant in this context is
whether the sale of shares which produces the surplus was so connected with
the carrying on the assessee's business that it could fairly be said that the
surplus so produced is the profits and gains of such business. As held by
Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Calcutta Discount Co.Ltd. v. ITO 41 ITR
191, the question whether sales of certain shares by way of changing the
investments or by way of trading in shares has to be decided on the
consideration of different circumstances including the frequency of the sales,
the nature of shares sold, the price received as compared to the past price
and other several facts. However, whether the assessee had the intention to
make a business profit as distinguished from the intention to change the form
of the investments is really an inference to be drawn by the assessing
authorities from the material facts taken in conjunction with the surrounding
circumstances. In the case of CIT, West Bengal III, Calcutta v. Guest Keen &
Nettlefold Ltd. 115 ITR 205, Hon'ble Calcutta High Court has held that in
determining whether a transaction was an investment or an adventure in the
nature of trade, no universal rule or principle can be applied. Each case has
to be judged on its own merits and the Court has to come to a conclusion
taking into account the totality of facts and circumstances. Therefore, the
purchase and sale of shares would invariably involve consideration of the
question whether such purchase and sale of shares is a mere investment or
adventure in the nature of trade. If it is found that purchase and sale of
shares is a solitary transaction, the presumption would be that it is not in
the nature of trade and presumption can be rebutted by the Revenue only by
establishing that the transaction is in the nature of trade as held by Hon'ble
Allahabad High Court in the case of Seth Banarsidas Gupta v. CIT 108 ITR 377.
96\. In the present case, heavy reliance has been placed by the learned DR on
the nature of assessee's business in support of the Revenue's case that the
transfer of shares in question was business transaction which was covered by
the provisions of Section 92. In this regard, he has relied on the statement
of Shri Shiv Nadar recorded during the course of search on 24.1.2002 (copy
placed at page No. 23 to 32 of Revenue's paper book No. II) wherein the
activities of the assessee company were explained by him as - (a) investment
planning, (b) investment monitoring and (c) governance monitoring such as
audit and overall strategic planning. The learned DR has also invited our
attention to the copy of written submission made on behalf of the assessee
company during the course of regular assessment proceedings for A.Y. 1998-99
placed at page Nos. l & 2 of the Revenue's paper book No. III wherein the
business activities of the assessee company were stated to be as follows:
The company is in the business of investment which includes investing in
equity shares of various companies. The company also takes a large block of
shares in upcoming new companies for which the company has to incur
expenditure in identifying and evaluation of these investment decisions. The
company, in order to purchase shares at par and get a preferential and firm
allotment in such upcoming companies, has to participate along with other
companies in the promotional stage and pay and contribute expenses.
97\. He has also drawn our attention to the various submissions made on behalf
of the assessee company during the course of assessment proceedings for the
different years in the regular course wherein the nature of its business was
explained on behalf of the assessee company. In one of such submissions made
during the course of assessment proceedings for A.Y. 1998-99, a copy of which
is placed at page Nos. 3 to 13 of assessee's paper book, it was submitted that
the assessee is a closely held domestic company incorporated in India with the
primary objective of carrying on the business of investment company and to,
inter-alia, buy, invest, underwrite, acquire shares/other securities. It was
also submitted that the assessee has acquired shares of various companies
since its inception, some of which are held as stock-in-trade whereas the
balance are held in investment portfolio with the primary intention of
acquiring and retaining controlling stake of the companies within the fold of
HCL group.
98\. The learned DR has also referred to the extensive submissions made on
behalf of the assessee company during the course of assessment proceedings
before the Assessing Officer for A.Y. 2000-01 (copy at pages 46 to 58 of
Revenue's paper book No. III) as well as before the learned CIT(A) during the
course of appellate proceedings for the same year (copy at pages 59 to 66 of
Revenue's paper book No. III) explaining the nature of its business. In the
said submissions, it was submitted that investment in shares has always been
in the shares of specific companies wherein the assessee seeks to retain the
controlling stake and the said investment thus is made for a specific business
purpose. It was also submitted that the investment decisions of the assessee
were taken by its directors more on the basis of enhancing strategic
shareholding in particular companies and while holding such shares as
investment, the company had an underlying business objective too. Heavy
reliance was also placed on behalf of the assessee company on the various
judicial pronouncements propounding that income falling under a specific head
should be chargeable under that head even if it is earned for business
purposes and even though an item of income falls under a specific head, the
commercial character of that income can be taken into account. In one of such
decisions in the case of CIT v. Chugan Das & Co. 55 ITR 17 relied upon by the
assessee, Hon'ble Supreme Court held that the different heads of income
described for the purpose of computation of income are merely to indicate the
classes of income and even if the business income is broken up under different
heads only for the purpose of the computation of total income, the nature of
such income does not cease to be the income of the business. It is pertinent
to note here that these submissions were made on behalf of the assessee in
support of its claim that the acquisition of shares held as investment was the
part of its business activity and therefore, interest paid on the borrowed
funds utilized for such acquisition was for the purpose of its business which
is deductible Under Section 36(1)(iii).
99\. The aforesaid stand taken by the assessee in the regular assessment
proceedings for A.Y. 2000-01 was accepted by the learned CIT(A) and a perusal
of his appellate order dated 22.9.2004 (copy placed at pages 67 to 96 of
Revenue's paper book No. III) shows that he has recorded the following
observations/findings on this issue:
i) The appellant company's main object is to invest in shares, stock and
debentures etc. of the specified group companies with controlling motive and
then hold the same for a long period.
ii) As per the balance sheets, at the time of purchase of shares/debentures
etc., the scrip has been quantified as "investment" or "stock in trade".
iii) Most of the shares held as "Investment" have been acquired and held by
the appellant for a long period.
iv) The appellant has not converted any of its investment into stock-in-trade
during the accounting period.
v) The appellant has shuffled his portfolio for a better investment.
vi) The appellant has not valued the investment at cost/market price whichever
is lower, which is applicable for "stock-in-trade" but has followed the cost
method, which is applicable for "investments" as prescribed by the Institute
of Chartered Accounts of India vide Accounting Standard-13.
vii) The appellant's claim for assessing the profits under the head 'Capital
Gain' from the sale of shares held as "Investment" by the appellant has been
accepted by the department for last so many assessment years. Further, there
is no change in the facts or circumstances of the case during the accounting
period as compared to the past years.
viii) The appellant has not purchased any shares of NUT from the market except
the shares allotted to it as promoter. Only 2,500 shares were allotted much
before the public issue, which clearly indicates the appellant's intention
that the shares of NUT were acquired as an "investment" and not as "stock-in-
trade".
ix) Merely that the sale of capital asset results into realization of a
substantial profit would not change the nature of the asset from capital
assets to stock-in-trade.
x) The CIT(A)-XVII vide his order No. 12/2003-04 dated 31.12.2003 in A.Y.
2000-01 in the case of M/s Pace Industries Ltd. and the CIT(A)-XXV vide his
order No. 8/99-2000 dated 4.10.2000 in A.Y. 1996-97 in the case of Sh. v. K.
Thadani, another co-promoter of NUT, held that the profit on sale of shares of
NUT was assessed as "capital gains" as against the A.O.'s assertion of
"business income".
100\. On the basis of the aforesaid findings/observations, the learned CIT(A)
held that the intention of the assessee company while holding investment in
shares and securities of specific companies was to retain the controlling
stake and therefore, the main object of this investment was not to earn
dividend and the borrowings were required to enable the assessee company to
purchase these shares. He, therefore, held that the capital was borrowed for
the purpose of business and the acquisition of assets being in the nature of
business assets, the expenses incurred in relation to such investments are
deductible as business expenditure Under Section 36(1)(iii).
101\. According to the learned DR, the aforesaid submissions made on behalf of
the assessee company itself and the findings recorded by the learned CIT(A)
are sufficient to establish that the shares in question were held for the
purpose of assessee's own business to retain the controlling stake and
therefore, the transfer of the same constituted business transactions of the
assessee to which the provisions of Section 92 were clearly attracted. He has
contended that this conclusion is inevitable on the basis of stand taken by
the assessee company itself during the course of regular assessment
proceedings and the evidence found during the course of search further
fortifies the same.
102\. It is no doubt true that the main object of the assessee company as per
its memorandum of association was to carry on the business of an investment
company and to buy, underwrite, invest in, acquire, hold shares, stocks,
debentures, securities etc. The main object of the assessee company was also
to hold by way of investment shares, stocks, debentures, securities and other
investments. Further, as explained on behalf of the assessee company itself in
the various submissions made before the authorities below during the course of
regular proceedings, the various and substantial activities of the assessee
company were in the nature of trading in shares, lending/advancing moneys on
interest and maintaining controlling stake over specific companies. It was
also explained that the assessee company has acquired shares of various
companies (quoted as well as unquoted) since its inception some of which were
held by it as stock-in-trade and balance are held in investment portfolio with
the primary intention of acquiring and retaining controlling stake of certain
companies. The shares of M/s HCL Technologies Ltd., sale of which is in
question in the present case, were held as such in investment portfolio with
the primary intention of retaining controlling stake. The said shares were
shown by the assessee company in its books of account separately as
investments and not stock-in-trade and the profit/loss on the same thereof was
declared under the head "capital gain" in the year under consideration as well
as in the earlier years which was accepted by the Department. At the same
time, the stand taken by the assessee company relying on the various judicial
pronouncements that the said investment have been made during the course of
its business of retaining the controlling stake in the concerned company was
accepted by the learned CIT(A) in A.Y. 2000-01 while allowing the interest
paid on the borrowed funds utilized for making the said investment as business
expenditure deductible Under Section 36(1)(iii).
103\. In the present context, the question, however, is whether the sale of
the aforesaid shares held as investment could be treated as a business
transacted between the assessee company and the buyer i.e. M/s Wintech
Investments Pvt.Ltd. as contemplated in the provisions of Section 92 as
applicable to the year under consideration, the requirements of which are very
specific. Before we consider the applicability of these specific requirements
to the transactions in question, let us see the nature of this transaction
involving sale of shares as per the general position under the law without a
particular reference to Section 92. The test often applied, to ascertain the
nature of such transaction and the treatment given to the profit/loss arising
out of such transaction, as laid down by Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of
Raja Bahadur Kamakhaya Narain Singh v. CIT -77 ITR 253, is the intention of
the assessee as reflected from the treatment given in his accounts in holding
the shares/securities as stock-in-trade of a business or as an investment. As
held by Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Bengal Assam Investors Ltd. v.
CIT 59 ITR 547, the mere fact that a company is incorporated to carry on
investment business does not automatically lead to the inference that it is
carrying on business by purchase and sale of their shares held as investments
and the question always is whether such sale which produced the surplus was
connected with the carrying on of the assessee's business that it could fairly
be said that the surplus is the profits and gains of such business. As laid
down by Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Calcutta Discount Co.Ltd. -- 41
ITR 191, one cannot generalize that in every case of investment company, all
transactions involving investments are nothing but dealings in the course of
business. Further, as held by Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Ram Narain
Sons (P) Ltd. 41 ITR 534, where the shares were purchased for acquisition of
managing agency, sale of some of the shares could not be treated as an
adventure in the nature of trade. Explaining further, Hon'ble Supreme Court
observed that the managing agency is manifestly the source of profits of the
appellants but the shares purchased and managing agency acquired were both
assets of a capital nature and did not constitute stock-in-trade of a trading
venture. The subsequent disposal of some of the shares could not also convert
what was a capital acquisition into an adventure in the nature of trade.
104\. In the present case, the investment in shares of M/s HCL Consulting Ltd.
was made by the assessee company to acquire and retain the controlling stake
in the said company and even though acquiring and maintaining the controlling
stake was the business of the assessee company, the shares purchased as well
as controlling stake acquired were both its business assets of a capital
nature and did not constitute a stock-in-trade. The controlling interest/stake
so acquired by purchase of shares was a capital asset in the hands of the
assessee company and even though the same was a business asset of the assessee
company going by its nature of business activities as set out in the object
Clause of Memorandum of Association and as further explained in the
submissions made before the authorities below in the regular assessment, the
same could not be said to be a stock-in-trade by any stretch of imagination.
105\. As held by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of CIT v. Associated
Industrial Development Co. Pvt. Ltd. 82 ITR 586, the determination of the
question whether particular holding of shares by the assessee is by way of an
investment or whether it forms part of stock-in-trade of the assessee is a
matter generally within the knowledge of the assessee holding the shares and
normally the assessee should be in a position to produce evidence from his own
records as to whether he had maintained any distinction between those shares
which are held as stock-in-trade and those which are held by way of
investments. In the present case, the learned Counsel for the assessee has
sufficiently and satisfactorily demonstrated before us on the basis of
relevant and material evidence in the form of relevant balance sheets of the
assessee company that the shares held by it as stock-in-trade and as
investments were separately and distinctly treated in the books of account and
the shares of M/s HCL Consulting Ltd. in question held by it were shown as
investment right from the date of acquisition. The purchase of the said shares
thus was a mere investment made by the assessee company and although the said
investment was a business asset going by the nature of assessee's business,
the sale thereof was on capital account and not an adventure in the nature of
trade. This position gets fortified from the fact that the profit arising from
such sale was declared by the assessee under the head "capital gain" and not
"profits and gains of business" and this treatment given by the assessee
company in the returns of income filed regularly for the year under
consideration as well as for the earlier years was accepted by the Department.
In the case of Raja Bahadur Kamakhaya Narain Singh v. CIT (supra), the
assessee had purchased and sold shares as well as gold in bulk and the profit
realized from such sale was held by the Hon'ble Supreme Court to be not
arising from an adventure in the nature of trade. Their Lordships of Hon'ble
Supreme Court, however, observed that if the investments in shares and
securities have been held as stock-in-trade, the loss resulting on sale
thereof would be a business loss being of a revenue nature.
106\. In the case of CIT v. Express Newspaper Limited 53 ITR 250, Hon'ble
Supreme Court has held that the profits and gains of business and capital
gains are two distinct concepts in the Income Tax Act, the former arises from
the activity which is called business and the latter accrues because capital
assets are disposed of at value higher than what they cost the assessee.
Explaining further, Hon'ble Supreme Court observed that the fact that capital
gains are connected with the capital assets of the business cannot make them
the profit of the business. They are only deemed to be income of the previous
year and not the profits or gains arising from the business during that year.
107\. Reverting to the applicability of Section 92, a perusal of the relevant
provisions as applicable in the present case which are reproduced above,
clearly shows that the conditions stipulated therein are specific and only the
transactions having all the ingredients/attributes in existence could only
attract the said provisions. The expressions used "income from transactions",
"where a business is carried on", "the course of business" and "produces to
the resident either no profits or less than ordinary profits which might be
expected to arise in that business" clearly define the limited scope of the
applicability of the said provisions and the specific transactions covered
therein. First of all, it contemplates a regular business being carried on
between a resident and a nonresident going by the expressions "income from
transactions" and "the course of business" which indicate explicitly the
multiplicity of transactions. In the 1922 Act, analogous provisions were
contained in Sub-section (2) of Section 42 corresponding to Section 92 of 1961
Act and the Hon'ble Bombay High Court had an occasion to consider the issue
relating to applicability of the provisions of Section 42(2) of the 1922 Act
in the case of CIT v. Mazagaon Dock Ltd. 28 ITR 35. It was observed in this
context by the Hon'ble Bombay High Court that business is brought about by a
transaction between two or more persons and if there is an activity which is a
business activity and the activity is carried on between two persons, then
each is carrying on business with the other. Explaining further, Hon'ble
Bombay High Court observed that if such activity is sufficiently continuous
and the same is in relation to the business of the concerned parties, then
there is no reason to suggest that there was no business carried on between
the said parties. In the present case, the shares of M/s HCL Consulting Ltd.
were held by the assessee company as investment whereas the shares being dealt
in as trading activity were held separately as stock-in-trade. In these
circumstances, it is difficult to say that the sale of shares of M/s HCL
Consulting Ltd. to M/s Wintech Investments Pvt.Ltd. in a solitary transaction
was an activity in relation to the business of the assessee company and such
activity was sufficiently continuous to suggest that there was a business
carried on between the said two parties. It was not the business of the
assessee company to deal in those shares which are held as investment and
therefore, the profits resulting from the sale of such shares cannot be said
to be the profits of the business of the assessee. As a matter of fact, the
assessee company had consistently declared such profit under the head "capital
gains" and not "profits and gains of business" in its returns of income filed
regularly and the same was accepted by the Department. The profits arising to
the assessee from the transaction of sale of M/s HCL Consulting Ltd.'s shares,
therefore, cannot be regarded as profits from the business and consequently,
the situation contemplated in Section 92 of the said transaction producing to
the resident either no profits or less than ordinary profits which might be
expected to arise in that business cannot be said to have been obtained in the
present case. It clearly shows that both the conditions stipulated in Section
92 viz., a business carried on between a resident and a non-resident and the
profit arising from that business were not satisfied in relation to the
transaction of sale of shares by the assessee company to M/s Wintech
Investments Pvt.Ltd. and in the absence of the same, the Assessing Officer was
not justified in applying the said provisions to such transaction.
108\. Our aforesaid conclusion about the inapplicability of the provisions of
Section 92 on the basis of limited scope of the said provisions gets support
from the relevant Rules i.e. Rules 10 & 11 of the Income Tax Rules, 1962. The
said Rules as applicable to the year under consideration i.e. A.Y. 2000-01 are
reproduced below:
Determination of income in the case of non-residents.
10\. In any case in which the Assessing Officer is of opinion that the actual
amount of the income accruing or arising to any non-resident person whether
directly or indirectly, through or from any business connection in India or
through or from any property in India or through or from any asset or source
of income in India or through or from any money lent at interest and brought
into India in cash or in kind cannot be definitely ascertained, the amount of
such income for the purposes of assessment to income-tax may be calculated:
(i) at such percentage of the turnover so accruing or arising as the Assessing
Officer may consider to be reasonable, or
(ii) on any amount which bears the same proportion to the total profits and
gains of the business of such person (such profits and gains being computed in
accordance with the provisions of the Act), as the receipts so accruing or
arising bear to the total receipts of the business: or
(iii) in such other manner as the Assessing Officer may deem suitable.
Determination of income from transactions with non-residents.
11\. The profits and gains derived from any business carried on in the manner
referred to in Section 92 may be determined for the purposes of assessment to
income-tax according to Rule 10.
109\. As is evident from the aforesaid Rules, Rule 11 lays down that the
profits and gains derived from any business carried on in the manner referred
to in Section 92 may be determined for the purposes of assessment to income
tax according to Rule 10. The manner and method of determining the quantum of
income to be added in the hands of the assessee are stipulated in Rule 10 and
the method so stipulated generally requires application of certain percentage
of profit to the total turnover or certain proportion to the total receipts of
the business. This method of computation/determination of income to be added
in the hands of the assessee Under Section 92 as well as the expression used
in Rule 11 "profits and gains derived from any business carried on in the
manner referred to in Section 92" further goes to show that the nature of
transactions sought to be covered by the legislature was very specific
inasmuch as such transactions should have been in the course of business
carried on by the assessee with non-resident and the same should have resulted
in the profits and gains derived from such business.
110\. It is also pertinent to note that the original Section 92 was
substituted by a new Section by the Finance Act, 2001 with effect from 1st
April, 2002 and before this new Section becomes operative from that date, the
same again came to be substituted by the Finance Act, 2002 with effect from
the same date i.e. 1.4.2002. These amendments made in the provisions of
Section 92 were mainly to overcome the limitation of the earlier provisions in
terms of scope covering only the specific type of transactions as discussed
above which is quite evident from the Circular No. 14 of 2001 explaining the
legislative intention behind introducing the new provisions of Section 92. A
copy of the said Circular is placed at page No. 1621 of the assessee's paper
book and the paragraphs of the said Circular bearing No. 55.1 and 55.2 being
relevant in this context are reproduced below:
55.1 The increasing participation of multi-national groups in economic
activities in the country has given rise to new and complex issues emerging
from transactions entered into between two or more enterprises belonging to
the same multi-national group. The profits derived by such enterprises
carrying on business in India can be controlled by the multi-national group,
by manipulating the prices charged and paid in such intra-group transactions,
thereby, leading to erosion of tax revenues.
55.2 Under the existing Section 92 of the Income-tax Act, which was the only
section dealing specifically with cross border transactions, an adjustment
could be made to the profits of a resident arising from a business carried on
between the resident and a non-resident, if it appeared to the Assessing
Officer that owing to the close connection between them, the course of
business was so arranged so as to produce less than expected profits to the
resident. Rule 11 prescribed under the section provided a method of estimation
of reasonable profits in such cases. However, this provision was of a general
nature and limited in scope. It did not allow adjustment of income in the case
of non-residents. It referred to a "close connection" which was undefined and
vague. It provided for adjustment of profits rather than adjustment of prices,
and the rule prescribed for estimating profits was not scientific. It also did
not apply to individual transactions such as payment of royalty, etc., which
are not part of a regular business carried on between a resident and a non-
resident. There were also no detailed rules prescribing the documentation
required to be maintained.
111\. As is evident from the aforesaid Circular, it has been accepted by the
lawmakers themselves that the provision of Section 92 as applicable up to A.Y.
2001-02 was of a general nature and limited in scope. It was also accepted in
the said Circular that the said provision did not apply to individual
transactions which are not part of a regular business carried on between a
resident and a non-resident. In the present case, the transaction for sale of
shares between the assessee company and the non-resident company i.e. M/s
Wintech Investments Pvt.Ltd. was an individual transaction and as already
discussed in detail, the same did not form part of a regular business carried
on between the said two parties. The said transaction of sale of shares held
as investment by the assessee company thus did not form part of the business
of the assessee company in general and that of the business carried on between
the assessee and the non-resident company i.e. M/s Wintech Investments
Pvt.Ltd. in particular. Therefore, there was no question or even possibility
of adjustments to the profits arising from such business as were permissible
by Rules 10 & 11 for determining the income to be assessed in the hands of the
assessee Under Section 92 and accordingly, the said Rules containing
computation provisions were clearly unworkable in determining such income as
accepted in the aforesaid Circular.
112\. It is worthwhile to note here that Section 92 was applied by the
Assessing Officer to the transaction of sale of shares in the present case
relying on the new provisions of the said Section substituted in the statute
w.e.f. 1.4.2002. He, however, overlooked the relevant and material aspect of
the matter that the provisions so substituted widening the scope thereof as
explained in the aforesaid Circular No. 14 of 2001 were not applicable to the
previous year relevant to the assessment year 2000-01 when the transaction in
question for sale of shares was effected. The Assessing Officer thus clearly
fell in error in applying the wrong provisions of law for holding that the
transaction was covered by Section 92 and he, therefore, had no occasion to
consider and appreciate as to whether the conditions precedent to invoke/apply
the said provisions indeed had been satisfied in the present case. The learned
CIT(A) no doubt realized this patent and glaring mistake in the order of the
Assessing Officer, but still he appears to have not appreciated the limited
scope of the provisions of Section 92 as applicable to the AY 2000-01 involved
in the present case in the right perspective and proceeded to uphold the
applicability of Section 92 without considering that the transaction in
question was not covered within the scope and ambit of the said Section as
already discussed by us.
113\. As such, considering all the facts of the case and keeping in view the
legal position as emanating from the interpretation of the relevant provisions
of Section 92 in the light of various judicial pronouncements as discussed
above, we are of the considered opinion that although the transaction of sale
of shares in question was between a resident i.e. the assessee company and M/s
Wintech Investments Pvt.Ltd., a non-resident who were closely connected, the
said transaction did not represent the business transacted between the said
two parties in ordinary course and since the said shares held as investment by
the assessee company were the capital assets of its business, the income
arising from the sale thereof was a capital gain and not the profits arising
from the business. The conditions precedent for applying the provisions of
Section 92 thus were not fully satisfied in the present case and since all the
attributes required to invoke the said provisions were not in existence in
respect of the said transaction of sale, we hold that the addition made by the
Assessing Officer and confirmed by the learned CIT(A) by invoking the said
provisions was not sustainable in law. Similar is the position as regards the
transactions involving transfer of shares by other two companies i.e. M/s
HCLCL and M/s SNIPL to M/s WIPL.
114\. The learned Counsel for the Assessee thereafter addressed arguments on
the 1st proposition referable to the Block assessment proceedings, which reads
as follows:
(1) Can a disclosed transaction give rise to undisclosed income especially
when it is not alleged that any amount over and above what has been disclosed
has in fact passed? As a corollary to the question the following question also
arises for consideration: (i) Can a disclosed transaction assessed in regular
assessment be at all assessed in the block period?
The above issue can be conveniently decided along with the second proposition
referable to Block Assessments viz., (2) Can invocation of Section 92 which
gives rise to notional income be classified as undisclosed income?
115\. We shall first narrate the arguments of the learned Counsel for the
Assessee on the question whether Section 92 can at all be invoked when one
makes a block assessment. According to him the provisions of Section 92 can be
invoked only in a case where the assessment is made Under Section 143(3) or
Under Section 148 and not when assessment is made under chapter XIV-B of the
Act. In this regard his first submission was that Section 92 brings to tax a
notional income. Such deeming provisions have to be construed strictly.
Reference was made to the decision of the Hon'ble Madras High Court in the
case of Balachander v. CIT 257 ITR 278 (Mad.) wherein it was held that deeming
provisions have to be strictly construed. He then referred to the definition
of undisclosed income Under Section 158B(b) which reads as follows:
158B. In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(b) "Undisclosed income" includes any money, bullion, jewellery or other
valuable article or thing or any income based on any entry in the books of
account or other documents or transactions, where such money, bullion,
jewellery, valuable article, thing, entry in the books of account or other
document or transaction represents wholly or partly income or property which
has not been or would not have been disclosed for the purposes of this Act [,
or any expense, deduction or allowance claimed under this Act which is found
to be false.
116\. Referring to the various Clause s in this definition the learned Counsel
submitted that there was no bullion jewellery or other valuable article or
thing found in the course of search. There was also no entry in the books of
accounts or other documents or transactions, which represented income, which
has not been or would not have been disclosed for the purpose of this Act. He
laid emphasis on the fact that the entries in the books of accounts or other
documents or transactions should first of all give rise to an income. Only if
it gives rise to income can there be a disclosure or non-disclosure of such
income. He then drew our attention to the definition of income as given in
Section 2(24) of the Act and submitted that by the very nature of definition
of income it contemplates something which should come in. Referring to the
decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Raghuvanshi Mills Ltd.,
Bombay v. CIT 22 ITR 484 (SC) it was submitted by him that the decision lays
down that the word income was very wide and would include anything that is
received and which swells the credit side of assessee's account. It was
submitted that in the absence of anything coming in, it cannot be considered
as income. He then drew our attention to provisions of Section 92 and
submitted that the said provisions do not contemplate an assessee receiving an
income, in the sense of something coming in to the hands of the assessee. The
provisions apply whether or not an assessee actually receives something. In
other words, these provisions deem something to be income in the hands of the
assessee, even though the assessee has not received the same. It was submitted
by him that the provisions of Section 92 by its very nature is something which
the Assessing Officer has to determine by using his discretion, whether or not
the assessee has in reality earned any income. Therefore, according to him, it
was not possible for an assessee to anticipate whether an Assessing Officer
would invoke his discretion and estimate an income under the provisions of the
Section 92 of the Act. In these circumstances the assessee cannot be expected
to disclose for the purposes of this Act an income, which could be brought to
tax by invoking the provisions of Section 92 of the Act. It was thus submitted
by him that in the absence of existence of an income Under Section 92, the
question of its disclosure, will not arise for consideration at all. It was
thus submitted by him that there cannot be disclosure of income falling within
the ambit of Section 92.
117\. He also drew our attention to the provisions of Section 158BA where the
legislature has provided that in the case of search initiated after 30.6.1995
the Assessing Officer shall assess the undisclosed income in accordance with
the provisions of chapter XIVB of the Act, notwithstanding anything contained
in any other provisions of the Act. According to the learned Counsel for the
assessee this non-obstante Clause in Section 158 BA, by itself would rule out
the applicability of the provisions of Section 92 of the Act in a Block
Assessment proceedings. Section 158 BH provides that other provisions of the
Act will apply to an assessment made under chapter XIVB. This provision
according to the learned Counsel is meant only for recovery of tax on
undisclosed income determined under chapter XIVB of the Act. The other
provisions of the Act only apply to assessment made and not assessment to be
made under chapter XIVB.
118\. The learned Counsel also referred to the provisions of Section 158BA(2)
read with 113 of the Act whereby undisclosed income is charged at the rate of
60% apart from surcharge and penalty Under Section 158BFA of the Act.
According to him it could never have been the intention of the legislature to
tax an artificial income determined by applying the provisions of Section 92
of the Act, at such a high rate of tax. In this regard he also referred to the
decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of K.P. Vergese v. CIT 131
ITR 597 (SC) wherein the Hon'ble Supreme Court has made an observation that
even in the context of the provisions of Section 52(2) of the Act there was a
necessity for availability of evidence to show that real income have been
earned by the assessee. The aforesaid decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court
was rendered in the context of capital gain on transfer of capital asset.
Under Section 52(2) of the Act if a capital asset being immovable property is
sold for a price which is less by 30% of its value as per the guidelines
values fixed for registration of such property by the Registrar of Assurances,
then the value fixed by the Registrar of Assurances will be deemed to be the
price at which the property was sold by the assessee. Even in the context of
such deeming provisions the Supreme Court had emphasized the need for evidence
to be available on record to show that the assessee received something more
than what has been stated in the instrument of transfer. The Supreme Court had
opined that only real income can be taxed and not notional income.
119\. He submitted that Section 92, which talks about fictional or notional
income is anti thesis of chapter XIVB of the Act, which only refers to income,
which is earned but not offered to tax. It was submitted by the learned
Counsel that the law does not oblige a trader to make maximum profit and in
this regard referred to the decision of Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of
A. Raman 67 ITR page 11 (SC). The Supreme Court however, in the case of
McDowell & Company -154 ITR 148 (SC) did cast shadow on this principle but in
the case of Azadi Bachao Andolan 263 ITR 706 (SC), the Supreme Court had
observed that the law laid down in the case of A. Raman (Supra) was very much
relevant even today.
120\. Reference was made to the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the
case of Gillanders Arbuthnot and Company 87 ITR 407 (SC) where the question
before the Court arose in the context of the proviso to Section 12B (2) of the
1922 Act, whereby a person acquiring a capital asset form another person
directly or indirectly connected at a particular price, the AO was empowered
to substitute the full value of consideration received by the transferee, with
the fair market value of the capital asset on the date of transfer. The
Supreme Court had held that in the case of sale, the price bargained between
the parties was to be adopted and no substitution of the fair market value can
be made. It was submitted that even the provision of Section 52(2) now stand
deleted from Assessment year 88-89. Reference was made to the provisions of
Section 158BB(3) which pre supposes income already earned and not the income
which is fictionally to be determined. It was thus submitted by him that the
provisions of Section 92 by its very nature is such that it can never be
applied while making Block Assessment under XIVB of the Act.
121\. The learned Counsel for the Assessee then advanced arguments, with
regard to question as to whether in a case where the assessee has already made
disclosure regarding a particular transaction, can it be said that there was
any undisclosed income. On this question learned Counsel first submitted that
the form in which return of income is to be field by a corporate assessee,
with reference to the regular assessment provisions of the Act, does not
contemplate any disclosure of income earned by the assessee which could be
subject to scrutiny Under Section 92. He drew our attention to the provisions
of Section 64 of the Act where there was an obligation on the part of the
parents of minor children to club the income of minors in their hands. No such
provision was available vis-a-vis the provisions of Section 92 of the Act.
Even assuming Section 92 can be applied in a given case since the assessee and
the two other companies in the present case, disclosed the capital gain on
transfer of shares of WIPL, there was no other disclosure contemplated. The
provisions of Section 92 only apply to business transaction and not to capital
gain. With regard to the disclosure contemplated under the Act, the learned
Counsel drew our attention to the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the
case of v. D.M. RM. M. RM. Muthaiah Chettiar v. CIT 74 ITR 183 (SC) wherein
the Hon'ble Supreme Court while dealing with the question as to when an
assessee could be said to have failed to disclose material facts in the
context of reassessment proceeding under the 1922 Act had held that where in
the form of return prescribed under the IT Rules, there was no Clause which
required a particular disclosure of income, then it cannot be said that an
assessee by not showing that income failed or omitted to disclose fully and
truly all material facts necessary for his assessment.
122\. The facts with regard to the disclosure made by the assessee in the
regular return of income had already been set out and are not being repeated
here.
123\. The learned Counsel drew our attention to the provisions of Section
158BA(2) and the explanation there under, wherein the legislature had
clarified that the assessment under chapter XIV-B is in additional to the
regular assessment in respect of each previous year included in the block
period and that undisclosed income of a block period should not include income
assessed in any regular assessment. He also drew our attention to the
provisions of Section 158BB(1) of the Act and submitted computation of
undisclosed income has to be on the basis of evidence found as a result of
search. He stressed on the use of the word 'evidence' and submitted that
suspicion, conjectures, estimates, surmises and imagination is not evidence
found in the course of search. The assessee submitted that in the light of the
fact that this transaction of sale of shares was already disclosed as income
under the head capital gain could only mean that there was a proper disclosure
by the assessee. The learned Counsel also drew our attention to the provisions
of Section 92E and 92C (3) of the Act as it applies from the Assessment Year
1.4.2002 and submitted that under the present provision there was an
obligation on the part of the assessee to make a specific disclosure, whereas
under the old provisions which was applicable to the present case, there was
no such obligation to make any disclosure. He referred to the fact that even
in the block assessment proceedings the Assessing Officer treated the
transaction as giving raise to a capital gain and not as a commercial
transaction, giving rise to business income. The CIT(A) however came to a
difference conclusion that the income was from business. Both the revenue
authorities have acted de hors the material found in the course of search.
Learned Counsel thereafter drew our attention to several judicial
pronouncement of the various High Courts on the question as to whether in
respect of a transaction, which is already disclosed can be subjected to tax
as undisclosed income, in a block assessment proceedings.
(a) CIT v. Ravikant Jain 250 ITR page 141 the Hon'ble Delhi High Court in the
aforesaid decision has emphasized the need that in a block assessment the
scope and ambit is limited to the material unearthed during search and that
assessment for the block period can only be made on the basis of evidence
found as a result of search. The Hon'ble High Court found that the block
assessment was framed not on the basis of material found as a result of search
but on the basis of the report of a Special Auditor who had given a different
color to the existing facts which stood assessed by the Assessing Officer in
the earlier assessment orders and was not relatable to any seized material.
(b) Reference was made to the decision of the Hon'ble Bombay High Court in the
case of CIT v. Vikram A Doshi 256 ITR 129 (Bombay). In this case the Hon'ble
Bombay High Court had taken the view that transactions disclosed in return
which was subject matter of regular assessment ought not to be assessed in the
block assessment.
(c) CIT v. Vinod Danchand Ghodawat 247 ITR 448(Bom) - In this case the
assessee in the Wealth Tax returns, which was accepted by the revenue, had
disclosed value of gold and silver articles and jewellery. In the block
assessment the source of investment in these articles found in the course of
search was held to be not explained and the value of the articles was treated
as unexplained investment giving rise to undisclosed income. The Bombay High
Court held that since there was a disclosure of these articles in the Wealth
Tax return the revenue was not entitled to treat the same as undisclosed and
make an addition in a block assessment.
(d) CIT v. Shyam Lal Balram Gurbani 249 ITR 501 (BOM) - In this case the
assessee who was a partner in a partnership firm receiving income in the form
of interest, salary and rent, did not file his return for three Assessment
Years. The firm however had filed its return in which in the audited balance
sheet for the three Assessment Years, these payments had been disclosed. The
Court held that this disclosure in the firms return was enough disclosure and
therefore the income in question cannot be construed as undisclosed income.
(e) Bhagwati Prasad Kedia v. CIT 248 ITR 562 (Cal) - There was a search and
seizure resulting in an order of block assessment of undisclosed income.
During the block assessment the assessee was called upon to explain the
advance taken from a company. The assessee had filed the confirmation letter
of loan from the company including income-tax file numbers of the creditor.
The income-tax authority held that the said loan was a fictitious one and was
to be considered as undisclosed income of the assessee during the block period
under consideration. On the question whether the Assessing Officer was
entitled to question the loan amount which was the subject matter of a regular
assessment, while making block assessment, the Court held as follows:
The Explanation to Section 158BA of the Income-tax Act, 1961 makes it clear
that the Legislature thought it fit to make a distinction between the block
assessment and the regular assessment. In the case of regular assessment, the
Assessing Officer is free to examine the veracity of the return as well as the
claims made by the assessee, whereas the undisclosed income is taxed by way of
block assessment as a result of search and seizure. The logic behind the two
different modes of assessment is that concealment of income and claiming
deduction or exemption in respect of a disclosed income cannot be treated at
par. The former is an offence, which goes to the root of the matter and the
other is on the basis of the causes shown by the assessee where the Assessing
Officer is free to accept the justification shown or reject the same. The
Court therefore held, that the Assessing Officer was not entitled to question
in block assessment the loan which was a subject matter of the regular
assessment. That the Assessing Officer was wrong in holding that the said sum
could be taxed in block assessment although the same featured in the regular
books of account. When the loan creditor was an assessee and in whose
assessment the loan advanced had been accepted by the revenue, the Assessing
Officer was wrong in holding that the assessee was liable to pay tax on that
loan money taken from that assessee.
124\. Besides the aforesaid decisions reference was made to several other
decisions laying down similar propositions. In conclusion on this issue, the
learned Counsel brought to our notice the manner in which the CIT(A) has dealt
with this issue. In paragraph 5.8 of his order the Commissioner has held that
the mere fact that the assessee filed a return prior to the search, in which
the transactions stood disclosed was not enough to hold that the same cannot
be subject matter of a block assessment proceeding. This conclusion, it was
submitted, was contrary to the several decisions relied upon by the learned
Counsel for the assessee.
125\. He drew our attention to paragraph 10.85 of the CIT(A) order wherein the
submissions of the assessee with regard to non-applicability of the Sections
92 to the transactions in question was referred to but not considered by the
CIT(A). The CIT(A) also brushed aside the fact that the assessee had already
disclosed this transaction in the regular return of income and the fact that
the same stood assessed by the Assessing Officer under the head capital gains
in the regular assessment. The learned Counsel also submitted that the CIT(A)
placed the onus on the assessee to prove that the consideration paid was just
and proper, when in law, it was for the revenue to establish that the assessee
had earned income which had not been disclosed.
126\. The submissions of the ld.counsel for the Revenue on the issue as to
whether a disclosed transaction can give rise to an undisclosed income was
that the seized material did reveal that the shares of HCL Consulting Ltd.
were held by the assessee not as an investment but as a stock in trade in the
business of promoting and controlling other companies. The Id.DR referred to
the statement of Mr. Shiv Nadar, President, Chairman, CEO of HCL Technologies
Ltd. as well as Director in several companies belonging to the HCL group. The
Id.DR referred to the fact that in his statement he had admitted that the
activity of the assessee was investment planning, investment monitoring,
governance monitoring such as audit and overall strategic planning. He also
referred to the various evidence found during the course of search which
clearly go to prove that the shares were held as stock-in-trade. The Id.DR
submitted that the Assessee was in the business of managing various companies
belonging to HCL Group. It is a primary business of assessee for planning,
investments, monitoring and governing. According to the Id.DR it was only
consequent to search and the material found in the course of such a search
that it came to light that the shares of HCL Consulting Ltd. which were sold
to WIPL were held as stock-in-trade and that its sale was a business
transaction attracting the applicability of the provisions of Section 92.
(a) Our attention was drawn to seized documents exhibit P.2/AS/155. This is a
letter horn one Mr. Anil Channana an employee of M/s HCCCL. This letter is
dated 20.1.1997 and addressed to one Mr. AST Rajan. Reference is made to a fax
message dt. 20.1.1997 and the fact that the said letter was in reply to the
said fax message is also referred to in this letter. There is a reference to
the shares of HCL Consulting Ltd. being capable of valued at Rs. 200 to Rs.
400 as on 20.1.97 on the basis of a multiplying factor of 2.5 or 5 being
applied to the sales revenue. There is also a comparison of the value at which
a similarly placed company which is half the size of M/s HCL Consulting Ltd.
having been quoted at 4.6 times its project revenue for 1997. Besides the
above there is a reference about the share holding pattern of M/s HCC
Consulting Ltd. (HCCCL)
(b) The next document referred to by the Id.DR exh.P2/AS/54 which is first a
letter dt. 25.2.97 from Anil Channana of HCLCL to one AST Rajan. This letter
refers to the discussion which the parties had on 25.2.97 regarding TEMASEK
proposal. In this letter there is a reference regarding IPO (initial public
offer) of HCLCL. There is also an alternative suggestion to issue convertible
bonds. There is a third proposal of Slocum (SIPL) (i.e. the Assessee) forming
a j.v. with TEMASEK in Mauritius in which Slocum (i.e. the Assessee) will make
its equity contribution in the form of its holding of equity shares in M/s HCL
Consulting Ltd. and other entities. The valuation of the equity contribution
being done at a particular figure is also mentioned in this letter. The letter
further highlights that this will be a mode of transferring shares to a
special purpose vehicle (SPV). TEMASEK was to contribute to the equity and
date in such joint venture company to be found. There is a suggestion that the
contribution of debt by TEMASEK could be convertible or exchanged for the
equity stock held by the SPV/ M/s Slocum (i.e. the Assessee) would get back
some consideration against shares transferred to SPV in the form of cash which
could be brought in by TEMASEK. There is also a reference in this letter that
once the shares are off-shore there is a possibility of putting structure
around the same.
127\. Pointing out to the aforesaid two letters found in the course of a
search, the Id.DR submitted that even in Feb. 97 the date of the second letter
there was a public issue of shares of HCL in contemplation. In fact an
investment by the Mauritius based company was also thought of. It was also
pointed out by the DR that the Assessee is in the business of promoting
companies and joint ventures and the above letters are a clear indication of a
desire to offer shares of M/s HCL Consulting Ltd. to the public and the mode
in which promoters were to retain control of M/s HCL Consulting Ltd.
128\. The Id.DR next drew our attention to seized documents P.2/A.2/157. This
is a letter dt. 5.6.98 by Anil Chanana to Mr. Shiv Nadar. This letter contains
various subjects. Our attention was drawn to paragraph 4 of this letter in
which there is a discussion about loan to FEC from HCL Consulting Ltd. There
is also a reference to investments in HCL Technologies, Bermuda. The Id.DR
thus submitted that M/s HCL Consuslting Ltd. and HCLT, Bermuda existed even as
early as 5.6.98 and that the initial public offer of HCLT, Bermuda was
connected with the i.p.o. of HCLCL.
129\. Our attention was drawn to seized documents P.2/A.2/105 which is a
letter dt. 13.6.98 by Anil Chanana to one Parwiz. This letter contains certain
directions by Mr. Anil Chanan to Mr. Parwiz. It is submitted by the Id.DR that
Mr. Perwiz was a person engaged in promoting paper companies in Mauritius.
This letter according to the DR shows that the Mauritius companies were acting
under instructions and under control and management by HCL group, India. A
reference was made to Exh. P.2/A.2/113 which is a letter dt. 20.1.98 by Vama
Sundari Investments Pvt. Ltd. to Magnus Capital Corporation Ltd. This letter
makes a reference to M/s Magnus acquiring shares on behalf of and for the
benefit of Vama Sundari Investments Pvt. Ltd. (VSIPL). Similarly our attention
was drawn to ex. P.4/A4/17 which is a share holding as on 13.9.99 in the
capital of HCL Consulting Ltd. Similarly a reference was made to P.6/A1/13
which is a letter from Nilesh Agarwal to Pricille Koeing of Mauritius. Mr.
Nilesh Agarwal is DGM Finance of M/s HCL group. In this letter Mr. Nilesh
Agarwal instructs Precille of Mauritius to incorporate minutes of board
whereby VSIPL would give up the idea of purchasing shares of HCL Consulting
Ltd. from the Assessee. A reference was made to Ex.P.6/A1/23 a letter dt.
25.9.98 from Nilesh Agarwal to Precilee of Mauritius whereby funds are
arranged from India by HCL Corporation for use by VSIPL. Our attention was
also drawn to a letter dt. 8.10.98 being P.6/A1/29 which is a similar letter
from Nilesh Agarwal to Precilee following up the arrangement of funds to VSIPL
for purchase of shares of HCL/HDMauritius Pvt.Ltd. Similar letters being
P6/A1/30, P6/A1/104 dt. 10.10.98 and 2.2.00 in connection with remittance of
funds to VSIPL are also documents found in the course of search. Exh.
P6/A14/89 is a C.A's Certificate regarding the share holding patter in M/s
WSIPL, Mauritius. The total shares of this company are US 3 dollars and these
shares are held by I.T.CON Investments Pvt.Ltd. and BSIPL.
130\. The Id.DR submitted that though the aforesaid seized documents have not
been referred to by the Assessing Officer in his order, since these documents
are material for arriving at a conclusion on the issues involved in the
present appeal, he was competent to place reliance on the same. In this regard
reliance was placed by the Id.DR on the decision reiterated in the case of
Uttam Construction Co. v. CIT 156 ITR 459(M.P.).
131\. The Id.DR submitted that the provisions of Section 92 would not apply in
the context of a capital gain but if it is established from the seized
material that there was a business connection then the provisions of Section
92 would stand attracted. The Id. counsel for the assessee drew our attention
to the provisions of Section 92 of the Act and submitted that when the
business of the Assessee was investment planning, monitoring and governance
the holding of the shares of HCL Consulting Ltd. cannot be said to be an
investment. It was submitted that the evidence found in the course of search
clearly points out that the shares were held as a stock in trade. It was
submitted that under the provisions of Section 92 income is deemed to accrue
or arise to an assessee by a legal fiction and therefore it has to be
considered as a real income. It was further contended that in the light of
evidence found in the course of search it was clear that the domain and
control of M/s WIPL was with the assessee. In this regard reference was made
to the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of CIT v. Best &
Co.Pvt.Ltd. 60 ITR 11 (S.C.) wherein it has been held that in the context of
deciding whether compensation given for loss of agency was a taxable income or
not. Adverse inference could be drawn against the assessee if he had
suppressed documents and evidence which were exclusively in his possession.
132\. With regard to the contention of the ld.counsel for the assessee that no
specific form of disclosure is contemplated by Section 92 of the Act. The
Id.DR submitted that the definition of undisclosed income as laid down in
Section 158 B(b) is an inclusive definition and the expression used therein
"would not have been disclosed for the purposes of this Act". According to
D.R. there is no requirement in the definition that a disclosure has to be
made in pursuance of any requirement to disclose under any provisions of the
Act. He submitted that the facts with regard to the connection of the assessee
with M/s WIPL was not disclosed and secondly the fact that the sale of shares
was in the course of business was not disclosed. The Id. DR also drew our
attention to the provisions of Section 158 BB(1) and submitted that while
making a block assessment, the Assessing Officer is empowered not only to use
the material or evidence found as a result of search but also was entitled to
fall back upon other materials and available with the Assessing Officer and
relatable to such evidence i.e. the evidence found in the course of search.
According to him the evidence found as a result of search revealing
applicability of Section 92 in respect of transaction of sale of shares of HCL
Consulting Ltd. to M/s WIPL and the material already available with the
Assessing Officer viz., the disclosure of the transaction by the assessee
would be sufficient to make the impugned addition in the block assessment. The
Id.DR submitted that there has to be a harmonious construction of the
definition of undisclosed income as contained in Section 158 BB(b) and Section
158 BB(1) of the Act, prescribing the mode of computing undisclosed income.
133\. We have considered the rival submissions. "Undisclosed Income" has been
defined in the Act as follows:
158B. In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(b) Undisclosed income" includes any money, bullion, jewellery or other
valuable article or thing or any income based on any entry in the books of
account or other documents or transactions, where such money, bullion,
jewellery,, valuable article, thing, entry in the books of account or other
document or transaction represents wholly or partly income or property which
has not been or would not have been disclosed for the purposes of this Act, or
any expense, deduction or allowance claimed under this Act which is found to
be false.
134\. The underlined portion in the definition above was inserted by the
Finance Act of 2002, w.e.f. 1-7-95. In the Memo explaining the above
amendment, it has been stated as follows:
Rationalisation of the provisions of Chapter XIV-B relating to block
assessments in cases of search and requisition The existing provisions
contained in Chapter XIV-B of the Income-tax Act provide for a single
assessment of undisclosed income of a block period of six years, in cases of
search Under Section 132 or requisition Under Section 132A, and lay down the
manner in which such income is to be computed, and the interest or penalty
which may be levied in certain circumstances. In order to remove
inconsistencies in some of the provisions of block assessment and to
rationalise the provisions it is proposed to -
(i) amend the definition of undisclosed income in Clause (b) of Section 158B
to specifically include therein income based on entries in books of account or
other documents which represent a false claim of any expense, deduction, or
allowance under the Income-tax Act;
135\. In Circular No. 8/02 dt 27-8-02 of CBDT, these provisions have been
explained to have been introduced for the following purposes:
61.1 The existing provisions contained in Chapter XIV-B of the Income-tax Act
provide for a single assessment of undisclosed income of a block period of six
years, in cases of search Under Section 132 or requisition Under Section 132A
and lay down the manner in which such income is to be computed, and the
interest or penalty which may be levied in certain circumstances.
61.2 The existing provisions of Clause (b) of Section 158B defines undisclosed
income to include income or property which has not been or would not have been
disclosed for the purposes of the Act, and which is represented by any money,
bullion, jewellery or other valuable article or thing, or by any entry in the
books of account or other document or any other transaction. It has been
noticed that in some cases the appellate authorities have taken a view that
this definition covers only property or receipts which have not been disclosed
and does not cover income represented by entries in respect of false claims of
expenses or deductions. Such view is contrary to the intention underlying the
provision of bringing to tax the entire undisclosed income, including income
which has been suppressed by making false claims of expenses or deduction,
which have been discovered as a result of search or requisition.
61.2.1 The Finance Act, 2002 has amended the definition of undisclosed income
in Section 158B to specifically include therein income based on entries in
books of account or other documents which represent a false claim of any
expense, deduction, or allowance under the Income-tax Act.
(Underlining by us for emphasis)
136\. The facts with regard to the filing of the return of income for the A.Y.
2000-2001 by the Assessee, M/S. HCLCL & M/S. SNIPL have already been narrated
by us in paragraphs 3 to 5 of this order. It is not in dispute that the
assessee and the two other companies duly disclosed the fact that they had
sold the shares held by them in M/s HCL Consulting Ltd. to M/s WIPL of
Mauritius. The Assessing Officer has also accepted the return of income filed
by the assessee in proceedings Under Section 143(3) of the Act. As far as M/s
SNIPL is concerned, an intimation has been issued accepting the return of
income filed by the said company. As far as M/s HCLCL is concerned, a return
of income had been filed disclosing the transaction in question. The
submission of the Id. counsel for the assessee was that there had been a
disclosure of the above transactions. In this connection we have perused the
paper book and we find that there was a proper disclosure of these transaction
in the returns filed by the assessee and two other companies in their return
of income.
137\. Even assuming that the transactions in question are a business
transaction, the Id. counsel for the assessee submitted that Under Section 92
there is no such form in which disclosure has to be made by the assessee. From
a reading of the provisions of Section 92 of the Act, it is clear that while
applying the provision of Section 92 it is always the duty of the Assessing
Officer, to consider the transaction between a resident and non-resident and
thereafter determine the profit, which a resident could have earned in the
transaction with a non-resident, and such income has to be included in the
total income. These are deeming provisions and the assessee is not expected to
make any disclosure in this regard. A reading of the provisions of the Section
92 by its very nature would show that it was only the duty of the assessee to
disclose the income from transaction with nonresident and it was up to the
Assessing Officer to estimate such income subject to the fulfillment of
conditions laid down in Section 92 and there was no duty on the part of the
assessee to disclose any thing in this regard. Under the new provisions of
Section 92 as they exist from 1.4.2002, an assessee is obliged to make certain
disclosure regarding the arms length price in an international transaction.
Under the new provisions, there is also a duty to file a report of Auditor. As
per the old provisions prevalent prior to 1.4.2002 which are applicable in the
present case, there was no such obligation. Rules 10 & 11 of I.T. Rules, 1962
as applicable to Assessment Year 2000-01, when the transaction in question had
taken place, reads as follows:
Determination of income in the case of non-residents.
10\. In any case in which the Assessing Officer is of opinion that the actual
amount of the income accruing or arising to any non-resident person whether
directly or indirectly, through or from any business connection in India or
through or from any property in India or through or from any asset or source
of income in India or through or from any money lent at interest and brought
into India in cash or in kind cannot be definitely ascertained, the amount of
such income for the purposes of assessment to income-tax may be calculated:
(i) at such percentage of the turnover so accruing or arising as the Assessing
Officer may consider to be reasonable, or
(ii) on any amount which bears the same proportion to the total profits and
gains of the business of such person (such profits and gains being computed in
accordance with the provisions of the Act), as the receipts so accruing or
arising bear to the total receipts of the business: or
(iii) in such other manner as the Assessing Officer may deem suitable.
Determination of income from transactions with non-residents.
11\. The profits and gains derived from any business carried on in the manner
referred to in Section 92 may be determined for the purposes of assessment to
income-tax according to Rule 10.
The above rules do not also call for any specific disclosure regarding
transaction with a non-resident by a resident. The provisions of Section 92E
and 92C (3) of the Act as it applies from 1.4.2002 there is an obligation on
the part of the assessee to make a specific disclosure, whereas under the old
provisions which was applicable to the present case, there was no such
obligation to make any disclosure.
138\. The Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of v. D.M. RM. M. RM. Muthiah
Chettiar v. CIT \- 74 ITR 183 (SC) was dealing with a question as to when an
assessee could be said to have failed to disclose material facts in the
context of reassessment proceeding under the 1922 Act. It held that where in
the form of return prescribed under the IT Rules, there was no Clause which
required a particular disclosure of income, then it cannot be said that an
assessee by not showing that income failed or omitted to disclose fully and
truly all material facts necessary for his assessment. The learned D.R.
however submitted that this decision was no longer good law in view of the
decision in the case of CIT v. P.K. Kochammu Amma Peroke 125 ITR 624 (SC). We
have perused the said judgment and do not agree with the contention of the
learned D.R. The Hon'ble Court in the case of Kochammu (Supra) has pointed out
that there was no column in the form of return about disclosure of income of
others includible in the total income of the Assessee but there was a note in
the form to that effect and that such note should be enough to hold that there
was a duty on the part of the Assessee to disclose income of others which is
includible in his income. Thus the principle laid down in the case of Muthiah
Chettiar (supra) has been only reiterated but distinguished on the ground that
the note in the form of return of income has been over looked. We therefore
hold that the principle regarding duty to disclose pursuant to any provision
of law still holds good and would be a condition precedent in the context of
Undisclosed Income. Even this principle is recognized under the provisions of
Section 158BC (1)(c) where if income is below taxable limit, non-furnishing of
return of income has been considered as not giving raise to undisclosed
income.
139\. Since no specific form of disclosure is contemplated by the Act as well
as the Rules and the form of return prescribed, an Assessee can never be held
to be guilty of nondisclosure of income which is determined by applying the
provisions of Section 92. We therefore hold the disclosure of the transaction
in question as done by the Assessee was sufficient in law. A question might
arise as to whether the fact that the sale of shares was to a Non-Resident at
least ought to have been disclosed by the Assessee. We have already noticed
the lacunae in the provisions of Section 92 and the Act and Rules in this
regard and as to how the law w.e.f. 1.4.2002 prescribes sufficient safeguards.
As the law stood at the relevant point of time which is the P.Y. relevant to
A.Y. 2000-01, there was no specific form of disclosure contemplated.
140\. The next question is as to whether a disclosed transaction can give rise
to undisclosed income. In this regard, we deem it appropriate to set out the
scope of Block Assessment proceedings as explained by the Hyderabad Bench of
ITAT in the case of Essem Intra-port Services (P) Ltd. v. Assistant
Commissioner Of Income-tax 72 ITD 228 (Hyd):
Chapter-XIV-B lays down special procedure for assessment in search cases. The
special procedure set out in Chapter-XIV-B is a separate set of rules, by
itself. For the purposes of this chapter, the term 'undisclosed income' is
defined. The definition of the term 'undisclosed income' is given in an
'inclusive' manner, but it is again made clear Under Section 158B(b) that
'undisclosed income' includes money, bullion, jewellery, etc. only if they
represent income or property which has not been or would not have been
disclosed for the purposes of this Act. Therefore, we find that even though
'undisclosed income' is defined in an 'inclusive' manner, the scope and extent
of the term 'undisclosed income' for the purposes of this Chapter XIV-B is
contingent upon the fact that the undisclosed income should be borne out of
materials representing income or property which has not been or would not have
been disclosed by the assessee for the purposes of this Act. When certain
information and details are already furnished in the returns of income or
statements accompanying thereto, filed before the 'Department, or when certain
information and details are already recorded in the books of account
maintained in the regular course of business, based on which returns of income
would be filed in normal course, that very same information and details cannot
be re-examined in the course of block assessment proceedings to arrive at any
fresh conclusions, so as to result in determination of undisclosed income
based on that materials. The true nature of undisclosed income, as it is
construed in Chapter-XIV-B is that the assessee has not or would not have
disclosed that income to the Department in the normal course, and such income
should be found out by the Department as a result of search or requisition of
books and details as provided Under Section 132 of the IT Act. Thus, there are
two elements to be satisfied so as to be treated as undisclosed income for
purposes of this Chapter, i.e. the factum of non-disclosure on the part of the
assessee should be existing, and the said non-disclosure should have been
blown out as a result of search or requisition of books, etc. Under Section
132 of the Act. It naturally follows therefore that whenever, the assessee has
disclosed necessary information and details regarding income or expenses or
credit or property in the returns of income or in the statements accompanying
the returns, or even if the books of account based on which returns would be
filed contain those details, assessee gets away from the clutches of non-
disclosure in respect of that income or property, etc. because those materials
are already available, even in the absence of any recourse to search
operations Under Section 132.
141\. A perusal of the aforesaid decision of the Tribunal clearly shows that
two elements have to be satisfied before the income can be said to be
undisclosed income:
a) there should be a factum of non disclosure on the part of the assessee
b) such non disclosure should have been detected as a result of search.
142\. We have already noticed that there was a proper disclosure of this
transaction in the regular terms of income filed by the assessee and the two
other companies even prior to the search. Even this fact is not disputed by
the Assessing Officer. But the only reason assigned by the Assessing Officer
is that from an analysis of the seized document it transpired that the
assessee with willful intent to avoid capital gain tax that may arise in
future transferred shares to associate foreign company at a tax neutral price
and that Section 92 of the Act was clearly attracted. That these facts came to
the knowledge of the Revenue only on the basis of incriminating documents
found in the course of search. It has been held in a series of cases by the
various High Courts that if there has been a disclosure by the assessee in the
regular returns of income, then no assessment could be made in respect of such
transactions in a block assessment as undisclosed income. In the case of N.R.
Paper & Board Ltd. the Hon'ble Gujarat High Court have at page 742, pointed
out that the process under Chapter XIV-B did not disturb the assessments
already made, of the previous years, and was only intended to "sniff out what
had remained hidden and would not have been disclosed by the assessee". In the
case of Shamlal Balram Gurbani (supra), the Hon'ble Bombay High Court held
that income disclosed by firm in its audited balance sheet could not be
treated as undisclosed income for purpose of block assessment. In the case of
Ravi Kant Jain, the Hon'ble Delhi High Court has held that the scope and ambit
of Chapter XIV-B is limited to "material unearthed during search". In the case
of Vikram A. Doshi (supra), the Hon'ble Bombay High Court held that the
transactions disclosed in returns "by no stretch of imagination can be said to
be undisclosed transactions falling Under Section 158 B" and "ought to have
been assessed in the regular assessment and not in the block assessment".
143\. The other argument of the Id. DR was that incriminating documents found
as a result of search and the disclosure already made by the assessee did
reveal existence of undisclosed income. Even in such a case, we are of the
view that proceedings under Chapter XIV-B is not the appropriate remedy as has
been laid down in the various decisions referred to above.
144\. Explanation to Section 158 BA (2) reads as follows:
Explanation - For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that -
(a) the Assessment made under this Chapter shall be in addition to the regular
assessment in respect of each Previous year included in the Block period;
(b) the total undisclosed income relating to the block period shall not
include the income assessed in any regular assessment as income of such block
period.
(c) The income assessed in this Chapter shall not be included in the regular
assessment of any Previous year included in the block period.
We have already noticed that the assessee filed ROI for A.Y. 2000-2001
disclosing the income (loss) on sale of shares of HCL Consulting Ltd. to M/s
WIPL, Mauritius. An order of assessment dt. 27.3.03 Under Section 143(3) has
also been passed by the Assessing Officer. The present order by the Assessing
Officer in the Block Assessment proceedings has been passed on 27.2.2004. Thus
the income in question as far as M/s Slocum Investment (P) Ltd. (i.e. the
assessee) has already been assessed in regular assessment and therefore
assessing the same income under Chapter XIV-B would be against the provisions
of Section 158BA(2) Explanation (b). Even on this ground the assessment under
Chapter XIV-B is liable to be set aside. As far as M/s SNIPL and M/s HCLCL are
concerned, we have already held that the assessment of their alleged
undisclosed income in the hands of the assessee was not valid.
145\. The provisions of Section 158B(b) inserting the words "or any expense,
deduction or allowance claimed under this Act which is found to be false" in
the definition of undisclosed income might give an impression that even
disclosed transactions, if found to result in undisclosed income as a result
of material found in the course of search, is covered by the said definition.
We are of the view that the present case is not a case where any expense,
deduction or allowance was claimed by the assessee. Moreover it is not the
case of the Revenue that the assessee received some consideration over and
above Rs. 50/- per share. In such circumstances it cannot be said that "any
claim of assessee has been found to be false". Therefore even the amended
Provisions of law do not help the case of the Revenue.
146\. The undisclosed income assessed in the present case does not fall within
the domain of Chapter XIV-B as there had already been a disclosure of the
transaction in the regular books of accounts maintained by the assessee, M/s
HCLCL and M/s SNIPL and since such disclosure was already made in the returns
filed prior to the search, the impugned addition is liable to be deleted being
beyond the scope and ambit of Chapter XIV-B.
147\. As a result of our decision rendered hereinabove in paragraph Nos. 113
and 146 holding that the additions made by the Assessing Officer and confirmed
by the learned CIT(A) by invoking Section 92 were not sustainable in the facts
of the present case and in any case, the said additions were beyond the scope
of block assessment proceedings under Chapter XIV-B, the issue relating to the
ascertainment of exact arm's length price (fair market value) of the shares of
M/s HCL Consulting Ltd. at the relevant time has become only academic. We,
therefore, do not deem it necessary or expedient to decide the same although
elaborate arguments have been advanced by the learned representatives of both
the sides on this issue at the time of hearing before us. Similarly, the
alternative contentions raised by the learned DR to support the Revenue's case
by placing reliance on the provisions of Section 93 as well as on the decision
of Hon'ble Supreme Court in the McDowell's case have also been rendered only
academic as a result of conclusion drawn by us that the relevant transactions
of purchase/sale of shares having been already disclosed by the assessee, the
addition in respect of the same, if any, could be made in the regular
assessment and not in the block assessment.
148\. The fourth issue referable to block assessment viz., whether the search
itself is valid because of absence of satisfaction or conditions Under Section
132(1)(c) does not require any detailed analysis in view of the decision of
the Special Bench of the ITAT, Delhi in the case of Promain Ltd. v. DCIT 95
ITD 489 (SB)(Del) and the Hon'ble High Court in the case of M.B. Lal v. CIT
279 ITR 298 (Delhi), wherein it has been held that the Tribunal docs not have
power to adjudicate upon the validity of search on the ground of non-
satisfaction of the conditions prior to issue of a warrant of search. The
fifth issue referable to block assessment viz., whether the block assessment
is invalid in view of defective notice Under Section 158BC of the Act is again
an issue which has already been decided by the Special Bench of the ITAT,
Amritsar Bench in the case of Smt. Mahesh Kumari Batra v. Jt. CIT 95 ITD 152
(SB)(Amr) wherein it has been held that any defect in notice Under Section
158BC of the Act will not vitiate the order of assessment. In view of the
above, these issues are decided against the assessee.
149\. In the result, the appeal of the assessee is partly allowed.
150\. Now we shall take up the Revenue's appeal for consideration which is
IT(SS) A. No. 45/Del/2005.
151\. The first ground of appeal of the Revenue reads as follows:
On the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Ld. CIT(A) has erred in
deleting the addition of Rs. 89,47,59,623/- made on account of sale of shares
of M/s HCL HDX Holdings (Mauritius) Pvt.Ltd. to M/s Varna Sundari Pvt.Ltd.,
Mauritius at less than the market price be manipulation.
The assessee has sought leave to raise the following additional ground for
adjudication:
On the facts and circumstances of the case, CIT(A) has erred in deleting the
addition of Rs. 89,47,59,623/- made on account of sale of shares of M/s HCL
Deluxe N.V. by M/s HCL-HDX-Holdings (Mauritius) (P) Ltd. to Deluxe Corporation
U.S.A.
152\. Leave to raise the additional ground is granted. The original ground and
the additional ground permitted to be raised as above are taken up for
consideration together. The facts and circumstances which are relevant for
adjudication of the aforesaid ground of appeal are as follows. The three
important HCL investment companies of HCL group namely HCL Corporation Ltd.,
Shiv Nadar Investment (P) Ltd. and Slocum Investment (P) Ltd. incorporated a
100% Subsidiary Company Wholly Owned Subsidiary (WOS) in Mauritius namely M/s
HCL-HDX Holdings (Mauritius) Private Limited in the month of June, 1997.
Subsequently, in September, 1997 a joint venture between HCL-HDX Holdings
(Mauritius) Private Limited and Deluxe Corporation USA was formed on the basis
of 50% equity holding by each party in the name of HCL Deluxe NV. This Joint
Venture company that is HCL Deluxe NV had two 100% Subsidiary companies namely
HCL Deluxe USA and HCL Deluxe India Pvt.Ltd. The joint venture company along
with its two subsidiaries commenced operation in 1997 and the nature of
business was to provide IT consulting and business process management. The
following chart will explain the position of shareholding:
HCL Deluxe India Pvt.Ltd. HCL Deluxe USA The three Indian investment co
mpanies namely HCL Corporation Ltd., Shiv Nadar Investment (P) Ltd. and Slocum
Investment P.Ltd. sold their 100% share holdings in HCL-HDX Holdings
(Mauritius) P.Ltd. to M/s Varna Sundari Investment (Mauritius)(P) Ltd.
hereinafter called VSIPL(M) for a consideration of US $ 2.11 Million (Approx.)
in September, 1998. HCL-HDX Holdings Pvt.Ltd. Mauritius, which became Wholly
Owned Subsidiary (WOS) of Vama Sundari Investments Pvt.Ltd. (Mauritius), in
turn, sold the shares of HCL Deluxe to Deluxe Corporation of the USA, for US $
23.4 Million in April, 1999.
153\. It may be relevant at this stage to point out that for establishing of
joint venture company the assessee and the two other companies were granted
permission/approval by the RBI vide its letter dt. 31.3.97. Later on this
approval was modified by letter dt. 24.5.97. Initially the Joint Venture
Company was to be at Austria. As per modified Certificate the Joint Venture
Company was to be located at Mauritius. It is consequent to such approval that
the company M/s HCL HDX Holdings (Mauritius) Pvt. Ltd. was formed. It was
incorporated according to the Laws of Mauritius and was a tax resident of the
Republic of Mauritius.
154\. When the shares of HCL HDX Holdings (Mauritius) Pvt.Ltd. were sold by
the assessee and the two other companies to VSIPL (Mauritius) the shares were
valued by M/s Purushottaman Bhutani & Co. Chartered Accountants. The
consideration for sale of the shares had been paid by VSIPL (Mauritius) to the
assessee and the two other companies and the foreign Inward Remittance
Certificate dt. 28.9.98, 6.10.98, 14.10.98 and 5.12.98 evidencing such payment
to the assessee and the two other companies are placed at page nos. 1719 to
1723 of the assessee's paper book. The sale of the shares by the assessee and
the two other companies had been duly approved by the RBI vide its letter dt.
3.11.01 a copy of which is placed at page No. 1724 of the assessee's paper
book.
155\. The Assessing Officer was however of the view that based on the seized
documents found in the course of search it was clear that the shares were sold
by the assessee to VSIPL(M) at a lower value and this had been done with a
view to avoid the incidence of capital gains tax which the assessee and the
two other companies would have incurred had the shares been sold at a proper
price. In this connection the Assessing Officer also found fault with the
assessee having obtained the valuation of shares from M/s Purushottaman
Bhutani & Co. According to the Assessing Officer the valuation of shares at
the time of sale ought to have been done by experts in valuing of technology
stocks like Merrill Lynch, Alex ground, JP Morgan, Morgan Stanley etc.
156\. The Assessing Officer thereupon called upon the assessee to give the
following particulars along with supporting evidence:
(a) the details of the funds available with VSIPL (M) during the period 1.4.98
to 31.12.99 with date wise inflow and outflow of funds and copy of bank
statement;
(b) copy of agreement between VSIPL (M) and Deluxe Corporation of USA for sale
of 50% ownership interest in M/s HCL-HDX (Mauritius)(P) Ltd.
(c) The circumstance under which VSIPL(M) had to sell the ownership interest
to Deluxe Corporation of USA.
157\. In reply the assessee submitted that with reference to point (a) above
it neither is in possession nor is expected to be in possession of the
aforesaid details which the Assessing Officer may obtain directly from the
said company. With reference to point (b) and (c) the assessee pleaded
inability to comply with the same as the assessee was not a party to the
agreement.
158\. The Assessing Officer took up for consideration the following issues:
A. Has the assessee company sold their 100% share holding in HCL-HDX Holdings
(Mauritius) Private Limited to a company namely "M/s Varna Sundari Investment
Pvt. Ltd. Mauritius" in normal course of business after applying due business
acumen.
B. Whether the whole transaction was designed in such a manner that resulted
into the diversion of income & evasion of Income Tax in India.
C. If it is designed, then who are the real beneficiaries and how they did it.
D. What is the evidence available which supports the argument that the whole
transaction was designed with some ulterior motive.
E. Whether the assessee company is really not in a position to provide the
information asked for on 17.02.04.
F. Whether the assessee company and M/s Vama Sundari P.Ltd. Mauritius are
totally independent of each other.
G. What were the circumstances which led M/s Vama Sundari Pvt.Ltd. Mauritius
to sell its 50% ownership interest in the "HCL Deluxe NV" to the Deluxe
Corporation of the USA.
H. Did M/s Vama Sundari Pvt.Ltd., Mauritius have sufficient funds to purchase
the shares of HCL-HDX Holdings (Mauritius) Private Limited from the assessee
company?
159\. The Assessing Officer answered each of the questions with reference to
the seized documents.
A. On the question that VSIPL(M) having sufficient funds to purchase the
shares of HCL HDX Holdings (Mauritius) Pvt.Ltd., the Assessing Officer
concluded that they did not have any funds. In this connection the Assessing
Officer referred to page 30 of Annexure A-1 of Party P-6 which is a letter dt.
10.10.98 by Nilesh Agarwal, a key person in HCL Group from India addressed to
one Priscille Koeing of Mauritius. In this letter there is a reference to
Remittance of certain funds into the account of VSIPL (M) and a further
instruction to transfer funds to the assessee and the two other companies.
There is also a further direction in the said letter that in future further
funds would be deposited and such funds should be utilized in the manner
directed. Further reference was also made to P-23 of Annexure A-1 Party P-6
which is a letter dt. 25.9.98 by Nilesh Agarwal to Prescille Koeing. Here
again there is a reference to a deposit of funds to M/s VSIPL (M) and further
instruction to transfer the same to M/s SNIPL towards consideration for
purchase of shares in HCL HDX Consulting (M) Pvt.Ltd. These letters which are
copies of E-mail were in a paper with the heading "HCL CORPORATION LIMITED".
From the above the Assessing Officer concluded that funds for purchase of
shares were provided to VSIPL(M) from the assessee company.
B. On the question whether the assessee company and VSIPL (M) are totally
independent of each other, the Assessing Officer observed that apart from the
letters referred to in (A) above the document page No. 105 of Annexure A-2
Party P-2 threw light on the degree of control exercised by the assessee on
M/s VSIPL (M). In this letter which is on a plain paper in the form of an
E-mail dt. 13.6.98 there is some instruction regarding singing of agreement on
behalf of VSIPL (M). This is authored by Mr. Anil Chanana, a key person in HCL
Group. These are addressed to Mr. Parwez and Mr. AST Rajan respectively.
Another reference was made to page 8 of Annexure A-23 seized from party P-4.
This is a dollar cash flow for the period 1.4.99 to 31.5.99. There is a
scribbling on top of this chart "Mr. Nadar 31.5.99". In this dollar cash flow
the receipt in US dollars of 2,44,34,225 has been shown against - HDX Sale as
an inflow of Dollars. From this the Assessing Officer concluded that VSIPL (M)
and the assessee were closely connected. Another reason given by the Assessing
Officer was that Shiv Nadar was the Chairman who had major share holdings in
other companies belonging to the HCL group of companies. He was also a
Director in M/s VSIPL (M) and a signatory in some of the bank accounts
standing in the name of the said company. He was also receiving salary from
HCL HDX Holdings Pvt.Ltd.(M). The AO therefore concluded that VSIPL(M) was
controlled by the assessee and its group companies through Mr. Shiv Nadar.
C. On the question of the circumstances leading to the sale of 50% of the
ownership interest in HCL Deluxe NV to Deluxe Corporation of USA, the
Assessing Officer held that the Deluxe Corporation of USA who was the 50%
joint venture partner in HCL Deluxe NV was not comfortable with the joint
venture with HCL HDX Holdings (M) Pvt.Ltd. In this regard the Assessing
Officer had referred to a seized document which is letter dt. 29.11.01 from
Turchan Markp. According to the Assessing Officer the stand taken in the
letter clearly showed that a split in the joint venture was contemplated long
before the actual sale of shares to Deluxe Corporation (USA). The Assessing
Officer referred to the agreement between VSIPL (M) and M/s Magnus Capital
Corporation Limited a company incorporated in Mauritius dt. 15.6.98 whereby
Magnus financed VSIPL (M) for purchase of shares in Indian companies. The
Assessing Officer has observed that the Agreement was signed on 15.6.98 but
was to be effective from 17.1.97 and this evidenced the fact that backdating
Agreements was a common thing in this group. The Assessing Officer ultimately
concluded that the joint venture of HCL DLX NV was likely to split and this
fact was known in advance to the assessee and the two other companies. With
this knowledge they sold the shares first to a Mauritius based company so that
the gains likely to arise on sale can be transferred to Mauritius a tax heaven
so far as tax on capital gains are concerned.
D. The Assessing Officer held that the real beneficiary was Shiv Nadar Group
which was effectively running and controlling from India M/s VSIPL (M).
E. The Assessing Officer concluded that the transaction was designed in such a
manner that it resulted into diversion of income and evasion of income tax in
India.
F. The Assessing Officer concluded that the assessee and the two other
companies selling shares of HCL HDX Holdings (M) Pvt.Ltd. to VSIPL(M) was not
a sale in the normal course of business after applying due business acumen.
160\. After concluding as above, the Assessing Officer had referred to the
fact that Reserve Bank of India granting permission for sale of shares has
nothing to do when it comes to bringing to tax income arising out of a
transaction. The final conclusions of the Assessing Officer on this issue were
as follows:
Thus owing to the close connection between HCL group and VSIPL (M), as
discussed above, the shares have actually been sold at US $ 23,043,727 instead
of US $ 2,110,000. The actual consideration was US $ 23,043,727 has been
established on the basis of page No. 8 and 11 of Annexure 23 seized by party
P4.
    A. Dollar cash inflow for the period 1.4.99 to 31.5.99
       towards the sale of shares of HDX                           US $ 24,434,225.
    B. Dollar cash outflow for the period 1.6.99 to 30.6.99
       mentioned against Deluxe                                    US $1,390,498
    C  Net receipt                                                 US $ 23,043,727
    Thus additional tax on income of US $ 20,933,727 (23,043,727 -2,110,000) has escaped assessment due to the colourable device used by the group.
161\. The Assessing Officer has thereafter referred to tax evasion and
employing colourable device to avoid tax. Reference was made to the decision
of the Supreme Court in the case of Sithal Das Tirath Das 41 ITR 367 and
decision in the case of Mcdowell Co.Ltd. v. CTO 154 ITR 148 and several other
decisions. The Assessing Officer ultimately assessed the difference between
the sale consideration received by the assessee and the two other companies
from VSIPL (M) and the Sale Consideration received by M/s HCL-HDX Mauritius
(P) Ltd. from Deluxe Corporation USA on sale of shares held in HCL-Deluxe
N.V., as undisclosed income of the assessee.
162\. Before the CIT(A), the assessee pointed out that the Assessing Officer
proceeded on an erroneous assumption that the shares of HCL HDX (Holdings)
Mauritius P.Ltd., which were sold by the assessee and the two other companies
to Varna Sundari Investments P.Ltd., Mauritius, were later sold by VSIPL
(Mauritius) to Deluxe Corporation at a substantially higher price. The fact
that the shares sold by the assessee and those sold by HCL-HDX (Holdings)
Mauritius P.Ltd. were entirely different and distinct from each other, was
claimed as not having been appreciated or deliberately overlooked by the
Assessing Officer. The assessee referred to finding by the Assessing Officer
that in order to avoid payment of capital gains tax in India the assessee
'parked' the shares with associate foreign company which in turn sold the same
at much higher price subsequently and the further finding that this action,
resulted in the diversion of income in the form of capital gains and the same
is brought to tax as the 'undisclosed income' and submitted that there is no
reference to any provisions of the Act which authorizes the action of the AO,
treating the income of a foreign company, i.e. VSIPL (M) or HCL-HDX Mauritius
(P) Ltd. arising entirely outside India, as income of the assessee, an Indian
company. It was submitted that the Assessing Officer has displayed scant
regard to the facts and twisted the same at will. It was pointed out that the
block of shares held, and later sold by the assessee were entirely different
from the block of shares held in a Dutch company by a Mauritius Company. It
was argued that the gains arising to HCL HDX (Holdings) Mauritius P.Ltd. from
the sale of shares in the Dutch company, HCL Deluxe NV could not be said to
accrue to the assessee from the sale of its shareholding in HCL-HDX (Holdings)
Mauritius P.Ltd. It was submitted that the sum of US $ 23.4 million, was the
income of HCL HDX Holdings (Mauritius) P.Ltd. obtained by sale of its holding
in the Dutch company M/s HCL Deluxe N.V. in favour of the US company. It was
pointed out that the said consideration was credited to the account of HCL HDX
in Mauritius and no part of the consideration of US Dollars 23.4 million was
receivable or actually received in India. Therefore, such income, can, by no
stretch of argument, be considered as the income of the assessee. Secondly,
the assessee and the two other companies ceased to be the owner of HCL HDX
Holdings (Mauritius) P.Ltd. in September, 1998, and, after that date, it was
VSIPL (Mauritius) which was the owner of HCL HDX Holdings (Mauritius) Pvt.Ltd.
It was again clarified that had the assessee and the two other companies not
sold their shares in HCL HDX Holdings (Mauritius) P.Ltd. and continued to hold
the same and if HCL-HDX Holdings (M) P.Ltd. transfers it's holding in HCL
Deluxe NV to Deluxe Corporation, the resultant consideration or the gains
arising therefrom could still not have been taxed in India in the hands of the
assessee. That the assessee and the other two companies could not have taken
any cognizance of the transaction at all. It was thus argued that, by no
stretch of imagination, can it be contended that US $ 23.4 million received by
a non resident company is the "undisclosed income" of the assessee.
163\. Apart from the above, the various inferences drawn by the Assessing
Officer from the seized documents were also explained by the assessee and it
was submitted that the assessment made in the hands of the assessee was
unsustainable.
The CIT(A) held as follows:
Thus, the appellant company has raised a valid plea that the shares of both
the Dutch JV company (M/s HCL Deluxe NV) as well as the Mauritius company (M/s
HCL HDX Holdings (Mauritius) P.Ltd.) were altogether different. No holding or
equity participation in any manner of M/s Deluxe Corporation USA existed in
M/s HCL HDX Holding (M) P.Ltd. (the WOS of the appellant and the erstwhile
companies, which became wholly owned subsidiary of M/s VSIPL (M) in October,
1998). The sale of shares in the JV company was made by M/s HCL HDX Holding
P.Ltd. Mauritius and not by the appellant company or any other companies.
Hence, the finding of the Assessing Officer that the shares of the JV company
were sold by M/s VSIPL(M) is grossly incorrect as the shares in JV company
were never held by M/s VSIPL(M). Another finding that no time would be left
for the appellant and other companies to sell their holding in M/s HCL HDX
Holdings (M) P.Ltd. to M/s VSIPL(M) in the event of sale of JV company is also
incorrect since M/s Deluxe Corporation USA was not effected at all by such
transfer since it held stake in JV company and not in M/s HCl HDX Holdings
(Mauritius) P.Ltd.
Here, it is pertinent to note that M/s VSIPL (M) is an overseas corporate body
incorporated in Mauritius with tax residence in that country. It has an
independent board having 3 Non-resident directions in addition to mr. Shiv
Nadar as director. Further, as per Clause (ii) of Section 6(3) of the Income
Tax Act, 1961, M/s VSIPL (M) is not a company resident in India as the control
and management of its affairs is situated wholly outside India and all
decisions are taken by the majority opinion of the Board of Directors outside
India.
From the above discussion, it is absolutely clear that instead of one actually
there were two transactions that had taken place. The first transaction was
between M/s Slocum Investments P.Ltd., M/s Shiv Nadar Investment P.Ltd. and
M/s HCLCL with M/s VSIPL (Mauritius) to sell their 100% wholly owned
subsidiary namely M/s HCL HDX Deluxe Holdings (Mauritius) P.Ltd. for US $ 2.11
million. The second transaction was between M/s HCL Delxue NV, Dutch JV
company and M/s Deluxe Corporation USA for acquisition of 50% of shares of M/s
HCL Delxue NV by M/s Deluxe Corporation USA. Thus, the first transaction was
between a resident (Indian companies) and Non resident (Mauritius company)
whereas the second transaction, on the basis of which the addition was made by
the Assessing Officer was between two Non-resident companies (a Dutch JV
company and a USA company). Since the second transaction was involving two Non
resident companies, therefore, there was absolutely no need on the part of
these Non resident companies to inform this transaction to the Indian Tax
Authorities or it can be said that the same has taken place outside the
taxable territory of India, therefore, can not be brought to tax under Indian
Income Tax Law. Further, I agree with the appellant's contention that even if
it is assumed that no off loading of investment in M/s HCL HDX Holding
(Mauritius) P.Ltd. would have occurred, then also the seller of shares of the
JV company would have been M/s HCL HDX Holdings (Mauritius) P.Ltd. and not the
appellant and the two erstwhile companies. In that case also, out of such
sale, no capital gain would have arisen in India and only corpus fund of M/s
HCL HDX Holdings (Mauritius) P.Ltd. would have been appreciated whereby only
the value of investment of the appellant and the other companies in such
wholly owned subsidiary would have increased.
The fact is that the block of shares held and later on sold by the appellant
and other companies was entirely different from the block of shares held in a
Dutch company (HCL Deluxe NV) by a Mauritius company (HCL HDX Holdings
(Mauritius) P.Ltd.). The gains arising to M/s HCL HDX Holdings (Mauritius)
P.ltd. from the sale of shares of M/s HCL Deluxe NV could not, therefore, said
to be accruing to the appellant. Therefore, the sum of US $ 23.4 million is
the income of M/s HCL HDX Holdings (Mauritius) P.Ltd. obtained by sale of its
holding in the Dutch JV Company in favour of M/s Deluxe Corporation USA. The
said consideration was credited to the account of M/s HCL HDX Holdings P. Ltd.
in Mauritius and not in India. Since the fact of existence of seller company
at Mauritius has not been challenged at any stage by either party, therefore,
such income can under no circumstances be considered as the income of the
appellant and the other two erstwhile companies.
The fact that the appellant ceased to be the owner of M/s HCL HDX Holdings
(Mauritius) P. Ltd. in September, 1998, and after that date, it was M/s VSIPL
(Mauritius), which was the owner of M/s HCL HDX Holdings (Mauritius) P.Ltd.
remained unchallenged. Therefore, the appellant's contention that had the
appellant and the two erstwhile companies not sold their shares in M/s HCL HDX
Holdings (Mauritius) P.Ltd. and continued to hold the same when that company
transferred its holding in M/s HCL Deluxe NV to M/s Deluxe Corporation USA,
the resultant consideration or the gains arising there from could still not
have been taxed in India is legally as well as factually correct.
The CIT(A) thus deleted the addition made by the AO.
164\. Aggrieved by the order of learned CIT(A) deleting the addition made by
the Assessing Officer, the Revenue has preferred the present appeal before the
Tribunal. We have heard the submissions of the Id. DR and the Id. counsel for
the assessee. The Id. DR at the outset pointed out that the assessee and the
two other companies sold their 100% shareholding in M/s HCL-HDX Holdings
(Mauritius) (P) Ltd. in September, 1998 for 2.11 Million US$ to M/s Varna
Sundari Investments P.Ltd. (M). M/s HCL-HDX Holdings (M)(P) Ltd. sold the
shares i.e. 50% of the share capital of the company HCL Deluxe NV of
Netherlands, held by them for 23.4 Million US $ in April, 1999 to M/s Deluxe
Corporation, U.S.A. He pointed out to seized document P.23 Al P6 and P-30 Al
P6 which clearly showed that funds for purchase of shares of HCL-HDX Holdings
(M) (P) Ltd. by M/s VSIPL(M) were provided from the HCL group in India. He
submitted that a comparison of the above seized document with the FIRC
evidencing in flow of consideration to the assessee and the two companies
being the consideration paid by VSIPL (M) for purchase of shares of M/s HCL-
HDX-Holdings (M) (P) Ltd. clearly showed that the funds which went out of
India came back to India. He also brought to our notice the documents seized
in the course of search viz., the Dollar Cash flow Statement for the period
1.4.99 to 31.5.99 which is P4/A23/8 and Dollar Cash Flow for the period
31.8.98 to 30.9.00 which is P4/A53/S4. His submission was that these documents
found in the course of search clearly indicated that the ownership, control
and decision making power in respect of all the Overseas Corporate Body lay
with the assessee and the two companies and therefore the two companies were
to be treated as dummy companies and the profit on sale of shares of HCL-
Deluxe-N.V. have to be taxed in the hands of the assessee and the two other
companies. His submission was that the overall control and decision making
power was with Shiv Nadar, the promoter and major shareholder in all the group
companies of HCL group. He pointed out that at every stage of all
transactions, there was presence of the HCL group India, either in the form of
remitting funds from India or arranging for loans from India. The Id.DR
further submitted that the assessee at every stage of the proceedings before
Assessing Officer did not furnish any information about VSIPL(M) or about the
basis of valuation of shares of HCL-HDX Holdings (M)(P) Ltd. which were sold
to Deluxe Corporation (U.S.A.). In the circumstances, according to him, the
Revenue was entitled to draw an adverse inference against the assessee. He
therefore submitted that the action of the Assessing Officer in taxing the
profits that HCL-HDX(M)(P) Ltd. earned on sale of shares of M/s HCL-Deluxe
(N.V.) Netherlands to Deluxe Corporation(U.S.A.) was right.
165\. He further submitted that provisions of Section 93 could be invoked in
the present case and the addition made could be sustained on that basis. It is
at this stage appropriate for us to narrate the provisions of Section 93 in so
far as the same is relevant for adjudicating the dispute in the present case.
Section 93 : Avoidance of income tax by transactions resulting in transfer of
income to non-residents:
93(1) : Where there is a transfer of assets by virtue or in consequence
whereof, either alone or in conjunction with associated operations, any income
becomes payable to a Non-resident, the following provisions shall apply -
(a) Where any person has, by means of any such transfer, either alone or in
conjunction with associated operations, acquired any rights by virtue of which
he has, within the meaning of this section, power to enjoy, whether forthwith
or in the future, any income of a non-resident person which, if it were income
of the first mentioned person, would be chargeable to income tax, that income
shall, whether it would or would not have been chargeable to income tax apart
from the provisions of this section be deemed to be income of the first
mentioned person for all the purposes of this Act.
(b) Where, whether before or after any such transfer, any such first mentioned
person receives or is entitled to receive any capital sum the payment whereof
is in any way connected with the transfer or any associated operations, then
any income which, by virtue or in consequence of the transfer, either alone or
in conjunction with associated operations, has become the income of a non-
resident shall, whether it would or would not have been chargeable to income
tax apart from the provisions of this section, be deemed to be the income of
the first mentioned person for all the purposes of this Act.
Explanation: The provisions of this Sub-section shall apply also in relation
to transfers of assets and associated operations carried out before the
commencement of this Act.
166\. The following are the purpose and intent behind the above provision and
the ingredients to be satisfied for application of these provisions. Under the
Act, a resident is chargeable on world income basis. It is immaterial where
his income accrued or arose whether within India or outside India, or where it
was received, whether within India or outside India. On the other hand, a non-
resident is chargeable to Indian taxation in respect of his income received or
deemed to be received in India and any income which accrued or arose or is
deemed to have accrued or arisen in India. Consequently, in the case of a non-
resident, if his income bearing asset is one situate outside India, the income
arising therefrom would not be includible in his total income. Therefore, a
resident who is desirous of reducing his tax liability may transfer the
ownership in his foreign asset to a non-resident while at the same time
contriving to secure benefits to himself or for his own men, relations or
dependants. The transferee may be a trustee or body of trustee under a
settlement or a limited company. To take a simple case of a settlement in
trust, the resident transferor would be liable to income tax only to the
extent to which any benefits are payable to him under the settlement. The rest
of the income remaining in the hands of the non-resident trustee would go free
of tax. Again, if there be several beneficiaries under the settlement and even
if all of them were residents in India, the income would be split amongst them
in various parcels carrying a nil or lower rate of tax. To take another
instance: should the resident transfer his foreign income bearing asset to a
foreign company formed for the purpose, in return for shares in the company,
the resident would render himself liable to tax only to the extent of the
dividends, if any, declared and paid by the company. But for the transfer to
the incorporated company, the resident would have been exigible to tax in
respect of the entire income from the foreign asset. To strike at such
transfers, Section 93 enacts that the income arising to the nonresident
transferee should be deemed to be the income of the transferor. The section is
designedly couched in the widest phraseology to prevent evasion of tax by such
devices, at the same time protecting bona fide transactions. The above is the
view expressed by the Hon'ble S.C. in the case of Chidambaram Chettiar v. CIT
60 ITR 28 (S.C.)
167\. The Id. DR submitted that the term 'rights' mentioned in Section
93(1)(a) is of wide amplitude. Referring to the Explanation below Sub-section
(3) of Section 93, the Id.DR submitted that Shiv Nadar had a right to sit on
the board of VSIPL(M) and was also authorized signatory of the bank accounts
of VSIPL(M). The fact that Shiv Nadar provided funds of US $ 9,500 is also
evident from document P.4-A53-S4. He drew our attention to exhibit P2-A2/156 &
157 and submitted that this seized document clearly evidenced control of the
various group companies of HCL based at Mauritius. These notings found in the
seized document according to the Id.DR were that of Shiv Nadar. His submission
was that the transfer of HCL HDX (M) P.Ltd. shares by the assessee and the two
other companies in favour of VSIPL(M) is a transfer of asset which generated
the income in question and which attracts the applicability of the provisions
of Section 93 of the Act. His further submission was that once the primary
conditions applicable Under Section 93 are satisfied it is then for the
assessee to prove that the transaction in question was a bonafide commercial
transaction and was not for the purpose of avoiding liability to taxation. He
drew our attention to the provisions of Section 93(3) of the Act in this
regard. The Id.DR thus submitted that the action of the Assessing Officer in
bringing to tax the income in question can be sustained on this basis. On the
applicability of the provisions of Section 93 reference was also made by the
ldDR to the decisions of the Supreme Court in the case of Chidambaram Chettiar
(supra).
168\. His further plea was that notwithstanding the decision of the Hon'ble
Supreme Court in the case of Azadi Bachao Andolan 263 ITR 706, still the
principle laid down in the case of McDowell and Co.Ltd. v. CTO 154 ITR 148
would be applicable. The nomenclature given by the parties to a transaction
can be ignored if it is a colourable device or a dubious method or a
subterfuge. The Id.DR relied on the decision of the Special Bench of ITAT in
the case of Wallfort shares and Stock Brokers Ltd. v. ITO 96 ITD 1 (Mum)(SB)
wherein the above principle has been laid down after making a reference to the
later decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of CCE v. Modi
Alkalies and Chemicals Ltd. 2004 (7) SCC 569. Reliance was also placed on the
decision of the Delhi High Court in the case of Bhagat Construction Co.(P)
Ltd. v. CIT -250 ITR 291 (Del) wherein the Hon'ble Delhi High Court has upheld
bringing to tax income ignoring a colourable device employed by an assessee.
The submission of the Id.DR in conclusion was that even on the basis of the
theory of colourable device as propounded by the Assessing Officer the
addition made can be sustained.
169\. For sustaining the order of the Assessing Officer on the new plea of
invoking the provisions of Section 93, the learned DR submitted that the same
is permissible even without a specific ground of appeal in this regard.
Reliance was placed on the following decisions:
(a) Hukumchand Mills v. CIT 63 ITR 232 (SC).
(b) NTPC v. CIT 229 ITR 383 (SC).
(c) Ahmedabad Electricity Co. v. CIT 199 ITR 351 (Bom).
170\. The Id. counsel for the assessee at the outset submitted that the Id.DR
was not in a position to dispute the error in the approach of the Assessing
Officer in presuming that the shares which were sold in April, 1999 were that
of HCL-HDX Holding (M) (P) Ltd. Referring to the original grounds of appeal of
the Revenue, he submitted that the grounds read in the context of the findings
of the CIT(A) are erroneous and reflects lack of application of mind by the
Commissioner in drafting and approving the grounds of appeal filed before the
Tribunal. On the question of application of Section 93, he submitted that the
same would completely change the very basis of assessment made by the AO.
While the Assessing Officer wanted to tax the profit made on alleged sale of
shares by VSIPL (M) to Deluxe Corporation, USA, the DR now wants to bring to
tax the profit made by M/s HCL-HDX (M)(P) Ltd. in the hands of the assessee.
He submitted that as an appellant, the Revenue cannot seek to put forth such
plea. It may be relevant at this stage to mention that the Id.DR in support of
his plea of invoking the provisions of Section 93 in the present case has
placed reliance on the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of
Hukum Chand Mills Ltd. (supra). The Id. counsel for the assessee submitted
that the course suggested by the Id.DR can not be adopted and in this
connection relied on the decision of the Bombay High Court in the case of CIT
v. T.M. Bhumraddi and Anr. 33 ITR 82 (Bom). His submission was that on the
plea raised by the DR before the Tribunal, it has to be assumed that the
transaction by the assessee and the two other companies i.e. sale of shares of
HCL HDX (M) P.Ltd. to VSIPL (M) was a sham transaction. Whether the plea of
sham can be allowed to be raised at this stage as it would negate the very
case sought to be made out by the Assessing Officer. Referring to the decision
in the case of Hukum Chand (supra) he submitted that in the said case there
was no change of the character assessment as in the present case. His
submission was that the applicability of Section 93 does not arise out of the
order of the CIT(A) and can not be the subject matter of the appeal. It was
submitted that entertaining the plea will involve investigation of new facts
and, therefore, cannot be permitted to be raised at this stage. It was also
submitted that for application of Section 93 the primary conditions as
mentioned in Section 93(1) have to be prima facie established by the Revenue
and only then the onus shifts to the assessee Under Section 93(3). In any case
it was submitted, that the facts of the present case do not warrant
application of the provisions of Section 93. According to him in the worst
situation it can only be said that Shiv Nadar was behind all these companies.
Even assuming the corporal veil is lifted/pierced, one can only find Mr. Shiv
Nadar as the person behind all these companies and assessment in the hands of
the assessee and the two other companies can never be made. It was submitted
that in the present case which is a block assessment proceeding, Section 93
could not be invoked, as there was already a disclosure of these transactions
by the assessee and the two other companies in their returns of income. He
points out that Under Section 93 there is intrinsic evidence available to show
that it cannot be applied at this second appeals stage. The reason, according
to him, is that under Sub-section 3 of Section 93, the assessee was entitled
to show to the satisfaction of the Assessing Officer that there was no tax
evasion and that the transaction was a genuine commercial transaction. If the
plea is raised at the second appeal stage, the assessee would loose the right
to rebut the inference regarding bonafides of a commercial transaction.
171\. On the question of raising a new plea before the Tribunal for the first
time the Id. counsel for the assessee submitted that without facts necessary
for adjudication of the new plea the Revenue should not be permitted to raise
the same before the Tribunal. He points out that the Revenue has no right of
appeal against the order of the Assessing Officer and therefore Commissioner
of Income Tax (Appeals) could not have invoked Section 93. When first appeal
cannot be filed the Revenue should not be allowed to raise the plea in the
second appeal. He points out that when an assessee seeks to raise a new plea
before the Tribunal, the same stands on a different footing because he has no
other avenue to redress his grievance whereas the Revenue can have recourse to
the provisions of Section 147 for bringing to tax income escaping assessment
and Section 263 where the order of the Assessing Officer is erroneous and
prejudicial to the interest of the Revenue.
172\. We have considered the rival submissions. At the outset, we have to
point out that the transaction in question namely sale of shares of HCL HDX
(M) (P) Ltd. by the assessee and the two other companies to VSIPL(M) took
place in the month of September, 1998 i.e. the P.Y. relevant to A.Y.
1999-2000. The assessee as well as the two other companies had filed the
returns of income for these A.Ys. wherein the sale of these shares duly
reflected in their returns of income and the documents filed therewith. A copy
of the return of income of the assessee for the A.Y. 1999-2000 is placed at
page nos. 291 to 295 and that of HCLCL is placed at page nos. 310 to 312 and
that of SNIPL is placed at page nos. 335 to 339. It is therefore seen that
there has been a disclosure of these facts in the return of income filed prior
to the date of search. We have already noticed while discussing the assessee's
appeal that in respect of a disclosed transaction no addition could be made in
a block assessment. This is not a case where as a result of material found in
the course of search any expenditure, deduction or allowance is found to be
false, it is not the Revenue's case that the assessee received something more
on sale of the shares in question over and above what has already been
disclosed.
173\. Secondly it is noticed that the Assessing Officer under a wrong
assumption that the shares sold by VSIPL(M) were that of HCL HDX Holdings (M)
(P) Ltd. proceeded to assess the undisclosed income. This was obviously on a
wrong basis. It is on this mistake that the CIT(A) had deleted the addition
made by the Assessing Officer. When this basic mistake subsists in the order
of the Assessing Officer, we do not see how the Revenue can seek to argue that
the profits made by HCL HDX Holdings (M) (P) Ltd. on sale of shares of HCL
Deluxe NV (Netherlands) should be assessed in the hands of the assessee. As
rightly contended by the Id. counsel for the assessee this would change the
very basis of the assessment as made by the Assessing Officer.
174\. We have also considered the question whether the Revenue should be
allowed to raise a new plea regarding applicability of Section 93 for the
first time before the Tribunal. For the following reasons, we are of the view
that the Revenue cannot be allowed to raise such a plea. The powers of the
Tribunal in dealing with appeals are expressed in Section 254(1) of the Act in
the widest possible terms.
The Appellate Tribunal may, after giving both parties to the appeal an
opportunity of being heard, pass such orders thereon as it thinks fit.
The word "thereon", of course, restricts the jurisdiction of the Tribunal to
the subject-matter of the appeal. The words "pass such orders as the Tribunal
thinks fit" include all the powers (except possibly the power of enhancement)
which are conferred upon the Commissioner of Income Tax (Appeals) by Section
251 of the Act. Rule 11 of the Appellate Tribunal Rules, 1963, provides as
follows:
The appellant shall not, except by leave of the Tribunal, urge or be heard in
support of any ground not set forth in the memorandum of appeal; but the
Tribunal, in deciding the appeal, shall not be confined to the grounds set for
the in the memorandum of appeal or taken by leave of the Tribunal under this
rule:
Provided that the Tribunal shall not rest its decision on any other ground
unless the party who may be affected thereby has had a sufficient opportunity
of being heard on that ground.
Rule 27 provides that:
The respondent, though he may not have appealed, may support the order
appealed against on any of the grounds decided against him.
175\. The Revenue has not chosen to raise an additional ground of appeal
praying for sustaining the order of the Revenue authorities on the basis of
this new plea. It has been held in the case of Hukumchand Mills (supra) that
the Tribunal has sufficient power Under Section 33(4) of the Act, 1922
(Section 254(1) of the Act of 1961) to entertain a new argument by the Revenue
and that Rules 12 (present Rule 11 of ITAT Rules) and 27 are not exhaustive of
the powers of the Appellate Tribunal. That the rules are merely procedural in
character and do not, in any way, circumscribe or control the power of the
Tribunal Under Section 33(4) of the Act.(Section 254(1) of Act of 1961).
176\. The Honorable Supreme Court in the case of National Thermal Power
Corporation 229 ITR 383 has laid down that (a) it is the discretion of the
Tribunal to admit or not to admit a new ground to be raised before it, (b) if
the Tribunal is required to only consider a question of law arising from the
facts which are on record in the assessment proceedings such question should
be allowed to be raised and (c) that the proceedings before the tax
authorities are for correctly assessing the tax liability of an assessee in
accordance with law.
177\. The next question would be where facts which are necessary for
adjudication of a new ground are not already on record can the Tribunal
exercise its discretion to allow a new ground to be raised? In this regard
should there be any difference in its approach when permitting the Assessee to
raise a new ground to be raised and in permitting the Revenue to raise a new
ground?
178\. In the case of Hukumchand Mills case (supra) relied by the learned D.R.,
it has been held as follows:
In the present case, the subject-matter of the appeal before the Tribunal was
the question as to what should be the proper written down value of the
buildings, machinery, etc., of the assessee for calculating the depreciation
allowance Under Section 10(2)(vi) of the Act. It was certainly open to the
department, in the appeal filed by the assessee before the Tribunal, to
support the finding of the Appellate Assistant Commissioner with regard to the
written down value on any of the grounds decided against it. It was argued on
behalf of the appellant that the action of the Tribunal in remanding the case
is not strictly justified by the language of Rule 27 or Rule 12. Even assuming
that Rules 12 and 27 are not strictly applicable, we are of opinion that the
Tribunal has got sufficient power Under Section 33(4) of the Act to entertain
the argument of the department with regard to the application of paragraph 2
of the Taxation Laws Order and remand the case to the Income-tax Officer in
the manner it has done. It is necessary to state that Rules 12 and 27 are not
exhaustive of the powers of the Appellate Tribunal. The rules are merely
procedural in character and do not, in any way, circumscribe or control the
power of the Tribunal Under Section 33(4) of the Act. We are accordingly of
the opinion that the Tribunal had jurisdiction to entertain the argument of
the department in this case and to direct the Income-tax Officer to find
whether any depreciation was actually allowed under the Industrial Tax Rules
and whether such depreciation should be taken into consideration for the
purpose of computing the written down value.
179\. The Hon'ble Gauhati High Court in the case of Assam Company (India) Ltd.
v. CIT (Supra) dealt with the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the
case of Hukumchand Mills case (Supra) and Mahalakshmi Mills Case (Supra)
relied upon by the learned Counsel for the Revenue in the context of admission
of new plea for adjudication by the Tribunal for the first time. The Court
also considered the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of
National Thermal Power Co. Ltd. (Supra). The question before the Court was as
to whether the Tribunal ought to have considered the plea of the applicant-
company that it was entitled to the benefit of weighted deduction Under
Section 35B(1)(b)(iv) of the Act in the absence of any appeal or any cross-
objection filed by it against the order of the Commissioner of Income-tax
(Appeals). The Court after considering several judicial pronouncements on the
subject held as follows:
We are therefore of the view that it is permissible on the part of the
Tribunal to entertain a ground beyond those incorporated in the memorandum of
appeal though the party urging the said ground had neither appealed before it
nor had filed a cross-objection in the appeal filed by the other party. We
must however hasten to add that in order to enable either the assessee or the
Department to urge a ground in the appeal filed by the other side, the
relevant facts on which such ground is to be founded should be available on
record. In the absence of such primary facts, in our opinion, neither the
assessee nor the Department can be permitted to urge any ground other than
those which are incorporated in the memorandum of appeal filed by the other
party. In other words, if the assessee or the Department, without filing any
appeal or a cross-objection seeks to urge a ground other than the grounds
incorporated in the memorandum of appeal filed by the other side, the
evidentiary facts in support of new ground must be available on record.
180\. The uniform view of Courts on this issue has been that facts necessary
for adjudication of a new plea should already be available on record. The only
other decision relied upon by the learned Counsel for the Revenue is the
decision of the Full Bench of the Hon'ble Bombay High Court in the case of
Ahmedabad Electricity Co. (supra). The Court after referring to several
judicial pronouncements on the subject held that the Appellate Tribunal has
jurisdiction to permit additional grounds to be raised before it even though
these may not arise from the order of the Appellate Assistant Commissioner, so
long as these grounds are in respect of the subject-matter of the entire tax
proceedings. The Court has not said anything about the existence of the facts
necessary for adjudication of the additional or a new ground. The
preponderance of judicial opinion is that the facts necessary for adjudication
of a new ground should already be available on record. In the present case
facts with regard to applicability of Section 93 are not available on record.
An order of remand for finding facts with regard to applicability of the
provisions of Section 93 cannot also be permitted as the same would be a mere
fishing inquiry hoping to sustain the action of the revenue authorities for
bringing to tax income in the hands of the assessee. The same cannot be
permitted, as adopting such a course would cause considerable harassment,
hardship and expenditure to the assessee and the same cannot be permitted on
the mere possibility or hope that some facts may emerge by which the action of
the revenue authorities can be sustained. Moreover, we should not forget the
fact that we are dealing with an assessment under Chapter-XIV-B of the Act,
under which determination of undisclosed income should be made on the basis of
material found in the course of search.
181\. We are also of the view where an assessee seeks to put forth a new plea
before Tribunal without facts necessary for adjudication of Appeal being
available on record in allowing such plea, the approach of the Tribunal should
be different for the following reasons:
(a) An assessee has no other avenue and if on the facts and in law if
ultimately it is found that the assessee is not liable to tax the Revenue can
not have grievance. After all, Article 265 of the Constitution of India
provides that no tax shall be levied and collected except by authority of law.
If ultimately the assessee is found to be liable to tax, he compensates the
Revenue in the form of interest. Therefore the Tribunal can even think of a
remand of the case for a finding on facts or can adjudicate on facts itself.
(b) On the other hand the Revenue has other options open to it under the Act.
If the order of an Assessing Officer is erroneous and prejudicial to the
interests of the Revenue the same can be revised by the CIT Under Section 263
of the Act. If income chargeable to tax escapes assessment, proceedings Under
Section 147 can be initiated to bring to tax such escaped income. In an appeal
by an assessee against the order of the Assessing Officer, the CIT9A) has
power of enhancement Under Section 251(1) of the Act.
(c) The Revenue does not have a right of appeal against the order of the
Assessing Officer. Therefore if Assessing Officer does not invoke Section 93,
and if the same was erroneous and prejudicial to the interest of the Revenue,
the same could be revised by the CIT Under Section 263.
(d) The Assessing Officer cannot plead before CIT(A) in an appeal by the
assessee to invoke Section 93. In a case in which Section 93 is not invoked by
Commissioner of Income Tax (Appeals) also, the Revenue cannot seek to sustain
the order of the Assessing Officer by invoking Section 93. The Revenue's right
of appeal before the Tribunal should therefore be held to be limited only to
restoring the assessment as done by the Assessing Officer and on the same
basis.
(e) An assessee aggrieved by an assessment of income in his hands has the
right to appeal to CIT(A) and thereafter to the Tribunal. By seeking to raise
an issue before the Tribunal for the first time, the right of appeal before
CIT(A) provided to an assessee becomes redundant and deprives the assessee the
benefit of adjudication by one of the Appellate Authority.
182\. In the light of the view, which we have taken above, we do not think it
appropriate to deal with the applicability of Section 93 to the transactions
in question. But we are of the view that the very basis of the arguments put
forth by the Id.DR on the basis of the seized documents cannot also be
sustained. Admittedly all the seized documents with reference to the
transaction of sale of shares to VSIPL(M) do not speak for themselves. The
complaint of the Assessing Officer was that the assessee did not cooperate in
furnishing the required information called for by him. The Assessing Officer
thereafter drew inferences from these seized documents without any basis. The
Id.DR submitted before us that in view of the non-cooperation of the assessee
adverse inference can be drawn against the assessee. We are of the view that
such an argument cannot be accepted. The Assessing Officer is empowered under
the various provisions of the Act to issue summons for examination of a
person. He has the powers of a Civil Court as are vested under the Code of
Civil Procedure when trying a suit regarding discovery and inspection,
compelling production of books, issuing commissions and enforcing attendance
of any person. These powers are meant to ensure investigation regarding
existence or non-existence of a fact. Without exhausting those remedies the
Revenue cannot be heard to say that there was a lack of cooperation on the
part of the assessee. In this connection, we also wish to add that the
documents found at the time of search itself did not throw any light on the
conclusions arrived at by the Assessing Officer. Apart from the above, the
basic premise of the Assessing Officer was that funds for purchase of shares
by VSIPL(M) had been arranged from India and in this connection the Assessing
Officer had placed reliance on documents A1 p.6 page 23 and A1 P6 p.30. The
first document is dated 25.9.98 and the second document is dated 10.10.98. The
transaction of sale of shares had however taken place in the month of
September, 1998. In the seized document dated 25.9.98, there is nothing to
indicate the involvement of the assessee or the two other companies in
arranging for funds to M/s VSIPL (M). The second document also refers to
disbursement of funds by and not to any flow of funds to VSIPL(M). Therefore,
the basic assumption of the Id.DR that there was an out flow of funds from
India from the assessee and the two other companies to VSIPL(M) which was used
for purchasing of shares is found to be not correct. In the circumstances, we
are doubtful as to how the provisions of Section 93 could be invoked by the
Revenue. We do not wish to (SIC) further on this issue for the reason that we
have already held that this new plea should not be permitted to be raised by
the Revenue for the first time before the Tribunal. For the reasons stated
above, we are of the view that the CIT(A) was fully justified in deleting the
addition made by the Assessing Officer and consequently his order is confirmed
and this ground of appeal by the Revenue is dismissed.
183\. The second ground of appeal by the Revenue does not call for any
adjudication as the additions made by the Assessing Officer have been deleted.
Consequently the question of levy of surcharge is academic calling for no
adjudication. In the result the appeal by the Revenue is dismissed.
184\. In the result, the appeal of the assessee is partly allowed whereas that
of the Revenue is dismissed.
Order pronounced in the open Court on 24th day of March, 200
indicate the involvement of the assessee or the two other companies in
arranging for funds to M/s VSIPL (M). The second document also refers to
disbursement of funds by and not to any flow of funds to VSIPL(M). Therefore,
the basic assumption of the Id.DR that there was an out flow of funds from
India from the assessee and the two other companies to VSIPL(M) which was used
for purchasing of shares is found to be not correct. In the circumstances, we
are doubtful as to how the provisions of Section 93 could be invoked by the
Revenue. We do not wish to (SIC) further on this issue for the reason that we
have already held that this new plea should not be permitted to be raised by
the Revenue for the first time before the Tribunal. For the reasons stated
above, we are of the view that the CIT(A) was fully justified in deleting the
addition made by the Assessing Officer and consequently his order is confirmed
and this ground of appeal by the Revenue is dismissed.
183\. The second ground of appeal by the Revenue does not call for any
adjudication as the additions made by the Assessing Officer have been deleted.
Consequently the question of levy of surcharge is academic calling for no
manage the companies, which they promote. The assessee, M/s HCLCL and M/s
SNIPL sold 41,00,000, 14,50,000 and 14,50,000 shares respectively of M/s HCL
Consulting Ltd. to one Overseas Corporate Body (OCB) i.e. M/s Wintech
Investment Pvt.Ltd., Mauritius (hereinafter referred to as 'M/s WIPL') at Rs.
50/- per share. All the three transactions took place in June, 1999. The three
companies passed a Board Resolution all dated 3.6.99 offering shares held by
them in the capital of M/s HCL Consulting Ltd., to M/s WIPL. M/s WIPL by Board
resolution dated 4.6.99 agreed to buy the shares in question subject to the
required Governmental approvals. The RBI granted in principle approval on
23.9.99 and final approval on 23.10.99. The assessee, M/s SNIPL and HCLCL
received the sale proceeds on 13.10.99, 14.10.99 and 12.10.99 respectively in
the form of remittances in foreign exchange duly evidenced by the Foreign
Exchange Remittance Certificates. Therefore, there was a completed sale of the
shares in the P.Y. relevant to A.Y. 2000-2001, i.e., Financial Year 99-2000,
by the Assessee, SNIPL & HCLCL respectively. Prior to this sale, M/s WIPL was
holding 20,00,000 shares of M/s HCL Consulting Ltd. and after acquiring
70,00,000 shares from the aforesaid three companies, it sold 4,15,000 shares
leaving with it 85,85,000 shares of M/s HCL Consulting Ltd. of the face value
of Rs. 10/- per share. Subsequently, M/s HCL Consulting Ltd. capitalized part
of its free reserves/profit by issuing bonus shares. Each shareholder was
indicate the involvement of the assessee or the two other companies in
arranging for funds to M/s VSIPL (M). The second document also refers to
disbursement of funds by and not to any flow of funds to VSIPL(M). Therefore,
the basic assumption of the Id.DR that there was an out flow of funds from
India from the assessee and the two other companies to VSIPL(M) which was used
for purchasing of shares is found to be not correct. In the circumstances, we
are doubtful as to how the provisions of Section 93 could be invoked by the
Revenue. We do not wish to (SIC) further on this issue for the reason that we
have already held that this new plea should not be permitted to be raised by
the Revenue for the first time before the Tribunal. For the reasons stated
above, we are of the view that the CIT(A) was fully justified in deleting the
addition made by the Assessing Officer and consequently his order is confirmed
and this ground of appeal by the Revenue is dismissed.
183\. The second ground of appeal by the Revenue does not call for any
adjudication as the additions made by the Assessing Officer have been deleted.
Consequently the question of levy of surcharge is academic calling for no
manage the companies, which they promote. The assessee, M/s HCLCL and M/s
SNIPL sold 41,00,000, 14,50,000 and 14,50,000 shares respectively of M/s HCL
Consulting Ltd. to one Overseas Corporate Body (OCB) i.e. M/s Wintech
Investment Pvt.Ltd., Mauritius (hereinafter referred to as 'M/s WIPL') at Rs.
50/- per share. All the three transactions took place in June, 1999. The three
companies passed a Board Resolution all dated 3.6.99 offering shares held by
them in the capital of M/s HCL Consulting Ltd., to M/s WIPL. M/s WIPL by Board
resolution dated 4.6.99 agreed to buy the shares in question subject to the
required Governmental approvals. The RBI granted in principle approval on
23.9.99 and final approval on 23.10.99. The assessee, M/s SNIPL and HCLCL
received the sale proceeds on 13.10.99, 14.10.99 and 12.10.99 respectively in
the form of remittances in foreign exchange duly evidenced by the Foreign
Exchange Remittance Certificates. Therefore, there was a completed sale of the
shares in the P.Y. relevant to A.Y. 2000-2001, i.e., Financial Year 99-2000,
by the Assessee, SNIPL & HCLCL respectively. Prior to this sale, M/s WIPL was
holding 20,00,000 shares of M/s HCL Consulting Ltd. and after acquiring
70,00,000 shares from the aforesaid three companies, it sold 4,15,000 shares
leaving with it 85,85,000 shares of M/s HCL Consulting Ltd. of the face value
of Rs. 10/- per share. Subsequently, M/s HCL Consulting Ltd. capitalized part
of its free reserves/profit by issuing bonus shares. Each shareholder was
indicate the involvement of the assessee or the two other companies in
arranging for funds to M/s VSIPL (M). The second document also refers to
disbursement of funds by and not to any flow of funds to VSIPL(M). Therefore,
the basic assumption of the Id.DR that there was an out flow of funds from
India from the assessee and the two other companies to VSIPL(M) which was used
for purchasing of shares is found to be not correct. In the circumstances, we
are doubtful as to how the provisions of Section 93 could be invoked by the
Revenue. We do not wish to (SIC) further on this issue for the reason that we
have already held that this new plea should not be permitted to be raised by
the Revenue for the first time before the Tribunal. For the reasons stated
above, we are of the view that the CIT(A) was fully justified in deleting the
addition made by the Assessing Officer and consequently his order is confirmed
and this ground of appeal by the Revenue is dismissed.
183\. The second ground of appeal by the Revenue does not call for any
adjudication as the additions made by the Assessing Officer have been deleted.
Consequently the question of levy of surcharge is academic calling for no
manage the companies, which they promote. The assessee, M/s HCLCL and M/s
SNIPL sold 41,00,000, 14,50,000 and 14,50,000 shares respectively of M/s HCL
Consulting Ltd. to one Overseas Corporate Body (OCB) i.e. M/s Wintech
Investment Pvt.Ltd., Mauritius (hereinafter referred to as 'M/s WIPL') at Rs.
50/- per share. All the three transactions took place in June, 1999. The three
companies passed a Board Resolution all dated 3.6.99 offering shares held by
them in the capital of M/s HCL Consulting Ltd., to M/s WIPL. M/s WIPL by Board
resolution dated 4.6.99 agreed to buy the shares in question subject to the
required Governmental approvals. The RBI granted in principle approval on
23.9.99 and final approval on 23.10.99. The assessee, M/s SNIPL and HCLCL
received the sale proceeds on 13.10.99, 14.10.99 and 12.10.99 respectively in
the form of remittances in foreign exchange duly evidenced by the Foreign
Exchange Remittance Certificates. Therefore, there was a completed sale of the
shares in the P.Y. relevant to A.Y. 2000-2001, i.e., Financial Year 99-2000,
by the Assessee, SNIPL & HCLCL respectively. Prior to this sale, M/s WIPL was
holding 20,00,000 shares of M/s HCL Consulting Ltd. and after acquiring
70,00,000 shares from the aforesaid three companies, it sold 4,15,000 shares
leaving with it 85,85,000 shares of M/s HCL Consulting Ltd. of the face value
of Rs. 10/- per share. Subsequently, M/s HCL Consulting Ltd. capitalized part
of its free reserves/profit by issuing bonus shares. Each shareholder was
issued one equity share of Rs. 10/- as bonus for every two shares held in M/s
HCL Consulting Ltd. Thus M/s WIPL held 1,28,77,500 shares of M/s HCL
Consulting Ltd. after such issue of bonus shares. The share capital of M/s HCL
Consulting Ltd. was consolidated and shares of the face value of Rs. 10 each
were sub-divided into shares of face value of Rs. 4/- each in November, 1999.
Accordingly, 1,28,77,500 shares of the face value of Rs. 10/- each held by M/s
Wintech Investment Pvt.Ltd. became 3,21,93,750 shares of the face value of Rs.
4/- each. Such consolidation and sub-division happened in the month of
November 1999. This holding by M/s WIPL in M/s HCL Consulting Ltd. represented
a controlling interest in the said company. Meanwhile, the name of M/s HCL
Consulting Ltd. was changed to M/s HCL Technologies Ltd. on 6/10/1999 and in
indicate the involvement of the assessee or the two other companies in
arranging for funds to M/s VSIPL (M). The second document also refers to
disbursement of funds by and not to any flow of funds to VSIPL(M). Therefore,
the basic assumption of the Id.DR that there was an out flow of funds from
India from the assessee and the two other companies to VSIPL(M) which was used
for purchasing of shares is found to be not correct. In the circumstances, we
are doubtful as to how the provisions of Section 93 could be invoked by the
Revenue. We do not wish to (SIC) further on this issue for the reason that we
have already held that this new plea should not be permitted to be raised by
the Revenue for the first time before the Tribunal. For the reasons stated
above, we are of the view that the CIT(A) was fully justified in deleting the
addition made by the Assessing Officer and consequently his order is confirmed
and this ground of appeal by the Revenue is dismissed.
183\. The second ground of appeal by the Revenue does not call for any
adjudication as the additions made by the Assessing Officer have been deleted.
Consequently the question of levy of surcharge is academic calling for no
manage the companies, which they promote. The assessee, M/s HCLCL and M/s
SNIPL sold 41,00,000, 14,50,000 and 14,50,000 shares respectively of M/s HCL
Consulting Ltd. to one Overseas Corporate Body (OCB) i.e. M/s Wintech
Investment Pvt.Ltd., Mauritius (hereinafter referred to as 'M/s WIPL') at Rs.
50/- per share. All the three transactions took place in June, 1999. The three
companies passed a Board Resolution all dated 3.6.99 offering shares held by
them in the capital of M/s HCL Consulting Ltd., to M/s WIPL. M/s WIPL by Board
resolution dated 4.6.99 agreed to buy the shares in question subject to the
required Governmental approvals. The RBI granted in principle approval on
23.9.99 and final approval on 23.10.99. The assessee, M/s SNIPL and HCLCL
received the sale proceeds on 13.10.99, 14.10.99 and 12.10.99 respectively in
the form of remittances in foreign exchange duly evidenced by the Foreign
Exchange Remittance Certificates. Therefore, there was a completed sale of the
shares in the P.Y. relevant to A.Y. 2000-2001, i.e., Financial Year 99-2000,
by the Assessee, SNIPL & HCLCL respectively. Prior to this sale, M/s WIPL was
holding 20,00,000 shares of M/s HCL Consulting Ltd. and after acquiring
70,00,000 shares from the aforesaid three companies, it sold 4,15,000 shares
leaving with it 85,85,000 shares of M/s HCL Consulting Ltd. of the face value
of Rs. 10/- per share. Subsequently, M/s HCL Consulting Ltd. capitalized part
of its free reserves/profit by issuing bonus shares. Each shareholder was
issued one equity share of Rs. 10/- as bonus for every two shares held in M/s
HCL Consulting Ltd. Thus M/s WIPL held 1,28,77,500 shares of M/s HCL
Consulting Ltd. after such issue of bonus shares. The share capital of M/s HCL
Consulting Ltd. was consolidated and shares of the face value of Rs. 10 each
were sub-divided into shares of face value of Rs. 4/- each in November, 1999.
Accordingly, 1,28,77,500 shares of the face value of Rs. 10/- each held by M/s
Wintech Investment Pvt.Ltd. became 3,21,93,750 shares of the face value of Rs.
4/- each. Such consolidation and sub-division happened in the month of
November 1999. This holding by M/s WIPL in M/s HCL Consulting Ltd. represented
a controlling interest in the said company. Meanwhile, the name of M/s HCL
Consulting Ltd. was changed to M/s HCL Technologies Ltd. on 6/10/1999 and in
indicate the involvement of the assessee or the two other companies in
arranging for funds to M/s VSIPL (M). The second document also refers to
disbursement of funds by and not to any flow of funds to VSIPL(M). Therefore,
the basic assumption of the Id.DR that there was an out flow of funds from
India from the assessee and the two other companies to VSIPL(M) which was used
for purchasing of shares is found to be not correct. In the circumstances, we
are doubtful as to how the provisions of Section 93 could be invoked by the
Revenue. We do not wish to (SIC) further on this issue for the reason that we
have already held that this new plea should not be permitted to be raised by
the Revenue for the first time before the Tribunal. For the reasons stated
above, we are of the view that the CIT(A) was fully justified in deleting the
addition made by the Assessing Officer and consequently his order is confirmed
and this ground of appeal by the Revenue is dismissed.
183\. The second ground of appeal by the Revenue does not call for any
adjudication as the additions made by the Assessing Officer have been deleted.
Consequently the question of levy of surcharge is academic calling for no
