Delhi District Court
Arun Kumar Saini ...Complainant vs . on 6 May, 2009
Author: Sh. Dig Singh
           IN THE COURT OF SH. DIG VINAY SINGH, ADDITIONAL CHIEF METROPOLITAN 
                                                  MAGISTRATE­03 (IPR), ROHINI, DELHI
                In re:                                 
                ARUN KUMAR SAINI                                          ...COMPLAINANT
                VS.
                MUKESH GARG                                               ...ACCUSED
                CC NO.88/1/2008    
                U/s.138 N.I. ACT                                                                                              
                P.S. KESHAV PURAM
    DATE OF RESERVATION OF JUDGMENT: 06.5.2009
    DATE OF PRONOUNCEMENT OF JUDGMENT: 06.5.2009
                                                                       JUDGEMENT
    (a) The serial no. of the case                                        : R0036572008
    (b) The date of commission of offence                                 : 16.10.2008.
    (c) The name of complainant                                           : ARUN KUMAR SAINI S/O. LATE SH. VEER SINGH 
                                                                             SAINI
(d) The name,parentage,residence of accused : MUKEH GARG S/O. RATTAN PRAKASH
against the drawer of the cheque. Once the accused is not drawer of the cheque
nor signatory of the cheque, no liability whatsoever u/s.138 of N.I. Act lies
on the accused. It is not a case where the cheque is issued by a company or a
partnership firm in which case, the directors or partners could have been
liable, had it been proved that they were incharge of and responsible for the
business of the company. It is a case where an individual had issued a cheque
in individual capacity. The drawer of the cheque is not the accused but his
wife, and the legal notice was never sent to the drawer i.e. wife of accused.
Therefore, the present complaint is not maintainable at all. The complaint is
liable to be dismissed. The complaint is accordingly dismissed and accused is
acquitted of the charges. Surety bond and personal bond stands cancelled.
Surety is discharged. Endorsement, if any on the documents of surety be
cancelled. File be consigned to Record Room.
    ANNOUNCED IN OPEN COURT ON 
    06.5.2009                                                                       DIGVINAY SINGH
                                           ADDITIONAL CHIEF METROPOLITAN MAGISTRATE­03 (IPR), 
(d) The name,parentage,residence of accused : MUKEH GARG S/O. RATTAN PRAKASH
GARG R/O. Q­15, TAGORE PARK, MODEL TOWN, DELHI.
    (e) The offence complained of/ proved       : U/s.138 N.I. ACT.
    (f) The plea of accused                                               : pleaded not guilty
    (g) The final order                                                   : ACQUITTED.
    (h) The date of such order                                            : 06.5.2009.
     (i) Brief statement of the reasons for the decision     :­
1\. Complainant Arun Kumar Saini preferred this complaint u/s.138 of
Negotiable Instruments Act against accused Mukesh Garg alleging that the
complainant was an employee under the accused who was running a tour and
travel company between the period 06.5.2008 to 06.8.2008. It is claimed by the
complainant that in lieu of balance salary and allowances, the accused issued
cheque no.402514 dated 29.8.2008 for Rs.3931/­ drawn on Andhra Bank, Model
Towan Branch, Delhi, hereinafter referred to as 'the cheque'. The said cheque
when presented JUDGMENT/ARUN KUMAR SAINI VS. MUKESH
GARG/CCNO.88/1/08/U.S.138N.I.ACT/06.5.2009/ACQUITTED/Pg1of 3/K for encashment
on 03.10.2008 was dishonoured due to "Insufficient Funds". The cheque was
again presented on 07.10.2008, but was again dishonoured due to "Stop
Payment". The complainant sent a legal notice 05.11.2008 to the accused
demanding the cheque amount within stipulated period. When accused failed to
make the payment of cheque amount within stipulated period, the present case
was filed.
2\. After pre summoning evidence, the accused was summoned. Thereafter the
accused was served notice u/s.251 Cr.PC to which he claimed trial.
3\. In support of its case, complainant examined himself as PW1 in which he
reaffirmed the allegations in the complaint and deposed in the affidavit that
he was an employee of the accused for the abovesaid period and in lieu of
salary and allowances, the cheque in question Ex. CW1/1 was issued by the
accused in favour of the complainant. When the the cheque was presented for
encashment, it was dishonoured due to "Insufficient Funds" on 03.10.2008 vide
memo Ex. CW1/2. The cheque was again presented for encashment on 07.10.2009,
but this time the cheque was dishonoured due to "Stop Payment" vide memo Ex.
CW1/3. Within thirty days of knowledge of dishonour, a legal notice was issued
to the accused dated 05.11.2008 through Registered Post and UPC demanding the
cheque amount which were proved as Ex.CW1/4 to CW1/6 respectively. The
complainant also deposed that accused replied to the notice through counsel
and denied to pay the cheque amount vide his reply Ex. CW1/7 and it is deposed
that when the accused failed to make payment of the cheque amount to the
complainant within stipulated period of fifteen days, the present case was
filed. During the cross examination of PW1, the accused suggested to the
complainant that the complainant was an employee of wife of accused and not
the accused or that he left the job without intimation on 13.7.2008. The
accused even suggested the complainant that the cheque in question is not
signed by the accused nor handed over by the accused. There is no dispute
regarding limitation.
4\. All the incriminating evidence was put to the accused in his examination
to which accused claimed that neither the complainant was in his employment
nor the cheque in question was issued or signed by him and, therefore, he had
no obligation to pay the cheque amount to the complainant or to honour the
cheque in question. Receipt of notice by the accused from the complainant and
sending of reply by the accused to the complainant is admitted.
5\. In his defence, the accused examined himself as DW1 and proved that the
account no. in JUDGMENT/ARUN KUMAR SAINI VS. MUKESH
GARG/CCNO.88/1/08/U.S.138N.I.ACT/06.5.2009/ACQUITTED/Pg2of 3/K question from
which the cheque is issued does not stand in his name and it stands in the
name in the name of his wife. He also proved that the cheque in question does
not bear his signatures and that legal notice was not sent to the wife of
accused. The accused proved the passbook of the account as Ex.DW1/1 from which
the cheque has been issued and, also proved the cheque book Ex. DW1/2. This
witness was tendered for cross examination by the complainant , but initially
the complainant did not avail the opportunity. Subsequently the accused was
cross examined by the counsel for the complainant but nothing material could
be brought out on record from the cross examination. The testimony of this
witness remained unrebutted.
6\. From the above fact, it is clearly established beyond reasonable doubt
that the cheque in question was not issued by the accused nor it bears
signatures of accused. It is proved that the account in question from which
the cheque is issued is in the name of wife of accused and not accused.
Admittedly legal notice was not sent to the wife of accused, nor the complaint
has been filed against the wife of accused. In a criminal trial u/s.138 N.I.
Act, in the cases of individual drawer of cheque, prosecution can be only
against the drawer of the cheque. Once the accused is not drawer of the cheque
nor signatory of the cheque, no liability whatsoever u/s.138 of N.I. Act lies
on the accused. It is not a case where the cheque is issued by a company or a
partnership firm in which case, the directors or partners could have been
liable, had it been proved that they were incharge of and responsible for the
business of the company. It is a case where an individual had issued a cheque
in individual capacity. The drawer of the cheque is not the accused but his
wife, and the legal notice was never sent to the drawer i.e. wife of accused.
Therefore, the present complaint is not maintainable at all. The complaint is
liable to be dismissed. The complaint is accordingly dismissed and accused is
acquitted of the charges. Surety bond and personal bond stands cancelled.
Surety is discharged. Endorsement, if any on the documents of surety be
cancelled. File be consigned to Record Room.
    ANNOUNCED IN OPEN COURT ON 
    06.5.2009                                                                       DIGVINAY SINGH
                                           ADDITIONAL CHIEF METROPOLITAN MAGISTRATE­03 (IPR), 
                                                                                    ROHINI, 
                                                                                            DELHI
JUDGMENT/ARUN KUMAR SAINI VS. MUKESH
GARG/CCNO.88/1/08/U.S.138N.I.ACT/06.5.2009/ACQUITTED/Pg3of 3/K
against the drawer of the cheque. Once the accused is not drawer of the cheque
nor signatory of the cheque, no liability whatsoever u/s.138 of N.I. Act lies
on the accused. It is not a case where the cheque is issued by a company or a
partnership firm in which case, the directors or partners could have been
liable, had it been proved that they were incharge of and responsible for the
business of the company. It is a case where an individual had issued a cheque
in individual capacity. The drawer of the cheque is not the accused but his
wife, and the legal notice was never sent to the drawer i.e. wife of accused.
Therefore, the present complaint is not maintainable at all. The complaint is
liable to be dismissed. The complaint is accordingly dismissed and accused is
acquitted of the charges. Surety bond and personal bond stands cancelled.
Surety is discharged. Endorsement, if any on the documents of surety be
cancelled. File be consigned to Record Room.
    ANNOUNCED IN OPEN COURT ON 
    06.5.2009                                                                       DIGVINAY SINGH
                                           ADDITIONAL CHIEF METROPOLITAN MAGISTRATE­03 (IPR), 
(d) The name,parentage,residence of accused : MUKEH GARG S/O. RATTAN PRAKASH
GARG R/O. Q­15, TAGORE PARK, MODEL TOWN, DELHI.
    (e) The offence complained of/ proved       : U/s.138 N.I. ACT.
    (f) The plea of accused                                               : pleaded not guilty
    (g) The final order                                                   : ACQUITTED.
    (h) The date of such order                                            : 06.5.2009.
     (i) Brief statement of the reasons for the decision     :­
1\. Complainant Arun Kumar Saini preferred this complaint u/s.138 of
Negotiable Instruments Act against accused Mukesh Garg alleging that the
complainant was an employee under the accused who was running a tour and
travel company between the period 06.5.2008 to 06.8.2008. It is claimed by the
complainant that in lieu of balance salary and allowances, the accused issued
cheque no.402514 dated 29.8.2008 for Rs.3931/­ drawn on Andhra Bank, Model
Towan Branch, Delhi, hereinafter referred to as 'the cheque'. The said cheque
when presented JUDGMENT/ARUN KUMAR SAINI VS. MUKESH
GARG/CCNO.88/1/08/U.S.138N.I.ACT/06.5.2009/ACQUITTED/Pg1of 3/K for encashment
on 03.10.2008 was dishonoured due to "Insufficient Funds". The cheque was
again presented on 07.10.2008, but was again dishonoured due to "Stop
Payment". The complainant sent a legal notice 05.11.2008 to the accused
demanding the cheque amount within stipulated period. When accused failed to
against the drawer of the cheque. Once the accused is not drawer of the cheque
nor signatory of the cheque, no liability whatsoever u/s.138 of N.I. Act lies
on the accused. It is not a case where the cheque is issued by a company or a
partnership firm in which case, the directors or partners could have been
liable, had it been proved that they were incharge of and responsible for the
business of the company. It is a case where an individual had issued a cheque
in individual capacity. The drawer of the cheque is not the accused but his
wife, and the legal notice was never sent to the drawer i.e. wife of accused.
Therefore, the present complaint is not maintainable at all. The complaint is
liable to be dismissed. The complaint is accordingly dismissed and accused is
acquitted of the charges. Surety bond and personal bond stands cancelled.
Surety is discharged. Endorsement, if any on the documents of surety be
cancelled. File be consigned to Record Room.
    ANNOUNCED IN OPEN COURT ON 
    06.5.2009                                                                       DIGVINAY SINGH
                                           ADDITIONAL CHIEF METROPOLITAN MAGISTRATE­03 (IPR), 
(d) The name,parentage,residence of accused : MUKEH GARG S/O. RATTAN PRAKASH
GARG R/O. Q­15, TAGORE PARK, MODEL TOWN, DELHI.
    (e) The offence complained of/ proved       : U/s.138 N.I. ACT.
    (f) The plea of accused                                               : pleaded not guilty
    (g) The final order                                                   : ACQUITTED.
    (h) The date of such order                                            : 06.5.2009.
     (i) Brief statement of the reasons for the decision     :­
1\. Complainant Arun Kumar Saini preferred this complaint u/s.138 of
Negotiable Instruments Act against accused Mukesh Garg alleging that the
complainant was an employee under the accused who was running a tour and
travel company between the period 06.5.2008 to 06.8.2008. It is claimed by the
complainant that in lieu of balance salary and allowances, the accused issued
cheque no.402514 dated 29.8.2008 for Rs.3931/­ drawn on Andhra Bank, Model
Towan Branch, Delhi, hereinafter referred to as 'the cheque'. The said cheque
when presented JUDGMENT/ARUN KUMAR SAINI VS. MUKESH
GARG/CCNO.88/1/08/U.S.138N.I.ACT/06.5.2009/ACQUITTED/Pg1of 3/K for encashment
on 03.10.2008 was dishonoured due to "Insufficient Funds". The cheque was
again presented on 07.10.2008, but was again dishonoured due to "Stop
Payment". The complainant sent a legal notice 05.11.2008 to the accused
demanding the cheque amount within stipulated period. When accused failed to
against the drawer of the cheque. Once the accused is not drawer of the cheque
nor signatory of the cheque, no liability whatsoever u/s.138 of N.I. Act lies
on the accused. It is not a case where the cheque is issued by a company or a
partnership firm in which case, the directors or partners could have been
liable, had it been proved that they were incharge of and responsible for the
business of the company. It is a case where an individual had issued a cheque
in individual capacity. The drawer of the cheque is not the accused but his
wife, and the legal notice was never sent to the drawer i.e. wife of accused.
Therefore, the present complaint is not maintainable at all. The complaint is
liable to be dismissed. The complaint is accordingly dismissed and accused is
acquitted of the charges. Surety bond and personal bond stands cancelled.
Surety is discharged. Endorsement, if any on the documents of surety be
cancelled. File be consigned to Record Room.
    ANNOUNCED IN OPEN COURT ON 
    06.5.2009                                                                       DIGVINAY SINGH
                                           ADDITIONAL CHIEF METROPOLITAN MAGISTRATE­03 (IPR), 
(d) The name,parentage,residence of accused : MUKEH GARG S/O. RATTAN PRAKASH
GARG R/O. Q­15, TAGORE PARK, MODEL TOWN, DELHI.
    (e) The offence complained of/ proved       : U/s.138 N.I. ACT.
    (f) The plea of accused                                               : pleaded not guilty
    (g) The final order                                                   : ACQUITTED.
    (h) The date of such order                                            : 06.5.2009.
     (i) Brief statement of the reasons for the decision     :­
1\. Complainant Arun Kumar Saini preferred this complaint u/s.138 of
Negotiable Instruments Act against accused Mukesh Garg alleging that the
complainant was an employee under the accused who was running a tour and
travel company between the period 06.5.2008 to 06.8.2008. It is claimed by the
complainant that in lieu of balance salary and allowances, the accused issued
cheque no.402514 dated 29.8.2008 for Rs.3931/­ drawn on Andhra Bank, Model
Towan Branch, Delhi, hereinafter referred to as 'the cheque'. The said cheque
when presented JUDGMENT/ARUN KUMAR SAINI VS. MUKESH
GARG/CCNO.88/1/08/U.S.138N.I.ACT/06.5.2009/ACQUITTED/Pg1of 3/K for encashment
on 03.10.2008 was dishonoured due to "Insufficient Funds". The cheque was
again presented on 07.10.2008, but was again dishonoured due to "Stop
Payment". The complainant sent a legal notice 05.11.2008 to the accused
demanding the cheque amount within stipulated period. When accused failed to
make the payment of cheque amount within stipulated period, the present case
was filed.
2\. After pre summoning evidence, the accused was summoned. Thereafter the
accused was served notice u/s.251 Cr.PC to which he claimed trial.
3\. In support of its case, complainant examined himself as PW1 in which he
reaffirmed the allegations in the complaint and deposed in the affidavit that
he was an employee of the accused for the abovesaid period and in lieu of
salary and allowances, the cheque in question Ex. CW1/1 was issued by the
accused in favour of the complainant. When the the cheque was presented for
encashment, it was dishonoured due to "Insufficient Funds" on 03.10.2008 vide
memo Ex. CW1/2. The cheque was again presented for encashment on 07.10.2009,
against the drawer of the cheque. Once the accused is not drawer of the cheque
nor signatory of the cheque, no liability whatsoever u/s.138 of N.I. Act lies
on the accused. It is not a case where the cheque is issued by a company or a
partnership firm in which case, the directors or partners could have been
liable, had it been proved that they were incharge of and responsible for the
business of the company. It is a case where an individual had issued a cheque
in individual capacity. The drawer of the cheque is not the accused but his
wife, and the legal notice was never sent to the drawer i.e. wife of accused.
Therefore, the present complaint is not maintainable at all. The complaint is
liable to be dismissed. The complaint is accordingly dismissed and accused is
acquitted of the charges. Surety bond and personal bond stands cancelled.
Surety is discharged. Endorsement, if any on the documents of surety be
cancelled. File be consigned to Record Room.
    ANNOUNCED IN OPEN COURT ON 
    06.5.2009                                                                       DIGVINAY SINGH
                                           ADDITIONAL CHIEF METROPOLITAN MAGISTRATE­03 (IPR), 
(d) The name,parentage,residence of accused : MUKEH GARG S/O. RATTAN PRAKASH
GARG R/O. Q­15, TAGORE PARK, MODEL TOWN, DELHI.
    (e) The offence complained of/ proved       : U/s.138 N.I. ACT.
    (f) The plea of accused                                               : pleaded not guilty
    (g) The final order                                                   : ACQUITTED.
    (h) The date of such order                                            : 06.5.2009.
     (i) Brief statement of the reasons for the decision     :­
1\. Complainant Arun Kumar Saini preferred this complaint u/s.138 of
Negotiable Instruments Act against accused Mukesh Garg alleging that the
complainant was an employee under the accused who was running a tour and
travel company between the period 06.5.2008 to 06.8.2008. It is claimed by the
complainant that in lieu of balance salary and allowances, the accused issued
cheque no.402514 dated 29.8.2008 for Rs.3931/­ drawn on Andhra Bank, Model
Towan Branch, Delhi, hereinafter referred to as 'the cheque'. The said cheque
when presented JUDGMENT/ARUN KUMAR SAINI VS. MUKESH
GARG/CCNO.88/1/08/U.S.138N.I.ACT/06.5.2009/ACQUITTED/Pg1of 3/K for encashment
on 03.10.2008 was dishonoured due to "Insufficient Funds". The cheque was
again presented on 07.10.2008, but was again dishonoured due to "Stop
Payment". The complainant sent a legal notice 05.11.2008 to the accused
demanding the cheque amount within stipulated period. When accused failed to
make the payment of cheque amount within stipulated period, the present case
was filed.
2\. After pre summoning evidence, the accused was summoned. Thereafter the
accused was served notice u/s.251 Cr.PC to which he claimed trial.
3\. In support of its case, complainant examined himself as PW1 in which he
reaffirmed the allegations in the complaint and deposed in the affidavit that
he was an employee of the accused for the abovesaid period and in lieu of
salary and allowances, the cheque in question Ex. CW1/1 was issued by the
accused in favour of the complainant. When the the cheque was presented for
encashment, it was dishonoured due to "Insufficient Funds" on 03.10.2008 vide
memo Ex. CW1/2. The cheque was again presented for encashment on 07.10.2009,
against the drawer of the cheque. Once the accused is not drawer of the cheque
nor signatory of the cheque, no liability whatsoever u/s.138 of N.I. Act lies
on the accused. It is not a case where the cheque is issued by a company or a
partnership firm in which case, the directors or partners could have been
liable, had it been proved that they were incharge of and responsible for the
business of the company. It is a case where an individual had issued a cheque
in individual capacity. The drawer of the cheque is not the accused but his
wife, and the legal notice was never sent to the drawer i.e. wife of accused.
Therefore, the present complaint is not maintainable at all. The complaint is
liable to be dismissed. The complaint is accordingly dismissed and accused is
acquitted of the charges. Surety bond and personal bond stands cancelled.
Surety is discharged. Endorsement, if any on the documents of surety be
cancelled. File be consigned to Record Room.
    ANNOUNCED IN OPEN COURT ON 
    06.5.2009                                                                       DIGVINAY SINGH
                                           ADDITIONAL CHIEF METROPOLITAN MAGISTRATE­03 (IPR), 
