Delhi District Court
M/S P.C.S. Associates vs North Delhi Municipal ... on 10 August, 2018
                IN THE COURT OF SHRI TALWANT SINGH
                   DISTRICT & SESSIONS JUDGE (HQs)
                      TIS HAZARI COURTS, DELHI
                       CNR No.: DLCT01­017260­2017
    MCD Appeal 32/2017
    1.    M/s P.C.S. Associates
          Having its Office at:
          5483 to 5494/1, Ward No. VI
          Situated at corner of Ghanta Ghar
          Town Hall, Chandni Chowk 
          Delhi­110006
          Through its partner
          Sh. Prashant Kapoor
    2.    Sh. Prashant Kapoor
          Partner of M/s P.C.S.Associates 
    3.    Sh. Suresh Kumar Chawla (since deceased)
          Partner of M/s P.C.S.Associates 
         Through his legal heirs
document has been filed or evidence has been brought on record that the
construction of the appellants was protected under any law or that same was
raised with sanction. There are allegations of unauthorized construction in
the building from ground to third floor. Even as per admission of the
appellants, a fire broke out in the building in the year 2002 and major
portion thereof was destroyed. The appellants purchased property in the year
2016 and they appear to have reconstructed the same in the garb of repairs.
Even the MCD Appeal 32/17 M/s P.C.S. Associates & Ors. v. North DMC Page 8 of
9 photographs placed on record support the case of the North DMC regarding
existence of unauthorized construction in the building. Hence, the impugned
order dated 15.11.2017 for not granting interim stay is reasoned and
justified. There is no merit in the appeal. Same is accordingly dismissed.
File be consigned to record room.
                                                                            Digitally signed by
                                                          TALWANT           TALWANT SINGH
                                                          SINGH             Date: 2018.08.14
         Through his legal heirs
    (a)  Smt. Neeta Chawla
         W/o Late Sh. Suresh Kumar Chawla
         R/o H.No.44, Road No.52,
         West Punjabi Bagh,
         New Delhi­110026
    (b) Sh. Sahil Chawla
    MCD Appeal 32/17       M/s P.C.S. Associates & Ors. v. North DMC      Page 1 of 9
           S/o Late Sh. Suresh Kumar Chawla
          R/o H.No.44, Road No.52,
          West Punjabi Bagh,
          New Delhi­110026
    (c) Smt. Mansi Sarin
        D/o Late Sh. Suresh Kumar Chawla
        W/o Sh. Nanak Sarin
        R/o H.No. 627, Rajinder Nagar,
        New Delhi­110060
    (d) Smt. Anchal Arora
        D/o Late Sh. Suresh Kumar Chawla
        W/o Sh. Rahul Arora
        R/o H.No.28, Road No.51,
        West Punjabi Bagh,
        New Delhi­110026
    4.    Sh. Chitranjan Pal Singh
          Partner of M/s P.C.S. Associates
    5.    Sh. Virender Mukim
          Partner of M/s P.C.S. Associates
          All having its office at:
          5483 to 5494/1, Ward No.VI,
          Situated at Corner of Ghanta Ghar,
          Town Hall, Chandni Chowk,
          Delhi­110006                                             .....Appellants
                                        Versus
    1.    North Delhi Municipal Corporation
          Through its Commissioner
          City Civic Centre, Minto Road, Delhi.                    .....Respondent
MCD Appeal 32/17 M/s P.C.S. Associates & Ors. v. North DMC Page 2 of 9 Date of
filing of Appeal : 20.11.2017 Date of reserving Order : 24.07.2018 Date of
Order : 10.08.2018 ORDER ON ON APPEAL UNDER SECTION 347(D) OF DELHI MUNICIPAL
CORPORATION ACT, 1957 Appellants have filed the present appeal against
impugned order dated 15.11.2017 passed by Ld. AT:MCD Delhi whereby application
filed by the appellant for interim stay against sealing order dated 18.10.2017
was dismissed.
2\. Notice of the appeal was issued to the respondent. Record of AT:MCD was
summoned. I have heard Ld. Counsel for the parties and perused the record.
3\. Ld. Counsel for the appellants has submitted that no show cause notice was
issued to the appellants before issuing of sealing order and same is also
ante­dated; there was no application of mind before issuing sealing order;
opinion is not to be expressed on merits of the case at interim stage;
appellant never received show cause notice dated 28.08.2017; there is no
evidence on record that any fresh construction was carried out by the
appellant contrary to law and no sealing order was served on the appellant.
MCD Appeal 32/17 M/s P.C.S. Associates & Ors. v. North DMC Page 3 of 9
4\. On the other hand, Ld. Counsel for the respondent submitted that there are
some errors in dates as observed by AT:MCD; there is unauthorised construction
in the premises in dispute from ground floor to third floor; a show cause
notice was duly served and no reply thereto was filed by the appellant till
date; matter was pending in Hon'ble High Court regarding ongoing unauthorised
construction in certain properties and number of this property is mentioned in
the list of such properties.
5\. Ld. Counsel for the appellant has placed reliance on the following
judgments:
(1)V.N.Bharat vs. D.D.A. & Anr. IV (2008) CPJ 13 (SC) wherein it has been held
that when service of notice is denied by the appellant, onus of proving
service of notice shifted back to the respondent and when no evidence was led
by the respondent (DDA) to prove service, it was held that such service had
not been effected.
(2)Assistant Commissioner Commercial Tax Department, Works Contract & Leasing,
Kota vs. Shukla & Brothers III (2010) SLT 565, it has been held that principal
of natural justice requires that person wo is likely to be adversely affected
by action of the authorities should be given notice to show cause thereof and
granted an opportunity of being heard and secondly order passed by the
authorities should be reasoned for arriving at any conclusion showing proper
application of mind.
MCD Appeal 32/17 M/s P.C.S. Associates & Ors. v. North DMC Page 4 of 9
(3)Allahabad Bank & Ors. vs. Krishna Narayan Tewari [Civil Appeal No. 7600 of
2014] decided by Hon'ble Supreme Court of India on 02.01.2017 wherein it has
been held that an order passed by authorities should be based on evidence and
there should be proper application of mind by the authorities.
(4)Interntional Confederation of Societies of Authors and Composers (CISAC)
vs. Aditya Pandey & Ors. VII (2016) SLT 592 wherein it has been held that
Court must refrain from expressing any opinion, whatsoever, touching upon
merits of controversy lest same may prejudice either of parties in suit, while
passing interim orders.
There is no dispute as to ratios of these judgments. But with due regard,
AT:MCD had not expressed opinion on merits of the case while dismissing
application of the appellants for interim stay and merely mentioning that
there exists unauthorised construction in the property in question from ground
to third floor does not amount to expressing of opinion on merits of the case.
6\. On the other hand, Ld. Counsel for the respondent has relied upon judgment
in case of M.A.Mohamed Ismail vs. Statement Government of Tamil Nadu & ors.
1999 (10) JT 372 wherein it has been held that apart from Section 114 of the
Indian Evidence Act under which a presumption would arise in respect of
letters sent by registered post that they were delivered to the addressee if
the address MCD Appeal 32/17 M/s P.C.S. Associates & Ors. v. North DMC Page 5
of 9 was correct, a presumtion will also arise under Section 27 of the General
Clauses Act, 1897.
7\. In the present case, notice under Section 348 & 349 of the DMC Act were
issued to the owner on 08.02.2013 as ground floor passage, some portion at
second floor and very small portion at third floor were shown as dangerous,
which were to be demolished by the owner/occupier. An application was received
from owner Sh. Prashant Kapoor regarding repair of the property and North DMC
had issued a letter dated 18.10.2016 specifically mentioning therein that
re­construction was not allowed. The owner/occupier of the property after
demolishing entire part had carried out new construction without
permission/sacntion of building plan. Further, the owner/builder had carried
out unauthorized construction at first floor and second floor which was booked
on 08.08.2017 and a show cause notice was pasted at the site on 09.08.2017 and
photographs of the same were taken. No reply to this show cause notice was
received by North DMC, hence, a demolition notice dated 17.08.2017 was issued.
Since the property was found locked, demolition notice was pasted at the site
on 21.08.2017.
8\. Section 444 of Delhi Municipal Corporation Act 1957 provides various modes
of service of the notices and Section 444(d) provides that if the addressee
cannot be found and the notices affixed on some conspicuous part of his last
known place of residence or MCD Appeal 32/17 M/s P.C.S. Associates & Ors. v.
North DMC Page 6 of 9 business, if within the Union Territory of Delhi, or is
given or tendered to some adult member of his family or is affixed on some
conspicuous part of the land or building, if any, to which it relates, it is a
proper service.
9\. In this case, the SHO PS Kotwali vide his letter dated 25.03.2016 had
informed the Dy. Commissioner, MCD, City Zone, Delhi regarding ongoing
unauthorized construction in property no. 5484­5492, Ghanta Ghar, Nai Sarak,
Chandni Chowk, New Delhi belonging to Parshant Kapoor & others. It is also
mentioned that all norms and safety measures were being violated as
construction was being raised over old structure which was very dangerous. A
show cause notice dated 18.04.2017 was issued to Sh. Prashant Kapoor bearing
address of the premises in question. The postal receipt shows that it was
dispatched to the addressee through speed post on 20.04.2017. As per track
report, the show cause notice was delivered to the addressee on 27.04.2017. On
08.05.2017 a representation was filed in the office of Executive Engineer
(Bldg.), City Zone on behalf of M/s P.C.S. Associates informing that they
carried out only necessary repairs and there was no fresh construction in the
building and proceedings were requested to be dropped. The property was again
inspected on 02.08.2017 and unauthorized construction was found going on at
the first and the second floor. A show cause notice dated 08.08.2017 was
issued to Parshant Kishore/Naveen Kapoor.
MCD Appeal 32/17 M/s P.C.S. Associates & Ors. v. North DMC Page 7 of 9 When
the notice was sought to be served, the premises in question was found locked
and thus notice was pasted at the site. Again the site was inspected on
29.09.2017 and unauthorized construction was found going on and the show cause
notice was issued on 29.09.2017. Premises was found locked and the notice was
pasted at the site. No reply was filed by the landlord/occupier to the notices
dated 08.08.2017 and 29.09.2017. Even a show cause notice dated 28.08.2017 of
sealing addressed to Parshant Kapoor and Naveen Kapoor bearing address of the
premises in question was sent through speed post on 29.08.2017. Postal receipt
of the speed post has been filed. Even no reply to this notice was filed by
the appellant, therefore, sealing order dated 18.10.2017 was issued. There is
some error in the dates on the noting, but this is not sufficient to hold that
the demolition order or the sealing order was passed without issuing show
cause notice or affording an opportunity of being heard to the appellants. No
document has been filed or evidence has been brought on record that the
construction of the appellants was protected under any law or that same was
raised with sanction. There are allegations of unauthorized construction in
the building from ground to third floor. Even as per admission of the
appellants, a fire broke out in the building in the year 2002 and major
portion thereof was destroyed. The appellants purchased property in the year
2016 and they appear to have reconstructed the same in the garb of repairs.
Even the MCD Appeal 32/17 M/s P.C.S. Associates & Ors. v. North DMC Page 8 of
9 photographs placed on record support the case of the North DMC regarding
existence of unauthorized construction in the building. Hence, the impugned
order dated 15.11.2017 for not granting interim stay is reasoned and
justified. There is no merit in the appeal. Same is accordingly dismissed.
File be consigned to record room.
                                                                            Digitally signed by
                                                          TALWANT           TALWANT SINGH
                                                          SINGH             Date: 2018.08.14
                                                                            10:39:36 +0530
    Announced in the open Court               (TALWANT SINGH)
Dated: 10th August, 2018 District & Sessions Judge (HQs) Tis Hazari Courts :
Delhi MCD Appeal 32/17 M/s P.C.S. Associates & Ors. v. North DMC Page 9 of 9
document has been filed or evidence has been brought on record that the
construction of the appellants was protected under any law or that same was
raised with sanction. There are allegations of unauthorized construction in
the building from ground to third floor. Even as per admission of the
appellants, a fire broke out in the building in the year 2002 and major
portion thereof was destroyed. The appellants purchased property in the year
2016 and they appear to have reconstructed the same in the garb of repairs.
Even the MCD Appeal 32/17 M/s P.C.S. Associates & Ors. v. North DMC Page 8 of
9 photographs placed on record support the case of the North DMC regarding
existence of unauthorized construction in the building. Hence, the impugned
order dated 15.11.2017 for not granting interim stay is reasoned and
justified. There is no merit in the appeal. Same is accordingly dismissed.
File be consigned to record room.
                                                                            Digitally signed by
                                                          TALWANT           TALWANT SINGH
                                                          SINGH             Date: 2018.08.14
         Through his legal heirs
    (a)  Smt. Neeta Chawla
         W/o Late Sh. Suresh Kumar Chawla
         R/o H.No.44, Road No.52,
         West Punjabi Bagh,
         New Delhi­110026
    (b) Sh. Sahil Chawla
    MCD Appeal 32/17       M/s P.C.S. Associates & Ors. v. North DMC      Page 1 of 9
           S/o Late Sh. Suresh Kumar Chawla
          R/o H.No.44, Road No.52,
          West Punjabi Bagh,
          New Delhi­110026
    (c) Smt. Mansi Sarin
        D/o Late Sh. Suresh Kumar Chawla
        W/o Sh. Nanak Sarin
        R/o H.No. 627, Rajinder Nagar,
        New Delhi­110060
    (d) Smt. Anchal Arora
        D/o Late Sh. Suresh Kumar Chawla
        W/o Sh. Rahul Arora
document has been filed or evidence has been brought on record that the
construction of the appellants was protected under any law or that same was
raised with sanction. There are allegations of unauthorized construction in
the building from ground to third floor. Even as per admission of the
appellants, a fire broke out in the building in the year 2002 and major
portion thereof was destroyed. The appellants purchased property in the year
2016 and they appear to have reconstructed the same in the garb of repairs.
Even the MCD Appeal 32/17 M/s P.C.S. Associates & Ors. v. North DMC Page 8 of
9 photographs placed on record support the case of the North DMC regarding
existence of unauthorized construction in the building. Hence, the impugned
order dated 15.11.2017 for not granting interim stay is reasoned and
justified. There is no merit in the appeal. Same is accordingly dismissed.
File be consigned to record room.
                                                                            Digitally signed by
                                                          TALWANT           TALWANT SINGH
                                                          SINGH             Date: 2018.08.14
         Through his legal heirs
    (a)  Smt. Neeta Chawla
         W/o Late Sh. Suresh Kumar Chawla
         R/o H.No.44, Road No.52,
         West Punjabi Bagh,
         New Delhi­110026
    (b) Sh. Sahil Chawla
    MCD Appeal 32/17       M/s P.C.S. Associates & Ors. v. North DMC      Page 1 of 9
           S/o Late Sh. Suresh Kumar Chawla
          R/o H.No.44, Road No.52,
          West Punjabi Bagh,
          New Delhi­110026
    (c) Smt. Mansi Sarin
        D/o Late Sh. Suresh Kumar Chawla
        W/o Sh. Nanak Sarin
        R/o H.No. 627, Rajinder Nagar,
        New Delhi­110060
    (d) Smt. Anchal Arora
        D/o Late Sh. Suresh Kumar Chawla
        W/o Sh. Rahul Arora
document has been filed or evidence has been brought on record that the
construction of the appellants was protected under any law or that same was
raised with sanction. There are allegations of unauthorized construction in
the building from ground to third floor. Even as per admission of the
appellants, a fire broke out in the building in the year 2002 and major
portion thereof was destroyed. The appellants purchased property in the year
2016 and they appear to have reconstructed the same in the garb of repairs.
Even the MCD Appeal 32/17 M/s P.C.S. Associates & Ors. v. North DMC Page 8 of
9 photographs placed on record support the case of the North DMC regarding
existence of unauthorized construction in the building. Hence, the impugned
order dated 15.11.2017 for not granting interim stay is reasoned and
justified. There is no merit in the appeal. Same is accordingly dismissed.
File be consigned to record room.
                                                                            Digitally signed by
                                                          TALWANT           TALWANT SINGH
                                                          SINGH             Date: 2018.08.14
         Through his legal heirs
    (a)  Smt. Neeta Chawla
         W/o Late Sh. Suresh Kumar Chawla
         R/o H.No.44, Road No.52,
         West Punjabi Bagh,
         New Delhi­110026
    (b) Sh. Sahil Chawla
    MCD Appeal 32/17       M/s P.C.S. Associates & Ors. v. North DMC      Page 1 of 9
           S/o Late Sh. Suresh Kumar Chawla
          R/o H.No.44, Road No.52,
          West Punjabi Bagh,
          New Delhi­110026
    (c) Smt. Mansi Sarin
        D/o Late Sh. Suresh Kumar Chawla
        W/o Sh. Nanak Sarin
        R/o H.No. 627, Rajinder Nagar,
        New Delhi­110060
    (d) Smt. Anchal Arora
        D/o Late Sh. Suresh Kumar Chawla
        W/o Sh. Rahul Arora
        R/o H.No.28, Road No.51,
        West Punjabi Bagh,
        New Delhi­110026
    4.    Sh. Chitranjan Pal Singh
          Partner of M/s P.C.S. Associates
    5.    Sh. Virender Mukim
          Partner of M/s P.C.S. Associates
          All having its office at:
          5483 to 5494/1, Ward No.VI,
          Situated at Corner of Ghanta Ghar,
          Town Hall, Chandni Chowk,
document has been filed or evidence has been brought on record that the
construction of the appellants was protected under any law or that same was
raised with sanction. There are allegations of unauthorized construction in
the building from ground to third floor. Even as per admission of the
appellants, a fire broke out in the building in the year 2002 and major
portion thereof was destroyed. The appellants purchased property in the year
2016 and they appear to have reconstructed the same in the garb of repairs.
Even the MCD Appeal 32/17 M/s P.C.S. Associates & Ors. v. North DMC Page 8 of
9 photographs placed on record support the case of the North DMC regarding
existence of unauthorized construction in the building. Hence, the impugned
order dated 15.11.2017 for not granting interim stay is reasoned and
justified. There is no merit in the appeal. Same is accordingly dismissed.
File be consigned to record room.
                                                                            Digitally signed by
                                                          TALWANT           TALWANT SINGH
                                                          SINGH             Date: 2018.08.14
         Through his legal heirs
    (a)  Smt. Neeta Chawla
         W/o Late Sh. Suresh Kumar Chawla
         R/o H.No.44, Road No.52,
         West Punjabi Bagh,
         New Delhi­110026
    (b) Sh. Sahil Chawla
    MCD Appeal 32/17       M/s P.C.S. Associates & Ors. v. North DMC      Page 1 of 9
           S/o Late Sh. Suresh Kumar Chawla
          R/o H.No.44, Road No.52,
          West Punjabi Bagh,
          New Delhi­110026
    (c) Smt. Mansi Sarin
        D/o Late Sh. Suresh Kumar Chawla
        W/o Sh. Nanak Sarin
        R/o H.No. 627, Rajinder Nagar,
        New Delhi­110060
    (d) Smt. Anchal Arora
        D/o Late Sh. Suresh Kumar Chawla
        W/o Sh. Rahul Arora
        R/o H.No.28, Road No.51,
        West Punjabi Bagh,
        New Delhi­110026
    4.    Sh. Chitranjan Pal Singh
          Partner of M/s P.C.S. Associates
    5.    Sh. Virender Mukim
          Partner of M/s P.C.S. Associates
          All having its office at:
          5483 to 5494/1, Ward No.VI,
          Situated at Corner of Ghanta Ghar,
          Town Hall, Chandni Chowk,
document has been filed or evidence has been brought on record that the
construction of the appellants was protected under any law or that same was
raised with sanction. There are allegations of unauthorized construction in
the building from ground to third floor. Even as per admission of the
appellants, a fire broke out in the building in the year 2002 and major
portion thereof was destroyed. The appellants purchased property in the year
2016 and they appear to have reconstructed the same in the garb of repairs.
Even the MCD Appeal 32/17 M/s P.C.S. Associates & Ors. v. North DMC Page 8 of
9 photographs placed on record support the case of the North DMC regarding
existence of unauthorized construction in the building. Hence, the impugned
order dated 15.11.2017 for not granting interim stay is reasoned and
justified. There is no merit in the appeal. Same is accordingly dismissed.
File be consigned to record room.
                                                                            Digitally signed by
                                                          TALWANT           TALWANT SINGH
                                                          SINGH             Date: 2018.08.14
