Custom, Excise & Service Tax Tribunal
Scope International Private ... vs Service Tax - Chennai on 27 June, 2018
Bench: Madhu Mohan Damodhar, Sulekha Beevi C.S.
                                         1
                     IN THE CUSTOMS, EXCISE AND SERVICE TAX
                               APPELLATE TRIBUNAL
                         SOUTH ZONAL BENCH AT CHENNAI
                            Appeal No. ST/00243/2011
    (Arising out of Order-in-Original No. 35/2010 dated 30.12.2010 passed by
    The Commissioner of Central Excise, Chennai)
    M/s. Scope International Pvt. Ltd.                         : Appellant
               Vs.
    The Commissioner of Central Excise, Chennai                : Respondent
Appearance:-
Shri Raghavan Ramabadran, Advocate for the Appellant Shri K. Veerabhadra
Reddy, JC (AR) for the Respondent CORAM:
Hon'ble Ms. Sulekha Beevi C.S., Member (Judicial) Hon'ble Shri Madhu Mohan
Damodhar, Member (Technical) Date of Hearing/Decision:27.06.2018 Final Order
No. 41944 / 2018 Per Bench, The appellant is a wholly owned subsidiary company
of M/s. Standard Chartered Bank, U.K. and is engaged in the business of
the levy of service tax and the demand pertaining to the training conducted
outside India to the tune of Rs. 2,90,569/- requires to be set aside, which we
hereby do.  9 7.5 From the above discussions, the impugned order is modified
to the extent of allowing the credit on the impugned input services, setting
aside the demand in respect of Commercial Coaching and Training Services for
the period prior to 18.04.2006 and also setting aside the demand relating to
the Commercial Coaching and Training Services conducted outside India (Rs.
2,90,569/-). The demand in respect of Commercial Coaching and Training
Services conducted in India post 18.04.2006 to the tune of Rs. 6,83,897/- is
upheld along with interest. However, the penalty in respect of the said demand
is set aside for the reason that the appellant has paid up the amount before
issuance of Show Cause Notice and also for the reason that the issue is an
interpretational one.
8\. The appeal is allowed partly in above terms, with consequential reliefs,
if any.
                       (Operative portion of the order was
of M/s. Standard Chartered Bank, U.K. and is engaged in the business of
providing back-end support to certain branches of the bank spread across the
globe including India. In the course of audit, it was noticed that appellants
had availed Cenvat Credit of service tax paid on certain input services which,
according to the Department, was not eligible for credit. Further, it was  2
also noticed that they had been imparting service of Commercial Coaching and
Training Services in India as well as abroad and are liable to pay service tax
on forward as well as reverse charge basis. Show Cause Notice was issuse
proposing to disallow the credit of input services and also for demanding the
short paid service tax along with interest and for imposing penalties. After
due process of law, the Original Authority disallowed the credit to the tune
of Rs. 2,09,28,910/- on input services for the period from April, 2005 to
December, 2008 and ordered for recovery of the same along with interest. The
demand of Rs. 12,83,005/- was confirmed, being the service tax payable on
Commercial Coaching and Training Services for the period from January, 2005 to
December, 2007. The amount of Rs. 6,83,897/- paid by the appellant towards the
said service was appropriated. The order also confirmed the payment of
interest and imposed equal penalties. Aggrieved, the appellants are now before
the Tribunal.
2\. On behalf of the appellant, the learned Counsel Shri Raghavan Ramabadran
submitted that the adjudicating authority has denied credit on various input
services alleging that there is no nexus of these services with the output
services provided by the appellant. He made the following submission regarding
the correlation between input services and output service which is shown in
the table below:
3
Sl. No. Input Service Usage in Output Service
1\. Outdoor Caterer Appellant provides service to the group Services companies
located across the globe in different countries. The services are provided
round the clock and the employees are required to work on shift basis. As
there is no facility nearby the office premises, where the employees can
quickly go and have their food and come back, the Company provides the food
and snacks to the employees at the office cafeteria itself.
The Company has to mandatorily provide this service in terms of the
requirement under the statutory labour laws.
2\. Rent-a-cab Services The Appellant provides service to their group
companies located across the globe.
Due to difference between the time zones of those countries, the services are
provided round the clock. The company hires cabs for picking their employees
from their residence and drops them back. In absence of public transport
facility for commuting at the odd hours of the day, it is essential to provide
transport facilities to the employees. It is an important input service for
providing output services.
3\. Cargo handling These professional services assist the services/ Packers
and Appellant in documentary process and Movers Services arrangement for
transfer of the imported goods viz. networking equipment and servers from
Customs port/ airport till office premises including clearance at subsequent
stages during the forwarding operations.
These imported networking equipment and servers are essential to provide ITES
services.
4 Event Management Manpower is the backbone of the IT Services industry and
for which it has to motivate its employees to perform job responsibilities
efficiently. The Appellant organizes various events and team building
activities with the help of even management agencies to motivate the
employees. Without the availability of the motivated manpower, Appellant would
not be able to carry out its work effectively.
3\. He argued that the authorities below have disallowed the credit on input
services on flimsy grounds without any evidence. It is pointed out by  4 him
that the period involved is prior to 01.04.2011 when the definition of "input
services" had a wide ambit has it included the words "activities relating to
business" and, therefore, the appellant has rightly availed the credit. To
support his contentions, he placed reliance on the following decisions:
                 Service Involved                   Legal Authority
                 Outdoor            Reliance Communication Ltd. v. CST [2018 (5)
                 Catering,          TMI 488 - CESTAT Mumbai]
                 Rent-a-Cab         Final Order No. 40194 - 40207/2018 passed by
                                    Hon'ble CESTAT, Chennai
                 Cargo Handling        i.     KLA Telcor Software India Pvt. Ltd. v.
                                              CST [2016 (45) STR 242 (Tri. - Chennai)
                                       ii.    Montage    Enterprises   Pvt.   Ltd.   v.
                                              Commissioner of ST [2018 (3) TMI 710
                                              - CESTAT Chennai]
                 Event              M/s. Titan Industries Ltd. v. Commissioner of ST
                 Management         [2018 (3) TMI 710 - CESTAT Chennai];
4\. He submitted that the Department has erroneously demanded service tax for
the services relating to Commercial Coaching and Training Services for the
period from 01.01.2005 to 18.04.2006 for the services which have been
performed abroad. The total demand for the said services is Rs. 12,83,005/-.
Out of this, an amount of Rs. 6,83,897/- relates to services/training
conducted in India for the period after 18.04.2006. The appellant admits this
liability and has paid the same along with interest. An amount of Rs.
2,90,569/- pertains to charges for training conducted outside India for the
period after 18.04.2006 and services having been performed outside India do
not attract the levy of service tax. That the  5 service in the nature of
Commercial Coaching and Training Service is a performance based service and,
therefore, as services are performed outside India, no service tax is payable.
Further, that the levy of service tax prior to the period 18.04.2006 cannot
sustain as decided by the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Union of India Vs.
Indian National Shipowners Association, 2010 (17) S.T.R. J57 (S.C.). He also
relied upon the decision in the case of C.C.E. Vs. Lumax Samlip Industries
Ltd, 2015 (39) S.T.R. 787 (Mad.) to argue that the demand of service tax on
any service provided by a non- resident or a person located outside India to a
recipient in India would arise only w.e.f. 18.04.2006. For the same reason, he
prayed that the penalty in respect of demand of service tax for Commercial
Coaching and Training Services performed in India during the disputed period
may be waived. Further, that the appellant has paid the said service tax along
with interest prior to the issuance of Show Cause Notice and, as per the
decision in the case of C.C.E. & S.T. Vs. Addeco Flexione Workforce Solutions
Ltd. [2012 (26) S.T.R. (3) Kar.] no penalty can be imposed.
5\. The learned AR, Shri K. Veerabhadra Reddy, supported the findings in the
impugned order. He submitted that the various input services were not used for
providing output services and, therefore, are not eligible for credit.
Further, though the appellant was liable to pay service tax on  6 Commercial
Coaching and Training Services performed in India as well as abroad, they have
failed to discharge the service tax. The evasion of tax would not have come to
light but for the interference of the Department and, therefore, the penalties
imposed are legal and proper.
6\. Heard both sides.
7.1 The credit on various input services, shown in the table above, namely,
outdoor catering services, Rent-a-Cab services, Cargo Handling, Event
Management, were disallowed by the adjudicating authority on the ground that
these services have no nexus with the output services of the appellant. In the
table given above, the appellant has stated the necessity of availing such
services and their nexus with the output services. We are convinced that these
services qualify as input services. Further, the period involved is prior to
01.04.2011 when the definition of input services had a wide ambit as pointed
out by the learned Counsel for appellant. We find that the disallowance of
credit on these input services is unjustified and requires to be set aside,
which we hereby do.
7.2 The next issue that has to be addressed is regarding the demand of service
tax on Commercial Coaching and Training Services. From the Annexure attached
to the Show Cause Notice, it is clear that the appellant has imparted training
services in India as well as abroad. Part of the demand falls prior to
18.04.2006. It is settled position of law, as rendered by  7 the Hon'ble Apex
Court in the case of Indian National Shipowners Association (supra), that an
assessee would be liable to pay service tax under reverse charge mechanism for
the services provided abroad only w.e.f. 18.04.2006. The demand prior to
18.04.2006 cannot, therefore, sustain. The details of the demand in respect of
Commercial Coaching and Training Services as per the impugned order as given
by the learned Counsel for appellant, is as below:
                               Particulars                                Amount
                                                                            (Rs.)
             Demand pre 18.04.2006                                A       3,08,539
             Demand post             For             training     B1      6,83,897
             18.04.2006 (Rs.         conducted in India
             9,74,466/-)             For             training     B2      2,90,569
                                     conducted       outside
                                     India
             Demand under Commercial Coaching and               C=A+      12,83,005
             Training Service as per the impugned OIO           B1 + B2
7.3 It is seen that the appellants have conducted training in India post
18.04.2006 for which an amount of Rs. 6,83,897/- is liable to be paid by them.
As per the impugned order, the appellants have paid up this liability along
with interest. The issue whether an assessee is liable to pay service tax on
reverse charge basis was under litigation and there was much confusion with
regard to the said issue during the relevant period. For the same reason, we
find that being an interpretational issue, no penalties can be imposed on the
appellant in regard to the amount of Rs. 6,83,897/-  8 pertaining to
Commercial Coaching and Training Services imparted in India post 18.04.2006.
7.4 It is seen that an amount of Rs. 2,90,569/- relates to training conducted
by the appellant outside India. The Department has relied on Rule 3(ii) of the
Taxation of Services (provided from outside India and received in India)
Rules, 2006 to demand the service tax post 18.04.2006 for services provided
outside India contending that the services were partly performed in India and,
therefore, has to be treated as performed in India. Though the learned AR has
made a frail effort to argue that the training conducted abroad is a
continuation of the training conducted by appellants in India, he has not been
able to support this by any allegation raised in the Show Cause Notice or by
any evidence. In fact, in Annexure to the Show Cause Notice, the charges
collected by appellant for training imparted in various places abroad as well
as in India are separately shown. It is submitted by the appellant that the
training sessions conducted for employees in India and abroad are distinct
training sessions and are not part of a single training programme. Thus, the
service is performed entirely outside India and, therefore, does not attract
the levy of service tax and the demand pertaining to the training conducted
outside India to the tune of Rs. 2,90,569/- requires to be set aside, which we
hereby do.  9 7.5 From the above discussions, the impugned order is modified
to the extent of allowing the credit on the impugned input services, setting
aside the demand in respect of Commercial Coaching and Training Services for
the period prior to 18.04.2006 and also setting aside the demand relating to
the Commercial Coaching and Training Services conducted outside India (Rs.
2,90,569/-). The demand in respect of Commercial Coaching and Training
Services conducted in India post 18.04.2006 to the tune of Rs. 6,83,897/- is
upheld along with interest. However, the penalty in respect of the said demand
is set aside for the reason that the appellant has paid up the amount before
issuance of Show Cause Notice and also for the reason that the issue is an
interpretational one.
8\. The appeal is allowed partly in above terms, with consequential reliefs,
if any.
                       (Operative portion of the order was
                              pronounced in open court)
    (Madhu Mohan Damodhar)                         (Sulekha Beevi C.S.)
      Member (Technical)                             Member (Judicial)
    Sdd
the levy of service tax and the demand pertaining to the training conducted
outside India to the tune of Rs. 2,90,569/- requires to be set aside, which we
hereby do.  9 7.5 From the above discussions, the impugned order is modified
to the extent of allowing the credit on the impugned input services, setting
aside the demand in respect of Commercial Coaching and Training Services for
the period prior to 18.04.2006 and also setting aside the demand relating to
the Commercial Coaching and Training Services conducted outside India (Rs.
2,90,569/-). The demand in respect of Commercial Coaching and Training
Services conducted in India post 18.04.2006 to the tune of Rs. 6,83,897/- is
upheld along with interest. However, the penalty in respect of the said demand
is set aside for the reason that the appellant has paid up the amount before
issuance of Show Cause Notice and also for the reason that the issue is an
interpretational one.
8\. The appeal is allowed partly in above terms, with consequential reliefs,
if any.
                       (Operative portion of the order was
of M/s. Standard Chartered Bank, U.K. and is engaged in the business of
providing back-end support to certain branches of the bank spread across the
globe including India. In the course of audit, it was noticed that appellants
had availed Cenvat Credit of service tax paid on certain input services which,
according to the Department, was not eligible for credit. Further, it was  2
also noticed that they had been imparting service of Commercial Coaching and
Training Services in India as well as abroad and are liable to pay service tax
on forward as well as reverse charge basis. Show Cause Notice was issuse
proposing to disallow the credit of input services and also for demanding the
short paid service tax along with interest and for imposing penalties. After
due process of law, the Original Authority disallowed the credit to the tune
of Rs. 2,09,28,910/- on input services for the period from April, 2005 to
December, 2008 and ordered for recovery of the same along with interest. The
demand of Rs. 12,83,005/- was confirmed, being the service tax payable on
Commercial Coaching and Training Services for the period from January, 2005 to
December, 2007. The amount of Rs. 6,83,897/- paid by the appellant towards the
said service was appropriated. The order also confirmed the payment of
interest and imposed equal penalties. Aggrieved, the appellants are now before
the Tribunal.
2\. On behalf of the appellant, the learned Counsel Shri Raghavan Ramabadran
the levy of service tax and the demand pertaining to the training conducted
outside India to the tune of Rs. 2,90,569/- requires to be set aside, which we
hereby do.  9 7.5 From the above discussions, the impugned order is modified
to the extent of allowing the credit on the impugned input services, setting
aside the demand in respect of Commercial Coaching and Training Services for
the period prior to 18.04.2006 and also setting aside the demand relating to
the Commercial Coaching and Training Services conducted outside India (Rs.
2,90,569/-). The demand in respect of Commercial Coaching and Training
Services conducted in India post 18.04.2006 to the tune of Rs. 6,83,897/- is
upheld along with interest. However, the penalty in respect of the said demand
is set aside for the reason that the appellant has paid up the amount before
issuance of Show Cause Notice and also for the reason that the issue is an
interpretational one.
8\. The appeal is allowed partly in above terms, with consequential reliefs,
if any.
                       (Operative portion of the order was
of M/s. Standard Chartered Bank, U.K. and is engaged in the business of
providing back-end support to certain branches of the bank spread across the
globe including India. In the course of audit, it was noticed that appellants
had availed Cenvat Credit of service tax paid on certain input services which,
according to the Department, was not eligible for credit. Further, it was  2
also noticed that they had been imparting service of Commercial Coaching and
Training Services in India as well as abroad and are liable to pay service tax
on forward as well as reverse charge basis. Show Cause Notice was issuse
proposing to disallow the credit of input services and also for demanding the
short paid service tax along with interest and for imposing penalties. After
due process of law, the Original Authority disallowed the credit to the tune
of Rs. 2,09,28,910/- on input services for the period from April, 2005 to
December, 2008 and ordered for recovery of the same along with interest. The
demand of Rs. 12,83,005/- was confirmed, being the service tax payable on
Commercial Coaching and Training Services for the period from January, 2005 to
December, 2007. The amount of Rs. 6,83,897/- paid by the appellant towards the
said service was appropriated. The order also confirmed the payment of
interest and imposed equal penalties. Aggrieved, the appellants are now before
the Tribunal.
2\. On behalf of the appellant, the learned Counsel Shri Raghavan Ramabadran
the levy of service tax and the demand pertaining to the training conducted
outside India to the tune of Rs. 2,90,569/- requires to be set aside, which we
hereby do.  9 7.5 From the above discussions, the impugned order is modified
to the extent of allowing the credit on the impugned input services, setting
aside the demand in respect of Commercial Coaching and Training Services for
the period prior to 18.04.2006 and also setting aside the demand relating to
the Commercial Coaching and Training Services conducted outside India (Rs.
2,90,569/-). The demand in respect of Commercial Coaching and Training
Services conducted in India post 18.04.2006 to the tune of Rs. 6,83,897/- is
upheld along with interest. However, the penalty in respect of the said demand
is set aside for the reason that the appellant has paid up the amount before
issuance of Show Cause Notice and also for the reason that the issue is an
interpretational one.
8\. The appeal is allowed partly in above terms, with consequential reliefs,
if any.
                       (Operative portion of the order was
of M/s. Standard Chartered Bank, U.K. and is engaged in the business of
providing back-end support to certain branches of the bank spread across the
globe including India. In the course of audit, it was noticed that appellants
had availed Cenvat Credit of service tax paid on certain input services which,
according to the Department, was not eligible for credit. Further, it was  2
also noticed that they had been imparting service of Commercial Coaching and
Training Services in India as well as abroad and are liable to pay service tax
on forward as well as reverse charge basis. Show Cause Notice was issuse
proposing to disallow the credit of input services and also for demanding the
short paid service tax along with interest and for imposing penalties. After
due process of law, the Original Authority disallowed the credit to the tune
of Rs. 2,09,28,910/- on input services for the period from April, 2005 to
December, 2008 and ordered for recovery of the same along with interest. The
demand of Rs. 12,83,005/- was confirmed, being the service tax payable on
Commercial Coaching and Training Services for the period from January, 2005 to
December, 2007. The amount of Rs. 6,83,897/- paid by the appellant towards the
said service was appropriated. The order also confirmed the payment of
interest and imposed equal penalties. Aggrieved, the appellants are now before
the Tribunal.
2\. On behalf of the appellant, the learned Counsel Shri Raghavan Ramabadran
submitted that the adjudicating authority has denied credit on various input
services alleging that there is no nexus of these services with the output
services provided by the appellant. He made the following submission regarding
the correlation between input services and output service which is shown in
the table below:
3
Sl. No. Input Service Usage in Output Service
1\. Outdoor Caterer Appellant provides service to the group Services companies
located across the globe in different countries. The services are provided
round the clock and the employees are required to work on shift basis. As
there is no facility nearby the office premises, where the employees can
the levy of service tax and the demand pertaining to the training conducted
outside India to the tune of Rs. 2,90,569/- requires to be set aside, which we
hereby do.  9 7.5 From the above discussions, the impugned order is modified
to the extent of allowing the credit on the impugned input services, setting
aside the demand in respect of Commercial Coaching and Training Services for
the period prior to 18.04.2006 and also setting aside the demand relating to
the Commercial Coaching and Training Services conducted outside India (Rs.
2,90,569/-). The demand in respect of Commercial Coaching and Training
Services conducted in India post 18.04.2006 to the tune of Rs. 6,83,897/- is
upheld along with interest. However, the penalty in respect of the said demand
is set aside for the reason that the appellant has paid up the amount before
issuance of Show Cause Notice and also for the reason that the issue is an
interpretational one.
8\. The appeal is allowed partly in above terms, with consequential reliefs,
if any.
                       (Operative portion of the order was
of M/s. Standard Chartered Bank, U.K. and is engaged in the business of
providing back-end support to certain branches of the bank spread across the
globe including India. In the course of audit, it was noticed that appellants
had availed Cenvat Credit of service tax paid on certain input services which,
according to the Department, was not eligible for credit. Further, it was  2
also noticed that they had been imparting service of Commercial Coaching and
Training Services in India as well as abroad and are liable to pay service tax
on forward as well as reverse charge basis. Show Cause Notice was issuse
proposing to disallow the credit of input services and also for demanding the
short paid service tax along with interest and for imposing penalties. After
due process of law, the Original Authority disallowed the credit to the tune
of Rs. 2,09,28,910/- on input services for the period from April, 2005 to
December, 2008 and ordered for recovery of the same along with interest. The
demand of Rs. 12,83,005/- was confirmed, being the service tax payable on
Commercial Coaching and Training Services for the period from January, 2005 to
December, 2007. The amount of Rs. 6,83,897/- paid by the appellant towards the
said service was appropriated. The order also confirmed the payment of
interest and imposed equal penalties. Aggrieved, the appellants are now before
the Tribunal.
2\. On behalf of the appellant, the learned Counsel Shri Raghavan Ramabadran
submitted that the adjudicating authority has denied credit on various input
services alleging that there is no nexus of these services with the output
services provided by the appellant. He made the following submission regarding
the correlation between input services and output service which is shown in
the table below:
3
Sl. No. Input Service Usage in Output Service
1\. Outdoor Caterer Appellant provides service to the group Services companies
located across the globe in different countries. The services are provided
round the clock and the employees are required to work on shift basis. As
there is no facility nearby the office premises, where the employees can
the levy of service tax and the demand pertaining to the training conducted
outside India to the tune of Rs. 2,90,569/- requires to be set aside, which we
hereby do.  9 7.5 From the above discussions, the impugned order is modified
to the extent of allowing the credit on the impugned input services, setting
aside the demand in respect of Commercial Coaching and Training Services for
the period prior to 18.04.2006 and also setting aside the demand relating to
the Commercial Coaching and Training Services conducted outside India (Rs.
2,90,569/-). The demand in respect of Commercial Coaching and Training
Services conducted in India post 18.04.2006 to the tune of Rs. 6,83,897/- is
upheld along with interest. However, the penalty in respect of the said demand
is set aside for the reason that the appellant has paid up the amount before
issuance of Show Cause Notice and also for the reason that the issue is an
interpretational one.
8\. The appeal is allowed partly in above terms, with consequential reliefs,
if any.
                       (Operative portion of the order was
