Delhi District Court
Cri. Rev. No.150/14 vs The State on 11 March, 2015
Author: Sh. Raj Kapoor
                                                            Cri. Rev. no.150/14
                                                    Smt. Shubhrachna v. State
    11.03.2015
    Pre:      Ld. APP for the State.
                 None for the revisionist.
                 File perused, vide separate detailed order placed along side
    in the file, I do not find any infirmity or impropriety or incorrectness in the
    impugned order dated 01.11.2014, so the revision petition does not
    deserve any merit to succeed at this stage.            Hence, the revision
    petition is dismissed.       Accordingly, revision petition stands disposed
    of.   Trial Court record, if any, be sent back with a copy of the order.
    Revision petition/ proceedings be consigned to record room.
                                                        (RAJ KAPOOR)
                                         ADDITIONAL SESSIONS JUDGE-03
                                     PATIALA HOUSE COURTS / NEW DELHI
    Cri. Rev. no.150/14
    Smt. Subhrachna  v. State
the accused and ld. APP as well. I have perused the case file very carefully.
On perusal of the case file it reveals that revisionist remained absent before
the ld. Trial Court vide orders dated 30.08.2013; 18.11.2013; 15.01.2014;
13.03.2014; 15.05.2014; 24.07.2014; and on 01.11.2014. Further, perusal of the
case file it reveals that the conduct of the revisionist is Cri. Rev.
no.150/14 Smt. Subhrachna v. State 4 contradictory to the facts as the
revisionist in her application moved for exemption on 01.11.2014 has given the
reason that she was not aware of the date of hearing in the court and no where
in the application it has been mentioned that she was preoccupied with the
illness of her daughter and that is why she could not attend the court. In
light of these facts and circumstances of the case, I do not find any force in
the contentions of ld. Counsel for the revisionist. Resultantly, I do not find
any infirmity or impropriety or incorrectness in the impugned order dated
01.11.2014, so the revision petition does not deserve any merit to succeed at
this stage. Hence, the revision petition is dismissed. Accordingly, revision
petition stands disposed of. Trial Court record, if any, be sent back with a
    Smt. Subhrachna  v. State
                                                                                  1
        IN THE COURT OF SH. RAJ KAPOOR, ADDITIONAL SESSIONS
            JUDGE (03) , PATIALA HOUSE COURT, NEW DELHI
                                Cri. Revision No.150/14
    IN THE MATTER OF :
    Smt. Shubhrachna
    w/o Shri Pardeep Sharma
    r/o 6131/8/6, Vasant Kunj,
    New Delhi.
                                                                       Revisionist
                                        Versus
    The State
    FIR no.66/06
    U/s 420/ 468/ 471 IPC
    PS Connaught Place.
                                                          ................ Respondent
    11.03.2015
    ORDER:
1\. By this order I shall decide the REVISION PETITION filed by REVISIONIST
against the order dated 01.11.2014 in the above noted case (hereinafter
referred as impugned order) passed by Ld. MM whereby ld. Trial court declared
the revisionist as Proclaimed Absconder on being satisfied with the execution
of process issued u/s 82 Cr. PC against the revisionist.
2\. Briefly facts of the case are that an FIR no.66/06 U/s 420/ 468/ 471 IPC
at PS Connaught Place has been lodged against the revisionist . During the
course of trial, revisionist Shubhrachna did not appear before the ld. Trial
Court hence, the NBWs were issued against the revisionist vide court order
dated 18.11.2013; Cri. Rev. no.150/14 Smt. Subhrachna v. State 2 15.01.2014;
13.03.2014 and thereafter, process u/s 82 Cr. PC was issued against her vide
order dated 15.05.2014. However, on 01.11.2014 one of the accused Pradeep
Sharma moved an application for dropping the proceedings u/s 82 Cr. PC before
ld. Trial court, but ld. Trial court did not find any reasonable explanation
for the absence of revisionist Shubhrachna as no assurance was given for the
appearance of the revisionist as a result of which application was dismissed,
vide order dated 01.11.2014. Hence, on receipt of the execution report of
process 82 Cr. PC ld. Trial Court recorded the statement of HC Rajpal and
after being satisfied with the statement of HC Rajpal revisionist Shubhrachna
was declared as Proclaimed Absconder. Further, perusal of the case file
reveals that proceedings u/s 82 Cr. PC against other co-accused persons namely
Pramod Kumar and Ashok Kumar are also in force. Feeling aggrieved with the
impugned order dated 01.11.2014, ld. Counsel for the revisionist Subhrachna
filed this revision petition.
3\. Arguments were heard. During the course of arguments, Ld. Counsel for the
revisionist submitted that impugned order dated 01.11.2014 vide which the
revisionist was declared PO is not sustainable on account of the fact that she
remained pre-occupied with her daughter as she was suffering from illness and
to this effect she has filed various medical prescriptions along with Cri.
Rev. no.150/14 Smt. Subhrachna v. State 3 exemption application. On these
grounds he submitted that revision petition be allowed.
4\. Contrary to the submissions of Ld. counsel for the revisionist, ld
Additional PP for the state submitted that revisionist did not appear inspite
of issuance of NBW and after that the revisionist was declared absconder under
Section 82 Cr.P.C. He further submitted that the conduct of the revisionist is
contradictory to the facts as the revisionist in her application moved for
exemption on 01.11.2014 has given the reason that she was not aware of the
date of hearing in the court and no where in the application it has been
mentioned that she was preoccupied with the illness of her daughter and that
is why she could not attend the court. On these grounds he submitted that the
revision petition is liable to be dismissed.
5\. I have given careful consideration to the submissions of ld. Counsel for
the accused and ld. APP as well. I have perused the case file very carefully.
On perusal of the case file it reveals that revisionist remained absent before
the ld. Trial Court vide orders dated 30.08.2013; 18.11.2013; 15.01.2014;
13.03.2014; 15.05.2014; 24.07.2014; and on 01.11.2014. Further, perusal of the
case file it reveals that the conduct of the revisionist is Cri. Rev.
no.150/14 Smt. Subhrachna v. State 4 contradictory to the facts as the
revisionist in her application moved for exemption on 01.11.2014 has given the
reason that she was not aware of the date of hearing in the court and no where
in the application it has been mentioned that she was preoccupied with the
illness of her daughter and that is why she could not attend the court. In
light of these facts and circumstances of the case, I do not find any force in
the contentions of ld. Counsel for the revisionist. Resultantly, I do not find
any infirmity or impropriety or incorrectness in the impugned order dated
01.11.2014, so the revision petition does not deserve any merit to succeed at
this stage. Hence, the revision petition is dismissed. Accordingly, revision
petition stands disposed of. Trial Court record, if any, be sent back with a
copy of the order. Revision petition/ proceedings be consigned to record room.
ANNOUNCED IN THE OPEN COURT ON THIS 11.03.2015 (RAJ KAPOOR) ADDITIONAL
SESSIONS JUDGE-03 PATIALA HOUSE COURTS / NEW DELHI Cri. Rev. no.150/14 Smt.
Subhrachna v. State 5
the accused and ld. APP as well. I have perused the case file very carefully.
On perusal of the case file it reveals that revisionist remained absent before
the ld. Trial Court vide orders dated 30.08.2013; 18.11.2013; 15.01.2014;
13.03.2014; 15.05.2014; 24.07.2014; and on 01.11.2014. Further, perusal of the
case file it reveals that the conduct of the revisionist is Cri. Rev.
no.150/14 Smt. Subhrachna v. State 4 contradictory to the facts as the
revisionist in her application moved for exemption on 01.11.2014 has given the
reason that she was not aware of the date of hearing in the court and no where
in the application it has been mentioned that she was preoccupied with the
illness of her daughter and that is why she could not attend the court. In
light of these facts and circumstances of the case, I do not find any force in
the contentions of ld. Counsel for the revisionist. Resultantly, I do not find
any infirmity or impropriety or incorrectness in the impugned order dated
01.11.2014, so the revision petition does not deserve any merit to succeed at
this stage. Hence, the revision petition is dismissed. Accordingly, revision
petition stands disposed of. Trial Court record, if any, be sent back with a
    Smt. Subhrachna  v. State
                                                                                  1
        IN THE COURT OF SH. RAJ KAPOOR, ADDITIONAL SESSIONS
            JUDGE (03) , PATIALA HOUSE COURT, NEW DELHI
                                Cri. Revision No.150/14
    IN THE MATTER OF :
    Smt. Shubhrachna
    w/o Shri Pardeep Sharma
    r/o 6131/8/6, Vasant Kunj,
    New Delhi.
                                                                       Revisionist
                                        Versus
    The State
    FIR no.66/06
    U/s 420/ 468/ 471 IPC
    PS Connaught Place.
                                                          ................ Respondent
    11.03.2015
    ORDER:
1\. By this order I shall decide the REVISION PETITION filed by REVISIONIST
the accused and ld. APP as well. I have perused the case file very carefully.
On perusal of the case file it reveals that revisionist remained absent before
the ld. Trial Court vide orders dated 30.08.2013; 18.11.2013; 15.01.2014;
13.03.2014; 15.05.2014; 24.07.2014; and on 01.11.2014. Further, perusal of the
case file it reveals that the conduct of the revisionist is Cri. Rev.
no.150/14 Smt. Subhrachna v. State 4 contradictory to the facts as the
revisionist in her application moved for exemption on 01.11.2014 has given the
reason that she was not aware of the date of hearing in the court and no where
in the application it has been mentioned that she was preoccupied with the
illness of her daughter and that is why she could not attend the court. In
light of these facts and circumstances of the case, I do not find any force in
the contentions of ld. Counsel for the revisionist. Resultantly, I do not find
any infirmity or impropriety or incorrectness in the impugned order dated
01.11.2014, so the revision petition does not deserve any merit to succeed at
this stage. Hence, the revision petition is dismissed. Accordingly, revision
petition stands disposed of. Trial Court record, if any, be sent back with a
    Smt. Subhrachna  v. State
                                                                                  1
        IN THE COURT OF SH. RAJ KAPOOR, ADDITIONAL SESSIONS
            JUDGE (03) , PATIALA HOUSE COURT, NEW DELHI
                                Cri. Revision No.150/14
    IN THE MATTER OF :
    Smt. Shubhrachna
    w/o Shri Pardeep Sharma
    r/o 6131/8/6, Vasant Kunj,
    New Delhi.
                                                                       Revisionist
                                        Versus
    The State
    FIR no.66/06
    U/s 420/ 468/ 471 IPC
    PS Connaught Place.
                                                          ................ Respondent
    11.03.2015
    ORDER:
1\. By this order I shall decide the REVISION PETITION filed by REVISIONIST
the accused and ld. APP as well. I have perused the case file very carefully.
On perusal of the case file it reveals that revisionist remained absent before
the ld. Trial Court vide orders dated 30.08.2013; 18.11.2013; 15.01.2014;
13.03.2014; 15.05.2014; 24.07.2014; and on 01.11.2014. Further, perusal of the
case file it reveals that the conduct of the revisionist is Cri. Rev.
no.150/14 Smt. Subhrachna v. State 4 contradictory to the facts as the
revisionist in her application moved for exemption on 01.11.2014 has given the
reason that she was not aware of the date of hearing in the court and no where
in the application it has been mentioned that she was preoccupied with the
illness of her daughter and that is why she could not attend the court. In
light of these facts and circumstances of the case, I do not find any force in
the contentions of ld. Counsel for the revisionist. Resultantly, I do not find
any infirmity or impropriety or incorrectness in the impugned order dated
01.11.2014, so the revision petition does not deserve any merit to succeed at
this stage. Hence, the revision petition is dismissed. Accordingly, revision
petition stands disposed of. Trial Court record, if any, be sent back with a
    Smt. Subhrachna  v. State
                                                                                  1
        IN THE COURT OF SH. RAJ KAPOOR, ADDITIONAL SESSIONS
            JUDGE (03) , PATIALA HOUSE COURT, NEW DELHI
                                Cri. Revision No.150/14
    IN THE MATTER OF :
    Smt. Shubhrachna
    w/o Shri Pardeep Sharma
    r/o 6131/8/6, Vasant Kunj,
    New Delhi.
                                                                       Revisionist
                                        Versus
    The State
    FIR no.66/06
    U/s 420/ 468/ 471 IPC
    PS Connaught Place.
                                                          ................ Respondent
    11.03.2015
    ORDER:
1\. By this order I shall decide the REVISION PETITION filed by REVISIONIST
against the order dated 01.11.2014 in the above noted case (hereinafter
referred as impugned order) passed by Ld. MM whereby ld. Trial court declared
the revisionist as Proclaimed Absconder on being satisfied with the execution
of process issued u/s 82 Cr. PC against the revisionist.
2\. Briefly facts of the case are that an FIR no.66/06 U/s 420/ 468/ 471 IPC
at PS Connaught Place has been lodged against the revisionist . During the
course of trial, revisionist Shubhrachna did not appear before the ld. Trial
Court hence, the NBWs were issued against the revisionist vide court order
dated 18.11.2013; Cri. Rev. no.150/14 Smt. Subhrachna v. State 2 15.01.2014;
13.03.2014 and thereafter, process u/s 82 Cr. PC was issued against her vide
order dated 15.05.2014. However, on 01.11.2014 one of the accused Pradeep
the accused and ld. APP as well. I have perused the case file very carefully.
On perusal of the case file it reveals that revisionist remained absent before
the ld. Trial Court vide orders dated 30.08.2013; 18.11.2013; 15.01.2014;
13.03.2014; 15.05.2014; 24.07.2014; and on 01.11.2014. Further, perusal of the
case file it reveals that the conduct of the revisionist is Cri. Rev.
no.150/14 Smt. Subhrachna v. State 4 contradictory to the facts as the
revisionist in her application moved for exemption on 01.11.2014 has given the
reason that she was not aware of the date of hearing in the court and no where
in the application it has been mentioned that she was preoccupied with the
illness of her daughter and that is why she could not attend the court. In
light of these facts and circumstances of the case, I do not find any force in
the contentions of ld. Counsel for the revisionist. Resultantly, I do not find
any infirmity or impropriety or incorrectness in the impugned order dated
01.11.2014, so the revision petition does not deserve any merit to succeed at
this stage. Hence, the revision petition is dismissed. Accordingly, revision
petition stands disposed of. Trial Court record, if any, be sent back with a
    Smt. Subhrachna  v. State
                                                                                  1
        IN THE COURT OF SH. RAJ KAPOOR, ADDITIONAL SESSIONS
            JUDGE (03) , PATIALA HOUSE COURT, NEW DELHI
                                Cri. Revision No.150/14
    IN THE MATTER OF :
    Smt. Shubhrachna
    w/o Shri Pardeep Sharma
    r/o 6131/8/6, Vasant Kunj,
    New Delhi.
                                                                       Revisionist
                                        Versus
    The State
    FIR no.66/06
    U/s 420/ 468/ 471 IPC
    PS Connaught Place.
                                                          ................ Respondent
    11.03.2015
    ORDER:
1\. By this order I shall decide the REVISION PETITION filed by REVISIONIST
against the order dated 01.11.2014 in the above noted case (hereinafter
referred as impugned order) passed by Ld. MM whereby ld. Trial court declared
the revisionist as Proclaimed Absconder on being satisfied with the execution
of process issued u/s 82 Cr. PC against the revisionist.
2\. Briefly facts of the case are that an FIR no.66/06 U/s 420/ 468/ 471 IPC
at PS Connaught Place has been lodged against the revisionist . During the
course of trial, revisionist Shubhrachna did not appear before the ld. Trial
Court hence, the NBWs were issued against the revisionist vide court order
dated 18.11.2013; Cri. Rev. no.150/14 Smt. Subhrachna v. State 2 15.01.2014;
13.03.2014 and thereafter, process u/s 82 Cr. PC was issued against her vide
order dated 15.05.2014. However, on 01.11.2014 one of the accused Pradeep
the accused and ld. APP as well. I have perused the case file very carefully.
On perusal of the case file it reveals that revisionist remained absent before
the ld. Trial Court vide orders dated 30.08.2013; 18.11.2013; 15.01.2014;
13.03.2014; 15.05.2014; 24.07.2014; and on 01.11.2014. Further, perusal of the
case file it reveals that the conduct of the revisionist is Cri. Rev.
no.150/14 Smt. Subhrachna v. State 4 contradictory to the facts as the
revisionist in her application moved for exemption on 01.11.2014 has given the
reason that she was not aware of the date of hearing in the court and no where
in the application it has been mentioned that she was preoccupied with the
illness of her daughter and that is why she could not attend the court. In
light of these facts and circumstances of the case, I do not find any force in
the contentions of ld. Counsel for the revisionist. Resultantly, I do not find
any infirmity or impropriety or incorrectness in the impugned order dated
01.11.2014, so the revision petition does not deserve any merit to succeed at
this stage. Hence, the revision petition is dismissed. Accordingly, revision
petition stands disposed of. Trial Court record, if any, be sent back with a
