Authority Tribunal
Accel Frontline Limited vs Commissioner Of Customs ... on 21 January, 2008
Equivalent citations: 2008 (126) ECC 207, 2008 (152) ECR 207 Tri AAR
Bench: P Reddi, A Sinha, C Saha
RULINGS NEW DELHI CENTRAL EXCISE, CUSTOMS AND SERVICE TAX Ruling No.
AAR/01(Cus)/2008 in Application No. AAR/06(Cus)/2007 Decided On: 21.01.2008
Appellants: Accel Frontline Limited Vs.
Respondent: Commissioner of Customs (Airports and Air Cargo) Hon'ble Judges:
P.V. Reddi, J. (Chairman), A. Sinha and Chitra Saha, Members Counsels:
For Appellant/Petitioner/Plaintiff: S. Murugappan, Adv., R. Balaji, Consultant
and R. Neelakantan, Company Secretary For Respondents/Defendant: A.N. Sharma,
Jt. CDR Subject: Customs Acts/Rules/Orders:
Customs Act 1962 - Sections 14 and 28H(1); Customs Tariff Act, 1985 - Section
3, 3(1) and 3(5); Customs Tariff Act, 1975 - Section 3(5); Customs Valuation
(Determination of Price of Imported Goods) Rules, 1988 - Rules 3, 7A, 9 and
9(1); Customs Valuation Rules, 1988 - Rule 2; Customs Valuation Rules, 2007
Cases Referred:
Associated Cement Companies Ltd. v. Commissioner of Customs (2001) 4 SCC 593;
Tata Consultancy Services v. State of Andhra Pradesh 2004 (178) ELT 22; Creg
v. Planque (1936) 1 KB 669 Citing Reference:
the DVD/HDD when they are re-imported. The applicant's Counsel contends that
the data being proprietary in nature and created by the user for his own use,
has no commercial value and therefore cannot be added to the assessable value.
The JCDR on the other hand, claims that data has value, which needs to be
included in the assessable value of the DVD/HDD. As we have held that the re-
imported HDD will be eligible for duty exemption against sr.No. 2 of
Notification Cus No. 94/96, its assessable value will be determined as per
column 3 of sr.No. 2 and it is therefore not necessary to take a view on the
above issue.
18\. To conclude, the classifications under the Customs and Central Excise
Tariffs and the rates of duty chargeable on the recorded digital video discs
and hard disc drives proposed to be imported will be as outlined in Para 13.
The additional duty of customs of 4% leviable under Section 3(5) of Customs
Tariff Act 1975 read with Notification No. 19/2006-Cus. dated 1.3.2006 on the
imports of the hard disc drives containing the recovered data, will be charged
on the value as determined as per column 3 of sr.No. 2 of Notification No.
v. Planque (1936) 1 KB 669 Citing Reference:
     *                Mentioned
     ***            Discussed
    Associated Cement Companies Ltd. v. Commissioner of Customs.	***
    Creg v. Planque.						*
    Tata Consultancy Services v. State of Andhra Pradesh.		***
    Case Note:  
Customs Advance Ruling Data recovery service Valuation Sections 14, 28H(1) of
the Customs Act, 1962 Rules 3, 7A, 9 of the Customs Valuation (Determination
of Price of Imported Goods) Rules, 1988 Notification No. 94/96-Cus dated, 16th
December, 1996 Applicants are engaged in the business of providing services
for development of information technology infrastructure and software Data
which is damaged, worn out and had become faulty, has been exported abroad
where it has been restored to its original quality and has thereafter been
reimported The medium on which it was contained has been replaced Agency
abroad will collect a service fee from the Applicant (1) What will be rates of
import duties under the relevant Customs Tariff for the data recovered and
reimported in different media; (2) What will be the assessable value as per
Section 14 of Customs Act, 1962 for the goods exported from India for recovery
of data and reimported after recovery of the data Held, data exported, albeit
in a damaged condition, and recovered data imported, have to be considered as
the same goods, provided the identity of the data exported and imported is
established Identity of data does not change because of a change in the
receptacle on which it is contained Import of the data recovered from the
defective data exported and reimported after restoration of the original
quality, cannot be denied duty exemption against Sr.No. 2 of Notification No.
94/96-Cus. on the ground that the data exported is different from the data
reimported As reimported HDD will be eligible for duty exemption against
Sr.No. 2 of Notification No. 94/96-Cus, its assessable value will be
determined as per column 3 of Sr.No. 2, subject to fulfillment of all
conditions specified in the latter notification Classification Recorded
Digital Video Discs and Recorded Hard Disc Drives Customs Tariff Act, 1975
What is the classification of the said goods Held, Recorded Digital Video
Discs are classifiable under Heading 8523 40 80 of Customs Tariff Act, 1975
and Recorded Hard Disc Drives are classifiable under Heading 8471 70 20
Customs Tariff Act, 1975 JUDGMENT Chitra Saha, Member
1\. M/s Accel Frontline Limited, a joint venture in India (hereinafter
referred to as the Applicant) have filed this application under Sub-section
(1) of Section 28H of the Customs Act 1962. They state that they are engaged
in the business of providing services for development of information
technology infrastructure and software. In Annexure-I to their application it
is stated that they propose to provide to customers in India the service of
data recovery, where the data contained in floppy, hard disc drive or any
other hardware medium, is damaged or corrupted. The applicant would receive
the data in a defective medium from specific customers for undertaking the job
of recovery of data. For effecting such recovery, the damaged/corrupted medium
containing the data would be exported abroad, where data will be recovered and
stored in a new medium. The data recovered and recorded on a new medium will
be sent to India, along with the damaged medium from which the data was
recovered. For rendering this service of recovering the data, the agency
abroad will collect a service fee from the applicant. Normally, if the
recovered data is less than 20GB in size, it will be sent in multiple digital
video discs (DVDs) which will be provided by the foreign agency to the
applicant free of charge. If the data is more than 20GB, the same will be
provided on a hard disc drive (HDD) and the cost of such drive will be billed
to the applicant. In column 12 of the application they have posed the
following questions for pronouncement of a ruling by this Authority:
(a) What will be the classification and rates of import duties under the
relevant Customs Tariff for the data recovered and re-imported in different
media.
(b) What will be the assessable value as per Section 14 of Customs Act 1962
for the goods exported from India for recovery of data and re-imported after
recovery of the data.
The applicant have also claimed that Notification Nos. 24/2005-Cus dt.1.3.05
and 94/96-Cus dt. 16.12.96, have a bearing on the rates of duty applicable for
their imports.
2\. In Annexure II containing the applicant's interpretation of law and facts,
it has been claimed that the media containing the data i.e. DVDs and HDDs are
classifiable under 8523. It is stated that at the time of sending the
defective media containing the data to be recovered, no duty is applicable.
When the recovered data is sent back to India on new DVDs and HDDs, these
imports are exempted from basic customs duty under notification No. 24/2005
dated 1.3.05 and attract CV duty of 16 per cent under 85.23 of Central Excise
Tariff. The applicant have claimed total exemption from customs duty against
sr.No. 3 of Customs Notification No. 94/2006 dated 16.12.96 for the re-
importation of the DVDs and HDDs containing the damaged/corrupted data which
had been exported and are proposed to be re-imported, along with the new media
containing the recovered data.
3\. On the question of valuation of the imports of DVDs and HDDs containing
the recovered data, the applicant states that the recovered data contained in
the medium being for the exclusive use of the owner of the data, will not be
saleable or marketable to any buyer and will have no commercial value. If any
value has to be determined for the import, it has to be only for the medium in
which the data is stored after recovery. In the case of the medium DVD, which
is supplied to the applicant free of charge, the value has to be fixed on the
basis of comparable costs of such media in India. When the recovered data is
sent on any other medium, then the value for such medium would be the
transaction value, i.e. the price charged by the foreign company from the
applicant for the medium.
4\. Advance ruling in the application has been sought in respect of
classification and valuation of the following imports:
(a) New DVDs and HDDs in which the data recovered from the DVDs and HDDs
exported from India, have been stored;
(b) The DVDs and HDDs containing the corrupted/damaged data which were earlier
exported from India and from which the data recovery was effected.
5\. The Commissioner of Customs, Chennai (hereafter referred to as the
Commissioner) has submitted his comments on the application vide his letters
dated 16.8.07 and 14.9.07. The Commissioner states that imports of the
damaged/corrupted DVDs and HDDs exported from India for the purpose of
effecting recovery by an agency abroad, of the data contained therein, can be
accepted to be a case of re-importation entitled to 'nil' rate of basic and
additional customs duty against sr.No. 3 of Notification No. 94/96-Cus. dated
16.12.96, so long as these can be identified to be the same as those exported.
However, bringing into India of new DVDs and HDDs containing the recovered
data has to be considered as fresh imports, not eligible for exemption as re-
importation under Notification No. 94/96-Cus., as in the process of retrieving
the data, the media on which the data was originally contained has been
changed. He further states that the recorded DVDs and the HDDs are
classifiable under 8523 40 80 and 8471 70 20 respectively, under the Customs
as well as the Central Excise Tariffs. The recorded DVDs and the HDDs attract
'nil' rate of basic customs duty as per sr.Nos. 15(b) and 8 respectively of
Notification No. 24/2005-Cus. dated 1.3.05. The above media, i.e., DVDs and
the HDDs, are liable to 'nil' rate of additional customs duty in terms of
sr.Nos. 22(c) and 17(c) respectively of Central Excise Notification No. 6/2006
dated 1.3.06. In respect of special additional duty, while the DVDs are
totally exempted as per sr.No. 1 of Notification No. 20/006-Cus. dated 1.3.06,
the HDDs attract a duty of 4 per cent in view of para 2 of the said
notification, read with sr.No. 17 of Notification No. C.E. 6/2006.
6\. In the comprehensive compilation on the application submitted at the time
of hearing, the Joint Chief Departmental Representative (JCDR) Shri A.N.
Sharma has reiterated the above comments of the Commissioner.
With respect to the submissions made by the applicant in the application, Shri
Sharma has strongly rebutted the claim of the applicant that the data
contained on the media which is being retrieved, has no commercial value. He
states that data is a saleable commodity, that a data loss episode can cause a
company dearly in terms of money and time. In this context, he has filed a
hard copy of a website named Fundoo Data Web Site which quotes the price at
which data relating to top companies in different states in India are being
sold to marketing companies. He asserts that the value of the data has to be
included in the assessable value of the DVDs and HDDs containing the recovered
data when they are imported. He states that as the importer in the instant
case is doing a job work and is procuring from the foreign service provider,
the data after recovery of the same, on a different media, the value of the
imports may be determined in terms of Rule 3 read with Rule 7A and Rule 9 of
the Customs Valuation (Determination of Price of Imported Goods) Rules, 1988.
In particular, he emphasizes that the following elements mentioned in Rule 9
should form a part of the assessable value:
(i) commissions and brokerage under Rule 9(1)(a)(i).
(ii) the cost of packing whether for labour or materials in terms of Rule
9(1)(a)(iii).
(iii) Since corrupted data is a material supplied by the importer/agent,
therefore, its cost in terms of Rule 9(1)(b)(i) & (iii).
(iv) Any element of cost and profit which the agent/importer/job worker
charges from the owner of the goods in terms of Rule 9(1)(d)&(e).
7\. Shri Sharma has also drawn attention to a news item appearing in Channel
Times Staff, Mumbai, March 26, 2007 which mentions that M/s Seagate, Singapore
International Headquarters Private Limited is to partner with M/s. Accel
Frontline to provide professional data recovery service in the Indian market.
The news item goes on to state that Seagate software solution and recovery
services employing patented technology will enable M/s Accel Frontline service
engineers to recover data from media, regardless of size or forms that have
undergone severe physical damage, liquid damage, fire damage, software
corruption, systems sabotage and accidental file deletion.
Shri Sharma states that the applicant need to disclose their relationship with
M/s Seagate to determine whether they should be deemed to be related for the
purpose of Section 14 of the Customs Act, specially since the said news item
reveals that Seagate and Accel Frontline will be partners.
8\. In response to the issues raised by the JCDR Shri Sharma, the applicant
vide a communication received on 2.11.07 has made the following submissions:
that the applicant and M/s Seagate are not related persons within the meaning
of the Customs Valuation Rules 1988/2007; that Rule 2 of the Customs Valuation
Rules 1988 defines 'related persons' and that the applicant and M/s Seagate do
not come within the purview of the definition of 'related persons' given in
this rule. The expression "partners in business" has been used in the news
item in a commercial sense and not in a legal sense which would lead to the
two entities becoming related in terms of the Customs Valuation Rules. A copy
of the agreement proposed to be signed by M/s Accel with M/s Seagate, has boon
enclosed with the communication;
that the applicant currently propose to deal with recovery of data only from
hard disks and DVDs.
on the nature of the data being recovered, it has been mentioned that the same
"is proprietary in nature created by the user and generated within the country
on account of the fact that no installable software can be re-installed /
recovered. As an importer in the present case, the applicant does not own the
data as it is only doing a third party recovery. Also the existing data can be
of two types. One is self generated in India and the other could be imported.
Self generated data is not liable for import duty. If the data is imported,
the same has already suffered duty at the time of original import and cannot
be liable for duty again."
If any installable software is also there in the defective media sent for
recovery, the same can only be condemned as no installable software can either
be recovered or re-installed.
that the value of the invoice raised by M/s Seagate on the applicant is
inclusive of media costs, packing costs, freight charges etc. The Counsel of
the applicant also stated that commissions paid, if includible in assessable
value in terms of the Valuation Rules, will be made part of value on which
duty is paid.
that the recovered data that has been copied into DVD will not contain any
sound or visual data.
The above submissions were reiterated during the hearing on 13.11.07 when the
JCDR was also present.
9\. In the course of the hearing on 13.11.2007, the question was put forward
to the Counsel of the applicant as to whether they would disclose the nature
of the data that was being exported and imported to the Customs, in order to
establish the identity of the data being exported and imported. The Counsel
stated that they would disclose the nature of the data being exported and
imported to the assessing Customs Officers.
10\. We have considered the submissions made in the application, as also the
comments thereon submitted by the Commissioner and his representative. We
agree with the classifications in the Customs and Central Excise Tariffs put
forward by the Commissioner i.e.8523 40 80 for the recorded digital video
discs and 8471 70 20 for the recorded hard disc drives. We also agree that the
imports of the DVDs and HDDs containing the damaged data, exported for
recovery of the data contained therein, are exempted from basic customs duty
and additional duties of customs leviable under Section 3 of the Customs
Tariff Act 1985, against sr.No. 3 of Notification No. 94/96-Cus. dated
16.12.96, provided the fact of re-import of the same damaged data is
established. We also agree that the imports of the hard disc drives and the
recorded DVDs (not containing any sound or visual data) containing the
recovered data, are fully exempted from basic customs duty under Notification
No. 24/2005-Cus. dated 1.3.05 and from additional duty of customs leviable
under Section 3(1) of the Customs Tariff Act by virtue of Notification No.
6/2006-CE dated 1.3.06. We further endorse the Commissioner's stand that no
additional duty of customs on the imports of DVDs, containing the recovered
data is leviable under Sub-section (5) of Section 3 of the Customs Tariff Act
by virtue of sr.No. 1 of Notification No. 20/2006-Cus. dated 1.3.06. The
imports of the hard disc drives containing the recovered data, however,
attract 4 per cent additional duty leviable under Section 3(5) of the above
Act as per Notification No. 19/2006-Cus. dtd. 1.3.06 as the exemption under
Notification No. 20/2006-Cus is not available in view of Para 2 of the latter
notification.
11\. We however disagree with the Commissioner's contention that benefit for
re-imported goods under Customs Notification No. 94/96 cannot be extended to
the imports of the hard discs drives containing recovered data and that these
should be treated as fresh imports and charged to the 4 per cent additional
duty of customs under Section 3(5) of the Customs Tariff Act on the full
transaction value of the goods, as determined under the Customs Valuation
Rules. The Commissioner states that import of the new medium, DVD or hard disc
drive, containing the recovered data, cannot be treated as re-import of the
DVDs/HDDs containing the damaged data exported earlier, since the medium on
which the data is recorded has been changed. Such an interpretation is
unacceptable. What is being imported is not an empty medium but one on which
the recovered data has been engraved and it is this data which determines the
identity of the imported or exported goods. The JCDR has referred to a web
site where different rates have been quoted for sale of data relating to
different clusters of companies in India. Similarly there would be other rates
for sale of, say, agricultural data relating to production per hectare in
different states of the country. Different data will have different uses,
different prices and will cater to the needs of different categories of
consumers. It is the nature of the data recorded that determines the identity
of the goods and this identity will not be changed if the medium on which it
is recorded, changes.
12\. In the case of Associated Cement Companies Ltd. v. Commissioner of
Customs , the Supreme Court examined the question whether customs duty was
leviable on technical material supplied in the form of drawings, manuals and
computer discs etc. and if so, what was the value on which the duty was to be
paid. In the above context, the apex court made the following observations
which are relevant:
The value of an encyclopaedia or a dictionary or a magazine is not only the
value of the paper. The value of the paper is in fact negligible as compared
to the value or price of an encyclopaedia. Therefore, the intellectual input
in such items greatly enhances the value of the paper and ink in the aforesaid
examples. This means that the charge of a duty is on the final product,
whether it be the encyclopaedia or the engineering or architectural drawings
or any manual.
" " "
" " "
" " "
It is a misconception to contend that what is being taxed is intellectual
input. What is being taxed under the Customs Act read with the Customs Tariff
Act and the Customs Valuation Rules is not the input alone but goods whose
value has been enhanced by the said inputs. The final product at the time of
import is either the magazine or the encyclopaedia or the engineering drawings
as the case may be. There is no scope for splitting the engineering drawing or
the encyclopaedia into intellectual input on the one hand and the paper on
which it is scribed on the other.
(emphasis supplied).
13\. In the case of Tata Consultancy Services v. State of Andhra Pradesh , the
Supreme Court while holding canned software recorded on floppy/CD/hard drives
to be goods on which sales tax was leviable made the following observations:
A software programme may consist of various commands which enable the computer
to perform a designated task. The copyright in that programme may remain with
the originator of the programme. But the moment copies are made and marketed,
if becomes goods, which are susceptible to sales tax. Even intellectual
property, once it is put on to a media, whether it be in the form of books or
canvas (in case of painting) or computer discs or cassettes, and marketed
would become "goods." We see no difference between a sale of a software
programme on a CD/floppy disc from a sale of music on a cassette/CD or sale of
a film on a video cassette/CD. In all such cases, the intellectual property
has been incorporated on a media for purposes of transfer. Sale is not just of
the media which by itself has very little value. The software and the media
cannot be split up. What the buyer purchases and pays for is not the disc or
the CD. As in the case of paintings or books or music or films the buyer is
purchasing the intellectual property and not the media i.e. the paper or
cassette or disc or CD.
(emphasis supplied).
14\. The conclusions emerging from the above pronouncements of the apex court
which are relevant for the present application are that software recorded on a
cassette or the encyclopaedia Britannica on a DVD, is identified as software
or encyclopaedia, that the encyclopaedia recorded on a different make of DVD
will continue to be identified as encyclopaedia Britannica, that the
encyclopaedia or the software is a single product whose identity cannot be
segregated in terms of the intellectual input and the medium in which it is
stored.
15\. Following the above logic, data recorded on a medium has to be regarded
as a composite good and it cannot be given a dual identity, once as data, and
then separately in terms of the medium on which it happens to be recorded. It
is the nature of the data recorded, that imparts the identity to the goods and
not the medium on which it is recorded. In the instant case, the data
exported, albeit in a damaged condition, and the recovered data imported, have
to be considered as the same goods, provided the identity of the data exported
and imported is established. The identity of this data does not change because
of a change in the receptacle on which it is contained. The Commissioner's
stand that the exported goods i.e. damaged data on DVDs/HDDs are different
from the imported goods, viz. recovered data contained on new DVDs/HDDs, only
because the medium on which the data has been recorded has been changed,
cannot therefore be accepted.
16\. Serial No. 2 of Notification No. 94/96-Cus. dated 16.12.96 provides
exemption from duty on goods re-imported after repairs abroad. The term
'repair' has been defined in dictionaries as follows:
Concise Oxford English Dictionary: "restore (something damaged, worn or
faulty) to a good condition."
The New International Webster's Dictionary and Thesaurus: "to restore to sound
on good condition after damage, injury, decay etc."
The Judicial Dictionary (13th Edition) compiled by K.J. Aiyer gives the
following definition of the term:
"The word 'repair' conveys the idea of replacing worn, broken, or lost parts
in a thing or restoring the thing to a good condition." In Creg v. Planque
(1936} 1 KB 669, the word 'repair' was taken to mean "the making good of
defects, including renewal where that is necessary".
It was then observed : "Therefore, whenever a thing or a part from a thing is
worn out and a new thing is replaced in its place, such replacement of a new
thing amounts to repair of the thing".
'Repair' thus implies restoring defective, worn out goods to a good condition,
if need be, by replacement of defective parts. Sr.No. 2 of Notification No.
94/96-Cus exempts goods exported and re-imported after repairs abroad, from so
much of basic customs duty and additional customs duties leviable under
Section (3) of the Customs Tariff Act as is in excess of the amount calculated
on a value equivalent to the sum total of "the fair cost of repairs carried
out including cost of materials used in repairs (whether such costs are
actually incurred or not), insurance and freight charges, both ways." By
including "cost of materials" in the value on which duty is to be charged in
case of re-imported goods received back after repairs abroad, the notification
implies that incorporation of new material in the course of repairs is
permissible. The cost of repair and materials in the present case will, inter
alia, include the cost of the DVD/HDD on which the recovered data is recorded
as also the service charges paid by the applicant for recovery of the data. In
the instant case, data which is damaged, is worn out and had become faulty,
has been exported abroad where it has been restored to its original quality
and has thereafter been re-imported. In the process, the medium on which it
was contained has been replaced. Incorporation of such new material in the
process of repair does not make the repaired goods different from what was
exported, so long as the original nature of the data is restored. In the
instant case, the data recovered cannot be held to be different from the data
received simply because the medium has been replaced in the process of
restating the original quality of the data. We therefore hold that import of
the data recovered from the defective data exported and re-imported after
restoration of the original quality, cannot be denied duty exemption against
sr.No. 2 of Notification Cus.No. 94/96 on the ground that the data exported
are different from the data re-imported. To avail of the duty exemption for
the importation under the above notification, the applicant, will however have
to reveal the nature of the data to the Customs in order to establish that the
data imported is the same as that exported.
17\. Both the applicant as well as JCDR have made forceful submissions about
the value to be attached to the data while calculating the assessable value of
the DVD/HDD when they are re-imported. The applicant's Counsel contends that
the data being proprietary in nature and created by the user for his own use,
has no commercial value and therefore cannot be added to the assessable value.
The JCDR on the other hand, claims that data has value, which needs to be
included in the assessable value of the DVD/HDD. As we have held that the re-
imported HDD will be eligible for duty exemption against sr.No. 2 of
Notification Cus No. 94/96, its assessable value will be determined as per
column 3 of sr.No. 2 and it is therefore not necessary to take a view on the
above issue.
18\. To conclude, the classifications under the Customs and Central Excise
Tariffs and the rates of duty chargeable on the recorded digital video discs
and hard disc drives proposed to be imported will be as outlined in Para 13.
The additional duty of customs of 4% leviable under Section 3(5) of Customs
Tariff Act 1975 read with Notification No. 19/2006-Cus. dated 1.3.2006 on the
imports of the hard disc drives containing the recovered data, will be charged
on the value as determined as per column 3 of sr.No. 2 of Notification No.
94/96-Cus dt. 16.12.96 subject to fulfillment of all conditions specified in
the latter notification.
Pronounced in the open Court of the Authority on this 21st day of January,
2008.
the DVD/HDD when they are re-imported. The applicant's Counsel contends that
the data being proprietary in nature and created by the user for his own use,
has no commercial value and therefore cannot be added to the assessable value.
The JCDR on the other hand, claims that data has value, which needs to be
included in the assessable value of the DVD/HDD. As we have held that the re-
imported HDD will be eligible for duty exemption against sr.No. 2 of
Notification Cus No. 94/96, its assessable value will be determined as per
column 3 of sr.No. 2 and it is therefore not necessary to take a view on the
above issue.
18\. To conclude, the classifications under the Customs and Central Excise
Tariffs and the rates of duty chargeable on the recorded digital video discs
and hard disc drives proposed to be imported will be as outlined in Para 13.
The additional duty of customs of 4% leviable under Section 3(5) of Customs
Tariff Act 1975 read with Notification No. 19/2006-Cus. dated 1.3.2006 on the
imports of the hard disc drives containing the recovered data, will be charged
on the value as determined as per column 3 of sr.No. 2 of Notification No.
v. Planque (1936) 1 KB 669 Citing Reference:
     *                Mentioned
     ***            Discussed
    Associated Cement Companies Ltd. v. Commissioner of Customs.	***
    Creg v. Planque.						*
    Tata Consultancy Services v. State of Andhra Pradesh.		***
    Case Note:  
Customs Advance Ruling Data recovery service Valuation Sections 14, 28H(1) of
the Customs Act, 1962 Rules 3, 7A, 9 of the Customs Valuation (Determination
of Price of Imported Goods) Rules, 1988 Notification No. 94/96-Cus dated, 16th
December, 1996 Applicants are engaged in the business of providing services
for development of information technology infrastructure and software Data
which is damaged, worn out and had become faulty, has been exported abroad
where it has been restored to its original quality and has thereafter been
reimported The medium on which it was contained has been replaced Agency
abroad will collect a service fee from the Applicant (1) What will be rates of
import duties under the relevant Customs Tariff for the data recovered and
reimported in different media; (2) What will be the assessable value as per
Section 14 of Customs Act, 1962 for the goods exported from India for recovery
of data and reimported after recovery of the data Held, data exported, albeit
the DVD/HDD when they are re-imported. The applicant's Counsel contends that
the data being proprietary in nature and created by the user for his own use,
has no commercial value and therefore cannot be added to the assessable value.
The JCDR on the other hand, claims that data has value, which needs to be
included in the assessable value of the DVD/HDD. As we have held that the re-
imported HDD will be eligible for duty exemption against sr.No. 2 of
Notification Cus No. 94/96, its assessable value will be determined as per
column 3 of sr.No. 2 and it is therefore not necessary to take a view on the
above issue.
18\. To conclude, the classifications under the Customs and Central Excise
Tariffs and the rates of duty chargeable on the recorded digital video discs
and hard disc drives proposed to be imported will be as outlined in Para 13.
The additional duty of customs of 4% leviable under Section 3(5) of Customs
Tariff Act 1975 read with Notification No. 19/2006-Cus. dated 1.3.2006 on the
imports of the hard disc drives containing the recovered data, will be charged
on the value as determined as per column 3 of sr.No. 2 of Notification No.
v. Planque (1936) 1 KB 669 Citing Reference:
     *                Mentioned
     ***            Discussed
    Associated Cement Companies Ltd. v. Commissioner of Customs.	***
    Creg v. Planque.						*
    Tata Consultancy Services v. State of Andhra Pradesh.		***
    Case Note:  
Customs Advance Ruling Data recovery service Valuation Sections 14, 28H(1) of
the Customs Act, 1962 Rules 3, 7A, 9 of the Customs Valuation (Determination
of Price of Imported Goods) Rules, 1988 Notification No. 94/96-Cus dated, 16th
December, 1996 Applicants are engaged in the business of providing services
for development of information technology infrastructure and software Data
which is damaged, worn out and had become faulty, has been exported abroad
where it has been restored to its original quality and has thereafter been
reimported The medium on which it was contained has been replaced Agency
abroad will collect a service fee from the Applicant (1) What will be rates of
import duties under the relevant Customs Tariff for the data recovered and
reimported in different media; (2) What will be the assessable value as per
Section 14 of Customs Act, 1962 for the goods exported from India for recovery
of data and reimported after recovery of the data Held, data exported, albeit
the DVD/HDD when they are re-imported. The applicant's Counsel contends that
the data being proprietary in nature and created by the user for his own use,
has no commercial value and therefore cannot be added to the assessable value.
The JCDR on the other hand, claims that data has value, which needs to be
included in the assessable value of the DVD/HDD. As we have held that the re-
imported HDD will be eligible for duty exemption against sr.No. 2 of
Notification Cus No. 94/96, its assessable value will be determined as per
column 3 of sr.No. 2 and it is therefore not necessary to take a view on the
above issue.
18\. To conclude, the classifications under the Customs and Central Excise
Tariffs and the rates of duty chargeable on the recorded digital video discs
and hard disc drives proposed to be imported will be as outlined in Para 13.
The additional duty of customs of 4% leviable under Section 3(5) of Customs
Tariff Act 1975 read with Notification No. 19/2006-Cus. dated 1.3.2006 on the
imports of the hard disc drives containing the recovered data, will be charged
on the value as determined as per column 3 of sr.No. 2 of Notification No.
v. Planque (1936) 1 KB 669 Citing Reference:
     *                Mentioned
     ***            Discussed
    Associated Cement Companies Ltd. v. Commissioner of Customs.	***
    Creg v. Planque.						*
    Tata Consultancy Services v. State of Andhra Pradesh.		***
    Case Note:  
Customs Advance Ruling Data recovery service Valuation Sections 14, 28H(1) of
the Customs Act, 1962 Rules 3, 7A, 9 of the Customs Valuation (Determination
of Price of Imported Goods) Rules, 1988 Notification No. 94/96-Cus dated, 16th
December, 1996 Applicants are engaged in the business of providing services
for development of information technology infrastructure and software Data
which is damaged, worn out and had become faulty, has been exported abroad
where it has been restored to its original quality and has thereafter been
reimported The medium on which it was contained has been replaced Agency
abroad will collect a service fee from the Applicant (1) What will be rates of
import duties under the relevant Customs Tariff for the data recovered and
reimported in different media; (2) What will be the assessable value as per
Section 14 of Customs Act, 1962 for the goods exported from India for recovery
of data and reimported after recovery of the data Held, data exported, albeit
in a damaged condition, and recovered data imported, have to be considered as
the same goods, provided the identity of the data exported and imported is
established Identity of data does not change because of a change in the
receptacle on which it is contained Import of the data recovered from the
defective data exported and reimported after restoration of the original
quality, cannot be denied duty exemption against Sr.No. 2 of Notification No.
94/96-Cus. on the ground that the data exported is different from the data
reimported As reimported HDD will be eligible for duty exemption against
Sr.No. 2 of Notification No. 94/96-Cus, its assessable value will be
determined as per column 3 of Sr.No. 2, subject to fulfillment of all
conditions specified in the latter notification Classification Recorded
the DVD/HDD when they are re-imported. The applicant's Counsel contends that
the data being proprietary in nature and created by the user for his own use,
has no commercial value and therefore cannot be added to the assessable value.
The JCDR on the other hand, claims that data has value, which needs to be
included in the assessable value of the DVD/HDD. As we have held that the re-
imported HDD will be eligible for duty exemption against sr.No. 2 of
Notification Cus No. 94/96, its assessable value will be determined as per
column 3 of sr.No. 2 and it is therefore not necessary to take a view on the
above issue.
18\. To conclude, the classifications under the Customs and Central Excise
Tariffs and the rates of duty chargeable on the recorded digital video discs
and hard disc drives proposed to be imported will be as outlined in Para 13.
The additional duty of customs of 4% leviable under Section 3(5) of Customs
Tariff Act 1975 read with Notification No. 19/2006-Cus. dated 1.3.2006 on the
imports of the hard disc drives containing the recovered data, will be charged
on the value as determined as per column 3 of sr.No. 2 of Notification No.
v. Planque (1936) 1 KB 669 Citing Reference:
     *                Mentioned
     ***            Discussed
    Associated Cement Companies Ltd. v. Commissioner of Customs.	***
    Creg v. Planque.						*
    Tata Consultancy Services v. State of Andhra Pradesh.		***
    Case Note:  
Customs Advance Ruling Data recovery service Valuation Sections 14, 28H(1) of
the Customs Act, 1962 Rules 3, 7A, 9 of the Customs Valuation (Determination
of Price of Imported Goods) Rules, 1988 Notification No. 94/96-Cus dated, 16th
December, 1996 Applicants are engaged in the business of providing services
for development of information technology infrastructure and software Data
which is damaged, worn out and had become faulty, has been exported abroad
where it has been restored to its original quality and has thereafter been
reimported The medium on which it was contained has been replaced Agency
abroad will collect a service fee from the Applicant (1) What will be rates of
import duties under the relevant Customs Tariff for the data recovered and
reimported in different media; (2) What will be the assessable value as per
Section 14 of Customs Act, 1962 for the goods exported from India for recovery
of data and reimported after recovery of the data Held, data exported, albeit
in a damaged condition, and recovered data imported, have to be considered as
the same goods, provided the identity of the data exported and imported is
established Identity of data does not change because of a change in the
receptacle on which it is contained Import of the data recovered from the
defective data exported and reimported after restoration of the original
quality, cannot be denied duty exemption against Sr.No. 2 of Notification No.
94/96-Cus. on the ground that the data exported is different from the data
reimported As reimported HDD will be eligible for duty exemption against
Sr.No. 2 of Notification No. 94/96-Cus, its assessable value will be
determined as per column 3 of Sr.No. 2, subject to fulfillment of all
conditions specified in the latter notification Classification Recorded
the DVD/HDD when they are re-imported. The applicant's Counsel contends that
the data being proprietary in nature and created by the user for his own use,
has no commercial value and therefore cannot be added to the assessable value.
The JCDR on the other hand, claims that data has value, which needs to be
included in the assessable value of the DVD/HDD. As we have held that the re-
imported HDD will be eligible for duty exemption against sr.No. 2 of
Notification Cus No. 94/96, its assessable value will be determined as per
column 3 of sr.No. 2 and it is therefore not necessary to take a view on the
above issue.
18\. To conclude, the classifications under the Customs and Central Excise
Tariffs and the rates of duty chargeable on the recorded digital video discs
and hard disc drives proposed to be imported will be as outlined in Para 13.
The additional duty of customs of 4% leviable under Section 3(5) of Customs
Tariff Act 1975 read with Notification No. 19/2006-Cus. dated 1.3.2006 on the
imports of the hard disc drives containing the recovered data, will be charged
on the value as determined as per column 3 of sr.No. 2 of Notification No.
