Custom, Excise & Service Tax Tribunal
Swastik Appliances vs Commissioner Of Central Excise, ... on 28 May, 2015
    IN THE CUSTOMS, EXCISE & SERVICE TAX APPELLATE TRIBUNAL
    WEST ZONAL BENCH AT MUMBAI
    COURT No. I
    APPEAL No. E/1274/2011; E/25/2012 & E/85356 & 88243/2013-Mum
    (Arising out of Order-in-Appeal Nos: PKS/18-22/Bel/2010 dated 29.4.2011; PKS/119/Bel/2011 dated 27.9.2011; BC/179/M-III/2012-13 dated 27.7.2012 & BC/78/M-III/2013-14 dated 23.5.2013 passed by the Commissioner of Central Excise (Appeals), MumbaiIII)
    For approval and signature:
    Honble Mr. P.K. Jain, Member (Technical)
    and
    Honble Mr. Ramesh Nair, Member (Judicial)
    ======================================================
1\. Whether Press Reporters may be allowed to see : No the Order for
publication as per Rule 27 of the CESTAT (Procedure) Rules, 1982?
2\. Whether it should be released under Rule 27 of the :
CESTAT (Procedure) Rules, 1982 for publication in any authoritative report or
not?
3\. Whether Their Lordships wish to see the fair copy : Seen of the Order?
4\. Whether Order is to be circulated to the Departmental : Yes authorities?
    ======================================================
cartons could be found only during the visit of the officials at the premises
of the appellant. Vital facts were suppressed and thus, in our view, this is
appropriate case for invoking the extended period of limitation in subsequent
notice. We, therefore, do not see any infirmity in invoking the extended
period of limitation in subsequent notices.
13\. The appellant has also stated that penalty is not imposable since the
issue relates to the interpretation of notification. We are not impressed with
the said argument. In the present case, from the day one it was very clear
that the appellant was manufacturing the goods in their own brand name and
entered into a contract with Shri A. Ramkishan, Director of R.K. Fans and
Allied Products, to manufacture mixer grinder in their brand name to be
exclusively supplied to them. There can be no doubt that they were
manufacturing the goods in the brand name of others and that is exactly what
the said notification prohibits to permit. In any case, the period involved in
the present case is 2004 onwards when the decisions of the Honble Supreme
Court on the issue were available and there could have been no doubt
    ======================================================
    Swastik Appliances							Appellant
    Vs.
    Commissioner of Central Excise, Mumbai-III		Respondent
    Appearance:
    Shri Mihir Mehta, Advocate, for appellant
    Shri V.K. Agrawal, Additional Commissioner (AR), for respondent
    CORAM:
    Honble Mr. P.K. Jain, Member (Technical)
    Honble Mr. Ramesh Nair, Member (Judicial)
    Date of Hearing: 25.3.2015
    Date of Decision: 28.5.2015
    ORDER NO
    Per: P.K. Jain
    	Brief facts of the case are that the appellant is engaged in the manufacture of mixer and grinder.  They availed the benefit of small scale exemption.  The mixer and grinder being manufactured by them bear the brand name Swastik as also some other brand names.
2\. Based upon an intelligence about the evasion of duty by the appellant,
certain searches were conducted on 27.4.2006 at various places including
factory, residential premises, transporter etc. and investigations were
carried out. Based upon the investigations, it came out that the appellant was
manufacturing mixer grinder in the brand name of Vipanchi along with the
logo of Veena. Further, the said brand name and logo belong to one M/s. R.K.
Fans & Allied Products, Hyderabad. Investigation also revealed that the mixer
grinder bearing the said name Vipanchi were being manufactured by the
appellant on behalf of the said M/s. R.K. Fans & Allied Products, Hyderabad
and after manufacture, these were being sold to the said firm/their marketing
arms who, in turn, was marketing the same. Appellants were not permitted to
sell the said goods bearing the said brand name to anyone else.
3\. A statement of Shri M. Krishna, Director of M/s. R.K. Fans & Allied
Products, Hyderabad, was recorded on 27.12.2006, wherein he stated that his
company was into the manufacturing of ceiling fans, voltage stabilizers under
Vipanchi brand and they were into trading of mixer grinder in the name of
Vipanchi. He further stated that the said brand name Vipanchi belongs to
M/s. R.K. Fans & Allied Products, Hyderabad. In the statement he submitted
that they have placed orders to the appellant for the manufacture of different
models of mixer grinder and while placing the order, they have also forwarded
a compact disc containing the details of their logo Vipanchi, design and the
name which can be used whenever required. Shri Ramkishan also confirmed in his
statement the uses of brand were exclusively for their supplies only. In
nutshell, the appellant was prohibited from selling the Vipanchi brand mixer
and grinder to anyone other than M/s. R.K. Fans & Allied Products, Hyderabad
or other marketing firm. Further, statements of Shri Amritlal Jain, proprietor
of the appellant-company, was recorded on 27.4.2006, 26.2.2007. In the
statements, he broadly confirmed the investigation details carried out. He
admitted that the artwork of the logo Vipanchi was provided to them by M/s.
R.K. Fans & Allied Products, Hyderabad. Based upon the investigation, it
appeared that the goods manufactured and bearing the brand name Vipanchi
along with its logo will not be entitled to the small scale exemption
Notification No. 8/2003 dated 1.3.2003. Accordingly a demand notice was issued
on 16.7.2007 covering the period September 2004 to March 2007. In spite of the
said show cause notice, the appellant did not take the registration or started
filing the returns. Another show cause notice dated 26.6.2008 was thereafter
issued covering the period April 2007 to March 2008. Similar show cause notice
dated 9.4.2010 was issued covering the period April 2008 to March 2009,
another show cause notice dated 8.7.2010 was issued covering the period April
2009 to March 2010 and yet another show cause notice dated 30.8.2011 was
issued covering the period April 2010 to March 2011. The first two show cause
notices were adjudicated by a single order-in-original dated 17.12.2008. Other
show cause notices were adjudicated vide orders-in-original dated 31.1.2011,
25.5.2011, 31.12.2012. Appellant filed appeal against the four orders-in-
original. In respect of the first order-in-original, the Commissioner
(Appeals) decided the matter vide his order dated 23.7.2013. In respect of
order-in-original dated 31.1.2011, the Commissioner (Appeals) decided vide his
order dated 29.4.2011. Similarly, order dated 25.5.2011 was decided by order
dated 27.9.2011 and the order-in-original dated 31.12.2012 was decided vide
order-in-appeal dated 27.7.2012. In the said orders, the Commissioner
(Appeals) has upheld the duty demand and penalties. Against the said orders-
in-appeal, the appellant is before this Tribunal.
4\. It is seen from the orders-in-original and the Commissioner (Appeals)s
various orders that though in his statement dated 27.12.2006 Shri M. Krishna,
Director of M/s. R.K. Fans & Allied Products, Hyderabad, claimed that the said
brand name Vipanchi belongs to them and the same was shown to Shri Amritlal
Jain during a statement in February 2007 and he did not object to the said
statement of Shri A. Ramkishan, however, after more than a year of receiving
the first show cause notice at the time of personal hearing, the appellant
produced a memorandum of understanding between him and Shri M. Krishna. The
said memorandum of understanding is dated 10.6.2004 and on the basis of the
said memorandum of understanding, the appellant claimed that the said brand
name was assigned to them by Shri M. Krishna, Director of M/s. R.K. Fans and
Allied Products, Hyderabad in respect of mixer/grinder. It is also the
contention of the appellant that they have applied to the Trade Marks Registry
for registration of the said brand name on 1.2.2007 and the Trade Marks
Registry granted Certificate of Registration of Trade Mark under Section
23(2), Rule 62(1), on 7th October 2008, in Class 7 for the said brand name
Vipanchi.
5\. It is to be noted that the first two show cause notices are for the period
prior to obtaining the registration from the Trade Marks Registry while in
respect of the third one, a part of the demand is for the period prior to
taking the registration (7.10.2008) from the Trade Marks Registry and part of
the period is thereafter. In fourth and fifth show cause notices, the period
involved is after obtaining the registration from the Trade Marks Registry. In
respect of the last three show cause notices, the ground taken by the Revenue
is that the symbol of Veena is the logo of M/s. R.K. Fans and Allied
Products, Hyderabad, and the same is being printed on the mixer grinder as
also on the cartons and the said symbol/logo has not been registered by the
appellant with the Trade Marks Registry. Further, the carton of the said mixer
grinder depicts the name of the marketing firm of Shri A. Ramkishan. According
to the Revenue, in view of the symbol/logo on the mixer grinder as also the
above factual aspect, even the goods manufactured post taking the registration
would fall outside the scope of SSI Notification No.8/2003.
6\. The learned counsel for the appellants main submission is that, as per
the memorandum of understanding dated 10/06/2005, the brand Vipanchi has
been assigned to the appellant in April, 2004 itself and in view of this
position it is an incorrect assertion that the band-name Vipanchi belongs to
M/s. R.K. Fans & Allied Products, Hyderabad. The brand-name actually belongs
to the appellant in respect of mixers and grinders and Shri M. Krishna in
respect of fans, cookers, etc. It was further submitted that in April 2004 the
brand-name has been assigned to the appellant and thus all rights vesting with
Shri M. Krishna in respect of Vipanchi was transferred to the appellant for
consideration upon execution of the memorandum of understanding dated
10/06/2004. It was submitted that the appellants are the owner of the brand-
name Vipanchi from April 2004 onwards after the deed of assignment by Shri A
Ramkishan. The learned counsel further relied upon the following case laws:
Commissioner of Central Excise, Ahmedabad vs. Vikshara Trading & Invest Pvt.
Ltd. 2003 (157) ELT 4 (SC); Commissioner of Central Excise vs. West Coast
Diesel Ltd. 2000 (122) ELT 103 (Tri.Mum) and Gavas Laboratory vs. Commissioner
of .Central Excise 2000 (122) ELT 516 (Tri.Del) wherein it was held that once
there was an assignment in favour of another person and that fact was not in
serious dispute; the mere fact that the assignment was not registered could
not alter the position for the purpose of benefit of SSI exemption. It was
also submitted that the brand-name Vipanchi is held by Shri M. Krishna for
electrical fans, voltage stabilizer, etc. in Class 9 from May 2003 onwards and
he has assigned/sold the brand-name to the appellants in respect of mixer
grinders. It was also submitted that there is no objection by the Revenue in
the show cause notice or in the impugned order-in-original and order-in-appeal
regarding the authenticity of memorandum of understanding and once the
assignment of the trademark is not in dispute, the fact that the brand-name
Vipanchi actually belonging to the appellant from April, 2004 onwards cannot
be disputed.
6.1 The learned counsel submitted that it would be seen that the department
had issued number of show cause notices invoking extended period. It is well
settled principle that after the first show cause notice, in subsequent show
cause notices, extended period cannot be invoked.
7\. The learned Additional Commissioner (AR), on the other hand, reiterated
the findings in the orders-in-original and in the orders-in-appeal. He
submitted that it cannot be said that the said memorandum of understanding was
accepted by the department. In fact, no such averment i.e. existence of
memorandum of understanding, was made by the appellant or Shri A. Ramkishan
during the course of investigation. On the contrary, Shri M. Krishna very
categorically stated in his statement that the brand name Vipanchi belongs
to them. Neither Shri Amritlal Jain or Shri M. Krishna had at any point of
time, talked about the said memorandum of understanding. During investigation,
what was claimed was that Shri M. Krishna, Director of M/s. R.K. Fans and
Allied Products, Hyderabad, got the mixer grinder manufactured from the
appellant in the brand name Vipanchi which belonged to M/s. R.K. Fans and
Allied Products. It is also submitted that the so called as memorandum of
understanding was submitted after about 13 months of the issuance of the first
show cause notice and at the time of personal hearing. The learned Additional
Commissioner (AR) also submitted that the document submitted is only
memorandum of understanding which has no legal force whatsoever. It is not
even notarised leave alone registered. It is not even an agreement between the
appellant and Shri M. Krishna, which can be enforced in a court of law. A
perusal of the said memorandum of understanding would indicate that this
cannot even be considered as a deed of assignment. It is at the most an
understanding about business deal between the two. The learned AR relied upon
the Honble Supreme Courts judgment in the case of Meghraj Biscuits
Industries Ltd. vs. Commissioner of Central Excise 2007 (210) ELT 161 (SC);
this Tribunals judgment in the case of Vee Gee Faucets P. Ltd. vs.
Commissioner of Central Excise 2010 (259) ELT 273; Swift Finvest Pvt. Ltd. vs.
Commissioner of Central Excise 2010 (260) ELT 461 (Tri.-Del.). The learned AR
also relied upon the Honble Supreme Court judgment in the case of
Commissioner of Central Excise vs. Rukmani Pakkwell Traders 2004 (165) ELT 481
(SC).
7.1 It was further submitted that from the carton produced during the hearing,
it is clear that the symbol of Veena is being printed on the carton as also
on the mixer grinder and the said logo is clearly identifiable as the logo
belonging to Shri M. Krishna/M/s. R.K. Fans and Allied Products, Hyderabad.
Since the said logo has not been registered in the name of the appellant, it
cannot be said that after getting the registration, there is no case of
Revenue. The brand name registered and that depicted on the goods are not the
same.
7.2 The learned AR further submitted that the object of the Notification is to
protect the small scale industries who are manufacturing the goods in their
own brand name. The purpose of the exemption is not to permit manufacture in
the name of others brand name. In the present case, it is undisputed fact
that the goods being manufactured in the Vipanchi brand name were required
to be compulsorily sold to M/s. R.K. Fans and Allied Products, Hyderabad or
their marketing company and thus it is a case of a brand name owner getting
the goods manufactured from a small scale unit. The purpose of the prohibition
under Notification 8/2003 is to clearly debar such cases. He further submitted
that in case of a small scale unit, the returns are required to be filed
quarterly and, therefore, the period of limitation has to be counted from such
date. In view of this position, the show cause notice dated 26.6.2008 cannot
be said to have been issued after the prescribed period of limitation. In any
case the appellant did not take registration or file any returns during the
period in question and hence the extended period of limitation in various show
cause notices has been correctly invoked.
8\. In rebuttal, the learned counsel submitted that the decision in the case
of Meghraj Biscuits Industries Ltd. (supra) is not applicable in the present
facts and circumstances of the case, as in the said judgment, the Honble
Supreme Court has observed that there is no deed of assignment to M/s. Meghraj
Biscuits Industries Ltd. Similarly, the other judgments quoted by the by the
AR are distinguishable due to the facts of the present case. It was also
submitted that the show cause notices issued post April 2008, after the
receipt of the Trade Mark Registration certificate by the appellant are on the
ground that the name of the marketing firm on the carton amounts to brand-name
and picture of Veena is appearing on the carton as well as on the mixer. The
learned counsel further submitted that the brand-name belongs to the appellant
and writing the name of the marketing firm/or printing Veena on carton/mixer
grinder will not disentitle the benefit of SSI Notification. He relied upon
the following case laws in support of his contention that merely because the
goods are distributed by some other company whose name and logo are also
printed on cartons of its specified goods, it cannot be said that they are
identified with the user of the brand name and the SSI exemption cannot be
denied on this ground.
(i) DCI Pharmaceuticals Pvt. Ltd. vs. Superintendent of Central Excise 2000
(115) ELT 45 (Bom.);
(ii) Commissioner of Central Excise vs. Aarem Enterprises 2003 (153) ELT 111
(Tri.-Mum.);
(iii) Vi John Beauty Tech vs. Commissioner of Central Excise 2002 (143) ELT
148 (Tri.-Del);
(iv) Commissioner of Central Excise vs. Thio Pharma 2003 (151) ELT 84
(Tri.-Del.);
(v) Emkay Investments Pvt. Ltd. vs. Commissioner of Central Excise 2000 (124)
ELT 741 (Tri.-Cal.);
(vi) CCE, Goa vs. Christine Hoden (I) Pvt. Ltd. reported in 1999 (113) ELT 591
(Tri.-Del.);
(vii) Palsons Drugs & Chemical Industries vs. CCE, Calcutta-I reported in 1998
(98) ELT 665 (Tri.-Cal.),
(viii) CCE, Mumbai vs. Ark Laboratories reported in 2005 (180) ELT
(Tri.-Mum.).
8.1 The learned counsel also relied upon the judgment of the Tribunal in the
case of Electron Industries Ltd. vs. CCE, Mumbai reported in 2014 (307) ELT
802 (Tri.-Mum.), to support the contention that penalty is not imposable since
the issue relates to interpretation of notification. The learned counsel also
submitted the following two case laws for advancing the plea that
consideration paid for getting the brand name assigned is not relevant for
determining exemption  National Appliances vs. CCE, Mumbai reported in 2006
(206) ELT 802 (Tri.-Mum.) and CCE, Goa vs. Premella Sanitary Products reported
in 2005 (184) ELT 125 (SC).
9\. We have considered the submissions made by both the sides. We note that
the benefit of small scale exemption is vide Notification 8/2003 dated
01/03/2003. Para 4 of the said Notification, which is relevant present
discussion, is as under:
4. The exemption contained in this notification shall not apply to specified
goods bearing a brand name or trade name, whether registered or not, of
another person, except in the following cases:-
(a) .
.
(b) .
..
The exclusion clauses are not relevant for the present dispute.
Further, in para 5, Explanation (A) defines brand-name or trade-name as under:
(A) brand name or trade name means a brand name or a trade name, whether
registered or not, that is to say, a name or a mark, such as symbol, monogram,
label, signature or invented word or writing which is used in relation to such
specified goods for the purpose of indicating, or so as to indicate a
connection in the course of trade between such specified goods and some person
using such name or mark with or without any indication of the identity of that
person; Thus in brief if a SSI unit manufactures specified goods bearing a
brand/trade name of other person, benefit of SSI exemption is not available.
10\. Before examining the applicability of the above mentioned Exemption
Notification, the factual matrix emerging in the case is as under:-
Shri A. Ramkishan, Director of M/s. R.K. Fans & Allied Products Pvt. Ltd.,
along with its marketing company, M/s. Vipanchi Marketing Pvt. Ltd., are
engaged in the business of trading, manufacturing and marketing of electrical
ceiling fans with a brand name Vipanchi along with a logo of Veena and the
same are sold in the markets in Andhra Pradesh and Maharashtra States. The
said brand/trade name has considerable goodwill in this area. Shri A.
Ramkishan though of extending his business by selling mixer grinder under his
brand name Vipanchi along with logo and for this purpose he approached the
appellant firm and ordered for manufacture of mixer grinders  different
models and these mixer grinders were to be manufactured by the appellant firm
carrying the brand name Vipanchi along with the logo. The goods were
supplied by the appellant at the agreed price. The artistic style of brand
name and logo were provided by Shri A. Ramkishan and the appellant. From the
statements recorded during the investigation, it is clear that Shri A.
Ramkishan was the brand name holder Vipanchi along with the logo. The same
statement was also shown to Shri Amritlal Jain and he had no objection to that
statement. It is to be noted that all throughout the period of various show
cause notices, the goods have been manufactured under the brand name
Vipanchi along with the logo Veena to Shri A. Ramkishans firm R.K. Fans
and Allied Products/Vipanchi Marketing Pvt. Ltd. There has been no change as
far as indication of the brand name and logo on the mixer grinder as also on
their carton is concerned. There are two factors that have come in between
which are important. The first factor is the appellant after about 13 months
of issuance of the show cause notice, during the personal hearing has produced
copy of memorandum of understanding between Shri A. Ramkishan and Shri
Amritlal Jain. Copy of the said memorandum of understanding is reproduced
below for ready reference:-
According to the appellant, on 10th June 2014 they have entered into the said
memorandum of understanding with Shri A. Ramkishan and as per serial No.3 on
page 2 of the said memorandum of understanding, the trade mark Vipanchi
(with logo) was assigned to the appellant in class 7 and they were required to
complete the procedure and formality for registration of the trade mark. It is
to be noted that the statements were recorded much later than 10th June 2004.
During both statements neither Shri A. Ramkishan nor the present appellant
talked anything about the said memorandum of understanding or the so called as
deed of assignment.
10.1 We have gone through the said memorandum of understanding. At the outset,
we note that the document produced is only a memorandum of understanding. It
is not even an enforceable agreement, leave alone the deed of assignment. A
plain reading of the said memorandum of understanding would indicate that the
appellant has entered into a contract with Shri A. Ramkishan to manufacture
mixer grinder of 550 watts and the price has been fixed at Rs.750/- per piece
excluding the tax etc. It also details about the testing and okaying of the
goods as also the guarantee period etc. Para 3 does not indicate that Shri A.
Ramkishan has assigned the said brand name to the appellant. It only talks
that the appellant will complete all required procedure and formalities for
registration of trade mark Vipanchi and the name with the logo in class 7 on
their firm/company/individual name for which Shri A. Ramkishan does not have
any objection. It is also seen that the memorandum of understanding is valid
for five years and thereafter required to be renewed. In our opinion, the said
memorandum of understanding which is not even notarized or registered and is
not even an agreement, cannot be considered as a deed of assignment. It is at
the most understanding between the appellant and Shri A. Ramkishan about the
business model.
10.2 Another important development that had taken place on 1st February 2007
is that the appellant applied to the Trade Marks Registry for registration of
the brand name Vipanchi and the appellant was granted registration on 7th
October 2008. It is interesting to note that the appellant did not apply for
registration of the logo which is being used by Shri A. Ramkishan on his
products as also by the appellant on the goods manufactured and are matter of
dispute in the present case. It is also important to note that the goods
manufactured and supplied after the registration of the above trade mark
continue to bear the logo of Veena on the mixer grinder as also on the
carton being supplied to Shri A. Ramkishan or his two firms. Another important
factor to be noted is that as per the statement of Shri A. Ramkishan, the
appellant can use the said brand name and logo only for the goods manufactured
and supplied to him/his firms and not to anyone else.
10.3 Keeping in view the above factual matrix, in our opinion, that before 7th
October 2008 when there was no registration in favour of the appellant and
Vipanchi was a brand name of Shri A. Ramkishan, Director of M/s. R.K. Fans
and Allied Products, no case whatsoever can be said to have been made that the
appellant was not using the brand name of another person which is the primary
requirement for availing the benefit of small scale exemption notification.
After 7th October 2008 also, we find that the logo of Veena which is
exclusively used to denote the products of R.K. Fans and Allied Products
continued to be used on the mixer grinder as also on the cartons. In nutshell,
all throughout the period, the goods were bearing the brand name Vipanchi as
also the logo Veena which are understood by the customers/purchasers as the
products of R.K. Fans and Allied Products/Vipanchi Marketing Pvt. Ltd. and the
appellant was prohibited from selling the same goods to anyone else other than
R.K. Fans and Allied Products or their marketing company. The various issues
raised by the appellant have already been decided by the Honble Supreme Court
in various judgments and subsequently this Tribunal has also decided certain
cases based upon the decision of the Honble Supreme Court.
10.4 First issue is that the appellant is using the brand/trade name for mixer
grinder in class 7 while R.K.Fans and Allied Products for class 9 goods. The
Honble Supreme Court in the case of CC, Chandigarh-I vs. Mahaan Dairies
reported in 2004 (166) ELT 23 (SC), in para 6, has to state the following:-
6. We have today delivered a Judgment in Commissioner of Central Excise,
Trichy v. Rukmani Pakkwell Traders \- 2004 (165) E.L.T. 481 (S.C.) (Civil
Appeal Nos. 3227-3228/1998) wherein we have held in respect of another
Notification containing identical words that it makes no difference whether
the goods on which the trade name or mark is used are the same in respect of
which the trade mark is registered. Even if the goods are different so long as
the trade name or brand name of some other Company is used the benefit of the
Notification would not be available. Further, in our view, once a trade name
or brand name is used then mere use of additional words would not enable the
party to claim the benefit of the Notification. In view of the above
decisions of the Honble Supreme Court, the fact that the appellant was using
the brand name Vipanchi on mixer grinder while their customer was using the
same brand name on other products, does not help the cause of the appellant.
10.5 Second issue is that goods were bearing brand name Vipanchi along with
logo of Veena belonging to R.K. Fans and Allied Products Ltd. while what is
registered was Vipanchi. Further, the Honble Supreme Court in the case of
CCE, Trichy vs. Rukmani Pakkwell Traders reported in 2004 (165) ELT 481 (SC),
in para 7, has to state as under:-
7. The Tribunal had also held that under the Notification the use must be of
such brand name. The Tribunal has held that the words such brand name
shows that the very same brand name or trade name must be used. The Tribunal
has held that if there are any differences then the exemption would not be
lost. We are afraid that in coming to this conclusion the Tribunal has ignored
Explanation IX. Explanation IX makes it clear that the brand name or trade
name shall mean a brand name or trade name (whether registered or not) that is
to say a name or a mark, code number, design number, drawing number, symbol,
monogram, label, signature or invented word or writing. This makes it very
clear that even a use of part of a brand name or trade name, so long as it
indicates a connection in the course of trade would be sufficient to
disentitle the person from getting exemption under the Notification. In this
case admittedly the brand name or trade name is the words ARR with the
photograph of the founder of the group. Merely because the registered trade
mark is not entirely reproduced does not take the Respondents out of Clause 4
and make them eligible to the benefit of the Notification.
11\. The learned AR has quoted the judgment of the Honble Supreme Court in
the case of Meghraj Biscuits Industries Ltd. (supra) and we note the following
paragraphs are relevant for some of the pleas advanced by the appellant:-
11. We do not find? any merit in the above arguments. In the case of Pahwa
Chemicals Pvt. Ltd. v. Commissioner of Central Excise, Delhi \- 2005 (189)
E.L.T. 257 (S.C.) this Court has held that the object of the exemption
notification was neither to protect the owners of the trade mark nor the
consumers from being misled. These are considerations which are relevant in
disputes arising out of infringement/passing of actions under the Trade Marks
Act. The object of the notification is to grant benefits only to those
industries which otherwise do not have the advantage of a brand name [See :
para 3].
12\. Applying the? ratio of the above judgment to the present case, it is
clear that grant of registration certificate under the Trade Marks Act will
not automatically provide benefit of exemption to the SSI Unit.
13\. In the case of? Commissioner of Central Excise, Chandigarh v. Bhalla
Enterprises - 2004 (173) E.L.T. 225 (S.C.), this Court held that the assessee
will not be entitled to the benefit of exemption if it uses on goods in
question, same/similar brand name with intention of indicating a connection
with the goods of the assessee and such other person or uses the name in such
manner that it would indicate such connection. It was further held that the
burden is on the assessee to satisfy the adjudicating authority that there was
no such intention [See : paras 6 and 7].
16\. Lastly, we are? required to examine the retrospective effect of the
registration certificate dated 30-6-2000 with effect from 30-9-91. At the
outset, we may reiterate that the object of the exemption notification was
neither to protect the owners of the trade mark nor the consumers from being
misled. These are considerations which are relevant in disputes arising under
the Trade Marks Act. The object of the exemption Notification No. 1/93-C.E.
was to grant benefits to those industries which do not have the advantage of a
brand name. However, since retrospective nature of the registration
certificate dated 30-6-2000 is repeatedly being raised in this Court we would
like to examine the case law in this regard.
19\. On reading the? above quoted paragraphs from the above judgment, with
which we agree, it is clear that the effect of making the registration
certificate applicable from retrospective date is based on the principle of
deemed equivalence to public user of such mark. This deeming fiction cannot be
extended to the Excise Law. It is confined to the provisions of the Trade
Marks Act. In a given case like the present case where there is evidence with
the Department of the trade mark being owned by M/s. Kay Aar Biscuits (P) Ltd.
and where there is evidence of the appellants trading on the reputation of
M/s. Kay Aar Biscuits (P) Ltd. which is not rebutted by the appellants
(assessee), issuance of registration certificate with retrospective effect
cannot confer the benefit of exemption notification to the assessee. In the
present case, issuance of registration certificate with retrospective effect
from 30-9-91 will not tantamount to conferment of exemption benefit under the
Excise Law once it is found that the appellants had wrongly used the trade
mark of M/s. Kay Aar Biscuits (P) Ltd. 11.1 We also note that this Tribunal
in the case of Swift Finvest Pvt. Ltd. (supra), has discussed about the deed
of assignment and para 14 and 15 of the said judgments which are relevant to
the present case are reproduced below:-
14.?At the outset it is to be noted that in a case where there is no dispute
that the name used by the manufacturer for his product is a brand name of
another person, taking resort to the explanation clause does not arise at all.
Even otherwise, if we peruse the explanation clause, it lends no support to
the case pleaded by the appellants. Plain reading of explanation would
disclose that the name which is used in relation to a product for indicating
some connection of that product in the course of trade with the person using
such names then it would be a brand name of that person. It is not in dispute
that Kamdhenu Cement is a brand name of Kamdhenu Ispat Ltd. In fact having
admitted so, they have even produced copy of the agreement entered into
between the appellants and M/s. Kamdhenu Ispat Ltd. for that purpose.
15.?The right of the appellants to use the said brand name pursuant to the
agreement between the parties cannot entitle the party to contend that it
ceased to be the brand name of another person or that it would become an
exclusive brand name of the manufacturer. The agreement between manufacturer
and the owner of the brand name may entitle the manufacturer to use such brand
name for his product without any objection from the owner of the brand name.
But that by itself will not result in amending the conditions of exemption
notification. The exemption notification clearly requires that the benefit
thereunder would not be available to the manufacturer of the cement bearing a
brand name or trade name, whether registered or not, of another person. It
does not make any exception when such use is permitted by the owner of the
brand name. Irrespective of the fact whether the manufacturer has full consent
of the owner of the brand name to use such brand name for his product or not,
the use of such brand name would disentitle the manufacturer of cement from
claiming any benefit under the said notification. 11.2 This Tribunal had
occasion to again examine similar issues in the case of Vee Gee Faucets P.
Ltd. (supra). In the said case, this Tribunal in para 11 to 14, 16, 21 to 23,
has observed as under:-
11.?The notification explains the term brand name or trade name to mean a
brand name or a trade name, whether registered or not, i.e. to say, the name
or a mark, such as symbol, monogram, label, signature or invented word or
writing which is used in relation to such specified goods for the purpose of
indicating or so as to indicate a connection in the course of trade between
such specified goods and some person using such name or mark with or without
any indication of the identity of that person. It is also clarified that where
the specified goods manufactured by the manufacturer bear a brand name or
trade name whether registered or not of any other manufacturer or trader, such
specified goods shall not, merely by reason of that fact be deemed to have
been manufactured by such other manufacturer or trader. The Apex Court in
Rukmani Pakkwell Traders case held that the explanation to clause 4 of the
Notification No. 1/93-C.E. provides that the exemption contained in the
notification would not apply to specified goods bearing a brand name or trade
name registered or not of another person. Referring to Explanation IX to the
said notification which explained meaning of the brand name or trade name to
mean that a brand name or trade name whether registered or not that is to say
a name or a mark, code number, design number, drawing number, symbol,
monogram, label, signature or invented word or writing which is used in
relation to such specified goods for the purpose of indicating, or so as to
indicate a connection in the course of trade between such specified goods and
some person using such name or mark with or without any indication of the
identity of that person, it was held that the said explanation makes it clear
that the brand name or trade name shall mean a brand name or trade name
whether registered or not of another person that is to say a name or a mark,
code number, design number, drawing number, symbol, monogram, label, signature
or invented work or writing and same makes it further clear that even a use of
part of a brand name or a trade name, so long as it indicates a connection in
the course of the trade would be sufficient to disentitle the person from
getting exemption under the notification.
12.?In Mahaan Dairies the Apex Court while dealing with the question as to
whether the assessee was entitled to exemption under Notification No.
8/98-C.E., dt. 2-6-98 which excluded the benefit of exemption if the goods
bore a brand name or trade name of another person and the explanation
clarified the said term brand name or trade name as above while reiterating
the decision in Rukmani Pakkwell Traders case held that even if the goods are
different so long as the trade name or brand name of some other Company is
used, the benefit of the Notification would not be available and further, once
a trade name or brand name is used then mere use of additional words would not
enable the party to claim the benefit of the Notification.
13.?In Bhalla Enterprises case while observing that there was no reason to
differ from the reasoning in the earlier decisions in Rukhmani Pakkwell
Traders and Mahaan Dairies case it was held by the Apex Court that Clause 4
of Notification No. 1/93-C.E. exempted certain goods upto a particular value
and excluded such benefit in case of product bearing brand name or trade name
of others and that therefore, Clause 4 of the said Notification clearly
disapproved the benefit of the exemption in cases where someone elses name in
connection with their goods was used either with the intention of indicating
in a manner a connection between the assesses goods and such other person.
There is no requirement for the owner of the trade mark should use the name or
mark with reference to any particular product. The object of the exemption
notification was neither to protect the owners of the trade mark/trade name
nor the consumers from being misled. These are considerations which are
relevant in cases relating to disputes arising out of trade mark infringement
or passing off actions under the Trade Marks Act. The object of the
Notification under the Excise Act is clearly to grant benefit only to those
industries which otherwise do not have the advantage of a brand name.
14.?In Meghraj Biscuits Industries Ltd. case, the Apex Court was dealing with
the matter in relation to Notification No. 1/93-C.E., dt. 28-2-93 which was
issued to help the SSI Units to survive in the market dominated by brand name
or trade name. The object of the Notification was to help such units and
thereby increase industrial production. Therein the Explanation IX to the said
Notification defined the word brand name and trade name as under :
Explanation IX - Brand name or trade name shall mean a brand name or
trade name, whether registered or not, that is to say a name or a mark, such
as symbol, monogram, label, signature or invented word or writing which is
used in relation to such specified goods for the purpose of indicating, or so
as to indicate a connection in the course of trade between such specified
goods and some person using such name or mark with or without any indication
of the identity of that person.
Para 7 which was added to the said notification w.e.f. 1-3-94 read thus -
Para 7 - The exemption contained in this notification shall not apply to the
specified goods where a manufacturer affixes the specified goods with a brand
name or trade name (registered or not) of another person, who is not eligible
for the grant of exemption under this notification.
Plain reading of the above decision of the Apex Court would reveal that a
notification which specifically excludes the benefit thereunder in cases where
the goods carry a brand name or trade name, merely because there is some
arrangement either in the form of contract between the parties giving consent
for use of such brand name or trade name by person other than the proprietor
thereof cannot result in nullifying the mandatory condition imposed and
incorporated in such notification in order to enable the manufacturer to avail
the benefit thereunder. It is well settled law that the exemption
notifications are to be strictly construed. A notification which grants the
benefit in the form of exemption from payment of duty when it requires the
claimant of such benefit to comply with certain condition, the claimant has no
option but to comply with such condition to enable him to avail the benefit
under such notification.
16.?Plain reading of the Notification nowhere discloses that the exemption
thereunder can be availed for the product bearing brand name or trade name of
other person on the basis of consent of the proprietor of such brand name or
trade name. Neither it discloses that assignment of right in relation to brand
name or trade name by the proprietor thereof in favour of manufacturer of
goods would exclude such manufacturer from the exclusion clause in the
notification. It is well established that the product which carries the brand
name or trade name whether registered or not of another person, such product
would be non-eligible to claim the benefit under the notification. That is the
law laid down in clear words by the Apex Court in Bhalla Enterprises and
reiterated in Meghraj Biscuits Inds. Ltd. case.
21.?Taking into consideration rival contentions in this regard as well as the
decisions of the Apex Court referred to above, it is difficult to accept the
contention on behalf of the appellants that mere consent or the mere
assignment deed would entitle the appellant to claim benefit under the said
notification.
22.?As regards the registration of brand name, the same does not disclose the
appellants to be the exclusive owner of the brand name or trade name, rather
it discloses that the appellant to be subsequent proprietor and that too on
the basis of assignment deed. In the absence of the appellant being exclusive
proprietor of the brand name and trade name and there is a clear admission
that M/s. United Cocks Pvt. Ltd. were the original owners, use of the brand
name GURU by the appellant would continue to be a use of a brand name of
another person. Being so that would be hit by the conditions incorporated
under the said notification and would disentitle the benefit thereunder .
23.?Besides the registration has been effected from 6-4-04. Applying the law
laid down by the Apex Court in Meghraj Biscuits case, retrospective grant of
registration cannot create any right in revenue matters even assuming that
such registration could be said to be exclusive registration of the brand name
n favour of the appellants. It is also not clear as to whether registration in
the manner and the circumstances it had been granted, has at all resulted in
creating the brand name to be the exclusive property of the appellants. 11.3
We find the appellant has quoted catena of judgments. However, we observe that
all these judgments are for period prior to the judgments of the Honble
Supreme Court mentioned earlier and the Honble Supreme Court has laid down
the law and interpreted the intention of the notification and in view of the
said position, we do not consider it necessary to discuss the said case laws.
The judgment of Honble Supreme Court in the case of Vikshara Trading &
Investment P. Ltd. (supra) does not help the appellant as there is no deed of
assignment.
12\. Another contention raised by the appellant is that after issuance of the
first show cause notice, extended period cannot be invoked in the subsequent
show cause notices. It is noted that the appellant was not registered and they
did not take the registration even after issuance of the first show cause
notice of 16th July 2007. We also note that the SSI units are generally
required to file quarterly returns. It is also noted that the fact that the
symbol Veena continues to be used on the mixer grinder as also on the
cartons could be found only during the visit of the officials at the premises
of the appellant. Vital facts were suppressed and thus, in our view, this is
appropriate case for invoking the extended period of limitation in subsequent
notice. We, therefore, do not see any infirmity in invoking the extended
period of limitation in subsequent notices.
13\. The appellant has also stated that penalty is not imposable since the
issue relates to the interpretation of notification. We are not impressed with
the said argument. In the present case, from the day one it was very clear
that the appellant was manufacturing the goods in their own brand name and
entered into a contract with Shri A. Ramkishan, Director of R.K. Fans and
Allied Products, to manufacture mixer grinder in their brand name to be
exclusively supplied to them. There can be no doubt that they were
manufacturing the goods in the brand name of others and that is exactly what
the said notification prohibits to permit. In any case, the period involved in
the present case is 2004 onwards when the decisions of the Honble Supreme
Court on the issue were available and there could have been no doubt
whatsoever relating to the interpretation of the notification.
14\. In the result, all the appeals are dismissed.
(Pronounced in Court on 28.5.2015) (Ramesh Nair) Member (Judicial) (P.K. Jain)
Member (Technical) tvu 1 30
cartons could be found only during the visit of the officials at the premises
of the appellant. Vital facts were suppressed and thus, in our view, this is
appropriate case for invoking the extended period of limitation in subsequent
notice. We, therefore, do not see any infirmity in invoking the extended
period of limitation in subsequent notices.
13\. The appellant has also stated that penalty is not imposable since the
issue relates to the interpretation of notification. We are not impressed with
the said argument. In the present case, from the day one it was very clear
that the appellant was manufacturing the goods in their own brand name and
entered into a contract with Shri A. Ramkishan, Director of R.K. Fans and
Allied Products, to manufacture mixer grinder in their brand name to be
exclusively supplied to them. There can be no doubt that they were
manufacturing the goods in the brand name of others and that is exactly what
the said notification prohibits to permit. In any case, the period involved in
the present case is 2004 onwards when the decisions of the Honble Supreme
Court on the issue were available and there could have been no doubt
    ======================================================
    Swastik Appliances							Appellant
    Vs.
    Commissioner of Central Excise, Mumbai-III		Respondent
    Appearance:
    Shri Mihir Mehta, Advocate, for appellant
    Shri V.K. Agrawal, Additional Commissioner (AR), for respondent
    CORAM:
    Honble Mr. P.K. Jain, Member (Technical)
    Honble Mr. Ramesh Nair, Member (Judicial)
    Date of Hearing: 25.3.2015
    Date of Decision: 28.5.2015
    ORDER NO
    Per: P.K. Jain
    	Brief facts of the case are that the appellant is engaged in the manufacture of mixer and grinder.  They availed the benefit of small scale exemption.  The mixer and grinder being manufactured by them bear the brand name Swastik as also some other brand names.
2\. Based upon an intelligence about the evasion of duty by the appellant,
certain searches were conducted on 27.4.2006 at various places including
factory, residential premises, transporter etc. and investigations were
carried out. Based upon the investigations, it came out that the appellant was
manufacturing mixer grinder in the brand name of Vipanchi along with the
cartons could be found only during the visit of the officials at the premises
of the appellant. Vital facts were suppressed and thus, in our view, this is
appropriate case for invoking the extended period of limitation in subsequent
notice. We, therefore, do not see any infirmity in invoking the extended
period of limitation in subsequent notices.
13\. The appellant has also stated that penalty is not imposable since the
issue relates to the interpretation of notification. We are not impressed with
the said argument. In the present case, from the day one it was very clear
that the appellant was manufacturing the goods in their own brand name and
entered into a contract with Shri A. Ramkishan, Director of R.K. Fans and
Allied Products, to manufacture mixer grinder in their brand name to be
exclusively supplied to them. There can be no doubt that they were
manufacturing the goods in the brand name of others and that is exactly what
the said notification prohibits to permit. In any case, the period involved in
the present case is 2004 onwards when the decisions of the Honble Supreme
Court on the issue were available and there could have been no doubt
    ======================================================
    Swastik Appliances							Appellant
    Vs.
    Commissioner of Central Excise, Mumbai-III		Respondent
    Appearance:
    Shri Mihir Mehta, Advocate, for appellant
    Shri V.K. Agrawal, Additional Commissioner (AR), for respondent
    CORAM:
    Honble Mr. P.K. Jain, Member (Technical)
    Honble Mr. Ramesh Nair, Member (Judicial)
    Date of Hearing: 25.3.2015
    Date of Decision: 28.5.2015
    ORDER NO
    Per: P.K. Jain
    	Brief facts of the case are that the appellant is engaged in the manufacture of mixer and grinder.  They availed the benefit of small scale exemption.  The mixer and grinder being manufactured by them bear the brand name Swastik as also some other brand names.
2\. Based upon an intelligence about the evasion of duty by the appellant,
certain searches were conducted on 27.4.2006 at various places including
factory, residential premises, transporter etc. and investigations were
carried out. Based upon the investigations, it came out that the appellant was
manufacturing mixer grinder in the brand name of Vipanchi along with the
cartons could be found only during the visit of the officials at the premises
of the appellant. Vital facts were suppressed and thus, in our view, this is
appropriate case for invoking the extended period of limitation in subsequent
notice. We, therefore, do not see any infirmity in invoking the extended
period of limitation in subsequent notices.
13\. The appellant has also stated that penalty is not imposable since the
issue relates to the interpretation of notification. We are not impressed with
the said argument. In the present case, from the day one it was very clear
that the appellant was manufacturing the goods in their own brand name and
entered into a contract with Shri A. Ramkishan, Director of R.K. Fans and
Allied Products, to manufacture mixer grinder in their brand name to be
exclusively supplied to them. There can be no doubt that they were
manufacturing the goods in the brand name of others and that is exactly what
the said notification prohibits to permit. In any case, the period involved in
the present case is 2004 onwards when the decisions of the Honble Supreme
Court on the issue were available and there could have been no doubt
    ======================================================
    Swastik Appliances							Appellant
    Vs.
    Commissioner of Central Excise, Mumbai-III		Respondent
    Appearance:
    Shri Mihir Mehta, Advocate, for appellant
    Shri V.K. Agrawal, Additional Commissioner (AR), for respondent
    CORAM:
    Honble Mr. P.K. Jain, Member (Technical)
    Honble Mr. Ramesh Nair, Member (Judicial)
    Date of Hearing: 25.3.2015
    Date of Decision: 28.5.2015
    ORDER NO
    Per: P.K. Jain
    	Brief facts of the case are that the appellant is engaged in the manufacture of mixer and grinder.  They availed the benefit of small scale exemption.  The mixer and grinder being manufactured by them bear the brand name Swastik as also some other brand names.
2\. Based upon an intelligence about the evasion of duty by the appellant,
certain searches were conducted on 27.4.2006 at various places including
factory, residential premises, transporter etc. and investigations were
carried out. Based upon the investigations, it came out that the appellant was
manufacturing mixer grinder in the brand name of Vipanchi along with the
logo of Veena. Further, the said brand name and logo belong to one M/s. R.K.
Fans & Allied Products, Hyderabad. Investigation also revealed that the mixer
grinder bearing the said name Vipanchi were being manufactured by the
appellant on behalf of the said M/s. R.K. Fans & Allied Products, Hyderabad
and after manufacture, these were being sold to the said firm/their marketing
arms who, in turn, was marketing the same. Appellants were not permitted to
sell the said goods bearing the said brand name to anyone else.
3\. A statement of Shri M. Krishna, Director of M/s. R.K. Fans & Allied
Products, Hyderabad, was recorded on 27.12.2006, wherein he stated that his
company was into the manufacturing of ceiling fans, voltage stabilizers under
Vipanchi brand and they were into trading of mixer grinder in the name of
cartons could be found only during the visit of the officials at the premises
of the appellant. Vital facts were suppressed and thus, in our view, this is
appropriate case for invoking the extended period of limitation in subsequent
notice. We, therefore, do not see any infirmity in invoking the extended
period of limitation in subsequent notices.
13\. The appellant has also stated that penalty is not imposable since the
issue relates to the interpretation of notification. We are not impressed with
the said argument. In the present case, from the day one it was very clear
that the appellant was manufacturing the goods in their own brand name and
entered into a contract with Shri A. Ramkishan, Director of R.K. Fans and
Allied Products, to manufacture mixer grinder in their brand name to be
exclusively supplied to them. There can be no doubt that they were
manufacturing the goods in the brand name of others and that is exactly what
the said notification prohibits to permit. In any case, the period involved in
the present case is 2004 onwards when the decisions of the Honble Supreme
Court on the issue were available and there could have been no doubt
    ======================================================
    Swastik Appliances							Appellant
    Vs.
    Commissioner of Central Excise, Mumbai-III		Respondent
    Appearance:
    Shri Mihir Mehta, Advocate, for appellant
    Shri V.K. Agrawal, Additional Commissioner (AR), for respondent
    CORAM:
    Honble Mr. P.K. Jain, Member (Technical)
    Honble Mr. Ramesh Nair, Member (Judicial)
    Date of Hearing: 25.3.2015
    Date of Decision: 28.5.2015
    ORDER NO
    Per: P.K. Jain
    	Brief facts of the case are that the appellant is engaged in the manufacture of mixer and grinder.  They availed the benefit of small scale exemption.  The mixer and grinder being manufactured by them bear the brand name Swastik as also some other brand names.
2\. Based upon an intelligence about the evasion of duty by the appellant,
certain searches were conducted on 27.4.2006 at various places including
factory, residential premises, transporter etc. and investigations were
carried out. Based upon the investigations, it came out that the appellant was
manufacturing mixer grinder in the brand name of Vipanchi along with the
logo of Veena. Further, the said brand name and logo belong to one M/s. R.K.
Fans & Allied Products, Hyderabad. Investigation also revealed that the mixer
grinder bearing the said name Vipanchi were being manufactured by the
appellant on behalf of the said M/s. R.K. Fans & Allied Products, Hyderabad
and after manufacture, these were being sold to the said firm/their marketing
arms who, in turn, was marketing the same. Appellants were not permitted to
sell the said goods bearing the said brand name to anyone else.
3\. A statement of Shri M. Krishna, Director of M/s. R.K. Fans & Allied
Products, Hyderabad, was recorded on 27.12.2006, wherein he stated that his
company was into the manufacturing of ceiling fans, voltage stabilizers under
Vipanchi brand and they were into trading of mixer grinder in the name of
cartons could be found only during the visit of the officials at the premises
of the appellant. Vital facts were suppressed and thus, in our view, this is
appropriate case for invoking the extended period of limitation in subsequent
notice. We, therefore, do not see any infirmity in invoking the extended
period of limitation in subsequent notices.
13\. The appellant has also stated that penalty is not imposable since the
issue relates to the interpretation of notification. We are not impressed with
the said argument. In the present case, from the day one it was very clear
that the appellant was manufacturing the goods in their own brand name and
entered into a contract with Shri A. Ramkishan, Director of R.K. Fans and
Allied Products, to manufacture mixer grinder in their brand name to be
exclusively supplied to them. There can be no doubt that they were
manufacturing the goods in the brand name of others and that is exactly what
the said notification prohibits to permit. In any case, the period involved in
the present case is 2004 onwards when the decisions of the Honble Supreme
Court on the issue were available and there could have been no doubt
