Delhi High Court
Pepsi Co., Inc. And Ors. vs Hindustan Coca Cola Ltd. And Anr. on 1 September,
2003
Equivalent citations: 2003 (27) PTC 305 Del
Author: U Mehra
Bench: U Mehra, O Dwivedi
JUDGMENT Usha Mehra, J.
1\. "Frivolity has become a serious business these days. Television
commercials which are meant to portray a stylization of the good life are
crafted with great care, using all the skills that the arts and psychology
have produced."
2\. The vast majority of the viewer of the commercial advertisement on
electronic media are influenced by the visual advertisements as these have a
far reaching influence on the psyche of the people, therefore, discrediting
the product of a competitor through commercial would amount to disparagement
as has been held by the High Courts and the Supreme Court of India as well as
the Law laid down by Courts in U.K. & U.S.A.
KERLY'S LAW OF TRADE MARKS AND TRADE NAMES BY DAVID KITCHIN AND ANR. in
Appendix 16, deals with Council Directive 84/450 of September 10, 1984
relating to the approximation of the laws, regulations and administrative
not a copy of the advertisement of the appellant, therefore, the provisions of
Section 14 of the Act are not applicable to the facts of this case.
35\. We were shown the commercial of roller coaster during the proceedings by
both parties. By seeing the same an impression which one gathers is that
roller coaster of the respondent is a copy of the theme of the roller coaster
of the appellant. The roller coaster commercial of the appellant is an
original work of the appellant, therefore, covered under Section 14 of the
Act. Not only the presence of roller coaster is replica of the appellant's
commercial but even the dress of the boys is also similar. Relying on the
observation of Apex Court in the case of R.G. Anand v. Delux Films, it can
prima facie be concluded that the roller coaster commercial of the respondent
is nothing but a literal imitation of the copyright work of the appellant with
some variations here and there. Having said so we would be failing in our duty
by not restraining the respondents from showing its roller coaster commercial
in the present form.
From the above analysis, we partly accept the appeal and restrain the
relating to the approximation of the laws, regulations and administrative
provisions of the Member States concerning misleading advertising where the
Council of the European Communities having regard to the Treaty establishing
the European Economic Community, and in particular Article 100 thereof while
taking into consideration the effect of misleading advertisement which reaches
beyond the frontiers of individual Member States, adopted the directives in
the form of Articles. Article 3(a) deals with Comparative advertising which
shall, as far as the comparison is concerned, be permitted if the following
conditions are met:
"(a) it is not misleading according to Articles 2(2), 3 and 7(1).
(b) it compares goods or services meeting the same needs or intended for the
same purpose;
(c) it objectively compares one or more material, relevant, verifiable and
representative features of those goods and services, which may include price;
(d) it does not create confusion in the market place between the advertiser
and a competitor or between the advertiser's trade marks, trade names, other
distinguishing marks, goods or services and those of a competitor;
(e) it does not discredit or denigrate the trade marks, trade names, other
distinguishing marks, goods, services, activities, or circumstances of a
competitor;
(f) for products with designation of origin, it relates in each case to
products with the same designation;
(g) it does not take unfair advantage of the reputation of a trade mark, trade
name or other distinguishing marks of a competitor of the designation of
origin of competing products;
(h) it does not present goods or services as imitations or replicas of goods
or services bearing a protected trade mark or trade name."
3\. The reading of the above would show that comparative advertising cannot be
permitted which discredits or denigrates the trade mark or trade name of the
competitor. Therefore, while analysing the respective arguments of the parties
we have to keep all these factors in mind. We have to see whether in the
present case the respondents have disparaged the product of the appellants'
namely "PEPSI COLA".
4\. Pepsi Company Incorporation Along with Pepsico (India) Holdings Limited
and Pepsi Foods Limited, the appellants (plaintiff's before the trial court)
filed suit against Hindustan Coca Cola and others. Along with that suit
appellants also filed an application for grant of ad interim injunction
seeking order restraining the respondents from in any manner infringing upon
the registered trade mark of the appellants by use of the word "PAPPI" which
according to appellant is deceptively similar to that of the appellants'
product "PEPSI" in the advertisements and commercials. Restraint order was
also sought from infringing upon the copy right of the appellants in the words
"Yen Dil Maange More" in television commercials including copying the roller
coaster commercial of the appellants. The appellants in fact wanted a
restraint order restraining the respondents from telecasting the impugned
commercials or any other form of advertisements through print advertising or
electronic media as according to the appellants, the impugned commercials
infringed the trade mark and copyright of the appellants and disparaged the
appellants' product resulting in dilution of appellants' goodwill and
reputation.
5\. Hindustan Coca Cola Limited and Coca Cola India Pvt. Ltd., the respondents
(defendants in the suit) contested the said application. By the impugned order
of the learned single Judge the application for interim injunction was
dismissed on the grounds that prima-facie no case is made out nor the balance
of convenience lies in favor of the appellants for the grant of interlocutory
injunction. The learned Judge further observed that the issues which have been
raised in the suit can be decided only after the evidence is led by the
parties. That in order to protect the right of the appellants, in the meantime
it has been ordered that if at the final stage and after detailed arguments,
the appellant succeeds in the suit, the respondent would pay damages and
therefore, directed the respondents to furnish an undertaking to pay damages
to the appellants within four weeks from the decision of the suit in favor of
the appellants and against the respondents. It is this order of the learned
Single Judge which is under challenge.
6\. We shall now state the facts and the conclusion arrived at by the learned
single Judge as are material for the purpose of deciding this appeal.
7\. The appellant is a registered owner of the mark "PEPSI", "PEPSI COLA" and
"GLOBAL DEVICE". It also claims to be the owner of the copy right in the words
"Yen Dil Maange More", which is a trade mark of the appellants under the Trade
and Merchandise Marks Act, 1958, Appellants claim exclusive rights in the
roller coaster commercial. The globe device is an original artistic work under
the Copy Right Act. Appellants' contention is that it popularized its products
by means of publicity in the print media, electronic media, hoardings, banners
etc. Various advertisement themes are introduced by the appellants. It is the
appellant who coined the phrase "Yen Dil Maange More" for advertising "PEPSI"
and this phrase has now caught up and is associated with "PEPSI COLA". It is
the case of the appellant that with a view to promote their products that is
"Thums Up" and "Sprite", the respondents got series of television commercials
launched. These commercials according to the appellants disparaged the
products of the appellants, thereby infringing the trade mark and copy right
of the appellants in relation to its registered trade mark "PEPSI", "GLOBE
DEVICE" and the phrase "Yeh Dil Maange More". The roller coaster commercial
'has been copied by the respondents thereby infringing the copy right of the
appellant.
8\. The case of the appellant was contested by the respondents, inter alia, on
the ground that the Cola War is a matter of trade rivalry and a market place
matter. It ought not to spill over to the court of Law. The appropriate forum
for settling the commercial dispute is a market place. Moreover, respondents
have neither infringed the trade mark nor copy right of the appellant nor in
any way disparaged the products/goods of the appellants. The respondents were
puffing to promote their goods which is a healthy competition. Moreover,
advertisements are nothing more than a probity and are aimed at pocking funs
at the advertisements of the others which is permissible in Law.
9\. On these and other allegations the learned single Judge determined the
questions of disparagement against the appellant by saying that commercial was
healthy competition. It was mere pocking the product of the appellant which is
permissible. Respondents had not denigrated the product of the appellant. To
say it is "Bacchon Wala Drink" does not amount to disparaging. Further held
that the phrase "Yeh Dil Maange More" is not copy rightable nor respondent
infringed the "Global Device" of the appellant. There is no infringement of
the appellant's roller coaster commercial.
10\. In this background we have to determine (i) whether prima facie the
respondents have disparaged the products of the appellants; (ii) whether the
globe devise and the phrase "Yeh Dil Maange More" is copy rightable and if so
whether this copy right has been infringed by the respondent; (iii) whether
the essence of the roller coaster has been copied by the respondents and if so
the affect of the same.
11\. Firstly, we have to appreciate the commercial in which on the bottle the
word "PAPPI" is written, whether it meant and stood for "PEPSI". From the
visual it is clear that bottle is PEPSI though the word written is PAPPI. For
arriving at this conclusion we are supported by three factors namely the actor
i.e. the boy who is called from the audience is asked to give his preference
of Cola drink. He mutters PEPSI in mutted manner but from movements of his
lips, it can be seen he says PEPSI. Secondly, there are only three cola drinks
i.e. PEPSI, THUMS UP and COCA COLA. The latter two belong to respondents,
hence the bottle of Cola colour on which word "Pappi" is written has to be
"PEPSI". Thirdly, the GLOBAL DEVICE and the colour scheme on that with the
word PAPPI is that of the appellant. Hence, it can safely be concluded that
the comparison in the commercial is with PEPSI. Now the question for
consideration is whether the commercial by depicting that the boy preferred
THUMS UP as against PEPSI because THUMS UP is strong drink while PEPSI is for
children as children like sweet, amounts to disparagement or it is only a
healthy competition and puffing the product of the respondents.
12\. What is disparagement. The New International Websters' Comprehensive
Dictionary defines disparage/disparagement to mean, "to speak of slightingly,
undervalue, to bring discredit or dishonor upon, the act of depreciating,
derogation, a condition of low estimation or valuation, a reproach, disgrace,
an unjust classing or comparison with that which is of less worth, and
degradation." The Concise Oxford Dictionary defines disparage as under, to
bring dis-credit on, slightingly of and depreciate."
13\. In the electronic media the disparaging message is conveyed to the viewer
by repeatedly showing the commercial everyday thereby ensuring that the
viewers get clear message as the said commercial leaves an indelible
impression in their mind. To decide the question of disparagement we have to
keep the following factors in mind namely; (1) Intent of commercial (ii)
Manner of the commercial (iii) Story line of the commercial and the message
sought to be conveyed by the commercial. Out of the above, "manner of the
commercial", is very important. If the manner is ridiculing or the condemning
product of the competitor then it amounts to disparaging but if the manner is
only to show one's product better or best without derogating other's product
then that is not actionable. Take for example the commercial which is at page
30 (Annexure A) filed with the plaint which describes "PEPSI" as a "Bachhon
Wali Drink" and the same is mocked at in the commercial and the message is
"that the kids who want to grow up should drink "Thums Up." The entire
commercial advertisement is shown to convey that the kids should prefer "Thums
Up" as against "PEPSI", which is sweet and meant for small children and not
grown up boys. The commercial shows that the lead actor asks a kid which is
his favorite drink. He mutters the word "PEPSI", which can be seen from his
lip movement though the same is muted. The lead actor thereafter asks the boy
to taste two drinks in two different bottles covered with lid and the question
asked by the lead actor is that "Bacchon Ko Konsi pasand aayegi".? After taste
the boy points out to one drink and says that that drink would be liked by the
children because it is sweet. In his words he says. "Who meethi hain, Bacchon
ko meethi cheese pasand hai". He discredited the drink one which according to
him has a sweet taste. He preferred the other drink which according to him
tastes strong and that grown up people would prefer the same. At that point,
the lead actor lifts the lid from both the bottles and the one which is said
to be strong taste reveals to be "Thums Up", and one which is sweet, word
"PAPPI" is written on the bottle with a globe device and the colour that of
the "PEPSI". Realizing that he had at the initial stage given his preference
for "PEPSI" and subsequently finding it to be a drink for kids, the boy felt
embarrassed. This embarrassment gesture he depicts by putting his hands on his
head.
14\. Second advertisement which appears at pages 35-45 (Annexure B) filed with
the plaint is another commercial advertisement in which the star actor asks
the audience. "Ek Sawaal do glass. Bacchoako konsi drink pasand aayegi?" As in
the first commercial, in this commercial also the drinks are covered and one
described as a sweet drink called "Bacchonwala" and the bottle comparing the
Globe Device and the mark "PAPPI". Like in the first advertisement, in this
also the boy covers his head with his arms and hands in the gesture of
embarrassment. Then there is another commercial advertisement at pages 46-50
and at page 51 as Annexures C and D of the plaint. These two commercial
advertisements are on the same line as the earlier one. The word "PEPSI" is
uttered in muted way. Similarly the globe device and the mark "PAPPI" is used
on the bottle. On the choice of the boy for Peppi i.e. Pepsi the lead actor
mockingly says, "Wrong Choice Baby". In these commercials the bottle which
resembles "PEPSI" and is referred to as "PAPPI" is termed as "Bacchon Wali".
"Thums Up" is referred to as "Bado Ke Liye and Damdar Hai". Pepsi is projected
to be a drink for kids, as it is "Sweet". These commercial through the
electronic media, Mr. Kapil Sibal, Sr. Advocate contended disparage the goods
of the appellant because by comparison, the respondents have tried to
denigrate the product of the appellant in the eye of the young audience.
Respondent projected Pepsi to be only a sweet drink hence of inferior quality.
Mr. Kapil Sibal, Sr. Advocate then contended that by competitive advertisement
the respondent could at best say that their Cola is better by giving reason
but they couldn't denigrate appellant's Cola by calling it a sweet drink meant
only for small children, and not meant for grown up. Hence, choice of the boy
for PEPSI was said to be wrong amounts to disparagement. These advertisements
by the respondents are not only made in mocking manner but in fact denigrate
the goods of the appellant when the lead actor said "Wrong choice baby", and
that the "Thums Up" is a right choice. The saying of the lead actor "Kyo Dil
Maange No More" in fact depict the product of the appellant in poor and
inferior form.
15\. Countering these arguments, Mr. Iqbal Chhagla, Senior Advocate contended
that the Cola War between the parties cann't be dragged to the court.
Comparative advertising is a facet of the "Cola War". The appellant even
through its commercials have attempted to parody the products and
advertisements of "Coca Cola". To support his contentions Mr. Chhagla relied
on the observation made by Lord Diplock in Erven Warnink B.V. and Anr. v. J.
Townend & Sons (Hull) Limited and Anr., 1980 RPC 31 where it is opined that
the economic battles should be confined to the market place. By granting the
injunction, Mr. Iqbal Chhagla, Sr. Advocate contended this Court would be
hampering healthy competition in the market. Rival claim of better product in
comparison to rival product can only be displayed in the market place. This is
nothing but puffing one's products which can give no cause of action to a
competitor. Moreover, courts are not the appropriate forum to resolve the
differences of opinion regarding quality of products of the parties. The
appellant has not come to the court with clean hands. Appellant in fact has
been indulging in the same advertisement war, therefore, is not entitled to
any equitable relief. The appellant has in fact been protected by the learned
Single Judge vide the impugned order thereby asking the respondent to furnish
undertaking that in case appellants succeed it can recover damages from the
respondents. Supreme Court in the case of Gujarat Bottling Co. Ltd. v. The
Coca Cola Co., has observed that while considering the grant of temporary
injunction the Court should beside other consideration, must also look to the
conduct of the party invoking the jurisdiction. That the conduct of the party
seeking the relief should be free from blame which in this case is not. Dr.
A.M. Singhvi, Sr. Advocate contended that calling a drink as "Bachhonwali"
i.e. meant for children cannot amount to denigrating the product of the
appellant. Calling it children's drink does not mean it is bad, harmful or
inferior drink. Therefore, to say it is children drink or it is sweet would
not amount to disparagement. It only conveys that "PAPPI" is sweet and sweet
things are not preferred by grown up. It is only meant to puffing the
respondents product.
16\. After analysing the submissions made by the counsel for the parties the
picture which emerges can be summed up thus; it is now a settled law that mere
puffing of goods is not actionable. Tradesman can say his goods are best or
better. But by comparison the tradesman cannot slander nor defame the goods of
the competitor nor can call it bad or inferior. It has been so held in the
following cases :
(i) Hindustan Lever v. Colgate Palmolive (I) Ltd., .
(ii) Reckitt & Colman of India Ltd. v. M.P. Ramchandran and Anr., 1999 PTC
(19) 741.
(iii) Reckitt & Colman of India v. Kiwi TTK Ltd., 1996 PTC (16) 393.
17\. By calling the Cola drink of the appellants "Yen Bacchon Wali Hai.
Bacchon Ko Yeh Pasand Aayegi", "Wrong Choice Baby", the respondents depicted
the commercial in a derogatory and mocking manner. It cann't be called puffing
up. Repeatedly telecasting this commercial will leave an impression on the
mind of the viewers that product of the appellant i.e. "PEPSI" is simply a
sweet thing not meant for grown up or growing children. If they choose PEPSI,
it would be a wrong choice. The message is that kids who want to grow should
not drink "PEPSI". They should grow up with "Thums Up". The manner in which
this message is conveyed does show disparagement of the appellant's product.
18\. In one of the commercial the lead actor appears on the screen and asks
two boys to come on the stage and point out their favorite drink. One of the
boy indicated his preference by mouthing of the word "PEPSI". He was asked by
the lead actor to taste the drink from both the bottles which were covered by
the glasses. After taking a sip from each of the bottle, that boy gave
preference of one over the other. When the reason for the preference was
asked, the boy tells that one of them is a sweet drink meant for children and
uses the word "Yen Meethi hein. Bachhon Ko Meethi Pasand Ahi" "Yen Bachhon
wall hei" (it is sweet, children like sweets. It is meant for children). The
moment it is said, the lid is lifted up by lead Actor from the bottles. The
drink which the boy says "Bachhon wali" meant for children, on that it is
written "PAPPI". The other bottle is of Thums Up. The comparison is in fact
between Pepsi and "Thums Up". It can be seen from the fact that the bottle
named as PAPPI is shown to certain Cola of Cola colour. The logo used in the
commercial on that bottle consists of circular device and red & blue colour
Along with the word PAPPI written underneath. That the respondent depicted the
bottle with the mark "PAPPI" and the global device on it is a clear
insinuation that the respondent is showing the product of the appellant i.e.
PEPSI meant for children only. Though the actor mouthed the word "PEPSI" in a
mute form yet from lip movement one can say he was uttering the word "PEPSI".
It is an admitted case of the parties that there are only three Colas having
Cola colour namely PEPSI, COCA COLA and THUMS UP, There is no other drink
having Coia colour. The bottle of "PAPPI" which the advertiser showed has Cola
colour, it is compared with "THUMS UP" which is owned by the respondents, who
are also the manufacturer of "COCA COLA". Therefore, it cannot be said that
the insinuation was against any other Cola other than "PEPSI COLA". The
description of the bottle though with the name of "PAPPI" fits to be that of
"PEPSI COLA". It cannot be said that the respondents were not comparing their
product "THUMS UP" with "PEPSI COLA". As said by Justice Barin Ghosh in the
case of Reckitt & Colman of India Ltd. (Supra) that one can boast about
technological superiority of his products and while doing so can also compare
the advantages of his product with those which are available in the market. He
can also boast about the relative advantages of his own product over the other
products available in the market. He can also say that the technology of the
products available in the market has become old or obsolete. He can further
add that the new technology available to him is far more superior to the known
technology, but he cannot say that the known technology is bad and harmful or
that the product made with the known technology is inferior. In the present
case while comparing "THUMS UP" with PAPPI i.e. PEPSI, the respondents have
tried to project to the customers that the appellants' product is not meant
for adults or for grown-up children. "Young and growing children would not
like PEPSI as it is sweet meant for children. Hence, of inferior quality. This
by no stretch of imagination can be called a mere comparison or boasting of
the superior technology of respondents. Rather this shows the product of the
appellants in poor state and of inferior quality. No doubt by saying that it
is a drink meant for children as such may not denigrate appellants' product
but the manner in which the boy felt embarrassed when he is told that the
drink for which he gave preference was not meant for grown up and strong
children depicts the product of the appellant in low estimation and of less
worth. It is nothing but denigrating the product of the appellants. The
expression on the face of the boy indicates that being grown up he must not
have given preference for PEPSI. The manner in which the commercial is shown
and the way the actor puts his hands on his head feeling embarrassed is
nothing but disparaging the products of the appellant. To say that a
particular drink is "Bachhon Wali Drink" is one thing but to redicule the
preference for Pepsi by action showing the boy feeling embarrassed after
knowing his preference conveys a very serious message particularly when the
lead actor says "wrong choice baby". This is a clear indication that the
product of the appellants is inferior. The observation of the learned Single
Judge that this comparison whereby Thums Up has been stated to be a drink for
grown up is poking fun, to our mind, is not a proper appreciation of the
commercial. Puffing does not mean one should denigrate the product of the
competitor.
19\. Admittedly puffing one's product by comparing others' goods and saying
his goods are better is not an actionable claim but when puffing or poking fun
amount to denigrate the goods of the competitor, it is actionable. Calcutta
High Court in the case of Reckitt & Colman of India Ltd. v. M.P. Ramchandran
and Anr. 1999 PTC (19) 741 while dealing with the question of disparagement,
laid down the principles which the court should look into while granting the
injunction. One of the principles is that the Court has to look at whether the
advertisement or the commercial, as the case may be, merely puff the product
of the advertiser or in the garb of doing so directly or indirectly contends
that the product of the other trader is inferior. In the present case in the
garb of puffing up its product i.e. "Thums Up" prima facie respondents have
tried to depict the product of the appellant as inferior.
20\. On the other hand, contentions of the counsel for the respondents that
merely calling PEPSI COLA a sweet drink or "bacchon wala hein" by itself does
not in any way indicate that respondent hinted appellant's product as
inferior. The products which are liked by children do not become inferior or
harmful nor by saying so respondents denigrated or disparaged the product of
the appellant.
21\. There is no doubt that comparison is permissible so long it does not
undervalue the product of the rival. In the commercials shown by respondent
and as quoted above children are made to understand that young people don't
drink sweet Cola. It is not an indication of superiority in technology of
respondent's drink but showing inferior quality of the appellant's product as
if "PEPSI COLA" is not liked by the young people or that it is meant only for
children, therefore, the choice of the Boy for Pepsi is said to be a wrong
choice. By projecting so the respondent through the lead actor conveys in a
sophisticated way that the product of the appellant is rubbish.
22\. The court in the case of Reckitt & Colman of India v. Kiwi TTK LTD., 1996
PTC (16) 393 while applying the principles laid down in the earlier case of
Reckitt & Colman of India v. M.P. Ramachandran and Anr. (Supra) held that the
comparative advertising is permissible, however, a promoter of product is not
entitled to defame the goods of its competitor. It is opined that "the Courts
will injunct the defendant from publishing or circulating an article if the
dominant purpose is to injure the reputation of the plaintiff." In the present
case Mr. Kabil Sibal, Sr. Advocate's contention that the intention of the
respondents is to show to the public at large through the electronic media
that appellants' product i.e. "PEPSI COLA" has a limited appeal and that too
among the children, it amounts to disparaging the "PEPSI COLA". The way the
lead actor after seeing the expression of the boy say "wrong choice baby"
speaks slightingly of the product of the appellant. The strict liability
status Mr. Kapil Sibal contended comes into play if there is infringement of
appellant's right as in this case the appellants have been able to establish
the legal right which has been infringed, therefore, there is no question of
going to the market place for fighting the commercial war as suggested by
respondents. Dr. AM. Singhvi's contention that the conduct of the appellant is
such which would dis-entitle it to any discretionary relief or that the
appellant has not come to the court with clean hands. The war of advertisement
against each other's products is going on but that does not entitle the
respondents to contend nor can be permitted to plead the past conduct as a
good defense to denigrate the product of the appellant nor the market place is
a suitable substitute for injunction.
23\. The next question for consideration is about infringement of copy right
and literary work of the appellant namely the phrase "Yen Dil Maange More".
According to appellants the ownership and copyright of the slogan "Yeh Dil
Maange More" vest with them. Appellants got the copyright of this slogan
registered in July, 1999. It attained distinctive character. This work has
been exclusively associated with the appellant and has a connection with the
product of the appellant. It is fully evocative of appellant's work and
business. To support his contentions, Mr. Kapil Sibal relied on following
decisions (i) State of A.P. v. Nagoti Venkataraman, : 1996 (16) PTC 634 (SC);
(ii) MacMillan & Co. Ltd. v. K & J Cooper, 1924 PC 75 : (iii) Dr. Pepper & Co.
v. Sambo's Restaurants, 517 F. Supp. 1202; (iv) Kleier Advertising Agency v.
Premier Pontiac 2 USPQ 2 d 1152; (v) McCarthy on Trade Mark & Unfair
Competition, 3rd Edition 6-38 to 6-38.1.
24\. Relying on these decisions Mr. Kapil Sibal contended that even a portion
of a song which is a part of the copyright work is also protected as a
literary work. Relying on Nimmer on Copyright Vol-1 1996 para 2.05p. Mr. Kapil
Sibal contended that the slogan "Yeh Dil Maange More" is a literary work hence
copy right able. The finding of the learned Single Judge that there is no
copyright in "Yeh Dil Maange More" would mean that no company can exercise its
rights on tests advertising theme. Hence, finding of the learned Single Judge
are not only contrary to the statutory rights of the appellants but also
against the provisions of Copyright Act. The advertising catch phrases are
entitled to copyright protection. It is the original work of the appellant
and, therefore, protect the advertising theme of the same. To popularise this
copyright work i.e. "Yeh Dil Maange More" the appellant has spent enormous
amount on this advertising theme. "Yeh Dil Maange More" is a successful theme
in India of the appellant. The judgments relied by respondent namely Sinanida
v. La Maison Kosmeo, 139 The Law Times 365; and Kirk v. J & R Fleming Limited,
1929 Ch. D. 44 are distinguishable on facts. In the case of Sinanida (Supra)
plaintiff had copied already existing slogan, hence it was held that it was
not original literary work of the plaintiff. Court further held that when
"slogan" consists of an original composition in four lines of verse, in which
there may be copyright, and the same may be said of an original composition in
prose. In the case of Kirk (Supra) relying Sinanida's case Court observed that
when a sentence is proved to have been in common use then it is not
copyrightable nor can be protected. These cases are distinguishable because
the slogan of the appellant is not a common place phrase. It is original
combination of words from two different languages thereby conveying the theme
of the advertising. It has acquired distinctiveness and association with the
product of the appellant.
25\. Similarly the GLOBE DEVICE is a registered trade mark of the appellant.
By showing GLOBE DEVICE of the colour scheme on the bottle on which word
"PAPPI" is written and then saying "Yeh Dil Maange No More". Mr. Kapil Sibal
said such use of a registered trade mark in comparative advertising
constitutes infringement of registered trade mark in terms of Section 29(1) of
the Trade and Merchandise Marks Act, 1958. The effect of permitting the use of
the Globe Device which is a registered trade mark of "PEPSI" to any other
manufacturer for its product or for comparison would take away the statutory
rights of the appellants. Non protection against such infringement would lead
to drastic consequences and would be contrary to the basic tenets of Copyright
Law which have repeatedly been affirmed by the highest court of this country.
26\. Countering these arguments Mr. Iqbal Chhagla said that registration of
copyright does not create any statutory right. It only show existence of
copyright and nothing more. Copyright can be rebutted and challenged. To
support this contention he placed reliance on the following decisions (i)
Satsang and Anr. v. Kiron Chandra, ; (ii) Manojab Cine Productions v. A.
Sundaresan, AIR 1976 Madras 22; (iii) Nav Sahitya Prakash and Ors. v. Anand
Kumar and Ors., ; (iv) Camlin (P) Ltd. v. National Pencil Industries, 2nd 1985
(II) Delhi 813 : 1986 (6) PTC 1 (Del). Moreover, stringing together of various
common place words cannot be the subject matter of copyright. The definition
of literary work in Section 2(o) of the copyright entails that a literary work
has to be unique or original and not merely formation of some ordinary words
into a phrase. For this argument he placed reliance on the decision in the
case of Glaxo Operations U.K. Ltd. Middlesex (England) v. Samrat
Pharmaceutical Ltd., Kanpur, .
27\. The infringement of trade mark under Section 29(1) of the Act of 1958 in
India is not based on the law in England as provided under Section 4(1)(b) of
the 1938 Act. The 1938 Act changed the law in England to constitute the use of
a trade mark of a rival trader for the purpose of comparison as infringement
as held in Bismag Ltd. v. Amblins (Chemists) Ltd., [1940] 2 ALL E.R. 608. The
law recognised in India under the Act of 1958 is as laid down in Irving's
Yeast Vite Ltd. v. FA Horse-nail, (1934) 51 RPC 110 and not as laid down in
bids mag's case (Supra). Section 29 of the Act of 1958 has omitted the
provision of Clause (b) Section 21 of the 1940 Act which in turn was based on
Section 4(1)(b) of the 1938 Act in England. Hence in view of the law laid down
in India comparative advertising is permissible and the infringement occurs
only when the registered mark is used by the rival for the purpose of
indicating the origin of the goods as being his.
28\. From the analysis of the arguments advanced by the counsel for the
parties it becomes clear that in terms of Section 29(1) of the Act
infringement would occur if appellant's mark had been used in the course of
trade. Section 29(1) of the Act which is reproduced as under requires the
usage in the course of trade of a mark which is identical with or deceptively
similar to the trade mark of the appellant.
"29. Infringement of registered trade marks -
(1) A registered trade mark is infringed by a person who, not being a
registered proprietor or a person using by way of permitted use, uses in the
course of trade, a mark which is identical with, or deceptively similar to,
the trade mark in relation to goods or services in respect of which the trade
mark is registered and in such manner as to render the use of the mark likely
to be taken as being used as a trade mark."
29\. Usage should be in relation to the goods of the appellant and in such a
manner rendering the use of mark likely to be taken as being used as a trade
mark by the respondent. That is not even the case of the appellant. It is
nowhere alleged by the appellant that respondents have used the globe device
of the appellants for its products nor passed on its products under the Trade
Mark or globe device of the appellant. We find force in the submission of Mr.
Iqbal Chhagla that the impugned advertisement neither uses the trade mark of
the appellants in the course of trade nor in any manner suggest the connection
of appellants trade mark with respondent's goods. Moreover comparative
advertising is permissible as held by this Court in Reckitt & Coleman v. Kiwi
TTK Ltd. (Supra) subject to the rider that it does not denigrate the product
of the appellant. Therefore, the contention of the appellant that the use of
its trade mark for comparative advertising is ipso facto infringement of the
appellants trade mark prima facie has no substance. In support reliance can be
placed on the following decisions; (i) Kaviraj Pandit Durga Dutt Sharma v.
Navratan Pharmaceutical Laboratories, : (ii) Ruston and Hornby Ltd. v.
Zamindara Engineering Co. ; (iii) Cadila Health Care Ltd. v. Cadila
Pharmaceuticals Ltd., decided on 8th November, 2000. If a trader compares his
goods with the goods of a rival without in any way advertising that the trade
mark is used in relation to his goods, there is prima facie no infringement.
Even otherwise this is only a prima facie view and if ultimately after trial
court comes to any other view then the appellants can be compensated as
rightly observed by the learned Single Judge. Similarly use of the phrase in
the commercial advertisement "Yen Dil Maange No More" can at best be mocking
or parodying in the context it is used but does not amount to infringement of
trademark of the appellant. Respondent did not use the slogan of the appellant
for its products. Hence on this court also we find no ground to interfere with
the order of the learned Single Judge.
30\. Turning to the submission of the appellant on roller coaster commercial
having been copied by the respondent and amounting to infringing the
copyright, in order to appreciate the same, we may have a glance to the
provision of Section 14 of the Copyright Act, which is reproduced as under :-
"14. Meaning of the copyright For the purpose of this Act, "copyright" means
the exclusive right subject to the provisions of this Act, to do or authorise
the doing of any of the following acts in respect of a work or any substantial
part thereof, namely:-
(a)...
(b)...
(c) ...
(d) In case of a cinematograph film,-
(i) to make a copy of the film including a photograph of any image forming
part thereof;
(ii) to sell or give on hire or offer for sale or hire, any copy of the film,
regardless of whether such copy has been sold or given on hire on earlier
occasions;
(iii) to communicate the film to the public...."
31\. Mr. Kapil Sibal basing his submission on Section 14 contended that the
copy can either be of the whole work or of substantial part of the work. In
this commercial i.e. of roller coaster, the respondents have completely copied
essential elements of the appellant's advertisement. The entire theme of the
advertisement is identical and even the sequence of events are identical. The
copying of the elements of the appellant's cinematographic film by the
respondent in their commercial constitutes infringement. To support his
contention he placed reliance on the decision of Supreme Court in the case of
R.G. Anand v. Deluxe Film, wherein the Apex Court observed that;
"Thus, the fundamental fact which has to be determined where a charge of
violation of the copyright is made by the plaintiff against the defendant is
to determine whether or not the defendant not only adopted the idea of the
copyrighted work but has also adopted the manner, arrangement, situation to
situation, scene to scene with minor changes or super-additions or
embellishment here and there. Indeed, if on a perusal of the copyrighted work
the defendant's work appear to be a transport rephrasing or a copy of a
substantial and material part of the original, the charge of palagiarism must
stand proved..."
32\. Mr. Kapil Sibal contended that the respondents are misconstruing the
provisions of Section 14 of the Copyright Act to justify their conduct. They
cannot be allowed to take shelter to justify their unjustifiable conduct. To
support his contentions he placed reliance on the decision in the case of AGL
Sydney v. Shortline Country Council, 17 IPR 199, which according to him is on
all fours applicable to the facts of this case. Since the substantial portion
of the commercial of the appellant was copied and communicated to the public
by the respondent barring the last portion, it amounts to infringement. That
the Roller Coaster commercial is a cinematograph film as defined in Section
2(f) of the Copyright Act hence the use of all the elements of the appellant's
commercial for promoting their product violates and infringes the copyright of
the appellant under Sections 51 & 52(A) of the Act. Mr. Sibal further
contended that use of the appellant's commercial cannot constitute "fair use"
nor can it be called parody on appellant's commercial. For this purpose he
placed reliance on the following cases; (i) C. Cunniah & Co. v. Balraj & Co.,
AIR 1961 Madras 111, (ii) AGL Sydney v. Shortline Country Council, 17 IPR 199,
(iii) R & C Products PTY Ltd. v. S.C. Johnson & Sons, 26 IPR 98. In all these
cases it was observed that if the advertisement or get-up has acquired a
special signification then the adoption of elements of that advertisement or
get up by other trade may give rise to a misrepresentation and hence
injunction should be granted. It was further observed that in deciding whether
defendant's work was taken from plaintiff's work there need not be an exact
reproduction to support the inference that the defendant's work was taken from
the plaintiff's work. A copy is that which comes so near to the original as to
suggest the original to the mind of every person seeing it. Therefore, Mr.
Kapil Sibal contended that in campaigning the commercial of roller coaster the
appellants spent lot of money and it has acquired a special significance and
has been associated with the product of the appellant. That life of a campaign
or commercial is shell life. It lasts hardly for an year or so. Hence if the
interim injunction is not granted against the use of the commercial by the
respondents, it will have far reaching consequences. The purpose for which the
campaign was launched by the appellant will get defeated and lost. Copying of
the entire theme of the advertisement cannot be called competitive
advertisement. The loss which appellant will suffer cannot be adequately
compensated by money.
34\. Countering these arguments Mr. Iqbal Chhagla contended that Section 14 of
the Act envisages that copying of the cinematographic film must be identical
in all respects and since the roller coaster commercial of the respondents is
not a copy of the advertisement of the appellant, therefore, the provisions of
Section 14 of the Act are not applicable to the facts of this case.
35\. We were shown the commercial of roller coaster during the proceedings by
both parties. By seeing the same an impression which one gathers is that
roller coaster of the respondent is a copy of the theme of the roller coaster
of the appellant. The roller coaster commercial of the appellant is an
original work of the appellant, therefore, covered under Section 14 of the
Act. Not only the presence of roller coaster is replica of the appellant's
commercial but even the dress of the boys is also similar. Relying on the
observation of Apex Court in the case of R.G. Anand v. Delux Films, it can
prima facie be concluded that the roller coaster commercial of the respondent
is nothing but a literal imitation of the copyright work of the appellant with
some variations here and there. Having said so we would be failing in our duty
by not restraining the respondents from showing its roller coaster commercial
in the present form.
From the above analysis, we partly accept the appeal and restrain the
respondent only in respect of showing the commercials annexed with the plaint
as Annexures-A, B, C and D and also the commercial of roller coaster in the
present form. Only prima facie view has been expressed, therefore, any
observation made hereinabove will have no bearing on the merits of the case.
not a copy of the advertisement of the appellant, therefore, the provisions of
Section 14 of the Act are not applicable to the facts of this case.
35\. We were shown the commercial of roller coaster during the proceedings by
both parties. By seeing the same an impression which one gathers is that
roller coaster of the respondent is a copy of the theme of the roller coaster
of the appellant. The roller coaster commercial of the appellant is an
original work of the appellant, therefore, covered under Section 14 of the
Act. Not only the presence of roller coaster is replica of the appellant's
commercial but even the dress of the boys is also similar. Relying on the
observation of Apex Court in the case of R.G. Anand v. Delux Films, it can
prima facie be concluded that the roller coaster commercial of the respondent
is nothing but a literal imitation of the copyright work of the appellant with
some variations here and there. Having said so we would be failing in our duty
by not restraining the respondents from showing its roller coaster commercial
in the present form.
From the above analysis, we partly accept the appeal and restrain the
relating to the approximation of the laws, regulations and administrative
provisions of the Member States concerning misleading advertising where the
Council of the European Communities having regard to the Treaty establishing
the European Economic Community, and in particular Article 100 thereof while
taking into consideration the effect of misleading advertisement which reaches
beyond the frontiers of individual Member States, adopted the directives in
the form of Articles. Article 3(a) deals with Comparative advertising which
shall, as far as the comparison is concerned, be permitted if the following
conditions are met:
"(a) it is not misleading according to Articles 2(2), 3 and 7(1).
(b) it compares goods or services meeting the same needs or intended for the
same purpose;
(c) it objectively compares one or more material, relevant, verifiable and
representative features of those goods and services, which may include price;
(d) it does not create confusion in the market place between the advertiser
and a competitor or between the advertiser's trade marks, trade names, other
distinguishing marks, goods or services and those of a competitor;
(e) it does not discredit or denigrate the trade marks, trade names, other
distinguishing marks, goods, services, activities, or circumstances of a
competitor;
not a copy of the advertisement of the appellant, therefore, the provisions of
Section 14 of the Act are not applicable to the facts of this case.
35\. We were shown the commercial of roller coaster during the proceedings by
both parties. By seeing the same an impression which one gathers is that
roller coaster of the respondent is a copy of the theme of the roller coaster
of the appellant. The roller coaster commercial of the appellant is an
original work of the appellant, therefore, covered under Section 14 of the
Act. Not only the presence of roller coaster is replica of the appellant's
commercial but even the dress of the boys is also similar. Relying on the
observation of Apex Court in the case of R.G. Anand v. Delux Films, it can
prima facie be concluded that the roller coaster commercial of the respondent
is nothing but a literal imitation of the copyright work of the appellant with
some variations here and there. Having said so we would be failing in our duty
by not restraining the respondents from showing its roller coaster commercial
in the present form.
From the above analysis, we partly accept the appeal and restrain the
relating to the approximation of the laws, regulations and administrative
provisions of the Member States concerning misleading advertising where the
Council of the European Communities having regard to the Treaty establishing
the European Economic Community, and in particular Article 100 thereof while
taking into consideration the effect of misleading advertisement which reaches
beyond the frontiers of individual Member States, adopted the directives in
the form of Articles. Article 3(a) deals with Comparative advertising which
shall, as far as the comparison is concerned, be permitted if the following
conditions are met:
"(a) it is not misleading according to Articles 2(2), 3 and 7(1).
(b) it compares goods or services meeting the same needs or intended for the
same purpose;
(c) it objectively compares one or more material, relevant, verifiable and
representative features of those goods and services, which may include price;
(d) it does not create confusion in the market place between the advertiser
and a competitor or between the advertiser's trade marks, trade names, other
distinguishing marks, goods or services and those of a competitor;
(e) it does not discredit or denigrate the trade marks, trade names, other
distinguishing marks, goods, services, activities, or circumstances of a
competitor;
not a copy of the advertisement of the appellant, therefore, the provisions of
Section 14 of the Act are not applicable to the facts of this case.
35\. We were shown the commercial of roller coaster during the proceedings by
both parties. By seeing the same an impression which one gathers is that
roller coaster of the respondent is a copy of the theme of the roller coaster
of the appellant. The roller coaster commercial of the appellant is an
original work of the appellant, therefore, covered under Section 14 of the
Act. Not only the presence of roller coaster is replica of the appellant's
commercial but even the dress of the boys is also similar. Relying on the
observation of Apex Court in the case of R.G. Anand v. Delux Films, it can
prima facie be concluded that the roller coaster commercial of the respondent
is nothing but a literal imitation of the copyright work of the appellant with
some variations here and there. Having said so we would be failing in our duty
by not restraining the respondents from showing its roller coaster commercial
in the present form.
From the above analysis, we partly accept the appeal and restrain the
relating to the approximation of the laws, regulations and administrative
provisions of the Member States concerning misleading advertising where the
Council of the European Communities having regard to the Treaty establishing
the European Economic Community, and in particular Article 100 thereof while
taking into consideration the effect of misleading advertisement which reaches
beyond the frontiers of individual Member States, adopted the directives in
the form of Articles. Article 3(a) deals with Comparative advertising which
shall, as far as the comparison is concerned, be permitted if the following
conditions are met:
"(a) it is not misleading according to Articles 2(2), 3 and 7(1).
(b) it compares goods or services meeting the same needs or intended for the
same purpose;
(c) it objectively compares one or more material, relevant, verifiable and
representative features of those goods and services, which may include price;
(d) it does not create confusion in the market place between the advertiser
and a competitor or between the advertiser's trade marks, trade names, other
distinguishing marks, goods or services and those of a competitor;
(e) it does not discredit or denigrate the trade marks, trade names, other
distinguishing marks, goods, services, activities, or circumstances of a
competitor;
(f) for products with designation of origin, it relates in each case to
products with the same designation;
(g) it does not take unfair advantage of the reputation of a trade mark, trade
name or other distinguishing marks of a competitor of the designation of
origin of competing products;
(h) it does not present goods or services as imitations or replicas of goods
or services bearing a protected trade mark or trade name."
3\. The reading of the above would show that comparative advertising cannot be
permitted which discredits or denigrates the trade mark or trade name of the
competitor. Therefore, while analysing the respective arguments of the parties
we have to keep all these factors in mind. We have to see whether in the
not a copy of the advertisement of the appellant, therefore, the provisions of
Section 14 of the Act are not applicable to the facts of this case.
35\. We were shown the commercial of roller coaster during the proceedings by
both parties. By seeing the same an impression which one gathers is that
roller coaster of the respondent is a copy of the theme of the roller coaster
of the appellant. The roller coaster commercial of the appellant is an
original work of the appellant, therefore, covered under Section 14 of the
Act. Not only the presence of roller coaster is replica of the appellant's
commercial but even the dress of the boys is also similar. Relying on the
observation of Apex Court in the case of R.G. Anand v. Delux Films, it can
prima facie be concluded that the roller coaster commercial of the respondent
is nothing but a literal imitation of the copyright work of the appellant with
some variations here and there. Having said so we would be failing in our duty
by not restraining the respondents from showing its roller coaster commercial
in the present form.
From the above analysis, we partly accept the appeal and restrain the
relating to the approximation of the laws, regulations and administrative
provisions of the Member States concerning misleading advertising where the
Council of the European Communities having regard to the Treaty establishing
the European Economic Community, and in particular Article 100 thereof while
taking into consideration the effect of misleading advertisement which reaches
beyond the frontiers of individual Member States, adopted the directives in
the form of Articles. Article 3(a) deals with Comparative advertising which
shall, as far as the comparison is concerned, be permitted if the following
conditions are met:
"(a) it is not misleading according to Articles 2(2), 3 and 7(1).
(b) it compares goods or services meeting the same needs or intended for the
same purpose;
(c) it objectively compares one or more material, relevant, verifiable and
representative features of those goods and services, which may include price;
(d) it does not create confusion in the market place between the advertiser
and a competitor or between the advertiser's trade marks, trade names, other
distinguishing marks, goods or services and those of a competitor;
(e) it does not discredit or denigrate the trade marks, trade names, other
distinguishing marks, goods, services, activities, or circumstances of a
competitor;
(f) for products with designation of origin, it relates in each case to
products with the same designation;
(g) it does not take unfair advantage of the reputation of a trade mark, trade
name or other distinguishing marks of a competitor of the designation of
origin of competing products;
(h) it does not present goods or services as imitations or replicas of goods
or services bearing a protected trade mark or trade name."
3\. The reading of the above would show that comparative advertising cannot be
permitted which discredits or denigrates the trade mark or trade name of the
competitor. Therefore, while analysing the respective arguments of the parties
we have to keep all these factors in mind. We have to see whether in the
not a copy of the advertisement of the appellant, therefore, the provisions of
Section 14 of the Act are not applicable to the facts of this case.
35\. We were shown the commercial of roller coaster during the proceedings by
both parties. By seeing the same an impression which one gathers is that
roller coaster of the respondent is a copy of the theme of the roller coaster
of the appellant. The roller coaster commercial of the appellant is an
original work of the appellant, therefore, covered under Section 14 of the
Act. Not only the presence of roller coaster is replica of the appellant's
commercial but even the dress of the boys is also similar. Relying on the
observation of Apex Court in the case of R.G. Anand v. Delux Films, it can
prima facie be concluded that the roller coaster commercial of the respondent
is nothing but a literal imitation of the copyright work of the appellant with
some variations here and there. Having said so we would be failing in our duty
by not restraining the respondents from showing its roller coaster commercial
in the present form.
From the above analysis, we partly accept the appeal and restrain the
