Allahabad High Court
Amarnath Yadav vs State Of U.P. And Another on 28 May, 2019
Bench: Karuna Nand Bajpayee
    HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD
    ?A.F.R. 
    Court No. - 65
    Case :- APPLICATION U/S 482 No. - 20347 of 2019
    Applicant :- Amarnath Yadav
    Opposite Party :- State Of U.P. And Another
    Counsel for Applicant :- Harish Chandra Shukla,Arvind Kumar Rai
    Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.
    Hon'ble Karuna Nand Bajpayee,J.
This application u/s 482 of Cr.P.C. has been moved seeking the quashing of
impugned order dated 29.11.2018 passed by the Principal Judge, Family Court,
Azamgarh in Case No.787 of 2016 (Smt. Shashikala Yadav vs. Amarnath Yadav) u/s
125 of Cr.P.C., Police Station-Tahbarpur, District-Azamgarh, whereby Rs.1500/-
per month has been awarded to the wife- opposite party no.2 as interim
maintenance.
Heard learned counsel for the applicant.
Submission of learned counsel for the applicant is that the allegedly
sought to show from the impugned order that the factum of the earlier relief
which the wife is already receiving under Section-24 of the Hindu Marriage Act
was never considered by the court below (while fixing the interim maintenance
amount in the proceedings u/s 125 of Criminal Procedure Code) seems to have
substance. The perusal of the impugned order shows that this aspect of the
matter was either never brought to the notice of the court on behalf of
applicant or his counsel or was at any rate never considered by the court
concerned. This Court does not propose to take it upon itself to consider
these aspects and enter into those factual details but leaves it open for the
applicant to move an application before the concerned court below and bring
the aforesaid fact to the notice of the court and seek a relook of the court
concerned to all these aspects of the matter. The applicant shall have the
liberty to move a proper application before the court concerned and bring the
necessary relevant facts in this regard to its notice and if any such
application is moved before the court below, then the court below shall look
into same and would pass appropriate orders as it may deem fit in accordance
Submission of learned counsel for the applicant is that the allegedly
neglected wife has already availed remedy under Section 24 of the Hindu
Marriage Act and she is already getting Rs.2,000/- per month as interim
maintenance amount. In that view of the matter, the fixation of the interim
maintenance amount in the present proceedings, which are going on under
Section 125 Cr.P.C., is bad in the eyes of law. In this regard reference was
given by the counsel to the case of Patna Improvement Trust vs. Lakshmi Devi,
1963 AIR (SC) 1077. It has also been submitted by the counsel that the factum
of the relief which has already been granted under Section 24 of the Hindu
Marriage Act was never considered by the court below while fixing the amount
of interim maintenance in the present case.
Heard learned A.G.A. and perused the record.
So far as the case law relied upon by the counsel for the applicant is
concerned, attention of the Court was specifically drawn to the observation
made by the Supreme Court in Para-12 of the aforesaid case Patna Improvement
Trust vs. Lakshmi Devi, 1963 AIR (SC) 1077 and on the basis of the same it was
sought to be argued by the counsel for the applicant that the general law must
yield place to the specific law and therefore if the wife was getting her
maintenance amount under the Hindu Marriage Act, she would forfeit her right
to get any maintenance under the provisions of Section 125 of the Criminal
Procedure Code. It shall be appropriate at this stage to quote para-12 of
aforesaid judgement which reads as follows :
"12.The law on the subject is very well settled and, in my view, the learned
judges of the High Court have correctly appreciated it and applied it to the
facts of the case. Two principles noticed by the High Court are apposite. The
first principle is generalia specialibus non derogant. This principle is
exemplified by the decision of the Privy Council in Secretary of State v.
Hindustan Co-operative Insurance Society Ltd. (1). The second principle is
that if a statute directs a thing be done in a certain wax that thing shall
not, even if there be no negative words,, be done in-any other way. This
principle is illustrated by the decision in Ex parte Stephens (2). A combined
effect of the said two principles may be stated thus : a general Act must
yield to a special Act dealing with a specific subject- matter and that if an
Act directs a thing to be done in a particular way, it shall be deemed to have
prohibited the doing of that thing in any other way. Under the Act, the Trust
is authorized to implement the improvement schemes in a particular way and for
the purposes of implementing them to acquire land in a prescribed manner. If
that be so, the Trust is bound to implement the scheme in the manner
prescribed and cannot resort to any other method, that is to say it can
acquire land for trust purposes only by resorting to the provisions of the
Land Acquisition Land as modified and incorporated by reference in the Act."
So far as the observations of the Apex Court made in aforesaid paragraph is
concerned, this Court finds it difficult to bring them into application in the
facts and circumstances of this case. The propositions of law as have been
referred to and observed by the Hon'ble Apex court are with regard to the
situations where there is some general law and then some specific law with
regard to the same has been enacted. It is difficult to accept the contention
of the counsel that Section-24 of the Hindu Marriage Act is a special law
while Section 125 of the Criminal Procedure Code should be described as a
general law. The provisions of Section 125 of the Criminal Procedure Code and
other related provisions in that regard are basically meant to provide succour
to the neglected wives, children and others who otherwise have a right to be
maintained by the husband or the father etc. The provisions to provide interim
maintenance are also basically meant to avert the eventuality of destitution
and vagrancy, in which otherwise a neglected party is likely to be driven. A
similar kind of beneficial provision may be found in more than one
legislations. Unless it is provided specifically by the statute it is
difficult to accept the contention of the counsel that two beneficial
legislations claiming to provide a similar kind of relief should be deemed to
be mutually exclusive to each other and only one should be allowed to be
availed. Contention of the counsel also appears to be not very sound when he
seeks to contend that if interim maintenance under Section 24 of the Hindu
Marriage Act has already been availed then the jurisdiction of the court
undertaking the proceedings under Section 125 of the Criminal procedure Code
should stand ousted. In the considered opinion of this Court both the
provisions, as they have been provided by the legislation, must be allowed to
co-exist for the simple reason that the legislation in its wisdom has not laid
down any such rule or provision of exclusion. The maximum that can be said
with some degree of reasonableness in this context is that if a particular
relief has already been granted to a party then while deciding upon the
question of granting another relief contemplated under a different
legislation, the court must keep in perspective the earlier relief which is
already being availed by a particular party. The two similar beneficial
statutes should be treated as complementary to each other and one should be
read in addition to other and not in derogation of the same. If an interim
relief can be granted under two legislations then it will be certainly in the
fitness of things to keep the earlier relief already granted to a particular
party in perspective and the amount of compensation or expenses or the
maintenance amount etc. should not be fixed in ignorance of the earlier orders
by way of which similar reliefs have been conferred upon a party. In the
present matter it has been made to appear that under the provisions of Section
24 of the Hindu Marriage Act Rs.2,000/- per month were fixed by the court
dealing with that matter. Subsequently in the proceedings which were
undertaken under Section 125 of Criminal procedure Code an amount of Rs.1500/-
as interim maintenance has further been fixed by the court below. This Court
while exercising its inherent jurisdiction aims not only to see that the
process of the court below should not be abused, it also makes it a point to
see that the ends of justice are also met with. In that view of the matter
this Court does in appropriate cases take into account the quantum of amounts
that might have been fixed by the two courts under two legislations. It is
quite possible that if sufficient amount of interim maintenance has already
been provided by a particular court under a particular legislation then the
subsequent similar relief under a different legislation may be treated to be
excessive and may be seen as something which is likely to cause excessive
hardship to the other side and this Court in that situation may proceed to
mitigate, extenuate, lessen or in a given case even put an end to the
subsequent relief in order to meet the ends of justice. But there may be cases
where the aggregate of amounts that have been fixed as interim measure under
the scheme of two legislations may be so meagre that this Court may not
proceed to disturb either of them. It all depends upon the facts and
circumstances of each case. When we advert to the facts of the present case it
is found that the allegations that have been made by the wife are about the
cruel treatment which was meted out to her. The allegations of demand of dowry
are also there. According to the allegations the wife was leading miserable
life and at some stage of her disgruntled matrimonial life she was ousted from
her matrimonial home and was living a life of utter neglect at the hands of
her husband. In a situation like this if Rs.1500/- have been fixed as an
interim maintenance amount in the subsequent proceedings u/s 125 of Criminal
Procedure Code, prima facie the same cannot be said to be either excessive or
disproportionate. But these observations of this Court are not being given as
a final finding on the point. This is actually for the court below to see all
these aspects and come to its own conclusion. So far as the other limb of the
argument raised by the counsel for the applicant is concerned, whereby he has
sought to show from the impugned order that the factum of the earlier relief
which the wife is already receiving under Section-24 of the Hindu Marriage Act
was never considered by the court below (while fixing the interim maintenance
amount in the proceedings u/s 125 of Criminal Procedure Code) seems to have
substance. The perusal of the impugned order shows that this aspect of the
matter was either never brought to the notice of the court on behalf of
applicant or his counsel or was at any rate never considered by the court
concerned. This Court does not propose to take it upon itself to consider
these aspects and enter into those factual details but leaves it open for the
applicant to move an application before the concerned court below and bring
the aforesaid fact to the notice of the court and seek a relook of the court
concerned to all these aspects of the matter. The applicant shall have the
liberty to move a proper application before the court concerned and bring the
necessary relevant facts in this regard to its notice and if any such
application is moved before the court below, then the court below shall look
into same and would pass appropriate orders as it may deem fit in accordance
with law and would have the liberty to amend the amount of interim
maintenance, if it deems it proper to do so.
With the aforesaid observations this application stands disposed off.
Order Date :- 28.5.2019 M. Kumar/CPP
sought to show from the impugned order that the factum of the earlier relief
which the wife is already receiving under Section-24 of the Hindu Marriage Act
was never considered by the court below (while fixing the interim maintenance
amount in the proceedings u/s 125 of Criminal Procedure Code) seems to have
substance. The perusal of the impugned order shows that this aspect of the
matter was either never brought to the notice of the court on behalf of
applicant or his counsel or was at any rate never considered by the court
concerned. This Court does not propose to take it upon itself to consider
these aspects and enter into those factual details but leaves it open for the
applicant to move an application before the concerned court below and bring
the aforesaid fact to the notice of the court and seek a relook of the court
concerned to all these aspects of the matter. The applicant shall have the
liberty to move a proper application before the court concerned and bring the
necessary relevant facts in this regard to its notice and if any such
application is moved before the court below, then the court below shall look
into same and would pass appropriate orders as it may deem fit in accordance
Submission of learned counsel for the applicant is that the allegedly
neglected wife has already availed remedy under Section 24 of the Hindu
Marriage Act and she is already getting Rs.2,000/- per month as interim
maintenance amount. In that view of the matter, the fixation of the interim
maintenance amount in the present proceedings, which are going on under
Section 125 Cr.P.C., is bad in the eyes of law. In this regard reference was
given by the counsel to the case of Patna Improvement Trust vs. Lakshmi Devi,
1963 AIR (SC) 1077. It has also been submitted by the counsel that the factum
of the relief which has already been granted under Section 24 of the Hindu
Marriage Act was never considered by the court below while fixing the amount
of interim maintenance in the present case.
Heard learned A.G.A. and perused the record.
So far as the case law relied upon by the counsel for the applicant is
concerned, attention of the Court was specifically drawn to the observation
made by the Supreme Court in Para-12 of the aforesaid case Patna Improvement
Trust vs. Lakshmi Devi, 1963 AIR (SC) 1077 and on the basis of the same it was
sought to be argued by the counsel for the applicant that the general law must
yield place to the specific law and therefore if the wife was getting her
maintenance amount under the Hindu Marriage Act, she would forfeit her right
to get any maintenance under the provisions of Section 125 of the Criminal
sought to show from the impugned order that the factum of the earlier relief
which the wife is already receiving under Section-24 of the Hindu Marriage Act
was never considered by the court below (while fixing the interim maintenance
amount in the proceedings u/s 125 of Criminal Procedure Code) seems to have
substance. The perusal of the impugned order shows that this aspect of the
matter was either never brought to the notice of the court on behalf of
applicant or his counsel or was at any rate never considered by the court
concerned. This Court does not propose to take it upon itself to consider
these aspects and enter into those factual details but leaves it open for the
applicant to move an application before the concerned court below and bring
the aforesaid fact to the notice of the court and seek a relook of the court
concerned to all these aspects of the matter. The applicant shall have the
liberty to move a proper application before the court concerned and bring the
necessary relevant facts in this regard to its notice and if any such
application is moved before the court below, then the court below shall look
into same and would pass appropriate orders as it may deem fit in accordance
Submission of learned counsel for the applicant is that the allegedly
neglected wife has already availed remedy under Section 24 of the Hindu
Marriage Act and she is already getting Rs.2,000/- per month as interim
maintenance amount. In that view of the matter, the fixation of the interim
maintenance amount in the present proceedings, which are going on under
Section 125 Cr.P.C., is bad in the eyes of law. In this regard reference was
given by the counsel to the case of Patna Improvement Trust vs. Lakshmi Devi,
1963 AIR (SC) 1077. It has also been submitted by the counsel that the factum
of the relief which has already been granted under Section 24 of the Hindu
Marriage Act was never considered by the court below while fixing the amount
of interim maintenance in the present case.
Heard learned A.G.A. and perused the record.
So far as the case law relied upon by the counsel for the applicant is
concerned, attention of the Court was specifically drawn to the observation
made by the Supreme Court in Para-12 of the aforesaid case Patna Improvement
Trust vs. Lakshmi Devi, 1963 AIR (SC) 1077 and on the basis of the same it was
sought to be argued by the counsel for the applicant that the general law must
yield place to the specific law and therefore if the wife was getting her
maintenance amount under the Hindu Marriage Act, she would forfeit her right
to get any maintenance under the provisions of Section 125 of the Criminal
sought to show from the impugned order that the factum of the earlier relief
which the wife is already receiving under Section-24 of the Hindu Marriage Act
was never considered by the court below (while fixing the interim maintenance
amount in the proceedings u/s 125 of Criminal Procedure Code) seems to have
substance. The perusal of the impugned order shows that this aspect of the
matter was either never brought to the notice of the court on behalf of
applicant or his counsel or was at any rate never considered by the court
concerned. This Court does not propose to take it upon itself to consider
these aspects and enter into those factual details but leaves it open for the
applicant to move an application before the concerned court below and bring
the aforesaid fact to the notice of the court and seek a relook of the court
concerned to all these aspects of the matter. The applicant shall have the
liberty to move a proper application before the court concerned and bring the
necessary relevant facts in this regard to its notice and if any such
application is moved before the court below, then the court below shall look
into same and would pass appropriate orders as it may deem fit in accordance
Submission of learned counsel for the applicant is that the allegedly
neglected wife has already availed remedy under Section 24 of the Hindu
Marriage Act and she is already getting Rs.2,000/- per month as interim
maintenance amount. In that view of the matter, the fixation of the interim
maintenance amount in the present proceedings, which are going on under
Section 125 Cr.P.C., is bad in the eyes of law. In this regard reference was
given by the counsel to the case of Patna Improvement Trust vs. Lakshmi Devi,
1963 AIR (SC) 1077. It has also been submitted by the counsel that the factum
of the relief which has already been granted under Section 24 of the Hindu
Marriage Act was never considered by the court below while fixing the amount
of interim maintenance in the present case.
Heard learned A.G.A. and perused the record.
So far as the case law relied upon by the counsel for the applicant is
concerned, attention of the Court was specifically drawn to the observation
made by the Supreme Court in Para-12 of the aforesaid case Patna Improvement
Trust vs. Lakshmi Devi, 1963 AIR (SC) 1077 and on the basis of the same it was
sought to be argued by the counsel for the applicant that the general law must
yield place to the specific law and therefore if the wife was getting her
maintenance amount under the Hindu Marriage Act, she would forfeit her right
to get any maintenance under the provisions of Section 125 of the Criminal
Procedure Code. It shall be appropriate at this stage to quote para-12 of
aforesaid judgement which reads as follows :
"12.The law on the subject is very well settled and, in my view, the learned
judges of the High Court have correctly appreciated it and applied it to the
facts of the case. Two principles noticed by the High Court are apposite. The
first principle is generalia specialibus non derogant. This principle is
exemplified by the decision of the Privy Council in Secretary of State v.
Hindustan Co-operative Insurance Society Ltd. (1). The second principle is
that if a statute directs a thing be done in a certain wax that thing shall
not, even if there be no negative words,, be done in-any other way. This
principle is illustrated by the decision in Ex parte Stephens (2). A combined
sought to show from the impugned order that the factum of the earlier relief
which the wife is already receiving under Section-24 of the Hindu Marriage Act
was never considered by the court below (while fixing the interim maintenance
amount in the proceedings u/s 125 of Criminal Procedure Code) seems to have
substance. The perusal of the impugned order shows that this aspect of the
matter was either never brought to the notice of the court on behalf of
applicant or his counsel or was at any rate never considered by the court
concerned. This Court does not propose to take it upon itself to consider
these aspects and enter into those factual details but leaves it open for the
applicant to move an application before the concerned court below and bring
the aforesaid fact to the notice of the court and seek a relook of the court
concerned to all these aspects of the matter. The applicant shall have the
liberty to move a proper application before the court concerned and bring the
necessary relevant facts in this regard to its notice and if any such
application is moved before the court below, then the court below shall look
into same and would pass appropriate orders as it may deem fit in accordance
Submission of learned counsel for the applicant is that the allegedly
neglected wife has already availed remedy under Section 24 of the Hindu
Marriage Act and she is already getting Rs.2,000/- per month as interim
maintenance amount. In that view of the matter, the fixation of the interim
maintenance amount in the present proceedings, which are going on under
Section 125 Cr.P.C., is bad in the eyes of law. In this regard reference was
given by the counsel to the case of Patna Improvement Trust vs. Lakshmi Devi,
1963 AIR (SC) 1077. It has also been submitted by the counsel that the factum
of the relief which has already been granted under Section 24 of the Hindu
Marriage Act was never considered by the court below while fixing the amount
of interim maintenance in the present case.
Heard learned A.G.A. and perused the record.
So far as the case law relied upon by the counsel for the applicant is
concerned, attention of the Court was specifically drawn to the observation
made by the Supreme Court in Para-12 of the aforesaid case Patna Improvement
Trust vs. Lakshmi Devi, 1963 AIR (SC) 1077 and on the basis of the same it was
sought to be argued by the counsel for the applicant that the general law must
yield place to the specific law and therefore if the wife was getting her
maintenance amount under the Hindu Marriage Act, she would forfeit her right
to get any maintenance under the provisions of Section 125 of the Criminal
Procedure Code. It shall be appropriate at this stage to quote para-12 of
aforesaid judgement which reads as follows :
"12.The law on the subject is very well settled and, in my view, the learned
judges of the High Court have correctly appreciated it and applied it to the
facts of the case. Two principles noticed by the High Court are apposite. The
first principle is generalia specialibus non derogant. This principle is
exemplified by the decision of the Privy Council in Secretary of State v.
Hindustan Co-operative Insurance Society Ltd. (1). The second principle is
that if a statute directs a thing be done in a certain wax that thing shall
not, even if there be no negative words,, be done in-any other way. This
principle is illustrated by the decision in Ex parte Stephens (2). A combined
sought to show from the impugned order that the factum of the earlier relief
which the wife is already receiving under Section-24 of the Hindu Marriage Act
was never considered by the court below (while fixing the interim maintenance
amount in the proceedings u/s 125 of Criminal Procedure Code) seems to have
substance. The perusal of the impugned order shows that this aspect of the
matter was either never brought to the notice of the court on behalf of
applicant or his counsel or was at any rate never considered by the court
concerned. This Court does not propose to take it upon itself to consider
these aspects and enter into those factual details but leaves it open for the
applicant to move an application before the concerned court below and bring
the aforesaid fact to the notice of the court and seek a relook of the court
concerned to all these aspects of the matter. The applicant shall have the
liberty to move a proper application before the court concerned and bring the
necessary relevant facts in this regard to its notice and if any such
application is moved before the court below, then the court below shall look
into same and would pass appropriate orders as it may deem fit in accordance
