Madras High Court
M.S.M.M. Meyyappa Chettiar ... vs The Income-Tax Officer, ... on 29 November,
1963
Equivalent citations: AIR 1965 Mad 68, 1964 54 ITR 151 Mad
Author: Jagadisan
Bench: Jagadisan, Srinivasan
JUDGMENT Jagadisan, J.
(1) These are writ petitions under Art. 226 of the Constitution by one M. S.
M. M. Meyyappa Chettiar of Karaikudi, in which S. 3 of the Indian Income-tax
Act, the charging section is challenged as being unconstitutional. It is said
to offend the equality clause of the Constitution. Though the petitioner is
the same in all the writ petitions and though the question raised is also the
same in each, several petitions have been filed calling in question the
validity of the assessment to tax in respect of each of the assessment years
1952-53, 1953-54, 1954-55, 1955-56 and 1956-57. Mr. M.K. Nambiar, learned
counsel for the petitioner, did not choose to address arguments to strike down
the entire section but confined his attack only to that portion of Section 3,
which seeks to assess an association of persons or the members of such an
association individually.
(2) We shall briefly refer to the facts leading up to these petitions. The
circumstances under which a fine should be imposed rather than a term of
imprisonment. That would depend upon the gravity of the offence, the
mitigating circumstances pleaded before the trying Magistrate and several
other factors. We have not so far heard it contended that the provisions of
the Indian Penal Code offend Art. 14 of the Constitution. The standard to be
followed by an authority in the matter of exercise of discretion may either be
expressly found within the four corners of the statute, or may be gleaned from
the underlying policy of the Act. If we are satisfied that, in the scheme of
Indian Income-tax Act, the Department had not been clothed with the powers of
taxing an association or the individual members in a naked arbitrary fashion
we must uphold it as being constitutional. It seems to us that, properly
understood the charging section does not confer any despotic power on the
Department to treat associations differently and tax with governed only by its
will. There is sufficient indication in the scheme, design and policy of the
Act to fetter free and unbridled taxing power. We are therefore, of opinion
that the challenge on the Act is unsustainable.
(2) We shall briefly refer to the facts leading up to these petitions. The
petitioner was treated as the "principal officer" of the association of
persons described as Messrs. M. M. Ipoh, and the Income-tax officer,
Karaikudi, assessed him in such capacity. There was a Hindu undivided family
with the name and Vilasam M. S. M. M. consisting of the father Meyyappa, and
his two minor sons, Chockalinga and Meyyappa. The family carried on business
in money-lending, purchase and sale of rubber gardens in the Malay States,
Burma and India. Besides the exclusive business carried on by the family, it
was also a partner in another business. A partition was effected among the
members of the family by a deed dated 5-4-1940 with effect from 22-2-1940. The
sons wee minors on that date and were represented by their mother as guardian.
Two of the business owned by the family referred to as the Karaikudi and the
Rangoon business were allotted to the share of the father Mayyappa. In
addition the father also took three rubber estates and three house properties.
The other businesses were divided equally among the shares, the father and his
two minor sons. Even after the alleged partition, the father continued to be
in management of all the businesses and the properties. In respect of the
three rubber estates and the house properties which the father took in the
partition, separate books of account were opened under the Vilasam 'M. M.'. In
1941, another son was born to Meyyappa and he was named Chettiappa. The father
and this after-born minor son constituted a Hindu undivided family, in respect
of the properties allotted to Meyyappa at the partition. This state of affairs
continued till 1949, when one of the sons of Meyyappa, Chockalinga attained
age. On 30-12-1949, there was a partnership between the father and the sons,
the father and the adult son becoming partners, and the minor sons being
admitted to the benefits of the partnership. This related to the business
carried on under the vilasam 'M.S.M.M.' at Ipoh. In this partnership, Meyyappa
represented the Hindu undivided family consisting of himself and his minor
son, Chettiappa.
Then followed a partition between Meyyappa and Chettiappa on 13-4-1950.
Chettiappa was also admitted tot he benefits of the partnership already
referred to and became entitled to a half of the share of the father. The deed
of partnership was executed in May, 1953, but it was accepted by the
Department and the partition recognised as effective from 13-4-1950. In 1951,
Chockalinga raised dispute protesting against the exclusive allotment of the
rubber estates and the house properties to the father at the partition in
1940. he put forward a claim that himself and his brother, Meyyappa, were
entitled to a half share in those properties. The father yielded, and a half
share in those items of properties was given to the M.S.M.M. firm of which, as
stated already, all of them were partners.
In this state of affairs, the Income-tax Officer, Karaikudi, issued notices to
Meyyappa under S. 34 of the Act, in respect of the assessment ears 1951-52,
1952-53 and 1953-54 proposing to assess him in his capacity as the principal
officer of an "Association of Persons". For the assessment years 1954-55,
1955-56 and 11856-57, the Officer issued notices under S. 22(2), again
treating Meyyappa as a principal officer. Meyyappa denied that there was any
Association of Persons, but the Officer overruled his objections and held that
in 1951-52 Meyyappa and his minor son, Chettiappa, were members of an
association of persons, and that, for the remaining assessment years, these
two persons and the firm of M. S. M. M. were the members of such an
Association. Assessments were made accordingly. There were appeals to he
Appellate Assistant Commissioner, in which Meyyappa raised the same
objections. The appeals failed, but the Appellate Authority, however, directed
hat the rental income from properties should be assessed in the hands of the
several owners instead of an assessment of Meyyappa as the principal officer.
Meyyappa went up by way of further appeals to the Appellate Tribunal, but was
again unsuccessful. proceedings under S. 66(1) of the Income-tax Act resulted
in the following question being referred to this Court:
"Whether the assessments on the Association of persons' for the assessment
years 1951-52 to 1956-57 are valid?"
That formed the subject-matter of the reference in M. M. Ipoh v. Commr. of
Income Tax, T. C. No. 201 of 1960 (Reference No. 92 of 1960) (Mad). It was
contended on behalf of Meyyappa in this Court that the assessment in respect
of the year 19511-52 was improperly made on him, as representing an
Association of persons, that there was no evidence to establish the existence
of such an association, that the can be no assessment to which a minor, though
has no contracting capacity, could be a member, and that, in respect of the
years subsequent to 1951-52, there was an additional disability to assess, as
the can be no association of which a firm can be a member. It was further
contended that, in assessing Meyyappa as the principal officer of the
Association of Persons, the Department failed to follow the procedure
contemplated under the Act. A Division Bench of this Court, to which one of us
was a party, held that the assessment of the Association of persons for the
assessment year 1951-52 was not lawfully made, but that the assessments for
the subsequent years in the status of 'Association of Persons' were valid.
(3) It is alleged in the affidavit in support of these petitions that the
petitioner was assessed to tax for the assessment year 1952-53 to 1956-57 in a
sum of Rs. 19-1/2 lakhs, that during the period when these assessments were
the subject-matter of appeals before the appellate authorities and reference
to this Court, the petitioner has filed writ petitions, which, however, were
dismissed, that writ appeals were filed, and that, during the pendency of
these proceedings, conditional orders of stay were granted by this Court,
which resulted in payment of Rs. 5 lakhs towards the demand on he association.
Apparently, the prior writ proceedings were taken with view to stay the hands
of the Department, in the matter of collection with the quantum of assessments
made upon the petitioner, nor with the further question as regards the
payments alleged to have been made by him towards the demands from the
Department. It is clear that, after the termination of the reference in this
Court, the Department has been making strenuous attempts to collect the tax
from the petitioner, but to no useful purpose. When the petitioner found that
he had practically exhausted all remedies to escape payment of tax due, he
turned his attention to he constitutional safeguards respecting fundamental
rights of the citizens. In these petitions, the prayer is for the issue of a
writ of Prohibition, or such other writ or direction as this Court may think
fit and appropriate in the circumstances, to restrain the Income-tax Office,
Karaikudi, from enforcing the collection of the tax in respect of the years
1952-53 to 1956-57. The original petitioner, Meyyappa is now dead and his son
Chettiappan has been impleaded as his legal representative.
(4) The single question that arises is, whether S. 3 of he Indian Income-tax
Act, providing for taxation of 'Association of Persons' as an empty or in the
alternative, of the members of that Association offends Art. 14 of the
Constitution.
(5) Before dealing with this questions, we should refer to an argument raised
by the learned Advocate General appearing for the Department, which is almost
in the nature of a preliminary objection regarding the maintainability of
these petitions. In short, the contentions that this Court had upheld the
validity of the assessments for the years 1952-53 to 1956-57 in T. C. No. 201
of 1960 (Mad) and that therefore, the petitioner cannot reagitate the same
question a different form or on different grounds. The simple question is,
whether the unsuccessful challenge of the validity of the assessments, in the
earlier reference before us operates as a bar to the present writ proceedings.
What was decided on a prior occasion cannot of course be impugned now, because
that decision has become final between the parties. It, however, appears that
an appeal is pending from that decision in the Supreme Court, But till it is
set aside, we can take it to be a final decision between the parties. It
cannot be defeated either by direct challenge or by disguised attack. It would
be vexatious to seek adjudication of the same point for a second time. This
rule is strict, and any attempt to violate it cannot succeed, however,
insidious or veiled it may be.
Mr. M. K. Nambiar, learned counsel for the petitioner, does not demur to this
proposition of law. But, what the contends is that the constitutional validity
of the charging section was not decided, wither expressly or by necessary
implication, in the earlier proceedings, that a citizen can complain of the
violation of fundamental rights at nay stage, so long as there is no
pronouncement against him on the point raised, and that the rule of res
judicata, actual or constructive, cannot possibly be invoked on the facts and
circumstances of this case. That the judgment this Court on the former
occasion did not deal with the constitutional question is plain and manifest.
We must, however, refer to the following passage in that judgment, which shows
that the petitioner very nearly attacked S. 3, but fell far short of the
contention now raised. That passage reads:
"It was next argued that S. 3 of the Act gives an option to the assessing
authority to assess either the association of persons or its members
individually and this option should have been exercised in favour of he
assess, that is to say, in a manner so far as to impose the lighter burden. It
is no doubt true that if the members of the association had to be assessed
individually, the incidence of tax would have been less. Reliance was placed
on Thakkar v. Commr. of Income-tax, Bombay, where Chagla, C. J. observed.
Whether or not the principle of the above decision would call for
implementation in the present case does not however appear to arise. This
contention was not taken before any of the officers below or even before the
Tribunal, That being the case, he argument outlined seeks to pose a question
which does not arise form the order of the Tribunal. We therefore decline to
deal with it."
What then is the effect of the prior decision, which upheld the validity of
the assessment on the petitioner in respect of the years 1952-53 to 1956-57 on
him on his capacity as the principal officer of M.M. Ipoh? We have already
pointed out that the constitutional validity did not arise for decision at
that stage. This Court then exercised its powers under S. 66 of the Indian
Income-tax Act. It is needless to point out that the jurisdiction under the
provision is limited to answering the questions referred. Only the question
that arises out of the order of the Tribunal can come within the scope of S.
66. The assess cannot, of course, raise the question, before the department of
the Tribunal, of the vires of any of the provisions of the Indian Income-tax
Act, either on the ground that the Legislature was not competent to enact the
measure or on the ground that it offended the fundamental rights guaranteed
under the Constitution. The reason is simple, because neither the Department
nor the Tribunal can give relief to the assessee holding that the impugned
provision is in any way bad in-law. If such a contention were to be raised, it
has necessarily to be ignored by the Department and the Tribunal, though
sometimes the Tribunal does refer to the question, if raised, and gives the
only answer which it can, namely, that that is not a matter within its
competence to decide.
Even if the Tribunal's order makes preference to a constitutional question
raised before it, it cannot be said that the question arises out of the order
of the Tribunal. It is true that a point raised but not considered by the
Tribunal would be one which can be said to arise out of its order. But that
would be a case where the Tribunal would have power to decide the question,
but for reasons given, it declines to decide it, either because it is
unnecessary, or in its view, it does not call for a decision. In a case where
the Tribunal is plainly without jurisdiction to decide the question, we cannot
say that the refusal by the Tribunal not to decide it, which is quite
legitimate and proper, would-be a question which can be said to arise out of
its decision, so as to justify a reference under S. 66 of the Act. We wish to
make it very clear that it is not the province of the Department or even the
statutory Tribunal, which is really the creation of the statute, to entertain
any objection to a piece of legislation as being ultra vires or
unconstitutional, and that, it would be beyond the jurisdiction of this Court,
functioning under S. 66 of the Act, which, as stated already, is narrow in is
scope and reach, to consider and determine a question not properly within its
sphere. The High Court, in a reference under the Indian Income-tax Act, does
not sit as an ordinary court of appeal in the matter of assessment: Newton
Chikki v. Commr. of Income-tax Madhya Pradesh . The jurisdiction of the High
Court in a reference is purely advisory: Petlad Turkey Red Dye Works v. Commr.
of Income-tax, Bombay North, (1963) 48 ITR (SC) 92: (AIR 1963 SC 1961 SC 1633
(SC 1484).
(6) The learned Advocate-General cited a decision of the judicial Committee in
Raleigh Investment Co., Ltd. v. Governor-General in Council, 74 Ind App 50:
(AIR 1947 PC 78) and drew our attention to certain observations in it to show
that an assessment purporting to be under the Act is inviolable and cannot be
collaterally attacked in any independent proceeding dehors the machinery under
the Act. The question that came up for consideration in that case was as
regards the scope of S. 67 of the Indian Income-tax Act. A Joint Stock company
was incorporated in the Isle of Man and had its main office in England. It
held shares in nine companies carrying on business in British India. All the
dividends received by the Company from the nine companies were declared, paid
and received in England; no part of the was ever remitted to British India.
The company was assessed in respect of income-tax and super-tax for the
assessment year 1939-40 as a non-resident on an income which included the
dividends received form the nine companies.
The tax was paid under protest, and a suit was instituted by the company in
the High Court of Calcutta in its ordinary original civil jurisdiction,
praying for a declaration that, in so far as explanation 3 and the other
provisions of S. 4 of the Indian Income-tax Act, 1922, as amended is 1939,
purported to authorise the assessment and charging to tax of a non-resident in
respect of dividends declared or paid outside British India, but not brought
into British India, those provisions were ultra vires the legislative powers
of the Federal legislature, and that the assessment was illegal and wrongful.
An injunction restraining the making of future assessments in respect of such
dividends and relief by way of repayment of the tax paid were also claimed.
Objections was taken on behalf of the Department to the maintainability of the
suit. Section 67 of the Act was relied upon. That reads:
"No suit shall be brought in any Civil Court to set aside or modify any
assessment made under this Act, and no prosecution, suit or other proceeding
shall lie against any officer of the Government for anything in good faith
done or intended to be done under this Act."
The Judicial Committee held that, while in form the relief claimed did not
profess to modify or set aside the assessment, in substance the suit was
directed exclusively to a modification of the assessment, and that therefore
the suit was barred under that provision. The main if not the only ground on
which the Board held the suit was barred was that the Act provided a special
machinery for the assesses to object to improper and illegal assessments, that
even a question relating to he vires of the provisions of the Act can properly
be agitated in the proceedings under such special machinery, and necessarily
therefore the assessment once made and completed cannot be called in question,
and hat S. 67 was only enacted ex abundant cautela, as even but for such a
provision, the suit would be barred. The following observations make this
position clear:
"In construing the section (section 67) it is pertinent, in their Lordships'
opinion, to ascertain whether the Act contains machinery which enables as
assess effectively to raise in the courts the question whether a particular
provision of the Income-tax Act bearing on the assessment mad is or is not
ultra vires. The presence of such machinery, though by no means conclusive,
marches with a construction of the section which denies an alternative to
inquire into the same subject-matter.............
Effective an appropriate machinery is therefore provided by the Act itself for
the review on grounds of law of any assessment. It is in that setting that S.
67 has to be construed....... The circumstance that the assessing officer has
taken into account an ultra vires provision of the Act is in this view
immaterial in determining whether the assessment is "made under this Act." The
phrase describes the provenance of the assessment; it does not relate to its
accuracy in point of law. The use of the machinery provided by the Act, nor
the result of that use, is the test."
(7) It is now a well-accepted rule of law that where rights are created under
a statute, and the statute itself prescribes or erects a special machinery to
adjudicate upon such rights, the jurisdiction of the normal forum of the land
is taken away by necessary implication. Their Lordships of the Judicial
Committee had apparently this principle in mind, when they laid emphasis on
the fact that questions relating to assessment, whatever be their nature and
character, could be solved with the help and assistance of the hierarchy of
tribunals constituted under the Act. We must confess, with great respect to
the judicial Committee, our difficulty in appreciating this point of view, as
regards cases where the assessee impugns, as ultra vires and unconstitutional,
the very Act, which the assessing authorities are compelled to administer.
(8) The authority of the Raleigh Investment Co's case, 74 Ind App 50: (AIR
1947 PC 78) however, seems to be shaken and whittled down by the decision of
the Supreme Court in State of Tripura v. Province of East Bengal, 1951 SCR 1:
(AIR 1951 Sc 123). That case had to construe not S. 67 of the Indian Income-
tax Act, but an analogous provision, S. 65 of the Bengal Agricultural Income-
tax Act, 1944. That section bared suits in civil courts to set aside or modify
any assessment made under that Act. Actually, the reliefs claimed in the suit,
the competency of which was in question in that case, were as follows. (1) For
a declaration that the Bengal Agricultural Income-tax Act, 1944, so far as it
imposes a liability to pay agricultural income-tax on the plaintiff, is ultra
vires and void and that the plaintiff is not bound by the same. (2) For a
declaration that in any case the notice served by the Agricultural Income-tax
Officer, Dacca Range, above referred to, is void and of no effect and that no
assessment can be made on the basis on that notice; and (3) For a perpetual
injunction to restrain the defendants form taking any steps to assess the
plaintiff to agricultural income-tax.
The Supreme Court held that the suit was not barred. Patanjali Sastri, J.,
after referring to the passage cited above in the Raleigh Investment Co.'s
case, 74 Ind App 50: (AIR 1947 PC 78) observed that the suit was not one to
set aside or modify the assessment, as no assessment had been made, that the
gist of the wrongful and complained of was the alleged harassment and trouble
caused to the assessee by commencing against him on illegal and unauthorised
assessment, and that therefore the suit was outside the mischief of the
barring provision. It is true that no dissent is expressed by the Supreme
Court form the principle laid down in Raleigh Investment Co.'s case, 74, Ind
App 50: (AIR 1947 PC 78). But the distinction pointed out by the Supreme Court
between an intended illegal assessment and such an illegal assessment having
become a fait accompli is sufficiently destructive of the view point adopted
by the Board.
(9) A recent decision of the Supreme Court in Civil Appeal; No. 315 of 1962: ,
Firm of Illuri Subbayya Chetty v. State of Andhra Pradesh, would seem to
indicate that their Lordships are not inclined to accept as sound the Raleigh
Investment Co.'s case, 74 Ind App 50: (AIR 1947 PC 78). That was a case which
considered the scope of Section 18-A of the Madras General Sales Tax Act,
1939, and incidentally the Raleigh's case 74 Ind App 50: (AIR 1947 PC 78) was
referred to and dealt with by His Lordship Gajendragadkar, J. The following
observation of His Lordship really gives an inkling of his view as regards
Raleigh's case, 74 Ind App 50: (AIR 1947 PC 78):
"It is true that the judgment shows that the Privy Council took the view that
even the constitutional validity of the taxing provision can be challenged by
adopting the procedure prescribed by the Income-tax Act; and this assumption
presumably proceeded on the basis that if an assessee wants to challenge the
vires of the taxing provision on which an assessment is purported to be made
against him, it would be open to him to raise that point before the High Court
under Section 66(1) of the Act. It is not necessary for us to consider whether
this assumption is well founded or not."
(10) In the present case, we can steer clear of the principle laid down in
Raleigh's case, 74 Ind App 50: (AIR 1947 PC 78) even if it were to be taken to
have laid down the law correctly on the subject as we are not now dealing with
the maintainability of a suit as contemplated under Section 67 of the Act.
These are proceedings under Art. 226 of the Constitution, and it cannot be
contended that Section 67 of the Act would deprive this Court of is powers to
issue writs. Such a power has been vested with the High Courts under the
provision in the Constitution which certainly overrides all legislations,
whether by the Parliament or by the State. It cannot be doubted that what
would be hit by the provisions of Section 67 can yet be agitated in a properly
constituted writ proceeding either under Art. 226 in the High Court or under
Art. 32 before the Supreme Court, if a fundamental right is involved. The bar
imposed under Section 226 of the Government of India Act, 1935, has now been
completely removed. The operations of Section 67 of the Indian Income-tax Act
has to be strictly and literally confined to original suits in any civil Court
to set aside or modify any assessment. Section 67 of the Act cannot prevent
the exercise of jurisdiction under Art. 32 or Art. 226 of the Constitution in
appropriate cases either by the Supreme Court or by the State High Court. The
maintainability of these writ petitions is, therefore, beyond question.
(11) It is, however, contended that the petitioner might and ought to have
raised these objection as regards the validity of the assessment even in the
former occasion, and that the bar of constructive res judicata should prevail.
The Supreme Court had recently to consider the applicability of the general
doctrine of res judicata in matters arising in writ proceedings. The reference
to that case is Civil Appeals Nos. 469 etc. of 1962 and Petns. Nos. 70 and 71
of 1962: . The Amalgamated Coal fields Ltd. v. The Janapada Sabha Chhindwara.
His Lordship Gajendragadkar, J., dealing with the general doctrine of res
judicata observed thus:
"The question about the applicability of the doctrine of res judicata to the
petitions filed under Art. 32 came before this Court in another form in Duryao
v. State of U.P., and in that case it has been held that where the petition
under Art. 226 is considered on the merits as a contested mater and dismissed
by the High Court, the decision pronounced is binding on the parties and so,
if the said decision was not challenged by an appropriate remedy provided by
the Constitution, a writ petition filed in respect of the same matter would be
deemed to be barred by the res judicata. Therefore, there can be no doubt that
the general principle of res judicata applies to writ petitions filed under
Art. 32 or Art. 226. It is necessary to emphasise that the application of the
doctrine of res judicata to the petitions filed under Art. 32 does not in nay
way impair or affect the content of the fundamental rights guaranteed to the
citizens of India."
Referring to the doctrine of constructive res judicata His Lordship stated
thus:
"The grounds now urged are entirely distinct, and so, the decision of the High
Court can be upheld only if the principle or constructive res judicata can be
said to apply to writ petitions filed under Art. 32 or Art. 226. In our
opinion, constructive res judicata which is a special and artificial form of
res judicata enacted by section 11 of the Civil Procedure Code should not
generally be applied to writ petitions filed under Art. 32 or Art. 226. We
would be reluctant to apply this principle to the present appeals all the more
because we are dealing with cases where the impugned tax liability is for with
cases where the impugned tax liability is for different years.......
Therefore, we are inclined to hold that the appellants cannot be precluded
from raising the new contentions on which their challenge against the validity
of the notices is based."
(12) The principle enunciated by their Lordships of the Supreme Court may thus
be summed up. A decision between the parties, which stands, not having been
appealed form, binds them, and it would not be open o either of the parties to
challenge its correctness by initiating fresh proceedings. This rule is firmly
rooted and it applies irrespective of the nature of the proceeding in which
the decision is rendered. A writ proceeding whether under Art. 32 or Art. 226
is just as much a proceeding in a civil Court and there is no virtue adverse
decision against him by permitting him to seek the refuge of writs. But all
the same, the entire body of the doctrine of res judicata as embodied in the
provisions of Section 11 of the Civil Procedure Code or under what may be
called the general principles of res judicata which are founded on grounds of
public policy to avoid multiplicity of proceedings need not be pressed into
service to delimit the scope of writ proceedings, particularly in cases where
the is a complaint of infringement of fundamental rights. It is, of course,
true that, if a fundamental right is put in issue once and decided upon, the
same subject manner call in question that decision, as if he has a fundamental
right to complain till a decision is rendered in his favour. In our opinion
therefore, in the present case, there is no substance in the contention raised
on behalf of the Department that these proceedings would not lie and would be
incompetent because of the decision of this Court in T.C. No. 201 of 1960
(Mad).
(13) The provision impugned as offending Art. 14 of the Constitution Section
3, which is the charging section under the Act. It reads as follows:
"Where any Central enacts that income-tax shall be charged for any year at any
rate or rates, tax at that rate or those rates shall be charged for that year
in accordant with and subject to the provisions of, this Act in respect of the
total income of the previous year of every individual, Hindu undivided family,
company and local authority, and of every firm and other association of
persons or the partners of the firm or the members of the association
individually."
The contention urged is that that part of the section enabling the imposition
of tax on the 'association of persons or the members of the association
individually' violates the equality clause, because the taxing authorities are
vested with the power to tax an association of persons or the members of he
association individually according to their whim and caprice. It is said that
the authorities are put in a position to pick and choose as amongst the
associations of persons, and subject one association to tax as an association,
and subject the members of another association individually without treating
them together as an entity. In other words, the vice of this part of Section
3, is according to the learned counsel for the petitioner, that the Department
is clothed with unguided and uncontrolled powers, which they can successfully
use to discriminate between associations similarly situated.
The argument is developed thus. Though the rate of tax on the income of the
individual and association of persons is the same, inequality might result, if
the assessing authorities wee to choose to tax the association rather than the
individual. The following illustration is given in paragraph 5 of the
affidavit in support of the petitions:
"For example when an Association of Persons consisting of 10 members is
assessed as such on income of Rs. 1,00,000/-the tax liability would
approximately be about Rs. 50,000/-each; and the share of tax on the
individual would be about Rs. 5,000/-each, but if on the same income of the
Association an individual member is taxed on his share of the income of Rs.
10,000/-the tax he is liable to pay would be only about Rs. 800/-. It is also
pointed out in the affidavit that the amount of tax levied on an association
is not divided and collected from the members forming the association, but is
capable of being demanded form the 'principal offer' defined under the Act.
(14) The words, 'or the members of the association individually' were not
originally in the Act, but appear to have come in by way of a subsequent
amendment. Some comment is made upon this circumstance to show that
discrimination was intended and designed. But, we do not see any substance in
this contention, as the question now is whether the Act, as it stands to-day,
violates the equality clause, by reason of the authorities being vested with
uncontrolled powers to tax an association or the individual members without
any standard principle or policy laid down by the Act. Prior to 11939, the Act
contained the expression, 'association of individuals' but subsequently it was
changed to 'association of persons'. 'Association of persons' is a term of
wider connotation and of more comprehensive import that the term 'association
of individuals.' An association, which is a taxing entity under the Act, is a
combination of persons in a joint enterprise to earn income. There is
community of interest and endeavor to earn the income, and the Act has
constituted the enterprises as an association for the purpose of levying tax.
It is not suggested that the creation of such an entity is repugnant to Art.
14 of the Constitution. The Act has a scheme of creating entities of groups of
persons like a Hindu undivided family, firm of partnership, a company, each
with different characteristics and different legal attributes. 'Association of
persons' is a residuary group which cannot fit in with the other groups
referred to. That is why separate mention is made of an ad hoc body like an
'association of persons' who join together to earn income, and whose jointness
is incapable of being assigned any legal label. It is, however, unnecessary to
pursue this point further, as the problem now before us is not whether the
constitution of such a group is unconstitutional, but whether the liberty
given to the Department to assess an association or its members is so large
and so bereft of any principle, as to attract the mischief of Art. 14.
(15) We do not think that the mere fact that the Department can that the
'principal officer' as the representative of the association would amount to
any discrimination, as suggested by the learned counsel for the petitioner.
'Principal officer' is defined in Section 2(12) of the Act and it reads:
"Principal officer", used with reference to a local authority or a company or
any other public body or any association means:
(a) the secretary, treasurer, manager or agent of the authority, company, body
or association, or
(b) any person connected with the authority, company, body or association upon
whom the Income-tax Officer has served a notice of his intention of treating
him as the principal officer thereof:"
An Association of persons may consist of members who hail from different parts
of the country. It would be very difficult for the Department to get at these
members individually, and complications might arise, as some of them may
reside and carry on business beyond the territorial jurisdiction of the
Officer concerned. It is purely a matter of administrative convenience. It
cannot be said that a member f the association is made vicariously liable for
he tax liability of his co-members. The tax is paid out of the common income,
and what would be available for division amongst the members is only the net
income after deducting the tax payable or paid. Section 63 of the Act provides
for service of notices and sub-section (2) reads:
"Any such notice or requisition may,... in the case of another association of
persons be addressed to the principal officer thereof."
It is thus clear that the principal officer is treated as an agent of the
members of the association collectively, for the limited purpose of putting
the machinery of the Act in force and in operation. Section 14, sub-section
(2), clause (b) of the Act enacts that if a member of an association of
persons receives any portion of the amount which he is entitled to receive
from the association on which tax has already been paid by the association, he
shall not be subjected to tax again. The provisions of the Act relating to
assessment of association of persons are practically of the same design and
pattern as the assessment of a firm or its partners.
(16) Does the Act really enable the Department to act arbitrarily with
unguided powers to tax an association or its members just to suit is own
convenience or desirability of imposing a greater burden of tax upon the
assessee to augment the Exchequer? In the counter affidavit on behalf of the
Department, it is averred as follows:
"..........the Act confers no choice as alleged and that where an association
of persons earns income and is assessable it is bound to be assessed as such.
The last part of Section 3 is intended to enable an assessment on the
individuals earlier than or independent of the association. Even assuming that
the Act permits an assessment either on the association or the members
individually, the choice of the Income-tax Officer, is not unguided or
arbitrary. He will have to make an assessment, in the submission of this
respondent on the principle that the object of the enactment is to levy the
tax at its point of accrual to the association itself and he can assess the
individuals only in cases as for example, where the association is not
assessable but the individuals are."
The constitutionality of the provision is of course to be judged not by the
averments in the counter affidavit but on a proper construction of the Statute
itself. In Jyoti Pershad v. Union Territory of Delhi, , the following
principles governing the applicability of Art. 14 of the Constitution to any
piece of legislation are laid down:
(1) "The enactment or the rule might not in terms enact a discriminatory rule
of law but might enable an unequal or discriminatory treatment to be accorded
to persons or things similarly situated. This would happen when the
legislature vests a discretion in an authority by a legislation which does not
lay down any policy or disclose any tangible or intelligible purpose, thus
clothing the authority with unguided and arbitrary powers enabling it to
discriminate.
(2) In such circumstances the very provision of the law which enables or
permits the authority to discriminate, offends the guarantee of equal
protection afforded by Art. 14.
(3) It is manifest that the above rule would not apply to cases where the
Legislatures lays down the policy and indicates the rule on the line of action
which should serve as a guidance to the authority. Where such guidance is
expressed in the statutory provision conferring the power, no question of
violation of Art. 14 could arise........
(4) It is not, however essential that the rules for the guidance of the
designated authority which is to exercise the owner to which is vested with
the discretion should be laid down in express terms in the statutory provision
itself. Such guidance may thus be obtained form or afforded by (a) the
preamble read in the light of the surrounding circumstances which necessitated
the legislation taken conjunction with well known faces of which the Court
might take judicial notice or of which it is appraised by evidence before it
to the form of affidavits. (b) or even from the policy and purpose of the
enactment which may is gathered from other operative situations or generally
form the object sought to be achieved by the enactment."
(17) Now reading the relevant provisions of the Act, it seems to us that the
Act does not vest any uncontrolled power or discretion on the part of the
authorities to tax an association or its members without any standard or
criterion whatsoever. If the authorities find an association of persons and a
return is made of its income by the principal officer or any member, it is
bond to assess the entity as such. The alternative of assessing the individual
member would common only in a case where the association itself cannot be
taxed as such for reasons which cannot be exhaustively listed. The fact that
there is some discretion left in the assessing officer would not be a ground
to condemn the provision. it is well-known that Statutes do vest the
authorities with discretion in the matter of administering the law, and it is
equally well-known that discretion means judicial discretion.
For example, under the Indian Penal Code, the is always a discretion on the
part of the publishing authority to sentence a person to a term of
imprisonment or to levy a fine. The Penal Code has nowhere defined the
circumstances under which a fine should be imposed rather than a term of
imprisonment. That would depend upon the gravity of the offence, the
mitigating circumstances pleaded before the trying Magistrate and several
other factors. We have not so far heard it contended that the provisions of
the Indian Penal Code offend Art. 14 of the Constitution. The standard to be
followed by an authority in the matter of exercise of discretion may either be
expressly found within the four corners of the statute, or may be gleaned from
the underlying policy of the Act. If we are satisfied that, in the scheme of
Indian Income-tax Act, the Department had not been clothed with the powers of
taxing an association or the individual members in a naked arbitrary fashion
we must uphold it as being constitutional. It seems to us that, properly
understood the charging section does not confer any despotic power on the
Department to treat associations differently and tax with governed only by its
will. There is sufficient indication in the scheme, design and policy of the
Act to fetter free and unbridled taxing power. We are therefore, of opinion
that the challenge on the Act is unsustainable.
(18) In the result, these writ petitions fail and are dismissed. The rule nisi
is discharged. The petitioner will pay the costs of the department in W. P.
No. 1374 of 1961. Counsel's fee Rs. 250.
Petitions dismissed.
circumstances under which a fine should be imposed rather than a term of
imprisonment. That would depend upon the gravity of the offence, the
mitigating circumstances pleaded before the trying Magistrate and several
other factors. We have not so far heard it contended that the provisions of
the Indian Penal Code offend Art. 14 of the Constitution. The standard to be
followed by an authority in the matter of exercise of discretion may either be
expressly found within the four corners of the statute, or may be gleaned from
the underlying policy of the Act. If we are satisfied that, in the scheme of
Indian Income-tax Act, the Department had not been clothed with the powers of
taxing an association or the individual members in a naked arbitrary fashion
we must uphold it as being constitutional. It seems to us that, properly
understood the charging section does not confer any despotic power on the
Department to treat associations differently and tax with governed only by its
will. There is sufficient indication in the scheme, design and policy of the
Act to fetter free and unbridled taxing power. We are therefore, of opinion
that the challenge on the Act is unsustainable.
(2) We shall briefly refer to the facts leading up to these petitions. The
petitioner was treated as the "principal officer" of the association of
persons described as Messrs. M. M. Ipoh, and the Income-tax officer,
Karaikudi, assessed him in such capacity. There was a Hindu undivided family
with the name and Vilasam M. S. M. M. consisting of the father Meyyappa, and
his two minor sons, Chockalinga and Meyyappa. The family carried on business
in money-lending, purchase and sale of rubber gardens in the Malay States,
Burma and India. Besides the exclusive business carried on by the family, it
was also a partner in another business. A partition was effected among the
members of the family by a deed dated 5-4-1940 with effect from 22-2-1940. The
sons wee minors on that date and were represented by their mother as guardian.
Two of the business owned by the family referred to as the Karaikudi and the
Rangoon business were allotted to the share of the father Mayyappa. In
addition the father also took three rubber estates and three house properties.
The other businesses were divided equally among the shares, the father and his
two minor sons. Even after the alleged partition, the father continued to be
in management of all the businesses and the properties. In respect of the
three rubber estates and the house properties which the father took in the
partition, separate books of account were opened under the Vilasam 'M. M.'. In
1941, another son was born to Meyyappa and he was named Chettiappa. The father
circumstances under which a fine should be imposed rather than a term of
imprisonment. That would depend upon the gravity of the offence, the
mitigating circumstances pleaded before the trying Magistrate and several
other factors. We have not so far heard it contended that the provisions of
the Indian Penal Code offend Art. 14 of the Constitution. The standard to be
followed by an authority in the matter of exercise of discretion may either be
expressly found within the four corners of the statute, or may be gleaned from
the underlying policy of the Act. If we are satisfied that, in the scheme of
Indian Income-tax Act, the Department had not been clothed with the powers of
taxing an association or the individual members in a naked arbitrary fashion
we must uphold it as being constitutional. It seems to us that, properly
understood the charging section does not confer any despotic power on the
Department to treat associations differently and tax with governed only by its
will. There is sufficient indication in the scheme, design and policy of the
Act to fetter free and unbridled taxing power. We are therefore, of opinion
that the challenge on the Act is unsustainable.
(2) We shall briefly refer to the facts leading up to these petitions. The
petitioner was treated as the "principal officer" of the association of
persons described as Messrs. M. M. Ipoh, and the Income-tax officer,
Karaikudi, assessed him in such capacity. There was a Hindu undivided family
with the name and Vilasam M. S. M. M. consisting of the father Meyyappa, and
his two minor sons, Chockalinga and Meyyappa. The family carried on business
in money-lending, purchase and sale of rubber gardens in the Malay States,
Burma and India. Besides the exclusive business carried on by the family, it
was also a partner in another business. A partition was effected among the
members of the family by a deed dated 5-4-1940 with effect from 22-2-1940. The
sons wee minors on that date and were represented by their mother as guardian.
Two of the business owned by the family referred to as the Karaikudi and the
Rangoon business were allotted to the share of the father Mayyappa. In
addition the father also took three rubber estates and three house properties.
The other businesses were divided equally among the shares, the father and his
two minor sons. Even after the alleged partition, the father continued to be
in management of all the businesses and the properties. In respect of the
three rubber estates and the house properties which the father took in the
partition, separate books of account were opened under the Vilasam 'M. M.'. In
1941, another son was born to Meyyappa and he was named Chettiappa. The father
circumstances under which a fine should be imposed rather than a term of
imprisonment. That would depend upon the gravity of the offence, the
mitigating circumstances pleaded before the trying Magistrate and several
other factors. We have not so far heard it contended that the provisions of
the Indian Penal Code offend Art. 14 of the Constitution. The standard to be
followed by an authority in the matter of exercise of discretion may either be
expressly found within the four corners of the statute, or may be gleaned from
the underlying policy of the Act. If we are satisfied that, in the scheme of
Indian Income-tax Act, the Department had not been clothed with the powers of
taxing an association or the individual members in a naked arbitrary fashion
we must uphold it as being constitutional. It seems to us that, properly
understood the charging section does not confer any despotic power on the
Department to treat associations differently and tax with governed only by its
will. There is sufficient indication in the scheme, design and policy of the
Act to fetter free and unbridled taxing power. We are therefore, of opinion
that the challenge on the Act is unsustainable.
(2) We shall briefly refer to the facts leading up to these petitions. The
petitioner was treated as the "principal officer" of the association of
persons described as Messrs. M. M. Ipoh, and the Income-tax officer,
Karaikudi, assessed him in such capacity. There was a Hindu undivided family
with the name and Vilasam M. S. M. M. consisting of the father Meyyappa, and
his two minor sons, Chockalinga and Meyyappa. The family carried on business
in money-lending, purchase and sale of rubber gardens in the Malay States,
Burma and India. Besides the exclusive business carried on by the family, it
was also a partner in another business. A partition was effected among the
members of the family by a deed dated 5-4-1940 with effect from 22-2-1940. The
sons wee minors on that date and were represented by their mother as guardian.
Two of the business owned by the family referred to as the Karaikudi and the
Rangoon business were allotted to the share of the father Mayyappa. In
addition the father also took three rubber estates and three house properties.
The other businesses were divided equally among the shares, the father and his
two minor sons. Even after the alleged partition, the father continued to be
in management of all the businesses and the properties. In respect of the
three rubber estates and the house properties which the father took in the
partition, separate books of account were opened under the Vilasam 'M. M.'. In
1941, another son was born to Meyyappa and he was named Chettiappa. The father
and this after-born minor son constituted a Hindu undivided family, in respect
of the properties allotted to Meyyappa at the partition. This state of affairs
continued till 1949, when one of the sons of Meyyappa, Chockalinga attained
age. On 30-12-1949, there was a partnership between the father and the sons,
the father and the adult son becoming partners, and the minor sons being
admitted to the benefits of the partnership. This related to the business
carried on under the vilasam 'M.S.M.M.' at Ipoh. In this partnership, Meyyappa
represented the Hindu undivided family consisting of himself and his minor
son, Chettiappa.
Then followed a partition between Meyyappa and Chettiappa on 13-4-1950.
Chettiappa was also admitted tot he benefits of the partnership already
circumstances under which a fine should be imposed rather than a term of
imprisonment. That would depend upon the gravity of the offence, the
mitigating circumstances pleaded before the trying Magistrate and several
other factors. We have not so far heard it contended that the provisions of
the Indian Penal Code offend Art. 14 of the Constitution. The standard to be
followed by an authority in the matter of exercise of discretion may either be
expressly found within the four corners of the statute, or may be gleaned from
the underlying policy of the Act. If we are satisfied that, in the scheme of
Indian Income-tax Act, the Department had not been clothed with the powers of
taxing an association or the individual members in a naked arbitrary fashion
we must uphold it as being constitutional. It seems to us that, properly
understood the charging section does not confer any despotic power on the
Department to treat associations differently and tax with governed only by its
will. There is sufficient indication in the scheme, design and policy of the
Act to fetter free and unbridled taxing power. We are therefore, of opinion
that the challenge on the Act is unsustainable.
(2) We shall briefly refer to the facts leading up to these petitions. The
petitioner was treated as the "principal officer" of the association of
persons described as Messrs. M. M. Ipoh, and the Income-tax officer,
Karaikudi, assessed him in such capacity. There was a Hindu undivided family
with the name and Vilasam M. S. M. M. consisting of the father Meyyappa, and
his two minor sons, Chockalinga and Meyyappa. The family carried on business
in money-lending, purchase and sale of rubber gardens in the Malay States,
Burma and India. Besides the exclusive business carried on by the family, it
was also a partner in another business. A partition was effected among the
members of the family by a deed dated 5-4-1940 with effect from 22-2-1940. The
sons wee minors on that date and were represented by their mother as guardian.
Two of the business owned by the family referred to as the Karaikudi and the
Rangoon business were allotted to the share of the father Mayyappa. In
addition the father also took three rubber estates and three house properties.
The other businesses were divided equally among the shares, the father and his
two minor sons. Even after the alleged partition, the father continued to be
in management of all the businesses and the properties. In respect of the
three rubber estates and the house properties which the father took in the
partition, separate books of account were opened under the Vilasam 'M. M.'. In
1941, another son was born to Meyyappa and he was named Chettiappa. The father
and this after-born minor son constituted a Hindu undivided family, in respect
of the properties allotted to Meyyappa at the partition. This state of affairs
continued till 1949, when one of the sons of Meyyappa, Chockalinga attained
age. On 30-12-1949, there was a partnership between the father and the sons,
the father and the adult son becoming partners, and the minor sons being
admitted to the benefits of the partnership. This related to the business
carried on under the vilasam 'M.S.M.M.' at Ipoh. In this partnership, Meyyappa
represented the Hindu undivided family consisting of himself and his minor
son, Chettiappa.
Then followed a partition between Meyyappa and Chettiappa on 13-4-1950.
Chettiappa was also admitted tot he benefits of the partnership already
circumstances under which a fine should be imposed rather than a term of
imprisonment. That would depend upon the gravity of the offence, the
mitigating circumstances pleaded before the trying Magistrate and several
other factors. We have not so far heard it contended that the provisions of
the Indian Penal Code offend Art. 14 of the Constitution. The standard to be
followed by an authority in the matter of exercise of discretion may either be
expressly found within the four corners of the statute, or may be gleaned from
the underlying policy of the Act. If we are satisfied that, in the scheme of
Indian Income-tax Act, the Department had not been clothed with the powers of
taxing an association or the individual members in a naked arbitrary fashion
we must uphold it as being constitutional. It seems to us that, properly
understood the charging section does not confer any despotic power on the
Department to treat associations differently and tax with governed only by its
will. There is sufficient indication in the scheme, design and policy of the
Act to fetter free and unbridled taxing power. We are therefore, of opinion
that the challenge on the Act is unsustainable.
