

Delhi High Court

Central Board Of Secondary ... vs Sh. Anil Kumar Kathpal on 24 May, 2012

Author: Rajiv Sahai Endlaw

    
    
    *     IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
    
                                             Date of decision: 24th May, 2012
    
    +                        LPA No.1090/2011
    
    %     CENTRAL BOARD OF SECONDARY EDUCATION....Appellant
                      Through: Ms. Manisha Singh, Adv. for
                               Mr. Amit Bansal, Adv.
    
                                      Versus
    
        SH. ANIL KUMAR KATHPAL                    ..... Respondent
                      Through: Respondent in person.
    CORAM :-
    HON'BLE THE ACTING CHIEF JUSTICE
    HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE RAJIV SAHAI ENDLAW
                                    JUDGMENT
    

RAJIV SAHAI ENDLAW, J.

1\. This intra-court appeal impugns the judgment dated 07.12.2011 of the
learned Single Judge dismissing W.P.(C) No.8532/2011 preferred by the
appellant. The said writ petition was filed by the appellant assailing the
order dated 27.09.2011 of the Central Information Commission (CIC) allowing
the appeal of the respondent.

2\. The daughter of the respondent passed the Class X examination held by the
appellant in the year 2010 and her result declared by the appellant was as
under:

LPA No.1090/2011 Page 1 of 11

    
    
     SUB CODE           SUB NAME                 GRADE GRADE POINT
       101             ENGLISH COMM.              A2      09
       002             HINDI COURSE-A             A1      10
       041             MATHEMATICS                A1      10
       086             SCIENCE                    A1      10
       087             SOCIAL SCIENCE             A1      10
    
    

3\. The respondent, under the provisions of the Right to Information Act,
2005, sought from the appellant the actual marks secured by his daughter in
each subject for the reason "this information will help me to identify her
week areas in studies and take timely action, so that she can pursue her
career after XII. I hereby certify that I will neither reveal the above
information to her nor put any pressure on her."

4\. The Information Officer of the appellant informed the respondent that with
the introduction of the grading system at secondary examination with effect
from the year 2010, the appellant had done away with intimating marks and
therefore the information sought could not be provided.

5\. The respondent preferred the statutory first appeal which was dismissed
observing that:

> i) the National Policy on Education 1986 and Programme of Action 1992 had
> provided for recasting of the examination system and suggested that grades
> be used in place of marks;

> ii) that the National Curriculum Framework 2005 also envisaged LPA
> No.1090/2011 Page 2 of 11 an evaluation system which would grade the
> students on their regular activities in the classroom and enable students to
> understand and focus on their learning gaps and learn through these as part
> of Formative Assessment;

> iii). that the introduction of grades in the examination had been debated by
> the appellant also and after holding countrywide consultations and
> deliberations with eminent educationists and experts, the nine point grading
> system had been introduced in the secondary school examination from the year
> 2010;

> iv). The system of declaring subject wise marks had thus been replaced by
> subject wise grades and grade point;

> v). the purpose of introducing the grading system was to take away the
> frightening judgmental quality of marks, to lead to a stress free and joyful
> learning environment and was intended to minimize mis-classification of
> students on the basis of marks, to eliminate unhealthy cut-throat
> competition and to reduce societal pressure etc. The order denying
> information as to marks was thus upheld.

6\. The respondent pursued the matter before the CIC. It was the LPA
No.1090/2011 Page 3 of 11 contention of the appellant before the CIC also
that, to provide specific marks would be contrary to the policy of introducing
the grading system and would undo the grading system. However the appellant,
on enquiry by the CIC, confirmed that the marks awarded were available with
the appellant in their data. The CIC held that since, the marks were available
with the appellant and since none of the exemptions under the RTI Act were
attracted to support the non disclosure thereof, the appellant was bound to
and directed to provide the information sought.

7\. It was the argument of the appellant before the learned Single Judge also
that disclosure of the marks would dilute and defeat the grading system. The
learned Single Judge however held that since the respondent was seeking
disclosure of marks, only of his daughter and further since his daughter who
has since attained majority had also consented to the same and since the
respondent was not seeking disclosure of marks obtained by other students and
further since the appellant was possessed of the information sought, it was
required to disclose the same. It was further observed that a student is
entitled to know the marks secured by him / her.

8\. Notice of this appeal was issued and the operation of the impugned order
stayed. The respondent appearing in person has been heard. Though LPA
No.1090/2011 Page 4 of 11 opportunity was given to the appellant to file
written arguments but no written arguments were filed.

9\. The documents filed by the appellant show that the appellant, vide its
letter dated 29.09.2009 to the Heads of all the Institutions affiliated to it,
while introducing the system of Grading at Secondary School level, explained
the evaluation process as under:

> "2.3 In this system, student's performance will be assessed using
> conventional numerical marking mode, and the same will be later converted
> into the grades on the basis of the pre- determined marks ranges as detailed
> below:
    
    
                MARKS RANGE            GRADE          GRADE POINT
                    91-100               A1               10.0
                     81-90               A2               9.0
                     71-80               B1               8.0
                     61-70               B2               7.0
                     51-60               C1               6.0
                     41-50               C2               5.0
                     33-40               D                4.0
                     21-32               E1                --
                 20 and below            E2                --
    
    

> The operational modalities were prescribed in the said letter as under: "4.
> Operational Modalities 4.1 The student's performance shall be assessed using
> conventional method of numerical marking. 4.2 The 'Grades' shall be awarded
> to indicate the subject wise performance.

> 4.3 The 'Grades' shall be awarded on a nine point scale as per Table at para
> 2.3.

LPA No.1090/2011 Page 5 of 11

> 4.4 Only subject wise grades shall be shown in the "Statement of Subject
> wise Performance" to be issued to all candidates.

> 4.5 Subject-wise percentile score / rank at the National level shall be
> provided to the schools on demand."

10\. The appellant has also placed before us the judgment of Division Bench of
this Court in Independent Schools' Federation of India (Regd.) Vs. Central
Board of Secondary Education 183(2011) DLT 211 upholding the grading system
introduced by the appellant and dismissing the challenge thereto. The
challenge to the grading system, in the said proceeding also was inter alia on
the ground that replacing marks by grades was only a cosmetic change and would
mar the quality of education and the concept of grading was virtually an eye-
wash. Needless to state that the said challenge was also found to be without
any basis and rejected.

11\. What we find to have prevailed with the CIC and the learned Single Judge
is that, despite introduction of grading system, marks existed with the
appellant; it was held that once the information sought was available, there
could be no denial thereof. What also prevailed was that the respondent was
seeking marks only of his ward and not of other students and thus there could
be no objection to disclosure thereof. The CIC also observed that the
information sought was not exempt.

LPA No.1090/2011 Page 6 of 11

12\. We are unable to agree; we feel that the CIC as well as the learned
Single Judge, by directing disclosure of „marks‟, in the regime of „grades‟
have indeed undone what was sought to be done by replacing marks with grades
and defeated the very objective thereof. The objective, in replacing the marks
with grades, as can be gathered from the documents on record, was to grade
students in a bandwidth rather than numerically; it was felt that difference,
between a student having 81% and a student having 89%, could be owing to
subjectivity in marking and there was no reason to otherwise consider a bearer
of 81 percentile to be inferior to a bearer of 89 percentile and there was no
reason to treat them differently. It was thus decided to place both in grade
A2 with grade point 9 as aforesaid. Though ideally, the examiner in such cases
ought to give both of them grade A2 only, without giving them 81% and 89% as
aforesaid but it appears that since the teachers and examiners also, owing to
the long past practice were used to marking instead grading students, for
their guidance, the range was prescribed as aforesaid. Thus it appears that
though the marks are available but in law and fact they ought not to have been
available. The marks appear to be available with the appellant only owing to
the examiners and teachers being not immediately accustomed to grading and for
their convenience. LPA No.1090/2011 Page 7 of 11

13\. The question which arises is, whether the information which ought not to
have been there as per the changed policy upheld by the Court can be treated
as information within the meaning of the RTI Act. In our opinion no.
Information which is forbidden by law or information of a nature, if
disclosed, would defeat the provisions of any law or disclosure whereof is
opposed to public policy, cannot be regarded as „lawful‟ and is to be ignored
and no disclosure thereof can be made or directed to be made.

14\. No doubt, as the CIC also has observed, none of the clauses of Section 8,
if literally interpreted, are attracted. However while interpreting a
statutory provision, we cannot shut our eyes to hard realities, to what was
sought to be achieved thereby and cannot in a pedantic manner allow the
literal interpretation to run amock and create a situation not intended by the
statute. Moreover, a reading of the provisions of the RTI Act in the manner
done by the CIC and the learned Single Judge would bring it in conflict with
other laws and notwithstanding the overriding effect given thereto by Section
22 thereof, the first attempt has to be to harmonise its provisions with other
laws. Once a purposive interpretation is given to Section 8, it will be found
that information forbidden to be published [Section 8(1)(b)] and information
available in fiduciary relationship [Section 8(1)(e)] is exempt. LPA
No.1090/2011 Page 8 of 11 In our opinion, even though there is no express
order of any court of law forbidding publication of marks [as is the want of
Section 8(1)(b)] but the effect of bringing the regime of grades in place of
marks and of dismissal of challenge thereto, is to forbid
publication/disclosure of marks. Similarly, in the evaluation process
prescribed by appellant, for guidance of its examiners, marks are only to
arrive at a grade, perhaps as aforesaid to acquaint the examiners with the
grading system and as a transitory stage in the shift from marks to grades.

15\. The Supreme Court in Kailash Chand v. Dharam Das (2005) 5 SCC 375
reiterated that a statute can never be exhaustive and legislature is incapable
of contemplating all possible situations which may arise in future litigation
and in myriad circumstances and it is for the Court to interpret the law with
pragmatism and consistently with demands of varying situations. The
legislative intent has to be found out and effectuated. Earlier also in Smt.
Pushpa Devi v. Milkhi Ram (1990) 2 SCC 134 the same sentiment was expressed by
holding that law as creative response should be so interpreted to meet the
different fact situations coming before the court, for Acts of Parliament were
not drafted with divine prescience and perfect clarity and when conflicting
interests arise, the court by consideration of LPA No.1090/2011 Page 9 of 11
legislative intent must supplement the written word with force and life. Lord
Denning (in Seaford Estate Ltd. v. Asher (1949) 2 KB 481) observing that the
judge must consciously seek to mould the law so as to serve the needs of time
and must not be a mere mechanic, was quoted with approval.

16\. The Supreme Court recently in The Institute of Chartered Accountants of
India v. Shaunak H. Satya (2011) 8 SCC 781, in the context of the RTI Act
itself held that in achieving the objective of transparency and accountability
of the RTI Act other equally important public interests including preservation
of confidentiality of sensitive information, are not to be ignored or
sacrificed and that it has to be ensured that the revelation of information in
actual practice, does not harm or adversely affect other public interests
including of preservation of confidentiality of sensitive information. We have
already held above that disclosure of marks, which though exists with the
appellant would amount to allowing play to the policy earlier prevalent of
marking the examinees. Merely because the appellant/its examiners for the
purpose of grading, first mark the students would not compel this court to put
at naught or to allow full play to the new policy of grades.

17\. No weightage can also be given to the submission of the respondent LPA
No.1090/2011 Page 10 of 11 that the marks even if disclosed would not be used
for any other purpose. Such an offer cannot be enforced by the Court and the
Court cannot on the basis thereof allow disclosure of something which was not
intended to exist in the first place. The possibility of the respondent and
his ward, in securing admission and for other purposes using the said
information to secure an advantage over others cannot be ruled out.

18\. We are therefore unable to agree with the reasoning of the CIC and of the
learned Single Judge and allow this appeal. We hold the information,
disclosure of which was sought, to be no information and also exempt from
disclosure. We allow this appeal as well as the writ petition preferred by the
respondent and set aside the order dated 27.09.2011 of the CIC.

No order as to costs.

RAJIV SAHAI ENDLAW, J ACTING CHIEF JUSTICE MAY 24, 2012 gsr LPA No.1090/2011
Page 11 of 11

