

Kerala High Court

Kerala Arecanut Stores vs Ramkishore And Sons And Anr. on 20 June, 1974

Equivalent citations: AIR 1975 Ker 144

Author: S Poti

Bench: P S Poti, K Narendran

JUDGMENT Subramonian Poti, J.

1\. The question for decision here is quite an interesting one. Whether the
suit by a partner of an unregistered firm for recovery of mony claimed on the
dishonour of a cheque endorsed in favour of the firm would be maintainable is
the question in controversy. It was contended that the suit is barred by
Section 69 (2) of the Indian Partnership Act. The court below, while holding
in favour of the plaintiff on the merits of the case, dismissed the suit
accepting this contention. The plaintiff has, hence, come up to this court in
appeal.

2\. The plaintiff-company claims to be a firm registered under the Indian
Partnership Act. The plaintiff is said to be the managing partner. Admittedly
the first defendant issued three cheques, one for Rs. 7,500/-, another for Rs.
5,000/-and yet another for Rs. 2,500/,- all of the date 21-4-1965 in favor of
the second defendant firm and the second defendant firm receiving
consideration endorsed these cheques to the plaintiff. These were sent for
collection by the plaintiff to the Canara Bank Limited, but they were
dishonoured and returned to the plaintiff. The plaintiff therefore claims the
amount of the cheque together with the interest and also the amount collected
by the Bank from the firm as discount.

3\. The suit was contested by the first defendant firm. Its case was that the
cheques were issued as security on a promise by the second defendant to supply
pepper to the first defendant and the understanding was that the cheques were
to be cashed only after such supply. The case is that the goods were not
actually supplied, but nevertheless second defendant collusively endorsed the
cheques in favour of the plaintiff. In short, the plea is that the cheques are
not supported by consideration and the plaintiff is not a holder in due
course. There was further contention that the plaintiff was not a registered
firm and the person who has filed the suit as managing partner was not a
partner at all.

4\. On the evidence, the court found that the cheques must be found to be
supported by consideration and the plaintiff was a holder in due course, but
nevertheless the court below dismissed the suit since it found that the
plaintiff firm being unregistered, the suit instituted by one of the partners
must be found to be barred by Section 69 (21 of the Indian Partnership Act.

5\. The only plea the plaintiff urges in this appeal is one of challenge to
the finding that the suit is unsustainable by reason of Section 69 (2) of the
Act. While seeking to support the judgment of the court below on this point
counsel for the defendant challenges the finding on the question of
consideration for the cheques and also the finding that the plaintiff is a
holder in due course. We will necessarily have to deal first with the plea of
the appellant that the lower court ought to have found the suit was sustain-
able in law.

6\. Section 69 of the Indian Partnership Act reads:

"69. (1) No suit to enforce a right arising from a contract or conferred by
this Act shall be instituted in any Court by or on behalf of any person suing
as a partner in a firm against the firm or any person alleged to be or to have
been a partner in a firm unless the firm is registered and the person suing is
or has been shown in the Register of Firms as a partner in the firm.

(2) No suit to enforce a right arising from a contract shall be instituted in
any court by or on behalf of a firm against any third party unless the firm is
registered and the persons suing are or have been shown in the register of
Firms as partners in the firm.

(3) The provisions of sub-sections (1) and (2) shall apply also to a claim of
set-off or other proceeding to enforce a right arising from a contract, but
shall not affect-

(a) the enforcement of any right to sue for the dissolution of a firm, or for
accounts of a dissolved firm, or any right or power to realise the property of
a dissolved firm, or

(b) the powers of an official assignee, receiver or Court under the Presidency
Towns Insolvency Act, 1909, or the Provincial Insolvency Act, 1920, to realise
the property of an insolvent partner.

(4) This section shall not apply:- (a) to firms or to partners in firms which
have no place of business in the territories to which this Act extends, or
whose places of business in the said territories are situated in areas to
which, by notification under Section 56, this Chapter does not apply, or.

(b) "to any suit or claim of set-off not exceeding one hundred rupees in value
which in the presidency towns, is not of a kind specified in Section 19 of the
Presidency Small Cause Courts Act, 1882, or, outside the presidency towns, is
not of a kind specified in the Second Schedule to the Provincial Small Cause
Courts Act. 1887, or to any proceeding in execution or other proceeding
incidental to or arising from any such suit or claim." This is not claimed to
be a suit against a firm or against any person alleged to be or to have been a
partner in the firm. Evidently therefore Section 69 (1) is not applicable.
Reliance is placed on Section 69 (2). According to learned counsel for the
first defendant the suit on the dishonoured cheques must be found to be a suit
to enforce a right arising from a contract instituted against a third party
and such a suit would not lie in a Court unless the firm is registered and
further the persons suing are or have been shown in the Register of Firms as
partners in the firm. There is controversy on the question whether the firm is
registered. Though plaintiff averred in the plaint that it was registered and
the first de-defendant categorically refuted it in the written statement and
an issue had been framed in the suit, no evidence was let in by the plaintiff
to show that the firm was registered. The certificate of registration was the
best evidence. That was not produced. On the evidence the Court below was
right in holding that the plaintiff firm was not registered. The plaintiff
relies on Ext. A-8, which is a memorandum acknowledging receipt of documents
by the Registrar of Firms, issued to the plaintiff. This is seen dated
3-6-1964. This does not indicate that the plaintiff's firm was registered. Any
application made under Section 58 must satisfy certain requirements, and it is
for the Registrar of Firms to decide whether registration could be granted or
not. Registration is not retrospective from the date of application, but is
operative only from the date the firm is registered. Therefore unless the
plaintiff succeeds in showing that there has actually been registration, by
the mere production of evidence to show that he had applied for registration,
his case cannot be found. Even here there has been no attempt to produce
evidence to show that the firm was registered, though it would appear from the
memorandum of appeal filed as early as in 1971 that sufficient opportunity has
not been granted is one of the grounds in appeal urged by the appellant. Hence
on that question we must agree with the Court below.

7\. Now that we find that the firm is not registered, the question is how far
the Court below was right in dismissing the suit. This arises because it is
not every suit by a partner of an unregistered firm that will have to be
dismissed as infringing Section 69 (2) of the Act. It is necessary that the
party contending that the suit is not maintainable must show that it is a suit
to enforce a right arising from a contract. Necessarily therefore whenever a
plea that the suit is not maintainable by reason of Section 69 (2) of the
Partnership Act is raised the Court will have to examine (1) what right is
sought to be enforced in the suit (2) does such right arise from a contract ?
If the right which is sought to be enforced arises otherwise than as in torts
or from rights conferred by statutory provisions necessarily the bar under
Section 69 (2) of the Indian Partnership Act will not operate.

8\. The Negotiable Instruments Act is a self contained enactment and provides
for the rights and obligations of parties to the negotiable instruments and
parties who acquire rights to such instruments in accordance with law. It may
be necessary, in this context, to refer to certain provisions of the
Negotiable Instruments Act relating to cheques. Section 30 of the Act defines
the liability of a drawer. It provides that a drawer of a bill of exchange or
cheque is bound, in case of dishonour by the drawee or acceptor thereof, to
compensate the holder, provided due notice of dishonour has been given to, or
received, by the drawer as provided in the Act. Section 36 defines the
liability of prior parties to the holder in due course and Section 37 concerns
the liability of a maker of a cheque. Section 36 provides that every prior
party to a negotiable instrument is liable thereon to a holder in due course
until the instrument is duly satisfied. Section 37 provides that the maker of
a promissory note or cheque, the drawer of a bill of exchange until
acceptance, and the accepter are in the absence of a contract to the contrary,
respectively liable thereon as principal debtors, and the other parties
thereto are liable thereon as sureties for the maker. Section 92 of the Act
relates to dishonour by non-payment. It defines that a cheque is dishonoured
by non-payment when the drawee of the cheque makes default in payment upon
being duly required to pay the same. When it is so dishonoured the holder
thereof or some party thereto who remains liable thereon has to give notice
that the instrument has been so dishonoured to all other parties whom the
holder seeks to make severally liable thereon and to some one of several
parties whom he seeks to make jointly liable thereon. This is the provision in
Section 93 of the Act.

9\. Reference has been made to these provisions to indicate that the
obligation of the drawer of a cheque as well as the indorser to the indorsee
who is the holder in due course arises by virtue of statutory provisions. It
is not as if there is any privity of contract between the maker of a cheque
and the holder in due course. Any right of action available to such holder is
not under any contract, for he would be a third Party to the contract and
would not come within one of the exceptions enabling a third party to a
contract to sue. But he is entitled to sue on his cheque by reason of the
right conferred upon him by the statute. In fact, in the case of an
indorsement of a pronote or of a cheque it is not an assignment of the debt as
such but only of the property in the note or the cheque and it is by virtue of
obtaining such property in the note or the cheque that the indorsee sues
thereon. It is not necessary to advert to the several decisions which indicate
that a person suing on a negotiable instrument is not suing by virtue of the
assignment of the debt. That, we think, is well settled and therefore we are
not referring to the decisions cited by counsel on this point. It is
sufficient to state here, for the purpose of this case, that the right of
action available to an indorsee of a cheque who comes to hold the cheque in
due course is based upon conferment on him by the statutory provisions the
right to sue the maker of the cheque and also the indorser. If that be the
case the right that is sought to be enforced does not arise from a contract.
It is not a suit by the indorsee to enforce a right arising out of a contract
and therefore the bar under Section 69 (2) of the Partnership Act will not
operate in such a case.

10\. We have not been referred to any decision directly bearing on the point.
No doubt there is a decision of this Court by a learned single Judge reported
in Sankeralinga Nadar v. Chacko, 1963 (1) Ker LR 443. That was a case where a
similar suit on a cheque was found to he sustainable since it was said that it
did not arise out of a contract. But there is no discussion on this question
in that decision.

11\. Having found that the suit would not be bad for the reason found by the
Court below, we have necessarily to consider the objections urged by the
defendant to the findings in the judgment under appeal which are against him.
According to him the Court was not right in holding that the cheques were
supported by consideration. Counsel for the respondent urges that the Court
ought to have found that the evidence in the case indicated that the cheques
were issued not as price of any goods supplied nor in satisfaction of any
money received, but purely as an arrangement by way of advance towards the
value of goods agreed to be supplied in due course and these could have been
presented only after such supplies were made. These questions have been urged
before the Court below. But we may state here that both parties adduced very
little evidence on this in the lower Court. Oral evidence is only that of the
managing partner of the plaintiff firm as PW1 and the manager of the defendant
firm as DW1. Reliance is sought to be placed by the first defendant on an
account book. Ext. B1. It would appear that the first defendant is a very well
established firm and we are surmised that the only account book produced is
Ext. B1 which does not appear to us to be an account book at all. Anyhow there
are entries in regard to certain transactions in that book and probably those
entries might have been regularly made. But that book must have been kept, in
addition to the regularly kept account books. We cannot conceive a state of
affairs when the first defendant firm was having only a book like Ext. B-1 and
no day book or ledger. Whatever that be, we think the criticism made by the
Court, below of Ext. B-1 is not well founded. There are entries in Ext. B-1
which would show that the second defendant firm had been receiving advances by
way of cheques even earlier. That is what the entries indicate in spite of
what the Court below says to the contrary. We are saving this because the
Court below seems to think that the entry in Page 125 of Exhibit B-1 to the
effect "otherwise can return cheques" is written in a different ink and assume
this to be a correction made subsequently. Possibly so. The rest of the entry
which of course could not have been any interpellation refers to the cheques
having been handed over to the second defendant by way of advances for the
goods to be supplied and therefore even if the words which are said to be made
by way of interpellation are omitted the idea conveyed by the entry which is
relied on is that the second defendant received these cheques as advances
against goods agreed to be supplied. Further the book contains other entries
of similar advances received by the second defendant firm. Unfortunately this
aspect of the matter has not been noticed by the Court below. Not that this is
conclusive of the issues, between the parties, but this is relevant in
properly assessing the merits of the controversy. It is true that Ext. B-1 has
not been produced before the Sales Tax Department. It is also not been
produced before the Income-tax authorities. Probably there are other books
which have been so produced. There has not been a Proper cross-examination
also on this point. The disputed entries in Ext. B-1 are seen signed by the
representative of the second defendant. There is no cross-examination as to
whether the signatures appearing as that of the second defendant are really
that of the second defendant. None has been examined on behalf of the second
defendant. The first defendant would have been well advised to take steps to
properly prove the acknowledgment by the second defendant in regard to these
entries. Thus we feel that while on the evidence the Court below was possibly
right in coming to the conclusion reached by it, this is a case where the
parties Would have been well advised to adduce better evidence and therefore
when the first defendant prays for a further opportunity to adduce evidence we
are inclined to view it favourably. It is not that merely for the asking we
are inclined to give an opportunity. That should not be the case. But taking
into account the circumstances and the nature of the evidence in the case, we
are not happy that the matter should be left as it is and in the interests of
justice, we are inclined to grant an opportunity to the first defendant
provided he is agreeable to comply with the heavy terms that we propose to
impose. In case the entire costs of the appellant in this appeal is paid by
the first defendant to the appellant's counsel in this Court within one month
from this date, the decree of the Court below will stand set aside and the
case will stand remitted to the Court below for enabling the parties to adduce
evidence and in that event the Court below will take up the matter immediately
and post the case day-to-day and dispose it of within four months from the
date of receipt of records in that Court. In case the condition is not
complied with, there is no question of further opportunity and on the evidence
the first defendant must lose his case on the merits. Now that we have found
that the suit is maintainable that would mean that the plaintiff would be
entitled to a decree in terms of the plaint. In that event the plaint will
stand decreed with costs throughout.

