

Custom, Excise & Service Tax Tribunal

M/S. Ritzbury India (P) Ltd vs Cce, Chennai on 2 May, 2012

    
    
            
    
     
    IN THE CUSTOMS, EXCISE & SERVICE TAX
    APPELLATE TRIBUNAL
    SOUTH ZONAL BENCH, CHENNAI
    
    E/774/2004 (Assessee Appeal)
    E/847/2004 (Dept. Appeal) 
    
    (Arising out of Order-in-Appeal No. 13/2004 (M-III) (D) dated 6.4.2004 passed by the Commissioner of Central Excise (Appeals), Chennai)
    
    For approval and signature:
    
    
    Honble Smt. Archana Wadhwa, Judicial Member 
    Honble Dr. Chittaranjan Satapathy, Technical Member
    
    1. Whether Press Reporters may be allowed to see the Order for Publication as per Rule 27 of the CESTAT (Procedure) Rules, 1982?
    
    2. Whether it should be released under Rule 27 of the CESTAT (Procedure) Rules, 1982 for publication in any authoritative report or not?
    
    3. Whether the Members wish to see the fair copy of the Order?
    
    4. Whether Order is to be circulated to the Departmental authorities?
    
    
    M/s. Ritzbury India (P) Ltd.						
    CCE, Chennai							Appellants
    
         
         Vs.
    
    
    CCE, Chennai
    M/s. Ritzbury India (P) Ltd.				        Respondents

Appearance Shri G. Natarajan, Advocate, for the Assessee Ms. Indira Sisupal,
JDR for the Department CORAM Honble Smt. Archana Wadhwa, Judicial Member
Honble Dr. Chittaranjan Satapathy, Technical Member Date of Hearing:
02.05.2012 Date of Decision: 02.05.2012 Final Order No. ____________ Per Dr.
Chittaranjan Satapathy Heard both sides.

2\. The appellants manufacture biscuits bearing the brand names RITZBURY and
MUNCHEE. The appellants have been denied SSI exemption on the allegation
that the brand name Ritzbury belongs to M/s. Ritzbury Lanka (P) Limited, Sri
Lanka and the brand name Munchee belongs to M/s. Ceylon Biscuits Limited,
Sri Lanka. The appellants are a 100% subsidiary of M/s. Ritzbury Lanka (P)
Limited, Sri Lanka, who in turn is a 100% subsidiary of M/s. Ceylon Biscuits
Limited, Sri Lanka.

3\. The Departments allegation against the appellants was based on the
decision of the Honble Tribunal in the case of Namtech Systems Ltd. Vs. CCE 
2000 (115) ELT 238, wherein it was held that if the specified goods are
affixed with the brand name of a foreign person, or a trader who is not a
manufacturer, the benefit of SSI exemption would not be available. The
Department also relied on the decision of the Honble Supreme Court in the
case of Indian Management Advisors and Leasing (P) Ltd. Vs. CCE  2002 (143)
ELT 241 (SC), wherein it was held that if a manufacturer affixes the brand
name of another person who is not at all a manufacturer, the benefit of SSI
exemption would not be available.

4\. The original authority dropped the proceedings distinguishing the above
cited two case laws on the ground that the appellants have obtained ownership
of the impugned brand names Ritzbury and Munchee in India.

5\. However, the lower appellate authority allowed the Departments appeal and
confirmed the demand of duty. He relied on the Honble Supreme Courts
decision in the case of Union of India Vs. Paliwal Electricals (P) Ltd.  1996
(83) ELT 241 (SC) which held that if a small scale manufacturer affixes the
brand name of another person who is not eligible for the exemption under the
notification then the said person cannot get the SSI exemption. He has held
that since the foreign companies are not eligible for the benefit of small
scale exemption, the appellants using their brand name are also not eligible
for the SSI exemption. He also relied on the decision of the Tribunal in the
case of Sonama Aromatics (P) Ltd. Vs. CCE  1995 (78) ELT 285, wherein the
Tribunal has held that the benefit of SSI exemption would not be available if
a manufacturer acts as an agent of the foreign company. The lower appellate
authority also relied on the decision of the Honble Supreme Court in the case
of CCE vs. Rukmani Pakkwell Traders  2004 (165) ELT 481 (SC), in which it has
been held that if a manufacturer uses even a part of the brand name of another
person, he shall be disentitled to claim the benefit of SSI exemption.

6\. It has been argued on behalf of the appellants that they have not used the
brand name of any other person, that the impugned brand names were owned by
the 100% holding companies of the appellant-company and that even though
holding companies and subsidiary companies are separate entities, in the eyes
of law, they shall not be considered completely different from one another. In
this case, the holding companies in Sri Lanka have assigned the exclusive
right of using their respective brand names to the appellants vide their
letter dated 15.8.1997 and the appellants have applied for registration vide
their application dated 15.7.2002. It has been held in the case of CCE,
Ahmedabad Vs. Vikshara Trading & Investment Pvt. Ltd.  2003 (157) ELT 4 (SC),
that the registration of the assignment is not a statutory requirement to
avail the benefit of SSI exemption. It is also submitted that the appellants
have not acted as an agent of the foreign company and therefore the decision
in the case of Sonama Aromatics (supra) cannot be applied to their case.
Similarly, the ratio of Rukmani Pakkwell (supra) cannot also be applied in the
case of the appellants as they are not using brand name of any other person.

7\. In the course of hearing, the learned counsel for the appellants also
relies on the decision of the Honble Supreme Court in the case of CCE, Meerut
Vs. Convertech Equipment Pvt. Ltd.  2011 (272) ELT 342 (SC), wherein the
Honble Supreme Court has held as follows:-

Before the Tribunal, the following two points were raised by the assessee-
respondent.

1.?Whether the price at which the respondent sold the product should be
treated as cum duty price and therefore the excise duty should be deducted
from the price for arriving at the assessable value.

2.?Whether affixation of brand name of a foreign company but otherwise
registered in the name of the Indian company would disentitle the Indian
company namely the assessee to the benefit of exemption under SSI notification
1/93/ On the first point, the case has been remanded back to the Commissioner
for re-quantification against which the revenue has no grievance. The findings
recorded by the Tribunal on point No. 1 is, therefore, affirmed.

2\. Point No. 2 has been decided by the? Tribunal against the revenue relying
upon a judgment of the Single Bench of the Calcutta High Court in the case of
ESBI Transmission Pvt. Ltd. v. CCE - 1997 (91) E.L.T. 47 (Cal.) which was
upheld by a Division Bench of that Court in CCE v. ESBI Transmission Pvt. Ltd.
- 1997 (91) E.L.T. 292.

3\. Admittedly, against the judgment of the Calcutta High Court the revenue
did not file any appeal. The same has become final.

4\. Since, the revenue did not challenge the judgment of the Calcutta High
Court in the afore-mentioned case, the revenue cannot be permitted to re-
agitate the pint which is concluded by the aofre-mentioned judgment of the
Calcutta High Court in the present appeal. This part, it has been pointed out
by the counsel appearing for the respondent which is not controverted by the
counsel for the revenue that the point also stands concluded by a judgment of
this Court in Commissioner of Central Excise, Goa v. Primella Sanitary
Products, 2005 (184) E.L.T. 125 (S.C.).

5\. In view of this, we find no merit in this appeal and dismiss the same
leaving the parties to bear their own costs. Reliance has also been placed on
the decision of the Honble Calcutta High Court in the case of Esbi
Transmissions Private Ltd. Vs. Collector of Central Excise  1997 (91) ELT 47
(Cal.), in which it has been held that there is no bar to availing SSI
exemption if the unit is using a trade mark belonging to the foreign firm so
long as the said unit is exclusive owner of the said trade mark in India.

8\. The learned DR, on the other hand, supports the impugned order for the
reasons recorded therein. Further reliance is placed on behalf of the
Department on the decision of the Tribunal and the Honble Supreme Court in
the cases of Vee Gee Faucets Pvt. Ltd. Vs. CCE, Gurgaon  2010 (259) ELT 273,
CCE, Bangalore Vs. Meyer Health Care Pvt. Ltd.  2011 (267) ELT 145 (SC) and
Meghraj Biscuits Industries Ltd. Vs. CCE  2007 (210) ELT 161 (SC), to canvass
the point that mere assignment of a brand name does not make the appellant
owner of the brand name for the purpose of SSI exemption. The learned DR also
argues that small scale exemption is meant for small producers and not for
subsidiaries of foreign companies.

9\. We have considered arguments from both sides, the case records as well as
the cited case laws. We find that the period in question in this case is
November 1999 to June 2002. The duty involved is Rs.18,81,084/- and the show-
cause notice has been issued on 10.1.2003. The appellants have contended that
the assignment of the brand name was done by a letter dated 15.8.1997 but the
application for registration was done only on 15.7.2002 after the
jurisdictional officers started enquiring about the affixation of brand names
owned by others vide letter dated 5.11.2001. We find that there are two
streams of precedent decisions which are applicable to a case of this kind. In
the case of CCE, Mumbai Vs. Capital Controls (I) Pvt. Ltd.  2008 (232) ELT
357, it was held by the Tribunal in the case of assignment of brand name by a
foreign collaborator that right to use brand name is different from ownership
and merely right to use by the assignment does not confer ownership and
accordingly small scale exemption is not available. In the case of CCE, Jaipur
Vs. Dugar Tetenal India Ltd.  2008 (224) ELT 180 (SC), the Honble Supreme
Court held that small scale exemption was not available when the brand name
Tetenal belonging to the foreign collaborator was used. In Meghraj Biscuits
(supra) and in Meyer Health Care (supra), the Honble Supreme Court held that
retrospective date of registration as applicable under trade mark law cannot
be extended to excise law for the purpose of small scale exemption and the
assessee was not entitled to take benefit of an assignment deed for the said
purpose.

10\. However, we find that in the case of CCE, Goa Vs. Primella Sanitary
Products  2005 (184) ELT 125 (SC), the Honble Supreme Court upheld the order
of the Tribunal that in view of the assignment, the assessee in that case was
entitled to use the mark Comfit always and that as long as the assignment
stands, the assessee was entitled to the benefit of small scale exemption. In
the case of Convertech Equipment (supra), the Honble Supreme Court has also
upheld the decision of the Tribunal that affixation of a brand name of a
foreign company otherwise registered in the name of the Indian company would
not be a bar to availing small scale exemption.

11\. We find that the Honble Supreme Courts decision in the cases of
Primella Sanitary Products (supra) and Convertech Equipment (supra) have been
rendered by the Benches comprising of three Honble Judges, hence, following
the ratio of these decisions, we hold that the appellant-assessee herein is
entitled to the small scale exemption. Hence, we set aside the impugned Order-
in-Appeal and restore the Order-in-Original. Consequently, the assessees
appeal is allowed and the Departments appeal for enhancement of penalty is
dismissed.

    
    
    (Operative portion of the order was pronounced 
    in open court on 2.5.2012)
    
    
    
    
    
    (Dr. Chittaranjan Satapathy)		        (Archana Wadhwa) 
           Technical Member				  Judicial Member 	
    
    Rex 
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    2
    
    
    
    
              

