

Delhi High Court

Commissioner Of Income Tax vs M/S Asahi India Safety Glass Ltd. on 4 November,
2011

Author: Rajiv Shakdher

    
    
    *                           THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
    
                                                           Judgment reserved on: 08.09.2011
    %                                                      Judgment delivered on: 04.11.2011
    
    +                           ITA Nos. 1110/2006 & 1111/2006
    
    
    COMMISSIONER OF INCOME TAX                                           ...... APPELLANT
    
                                                      Vs
    
    
    M/S ASAHI INDIA SAFETY GLASS LTD.                                    ..... RESPONDENT

Advocates who appeared in this case:

For the Appellant: Mr Sanjeev Rajpal, Advocate For the Respondent: Mr M.S.
Syali, Sr. Advocate with Mr O.P. Sapra, Ms Mahua Kalra & Ms Husnal Syali,
Advocates.

CORAM :-

HON'BLE MR JUSTICE SANJAY KISHAN KAUL HON'BLE MR JUSTICE RAJIV SHAKDHER

1\. Whether the Reporters of local papers may Yes be allowed to see the
judgment ?

    
    
    2.       To be referred to Reporters or not ?                        Yes
    3.       Whether the judgment should be reported                     Yes
             in the Digest ?
    
    RAJIV SHAKDHER, J
    
    

1\. The captioned appeals pertain to assessment years 1997-98 and 1998-99. The
Income Tax Appellate Tribunal (hereinafter referred to as the „Tribunal‟) had
by a common judgment dated 29.12.2005 disposed of three appeals pertaining to
the aforementioned assessment years. Out of the three appeals, two appeals had
been filed by the revenue, while the third appeal had been filed by the
assessee. The revenue had filed appeals for both the assessment years, i.e.,
1997-98 and 1998-99, while the ITA 1110/2006 & 1111/2006 Page 1 of 17 assessee
had filed an appeal only qua assessment year 1997-98. However, before us the
common ground is that the appeals pertained to a singular issue, though the
amounts involved differ in each of the captioned assessment years. Therefore,
we have framed the following questions of law for assessment years 1996-97 and
1998-99, which, as would be evident, apart from the amounts involved are
otherwise identical:

> Assessment year 1998-99 Whether ITAT was correct in law in holding that the
> expenditure of Rs 1,70,68,811/- incurred by the assessee on account of
> software and professional expenses was a revenue expenditure?

> Assessment year 1997-98 Whether ITAT was correct in law in holding that the
> expenditure of Rs 1,36,77,664/- incurred by the assessee on account of
> software and professional expenses was a revenue expenditure?

2\. Given aforesaid circumstances, following facts are required to be noticed
in order to adjudicate upon the issues culled out above: 2.1 The assessee it
appears had installed a software in the financial year 1996-97, relevant for
assessment year 1997-98. The software was installed by Arthur Anderson &
Associates, which is an accounting and consulting firm, pursuant to an
agreement dated 25.06.1996 executed with the assessee. The software was based
on application software, commonly known as, oracle application. In respect of
this, an agreement appears to have been executed between the assessee and
Oracle Software India Pvt. Ltd. The agreement between the assessee and Arthur
Anderson & Associates ITA 1110/2006 & 1111/2006 Page 2 of 17 inter alia
adverted to the manner in which oracle application had to be implemented.

3\. In the assessment year 1997-98, the assessee had amortized an expenditure
amounting to Rs 1,36,77,664/- towards software and professional expenses under
the head "deferred revenue expenditure". It is pertinent to note that the
assessee had not written off any part of this expenditure in its books of
accounts, during the assessment year 1997-98; though, while computing its
taxable income the assessee claimed the entire amount as expenditure on
revenue account. In the succeeding assessment year, i.e., 1998-99, an
additional expenditure in the sum of Rs 1.71 crores was claimed as deduction.
During the assessment proceedings conducted in respect of assessment year
1997-98, the assessing officer noticed the aforementioned aspect and,
therefore, called upon the assessee to give details of the nature of software
purchased and, the period by which it was likely to be replaced. The assessee
responded to the query raised, by broadly stating as follows:

> "a) that software technology is very rapidly changing and hence there is no
> enduring benefit.

> b) In the instant case, software has been installed for carrying on the
> assessee's business more efficiently and that the said expenditure has not
> brought into existence any asset which is capable of being source of income.

> c) that the software installed in F.Y. 96-97, due to various deficiencies,
> had to be upgraded in the following F.Y. and ITA 1110/2006 & 1111/2006 Page
> 3 of 17 an additional expenditure of Rs 1.71 crores was incurred for this
> purpose."

3.1 The Assessing Officer, however, did not accept the explanation given by
the assessee, and thus, proceeded to disallow the deduction claimed by the
assessee. Briefly, the reasons for doing so were as follows:

(i) the expense was incurred by the assessee towards an „intensive project‟
with the idea of overhauling the method accountancy, and to efficiently train
the accounting staff of the assessee;

(ii) the project spanned over a period of 18-24 months;

(iii) the expenditure incurred by the assessee had accorded long term benefit
to it - since it would serve the assessee‟s purpose for a number of years as
also the fact that it would enhance the income of the assessee;

3.2 The fact that the assessee had incurred an expenditure in the succeeding
year as well weighed with the Assessing Officer in coming to the conclusion
that the expenditure incurred had brought about enduring benefit to the
assessee.

3.3 Towards this end, the Assessing Officer also observed that the expenditure
incurred in the financial year 1997-98 (assessment year 1998-99) was towards a
"project" and not for „upgradation of an existing project or for rectification
of mistakes‟. 3.4 The Assessing Officer, broadly for the foregoing reasons, as
indicated above, rejected the claim for deduction and, as a matter of fact
also denied, it appears, the depreciation allowance to the ITA 1110/2006 &
1111/2006 Page 4 of 17 assessee on the ground that there was no clarity as to
whether in the relevant period the assessee had put the software to use. 3.5
In the assessment year 1998-99 the Assessing Officer followed the rationale
adopted by his predecessors in the earlier assessment year, i.e., 1997-98 and
for the reasons given therein (i.e., that the expenditure was incurred towards
an ongoing project) disallowed the deduction claimed, by treating the
expenditure incurred, in the sum of Rs 1,70,68,811/-, as capital expenditure.
It appears that for the very same reason that there was no material to show
that the software had been used in the relevant period, i.e., assessment years
1998-99, depreciation was also disallowed to the assessee. However, the
assessee was allowed deduction under Section 80IA, after taking into account
the aforementioned disallowance.

4\. Being aggrieved, the assessee preferred appeals with the Commissioner of
Income Tax (Appeals) [hereinafter referred to as „CIT(A)‟] in respect of
orders passed by the Assessing Officer for both the assessment years, i.e.,
1997-98 and 1998-99. The CIT(A), in respect of both appeals passed a common
order. After noticing at great length the terms of the agreement entered into
between the assessee and Arthur Anderson & Associates, the submissions of the
parties and, the judgments cited on the issue; he came to the conclusion that
the assessee‟s claim for both the assessment years, i.e., 1997-98 and 1998-99
had to be allowed.

5\. The revenue being aggrieved by the decision of the CIT(A) preferred an
appeal to the Tribunal. The Tribunal, as indicated ITA 1110/2006 & 1111/2006
Page 5 of 17 above, passed a common judgment after noticing the aforementioned
facts in respect of the said assessment years. The Tribunal returned the
following finding of facts.

(i) The assessee was in the business of manufacturing of automobile safety
glass; broadly of two types, tampered and laminated, and that its main source
of income was from the said activity.

(ii) During the financial year 1996-97 (assessment year 1997-98) the assessee
had embarked upon a major computerization programme in the area of financial
accounting, purchases, inventory, production, planning and control.

(iii) Arthur Anderson & Associates presented a software package produced by
Oracle Corporation, USA, distributed through its associates Oracle Software
India Pvt. Ltd., vide its offer letter dated 25.06.1996. The said letter set
out the contours of what the software application envisaged. The software
application broadly dealt with financial accounting, inventory and purchase.
The assessee in terms of the arrangement arrived at with Arthour Anderson &
Associates was required to pay professional fee to it, and that on the
assessee accepting the offer of Aurthor Anderson & Associates was required to
enter into an agreement dated 28.06.1996 with Oracle Software India Pvt. Ltd.
The said agreement was titled as "Master Software Licence and Service
Agreement". ITA 1110/2006 & 1111/2006 Page 6 of 17

(iv) The software supplied to the assessee was not used as a part of any
production process. The agreement with Oracle was a licence agreement which
enabled the assessee to use the software.

(v) The assessee did not acquire any ownership in the software application;
all rights, title and interest in the application remained in Oracle.

(vi) In return for a right to use the software application, the assessee paid
licence fee and „not any purchase price‟.

(vii) In addition to the above, the agreement with Oracle was also provided
for extension of maintenance services, for which, the assessee was required to
pay an additional fee over and above, the licence fee.

(viii) The licence was terminable under the provisions of the agreement.

(ix) The assessee did not acquire any tangible asset or an asset which created
a new source of income or augmented the existing source of income.

(x) The expenses incurred facilitated, management and the conduct of the
assessee‟s business and, thus was not in the nature of a capital expenditure,
and

(xi) Lastly, the expenditure incurred by the assessee allowed it to run its
business „more efficiently‟ and perhaps „more profitably‟. 5.1 The expenditure
incurred in the aforementioned assessment years was found as having been
broadly incurred under following sub-heads:

ITA 1110/2006 & 1111/2006 Page 7 of 17

    
    
              (a)        Licence fee;
    
             (b)       Annual technical support fee;
    
             (c)       Professional charges;
    
             (d)       Data entry operator charges;
    
             (e)       Training charges; and
    
             (f)       Travelling expenses.
    
    5.2      Therefore, none of these expenses, according to the Tribunal
    
    

resulted in creation of new asset or a new source of income. The expenses
incurred were as per the Tribunal recurring in nature, expended either to
upgrade the system or run the system.

6\. Being aggrieved by the aforementioned judgment of the Tribunal, the
revenue preferred an appeal to this court. 6.1 On behalf of the revenue
arguments were advanced by Mr Sanjiv Rajpal, while on behalf of the assessee
submissions were made by Mr M.S. Syali, learned senior counsel. The learned
counsel for the revenue in support of his arguments relied upon the orders
passed by the assessing officer in the two assessment years to demonstrate
that the expenditure incurred was of a capital nature as it would enure to the
benefit of the assessee for a long period of time.

6.2 Mr Rajpal submitted that the very fact that a huge expense had been
incurred in the financial year 1997-98 (assessment year 1998-99) would show
that the expenditure was not incurred for the purposes of upgradation or for
correction of deficiencies, as has been found by the Tribunal.

ITA 1110/2006 & 1111/2006 Page 8 of 17 6.3 The learned counsel, thus,
contended that the deduction as claimed by the assessee ought to be disallowed
and the view taken by the Tribunal and the CIT(A) on the said issue,
consequently, be reversed.

6.4 In support of his submissions Mr Rajpal also highlighted the fact that the
assessee in its books of accounts had not debited the expenditure and, as a
matter of fact, had attempted to amortize the expenditure over a number of
years. This, according to Mr Rajpal, was a clear indicator that the
expenditure as per the assessee‟s own understanding was not made on revenue
account.

7\. On the other hand Mr Syali appearing for the assessee contended that it is
well settled in a catena of judgments, both of this court and of the Supreme
Court, that merely because an expenditure results in an enduring benefit would
not be a sufficient reason to treat the expenditure incurred as one expended
on capital account. Mr Syali submitted that what had to be deciphered in the
facts and circumstances of each case, the real intent and purpose of the
expenditure, to ascertain as to whether it resulted in bringing into existence
a capital asset. In support of his submissions learned counsel relied upon the
following judgments:

> CIT vs Indian Visit.com (P) Ltd. (2009) 176 Taxman 164 (Del); CIT vs GE
> Capital Services ltd. (2008) 300 ITR 420(Del); CIT vs K & Co. (2003) 181 CTR
> (Del) 378; CIT vs Sumitomo Corporation India, ITA No. 48/2005 dated
> 28.07.2005; Khem Singh Sankhla vs ITA 1110/2006 & 1111/2006 Page 9 of 17 UOI
> & Ors. (2003) 181 CTR 380 (Raj); CIT vs Varinder Agro Chemicals Ltd. (2009)
> 309 ITR 272 (P&H); CIT vs Southern Roadways Ltd. (2008) 304 ITR 84 (Mad);
> CIT vs Arawali Constructions Co. (P) Ltd. (2003) 259 ITR 30 (Raj.); CIT vs
> Raychem RPG Ltd. in ITA No. 4176/2009 dated 04.07.2011 of Bombay High Court;
> CIT vs Southern Roadways Ltd. (2007) 288 ITR 15 (Mad); Chief CIT vs O.K.
> Play India Ltd. passed in ITA No. 414/2006 dated 25.02.2011 by the Punjab &
> Haryana High Court; CIT vs Sundaram Clayton Ltd. (2010) 321 ITR 69 (Mad) and
> CIT vs Voith Paper Fabrics India Ltd passed in ITA No. 777/2010 dated
> 07.02.2011 by the Punjab & Haryana High Court.

8\. Having heard the learned counsel for the parties, what has emerged on
facts as found by the authorities below is as follows: The assessee is in the
business of manufacturing safety glass which is used in automobiles. Thus the
main source of income of the assessee is from the said activity. The assessee
appears to have entered into an agreement with Arthur Anderson & Associates in
the financial year 1996-97 (assessment year 1997-98) for installation of a
software application for assistance in areas related to financial accounting,
inventory and purchase. It has emerged that an offer was made in respect of
such a software application by Arthur Anderson & Associates, which find a
reflection in a letter dated 25.06.1996. The said agreement between the
assessee and Arthur ITA 1110/2006 & 1111/2006 Page 10 of 17 Anderson &
Associates also required the assessee to enter into a back-to-back agreement
with Oracle. The reasons perhaps being that the software application supplied
by the Aurthor Anderson & Associates worked on oracle application. It is
precisely for this reason that Arthur Anderson & Associates required the
assessee to enter into a licence agreement with oracle titled Master Software
Licence and Services Agreement. The assessee was thus, required to pay : apart
from the fee to Arthur Anderson & Associates qua its agreement with it;
licence fee to Oracle. As a matter of fact Oracle also offered support and
maintenance services for which a further additional fee was required to be
paid to Oracle. 8.1 The assessee thus admittedly in respect of the aforesaid
transactions incurred an expenditure to the tune of Rs 1,36,77,664/- and Rs
1,70,68,811/- in assessment years 1997-98 and 1998-99 respectively. In the
books of accounts for the assessment years 1997-98 the assessee had not
written off any sum, while in the succeeding assessment year, i.e., 1998-99
the assessee had written off a part of the expenditure amounting to Rs
9,91,228/-. 8.2 Given these facts, could it be said that the expenditure
incurred by the assessee in the aforementioned assessment years was in the
nature of capital expenditure.

9\. The revenue in support of its stand has taken recourse to the test of
enduring benefit. It is in our view now somewhat trite to say that the test of
enduring benefit is not a certain or a conclusive test which the courts can
apply almost by rote. What is required to be ITA 1110/2006 & 1111/2006 Page 11
of 17 seen is the real intent and purpose of the expenditure and whether the
expenditure results in creation of fixed capital for the assessee. It is
important to bear in mind that what is required to be seen is not whether the
advantage obtained lasts forever but whether the expense incurred does away
with a recurring expense(s) defrayed towards running a business as against an
expense undertaken for the benefit of the business as a whole. In other words,
the expenditure which is incurred, which enables the profit making structure
to work more efficiently leaving the source of the profit making structure
untouched, would in our view be an expense in the nature of revenue
expenditure. Fine tuning business operations to enable the management to run
its business effectively, efficiently and profitably; leaving the fixed assets
untouched would be an expenditure in the nature of revenue expenditure even
though the advantage may last for an indefinite period. Test of enduring
benefit or advantage would thus collapse in such like cases. It would in our
view be only truer in cases which deal with technology and software
application, which do not in any manner supplant the source of income or added
to the fixed capital of the assessee. [See Alembic Chemical Works Co. Ltd. vs
CIT (1989) 177 ITR 377; CIT vs J.K. Synthetics (2009) 309 ITR 371 at page 412
and CIT Vs. Indian Visit.com (supra)].

9.1. This is the approach which the Supreme Court has applied even in cases
where there is a once for all or a lump sum payment. What is to be seen in the
facts of this case, as already noticed by us ITA 1110/2006 & 1111/2006 Page 12
of 17 hereinabove, that the assessing officer as a matter of fact has returned
a finding that the expenditure undertaken was for overhauling the accountancy
of the assessee and to efficiently train the accounting staff of the assessee.
The Tribunal, which is decidedly the final fact finding authority has after
noticing the material on record observed that the expenditure was incurred
under various sub-heads, which included licence fee, annual technical support
fee, professional charges, data entry operator charges, training charges and
travelling expenses. The final figure was a consolidation of expenses incurred
under these sub-heads. The Tribunal, in our view, and rightly so, came to the
conclusion that none of these resulted in either creation of a new asset or
brought forth a new source of income for the assessee. The Tribunal classified
the said expenses as being recurring in nature to upgrade and/or to run the
system.

10\. In the background of the aforementioned findings, it cannot be said that
the expenses brought about in an enduring benefit to the assessee. The
assessing officer was perhaps swayed by the fact that in the succeeding
financial year, i.e., 1997-98 (assessment year 1998-99), the amount spent was
large. First of all, the extent of the expenditure cannot be a decisive factor
in determining its nature. As observed by the Tribunal, the assessee in the
relevant assessment year had a turnover of Rs 150 crores and that even without
this expenditure it would have continued to achieve the said turnover; though
the expenditure incurred in issue would have ITA 1110/2006 & 1111/2006 Page 13
of 17 enabled it to run its business more efficiently. Therefore, the
rationale supplied by the assessing officer in support of its order which
found resonance in submissions of the learned counsel for the revenue is, in
our view flawed and, hence it would have to be rejected.

10.1. Secondly, the mere fact that the assessing officer records that the
expenditure, in financial year 1997-98 (assessment year 1998-

99), was incurred towards what he terms as an „on-going project‟ would not
ipso facto give it a colour of capital expenditure. A careful reading of the
Tribunal‟s judgment show that after noticing the submission of the assessee
that the expenditure incurred in the said assessment year was for removing
deficiencies which were found in the software installed in the earlier
assessment year, and that, out of a sum of Rs 1.71 crores a sum of Rs 49 lacs
was incurred to modify, customize and upgrade the software installed, while
the balance expenditure was used for development and implementation

\- it returned a finding that the expenses were incurred to upgrade and run
the system. In view of these findings we are of the opinion that assessing
officer discovered an erroneous principle on the basis of which he denied the
exemption to the assessee.

11\. Software is nothing but another word for computer programmes, i.e.,
instructions, that make the hardware work. Software is broadly of two types,
i.e., the systems software, which is also known as the operating system which
controls the working of the computer; while the other being applications such
as word ITA 1110/2006 & 1111/2006 Page 14 of 17 processing programs, spread
sheets and data base which perform the tasks for which people use computers.
Besides these there are two other categories of software, these being: network
software and language software. The network software enables groups of
computers to communicate with each other, while language software provides
with tools required to write programmes. (See Microsoft Computer Dictionary,
5th Edition "Software" at page 489).

12\. The aforesaid would show that what the assessee acquired through Arthur
Anderson and Associates was an application software which, enabled it to
execute tasks in the field of accounting, purchases and inventory maintenance.
The fact that the application software would have to be updated from time to
time based on the requirements of the assessee in the context of the
advancement of its business and/or its diversification, if any; the changes
brought about due to statutory amendments by law or by professional bodies
like the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India, which are given the
responsibility of conceiving and formulating the accounting standards from
time to time, and perhaps also, by reason of the fact that expenses may have
to be incurred on account of corruption of the software due to unintended or
intended ingress into the system - ought not give a colour to the expenditure
incurred as one expended on capital account. Given the fact that there are
myriad factors which may call for expenses to be incurred in the field of
software applications, it cannot be said that either the extent of the expense
or the expense being incurred ITA 1110/2006 & 1111/2006 Page 15 of 17 in close
proximity, in the subsequent years, would be conclusively determinative of its
nature. The assessing officer has, in our view, erred precisely for these very
reasons.

13\. Before we conclude, we may also deal with the one last issue raised by
the learned counsel for the revenue which is that in the books of accounts,
the assessee had not written off the expense in issue, while in the succeeding
assessment year only a part of the expense had been written off and,
therefore, the assessee‟s own understanding of the nature of the expense
involved was that it was expended on capital account.

13.1 The aforesaid submission is only to be stated to be rejected. The reason
being: that the treatment of a particular expense or, a provision in the books
of accounts can never be conclusively determinative of the nature of the
expense. An assessee cannot be denied a claim for deduction which is otherwise
tenable in law on the ground that the assessee had treated it differently in
its books. The observation of the Supreme court in the case of Kedar Nath Jute
Manufacturing Co. Ltd. vs CIT (1971) 82 ITR 363 puts this beyond doubt. The
relevant observations of the Supreme court on this aspect of the matter are
extracted hereinbelow: "......Whether the assessee is entitled to a particular
deduction or not will depend on the provision of law relating thereto and not
on the view which the assessee might take of his rights nor can the existence
or absence of entries in the books of accounts be decisive or conclusive in
the matter"......

ITA 1110/2006 & 1111/2006 Page 16 of 17 13.2 Therefore, the aforesaid
contention is of no avail to the revenue.

14\. For the foregoing reasons, we are of the view that the questions of law
for each of the aforementioned assessment years have to be answered in the
affirmative and in favour of the assessee. Resultantly, the aforementioned
appeals are dismissed.

RAJIV SHAKDHER, J SANJAY KISHAN KAUL,J NOVEMBER 04, 2011 kk ITA 1110/2006 &
1111/2006 Page 17 of 17

