

Patna High Court

Bindeshwari Prasad Singh vs Kali Singh on 28 July, 1975

Equivalent citations: 1976 CriLJ 1515

Author: M Sahay

Bench: M Sahay

ORDER Muneshwari Sahay, J.

1\. This application is directed against an order dated the 3rd May 1972,
passed by the acting Subdivisional Magistrate, Monghyr In case No. 116C of
1966, by which the learned Magistrate took cognizance against the petitioners
for offences under Sections 419, 420 and 466 of the Indian Penal Code.

2\. The case against the petitioner was instituted on the complaint filed by
the opposite party on the 21st February 1966. It is really unfortunate that
even after nine years from the filing of the complaint, no progress could be
made in the same for one reason or the other. After the complainant was
examined on solemn affirmation, the complaint was sent to Shri A. K. Prasad,
Sub Deputy Collector for enquiry and report. Shri Prasad could not hold the
enquiry as he was transferred from Monghyr. Thereafter the enquiry was
recalled from him and it was entrusted to Shri K. P. Sinha, Deputy Magistrate
on the 15-3-1967. Although the complainant examined some witnesses before Shri
Sinha, he did not submit any report of enquiry and on the 23rd November 1968,
the acting Subdivi-sional Magistrate passed the following order dismissing the
complaint;

Complainant is absenting since long. Enquiry report also not received in spite
of several reminders. The complainant is not having interest in expediting the
enquiry. Enquiry recalled. The complaint is dismissed now.

Only a few days later (i. e. 7th December 1968), the opposite party filed a
petition before the Subdivisional Magistrate in which he stated that Shri K.
P. Sinha to whom the enquiry had been entrusted had already examined all the
witnesses of the opposite party and final hearing had been done in the
enquiry. He, accordingly, prayed that the order of dismissal be recalled and
cognizance be taken against the petitioner. Although the learned Subdivisional
Magistrate did not pass any formal order recalling the order of dismissal, he
ordered to call for the record of the enquiry. The record of enquiry was not
produced before him and on the 21st June 1969, the enquiry was entrusted to
one Shri S. N. Dubey. Shri Dubey reported on the 30th October 1969 that since
the complainant had not cared to appear before him or to adduce any evidence
before him on the ground that Shri K. P. Sinha had already completed the
enquiry, he wag returning the enquiry to the Subdivisional Magistrate. The
order of the Subdivisional Magistrate dated the 9th December 1970 shows that
Shri K. P. Sinha had informed the Sub-divisional Magistrate that although some
witnesses were examined before him, he had not submitted any report of
enquiry. The learned Subdivisional Magistrate observed in his order that
although no formal order had been passed recalling the dismissal of the
complaint, the order of dismissal should be deemed to have been recalled. He,
accordingly, entrusted the enquiry on the 9th December, 1970 to Shri A. R.
Ansari, Sub Deputy Collector who reported on 14-1-1971 that a prima facie case
had been made out against the petitioner. In the meantime the opposite party
filed a petition before the Sub-divisional Magistrate to call for the record
of the enquiry from Shri K. P. Sinha. The record of enquiry was not produced
in spite of reminders and on the 3rd May, 1972, the learned Subdivisional
Magistrate agreeing with the report of Shri Ansari, took cognizance against
the petitioner, as mentioned earlier.

3\. Shri B. P. Sinha, learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner
has raised only one point in support of the application. He has contended that
after the complaint had been dismissed under Section 203 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, it was not competent for the Subdivisional Magistrate to
have revived the same. Reliance for this proposition is placed on a decision
of this Court in Criminal Revn. No. 1847 of 1967 (Dhandhilal Pandey v. The
State of Bihar) disposed of on the 17th October 1968 (Pat). His Lordship G. N.
Prasad, J. who heard the application took note of an earlier decision of this
Court in the case of Ram Narayan Choubey v. Panachand Jain AIR 1949 Pat 256 :
50 Cri LJ 524, in which it was held that the complaint which had been
dismissed could be revived without filing a fresh complaint. His Lordship,
however, pointed out that this view was not approved by the Supreme Court in
the case of Pramatha Nath Talukdar v. Saroi Ranjan Sarkar . Relying on the
decision of the Supreme Court and a decision of the Allahabad High Court in
the case of Bhagwan Sahai v. Moti Lal his Lordship held that the complaint
which had already been dismissed for default could not be revived by recalling
the order of dismissal.

4\. Learned Counsel for the opposite party, however, contends that the
decision of the Supreme Court in Pramatha Nath Talukdar's case (1962-1 Cri LJ
770) (SC) (supra), does not support the view taken in Criminal Revision No.
1847 of 1967 (Pat). I have gone through this decision and I am inclined to
think that the question as to whether a complaint which had been dismissed
could be revived was never considered by the Supreme Court, in that case. The
Supreme Court was considering the question as to whether a fresh complaint was
maintainable after the dismissal of the first complaint and it was in this
context that the Supreme Court observed, 'it cannot be said to be in the
interest of justice that after a decision has been taken against the
complainant, upon a full consideration of his case, he or any other person
should be given another opportunity to have his complaint enquired into'.
Earlier in the same paragraph (paragraph 48), the Supreme Court said that an
order of dismissal under Section 203 of the Code of Criminal Procedure was not
a bar to the entertainment of a second complaint on the same facts, but it
would be entertained only in exceptional circumstances. In Ram Narain
Chaubey's case (1949-50 Cri LJ 524) (Pat) (supra) a Division Bench of this
Court has held that the Magistrate has jurisdiction to revive the complaint
dismissed under Section 203 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. It is true that
this observation was made as an obiter in this case. Nevertheless the view
expressed by their Lordships was clear and free from any reservation. I may
point out that as far back as in the year 1929, a Division Bench of this Court
had taken the same view in the case of Janakdhari Singh v. Emperor AIR 1929
Pat 469. His Lordship Wort, J., observed "in my judgment, quite apart from any
order of the revisional Court, the Magistrate had jurisdiction to proceed in
spite of the fact that he had already dismissed the complaint under Section
203 of the Code", The same view was taken by his Lordship Raj Kishore Prasad,
J., in the case of Prithvi Bhagat v. Birju Sada 1962 BLJR 221 : 1962-2 Cri LJ
206. In all these cases reliance was placed on a Full Bench decision of the
Calcutta High Court (1909) ILR 36 Cal 415 : 9 Cri LJ 563.

5\. Therefore, having regard to the decisions of the Division Bench in two
cases of this Court AIR 1949 Pat 256 : 50 Cri LJ 524 and AIR 1929 Pat 469, the
view taken in the case of Dhandhilal Pandey v. The State of Bihar Criminal
Revision No. 1847 of 1967 (Pat), if I may say so with utmost respect, cannot
be accepted. On the facts and circumstances before me, I have no hesitation in
saying that although no formal order recalling the order of dismissal of the
complaint was passed, the learned Subdivi-sional Magistrate had proceeded on
the footing that the order of dismissal stood recalled. I am satisfied that
the Subdivi-sional Magistrate has not committed any illegality in taking
cognizance against the petitioner in this case and, therefore, no interference
is called for in the impugned order. The application is, therefore, dismissed.

