

Madras High Court

M.Balaji vs Perim Janardhana Rao

    
    
                                                                                      C.S.No.941 of 2010
    
                                   IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT MADRAS
    
                                               RESERVED ON : 09.12.2019
    
                                             PRONOUNCED ON :        08.01.2020
    
                                                           CORAM
    
                                THE HONOURABLE DR.JUSTICE G.JAYACHANDRAN
    
                                                Civil Suit No.941 of 2010
    
                     M.Balaji                                     ...                         Plaintiff
    
                                                            Vs
    
                     1.Perim Janardhana Rao
    
                     2.M/s.JAY AR Enterprises,
                     Rep. By its Partner,
                     Perim Janardhana Rao,
                     No.7, N.S.Krishnan Street,
                     Eswaran Nagar, Pammal,
                     Chennai – 600 075.
    
                     3.Perim Janardhana Rao
    
                     4.K.Rajendra Reddy                                         ...     Defendants
    
    
                     Prayer:- This Civil Suit is filed under Order IV Rule 1 of Original Side Rules
    
                     r/w Order VII Rule 1 of C.P.C., for directing the defendants jointly and
    
                     severally to pay a sum of Rs.1,21,66,000/- to the plaintiff along with interest
    
                     @ 18% per annum on the principal sum of Rs.79,00,000/- from date of
    
                     plaint till realization and to pay the cost of the suit.
    
    
    
                     1/51
    
    
    
    http://www.judis.nic.in
                                                                                       C.S.No.941 of 2010
    
    
    
    
                              For Plaintiff                :Mr.Sarath Chandran for
                                                            Mr.S.V.Kirubanandam
    
                              For Defendants                :Mr.V.Balasubramanian
    
    
                                                           JUDGMENT
    

The plaint averment in brief:-

Mr.M.Balaji, the plaintiff herein is a businessman in real estate since 2004\.
He had entered into agreement with land owners in and around Bangalore
advancing money to them. The first defendant a businessman dealing with
leather products at Chennai in the name of M/s.JAY AR Enterprises, a
partnership firm approached the plaintiff expressing his interest in
purchasing those properties. On 09.09.2004, the first defendant purchased 50%
interest in three acres of land in S.No.1, Giddanahalli Village, Anekal Taluk,
Bangalore Rural District through the plaintiff and gained his trust.
Subsequently, the first defendant expressed his interest to purchase 5 acres
22 ½ guntas of agricultural land in Bidaraguppe Village at Sarjapur Main Road,
Anekal Taluk, Bangalore Rural District, in which, the plaintiff had already
acquired interest. The sale price for the said land was finalised @ Rs.46
lakhs per acre with condition that the plaintiff should get permission for
converting the usage of the said land from agricultural to non  2/51
http://www.judis.nic.in C.S.No.941 of 2010 agricultural purpose. The plaintiff
spent huge money for the said conversion and also spent heavily on settling
the Court dispute among the land owners.

2.Thereafter, the plaintiff arranged for the sale deeds being executed
directly in the name of the first defendant. The plaintiff believing the first
defendant paid the sale consideration to the land owners from out of his
personal fund. The plaintiff by issuing post dated cheques got three sale
deeds dated 19.03.2005 and one sale deed dated 11.04.2005 registered in the
name of the first defendant directly. Based on the resolution passed by the
second defendant firm cheque of the partnership firm was issued by the first
defendant to purchase the above said land in his personal name. In the said
transaction, the first defendant is liable to pay Rs.2,56,00,000/- whereas, he
paid only a sum of Rs.1,77,00,000/- and the balance sum of Rs.79,00,000/- was
due and payable by the plaintiff.

3.The entire transaction on behalf of the first defendant was done through his
Power Agent Krishnamurthy. When the plaintiff demanded the balance of
Rs.79,00,000/-, Krishnamurthy the Power Agent of the first defendant executed
a letter of acknowledgment dated 15.04.2006 in favour of the plaintiff.
Subsequently, the first defendant issued a cheque from the Bank account
maintained by the second defendant for a sum of  3/51 http://www.judis.nic.in
C.S.No.941 of 2010 Rs.79,00,000/- dated 30.10.2007 drawn on ABN AMRO Bank,
Haddows Road Branch, Chennai. On 15.04.2008, the plaintiff presented the
cheque for collection. The same was dishonoured with endorsement “Insufficient
fund”. Notice was issued to the first defendant calling upon him to pay the
dues covered under the said cheque. Denying the liability, the first defendant
sent a reply dated 30.05.2008. Therefore, the plaintiff has initiated
proceedings under section 138 of the Negotiable Instruments Act to prosecute
the first defendant before the XVI Additional Chief Metropolitan Magistrate,
Bangalore, in C.C.No.19342 of 2008 and the same is pending.

4.Thus, the plaintiff is entitle to receive a sum of Rs 79,00,000/- with
interest at the rate of 18% pa. Hence the suit for recovery of Rs
1,21,66,000/- with interest at the rate of 18% from the date of suit till the
date of recovery on the principle sum of Rs. 79,00,000/-.

5.The Written statement averment in brief:-

The defendants deny the plaint averments in toto. According to them, the suit
claim is barred by limitation since, the alleged cause of action took place
between 19.03.2005 and 11.04.2005. The cheque dated 30.10.2007 is not a fresh
promise to pay a time barred debt and it will not give a  4/51
http://www.judis.nic.in C.S.No.941 of 2010 supporting point for limitation.
V.Krishnamurthy who was the erstwhile Power Agent and employee under the first
defendant has stolen the cheque leaf from the first defendant. On the criminal
complaint initiated against the plaintiff and Krishnamurthy before Central
Crime Branch, Chennai, they were arrested and remanded to judicial custody.
The said criminal case is pending before the Judicial Magistrate, Poonamallee.
Further, the defendants had already instituted suit before the Civil Court at
Tirupathi against Krishnamurthy and the plaintiff for surreptitiously
withdrawing the defendants' money for purchase of property at Tirupathi in the
name of the plaintiff. The alleged letter of acknowledgment dated 15.04.2006
executed by Krishnamurthy cannot be the basis for any claim against the
defendants in the absence of any proof of money payable by the defendants.

6.The criminal case initiated under the Negotiable Instruments Act against the
first defendant though initially ended in conviction before the trial court,
the judgment of the trial Court was later reversed in the appeal by the
Appellate Court and therefore, there is no enforceable debt against the
defendants. The plaintiff along with Krishnamurthy who is the estranged
employee of the first defendant had illegally withdrawn lakhs of rupees from
the first defendant. There is no document to show that the plaintiff had
interest in 5 acres 22 ½ guntas of agriculture land in Bidaraguppe Village at
5/51 http://www.judis.nic.in C.S.No.941 of 2010 Sarjapur Main Road, Anekal
Taluk, Bangalore Rural District and he spent heavily towards conversion of the
said agricultural land into non agricultural land. Further, the allegation of
fixing the price of the land @ 46 lakhs per acre is not true. The claim of the
plaintiff is false and is not entitled for any interest as claimed.

7.Based on the above averments, the following issues were framed by this Court
on 18.09.2014:-

> “1.Whether the plaintiff is entitled to recover a sum of Rs.1,21,66,000/-
> from the defendants along with interest at 18% p.a on the principal sum of
> Rs.79,00,000/- from the date of plaint ?

> > 2.Whether the suit claim is sustainable on speculation as the plaintiff is
> a speculator and middle man in real estate business ?

> > 3.Whether the suit is barred by limitation ?
    
    
                                       4.Whether    the    suit     is   bad   for   mis-joinder     of
                                 parties ?
    
    
    

> 5.Whether the dishonoured cheque will give raise to  6/51
> http://www.judis.nic.in C.S.No.941 of 2010 a cause of action without any
> specific promise to pay a time barred debt under Section 25 (3) of Indian
> Contract Act ?

> > 6.Whether the suit claim is sustainable in view of the provision of
> Section 139 of Negotiable Instruments Act and whether the presumption
> contemplated under section 139 is sufficient to prove the claim in the suit
> without any acceptable evidence to show that the defendants owe the suit
> claim to the plaintiff ?

> 7.Whether the claim of the plaintiff is proved beyond reasonable doubt in
> the absence of any legally enforceable claim to sustain in the suit ?

> 8.To what other reliefs, the parties are entitled to?”

> 8.To substantiate their respective claim, the plaintiff and the defendants
> have examined one witness each. On behalf of the plaintiff, 69 documents
> were marked as Exs.P.1 to P.69. On behalf of the defendants, 21 documents
> were marked as Exs.D.1 to D.21.

9.The plaintiff, M.Balaji was examined as P.W.1. According to him, the first
defendant is the partner of second defendant firm. Defendants 3 and 4 are the
other partners. The first defendant approached him for purchase of  7/51
http://www.judis.nic.in C.S.No.941 of 2010 5 acres 22 guntas of land at
Bangalore in which, the plaintiff had acquired interest and right by entering
into agreement with the land owners. Though initially, he was not interested
to the proposal of the first defendant to sell the lands to the defendant
later, agreed for it, on the specific understanding that the plaintiff will be
paid Rs.46 lakhs per acre. Accordingly, he acted upon investing his money by
advancing sale consideration and for other expenses to get conversion of land
usage, settle the litigation between the land owners. He facilitated the first
defendant to purchase of the properties and get it registered in the name of
the first defendant directly.

10.According to the plaintiff, he entered into a sale agreement with one
B.Chennakesava on 05.11.2004 who is the absolute owner of 7 ½ guntas of land
situated at Bidaraguppe Village at Sarjapur Main Road, Anekal Taluk, Bangalore
Rural District. In the said agreement, B.Chennakesava for himself and on
behalf of the adjoining land owners falling under S.Nos.269, 270 and 279 at
Bidaraguppe Village at Sarjapur Main Road, Anekal Taluk, Bangalore Rural
District agreed to sell the land @ Rs.41 lakhs per acre and executed the sale
agreement marked as Ex P-3. In the said agreement for sale between the
plaintiff and B.Chennakesava, the parties have agreed for transfer of 5 acres
22 ½ guntas land for a sale consideration of Rs 41 lakhs per acre. The
plaintiff has advanced a sum of  8/51 http://www.judis.nic.in C.S.No.941 of
2010 Rs.1,00,000/- to B.Chennakesava. The plaintiff contends that he invested
his money for conversion of the said land into non agricultural land and to
settle the dispute between the land owners. He arranged for execution of the
sale deeds by the respective land owners directly in the name of the first
defendant showing the guide line value of the properties which was far below
the agreed value. The land owners accordingly, executed four sale deeds which
were marked as Exs.P.5 to P.8 respectively. The sale consideration agreed by
the first defendant for the said land was Rs.2,56,00,000/- whereas, he paid
only Rs.1,77,00,000/-. For the balance sum of Rs.79,00,000/- one Krishnamurthy
the Power Agent of the first defendant gave an acknowledgment letter dated
15.04.2006 (Ex.P.10). Later, the first defendant gave the cheque dated
17.03.2007 drawn in the name of the account of the second defendant, for a sum
of Rs.79,00,000/- (Ex.P.11). When the said cheque was presented for
collection, it was returned for want of sufficient fund. Criminal case was
initiated for dishonouring the cheque after issuing notice. The legal notice
issued by the plaintiff is marked as Ex.P.13 and the reply of the defendants
is marked as Ex.P.14.

11.The criminal case initiated for dishonouring of cheque ended in conviction
on 16.06.2009 and the order copy is marked as Ex.P.16. The bank statements of
the plaintiff between 01/04/2004 and 01/07/2005 to  9/51
http://www.judis.nic.in C.S.No.941 of 2010 show that he has paid money to some
of the land owners namely Sriramaiah, Narayanappa and Gangadaran is Ex.P.17.
The statement of accounts for the period 10/12/2004 to 15/04/2005 to show
payments made by the plaintiff to the land owners Chennakesava, Naryaanappa
and Sriramaiah and to the Sub-Registrar, Anekal is marked as Ex P-42. These
documents were relied to prove that the plaintiff was involved in the land
purchased in the name of the first defendant through his power agent
Krishnamurthy and he has financially contributed for the transaction.

12.To prove that in the earlier transaction in respect of the property at
Giddanahalli village in which the first defendant purchased the land on
09/09/2004 and after converting into plots sold it for huge profit to third
parties, the plaintiff relies on the sale deeds Exs.P-18, P-19, P-20 and P-21,
to prove that the first defendant has taken inconsistent stand about the
authroisation given by him to his power agent Krishnamurthy and the
entrustment of signed cheques to him, the plaintiff relies on Ex P-22 and Ex P
23.

13.The copy of the FIR dated 20/08/2007 given by the first defendant against
his power agent Krishnamurthy and the plaintiff is Ex P-22. In this complaint
the first defendant has alleged that Kirshnamurthy along with  10/51
http://www.judis.nic.in C.S.No.941 of 2010 Balaji ( Plaintiff ) had cheated
him to the tune of Rs. 1.70 crores by misleading him that they have purchased
land at Kanakapura, Bangalore for Rs 65 lakhs in the name of the firsr
defendant,but actually they did not pruchased any land at Kanakapura. The
first defendant has also alleged that the plaintiff and Krishnamurthy had
taken away Rs 2,56,00,000/- from him for the purchase of the properties at
Sharjapur Road registered in his him, whereas on verification from the vendors
he came to know that the they were paid only Rs. 1,50,00,000/-.

14.The plaintiff relies on this document to show that the first defendant has
admitted in his complaint that the said Krishnamurthy is the working partner
in KVL Associates, Chennai which is the sister concern of the second defendant
firm. Further krishnomurthy was authorised by the first defendant to negotiate
with the parties for purchase of property and he has executed a power of
attorney deed in his favour for that purpose.

15.The stop payment letter given by the first defendant is marked as Ex P:-23.
In this letter the first defendant informed ABN AMRO Bank, Nugambakkam Branch
that 8 of his signed cheques are missing from his office. To avoid misuse of
the cheques he instruct the bank to stop payment. The Cheque bearing No.
401681 ( Ex P-11) is not one among the 8 cheques  11/51
http://www.judis.nic.in C.S.No.941 of 2010 referred in this letter dated
14/07/2008.

16.The counsel for the plaintiff pointing out that Ex P-11 cheque bearing No.
401681 dated 30/10/2007 was presented for collection by the plaintiff on
15/4/2008. The said cheque was returned by the banker with the memo Ex P-12
intimating that the cheque is returned unpaid for funds insufficiency.
Therefore the plaintiff caused legal notice (Ex P-13) to the first defendant
on 14/05/2008. The defendant in his reply Ex P-14 has stated that the
plaintiff and Krishnamurthy were his agents for purchase of lands in Bangalore
and sell it to third parties for higher value after some period. In the course
of the said dealing, he being a frequent traveller abroad, gave signed 20
cheque leaves bearing Numbers 401071 to 401090 to the Plaintiff and
Krishnamurthy to withdrew money from the second defendant firm account for
effecting payment to the land owners. In the criminal complaint given to the
Central Crime Branch on 20/08/2007 against the plaintiff and Krishnamurthy,
the defendant has not wisphered about entrustment of signed blank cheques to
the plaintiff or to Krishnamurthy. In Ex P-23 dated 14/07/2008, the letter
intimating the banker to stop payment, the first defendant has stated that the
signed blank cheques are missing and to avoid misuse payment should be
stopped. The next day the first defendant has given a complaint to the
Commissioner of Police alleging that the plaintiff  12/51
http://www.judis.nic.in C.S.No.941 of 2010 ( BALAJI) and Krishnamurthy hatched
conspiracy to misuse one of the blank cheque bearing No. 401681 dated
30/10/2007 drawn on ABN AMRO BANK, Chennai which was issued for purchase of
land during the year 2004-2005, filed it for Rs 79,00,000/-, presented the
same and got it dishonoured. The learned counsel for the plaintiff submitted
that having admitted the liablity and issued cheque for Rs. 79,00,000/- just
to deprive the plaintiff, the first defendant has taken different and
inconsistent stands at different point of time only to be exposed of his
falsehood.

17.Ex P-25, Ex-P-26, Ex P-30 to Ex P-33, Ex P-61 , Ex P-64 to Ex P-65, are
documents relating to the proceedings in connection with the private complaint
initiated before the XVI Addl. CMM at Bangalore in CC 19342/2008 under section
138 of the Negotiable Instruments Act in respect of the cheque marked as Ex
P-11. The said criminal complaint filed by the plaintiff ended in conviction
in C.C.19342/2008 on 18/11/2010 (judgment copy is marked as Ex P-33). On
Appeal before the Session Judge, Bangalore in C.A. 878/2010 the conviction was
set aside on 21/07/2012. ( judgment copy is marked as Ex P-67). The plaintiff
aggrieved by the order of the appellate court has preferred appeal before the
High Court, Bangalore in Cri.Appeal No. 1110/2012.( Appeal copy is marked as
Ex P-61).

18.The documents connected to the civil proceedings initiated by the  13/51
http://www.judis.nic.in C.S.No.941 of 2010 first defendant against Balaji (the
plaintiff herein), Ravoori Swarnalatha w/o Balaji and Krishnamurthy before the
Additional District Judge, Tirupathi in O.S 107/2007 is relied by the
plaintiff and they are marked as exhibits P-29, Ex P-34 to 40. The pith and
substance of the said suit is that Balaji (the plaintiff in this suit), his
wife Ravoori Swarnalatha and krishnamurthy misappropriated the money of the
first defendant and purchase property at Tirupathi, hence prayer to declare
the properties purchased in the name of the Balaji and his wife were from out
of the amounts received from the Perim Janarthan Rao ( the first defendant
herein).

19.The orders passed by the Government of Karnataka permitting the conversion
of the agricultural land which are the subject matter of the transactions
under consideration in the present suit is marked as Ex P-41. The plaintiff
relies this document to show he had a role in getting the conversion orders
and for which he has spent money.

20.The Andra Bank, Vidyapeetha Circle Branch, Bangalore in which the plaintiff
maintains account had given the letter dated 08/09/2012 certifying that the
plaintiff had purchased 5 pay orders from his account as on 13/03/2005 out of
which 4 were purchased in favour of Sub-Registrar, Anekal and one in favour of
Sreeramulu. Later the plaintiff has cancelled one  14/51
http://www.judis.nic.in C.S.No.941 of 2010 pay order of Rs 2,25,600/-
purchased in favour of Sub-Registrar, Anekal. The plaintiff contention is that
these are the investment he made on behalf of the first defendant to purchase
the lands covering the sale deeds Ex P-5 to P-8.

21.The statement of bank accounts of the defendants in ABN Amro Bank, Indian
Bank and Indian Overseas Bank are marked as Ex P-47 to 52. The statement of
Bank Accounts of M/s Nimeesha Leathers Exports Ltd, M/s KVL Associates the
cheques issued by Krishnamurthy for KVL Associates for purchase of demand
drafts in the name of the vendors and cheques issued by the 2nd defendant are
exhibits P-54 and P-55.

22.To show that after purchase of the properties under sale deeds Ex P-5 to Ex
P-8 the his power agent Krishnamurthy, the first defendant has appointed one
Sri Rama Bala Subba Rayudu as his power agent on 17/03/2007 under Ex P-57.

23.The Sub Registrar has refixed the guideline value of the said property
after conversion and issued certificate of valuation and endorsment on
21/03/2011. The plaintiff rely on this document marked as exhibit P-59 since
the endorsement certificate is addressed to the plaintiff.  15/51
http://www.judis.nic.in C.S.No.941 of 2010

24.The statement of account in respect of the 2nd defendant firm maintained at
ABN Amro Bank, Chennai is Ex P-47. This document indicates that the cheques
bearing No. 401673 for Rs 9,50,000/-, Cheque No. 401676 for Rs 5,00,000/- and
cheque No. 401683 for Rs 5,00,000/- were issued by the 2nd defendant in favour
of the plaintiff and same were encashed by the plaintiff.

25.The learned counsel for the plaintiff referring the above documents and
explaining the purpose for which those documents are relied, submitted that
there can be no doubt about the facts that the first defendant is one of the
partners of the second defendant firm, the second respondent firm has resolved
to utilise the funds of the firm to purchase lands in the name of the first
defendant, the cheques of the second defendant firm were used for the purchase
of the lands at Bangalore.

26.The first defendant though initially denied the status of Krishnamurthy,
admits in his complaint to police commissioner and in the cross examination
that Krishnamurthy was his authorised agent and only through him the sale
deeds Ex P-5 to P-8 were got registered. The recitals in these Exhibits also
indicates that Krishnamurthy is the authorised  16/51 http://www.judis.nic.in
C.S.No.941 of 2010 representative of the first defendant. While so, the
acknowledgment letter dated 15/04/2006 Ex P-10 given by Krishnamurthy binds
the principal and the first defendant cannot turn around and plead that the
act of his agent does not binds him.

27.Pointing the portion of the DW-1 testimony where the first defendant has
admitted that he started the firm KVL Associates and he appointed
Krishnamurthy as the working partner of the said firm, the learned counsel for
the plaintiff would submit that, this admission positively disproves the claim
of the defendants that the acknowledgment letter Ex P- 10 admitting liablity
of Rs 79,00,000/- and the cheque Ex P-11 for Rs.79,00,000/- were documents
created in collusion between the plaintiff and the said Krishnamurthy.
Therefore the learned counsel submits that there is no reasonable ground to
suspect Ex P-10 acknowledgment of debt and issuance of cheque (Ex P-11) to
discharge the debt.

28.Regarding the criminal prosecution initiated under section 138 of NI Act,
the learned counsel for the plaintiff submitted that the the present civil
suit for recovery of money has to be independently decided based on the
evidence and preponderance of probabilities. The finding of criminal court not
relevant for deciding the civil suit. The learned counsel relies on the  17/51
http://www.judis.nic.in C.S.No.941 of 2010 judgment of the Supreme court
rendered in Seth Ramdayal Jat -vs- Lakmi Prasad [2009(11) SCC 545] to add
emphasis to his submission that the civil proceedings cannot be determined on
the basis of the judgment of criminal court finding, except statement admitted
by the parties which are relevant subject to sections 21,23, 42 and 43 of the
Indian Evidence Act,

29.The learned counsel submit that it has to be reasonable presumed that a
person who was issuing the cheque admits his liability by issuing the cheque
irrespective of the fact whether the cheque is honoured or not. To buttress
this submission he relies upon the judgments:-

> 1) Rajpathi Prasad -vs Kaushalya Kuer and others ( 1980 SCC OnLine Pat 107)
> and

> 2) Hindustan Apparel Industries -vs- Fair Deal Corporation, New Delhi ( 2000
> SCC Online Guj 177).

> and submitted that apart from the letter of the agent Ex P-10, the
> dishonoured cheque Ex P-11 independently constitutes direct acknowledgment
> of the debt by the defendant.

30.Rebutting the submission of the defendants that the blank cheques  18/51
http://www.judis.nic.in C.S.No.941 of 2010 entrusted to Krishnamurthy for a
different purpose was misused by him in collusion with the plaintiff, the
learned counsel submit that, the cheque Ex P- 11 admittedly bears the
signature of the first defendant. It is admitted by the first defendant in the
connected proceedings that blank signed cheques was entrusted by him to
Krishnamurthy to pay the sale consideration, broker commission, registration
charges and other incidental expenses. The recital in Ex P-69 the power of
attorney deed dated 14/03/2005 executed by the first defendant in favour of
the said Krishnamurthy empowers the agent to appear before the Sub-Registrar ,
Anekal for the presentation of deeds that would be executed by the owners of
the aforesaid lands. The bank account statements and the letter of the Andra
Bank which are marked as Ex P-42, Ex P-43 and Ex P-44 clearly proves that the
part sale consideration to the vendors and registration charges were paid by
the plaintiff from his bank account. Even assuming only blank cheque was given
by the first defendant it would attract the presumption under section 139 of
the Negotiable Instruments Act, in case if the defendant fails to prove that
the cheque was not issued to discharge of a debt.

31.The learned counsel for the plaintiff would state that, the defendants have
not rebutted the said statutory presumption, contrarily, the plaintiff through
the above mentioned documents have established there was  19/51
http://www.judis.nic.in C.S.No.941 of 2010 financial transaction between the
plaintiff and the defendants and the plaintiff has contributed his service and
money for completion of the transactions pertaining to the land purchased
under Ex P-5 to P-8.

32.Relying upon Bir Singh -vs- Mukesh Kumar [2019(4) SCC 197] the counsel for
the plaintiff submitted that there is strong presumption against the
defendants which has not been rebutted. Except a bald denial of debt and fake
allegation of misuse of cheque by his agent in collusion with the plaintiff,
there is no cogent evidence that there was no debt or liability. Hence suit to
be allowed.

33.In defence, the first defendant has mounted the witness box. 21 documents
are marked as defence side exhibits. Ex D-1 to D-5 are civil proceedings for
recovery money initiated against the plaintiff and others by one Gottipatti
Damodara Naidu. Ex D-6 and D-7 are the copy of the criminal complaint under
section 200 Cr.P.C and FIR copy filed by one Narra Jagadish against the
plaintiff and his wife before the Judicial Magistrate, Tirupathi. These
documents are relied by the defendants to show that the plaintiff is a
financier operating at Tirupathi and had involved in prize chit and money
circulation fraud. Ex D-8 is the letter of acknowledgment purported to have
been given by Krishnamurthy to the first defendant admitting the receipt of
20/51 http://www.judis.nic.in C.S.No.941 of 2010 Rs 3,20,45,826/- which is in
tune with the auditor's report Ex P-46/-. Ex D-9 FIR in Cr.No. 470/ 2007 on
the file of crime branch Chennai is duplication of Ex P-22. Ex D-10 legal
notice under section 138 of NI Act issued by the plaintiff is duplication of
Ex P-13. Ex D-11 reply notice of the defendants counsel is duplication of Ex
P-14. Ex D-12 complaint to Commissioner of Police, Chennai given by the
defendant is duplication of Ex P-24. Ex D-13 stop payment letter of the
defendant is duplication of Ex P-23. Ex D-14 and Ex D-15 are orders of the
Madras High Court, granting bail to the plaintiff and Krishnamurthy in Cr.No.
470/2007. Ex D- 16 is the copy of the application made by the first defendant
before the JM-1, Poonamallee to furnish copy of the accused statements (
Balaji and Krishnamurthy). Ex P-17 is replica of the complaint Ex D-12 and
P-24. Ex D-18 is the final report filed by CCB, Chennai in Cr.No. 470/2007. Ex
D-19 is replica of Ex P-67. Ex D-20 is duplication of Ex P-8 and Ex D-21 is
duplication of Ex P- 30.

34.The learned counsel for the defendant s relying upon the testimony of the
first defendant and the documents, contend that believing Krishnamurthy, blank
signed cheques were entrusted to negotiate with the land owners for purchase
of the land covered under Exs.P.5 to P.8. The plaintiff who was the middleman
for the said transaction has received his remuneration. However he in
connivance with the power agent  21/51 http://www.judis.nic.in C.S.No.941 of
2010 Krishnamurthy has overdrawn money from the 2nd defendant's bank account
more and above what is payable to the vendors. For the said act of cheating
criminal complaint lodged with Commissioner of Police, Chennai against the
plaintiff and Krishnamurthy. On his complaint, Balaji and Krishnamurthy were
arrested and released on bail by order of the High Court Madras vide Ex D-15
and D-16. Therefore in connivance with his estranged Power Agent,
Krishnamurthy the blank cheque Ex P-11 was filed up and presented for
collection.

35.The plaintiff initiated private complaint under the Negotiable Instruments
Act in respect of the cheque issued in favour of the plaintiff for a sum of
Rs.79,00,000/-. The Judicial Magistrate convicted the defendant. Later, the
Principal City Civil Court and Sessions Judge Bangalore City vide order dated
21.07.2012 in Criminal Appeal No.878 of 2010 (Ex.D.19) has set aside the
judgment and order of the trial Court dated 18.11.2010 convicting the first
defendant. The Learned Counsel for the Defendant further states across the bar
that the further appeal preferred by the plaintiff before the High Court
against the order of acquittal also dismissed by the High Court, Bangalore.

36.The prime contention of the learned counsel for the defendant is  22/51
http://www.judis.nic.in C.S.No.941 of 2010 that, there is no agreement between
the plaintiff and the defendants to pay Rs 46 lakhs per acre in respect of the
property covered under the sale deeds Ex P-5 to P-8. The plaintiff was duly
paid for his services and nothing payable to him. Contrarily the plaintiff and
Krishnamurthy (since deceased) has fraudulently encashed the blank signed
cheques entrusted and facing criminal prosecution. Though the criminal court
finding does not bind the civil proceedings, the admissions and statements
made by the parties in the criminal proceedings are relevant and admissible in
evidence in the subsequent proceedings. In those proceedings the plaintiff has
admitted that he has received more than 19,50,000/- from the defendants. He
has also admitted that there is no documentary evidence to show that he had
prior agreement with the land owners except Chennakesava who held only 7 ½
guntas of land.

37.The Learned counsel for the defendant strongly relying upon section 188 of
the Indian Contract Act, submitted that the power of attorney deed given in
favour of Krishnamurthy never authorisied him to borrow money or acknowledge
debts. He was only authorised to carryout the registration work. Therefore Ex
P-10 alleged acknowledgment of debt letter given by the agent without
authorisation is invalid.

38.On considering the rival submissions, this court finds that the  23/51
http://www.judis.nic.in C.S.No.941 of 2010 dispute between the plaintiff and
the defendants primarily centres upon Ex.P.10, the letter of acknowledgment
alleged to have been given by Krishnamurthy, the Power Agent of the first
defendant. The content of the said Exhibit (Ex.P.10) reads as below:-

> “Towards purchase of lands through M.Balaji at Bidaraguppe Village at
> Sarjapur Main Road, Bangalore in Sy.Nos.269, 270 and 273.

> > Extent of land 5 Acres and 22 ½ guntas at the rate of Rs.46 lakhs per
> acre.

>
                                    Total amount payable       Rs.2,56,00,000/-
    
    
                                    Amount paid by way
                                    of cheques, costs and DD's Rs.1,77,00,000/-
                                                                 ------------------
                                    Amount due to M.Balaji
                                    from P.Janardha Rao           Rs.79,00,000/-
    
    
                                                                 K.Krishnamurthy (s/d)
                                                                 G.P.A Holder of
                                                                 P.Janardhan Rao
    
    
                              Bangalore
                              15-04-2006”
    
                     24/51
    
    
    
    http://www.judis.nic.in
                                                                                               C.S.No.941 of 2010
    
    
    
    
    

> 39.The specific case of the plaintiff is that, he had an understanding with
> the land owners to sell 5 acres 22 ½ guntas at the rate of Rs 41 lakhs.

Knowing this the first defendant expressed his desire to buy those land for a
sale consideration @ Rs.46 lakhs per acre. To substantiate this contention the
plaintiff relies the recital in Ex.P.10 and Ex.P.3.

40.However, the recital in Ex.P.3 would show that one B.Chennakesava holding 7
½ guntas of land has agreed to sell 5 acres of land @ Rs.41 lakhs per acre in
S.Nos.269, 270 and 279 at Bidaraguppe Village at Sarjapur Main Road, Anekal
Taluk, Bangalore Rural District to the plaintiff. In this document,
Chennakesava claims himself as the representative of the owners of 5 acres 22
½ guntas of land. The plaintiff has not explained how this document could be
relied upon for his contention that he had interest in the entire 5 acres 22 ½
guntas of land situated at S.Nos.269, 270 and 279 at Bidaraguppe Village at
Sarjapur Main Road, Anekal Taluk, Bangalore Rural District when there is no
document to link B.Chennakesava and other owners of 5 acres 22 ½ guntas of
land at S.Nos.269, 270 and 279 at Bidaraguppe Village at Sarjapur Main Road,
Anekal Taluk, Bangalore Rural District. The lack of privity of contract with
other owners, renders a plaintiff case weak. Even assuming that the plaintiff
25/51 http://www.judis.nic.in C.S.No.941 of 2010 have some claim over the
property which is covered under Exs.P.5 to P.8 by virtue of Ex.P.3 agreement
of sale, it is an agreement between the plaintiff and one of the several
owners who hold only 7 ½ guntas of land. How this agreement of sale will bind
the remaining owners holding more than 5 acres of land is unexplained by the
plaintiff. Further, the evidence available reveals that the first defendant
has purchased the property directly from the land owners and got it registered
including the portion of the land for which the plaintiff had entered into
agreement of sale with Chennakesava under Ex.P-3. If at all the plaintiff
wants to ascertain his right or interest, before or the moment sale deeds
executed and got registered in favour of the first defendant he should have
challenged the said transaction.

41.Therefore, this Court holds that the plaintiff has failed to prove that he
had any interest or right in respect of properties covering Ex P-5 to P-8 and
also the plaintiff has not proved that there was agreement between him and the
defendants to alienate the property at the rate of Rs 46 lakhs per acre.

42.The counsel for the plaintiff states that Ex in P-10 the agent of the first
respondent has acknowledged the existence of agreement and debt of  26/51
http://www.judis.nic.in C.S.No.941 of 2010 Rs 79,00,000/-. As pointed out by
the learned counsel for the Defendant, to acknowledge the debt, the agent
should have authorisation. In the absence of authorisation, the act of the
agent will not bind the principal.

42.Sections 186 to 188 of the Indian Contract Act, read as below:- “186.
Agent’s authority may be expressed or implied.—The authority of an agent may
be expressed or implied. 55

187\. Definitions of express and implied authority.—An authority is said to be
express when it is given by words spoken or written. An authority is said to
be implied when it is to be inferred from the circumstances of the case; and
things spoken or written, or the ordinary course of dealing, may be accounted
circumstances of the case. —An authority is said to be express when it is
given by words spoken or written. An authority is said to be implied when it
is to be inferred from the circumstances of the case; and things spoken or
written, or the ordinary course of dealing, may be accounted circumstances of
the case." Illustration A owns a shop in Serampor, living himself in Calcutta,
and visiting the shop occasionally. The shop is managed by B, and he is in the
habit of ordering goods from C in the name of A for the purposes of the shop,
and of paying for them out of A’s funds with A’s knowledge. B has an implied
authority from A to order goods from C in the name of A for the purposes of
the shop. A owns a shop in Serampor, living himself in Calcutta, and visiting
the shop occasionally. The shop is managed by B, and he is in the habit of
ordering goods from C in the name of A for the purposes of the shop, and of
paying for them out of A’s funds with A’s knowledge. B has an implied  27/51
http://www.judis.nic.in C.S.No.941 of 2010 authority from A to order goods
from C in the name of A for the purposes of the shop."

188\. Extent of agent’s authority.—An agent having an authority to do an act
has authority to do every lawful thing which is necessary in order to do such
act. —An agent having an authority to do an act has authority to do every
lawful thing which is necessary in order to do such act." An agent having an
authority to carry on a business, has authority to do every lawful thing
necessary for the purpose, or usually done in the course, of conducting such
business. Illustrations

(a) A is employed by B, residing in London, to recover at Bombay a debt due to
B. A may adopt any legal process necessary for the purpose of recovering the
debt, and may give a valid discharge for the same. (a) A is employed by B,
residing in London, to recover at Bombay a debt due to B. A may adopt any
legal process necessary for the purpose of recovering the debt, and may give a
valid discharge for the same."

(b) A constitutes B his agent to carry on his business of a ship-builder. B
may purchase timber and other materials, and hire workmen, for the purpose of
carrying on the business. (b) A constitutes B his agent to carry on his
business of a ship-builder. B may purchase timber and other materials, and
hire workmen, for the purpose of carrying on the business."

In the light of these provisions, it is essential to see the recital of the
general power of attorney dated 14/03/2005 executed by the first defendant in
favour of the said Krishnamurthy which is marked as Ex P 69. The recital in
this deed speaks about the agreement already entered between the  28/51
http://www.judis.nic.in C.S.No.941 of 2010 defendant and the land owners in
respect of 2 acres 35 guntas of land in Survey No. 270 and 269 at Bidaragauppe
Village. The defendant expressing his inability to go over to Anekal has
authorised Krishnamurthy to do all or any of the following acts, deeds and
things on behalf of Pertim Janarthana Rao ( first defendant).

1) To appear before the Sub- Registrar, Anekal for the purpose of presentation
of the sale deeds that would be executed by the owners of the aforesaid lands.
To appear on my behalf before the sub-

Registrar for the purpose of registration of the sale deeds in my name and on
my behalf and to sign all statutory application forms, to swear to affidavits
or such other documents or papers as may be required and also to do such other
acts, deeds and things that may be required to be done for the effective
completion of registration of sale deeds in my favour.

2) To represent me before the Revenue Authorities for the purpose of transfer
of Khatha in respect of the aforesaid lands in my name and for the said
purpose to sign applications, statutory forms, to swear to affidavits. My
lawful attorney shall have powers to pay cess, tax and such other outgoings in
respect of the aforesaid lands on my behalf.”  29/51 http://www.judis.nic.in
C.S.No.941 of 2010

44.The recital thus authorise Krishnamurthy only to do acts and deeds relating
to registration of the sale deeds and nothing more. While so, the alleged
acknowledgment of debt executed by Krishnmurthy on behalf of the first
defendant will not bind the defendants.

45.In this context, it is also relevant to refer Sections 226, 227 and 228 of
the Indian Contracts Act which deals enforcement and consequences of agent's
contracts, and how far the act of agent exceeding his authority will bind the
principal.

“226. Enforcement and consequences of agent’s contracts.— Contracts entered
into through an agent, and obligations arising from acts done by an agent, may
be enforced in the same manner, and will have the same legal consequences as
if the contracts had been entered into the acts done by the principal in
person. —Contracts entered into through an agent, and obligations arising from
acts done by an agent, may be enforced in the same manner, and will have the
same legal consequences as if the contracts had been entered into the acts
done by the principal in person." Illustrations

(a) A buys goods from B, knowing that he is an agent for their sale, but not
knowing who is the principal. B’s principal is the person entitled to claim
from A the price of the goods, and A cannot, in a suit by the principal, set-
off against that claim a debt due to himself from B. (a) A  30/51
http://www.judis.nic.in C.S.No.941 of 2010 buys goods from B, knowing that he
is an agent for their sale, but not knowing who is the principal. B’s
principal is the person entitled to claim from A the price of the goods, and A
cannot, in a suit by the principal, set-off against that claim a debt due to
himself from B."

(b) A, being B’s agent, with authority to receive money on his behalf,
receives from C a sum of money due to B. C is discharged of his obligation to
pay the sum in question to B. (b) A, being B’s agent, with authority to
receive money on his behalf, receives from C a sum of money due to B. C is
discharged of his obligation to pay the sum in question to B."

227\. Principal how far bound, when agent exceeds authority.—When an agent
does more than he is authorized to do, and when the part of what he does,
which is within his authority, can be separated from the part which is beyond
his authority, so much only of what he does as is within his authority is
binding as between him and his principal. —When an agent does more than he is
authorized to do, and when the part of what he does, which is within his
authority, can be separated from the part which is beyond his authority, so
much only of what he does as is within his authority is binding as between him
and his principal." Illustration A, being owner of a ship and cargo,
authorizes B to procure an insurance for 4,000 rupees on the ship. B procures
a policy for 4,000 rupees on the ship, and another for the like sum on the
cargo. A is bound to pay the premium for the policy on the ship, but not the
premium for the policy on the cargo. A, being owner of a ship and cargo,
authorizes B to procure an insurance for 4,000 rupees on the ship. B procures
a policy for 4,000 rupees on the ship, and another for the like sum on the
cargo. A is bound to pay the premium for the policy on the ship, but not the
premium for the  31/51 http://www.judis.nic.in C.S.No.941 of 2010 policy on
the cargo."

228\. Principal not bound when excess of agent’s authority is not
separable.—Where an agent does more than he is authroized to do, and what he
does beyond the scope of his authority cannot be separated from what is within
it, the principal is not bound to recognize the transaction. —Where an agent
does more than he is authroized to do, and what he does beyond the scope of
his authority cannot be separated from what is within it, the principal is not
bound to recognize the transaction." Illustration A, authorizes B to buy 500
sheep for him. B buys 500 sheep and 200 lambs for one sum of 6,000 rupees. A
may repudiate the whole transaction. A, authorizes B to buy 500 sheep for him.
B buys 500 sheep and 200 lambs for one sum of 6,000 rupees. A may repudiate
the whole transaction."

46.It is seen that Ex P-10 letter given by Krishnamurthy the agent of the
first defendant is not within the authority and it is separable from the acts
authorised. Therefore, execution of the letter Ex P-10 as agent of first
defendant is an act in excess of the authorisation. This execution of this
letter does not fall within the acts authorised to do under Exhibit P-69.
Therefore, it is held that for want of authorisation, the first defendant who
is the principal is not bound by Ex P-10 executed by his agent.

47.Dehors of Ex P-10, independently if other documents are analysed for
ascertaining the existence of liability, in the absence of the documents to
32/51 http://www.judis.nic.in C.S.No.941 of 2010 show that the plaintiff has
incurred expenses in dealing with the property and the first defendant agreed
for a sale consideration of the properties at the rate of Rs. 46 lakhs per
acre the plaintiff averments stand in air without any corroboration. Neither
in the sale agreement ( Ex P-3) nor in sale deeds marked as Ex.P.5 to P.8 the
property is valued at Rs 46 lakhs per acre.

48.It is the contention of the plaintiff that, though the market value of the
property was Rs 46 lakhs per acre, just for registration purpose, it was
undervalued. If that is so, it is for the land owners to speak about it and
not the plaintiff who has nothing to do with the property. Further, in Ex
P-59, the endorsement certificate issued by the Sub-Registrar, Anekal this
Court finds that the Government after conversion of the land use has fixed the
market value of the property at the rate of Rs.31,50,000/-. Therefore, even by
remote preponderance of probabilities, the case of the plaintiff could not be
accepted.

49.This Court finds that except Exs.P-3, P-10 and P.11, all other documents
relied by the plaintiff is either documents relating to the criminal
proceedings initiated by either side or civil proceedings initiated by third
parties. The relevancy of these evidence are almost nil or very remote. The
materials available and culled out by the learned counsel for the plaintiff
33/51 http://www.judis.nic.in C.S.No.941 of 2010 proves that the parties are
not strangers. There was money transactions between them. Later, in view of
the dispute cropped up, litigations at various forum have been initiated. As
for as the relief sought in this case, the parallel criminal prosecution based
on the cheque marked as Ex P-11 alone is some relevancy. The said prosecution
has ultimately ended in acquittal. However, as fairly conceded by both the
learned counsel on either side, the finding of the Criminal Court has less
binding effect on the civil proceedings. Therefore, to arrive at a conclusion
on the issues framed evidence has to appreciated independently. For that
purpose, essentially, 3 documents are to be scrutinized. Those documents are
Exs.P-3, P-10 and P-11.

50.As pointed out earlier, Ex P-3 is an agreement for a miniscule minuscule
extent of land (7 ½ guntas ) with one owner and the property under
consideration is of vast extent of 5 acres and 22 ½ guntas. (About 40 guntas
is equal to one acre) owned by several persons. The plaintiff has no evidence
to show he has any agreement with all the owners except one.

51.Ex.P.10 is a letter given by Krishnamurthy, the Power Agent of the first
defendant. It is claimed to be letter acknowledging the debt. However, when
tested with the recital of power of attorney deed ( Ex P 69) 'whether
Krishnamurthy had authority to give such letter', it is found to be beyond his
34/51 http://www.judis.nic.in C.S.No.941 of 2010 authority. Under section 188
of the Indian Contract Act, an Agent can do an act only to an extent which he
is authorised explicitly or impliedly and not beyond that.

52.Ex.P.10, acknowledgment alleged to have been executed by Krishnamurthy is
dated 15.04.2006. This letter indicates that the first defendant is liable to
pay Rs.79,00,000/- towards purchase of land bought through the plaintiff. If
the statement found in the document is true, then there must be some evidence
that the plaintiff had entered into an agreement with the other land owners
holding the entire 5 acre 22 ½ guntas of land whereas, the only document
produced by the plaintiff is Ex.P.3, which is in respect of 7 ½ guntas of land
held by B.Chennakesava. When the entire transfer of property got completed and
sale deeds Exs.P-5 to P-8 got registered between 19.03.2005 and 11.04.2005,
the necessity to give the letter Ex P-10 on 15/04/2006 is also left
unexplained by the plaintiff.

53.The learned counsel for the plaintiff relying upon the entries made in the
statement of bank accounts and the letter of the Andra Bank which are marked
as Exs.P-17; P-42; P-43 and P-44 would submit that the plaintiff had paid
money to the other land owners on the dates relevant to the date of sale deeds
and paid the necessary registration charges to the  35/51
http://www.judis.nic.in C.S.No.941 of 2010 Sub-registrar and the same is
admitted by the first defendant.

54.Merely by such entries and admission, the case of the plaintiff cannot be
held to be proved, when there are contra evidence let in by the defendant that
more than Rs.19 lakhs been paid to the plaintiff and the plaintiff has not
rendered accounts to the first defendant. The plaintiff in his wisdom has
thought fit not to examine the vendors to show that he had some role in the
transactions covered under Exs.P.5 to P.8. Neither he has placed evidence to
lend credence to his case that he has spent money for conversion and to settle
the litigation between the vendors. Therefore, by all means, this case could
be viewed only as a speculative litigation webbed out of documents given in
trust or held during the normal course of business transaction. For the above
reasons, issues No.1 and 2 are answered in negative.

55.Both the plaintiff as well as the defendants have multiple litigations
against each other. In each case, they have taken different stand. As far as
the present case is concerned, the plaintiff would rely upon Ex P.11 cheque to
prove the liability. No doubt, there shall be an initial presumption of
liability regarding the cheque, however, the said presumption is rebuttable.
The defendants can rebut the presumption by placing materials to show that
36/51 http://www.judis.nic.in C.S.No.941 of 2010 the cheque was not issued for
the liability in the manner in which the plaintiff has projected.

56.The plaintiff to prove his entitlement of Rs.79,00,000/- would heavily rely
upon the sale agreement for 7 ½ guntas of land and the acknowledgment letter
of Krishnamurthy. The content of documents does not correlates the parties,
value of the property and liability mentioned in the cheque Ex P-11. The claim
of Rs.79,00,000/- for the transactions covered under the sale deeds viz.,
Exs.P.5 to P.8 executed by the land owners directly in the name of the first
defendant either should be established through impeccable documents or through
independent reliable oral evidence. In this case, the plaintiff has failed to
state the exact date the cheque was issued and from whom he received the
cheque.

57.Under section 118 of the Negotiable Instruments Act , unless contrary is
proved, it has to be presumed that it was issued on the date on which it bear.
Being a rebuttable presumption, it is the duty of the Court to look whether
the cheque would have been given on 30/10/2007. In this context, Ex P-22 the
criminal complaint before the Crime Branch, Chennai on 30.08.2007, against the
plaintiff and Krishnamurthy given by the first defendant is relevant and
requires consideration. This complaint was taken  37/51
http://www.judis.nic.in C.S.No.941 of 2010 on file for investigation in Crime
No. 470/2007. In this complaint it is specifically alleged that the plaintiff
and Krishnamurthy has cheated the first defendant to a tune of Rs.1.50 crores
in connection with the land dealing. While so, after lodging criminal
complaint on 20/08/2007, the first defendant could not have issued the cheque
Ex P-11 in favour of the plaintiff on 30.10.2007.

58.In alternate, the probable date or month of issuance of this cheque can be
ascertained by verifying the dates on which the previous and subsequent
cheques were encashed. From Ex P-47 the ABN/AMRO bank statement of account of
the second respondent firm indicate that most of the cheques bearing Numbers
between 401673 and 401683 were encashed between October 2004 and January 2005.
Out of these cheques, the plaintiff himself has encashed the following 4
cheques for total sum of Rs 19,50,000/-:-

> 1) 27/10/2004 – Cheque No. 401673 Rs. 9,50,000/-

> 2) 13/12/2004 – Cheque No. 401676 Rs. 5,00,000/-

> 3) 01/01/2004 – Cheque No. 401683 Rs. 5,00,000/-

> 59.Therefore, by preponderance of probabilities, the defendants had rebutted
> the presumptions under sections 118 and 139 of the Negotiable  38/51
> http://www.judis.nic.in C.S.No.941 of 2010 Instruments Act, that the cheques
> were not issued on 30/10/2007 for any debt or existing liability. After the
> rebuttal, the burden shifts on the plaintiff to prove 'whether the cheque Ex
> P-11 was given to him by the first defendant on 30/10/2007' and 'whether the
> same was given for discharge of liability'. The evidence available does not
> prove the facts asserted by the plaintiff. Therefore, there is no doubt in
> the mind of this Court that the case of the plaintiff is a story concocted
> by making use of the cheque and letter given by Krishnamurthy. Accordingly,
> the issues 6 and 7 are answered in negative.

60.The suit is laid before this Court on 25/10/2010 based on the dishonoured
cheque dated 30/10/2007 issued pursuant to the acknowledgment of debt given by
Krishnamurthy on 15/04/2006. As far as the letter of acknowledgment Ex P-10,
which is given by the agent and already in the earlier part of this judgment
it is held that the agent has given this letter without authority. In so far
as the Cheque Ex P-11 is concerned, though it bears 30/10/2007 as date and
under section 118 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, it shall be presumed
unless the contrary is proved the negotiable instrument bearing a date was
made or drawn on such date, this point has been discussed above at length and
held that the presumption under section 118 of the Negotiable Instruments Act
regarding the date has  39/51 http://www.judis.nic.in C.S.No.941 of 2010 been
rebutted through the entries found in the 2nd defendant's bank statement of
account marked as Ex P-47.

61.Sub-section (3) of section 25 Indian Contracts Act deals with
acknowledgment time barred debt. According to Pollock and Mulla ( The Indian
Contract Act and Specific Relief Act \- 14th Edition, Lexis Nexis -
Butterworths Wadhwa), in order to invoke the provisions of Section 25(3) of
the Indian Contracts Act, the following conditions must be satisfied:-

> 1\. It must be referred to a debt which the creditor but for the period of
> limitation, might have enforced;

> > 2\. There must be a distinct promise to pay wholly or in part such debt
> and

> 3\. The promise must be in writing signed by the person or by his duly
> appointed agent.

62.Therefore, a promise to pay a time-barred debt is a condition precedent for
application of Section 25(3) of the Indian Contract Act. The said promise must
be express and unequivocal. Now, when we read the content of the letter - Ex
P-10 given by Krishnamurthy as general power of  40/51 http://www.judis.nic.in
C.S.No.941 of 2010 Attorney holder of the first defendant, leave alone the
authority to give such letter, we find that the promise to pay is
conspicuously absent in this letter. Assuming the letter acknowledging the
debt is valid and given prior to the expiry of limitation, it is highly
improbable to say the cheque - Ex P-11 was issued on 30/10/2007. Undoubtedly,
it should have been left the possession of the defendants and come to the
possession of the plaintiff prior to 20/08/2007, the date on which the first
defendant gave complaint to the Commissioner of Police, Chennai alleging fraud
and cheating.

63.However, the cheque being dishonoured, one of the issue framed in this case
is 'whether a dishonoured cheque will save the limitation of time barred debt,
in the absence of promise'. This issue is a significant question of law,
though may not have serious bearing on the case in hand, even if held either
way.

64.Cheque is defined under section 4 of the Negotiable Instruments Act as a
'bill of exchange drawn on a specified banker and not expressed to be payable
otherwise than on demand'. Cheque is therefore a negotiable instrument
carrying the promise implicitly, unlike a pro-note where the promise is
explicit and mandatory. Therefore, limitation has to be reckoned from the the
date the cheque and not on the fact 'whether the cheque was  41/51
http://www.judis.nic.in C.S.No.941 of 2010 honoured or dishonoured'. Under the
Negotiable Instruments Act, the issuance of cheque is to be presumed to be
issued for discharge of debt. The consequence event 'whether the said cheque
on presentation honoured or not,' is immaterial.

65.In the opinion of this Court, even if the said cheque is not presented in
time and become stale, but it is proved that the cheque was issued with
intention to discharge the debt or part of the debt then, the limitation has
to be reckoned from the date of the cheque considering the cheque as
acknowledgment of debt.

66.As far as the facts of this case in hand, the cheque in the name of the
plaintiff gives him the cause of action to sue and suit being filed within 3
years from the date on which the cheque bear, this prima facie saves the
limitation. The plaintiff cannot be desuited on the ground of limitation.
However, the plaintiff fails to succeed, since, this Court has held that the
plaintiff has not proved his case for recovery of money and the cheque is not
issued for any enforcible debt. Therefore, the discussions on limitation based
on the fact 'whether dishonour of cheque will save limitation is academics'.
Issues 3 and 5 are answered accordingly.  42/51 http://www.judis.nic.in
C.S.No.941 of 2010

67.The first defendant is the signatory of the cheque - Ex P-11 and he has
signed the cheque on behalf of the 2nd defendant partnership firm. Therefore,
the other partners of the 2nd defendant firm are arrayed as defendants 3 and
4. Hence, this court finds no legal error in joinder of parties. Issue No. 4
is answered in negative.

68.As a result, for the reasons stated, the issues are held against the
plaintiff and the suit is dismissed with costs.

08.01.2020 jbm Index: Yes Speaking order/non speaking order List of witness
examined on the side of the plaintiff :- M.Balaji – P.W.1 List of witness
examined on the side of the defendants :- Perim Janardhan Rao – D.W.1 List of
exhibits marked on the side of the plaintiff :-

    
    
    
    
    
    
                     43/51
    
    
    
    http://www.judis.nic.in
                              C.S.No.941 of 2010
    
    
    
    
                     44/51
    
    
    
    http://www.judis.nic.in
                                                                                        C.S.No.941 of 2010
    
                        Exhibits                          Description
                         Ex.P16    Certified copy of the order passed in Criminal Petition
                                   No.5483 of 2008 dated 16.06.2009.
                         Ex.P17    Certified copy of the Bank statement of plaintiff for the
                                   period 01.04.2005 to 01.07.2005.
                         Ex.P18    Certified copy of the sale deed dated 08.09.2004.
                         Ex.P19    Certified copy of the sale deed dated 21.07.2005.
                         Ex.P20    Certified copy of the sale deed dated 08.03.2006
                         Ex.P21    Certified copy of the sale deed dated 10.03.2006
                         Ex.P22    Certified copy of the F.I.R. No.470/2007 dated
                                   20.08.2007
                         Ex.P23    Certified copy of the stop payment letter dated 14.07.2008
                         Ex.P24    Certified copy of the complaint dated        15.07.2008
                                   to the Commissioner of Police, Chennai
                         Ex.P25    Certified copy of the petition in Crl.P.No.5483/2008
                         Ex.P26    Certified copy of the affidavit dated       24.12.2008 in
                                   I.A.No. 1/2008 in Crl.P.No.5483/2006
                         Ex.P27    Certified copy of the fabricated letter of
                                   acknowledgment dated 30.06.2006
                        Ex.P28     Two original sample copies of RTC Forms (In Kannada)
                                   and same are translated into English
                        Ex.P29     Certified copy of the calculation memo filed by the
                                   first defendant in O.S.No.107/2007
                        Ex.P30     Certified copy of the plaintiffs affidavit dated 27.05.2009
                                   filed in C.C.No.19342 of 2008
                        Ex.P31     Certified copies of the affidavits (2 nos) dated
                                   07.10.2009 and 10.02.2010
                        series
                        Ex.P32     Certified copies of deposition dated 17.11.2009,
    

11.12.2009,19.12.2009, 07.01.2010 and 22.03.2010 filed in NI Act case Ex.P33
Certified copy of the judgment in 138 NI Act case Ex.P34 Certified copy of the
plaint in O.S.No.107 of 2007 Ex.P35 Certified copy of the affidavit dated
28.12.2007  45/51 http://www.judis.nic.in C.S.No.941 of 2010  46/51
http://www.judis.nic.in C.S.No.941 of 2010  47/51 http://www.judis.nic.in
C.S.No.941 of 2010  48/51 http://www.judis.nic.in C.S.No.941 of 2010 List of
Documents exhibited on the side of the defendants:-

    
    
                                 Exhibit No.                          Description
                         Ex.D1                 Certified copy of the plaint in O.S.No.14 of 2002 dated
                                               25.02.2002.
                         Ex.D2                 Certified copy of the Judgment in O.S.No.14 of 2002
                                               dated 06.02.2009
                         Ex.D3                 Certified copy of the decree in O.S.No.200 of 2006 dated
                                               06.02.2009
                         Ex.D4                 Certified copy of the plaint in O.S.No.13 of 2002 dated
                                               25.02.2002
                         Ex.D5                 Certified copy of the order in O.S.No.13 of 2002 dated
                                               04.03.2006
                         Ex.D6                 Certified copy of the criminal M.P.No.2199 of 2008
                                               dated 28.05.2008
                         Ex.D7                 Certified copy of the FIR 265 of 2008 filed against the
                                               plaintiff by Narra Jagadesh dated 22.08.2008
                         Ex.D8                 Certified copy of the letter of acknowledgment from
                                               Krishnamurthy dated 30.06.2006.
                         Ex.D9                 Certified copy of the FIR filed against plaintiff in Crime
                                               No.470 of 2007
                         Ex.D10                Certified copy of the Notice to the defendant by counsel
                                               for plaintiff dated 14.05.2008
                         Ex.D11                Certified copy of the reply from defendant dated
                                               30.05.2008
                         Ex.D12                Certified copy of the complaint from the defendant to the
                                               Commissioner of Police dated 15.07.2008.
                         Ex.D13                Certified copy of the Stop instruction issued by the
                                               defendant to ABN Amro Bank dated 14.07.2008.
                         Ex.D14                Certified copy of the order of the High Court, Madras in
                                               Crl.O.P.No.2774 of 2008 dated 08.02.2008.
                         Ex.D15                Certified copy of the order of the High Court in
                                               Crl.O.P.No.1371 of 2008 dated 28.01.2008.
                         Ex.D16                Certified copy of the affidavit and petition filed by the
    

defendant before the Judicial Magistrate – I, Poonamallee  49/51
http://www.judis.nic.in C.S.No.941 of 2010 Exhibit No. Description for
production of confession statement of the plaintiff. Ex.D17 Certified copy of
the complaint given to the Commissioner of police by the defendant.

Ex.D18 Certified copy of the charge sheet filed before the Judicial
Magistrate, Poonamallee dated 25.08.2009. Ex.D19 Certified copy of the
judgment in Cl.Appeal No.878 of 2010 dated 21.07.2012.

Ex.D20 Certified copy of the sale deed in favour of the defendant by
Narayanappa and others dated 11.05.2005.

Ex.D21 Certified copy of the sworn affidavit of the plaintiff in C.C.No.19342
of 2008 dated 27.05.2009.

50/51 http://www.judis.nic.in C.S.No.941 of 2010 G.JAYACHANDRAN.J., jbm
Judgment made in C.S.No.941 of 2010 08.01.2020  51/51 http://www.judis.nic.in

