

Delhi High Court

Honda Motors Co. Ltd. vs Mr. Charanjit Singh And Ors. on 28 November, 2002

Equivalent citations: 101 (2002) DLT 359, 2003 (26) PTC 1 Del

Author: S Aggarwal

Bench: S Aggarwal

JUDGMENT Sharda Aggarwal, J.

1\. The plaintiff is a company incorporated in Japan. The plaintiff's line of
operation includes manufacture and sale of motorcycles, motor cars, power
equipments etc. It also provides financial services. It is pleaded that the
company is manufacturing and marketing its products all over the world under
the trade mark HONDA, which is of international repute. It is one of the
largest producers of automobiles in the world and has over 100 production
facilities in 39 countries of the world including India and its products
bearing the mark HONDA are sold in more than 160 countries. The plaintiff is
known for its innovative techniques and is committed to produce quality
products. It takes keen interest in promoting clean environment, low emission
and low fuel consumption. These coupled with traffic safety requirements of
international standard has made it one of the most prominent and responsible
multinational corporations in the world. It has acquired international
dimensions. It started exporting its motorcycles under the mark HONDA to
U.S.A. as early as in the year 1959. Later on it also developed the
manufacturing operations in U.S.A. for motor cars. A number of manufacturing
units were also developed in various countries of Europe. It started retailing
and exporting of motorcycles in various countries of Asia since late fifties.
It is averred that it has been using the trade mark HONDA for its products in
India since 1957. Its quality products and marketing the same under the mark
HONDA has helped it to achieve a very high turn over. The plaintiff in para
No. 7 of the plaint has given a statement showing the net sales and other
operating revenues of the company between the years 1974 and 1997. On account
of its initial adoption and its extensive use, the mark HONDA became
exclusively associated with the plaintiff in the eyes of the consumers. It, in
fact, became a house mark of the plaintiff. It is averred that the plaintiff's
products bearing the mark HONDA are being advertised in well known journals
having international circulation e.g. Asia Inc., Asia Week, Forbes etc. It
products bearing the mark HONDA have also been advertised in many
international magazines including "National Geographic" having considerable
circulation in India. It also entered into collaboration arrangements in India
with Indian companies. In 1983, it entered into a joint venture with Hero
Cycles Pvt. Ltd., a company belonging to Punjab based Munjal Group for
manufacturing motorcycles. The joint venture company, "Hero Honda Motors
Limited" was permitted to use the mark HERO HONDA. Another joint venture
company was promoted in the year 1985 named Shriram Honda Power Equipment Ltd.
, presently known as Honda Siel Power Products Ltd. This company is engaged in
the manufacturing of generator sets. The mark "HONDA" was allowed by the
plaintiff to be used as part of the trade mark of the said company "SHRIRAM
HONDA". Lately in the year 1997, the plaintiff promoted another company Honda
Siel Cars India Ltd. , which is engaged in the manufacture and sale of motor
cars under the house mark HONDA and the sub-brand CITY. The plaintiff's cars
otherwise are being sold in India for the last many decades. The plaintiff has
also obtained several registrations of the trade mark HONDA in India in
various classes under the Trade and Merchandise Marks Act, 1958. It has also
applied for registration of the trade mark HONDA in all the classes contained
in 4th Schedule to the Trade and Merchandise Marks Rules, 1959. The
plaintiff's case is that the goodwill and reputation of its mark HONDA has
made the said mark distinctive of the plaintiff being a symbol of high quality
products.

2\. In April, 1991, the plaintiff came to know from the trade Mark Journal
dated 1st April, 1991 that an application for registration of trade mark HONDA
in respect of pressure cookers (non-electric) had been filed in the name of
M/s. Steel India, defendant No. 5. The plaintiff opposed the said application
by taking out opposition proceedings before the Registrar, Trade Marks. Vide a
detailed order dated 19th October, 1995, the Registrar allowed the opposition
application of the plaintiff and rejected the application for registration of
the defendants. The said order is alleged to have become final against the
defendants as no appeal was preferred. The plaintiff assumed that after the
rejection of their application, the defendants had discontinued the use of
mark HONDA on their goods. The plaintiff was, however, shocked to see and
advertisement in the Trade Mark Journal in the year 1999 about defendants
moving another application for registration of trade mark HONDA in class 21.
That application is being contested by filing opposition before the Registrar.
when the plaintiff came to know that the defendants were still using the trade
mark HONDA in respect of their goods, a cease and desist notice was served on
them to which they did not reply. Left with no option, the plaintiff filed the
present suit for permanent injunction, passing off, rendition of accounts and
delivery up etc., against the defendants alleging that the defendants, by
using the mark HONDA in respect of their goods pressure cookers, are passing
off the same as the goods of the plaintiff and encashing upon the plaintiff's
goodwill and reputation attached to its mark HONDA. The plaintiff has prayed
for restraining the defendants, their servants, agents, stockists and all
other persons acting on their behalf, from using the trade mark HONDA in
respect of pressure cookers or other goods or any other allied and cognate
goods or any other trade mark/mark identical with or deceptively similar to
the trade mark HONDA of the plaintiff and in any manner passing of their goods
as that of the plaintiff. On the same lines, interim injunction is prayed
against the defendants by moving an application under Order 39, Rules 1 & 2
CPC. No ex-pare ad-interim injunction was granted as the defendants had filed
a caveat. Accordingly, they were put to notice. It is this application, which
I propose to dispose of by this order.

3\. The names of defendants 2, 3 and 4 were deleted at the request of the
learned counsel for the plaintiff as defendant No. 5, M/s. Steel India, was
stated to be the proprietorship concern of defendant No. 1.

4\. Defendants resisted the present application. They contend that they are
carrying on the business of manufacturing and marketing of 'pressure cookers'
under the trade mark HONDA since the year 1985. It is pleaded that the
impugned trade mark is registered in the name of the plaintiff for the goods
which are entirely different for the goods of the defendants. Also the visual
presentation of the mark HONDA, under which the defendants' products are being
marked, is such that no confusion and deception of any kind can arise.
Defendants further plead that the goods of the parties are vastly different
physically and no consumer can take the defendants' goods as that of the
plaintiff. They also claim to be the prior users of the trade mark/lable HONDA
in respect of pressure cookers. Another defense raised is that the trade
marketed, HONdA is common to the trade an is a common surname for which the
plaintiff cannot claim any exclusive proprietory rights. It is also contended
that the plaintiff has not used the mark HONDA in India independently but is
using it with some added matter as HERO HONDA, SHRIRAM HONDA, HONDA CITY etc.
The plaintiff's action is also contested on the ground that there is delay on
the part of the plaintiff in initiating action against the defendants and thus
on account of inordinate delay, latches, waiver and acquiescence, the
plaintiff is not entitled to any relief in the suit. According to the
defendants, their business is confined to Punjab, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu &
Kashmir and Bihar and their products are not sold in Delhi. Defendants have,
however, not denied that they had earlier moved an application for
registration of trade mark HONDA for their products, which was opposed by the
plaintiff and their application was dismissed by the Registrar, Trade Marks.
Even the moving of second application in the year 1999, for registration of
trade mark HONDA for their product is not disputed.

5\. I have heard Mr. Rajiv Nayyar, learned senior counsel for the plaintiff
and Mr. S.C. Chadha, learned counsel for defendants at length.

6\. The plaintiff's suit is an action for passing off, on the basis of alleged
unfair practice of the defendants, who have appropriated the renowned trade
mark HONDA of the plaintiff for their goods causing deception and confusion in
the minds of purchasers, so as to pass off their goods as that of the
plaintiff. The substantive law of passing off is entirely based on common law
i.e. case law. In an action for infringement of a trade mark, title of the
plaintiff is established by evidence of registration whereas in a passing off
action, title is established by the evidence of reputation and goodwill of the
business acquired by the use of a mark, symbol or other badge. The concept of
passing off has undergone considerable changes in the course of time. It is
applied to many forms of unfair trading and unfair competition where the
activities of one person cause damage or injury to the goodwill associated
with the activities of another person or group of persons. The concept of
passing off has come up for consideration in a concept of English and Indian
decisions. A classic decision on "passing off" is the case of Singer
Manufacturing Company v. Loog, (1880) 18 Ch.D. 395, when it was held as under:

"No man is entitled to represent his goods as the goods of another man; and no
man is permitted to use any mark, sign or symbols, device or other means,
whereby, without making a direct false representation himself to a purchaser
who purchases from him he enables such purchaser to tell a lie or to make a
false representation to somebody else who is the ultimate consumer."

7\. The above principle was followed in the case of Thomas Bear & Sons (India)
Ltd. v. Prayag Narain , . Yet in an earlier case in Perry v. Truefitt, (1842)
6 Beav 66, Lord Langdale observed as under:

"A man is not to sell his own goods under the pretence that they are the goods
of another man; he cannot be permitted to practise such a deception nor to use
the means which contribute to that end. He cannot, therefore, be allowed to
use names, marks, letters or other indicia, by which he may induce purchasers
to believe that the goods which he is selling are the manufacture of another
person."

8\. It is clearly indicated from the above observations that the action in
passing off is an actionable wrong where a person passes off his goods as the
goods of another.

9\. What are the essential characteristics of an action of passing off has
also come up for consideration in umpteen number of judgments. In Erven
Warnink B.V. v. J. Townend & Sons (Hull) Ltd., 1980 RPC 31, Lord Diplock
stated the essential characteristics of a passing off action as under:

"(1) misrepresentation, (2) made by a person in the course of trade, (3) to
prospective customers of his or ultimate consumers of goods or services
supplied by him (4) which is calculated to injure the business or goodwill of
another trader (in the sense that this is a reasonably forseable consequence
and (5) which causes actual damage to a business or goodwill of the trader by
whom the action is brought or (in a quia timet action) will probably do so."

10\. The essentials of passing off action as stated in Halsbury's Laws of
England Vol. 38 (3rd Edition) para 998 as reproduced below are worth noting:

" 998. Essentials of the cause of action. The plaintiff must prove that the
disputed name, mark, sign or get up has become distinctive of his goods in the
sense that by the use of his name or mark, etc in relation to goods they are
regarded, by a substantial number of members of the public or in the trade, as
coming from a particular source, known or unknown; it is not necessary that
the name of the plaintiff's firm should be known.....The plaintiff must
further prove that the defendant's use of name or mark was likely or
calculated to deceive, and thus cause confusion and injury, actual or
probable, to the goodwill and the plaintiff's business, as for example, by
depriving him of the profit that he might have had by selling the goods which
ex hypothesi, the purchaser intended to buy. Thus, the cause of action
involves a combination of distinctiveness of the plaintiff's name or mark and
an injurious use by the defendant of the name or mark or a similar name or
mark, sign, picture or get-up does or does not amount to passing off is in
substance a question of evidence; the question whether the matter complained
of is likely to deceive is a question for the Court."

11\. In Bata India Ltd. v. Pyare Lal & Co., , it was observed as follows:

"Where a trader uses the name or mark or sign deceptively similar to that of
the second trader is relation to goods marketed by the former even though it
may not be the same goods or the same type of goods as produced by the second
trader, yet a question of passing off may arise. The main consideration will
be whether there is a misrepresentation."

12\. It is also well settled that the plaintiff in passing off action does not
have to prove that he has actually suffered damage by loss of business or in
any other way. A probability of damage is enough but the actual or probable
damage must be damage to him in his trade or business i.e., damage to his
goodwill in respect of that trade or business. It was so observed in Bulmer v.
Bellinger, (1978) RPC 79 (CA).

13\. It has further been observed in Apple Computer v. Apple Leasing, 1993
IPLR 63 [1992 (1) Arb.LR 93 (Delhi)] that it is not even necessary in the
context of the present day circumstances of free exchange of information and
advertising through newspapers, magazines, video, T.V. movies, freedom of
travel between parts of the world to insist that a particular plaintiff must
carry on business in a jurisdiction where improper use of its name or mark can
be restrained by the Court. It was also observed that in a case of passing off
action, the main consideration is the likelihood of confusion and
consequential injury to the plaintiff, and the need to protect the public from
deception, deliberate or otherwise.

14\. In a nutshell, in an action for passing off, the plaintiff has to
establish that his business or goods has acquired the reputation he is
claiming, by showing that, his trade name has become distinctive of his goods
and the purchasing public at large associates the plaintiff's name with them.
The plaintiff is, however, not required to establish fraudulent intention on
the part of the defendant. Causing of actual confusion amongst the customers
is also not to be proved. What is required to be established is the likelihood
of deception or confusion in the minds of the public at large. The likelihood
or probability of deception depends on a number of factors, which necessarily,
is a question of fact and varies in the circumstances of each case. The
plaintiff has also to establish that the defendant's user of the plaintiff's
marks, letters or other indicia with regard to his goods is likely to lead to
confusion in the minds of public, and such confusion is likely to cause damage
or injury to the reputation, goodwill and fair name of the plaintiff. The
plaintiff has also to show his prior user of the trade mark, in point of time
than the defendant. The plaintiff, however, need not prove actual loss or
damage in an action of passing off. Also registration of the trade mark is
inconsequential in such an action.

15\. For grant of interim injunction, what is to be see is as to whether the
plaintiff has a prima facie case. The mark HONDA is not only the trade mark of
the plaintiff, but it also forms part of its corporate name. With the passage
of time, the word "HONDA" has attained world wide recognition and is
associated with the plaintiff company. The plaintiff's products specially cars
and motorcycles are known all over world for their superior quality and the
mark HONDA has acquired substantial international reputation and goodwill.

16\. It is contended by the learned counsel for the plaintiff that the
plaintiff's products are being imported into India since late fifties which
has made HONDA a household name with the consumers in India. It is also
contended that the plaintiff's goodwill and reputation also reached India
through various advertisements, published by the plaintiff in many
international journals. Even the cars, manufactured by the plaintiff, are in
use in India for the last many decades. The plaintiff has placed on record
documents to prima facie show that the mark HONDA is of international repute
and is also being used in India for the last about five decades. Photocopies
of the journal "Business Week" placed on record shows the international
ranking of HONDA. The photocopies of the magazines "Asia Inc." and "Asia Week"
show some write ups about the plaintiff's business activities signifying its
world wide reputation. Some extracts from the magazine "National Geographic"
Having considerable circulation in India, more particularly from some of its
issues pertaining to the period from 1971 to 1979 containing advertisements of
HONDA have been placed on record. Extracts from some issues of Asia Inc., Asia
Week and Forbes carrying on advertisements of HONDA have also been placed on
record. All these magazines are having circulation in India. These documents
prima facie show that the name of HONDA has been known in India for the last
five decades. Photocopy of the annual report of HERO HONDA (at pages 45 to 66
of the document file) show that the company HERO HONDA MOtorS LTD. was
promoted by the plaintiff in joint venture with HERO CYCLES PVT. LTD., which
was prior to 1985\. A document at pages 67-68 (documents file) shows that
public issue of SHRIRAM HONDA POWER EQUIPMENTS LTD. was opened on 31st August,
1987. Not only this, some invoices of HONDA products showing its sales in the
year 1982-83 have also been placed on record. A list of persons owning HONDA
cars in India from 1965 to 1990 is also placed on record. Some other documents
like statement of account and documents pertaining to commission paid to
"T.I.M. & Sales Ltd." and "Giriraj & Associates", for sale promotion expenses,
have been placed on record. These documents indicate that sale promotion
activities of plaintiff's products were going on in India even during the
period 1982-83. Reference has also been made to a statement mentioned in para
7 of the plaint giving the net sales of the plaintiff between 1974 to 1997.
The plaintiff has also placed on record the registration certificate and their
renewals which the plaintiff had obtained for the trade mark HONDA. Not only
that, the plaintiff has also applied for registration of trade mark HONDA in
all classes contained in 4th Schedule of Trade & Merchandise Marks Rules.

17\. The learned counsel for the plaintiff brought to my notice that trade
mark HONDA came for consideration by Indian Courts on suits filed by the
plaintiff for its user by other various traders for allied and cognate goods
like rubber parts, paints etc. and some of the courts have been passed interim
orders and some have even decreed the suits. My attention has also been drawn
to a number of cases in which offending traders illegally using the
plaintiff's mark HONDA have given an undertaking that henceforth they will not
use the plaintiff's mark after they were served with 'cease and desist'
notice. Documentary evidence has been placed on record by the plaintiff. To my
mind, the material placed on record, prima facie show that the plaintiff's
mark HONDA has acquired substantial international reputation and goodwill and
the consumers in India are aware of the same for the last several years. It is
prima facie established that the mark HONDA has become distinctive of the
goods of the plaintiff and the purchasing public at large associates the
plaintiff's name with the said mark.

18\. Learned counsel for the plaintiff contends that the defendants, have used
the mark HONDA for their product 'pressure cookers', in order to encash upon
goodwill and reputation of the plaintiff by inducing the customers to buy
their products taking them as those of the plaintiff. The defendants are thus
passing off their goods as that of the plaintiff's. It is, therefore, urged
that defendants should be restrained from using the mark HONDA for their
products. It is submitted that this user by the defendants also dilutes the
plaintiff's reputation and goodwill, which is known for its high quality
products.

19\. Learned counsel for the plaintiff has further emphasized the manner in
which the mark HONDA is used by the defendants for their product pressure
cooker. It is pointed out that from the defendants' application for
registration of the trade mark HONDA, which is available on documents filed it
is apparent that the trade mark HONDA has been shown in a circular device. The
added matter is "SI PRODUCTS" perhaps indicating the name of defendants firm
"Steel India Products". In this representation the mark HONDA is so prominent
that the added matter " SI PRODUCTS" is likely to be over-looked by the
producer and he would purchase the product pressure cooker, taking it to be of
the plaintiff or associated in some manner with the plaintiff. In the second
application for registration of the trade mark, which is pending consideration
before the Registrar of Trade Marks, the defendants have even removed the
added matter "SI PRODUCTS" and the mark HONDA has been shown prominently in a
circular device, which is all respect is identical to the plaintiff's mark.
Apparently the defendants have done so with dishonest intention so as to
create a deception in the minds of the public and pass off their products as
those of the plaintiff, encashing upon its good will and reputation. This
representation of the mark HONDA appears on page 2 of the list of documents
dated 12th January 2001 filed by the defendants. Another lable showing the
mark HONDA used or intended to be used by the defendants has been placed on
record by the defendants at page 2A of the above stated list. This shows the
mark HONDA prominently in the same style, which is used by the plaintiff with
the added matter "Steelindia" above and "pressure cooker" below the mark
HONDA. The added matter is in italics and the font is so small that it can
hardly be noticed. The whole prominence is taken by the mark HONDA. It is
submitted that such depiction of the mark HONDA in the labels used by the
defendants are likely to lead the public to believe that the goods offered by
them are the goods of the plaintiff. It is further contended that the
plaintiff is likely to suffer damage by reason of the erroneous belief likely
to be entertained by the public, that the source of the defendants' goods is
the same as that of the plaintiff or the defendants goods are in some manner
associated with the plaintiffs.

20\. The main contention of the defendants is that the defendants have been
using the mark HONDA for their product pressure cooker since 1985 and the
visual presentation of the mark of their product is such that no confusion and
deception of any kind can arise in the minds of the purchasers. It is
contended that the impugned mark HONDA of the plaintiff is entirely for
different goods, as compared to those of the defendants.

21\. The defendants have placed on record a search report for the trade mark
HONDA and copies of the defendants invoices issued to their purported
customers, to indicate that the defendants had been using the trade mark HONDA
for pressure cooker for many years. Learned senior counsel for the plaintiff
points out that the plaintiff took action against the parties whose names and
addressed are provided in the search report. Cease and desist notices have
been served upon most of them and even suits have been filed against of them.
No response was received from some of them and on inquiry, it transpired that
they had already stopped the business, some gave undertaking that they would
discontinue the user of the trade mark HONDA. Some instances, against whom
action is taken by the plaintiff, are shown in the replication to the amended
written statement. Out of the 234 documents purported to be invoices issued by
the defendants to show that they have been dealing with sale of pressure
cookers under the mark HONDA, for many years, the plaintiff has issued 64
letters to the persons/entities, to seek confirmation as to whether in fact
they have been purchasing the goods from the defendants or not. Only a few
have responded, who have denied having any trade relation with the defendants.
Only one person has stated that he had some relation about 10 years ago. The
invoices in any case relate to the period 1988 onwards.

22\. As discussed above, the plaintiff has prima facie placed sufficient
material on record to indicate that it had been using the mark HONDA for the
last about five decades. The plaintiff has also placed on record prima facie
evidence that its marks HONDA is of international repute and is known for its
quality products. There is also material placed on record which prima facie
shows that the mark HONDA is known, not only internationally but even in India
since late 1950's through advertisements in various international journals and
magazines. Prima facie it also appears that the plaintiff is using the mark
HONDA prior to that of the defendants. Though the plaintiff has placed on
record sufficient material to prima facie show its prior user of the mark
HONDA, the learned counsel for the plaintiff submits that even otherwise the
plaintiff's action for passing off is maintainable as the goodwill and
reputation of its mark HONDA is not confined to one country, as it has
travelled and spread all over the world. Reference in this respect is made to
N.R. Dongre and Ors. v. Whirlpool Corporation and Ors., case, where it was
observed that the goodwill is not limited to a particular country as in the
present days the trade is spread all over the world and the goods are
transported from one country to another very rapidly and on extensive scale.
It was also observed that the goodwill acquired by the manufacturer is not
necessarily limited to the country where the goods are easily available
because the goods though not available are widely advertised in newspapers,
periodicals, magazines and in other media. It also observed that the trade
name transcends the physical boundaries of a geographical region and acquires
a trans-border or overseas or extra-territorial reputation not only through
import of goods but also by its advertisement. Another authority on this
proposition is 1996 PTC (16) 293, Calvin Klein Inc. v. International Apparel
Syndicate.

23\. Learned counsel for the defendants contend that the plaintiffs are
dealing in automobile products and power generated equipment, whereas the
defendants product is pressure cooker and as such the two sets of goods are
neither allied nor cognate, much less identical and as such there is no
likelihood of any deception or confusion being caused in the minds of the
public to purchase the defendants' goods as those of the plaintiff's.

24\. The case of the plaintiff is in fact based on passing off action and not
for infringement of the trade mark. It has never been the case of the
plaintiff that the two sets of goods are identical. The concept of passing
off, which is a form of tort has undergone changes with the course of time.
The plaintiff now does not have to be in direct competition with the defendant
to suffer injury from the use of its trade name by the defendants.

25\. Learned senior counsel for the plaintiff contends that the trade mark
HONDA has a unique goodwill and reputation all over the world and the use
there of by the defendants will dilute plaintiff's goodwill and reputation, as
the public while purchasing any product under the said trade mark would
believe that the said item might have come from the house of HONDA. The
distinctiveness of the mark HONDA of the plaintiff is likely to be eroded and
debased. In Taittinger v. Allbev Ltd., (1993) FSR 641 (CA) , Per Peter Gibson
LJ, observed:

"By parity of reasoning it seems to me no less obvious that erosion of the
distinctiveness of the name champagne in this country is a form of damage to
the goodwill of the business of the champagne houses."

In the same judgment Sir T. Bingham said that:

"Champagne" has an exclusiveness which is impaired if it is used in relation
to a product. (Particularly a potable product) which is neither champagne not
associated or connected with the business which produce champagne. The
impairment is a gradual debasement: dilution or erosion are not demonstrable
in figures of lost sales but that they will be incrementally damaging to
goodwill is in my opinion inescapable."

26\. Learned counsel for the plaintiff to support the proposition that in
passing off action it is not material if the plaintiff and the defendant trade
in the same field or trade in different products, has relied upon the
following judgments:

27\. Daimler Benz Aktiegesellschaft and Anr. v. Hybo Hindustan, ; Ciba-Geigy
Ltd. and Anr.

v. Surinder Singh and Ors. , 1998 PTC (18) 545 ; Sunder Parmanand Lalwani and
Ors. v. Caltex (India) Ltd. ; Lego System Aktieselskab and Anr. v. Lego M.
Lemelstrich Ltd., Fleet Sheet Reports (1983); The Dunlop Pneumatic Tyre Co.
Ltd. v. The Dunlop Lubricant Co., 1899 (16) RPC 12; Surjit Singh v. Almbic
Glass Industries Ltd., ;

Essel Packaging Ltd. and Ors. v. Essel Tea Exports Ltd., 1999 PTC (19) 521 ;
Banga Watch Company v.

    
    
    N.V. Philips and Anr.,    ;
    Bata India Ltd. v. Pyare Lal & Co. and Ors.,   ; C.A. Shimer (M.) SDN BHD,    2000 RPC
    

484 ; Harrods Ltd. v. R. Harrod LTd., (1924) 41 RPC 74 .

28\. In all the aforesaid decisions relied upon by the plaintiff, injunction
was granted in favor of the plaintiff on the basis of an action of passing off
even though the plaintiff and defendant were trading in altogether different
products. I would deal with some of the afore-noted decisions.

29\. In Daimler Benz's case (supra), the plaintiff was using the trade mark
MERCEDES BENZ in relation to vehicles, whereas the defendant had started using
the trade mark BENZ in respect of undergarments. The Court granted injunction
restraining the defendant from using the trade mark BENZ as well as "three
pointed human being in a ring". The judgment was upheld by the Supreme Court.
The following observations made in this judgment are worth-noting:

"There are marks which are different from other marks. There are names which
are different from other names. There are names and marks which have become
household words. "Benz" as name of a Car would be known to every family that
has ever used a quality car. The name "Benz" as applied to a car, has a unique
place in the world.

There is hardly one who is conscious of existence of the cars/automobiles, who
would not recognize the name "Benz" used in connection with cars. Nobody can
plead in India, where "Mercedes Benz" cars are seen on roads, where "Mercedes"
have collaborated with TATAs, where there are Mercedes Benz-Tata trucks have
been have been on roads in every large number, (known as Mercedes Benz Trucks,
so long as the collaboration was there), who can plead that he is unaware of
the word "Benz" as used with reference to car or trucks.

In my view, the Trade Mark law is not intended to protect a person who
deliberately sets out to take the benefit of somebody else's reputation with
reference to goods, especially so when the reputation extends world wide.

30\. In Ciba Geigy Ltd.'s case ( supra) the plaintiff was using the mark CIBA,
CIBACA in relation to goods different than those of the defendant's. The
defendant was using the trade mark CIBACA in relation to filters for motor
vehicles. The case of the defendant was that the goods in question were
entirely different and as such there was no question of any deception being
cause in the minds of the public, when trade mark CIBACA was used in relation
to altogether different goods. While coming to the conclusion that the
defendant had adopted the mark CIBACA deliberately with the intention of
creating confusion in the minds of the public so as to pass off its goods as
those of the plaintiff, the Court granted injunction restraining the
defendants from using the plaintiff's trade mark by the defendants for
altogether different goods, as the use of the trade mark CIBACA by the
defendant was held not to be honest.

31\. Again in Sunder Parmanand Lalwani v. Caltex India Ltd. case (supra) the
goods were totally different having no trade connection between them. The
matter was in appeal before the High Court from the orders of the Registrar,
Trade Marks. The dispute related to mark CALTEX used by the applicant for
watches for which he had applied for registration, whereas the defendant,
Caltex India Ltd., who used it for their products like lubricants, grease,
oils, etc. filed opposition before the Registrar Trade Mark. The Registrar
dismissed the opposition holding the applicant to be the proprietor of the
trade mark. Though the competing marks were held to be identical but the
application was rejected on the ground that the competing goods ere entirely
different. Caltex (India) Ltd. appealed to the High Court, which was allowed.
One of the points for decision before the High Court was as to whether the use
of the mark was likely to deceive or cause confusion, i.e., whether there was
any tangible danger of deception or confusion being caused by the word/mark
"CALTEX" in the minds of the purchaser. The High Court after considering the
respective pleas of the parties held as under:

"In this case, the goods are totally different. There is no trade connection
between them. There is no connection in the course of trade, nor any common
trade channels. There are factors against holding that there would be any
danger of deception or confusion. But we must consider the factors which tend
to show that there is a likelihood of creating deception or confusion. The
opponents have been using their mark on the very large scale since 1937. Their
sales in 1956 exceeded Rs. 30 crores. Their publicity is wide spread and
large. In 1956 they spent over a million rupees on advertisements. The goods
in respect of which they use the trade mark "Caltex" are mainly petroleum,
kerosene and lubricants like greases and oils etc. The goods in respect of
which the applicant seeks registration are mainly watches, the class of goods
in respect of which the applicant seeks registration is wider than watches and
watches can be both costly and cheap."

32\. In Lego'S case (supra) the plaintiff was using the trade mark Lego in
respect of toys, whereas defendant started using the trade mark LEGO in
relation to irrigation equipment. Even though the trade mark LEGO was being
used for different products, the Court granted injunction against the
defendant holding that the plaintiff had established high reputation for the
mark Lego which extended beyond the field of toys and construction kits and
the mark Lego had acquired distinctiveness as the products of the plaintiff.
It had become a house-hold word. It was also observed that in the law of
passing off, there was no limitation in respect of parties field of activity.

33\. In Dunlop'S case (supra), the plaintiff was using the trade mark DUNLOP
in respect of tyres whereas the defendant was using the same in respect of Oil
and lubricants. On a suit for passing off action filed by the plaintiff,
defendant was restrained from using the mark DUNLOP for its products and for
its business name.

34\. In Alembic Glass Industries Ltd.'s case (supra), the respondent used the
trade mark YERA in respect of glassware including jars and bottles, whereas
the appellant Surjit Singh started using the same in respect of perfumery and
cosmetics. The appellant lost before the Registrar of Trade Marks and filed an
appeal before the High Court. While dismissing the appeal it was held as
under:

"Held, the word 'YERA' was being copied by the petitioner in order to take
advantage of the reputation acquired by the trade mark. Perfumery and
cosmetics manufactured by the petitioner are sold in bottles and glass
containers and if the trade mark "YERA" appears on these bottles and glass
containers, there is likelihood that a common man who would go to buy these
perfumery and cosmetics would be led to believe that these goods were
manufactured by the opponent company. The petitioner was, therefore, not
entitled to registration under Section 11(a). Case law discussed."

35\. In Essel Packaging Ltd. v. Essel Tea Exports Ltd. case (supra), the High
Court of Bombay after considering Kirloskar Diesel Recon Pvt. Ltd. v.
Kirlosker Proprietary Ltd. and Bajaj Electricals Pvt. Ltd. v. Metals and
Allied Projects, held, that common field of activity is not conclusive for
deciding whether there can be passing off action, although at one point of
time the said test was treated as conclusive. It was held that with the
passage of time the law of requirement of common field of activity in a
passing off action has undergone a radical change and as such there was no
requirement for a common field of activity to found a claim on passing off
action, because the real question in each of such cases is, whether there is,
as a result of mis-representation, a real likelihood of confusion or deception
of the public and consequent damage to the plaintiff is likely to be caused
and if that is taken to be the test then the focus is shifted from the
external objective test of making comparison of activities of the parties, to
the state of mind of public, in deciding whether it will be confused. Applying
these principles the injunction in favor of the plaintiff was granted.

36\. In Banga Watch Co. v. N.V. Philliphs case (supra), the plaintiff M/s.
N.V. Philliphs was using the trade mark PHILLIPHS, which had become a
household mark and acquired enviable reputation in India and through out the
world dealing in electrical and electronics goods. The defendant was using the
trade mark PHILLIPHS in request of watches and clocks.

37\. In Bata India Ltd.'s case (supra), the plaintiff was using the trade mark
in respect of canvas, rubber, leather shoes, rubber footwear, etc., Whereas
the defendant started using the trade mark Bata and Batafoam in relation to
mattresses. The Court after discussing in detail the law on passing off action
granted injunction in favor of the plaintiff despite the fact that the same
trade mark was being used for different goods.

38\. In the light of the above pronouncement, the proposition pleaded by the
defendants that since they are dealing in entirely different products, there
is no likelihood of any confusion or deception in the minds of the consumers,
is rejected.

39\. Learned counsel for the defendants on the contrary has placed reliance on
the following authorities:

40\. Nestle's Products Ltd. and Ors. v. Milkmade Corporation and Ors., ; The
Procter & Gamble Co. v. Satish Patel, PTC (1996) 646 ; Kedar Nath Gupta v.
J.K. Organisation, 1998 PTC (18) ; United Brother v. United Traders, PTC 1997
Delhi 603 ; Sony Kabushiki Kaidha v. Shamrao Masker and Ors., ; Vishnudas v.
The Vazir Sultan Tobacco Co. Ltd., AIR (1996) 2275; Thomas Bear & Sons v.
Prayag Narain and Anr., ; S.M. Dyechem Ltd. v.

Cadbury (India) Ltd., PTC 2000 397 (SC) ; Relaxo Rubber Ltd. and Ors. v. Aman
Cable Industries and Ors., PTC 1998 Delhi 759 ; London Rubber v. Durex, .

41\. The aforesaid authorities relied upon by learned counsel for the
defendants are to be considered on their own facts. In fact none of the
authorities can be applied on facts to the present case. Whether there is a
mis-representation by the defendant amounting to passing off or mis-
representation is such as to be likely to pas off his goods as the goods of
the plaintiff is in each case a question of fact. No previous case can,
therefore, be an authority for any other case, each case must depend upon the
facts applicable to that case alone. It was so observed in Cellular Clothing
v. Nexton, (1899) 16 RPC 397 (HL) .

42\. In the present case the plaintiff's mark HONDA has acquired a global
goodwill and reputation. Its reputation is for quality products. The name of
HONDA is associated with the plaintiff's especially in the field of
automobiles and power equipments on account of their superior quality and high
standard. The plaintiff's business or products under the trade mark HONDA has
acquired such goodwill and reputation that it has become distinctive of its
products and the defendants' user of this mark for their product "Pressure
Cooker" tends to mislead the public to believe that the defendants business
and goods are that of the plaintiff. Such user by the defendants has also
diluted and debased the goodwill and reputation of the plaintiff.

43\. As observed above, the concept of passing off is a tort and with the
passage of time, with the developing case law it has changed and now the two
traders need not necessarily operate in the same field so as to suffer injury
on account of the goods of one trader being passed off as those of the other.

44\. With the changed concept of passing off action, it is now not material
for a passing off action that the plaintiff and the defendant should trade in
the same field. I find that some business are truly international in character
and the reputation and goodwill attached to them cannot in fact be held being
international also. The plaintiff's business is of international character and
obviously the reputation and goodwill attached to its trade mark HONDA is also
of international repute. The plaintiff's trade mark HONDA, which is of global
repute, is used by the defendants for a product like pressure cooker, to
acquire the benefit of its goodwill and reputation so as to create deception
for the public who are likely to buy defendant's product believing the same as
coming from the house of HONDA or associated with the plaintiff in some
manner. By doing so, it would dilute the goodwill and reputation of the
plaintiff and the wrong committed by the defendants would certainly be an
actionable wrong and the plaintiff is within its rights to ask for restraint
against the defendants from using its mark HONDA for their products.

45\. Further contention of the defendants is that the trade mark HONDA is
common to trade and common surname. The defendant has filed an affidavit to
the effect that the name of his uncle is S. Honda Singh. However, no
documentary evidence is produced by the defendants in this respect to show
that the alleged S. Honda Singh was the uncle of defendant No. 1. The
affidavit of defendant No. 1 in this respect is nothing but a self-serving
document. Such an affidavit cannot take place of cogent documentary evidence.
Two persons with the surname have been shown as members APAA. It does not
establish that the mark HONDA has become a common surname. The defendants have
also placed on record a few pages of the telephone directory of the year 1999
published by MTNL, Delhi, which gives some names with HONDA as surname but in
the given facts and circumstances of this case no weightage can be given to
the same. From the entire record the trade mark HONDA does not appear to be a
common name in India as submitted by learned counsel for the plaintiff. It is
possible that since the plaintiff's trade mark is in existence for the last
more than 50 years in more than 140 countries of the world there a possibility
that few persons have adopted and used the name HONDA in temptation. Even the
said fact does not give any legal right to use the same in relation to
merchandised goods. As a matter of fact, it is borne out from the record that
HONDA is not a dictionary word. It is pertinent to note that it is not only
the trade mark of the plaintiff but it is also, part of its corporate name.
The word 'HONDA' in fact appears to be an invented word being unusual and
having no meaning.

46\. Learned counsel for the defendants further contends that apart from the
defendants there are other traders/businessmen, who have been using the mark
HONDA for different products and have been applied for their registration
under the Trade and Merchandise Marks Act, 1958\. Learned counsel for the
plaintiff submits that registration and pending applications of different
parties is of no consequence. The plaintiff has already taken action against
all those parties who have either applied for registration of the trade mark
or used the same in relation to their goods. Various Courts in this respect
have already protected the trade mark HONDA in favor of the plaintiff. The
plaintiff has placed on record some of the orders, where the Courts have
granted injunction against various defendants restraining them from using the
mark HONDA in relation to different goods like rubber goods, batteries,
pesticides, door laches, etc. It is pointed out that in view of the search
report placed on record by the defendants, the plaintiff has already written
letters and given notices to various persons whose names have been shown in he
search report and some of them have been found non-existent, some have already
closed down their business and some have given an undertaking not to use the
plaintiff's trade mark HONDA.

47\. It is also submitted by learned counsel for the plaintiff and rightly so
that user of plaintiff's trade mark illegally by others does not give a right
to the defendants to use plaintiff's trade mark and to encash upon its
goodwill and reputation. it is also submitted that simply moving application
for registration of a trade mark does not show its user of the mark. It is
submitted that the alleged user of mark HONDA by some other persons is no
defense to the suit. Reference in this aspect is made to 1998 PTC 698, Indian
Shaving Products Ltd. and Anr. v. Gift Pack and Anr., wherein it was held as
under:

"The said parties are not before this Court. Neither the said parties are
claiming any relief against the plaintiffs nor the plaintiffs are claiming any
relief against them. Hence, the said defense, that other persons are also
using the said trade mark is not available to the defendants. The Court is
called upon to decide disputes in between the parties which are before it. The
court cannot be expected to adjudicate upon a dispute which is not before it."

48\. Yet another contention raised by the defendants is that the plaintiff is
not using the trade mark HONDA independently rather there is some added matter
with the mark HONDA as H-Honda, Shriram Honda, Hero Honda, etc. The contention
raised by the defendant on the face of it appears to be devoid of any
substance. In view of the material placed on record, it cannot be argued that
the plaintiff is not using the trade mark independently. The monogram 'H' is
separately registered and the relevant documents appear at pages 55-56 of the
plaintiff's documents. In fact letter 'H' is the logo of the plaintiff's
company which is separately registered. As regards 'SHRIRAM HONDA', it has
already come in pleadings that the plaintiff had a joint venture agreement
with Shriram group of companies and allowed them to use their mark HONDA in
India in relation to generator sets. As regards the mark CITY along with HONDA
it only distinguishes the types of car sold by plaintiff.

49\. The defendants have also raised an objection to the maintainability of
the suit alleging that it suffer from delay and laches. The facts, prima facie
do not show that the suit is barred by time. This issue would be decided on
merits after trial. In any case, it is apparent from the record that the
plaintiff came to know in April 1991 about the defendant's filing an
application for registration of the trade mark HONDA in respect of 'Pressure
Cooker' for which the plaintiff filed opposition which was decided by the
Registrar of Trade Marks vide orders dated 19.10.1995 in favor of the
plaintiff by rejecting the defendant's application. The plaintiff expected and
assumed, that the defendants had stopped the user of the mark HONDA for their
product after the rejection of their application, but when they again came
across an advertisement in trade marks journals about a fresh application of
the defendant's for registration of the mark HONDA in Class 21 in the year
1999, it served upon them a 'cease and desist' notice to which the defendants
did not reply. Instead, they filed caveat application in the Court. The
plaintiff was, therefore, constrained to file the present suit. Under these
circumstances, prima facie it cannot be argued that the plaintiff's suit
suffers from delay or laches. Otherwise also the plaintiff's suit is for
passing off action as the defendants are allegedly passing off their goods
under the trade mark of the plaintiff with a view to encash upon its goodwill
and reputation and the defendants user of the plaintiffs trade mark is a
continuing wrong which gives rise to a recurring cause of action. It was so
held by he Apex Court in Bengal Waterproof Ltd. v. Bombay Waterproof Co. and
Anr., .

50\. In view of the above discussion, I find that the plaintiff has placed
sufficient material on record to show that it has acquired distinctiveness and
goodwill in the mark HONDA which has become a household mark, of the
plaintiff. The mark HONDA connotes distinctiveness, reputation, quality and
goodwill acquired by the plaintiff over a number of years and is understood by
the consumers as associated with the plaintiff. Defendants started using the
mark HONDA to derive benefit from the reputation and goodwill enjoyed by the
plaintiff and their products under the said mark, thereby perpetrating fraud
and deception on the unwary customers by passing off their goods as those of
the plaintiff. I have no hesitation in taking a prima facie view that the
defendants have adopted the mark HONDA deliberately with an intention of
creating a subtle association between their activities and that of the
plaintiff. The user of he trade mark HONDA by the defendants cannot be said to
be an honest and concurrent user, as claimed by them. the trade mark HONDA
being of global reputation, its user by the defendants is likely to cause not
only deception in the minds of ordinary customers but may also cause injury to
the plaintiff company. In this view of the matter, it will be necessary to
restrain the defendants from using the trade mark HONDA for their products
till the matter is decided on merits after trial. Accordingly, the defendants,
their agents, servants, stockists, shopkeepers etc. or any other person acting
on their behalf, are restrained from using the mark HONDA in respect of
pressure cookers or any other allied and cognate goods or any other trade
mark/marks, which are identical with and deceptively similar to the trade mark
HONDA of the plaintiff and to do anything which amounts to passing off their
goods as the goods of the plaintiff till the disposal of this suit. The
application is, accordingly, allowed.

51\. It is, however, made clear that my observations in this order are prima
facie in purport and are not to be taken as the final expression of opinion on
merits.

