

Delhi High Court

Nestle'S Products Limited And ... vs Milkmade Corporation And Anr. on 25
April, 1972

Equivalent citations: AIR 1974 Delhi 40, ILR 1973 Delhi 203

Author: S Rangarajan

Bench: V Deshpande, S Rangarajan

JUDGMENT S. Rangarajan, J.

(1) The Plaintiffs-Appellants, Nestle's Products Limited, instituted a suit on
23-11-1971 and also filed an application under Order 39 Rules 1 & 2 and S. 151
of the Code of Civil Procedure for a temporary injunction against the
defendants (Messrs Milkmade Corporation & Anr). Shankar Lal (defendant No. 2)
is supposed to be carrying on the business of the first defendant either alone
or in association with other persons in the following circumstances.

(2) Plaintiff No. 1 is Nestle's Products Limited, a company registered under
the laws of the Bahama Islands and the second Plaintiff, Nestle's Products
(India) Limited though registered under the laws of the Bahama Islands has its
principal place of business in India at New Delhi.

(3) Plaintiff No. 1 is the registered proprietor of the following among other
trade marks registered in India in respect of goods mentioned in class 29 of
the classified list of goods in the Fourth Schedule of the Trade and
Merchandise Marks Rules : (1)Trade Mark consisting of a figure representing a
milkmaid and the words "Milkmaid brand". (2) Trade Marks consisting of the
transcription of the English word 'Milkmaid' in Tamil, Telugu, Bengali,
Gujarati, Hindi and Assamese, respectively.

(4) In addition the second plaintiff had applied for the formalities for the
recordal of registered user rights in respect of trade mark containing the
words "Milkmaid Brand" on a central panel consisting of a figure representing
a milkmaid reproduction on either side thereof of two sides of a medal set in
the middle of a rectangle with the words "Condensed Milk". The trade marks
consisting of the word "Milkmaid" and the figure representing a milkmaid have
been used by the plaintiffs and their predecessors for over 100 years to
distinguish the condensed milk manufactured and/or sold by them. The said
condensed milk has been sold in India for over 50 years. The plaintiffs had
acquired the said trade marks and brand "Milkmaid" which had acquired a wide
reputation in other markets as well as in India. It came to the notice of the
plaintiffs in or about November, 1970 that the defendants had adopted the
trade name "Milkmade Corporation" and had put on the market biscuits and
toffees, under their said trade name and/or mark "Milkmade". The plaintiffs
complained that the said trade name and/or mark adopted by the defendants was
both visually and phonetically nearly identical with and/or deceptively
similar to the aforesaid trade marks and brand name "Milkmaid". The second
plaintiff thereupon wrote to the defendants requiring them to desist from
using the word "Milkmade" or any other similar word or mark in respect of
their goods.

(5) Various defenses were taken to the plaintiffs' suit; they are, inter alia,
as follows : The plaintiffs' trade marks, which were in respect of class 29,
could not give them any right in respect of biscuits and toffees manufactured
by the defendants, which fall under class 30 and not under class 29'. The
defendants had advertised those products in 1968 (An issue of the Indian
Express of that year containing the said advertisement was relied upon in
support of this) and have invested huge sums of money going beyond Rs. 6
lakhs, on the construction of the factory and installation of machinery for
the manufacture of biscuits and toffees. The plaintiffs have stood by and
allowed the defendants to carry on their business. Moreover "Milkmaid" is an
ordinary English word which could not be registered under the Indian Trade and
Merchandise Mark Act.

(6) In their replication, which was filed by the plaintiffs, they met the
charge of delay or latches made by the defendants and explained that the
registered proprietors (Plaintiff No. 1) had to be consulted, necessary copies
had to be obtained and that a counsel had to be engaged and pleadings drafted
with the approval of both the plaintiffs. The legal certificates of their
trade mark registration were not available until November, 1971. The present
suit was filed in November, 1971 without even waiting for the said
certificates. It was also asserted that the manner in which the defendants
were manufacturing and selling their goods has made people wonder whether the
plaintiffs were also entering the markets in regard to the products
manufactured by the defendants' In this way not only did the defandants
infringe the plaintiffs' trade marks but also passing off their goods as the
goods of the plaintiffs and exploiting the goodwill and reputation of the
plaintiffs to their disadvantage.

(7) The learned single Judge who had granted an ex-pane interim in junction
vacated it by his impugned order dated 20-12-1971. The learned single Judge
has held as follows : (1)The plaintiffs, on their own showing, have a
registered trade mark "Milkmaid Brand" which falls under class 29 of the
Fourth Schedule whereas the biscuits and toffees, which are manufactured by
the defendants but not by the plaintiffs, are covered by class 30. (2)
Although the plaintiffs' trade mark is "Milkmaid Brand" they are using only
"Milkmaid" with a pictorial figure of the milkmaid and that under Section 15
of the Trade and Merchandise Marks Act they were not entitled to exclusively
use a part of the trade mark "Milkmaid" without applying for separate
registration of that mark (not the whole "Milkmaid Brand"). (3) There were no
materials to show that the defendants were passing off their goods as those of
the plaintiffs. The above view it may be noticed, was taken without any
prejudice to the case of both sides on the merits. The plaintiffs have filed
this appeal aggrieved by the above-said order of the learned single Judge
vacating the interim injunction granted to them.

(8) Shri A.C. Gulati, learned counsel for the plaintiffs, has contended before
us that the classification of goods in the Fourth Schedule was not a legal
criterion regarding description of the goods or classes of goods, the said
classification merely being procedural. The real question was the nature of
the goods and the trade connection. He contended that the registration of the
trade mark is sufficient to give the exclusive right to the said trade mark to
the plaintiffs who were entitled to prevent the defendants from manufacturing
biscuits and toffees under the impugned trade marks which are said to be
deceptively similar because the description of the plaintiffs' goods were wide
enough to cover goods of similar nature entitling them to enter the field for
allied goods.

(9) It was contended by Shri N.N. Keshwani, learned counsel for the defendants
(respondents), that the right of plaintiffs to complain of infringement was
confined to the goods in respect of which the trade mark has been registered
in the plaintiffs' favor and there being no registration of trade mark in
respect of toffees and biscuits the present action is misconceived. The goods
and business of the plaintiffs being wholly different from that of the
defendants, it is contended, the plaintiffs could not bring an action against
them. It is, therefore, pointed out that the plaintiffs have no prima fade
case and that in any case, the balance of convenience is in favor of refusing
the injunction rather than granting it; the plaintiffs cannot besaid to suffer
any irreparable injury by the injunction being not granted during the pendency
of the suit.

(10) The arguments concerning delay need not detain us for this has been
sufficiently explained in the replication filed by the plaintiffs. The learned
single Judge has also not apparently vacated the interim ex parte injunction
on the ground of delay.

(11) The most important question for consideration in this appeal is whether
the appellants have a prima fade case. This aspect of the matter has to be
considered from the point of view of whether in relation to biscuits and
toffees (the latter, toffee, alone was pressed seriously for the purpose of
this injunction application by Shri Gulati during the hearing) would come
within the ambit of the registered trade mark in favor of the plaintiffs.
Whereas according to Shri Keshwani the goods manufactured by the defendants
are totally different from the goods in respect of which registration was
granted to the plaintiffs, according to Shri Gulati, the registration is wide
enough to cover goods of similar nature for the appellants could enter the
field in respect of similar and allied goods.

(12) In order to appreciate these rival contentions it is necessary to notice
the relevant provisions of the Trade and Merchandise Marks Act, 1958 (Act 43
of 1958). Section 28 of the Act provides that registration of a trade mark
shall, if valid, give to the registered proprietor of the trade mark the
exclusive right to the use of the trade mark in relation to the goods in
respect of which the trade mark is registered and to obtain relief in respect
of infringement of the trade mark in the manner provided above. Section 29(1)
provides that a registered trade mark is infringed by a person who, not being
the registered proprietor of the trade mark or a registered user thereof using
by way of permitted use, uses in the course of trade a mark which is identical
with, or deceptively similar to the trade mark, in relation to any goods in
respect of which the said trade mark is registered and in such manner as to
render the use of the mark likely to be taken as being used as a trade mark.
According to Section 32, the original registration (subject to sections 35 and
46, which do not apply here) of the trade mark shall, after the expiration of
seven years from the date of such registration, be taken to be valid in all
respects unless the registration is obtained by fraud or was registered in
contravention of the provision of Section 11 (which prohibits the use of
certain marks likely to deceive or cause confusion) or was not at the
commencement of the proceedings, distinctive of the goods of the registered
proprietor.

(13) The distinction between an action for infringement and for passing off is
well-known. The latter is a common law remedy being in substance an action for
deceit, that is, passing off by a person of his own goods as those of another.
The former is a statutory remedy conferred on the registered proprietor of a
registered trade mark for the vindication of the exclusive right to the use of
the trade mark in relation to those goods. The use by the defendant of the
trade mark of the plaintiff is not essential in an action for passing off, but
is the sine qua non in the case of an action for infringement. In an action
for infringement, the plaintiff must make out that the use of the defendant's
mark is likely to deceive, but where the similarity between the plaintiffs and
the defendant's mark is so close either visually, phonetically or otherwise
and the Court reaches the conclusion that there is an imitation, no further
evidence is required to establish that the plaintiff's rights are violated. In
other words, if the essential features of the trade mark of the plaintiff have
been adopted by the defendant, the fact that the get up, packing and other
writing or marks on the goods or on the packets in which he offers his goods
for sale show marked differences, or indicate clearly a trade origin different
from that of the registered proprietor of the mark would be immaterial;
whereas, in the case of passing off the defendant may escape liability if he
can show that the added matter is sufficient to distinguish his goods from
those of the plaintiff (Kaviraj Pandit Durga Dutt Sharma v. Navaratna
Pharmaceutical Laboratories, ).

(14) The test as to likelihood of confusion or deception arising from
similarity of marks is the same both in infringement and passing off actions.
The action for infringement is a statutory right depending on the validity of
the registration and subject to other restrictions laid down in the Act
(Ruston and Hornby Ltd. v. Zamindara Engineering Co. ). Lord Denning explained
in Parker Knoll v. Knoll International Ltd. [1962 R.P.C. 265 (274)] the words
"to deceive" and the phrase "to cause confusion". "When you deceive a man you
tell him a lie...... you may not to do it knowingly, or intentionally, but
still you do it and so you deceive him. But you may cause confusion without
telling him a lie at all, and without making any false] representation". These
observations were cited with approval by Ramaswami, J. in F. Hoffimanna-La
Roche and Co. Ltd. v. Geoffrey Manners and Co. Private Ltd. . As pointed out
by Sir Wilfred Green, M.R. reversing the judgment of Bennet, J. in Saville
Perfumery Ltd. v. June Perfect Ltd. and F.W. Woolworth & Co. Ltd. (58 R.P.C.
147 at page 163). that it did not necessarily follow that a trader who uses an
infringing mark upon goods is also guilty of passing off, the reason being
that once a mark is used indicating its origin, no amount of added matter
intended to show the true origin of the goods can affect the question. The
statutory protection is absolute and infringement takes place not merely by
exact incation but by the use of a mark so nearly resembling the registered
mark as to be likely to deceive (at page 161). The House of Lords dismissed
the appeal preferred against the decision of the Court of Appeal.

(15) Section 12 imposes a ban on the registration of an identical or
deceptively similar trade mark. But this prohibition does not apply where the
applicant's trade mark is in respect of goods which are of essentially
different character from the goods or description of goods for which an
identical or similar mark is already in the register.

(16) To sell merchandise or carry on business under such a name, mark,
description, or otherwise in such a manner as to mislead the public into
believing that the merchandise or business is that of another person is a
wrong actionable at the suit of that other person. This form of injury,
according to Heuston (Law of torts, 12th Ed., pp. l659-668) is commonly though
awkwardly, termed as that of passing off one's goods or business as the goods
or business of another and is the most important example of the wrong of
injurious falsehood, though the statutory remedies in this respect would have
to be treated separately. The wrong of passing off is not confined to cases of
the sale of goods but assumes many forms of which, Heuston has given some
instances.

(17) Though in the plaint as well as in the application for injunction
reference has been made to the use of the trade name and/or mark-
"Milkmade"-of the defendants being calculated to deceive, confuse and induce
the belief that the goods of the defendants are those of the plaintiffs, thus
damaging the high reputation which they had earned, it is seen from the order
of the learned single Judge, however that only two contentions were put
forward, namely, infringement of trade mark and brand name of the plaintiffs
and passing off by the defendants of their goods as if they were the goods of
the plaintiffs. It is, therefore, not permissible for the
plaintiffs/appellants before us to support their application for a temporary
injunction, pending the disposal of the suit on any ground not expressly urged
before and considered by the learned single Judge; that could be canvassed, if
it is permissible, only in the suit. The present discussion, therefore, is
confined to the twin contentions, of infringement and of passing off which
alone were urged before the learned single Judge.

(18) Dr. Venkateswaran in his book on Trade and Merchandise Marks (1963
Edition at page 511) has stated as follows : "IThas already been pointed out
that the exclusive right conferred by registration is limited to the goods for
which the mark is registered, and does not extend to allied goods. In order to
constitute infringement, the defendant's use of the mark complained of must be
in relation to any goods in respect of which the plaintiffs mark is
registered. An action for infringement cannot, therefore, be brought when the
use complained of is in respect of goods for which the plaintiffs mark is not
registered, even though an action for passing off may still be sustained".

(19) In support of this statement the following cases have been cited :
"HARTv. Colley, (1890) 7 R.P.C. 93,. Edwards v. Dennis, (1885) 30 Ch. D. 454,
. Hargr aves v. Freman, (1891) 8 R.P.C. 237. In Hart v. Colley, the defendant
was charged with selling rolls of paper with the trade mark of the plaintiff;
the plaintiff was not registered in class 39 which took in rolls of paper. It
was held that the plaintiff not being registered under class 39 was not
entitled to sue in respect of the infringement of the trade mark. We are not
for the moment concerned with the other ground of passing off, on which that
decision was rested. North, J. observed as follows : "In turning over the
leaves of the Trade Mark Journal we constantly find four or five or more trade
marks all exactly alike registered in respect of different classes of goods.
What is that for ? Why, because the common consent of every one shows that
they understand the right to registration under the Act is in respect of the
particular goods or classes of goods for which registration is obtained. I am
surprised to find that this point has not expressly been decided, for it must
have arisen a great many times; but I find in that case to which Mr. Aston
referred of Edwards v. Dennis, there are certain observations of the Judges
which seem to me to point exactly the same way. There, it will be remembered,
it was held that a person could not register with respect to all goods of a
particular class unless he had used the marks in respect of such goods; and it
was held that the mark having been registered with respect to a particular
class, but only used with respect to certain goods in that class, the
registration must be rectified so as to show that it was not in respect of the
whole class, but of the goods only with respect to which the marks had been
used. Now, it would be absured to say that if a man registers under Class, I,
in respect of particular goods in that class, he cannot sue in respect of
other goods in that class, but can, without any other registration sue in
respect of all goods found in all the other classes. It is impossible to come
to the conclusion that that could be so : and as it is decided that a man can
register with respect to such only of the goods in any given class as he has
used his marks upon, it follows, a fortiori, that a man who is registered in
respect of one particular class cannot, by virtue of such registration, sue in
respect of goods which are not within that class at all. At page 474 of the
30th Chancery Division, in the case of Edwards v. Dennis, Lord Justice Cotton
says :-'Now, what was done in the present case ? There was a registration by
Mr. Edwards' predecessors in title for Class 5, of unwrought and partly
wrought metals used in manufacture. That was registration in respect of all
goods which came under Clause 5, a class which includes a vast number of
things.' Then, passing over a few lines :-'The registration in the present
case has been for the entirety of that class. In my opinion that is wrong.
Even if a trade mark can be registered, which is not in actual use, it ought
to be restricted to those goods in connection with which it is going to be
used. In my opinion if is not the intention of the Act that a man registering
a trade mark for the entire class, and yet only using it for one article in
that class, can claim for himself the exclusive right to use it for every
article in the class'.

(20) A little further on, he says :--'Can a man claim registration for all the
articles specified in the class when the business he is engaged in comprsises
only one specific portion of the articles named in the class. I am of the
opinion 'he cannot'. To paraphrase that, can a man who is registered in one
class claim in respect of articles not comprised in that class, but comprised
in some of the other classes ? In the same way, in my opinion, he cannot".

(21) In Edwards v. Dennis it was held that an assignee of the goodwill of a
business with the right to a trade mark which has been registered by the
assignor under the Trade-marks Registration Act, 1875, in respect of an entire
class, but of which the articles dealt with in such business form part only,
is not entitled to the exclusive user of the trade-mark for the entire class,
but only for the particular articles in connection with which it is actually
used. In addition to the passages occurring in the above extract it would be
helpful to set out the observations of Lindley, L.J. (page 477) : "IN my
opinion the existing registration has no application to a class of goods in
which Mr. Edwards carries on no business whatever. Surely an iron manifacturer
could not obtain a restriction of registration against, for instance a gold
manufacturer."

(22) In Hargreaves v. Freeman, Hargreaves registered a mark consisting of
three crowns, his name and address, and the words "The Three Crowns Mixture"
for tobacco; he sold cut tobacco with this mark, and sold cigars with a label
containing the three crowns, ornamental devices of leaves and flowers along
with the words "The Three Crowns" and " Habana". Freeman commenced to sell
cigars with a label bearing three crowns and the words "The Three Crowns". It
was contended that the registration of 'Hargreaves' was confined to cut
tobacco only and did not extend to cigars and was never applied by him to
cigars. The motion was dismissed.

(23) Reference may now be made to some further English cases which seem to
bear on this question. In Eno v. Dunn (7 R.P.C. 311 at p. 317) it was observed
by Lord Marshall that the words "Fruit salt" for medicinal preparation did not
prevent the registration by another for umbrellas. Whether the concerned goods
are of the same description is a question of fact (Lord Evershed, M.R. and
Romer, L.J. Lycns (J.) & Co. Ltd's. application, 1959 R.P.C. 120 at pages' 28
and 132, respectively). In deciding this question one has to look at the trade
and from a practical, business and commercial point of view (Australian Wine
Importers' Trade Mark, 6 R.P.C. 311), It is also true that the mere
classification in the trade mark rules may not be the decisive consideration.
Lindley, LJ. observed in the above case at page 318 as follows : "NOW,for the
purpose of deciding whether two sets of goods are of the same description,
when they are not the same goods, we must not, as it appears to me, lay too
much stress on the classification of the framers of the rules".

(24) Shri A. C. Gulati relied upon the above case, where an application to
register for wines with a trade mark containing the device of a suspended
sheep and the words "Golden Fleece" was refused on the opposition of one who
was the owner of two trade marks for spirits which comprised the same device
and the same words; the appeal against the said refusal was dismissed. Cotton,
L.J. distinguishing Edwards v. Dennis (7) observed as follows : "ALTHOUGHMr.
Mason does not in fact use his registered trade mark-nor could he without some
alteration-in the sale of his wine, yet he is selling both whiskey and rum,
and also selling wine, and it would be therefore wrong, in my opinion, to give
a sanction to the Australian Wine Importers by enabling them to register this
trade mark, although they register it, not for that in respect of which Mr.
Mason is using his trade mark, but in respect of one branch of the trade which
he is carrying on, and has been carrying on, since the year 1882".

(25) The decision of the Supreme Court in Corn Products Refining Co. v.
Shangri/a Food Products Ltd.0 is also of no assistance to Shri Gulati. That
case also arose out of an application for registration of the trade mark
"Gluvita" in class 30, which the applicant had not used prior to the date of
application for registration. The application by Shangrila Food Products Ltd.
for registration was opposed by Corn Products Refining Co. on the ground that
it had the mark "Glucovita" in class 30 in respect of "Dextrose (d-Glucose
powder mixed with vitamins) a substance used as food for as an ingredient in
food ; glucose for food". They had also registered the same trade mark in
class 5 in respect of "infants' and invalids' foods". A single Judge of the
Bombay High Court had allowed the appeal against the Registrar's decision, but
it was set aside by a Division Bench of that High Court. The Supreme Court
restored the decision of the single Judge on the ground of the absolute
identity of the two competing marks and the trade connection. A. K. Sarker, J.
speaking for the Supreme Court observed as follows : ''...... a trade
connection between glucose and biscuits would appear to be established. We are
therefore of opinion that the commodities concerned in the present case are so
connected as to make confusion or deception likely in view of the similarity
of the two trade marks."

(26) Reference was made by the Supreme Court to 58 (1941) R.P.C .91 (In the
matter of an Application by Edward Hack for the registration of a Trade Mark)
and to 63 (1946) R.P.C. 59((In the matter of an application by Ladislas
Jellinek for the registration of a Trade Mark). In the former case Morton, J.
accepted the appeal against the Registrar of Trade Marks allowing the
registration of laxatives despite opposition. The facts were that application
was made for registration of the words "Black Magic" in respect of "Medicated
preparations in solid form for human use as laxatives" in Class 3. It was
opposed by the proprietors of the Trade Mark "Black Magic" in Class 42 in
respect of (inter alia) "Chocolate and chocolates", which mark had been
extensively advertised and used for a certain class of their goods. It was
proved that chocolate was used to flavour certain laxatives, and that in many
cases chocolates and laxatives were sold in the same shop. On the ground that
there was a risk of confusion. in that some persons are likely to think that
both the preparations were made by the same manufacturers and others to wonder
if this might be the case: the appeal was allowed and registration was
refused. Morton, J. pointed out that chocolates and laxatives were alike in
this, that they were both edible, that the laxatives were solid in form and
both articles were intended for human consumption. There was evidence,
however, that ''Black Magic" had been applied in respect of lip-stick pencils
and vacuum cleaners, but there was no evidence that it had ever been applied,
except by those who opposed registration, to articles which are edible, or
solid in form and intended for human consumption. This case, therefore, does
not support the broad proposition of Shri Gulati that regardless of the nature
and kind of goods in respect of which the plaintiffs' trade marks were adopted
by the defendants, the registration in the plaintiffs' favor, of the trade
mark, by itself, is sufficient. In the latter case the trade name "Panda" in
respect of shoe polish was held not permissible when the mark had been used
for shoes even though both of them were not of the same description of goods.
Romer, J. declined to interfere with the order of the Registrar allowing an
application to register the trade mark of a Panda together with the word
"Panda" in class 3 for shoe polish despite the opposition by the proprietors
of a similar mark "Panda" registered in respect of shoes. The Registrar had
found that the main channel for the sale of shoe polish was such that there
was little risk of confusion with the opponents' shoe mark, and that different
traders did not hesitate to adopt the same mark for shoes and polish
respectively as was seen from a reference to a trade Year Book and to extracts
from the Registrar; the Registrar also held that shoes and shoe polish were
not of the same description of goods. Romer, J. observed that while shoes are
made to wear, shoe polish is used for cleaning and from this point of view
there is nothing common between the two. Reliance was placed upon the decision
of Eve, J. in J. & J. Colman Ltd.'s Application reported in 46 R.P.C. 126,
(13) The Registrar had come to the conclusion that mustard and semolina were
sold by the same persons and across the same counter and both the commodities
were sufficiently similar to one another and should be treated as of the same
description, one being condiment and the other a nutrient; both were probably
treated as articles of food and used for cooking in the same kitchen. Eve, J.,
however, took a different view of the matter while conceding the common
characteristics on which the Registrar relied and had observed as follows:
"ONEmust, I think, go a little further and find out what is the real nature of
the article. . . . I think it is a fair division of the two sets of things to
say that one would fall under the description of a condiment and the other
under the description of a cereal, and although these goods are found side by
side and in just aposition when offered for sale and in domestic use, that
cannot of itself alter the description of the goods".

(27) Romer, J. also observed that there was no evidence that members of the
public at any relevant time were aware of Panda at all. Romer, J. applied the
test (in 63 R.P.C. 59 at page 80) propounded by Lord Wright in Aristoc Ltd v.
Rvsta Ltd. (1945) R.P.C. 104 (14) of there being a general risk of confusion
which in the public interest should not be authorised.

(28) Shri Gulati also relied upon a number of other cases where trade marks
resembling those already in the register were not permitted even in respect of
goods which were either not the same or identical with those used by the
existing registered proprietor but also not strictly coming within the
classification of the goods in respect of which registration had already been
permitted. These cases would, on examination, seem to rest on the basis of the
connection in the course of trade which the two classes of goods in addition
to similarity of the marks and other surrounding circumstances may lead on
unwary customer to mistake the defendant's goods for those of the plaintiffs.

(29) In the Eastman Photographic Materials Company, Ltd. v. The John Griffiths
Cycle Corporation, Ltd. and the Kodak Cycle Company, Ltd. (15) (1898) R.P.C.
105) an injunction was granted restraining the carrying on of cycle
manufacturing business under the name Kodak Cycle Company Ltd. having regard
to the trade mark "Kodak" having become associated with the manufacturers of
"Cycle cameras"- camras associated with cyclists. It was held that the
registration had been procured by the Cycle Company by an untrue statement to
the Registrar and that the trade mark of the Cycle Company must be expunged as
being calculated to deceive. Following this, among other cases, an injunction
was issued by the Lahore High Court in National Electric Stores v. General
Electric Co. Ltd. (A.I.R. 1944 Lahore 386) restraining the use of the trade
mark "Osram" in respect of electric batteries at the instance of the General
Electric Company who had been manufacturing electric goods, such as, bulbs and
dry cells for flash light batteries. It was held on the basis of the evidence
in that case that any normal purchaser of ordinary intelligence who had used
Osram electric bulbs would regard the battery sold by the defendants as having
been manufactured by the general Electric Company as they bore the trade mark
which is also printed exactly in the same manner on the batteries as on the
electric goods manufactured by the General Electric Company.

(30) Abdul Rashid, J., speaking for the Division Bench in the above case, also
referred to a number of other English decisions, some of which have also been
replied upon by Shri Gulati. One of them was Warwick Tyre Co. Ltd. v. New
Motor & General Rubber Co. Ltd. (1910) 1 Ch. 248, where the plaintiffs had
manufactured and sold tyres for cycles and motor cycles under the name of
"Warwick" and had obtained a distinctive meaning and character, but they never
manufactured or sold tyres for motor cars. The defendants, whose Managing
Director bore the name Warwick, commenced to sell their motor tyres under the
name of "Warwick Motor Tyres". Injunction restraining the selling of motor
tyres was granted on the ground that it would lead to the supposition that the
persons who were dealing with motor tyres were the same as those who had for
many years in the past been dealing with Warwick Cycle tyres.

(31) Another case was The Dunlop Pneumatic Tyre Co. Ltd. v. The Dunlop
Lubricant Co. (1899) R.P.C. 12) where an injunction was issued restraining the
use of the word "Dunlop" for oils and lubricants for cycles, a name which had
become associated with pneumatic tyres for cycles and other accessories, such
as pumps, inflators etc. by the Dunlop Pneumatic Tyre Co., Ltd. Romer, J. (as
he then was) observed as follows : "ITappears to me that the plaintiffs are
entitled to say that the word "Dunlop" ought not to be allowed to be used
under those circumstances with those objects by the Defendant; that it would
injure them in their business very considerably if it is not stopped. They
themselves are sellers of cycles accessories, though as a matter of fact up to
the present time they have not sold burning oil or lubricants. But they may do
so, and in the meantime it appears to me that they are entitled to come into
Court and say that a name substantially identical with theirs ought not to be
allowed to be used by the Defendant in the way in which he is using it."

(32) Yet another case referred to by Abdul Rashid, J. was Ainsworth v.
Walmslay, (1966) 35 L.J. Ch. 352, where the following observations were made
by Vice Chancellor Wood : "IFa manufacturer does not carry on a trade in iron,
but carries on a trade in linen, and stamps a lion on his linen, another
person may stamp a lion on iron; but when he has appropriated a mark to a
particular species of goods and caused his goods to circulate with this mark
upon them, the Court has said that no one shall be at liberty to defraud that
man by using that mark, and passing off goods of his manufacture as being the
goods of the owner of that mark."

(33) Abdul Rashid, J. had relied on Niamatullah, J. of the Allahabad High
Court, who in Thomas Bear & Sons v. Pryag Narain held (on a difference between
King and lqbal Ahmed, JJ.) that chewing tobacco did not constitute goods of
the same character as smoking tobacco; these observations were affirmed by the
Privy Council in Thomas Bear & Sons v. Pryag Narain The observations of
Viscount Maugham, J., who spoke for the Judicial Committee of the Privy
Council, are instructive : "Amanufacturer of cigarettes under an undoubted
trade mark such as an animal, or any other device cannot legally object to the
use of the identical mark on, say, hats, or soap, for the simple reason that
purchasers of any of the latter kinds of goods could not reasonably suppose,
even if they were well acquainted with the mark as used on cigarettes, that
its use on hats or soap denoted that these goods were manufactured on marketed
by the cigarette manufacturer: see Somerville v. Schembri, (1887) 12 A.C.
453-56 L.J.P.C.61-56 L.T. 454. Those would be simple cases, but some much more
difficult ones can be suggested. If a manufacturer of a special kind of
smoking tobacco under a trade mark seeks to restrain the use of it on cigars,
or on a very different kind of smoking tobacco, of or cigarettes, or on snuff,
or on chewing tobacco, or on tobacco in some form sold for use as a weed
killer-all these things being made of tobacco-questions, sometimes of great
difficulty, may arise. It is however very important to observe that each of
these questions will be a question of fact to be decided on the evidence
adduced. The vital element in such a case is the probability of deception."

(Emphases added) (34) Reference was also made by Abdul Rashid, J. to Angle-
Indian Drug Chemical Co. v. Swastik Oil mills Co. Ltd. (A.I.R. 1935 Bombay
101) (23) where it was held that bar soap for washing clothes could not be
regarded as goods of the same class and character as toilet requisites.

(35) In the Matter of Dunn's Trade Mark (7 (1890) R.P.C. 311))(24) the House
of Lords, by a majority, held that the application by Dunn to register the
words "Dunn's Fruit Salt Trade Mark Baking Powder" as a trade mark for baking
powder in class 42 should not be registered on account of there being already
on the register the mark of J.C. Eno, containing the words "Fruit Salt", in
class 42 for dry preparation for making a non-introxicating beverage. Despite
the powerful dissent of the Lord Chancellor and Lord. Morris the majority held
that it was the element of deception which compelled Courts of Equity to
interfere to protect traders. Lord Macnaghten referred (at page 319) to Dunn
giving the words "Fruit Salt" prominent position among the words he sought to
be registered, which was calculated to deceive. What is of particular
significance for our present purpose is the observation of Lord Morris which
characterised the argument for J.C. Eno that persons who wanted Enu's Fruit
Salt powder to bake might be deceived into buying Dunn's products, as
anargument wanting foundation in fact. As we read the majority opinions we do
not think that this reasoning of Lord Morris was repudiated; the majority
rested the decision against Dunn on the element of deception. Lord Evershed,
M.R. held ice cream and table jellies were not of the same description ( vide
J. Lyons and Co. Ld's Application to rectify the register, 1959 R.P.C. 120).
He discussed some of the cases decided in England. Paraffin oil intended to be
used medically for human consumption was held to be of the same description as
paraffin oil intended to be used for machine lubrication on the ground that
both were Chemically the same substance, the difference between them depending
only on the degree of refinement (In the matter of McDowell's Application for
a Trade Mark, 43 R.P.C. 313 at P. 334 (C.A.) and in the matter of McDowell's
Application for a Trade Mark, 44 R.P.C. 335 (H.L.) . In the Australian Wines
case (already noticed) spirits, particularly rum and whiskey were held to be
of the same description. In Jellinek's Application (already noticed) it was
held that shoe polish and shoes were different. In J and J Colman Ltd's
Application (also noticed already) mustard and semolina, inspite of their
being commonly sold in the same establishment over the counter were held to be
not goods of the same description particularly having regard to the divergence
in use and method of preparation when they respectively reached the kitchen of
the housewife. Lord Evershed, M.R. then observed Cat pages 128-129) :
"ITshould be stated that the two things, ice creams and. jellies, are not in
the same classes under the rules for registration of trade marks. This,
however, is admittedly irrelevant. Now, with all respect to the Assistant
Comptroller, can I attach much significance to the fact that they may be eaten
off the same plate, if he meant, so eaten at the same time : for so might, for
example, roast beef and Yorkshire pudding or chops and tomato sauce,
respectively goods (I should say) of very different descriptions. But the
circumstances in which the two things are used (as I have attempted to state
in my more limited description of the kind of sweets which they are) plus the
fact that they or their sources for the housewife may be offered for sale side
by side on a grocer's counter are, I think, weighty considerations".

(36) The Judicial Committee of the Privy Council held in Somerville v.
Schembri (1881) Xii Appeal Cases 453 that on general principles, even apart
from any statute (the case arising from Malta) the use of the trade mark "
Kaisar-i-Hind" in respect of hats, soaps and pickles could not impede the
acquisition of an exclusive right to it as a trade mark for cigarettes.

(37) A Division Bench of the Calcutta High Court held in Rustom Ali and Bata
Shoe Company that the trade mark 'Bata' used in respect of foot-wear, leather
and rubber goods. socks and hosiery, could not impede the use of the said mark
with reference to lungis. Warwick (cited already) was distinguished on the
ground that it involved tyres for cycles and motor cycles. Somerville was
followed and the observations of Romer, J. in Dunlop Pneumatic Tyre Co. case
(already cited) were dissented from if he meant that even if the sets of
articles concerned had no connection with each other, still an injunction
could be granted.

(38) Since even the cases relied upon by Shri Gulati, besides those discussed
by Abdul Rashid, J., were also seen to be those where some kind of trade
connection between the two sets of goods was established, he had ultimately to
rely more on the appellants making a false suggestion that Nestle's had
entered the field of toffees also and that if this is permitted the trade
reputation acquired for them by expending such labour and cost over a long
period of time would be affected. For this submission Shri Gulati tried to
seek support from the observations of Maugham, J. in British Medical
Association v. Marsh (48 R.P.C. 565) This case really followed the
observations of Winn Parry, J. in Derek McCulloch v. Lewis A. May (Produce
Distributors) Ltd. (65 (1948) R.P.C. 58) . In the latter case the plaintiff, a
well-known broadcaster under the name "Uncle Mac" sued the defendant from
selling cereals under his name, causing confusion with himself and damaging
his professional reputation; the action was dismissed. In the former case the
British Medical Association (B.M.A., for short) obtained an injunction against
the defendant who had formed a company which made articles from the analysis
of the B.M.A. but sold them at low prices with the letters "B.M.A.2". On the
window, where these goods were displayed, there was a card guaranteeing that
they were prepared strictly according to analysis of the B.M.A. The injunction
was granted on the ground that the act of the defendant injured the plaintiffs
in their business both by tending to cause existing members of the Association
to leave it and others to abstain from joining it. Referring to a decision of
Lord Langdale in the year 1848 (dark v. Freeman (11 Beav. 112) Maugham, J.
observed that the said case was not an authority for the proposition, as some
people held, that a professional man had no remedy if a tradesman chooses to
put forward some quack remedy or ar- tide of that kind as having been
prescribed or been sold for the benefit of or the approval of the medical man
in question. In Clark v. Freeman a leading physician had applied for an
injunction restraining the defendant from selling or processing to be sold
pills purporting to be those of that Physician. The injunction was refused on
the ground that such an eminent physician could not be really injured by the
kind of false statement published by the defendant.

(39) An action of this kind, it is worth recalling, would not be either one of
infringement or of passing off; it would be one of injurious falsehood. Wynn
Parry, J. referring to the British Medical Association case observed as
follows :- "I have listened with care to all the cases that have been cited
and upon analysis I am satisfied that there is discoverable in all those in
which the Court has intervened this factor, namely, that there was a common
field of activity in which, however, remotely both the Plaintiff and the
Defendant were engaged and that it was the presence of that fact or that
accounted for the jurisdiction of the Court."

(40) The relevancy of the use of the mark in respsct of goods was highlighted
in Walpamur Company Ltd. v. A. Sanderson & Co. Ltd. [43 (1926) R.P.C. 385] .
The plaintiffs were proprietors of the mark "Mirabol" registered for enamels,
paints and varnishes, but only used in respsct of enamels and undercoating.
The defendants were proprietors of Trade Mark "Muralol" registered for
colours, paints and varnishes, but used only for flat oil paint. There was a
motion by plaintiffs to remove defendants' mark from the register and there
was another motion by the defendants to limit registration of plaintiffs'
mark. The defendants' mark was ordered to be removed from the register and the
plaintiffs' mark was allowed to be infringed. It was held that passing off was
not proved. Astbury, J. referred to Edwards v. Dennis and Hart v. Colley . In
distinguishing the former, Astbury, J. observed that the trade mark of the
defendants was of a totally separate class of business, one which was not
carried on and was never intended to be carried on by the plaintiff. In
Walpamur the plaintiffs had registered in a very wide class but only for
specific articles in respect of which they carried on their business articles
ordinarily made and sold by persons in that particular kind of business. Hart
was distinguished on the ground that the registration in that case was for a
wide class and not for a specified article in that class: the user had been
for 15 years unlike the one which had just commenced in Walpamur.

(41) The test of remoteness of the defendant's activities from that of the
plaintiff was adopted in the Matter of British Lead Mills Ltd.'s Application
for a Trade Mark (1958 R.P.C 425) . British Lead Mills Ltd. applied to
register the mark "Welloy" in respect of "cast rolled and extruded alloys of
tin and lead". Wellworthy Ld. opposed on the grounds (under S. 11) that they
were the proprietors of the registered trade marks "Wellworthy", "Welflex" and
"Welcrom" in respect of goods which were included "metallic Alloys" and that
the registration of the metallic alloy would be contrary to Section 12 of the
Trade Marks Act, 1938 on account of "Welloy" and "Walloy" both being similar
visually and phonetically, and that the goods in respect of which Welloy were
registered (alloys containing lead, the lead predominating) are goods of the
same description as the goods in. respect of which it was sought to register
the mark Welloy. The Assistant Controller disallowed the application on the
ground that tin alloys were not so remote from the Wellworthy's field of
activity.

(42) The Court of Appeal discussed in Neostyle Manufacturing Company Ltd. v.
Ellam's Duplicator Company [21 (1904) R.P.C. 569] whether the word "Neostyle"
had become identified in England with the plaintiffs' duplicating machines
(they never had any exclusive right to the word in connection with duplicator
accessories) and whether the defendants might sell ink and paper for use on
the "Necstyle" machines. and so describe them, provided they did not by words
or get up represent their goods as those of the plaintiffs. Passing off was
no. made out. The injunction sought for was refused by Byrne, J. which
decision was confirmed in appeal. Byrne, J. had suggested, however, that the
defendants' name should always appear on the tins of ink sold by them.

(43) Toffees are of various kinds. According to the classification made in the
Prevention of Food Adulteration Rules, 1955 framed under the Prevention of
Food Adulteration Act, 1954, toffees have been classified as plan. milk,
modified and butter. Plain toffee shall be made out of sugar, vanaspati, milk
fat of any edible oil and in addition any of the materials mentioned in Rule
A. 25.02 as being permissible for use in such manufacture. Milk toffee shall
be made out of sugar, vanaspati, milk fat of any cdible oil and milk in any
form and in addition may contain any of the materials used in the making of
plain toffee. Modified toffee shall be made of the ingredients used for plain
toffes or milk toffee. In addition, it may conta.in one or more of chocolate.
coffee, cocoa, dried fruits and nuts. Butter toffee shall be made out of
ingredients used for plain toffee, milk toffee or modified toffee, but should
not contain less than 5 per cent bulter by weight. Toffee should also comply
with certain prescribed requirements i.e. ingredients like ash, sugar, fat,
total protein etc. In. the face of the above there does not appear to be much
force in the contention of Shri Gulati that by merely condensing the condensed
milk still further toffee is prepared. According to Encyclopedia Britannica
(1969) Vol. 15, page 457, plain condensed milk is concentrated whole milk of a
composition similar to that of evaporated milk, but not sterilised. The
standards of solids and food value differ from country to country. The same
Encyclopedia (Vol. 6, page 284) explains "Caramel and Toffee" as follows :
"CARMELSdepend on large amounts of milk for their typical texture. The other
ingredients are sugar, corn sirup and fat, which are cooked until the desired
degrees of caramelization. and texture have been attainsd. The most popular
flavours arc vanilla and chocolate. Toffee is highly cooked or hard caramel."

(44) WEBSTER'S Third New International Dictionary Vol. Ii (page 2403)
describes toffee as a candy of brittle but tender texture made by boiling
sugar and butter together to approximatsly 310 For the hard crack stage.

(45) Shri Gulati has not been. able to substantiate his contention that toffee
is merely condensing already condensed milk without more. The ingredients of
toffee could be as noticed, above. His further contention that the buyers of
the toffee of the defendants would, because of the name "milk-made" being used
with reference to them, be led to think that these toffees are made out of the
condensed milk prepared by Nestle's has not been prima fade established. The
said view of the plaintiffs could not derive support merely from the fact that
in the defendants' wrappers two bottles of milk are shown as being emptied in
a glass tumbler; this alone without mere, cannot support the inference that
the condensed milk of the plaintiffs was being used bythe defendants. The
plaintiffs/appellants have also not been able to establish prima fade that
there is such a trade connection between the defendants' goods and the
plaintiffs' trade mark. and the goods manufactured by them with the said trade
mark as would constitute an infringement of the said trade mark.

(46) Regarding passing off the plaintiffs face greater difficulty because they
are unable to show how there could be an action for passing off of goods
without the defendants even putting on the market goods of an identical or
similar description or at least having such a close association with the goods
of the plaintiffs as are likely to deceive or cause confusion.

(47) The learned single Judge has referred to the decision of the House of
Lords in Reddaway v. Banham (1896) A.C. 199. and distinguished it onthe ground
that the impugned goods bore no marks or words, that the manufacturer could
not be known there from and hence the respondents were held guilty of passing
off. The wrappers used in the present case bear the words "Milk-made
Corporation" which are sufficient to show that the goods are the products of a
different Corporation and not of the Plaintiffs. The learned single Judge has
also referred to Anglo Swiss Condensed Milk Co. v. Metcalf, in re : Metcalf's
trade mark, (1886) 31 Ch. D. 454, (involving the present "Milk-Maid" mark) and
distinguished it on the ground that the defendants in this case were not
selling condensed milk in tins or cans having the same size. type and shape as
are the tins used by the plaintiffs in packing their condensed milk; they are
dealing with biscuits and toffees which are not produced by the plaintiffs.

(48) In the above view it is not necessary to go into the further contention
raised as to whether the plaintiffs are entitled to use the word "Milkmaid" in
English separately when the registered trade mark is "Milkmaid Brand".

(49) We have only to reiterate what we have already stated that the question
whether apart from infringement of trade mark and passing off' the plaintiffs
are entitled to any relief on any other footing does not fall to be considered
in this appeal in view of the submission? before the learned single Judge
having been restricted to only two aspects. namely, infringement of trade mark
and passing off.

(50) In the result we hold that the plaintiffs have not made out any prima
facie case for the grant of the injunction sought for by them or for any other
allied relief pending disposal of the suit and that the learned single Judge,
with respect, rightly dismissed the plaintiffs' application for interim
relief. In the result the appeal is dismissed but in the circumstances without
costs. C. M454/72 is also dismissed.

