

Himachal Pradesh High Court

Dhanpat Seth And Ors. vs Nil Kamal Plastic Crates Ltd. on 20 September, 2007

Equivalent citations: AIR 2008 HP 23, MIPR 2008 (2) 370, 2008 (36) PTC 938
NULL

Author: D Gupta

Bench: D Gupta, V Ahuja

JUDGMENT Deepak Gupta, J.

1\. This appeal is directed against the order passed by a learned single Judge
of this Court in OMP No. 530 of 2005 in Civil Suit No. 69 of 2005 rejecting
the prayer of the appellants-plaintiffs for grant of interim relief.

2\. The brief facts relevant for disposal of this appeal are that the
appellants, hereinafter referred to as the plaintiffs, filed a suit seeking
grant of permanent prohibitory injunction restraining the defendant from
infringing Patent No. 195917 granted in favour of the plaintiffs on 11-7-2005.
The patent has been granted in respect of a device used for manufacture of
manually hauling the agricultural produce. According to the plaintiffs, the
invention was visualized by them in 1999. They developed it over a period of
time and applied for grant of patent on 24-5-2000. The patent was granted in
their favour on 11-7-2005 but it will relate back to the date of application
i.e. 24-5-2002. The invention of the plaintiffs as set out by them in the
plaint is as follows:

A device for hauling agriculture produce comprising a container of synthetic
polymeric material defined by a hollow frusta-conical body open at he top and
closed at the base and tapering from the operative open top to the base with
perforated walls, said perforations being essentially quadrilateral in
configuration and reducing in dimensions from the operative top to the base;
said wall having a contour adopted to proximate the back of a human body; and
removable harnessing means secured to the container in the. upper
perforations, said harnessing means having straps and buckle formations
adapted to be irremovably secured in and around the perforations in the said
walls and looping means around the back and the shoulders of an individual,
said straps and buckle components of the harnessing means being adjustable to
permit the harnessing means to be secured to the container at varying
locations on the wall of the contained in the perforations and the looping
means adapted to be adjusted to accommodate Individuals of different heights
and body structure.

3\. The plaintiffs further alleged that the respondent-defendant, hereinafter
referred to as the defendant, in fact, sold this device to the Department of
Horticulture, Govt. of H.P. and other private parties. The plaintiffs
consequently filed a suit praying for a decree for grant of permanent
prohibitory injunction in their favour restraining the defendant from
infringing the Patent No. 195917 and also for a decree of mandatory injunction
virtually in the same terms. The plaintiffs also prayed that the defendant be
directed to pay them Rs. 51 lacs.

4\. The defendant contested the suit and contended that the plaintiffs have
fraudulently obtained the patent and the patent has wrongly been granted in
their favour. The defendant further alleged that there is no novelty or
invention in the patent and in fact it is just centuries old device popularly
known as "KILTA" which was originally made of bamboo and has now been produced
in plastic, it is also further alleged that the defendant had anticipated the
device in fact in December, 2001. It designed a similar Kilta and sent
drawings of the same for manufacturing of the design to Arries Moulding
Company Ltd., Taiwan and thereafter the production of the Kilta was started
and the same was introduced in the market.

5\. The plaintiffs along with the suit filed an application for grant of
interim relief seeking temporary injunction restraining the defendant from
manufacturing or selling its version of the Kilta or committing any acts which
may infringe in the patent granted to the plaintiffs. This application was
contested by the defendant and the learned single Judge by a well reasoned
order dismissed the application for grant of interim relief, The learned
single Judge has come to the conclusion that the device patent of which was
obtained by the plaintiffs is basically an imitation of the traditional Kilta.
There is no novelty about the same. The learned single Judge has also came to
the conclusion that the suit of the plaintiffs is hit by the principle of
doctrine of anticipation since the produce had been in the market even prior
to the same being patented. This order is under challenge before us,

6\. It would also be pertinent to mention that during the course of this
appeal, the plaintiffs had filed an application placing on record an order
passed by the Assistant Controller. Patents and Design, rejecting the
application filed by the defendant for revocation of the patent granted in
favour of the plaintiffs.

7\. We have heard Shri Vinay Kuthiala, learned Counsel for the plaintiffs and
Shri Bipan Chander Negi, learned Counsel for the defendant.

8\. Shri Vinay Kuthiala contended that the plastic Kilta developed by the
plaintiffs is an invention and in the alternative submitted that the
development of the traditional Kilta into a plastic one with adjustable nylon
straps is an inventive step and amounts to an invention. He further submitted
that the grant of patent itself is a conclusive fact to hold that there is a
prima facie case in favour of the plaintiffs. He has also submitted that the
doctrine of anticipation is not applicable since various steps relied upon by
the learned single Judge to come to the conclusion that the suit is hit by
doctrine of anticipation were only steps taken by the plaintiffs to submit
their product before the expert bodies for their evaluation of the device and
no steps have been taken to market the same.

9\. To appreciate the rival contentions of the parties, it would be relevant
to refer to the definition of invention and inventive steps in Section 2(j)
and 2(ja)) of the Patents Act, 1970:

2(j) "invention" means a new product or process involving an inventive step
and capable of industrial application;

(ja) "inventive step" means a feature of an invention that involves technical
advance as compared to the existing knowledge or having economic significance
or both and that makes the invention not obvious to a person skilled in the
art.

10\. Section 3(p) of the Patents Act reads as follows:

3(p). an invention which In effect, is traditional knowledge or which is an
aggregation or duplication of known properties of traditionally known
component or components.

11\. A bare perusal of the definition of invention clearly shows that even a
process involving an inventive step is an invention within the meaning of the
Act. It is, therefore, not necessary that the product developed should be a
totally new product. Even if a product is substantially improved by an
inventive step, it would be termed to be an Invention. The definition of
'inventive step' provides that when technical advances as compared to existing
knowledge take place in an existing product or there is improved economic
significance in the development of the already existing device and the
invention is not obvious to people skilled in the art, it would amount to an
inventive step.

12\. The learned single Judge had seen the products of the plaintiffs, the
defendant and the traditional Kilta. We also called upon the parties to
produce their respective devices as well as the traditional Kiltas.

13\. A Kilta is a traditional product which has been used since time
immemorial for carrying produce including agricultural produce in hill areas
especially in the State of Himachal Pradesh. The traditional Kilta is made of
bamboo. The shape of a kilta is conical having a wider circular opening on the
top and it tapers and narrows down at the bottom. There is virtually no
difference in the overall design of the tradition Kilta or the 'devices'
developed by the plaintiffs and: the defendant. A visual comparison of the'
three items prima facie establishes that the articles manufactured by the
plaintiffs and the defendant are virtual copies of the traditional Kilta. The
only difference is that the Kilta is made of bamboo and the Kilta made by the
plaintiffs is made of polypropylene copolymer (PP). The Kilta made by the
defendant is also made of polymeric material. The Kilta manufactured by the
defendant is made of high density polyethylene (HDP). In actual fact, both the
materials are polymers in common parlance known as plastic. The only visible
difference is that device now being manufactured is having detachable nylon
straps with buckles. The question which arises for consideration is whether
this change of material from bamboo to plastic and the development of
adjustable nylon straps with buckles is an inventive step falling within the
meaning of Section 2{ja).

14\. Shri Vinay Kuthiala, contended that by changing the material from bamboo
to plastic there is a great economic gain and there is technical advance of
economic significance. Though the cost of Kilta made of plastic may be higher
than that of Kilta made of bamboo, its life is much longer making it more
economic. He further submits that the Kilta is designed in such a manner as to
make it easy to carry heavy load and, therefore, this is an inventive step.

15\. After having seen the traditional Kijta and the devices of the parties
and having examined the same, we are prima facie of the view that the devices
being manufactured by the parties are only imitations of the traditional
Kilta. Shri Vinay Kuthiala has contended that the traditional Kilta was only
supported by rope on the forehead. This assertion is in fact incorrect. The
traditional Kilta used in Himachal Pradesh is by and large supported by
adjustable ropes going over the shoulders. In some cases, the supporting strap
goes over the forehead. Both types have been in existence for times
immemorial.

16\. The Apex Court in M/s. Bishwanath Prasad Radhey Shyam v. Hindustan Metal
Industries , while dealing with the meaning of the words 'inventive step' held
as follows:

21\. It is important to bear in mind that in order to be patentable an
improvement on something known before or a combination of different matters
already known, should be something more than a mere workshop improvement; and
must independently satisfy the test of invention or an "inventive step". To be
patentable the improvement or the combination must produce a new result or a
new article or a better or cheaper article than before. The combination of old
known integers may be so combined that by their working inter-relation they
produce a new process or improved result. Mere collection of more than one
integers or things, not involving the exercise of any inventive faculty, does
not qualify for the grant of a patent.

17\. The device being manufactured by the plaintiffs is basically a Kilta but
made out of synthetic polymeric material which is commonly known as plastic.
The process of making traditional items out of such polymers is a well known
and well established process. This Court can take judicial notice of the fact
that much prior to the device being manufactured by the plaintiffs,
traditional items made out of woods, steel, brass, leather and other natural
materials have been replaced by plastic. In this regard reference may be made
to chairs, tables, Jugs, baskets, shoes and numerous other items which were
traditionally made of natural material but are now made of plastic. Therefore,
in our opinion, the mere fact that the device is made of polymeric material
instead of bamboo is not an inventive step involving any novelty. There is
nothing new about the process of manufacturing the traditional Kilta made of
natural material from synthetic material. Even nylon straps now added are
virtually copies of the ropes used in the traditional Kilta. The ropes in the
Kilta can also be adjusted by the user keeping in view the height of the
person using the Kilta and the weight being carried by him. The mere
introduction of buckles would not amount to a new device being called an
invention or an inventive step.

18\. Shri Vinay Kuthiala has laid great emphasis on the order dated 2-7-2007
passed by the Assistant Controller, Patents and Designs, whereby he has
rejected the application for revocation filed by the defendant.

19\. At the outset, it would be pertinent to mention that the Controller
before dealing with the matter did not even take the traditionally built Kilta
into consideration as a citation. His reasoning in this regard is as follows:

Exhibit A is a Bamboo made Kilta with a strap but there is no proof of date of
its publication. Hence the said document cannot be taken into consideration as
a citation.

20\. We fail to understand the reasoning given by the Assistant Controller,
Patents and Designs in not taking into traditionally built Kilta into
consideration. Even the case set up by the plaintiffs was not that he had
invented an entirely new product but his case was that he had developed a
traditional Kilta by means of inventive steps in such a fashion that it
amounts to a new invention. The contentions of both the parties could not have
been appreciated without first taking into consideration the traditional
Kilta. On this short ground alone we feel that much reliance can be placed on
the aforesaid order.

21\. Mere grant of patent in favour of the plaintiffs by itself does not mean
that the plaintiffs are entitled to any injunction. This is a factor which may
be taken into consideration and would be a relevant factor but the grant of
patent would not ipso facto entitle the plaintiffs to grant of an injunction
without taking into consideration other relevant factors. In fact Section 107
of the Patents Act clearly provides that in any suit for infringement of a
patent every ground on which it may be revoked under Section 64 shall be
available as a ground for defence. Therefore, the defendant is entitled to
argue before this Court that the patent granted is not valid. Reliance placed
upon by the plaintiffs on the judgment of the Apex Court in Midas Hygiene
Industries (P) Ltd. and Anr. v. Sudhir Bhatia and Ors. is totally
misconceived. The action in the case was under the Trade Marks Act where the
provisions are different. It may be true that Section 28 of the Trade Marks
Act is similar to Section 28 of the Patents Act but under the various
provisions of the Patents Act, such as Sections 64 and 107(2) even after the
patent is granted, the same can be challenged in appropriate proceedings.

22\. We also find that the device manufactured by the plaintiffs has been
termed as hauling device. The learned single Judge is absolutely right in
holding that the so-called-device is not a device of hauling but basically a
device for carrying the produce.

23\. The House of Lords, in (1975) All England Law Reports 504, American
Cyanamid Co. v. Ethicon Ltd., clearly laid down that the governing principle
with regard to grant of injunction is that the court should first consider
whether if the plaintiff were to succeed at the trial in establishing his
right to a permanent injunction he could be adequately compensated by an award
of damages for the loss he would have sustained as a result of the defendant's
continuing to do what was sought to be enjoined between the time of the
application and the time of the trial. If damages in the measure recoverable
at common law would be adequate remedy and the defendant would be in a
financial position to pay them, no interlocutory injunction should normally be
granted, however, strong the plaintiffs claim appeared to be at that stage.
If, on the other hand, damages would not be an adequate remedy to the
plaintiff in the event of the success in the trial, the Court can grant
injunction in favour of the plaintiff by ensuring that the defendant is
adequately compensated in case the trial culminates in his favour. If damages
in the measure recoverable under such an undertaking would be an adequate
remedy and the plaintiff would be in a financial position to pay them, there
would be no reason on this ground to refuse an interlocutory injunction.

24\. It also held that where other factors appear to be evenly balanced the
rule of prudence would be to preserve the status quo. In the case before the
House of Lords, the defendant had not started manufacturing of absorbable
surgical sutures and it is in these facts that relief of temporary injunction
was granted. In the present case, the defendant has already started
manufacturing and selling the Kiltas and has been doing so for a number of
years. In our opinion, at this stage it would not be appropriate to put the
clock back.

25\. In respect of the arguments addressed on the doctrine of anticipation,
even if we discount the production of the device by the plaintiffs prior to
24-5-2002, it is clear that prior to this date, the defendant had sent the
drawing for production of the Kilta to Taiwan. At this stage of the suit when
evidence is still to be recorded, the said material cannot be discarded.

26\. Keeping in view the aforesaid discussion, we are clearly of the view that
the device developed by the plaintiffs is in fact the result of traditional
knowledge and aggregation /duplication of known products such as polymers and,
therefore, cannot be said to be an invention. The plaintiffs are, therefore,
not entitled to any injunction.

27\. It is, however, made clear that any observations made in this appeal are
only limited for the purpose of deciding the application for grant of interim
relief and shall not be construed as the observations on the merits of the
suit.

28\. It is, however, amply clear that even if the Court does not grant interim
relief in favour of the plaintiffs, some directions must be issued to ensure
that in the event of his success in the action, his interests are protected.
We, therefore, direct that the respondent shall maintain full and complete
accounts of all the sales made of the Kiltas manufactured by it. The defendant
shall submit the returns in this Registry of this Court every quarter. A copy
of this return shall also be handed over to Mr. Vinay Kuthiala, counsel for
the appellants/plaintiffs. The defendant shall file a consolidated return for
all the Kiltas sold by it from the date of institution of the suit till
30-9-2007 by 31st October, 2007. Thereafter the defendant shall file quarterly
returns depicting the sales of each quarter within 30 days of the ending of
each quarter. The defendant shall also file copies of the complete accounts
with regard to sale of the Kiltas made during the pendency of the suit duly
certified by the Chartered Accountant of the defendant-company in a similar
manner. The respondent/defendant shall furnish a surety bond in the sum of Rs.
20 lacs to the satisfaction of the Registrar (Inspection) of this Court
undertaking to pay the decretal amount, if any, which may be decreed in favour
of the plaintiffs and against the defendant. This order has been passed to
protect the interest of the plaintiffs in case they succeed.

The appeal is disposed of in the aforesaid terms. No costs.

