

Supreme Court of India

Monsanto Technology Llc Thru The ... vs Nuziveedu Seeds Ltd. Thru The ... on 8
January, 2019

Author: N Sinha

    
    
                                                                        REPORTABLE
    
                                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                         CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
    
    
                                      CIVIL APPEAL NOS.4616­4617 OF 2018
                             MONSANTO TECHNOLOGY LLC THRU
                             THE AUTHORISED REPRESENTATIVE
                             MS. NATALIA VORUZ & OTHERS             ....APPELLANT(S)
    
                                                     VERSUS
    
                             NUZIVEEDU SEEDS LTD. THRU
                             THE DIRECTOR & OTHERS                ...RESPONDENT(S)
    
                                                       with
    
                                         CIVIL APPEAL NO(s). 188 OF 2019
                                       (arising out of SLP(C) No.19411 of 2018
                             FEDERATION OF SEED INDUSTRY
                             OF INDIA (FSII)                          ….APPELLANT(S)
                                                       VERSUS
                             NUZIVEEDU SEEDS LTD. AND OTHERS….RESPONDENT(S)
    
                                      CIVIL APPEAL NO(s). 189­190 OF 2019
                                  (arising out of SLP(C) Nos.16479­16480 of 2018
                             NUZIVEEDU SEEDS LTD. AND ORS.             ..APPELLANT(S)
                                                      VERSUS
                             MONSANTO TECHNOLOGY LLC
                             AND OTHERS                             ...RESPONDENT(S)
    
                                       CIVIL APPEAL NO(s). 191­192 OF 2019
                                   (arising out of SLP(C) Nos.19409­19410 of 2018
                             ALL INDIA KISAN SABHA                      ..APPELLANT(S)
    Signature Not Verified
                                                       VERSUS
    Digitally signed by R
    NATARAJAN
    Date: 2019.01.08
    16:49:55 IST
    Reason:
                             MONSANTO TECHNOLOGY LLC
                             AND OTHERS                             ...RESPONDENT(S)
    
    
                                                         1
                               JUDGMENT
    
    
            NAVIN SINHA, J.
    

Leave granted.

2\. The appellants/plaintiffs in Civil Appeal Nos.4616­4617 of 2018 instituted
Civil Suit (Comm) No. 132 of 2016 seeking permanent injunction against the
defendants from using the trademark “BOLGARD” and “BOLGARD II” brand cotton
technology, violating the registered patent no. 214436 of the plaintiffs, and
also to further restrain the defendants from selling and or using seeds/hybrid
seeds bearing the patented technology, infringing the registered patent of the
plaintiffs, along with rendition of accounts. The parties shall, for
convenience, be referred to by their position in the original suit.

3\. The plaintiffs pursuant to their patent rights had entered into a
sub­licence agreement dated 21.02.2004 with the defendants for an initial
period of ten years. The agreement entitled the defendants to develop
“Genetically Modified Hybrid Cotton Planting Seeds” with help of the  2
plaintiffs’ technology and to commercially exploit the same subject to the
limitations prescribed in the agreement. The agreement also provided for
payment of licence fee/trait value by the defendants, for use of the
plaintiffs’ patented technology. The agreement after extension was ultimately
terminated by the plaintiffs on 14.11.2015 due to disputes regarding payment
of licence fee/trait value in view of subsequent price control regime
introduced by the State, and to which the defendants required adherence by the
plaintiffs. The plaintiffs filed an application for injunction under Order 39,
Rule 1 and 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure (hereinafter referred to as ‘the
Code”), to restrain the defendants from using their registered trade mark in
violation of the registered patent during the pendency of the suit in view of
the termination of the agreement.

4\. The defendants in their written statement inter alia contended that their
rights were protected under the Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’
Rights Act, 2001 (hereinafter referred to as ‘the PPVFR Act’). The suit patent
was bad because claims 1­24 were “process claims”  3 concerning genetic
engineering or biotechnology method to insert “Nucleic Acid Sequence” (NAS)
into a plant cell as in claim 25­27 practiced in laboratory conditions, unlike
the complete biological process adopted by the defendants. The NAS was a
chemical composition incapable of reproducing itself and was thus not a
micro­organism. Only on insertion into a plant, a living organism, it imparts
Bt.trait (insect resistance) to the living organism. The defendants also filed
a counter claim no.51 of 2016 seeking revocation of the patent under Section
64 of the Act, as being in violation of Section 3(j) of the Patents Act
(hereinafter referred to as “the Act”) in respect of plants and seeds that
contained DNA sequences, denying any infringement.

5\. The learned Single Judge on 28.03.2017, while deciding the plaintiffs’
application for injunction, observed that the issues arising in the suit
necessarily required formal proof, particularly expert opinion, which in
complicated matters like that of patent were crucial for ascertaining the
breadth of the monopoly granted by the specifications of a patent claim. The
nature and extent of the patent claim was more properly  4 a matter to be
examined after pleadings were complete and evidence adduced on the issues
arising, which did not merit comments at the stage of interim injunction.
Considering the existing patent registered under Section 48 of the Act, it was
ordered that during the pendency of the suit, the parties shall remain bound
by their respective obligations under the sub­licence agreement and that the
licence fee/trait value payable by the defendant shall be governed by the laws
in force. The learned Single Judge simultaneously only issued notice on the
counter claim no.51 of 2016. The order of injunction dated 28.03.2017,
therefore did not deal with or consider the counter claim. It was prima facie
observed that the defendants having had the advantage of a sub­licence ever
since 2004, appeared unjustified in contending that they were not bound by the
obligations under the agreement in view of the claimed statutory protections
vis­à­vis the suit patent or the registered trademarks. Prima facie opining
that the termination of the sub­licence agreement by the plaintiffs on
14.11.2015 appeared unjustified in view of the statutory  5 price
restrictions, the termination was held not to be of any consequence.

6\. Aggrieved, both the Plaintiffs and the defendants preferred appeals. The
Division Bench dismissed the plaintiffs’ appeal upholding the defendants’
contention with respect to patent exclusion under Section 3(j) of the Act and
that the plaintiffs were at liberty to claim registration under the PPVFR Act,
as the two Acts were not complementary, but exclusive in the case of all
processes and products falling under Section 3(j) of the Act. Consequentially,
the defendants’ counter claim succeeded. The suit was, however, permitted to
continue with regard to the claim for damages and other reliefs. The
plaintiffs were required to continue with their obligations under the
sub­licence agreement including payment of licence fee/trait value by the
defendants in accordance with law.

7\. We have heard learned senior counsel Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi, Sri Kapil
Sibal, Sri Neeraj Kaul, Sri K.V. Vishwanathan, Sri Arvind P. Datar, Sri Jayant
Bhushan, Sri  6 Krishnan Venugopal, Sri Shyam Divan and Sri Sanjiv Sen, and
learned counsel Sri Prasahant Bhushan and Ms. Anandita Mitra on behalf of the
parties.

8\. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi contended that the plaintiffs’ suit was for
injunction restraining infringement of an existing and valid patent. The lack
of patentability was never an issue in the suit. The defendants argued lack of
patentability to invalidate the primary issue relating to infringement only.
The counter claim for revocation of the patent as unpatentable, was neither
argued nor adjudicated by the learned Single Judge. Only notice was issued on
the counter claim bearing no.51 of 2016 while counter claim bearing no.50 of
2016 challenging the termination of sub­ licence agreement was withdrawn. The
issue for existence of the patent, patent exclusion under Section 3(j) of the
Act was a heavily mixed question of law and facts requiring formal proof and
expert evidence, to be considered at the hearing of the suit, as rightly
observed by the Single Judge. The defendants in their memo of appeal
themselves contended that the issue regarding existence of the patent  7
and/or its revocation could not have been decided summarily by the learned
Single Judge as these were matters which required evidence and could be
adjudicated only at the final trial of the suit. The plaintiffs’ claims were
under 25­27 only. The process claims 1­24 was never an issue in consideration
before the Single Judge and yet the Division Bench delved into the same and
held the process claims to be bad also.

9\. The plaintiffs had never consented to a summary adjudication regarding the
validity of its patent. The consent referred to by the Division Bench, had
been given only to decide whether the plaintiffs’ patent had been infringed or
not, as also the scope of the patent, so as to allow or disallow the relief of
injunction. It is incomprehensible that the plaintiffs holding a valid
registered patent under the Act nonetheless would have agreed to a summary
consideration and validation/invalidation of the patent. The patent comprises
of a DNA construct or nucleotide sequence in claim 25­27 comprising of three
different components, i.e. (i) a promoter (ii) a man­made gene for the
production of Cry2Ab  8 5­endotoxin and, (iii) a third component for the
production of a transit peptide 6. The DNA construct so created did not exist
in nature and upon insertion into a plant confers insect tolerant trait. A
plant is next produced as a “fusion protein” which comprises the Cry2Ab
S­endotoxin 7 bonded with the transit peptide. The subject patent claims use
of bacillus thuringiensis strain and the development of two genes designated
Cry2Aa and Cry2Ab. Each gene sequence is known for its ability to synthesize
proteins with pesticidal properties. The NAS is not a living organism but a
chemical created in a laboratory. The “event” which is the positioning of the
NAS at a unique location in the genome of a plant cell is a separate,
subsequent and entirely different invention for which the plaintiffs have
obtained a different patent no. 232681 and which is not the subject matter of
the present suit. In this case, the invention is the NAS and the target of the
invention is its use in a plant cell. The property of the NAS is what makes
the plant produce and localize the toxin protein in a specific location in the
plant cell so as to make the toxin protein present throughout the plant, in
pesticidal  9 effective levels and still produce agronomically stable plants.
Relying on “Marker ­Assisted Recurrent Backcrossing in Cultivar Development”
by Guoyou et.al, it was submitted a NAS gene once inserted into a plant, was
removable and did not become part of the plant genome, to lose its patentable
characteristics. These were matters to be considered in the suit on basis of
expert evidence.

10\. Shri Vishwanathan and Shri Datar for the defendant have adopted directly
and mutually contradictory stands by contending that claims 25­27 are product
claims, namely parts of a plant, and subsequently that the said claims are
essentially biological process claims. Claims 1­24 are not excluded under
Section 3(j) being essentially biological processes as there exists
significant human intervention. Dr. Singhvi very fairly admitted that he was
not in a position to support the termination of the sub­licence agreement and
that the plaintiffs’ claims for licence fee/trait value had to be in
accordance with the statutory price regime. The seeds from the plaintiffs’
patented technology were the highest selling compared to similar other seeds.
The plaintiffs have  10 no intention to sue any Indian farmer for violation of
patent. It was lastly submitted that either this Court may remand the entire
matter for adjudication of the patent issue and infringement or decide the
patent issue and then remand the suit for other issues.

11\. Shri Kapil Sibbal contended that a chemical/gene/DNA construct is not a
plant variety, and is not eligible for protection under the PPVFR Act. A gene
cannot be a plant variety and it would be denied such registration on account
of lack of fulfillment of the conditions precedent in Section 2(za) read with
Sections 14 and 15. A gene cannot be a “plant grouping”, “within a single
botanical taxon of the lowest rank”, which in simple terms means that it
cannot belong to the lowest rank of a plant, namely a species. The PPVFR Act
came into effect from 2007 and in the last 11 years, no infringement action
has been filed under the same or injunction obtained. The department of
bio­technology on their official website has acknowledged the role agro­
biotechnology has to play in feeding billion plus mouths in this country and
the role that “novel genes” can play to deal  11 with biotic and abiotic
stresses, enhance productivity and nutritional quality.

12\. Sri Neeraj Kaul submitted that the patented NAS is not the creation of
any biological process. The correct admixture of the promoter, the man made
gene for the production of Cry2Ab endotoxin and the 3rd component for the
production of the transit peptide leading to the DNA construct, is entirely
the creation of the human intervention. The Division Bench wrongly holds the
invention to be a plant variety. It is only plant varieties and seeds which
are covered by the PPVFR Act. The Patent Act and the PPVFR Act are mutually
exclusively.

13\. Shri Vishwanathan leading the arguments on behalf of the defendants
submitted that no patent rights can be exercised with respect to genetically
modified cotton planting seeds being developed by the defendants through
conventional breeding methods and sold to the farmers. If the patent rights of
the plaintiffs be accepted, then the regime provided under the PPVFR Act for
plant intellectual property  12 with respect to genetically modified plants
would be entirely defeated. The plaintiffs’ claim was essentially of a
“breeder” for developing a variety and therefore its donor seed containing the
NAS was registerable under the PPVFR Act and they were entitled to benefit
sharing under Section 26 after such registration. No patent could be granted
in a plant, or part of a plant, under Section 3(j) of the Act. Patent
infringement analysis involves two steps: the proper construction of asserted
claims and the determination as to whether the product infringes the asserted
claim as properly construed. The plaintiffs claim to patent was never for a
chemical sequence in a vial. The plaintiffs’ claimed invention was only an
improvement on prior art where it claimed that it had found a way to have a
plant produce a higher level of expression of the endotoxin protein by
localizing it to the plastid thereby reducing insect tolerance and at the same
time producing morphologically normal plants. The plaintiffs were also
precluded from claiming rights on the genetically modified Bt. cotton seeds on
basis of prosecution history estoppel. The order of the Division bench being
based on  13 consent; it is not open for the plaintiffs to contend to the
contrary now.

14\. Shri Datar submitted that the “product” in claim 25­27 for NAS is a
chemical is false, because any chemical that is inserted into a plant is not
capable of being passed on to the seeds of that plant and to the future
progeny as the chemical will be metabolized by the plant itself and will never
be transmitted to its seeds. Further, the NAS, by the wording of claims 25­27
itself, is a plant gene which is meant to be an inherent, intrinsic and
integral part of the plant as it exists at the sub cellular level. The cell
after transformation with the gene through the biological process of tissue
culture results in a transgenic plant that produces seeds having the essential
characteristic of these transgenic plants. Therefore, claims 25 to 27 even if
it represents merely a “gene” will manifest as an inseparable and inheritable
part of a plant and cannot be patented. The NAS gene inserted into the plant
becomes an inseparable part of the plant at the sub­ cellular level by an
irreversible biological process. It exists in every cell of the transformed
plant. It not only expresses in  14 the plant to produce endotoxin but also
inherits into progeny plants in perpetuity. It does not result in a “product”
which can be put into a vial and sold as such. The claims must be construed so
as to give an effective meaning to each of them but the specifications and the
claims must be looked at and construed together.

15\. Shri Jayant Bhushan submitted that the plaintiffs did not bring the NAS
in a vial and but imported plants seeds containing NAS. These seeds were not
protected by Patent. Indian seed companies were given donor seeds which
already had the NAS/Bt. Trait integrated in them and was capable of
germination. What the Indian Seed companies do is to cross one of the
plaintiffs’ plants with the plants of their proprietary Indian varieties
suitable for cultivation in India, to develop a third/new cross­bred cotton
variety which would have the Bt. trait from plaintiffs’ variety so as to
resist Bollworm and other traits from their own developed varieties. Since the
Indian Seed Companies do not use the NAS in isolation nor do they use the
method of introducing the NAS into the plant through the method described in
the patent,  15 there is no infringement of the patent. NAS is an essentially
biological process in which the patented product is neither separately used
nor the patented process of insertion into a plant is used, the NAS is not
being made or used by the Indian Seed Companies. The patent on a gene sequence
in a test tube cannot negate/undo the important researchers’ and farmers’
rights under Sections 30 and 39 of the PPVFR Act. Section 39 relates to
Farmer’s Rights entitling him to save, use, sow and re­sow his farmed produce
including a registered variety protected under the Act. It was lastly
submitted that if the Court is not inclined to uphold the order of the
Division Bench, the matter may be remanded to the Division Bench for fresh
hearing on the injunction matter because the correctness of the injunction
order dated 28.03.2017 never came to be tested or considered by the Division
Bench.

16\. Shri Divan submitted that that there is no inventive step in the
plaintiffs’ patent claim, until the artificial NAS is inserted into a plant so
that the plant starts producing the delta endotoxin which is toxic to the
Bollworms. There is no  16 capability of industrial application of the NAS
except to become part of a plant and to develop a transgenic plant. The
threshold requirements of an invention in terms of the patents Act are missing
until the implant stage. The inventive qualities begin when the NAS is
inserted in a plant cell and not before that stage. Once, the NAS is inserted
in a plant cell, the exclusion under Section 3(j) applies and the PPVFR Act
becomes operative.

17\. Shri Venugopal submitted that a conjoint reading of Section 2(j) and
Section 3(c) of the Act makes it clear that it excludes patentability both of
transgenic plants (invented through recombinant gene technology in the
laboratory) and those invented through conventional breeding techniques even
where a new plant, variety or species is initially created through genetic
manipulation, to the extent that the subsequent production or propagation of
the plant, variety or species is done through “an essentially biological
process”, the biological process would not be patentable under Section 3(j) of
the Act. Even if patent exclusion under Section 3(j) was not applicable, still
the patent claim could never permit  17 plaintiffs to claim the right to
prevent farmers from making, using, offering for sale or selling plants or
seeds of the cotton plant that contain Bt. gene. The patent of an artificial
gene and the process for inserting it into the genome of a plant, will not
entitle the exercise of rights under Section 48 of the Act in respect of a
plant that contains the artificial gene on which it has a patent. The
protection under Section 48 of the Act is capable of being exercised against
other biotechnology companies that seek to replicate the Bt. gene product or
the process of insertion of that gene in the genome of the cotton plant. Both
the Patents Act and PPVFR Act have a link that is to protect the interests of
the farmers so that they are not burdened by exorbitant rates of seeds.

18\. Shri Prashant Bhusan, Shri Sanjiv Sen, and Smt. Anandita Mitra on behalf
of the interveners submitted that the NAS is not “capable of industrial
application” unless it becomes a part of the plant cell where it is expressed
by the plant cell through essentially biological processes of transcription,
translation, and replication, to produce the desired protein. The Biodiversity
Act which prohibits the  18 “use” of any biological resources occurring in
India for commercial utilisation and which includes genes used for improving
crops and livestock through genetic intervention necessitates prior permission
from the National Bio Diversity Authority which has not been taken by the
plaintiffs. The NAS only adds a trait to a plant leading to development of a
transgenic variety creating donor seeds. The seeds are not patentable under
Section 3(j) of the Act though the plaintiffs may be entitled for benefit
sharing under the provision of the PPVFR Act as defined under Section 2(h) of
the PPVFR Act. The claim of the plaintiffs has ramifications beyond the
immediate parties.

19\. We have considered the respective submissions made on behalf of the
parties. Though very elaborate submissions have been made with regard to facts
and the technical processes involved in the patent in question, the provisions
of the Act, the PPVFR Act and a large volume of case laws for construction of
patents, the obligations under the World Trade Organisation (WTO), General
Agreement on Tariffs and  19 Trade (GATT), Trade­Related Aspects of
Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS) Agreement, leading to the Patents
Amendment Act, 2002 on 25.06.2002, in view of nature of the order proposed to
be passed, we do not consider it necessary to deal with the same at this
stage, and leave open all questions of facts and law to be urged for
consideration in appropriate proceedings.

20\. The patent claims 1­24 are with regard to the processes while claims
25­27 are with regard to the chemical product called NAS. According to the
plaintiffs, the latter was a man­ made DNA construct that did not exist in
nature and did not otherwise form part of a plant existing in nature. The DNA
construct was inserted into a plant which confers the trait of insect
tolerance to the plant. It comprises of three different components i.e. (i) A
promoter, (ii) A gene for the production of Cry2Ab 5­endotoxin and (iii) a
third component for the production of a transit peptide. Of these three,
Cry2Ab 5­ endotoxin is stated to be a man­made gene. This nucleic acid
sequence is then inserted into the cell of the plant at a particular location
resulting in the production of “a fusion  20 protein” which comprises the
Cry2Ab 5­endotoxin 7 bonded with transit peptide. The production of a fusion
protein is critical in this respect for the technology to be effected in
plants. The bacillus thuringiensis strain does not produce such a fusion
protein. It is the plaintiffs’ claim that it is only its technology that
allows a cotton plant to produce the Cry2Ab 8­endotoxin protected inter­alia
by claims 25­27 of the patented inventions. The subject patent claims the use
of Bacillus thuringiensis strain and development of two genes designated
Cry2Aa and Cry2Ab. Each gene sequence is known for its ability to synthesize
proteins with pesticidal properties.

21\. It is the contention of the defendants apart from the unpatentability of
the plaintiff’s claim, they have not violated patented rights, if any, as:

> “a) Nuziveedu sowed seeds of their proprietary cotton varieties alongside
> the Transgenic Bt. Cotton seed.

> b) The Transgenic Bt. Cotton seed and the Nuziveedu’s varieties seed yielded
> different plants, which were cross­pollinated at the flowering stage.

c) The cotton fruits from the Nuziveedu’s cotton varieties had cotton seeds,
which were carrying the proprietary hybrid (“Bt. cotton hybrids”)  21

d) Nuziveedu conducted extensive agronomic evaluation trials of newly
developed Bt. Cotton Hybrids to ascertain their utility to the farmers.

e) Nuziveedu obtained the approval of the GEAC under the Environment
(Protection) Act, 1986 for the commercial release of each new Bt. Cotton
Hybrid which were considered satisfactory after internal evaluation, and
thereafter produced in mass scale and distributed to the farmers.”

22\. Manifestly, the counter claim of the defendants was never considered by
the learned Single Judge as only notice had been issued on the same. The
plaintiffs had preferred an appeal against the nature of the injunctive relief
with regard to the issue of licence fee/trait value, now conceded by the
plaintiffs. We see no reason to reject the submission of Dr. Singhvi that it
stands to reason why the plaintiffs would have consented to a summary
adjudication of an existing patent and risk losing the same without any merit
adjudication. The defendants themselves had contended in their appeal that the
issues were complicated requiring expert evidence to be considered in a
full­fledged trial. The Division Bench therefore ought to have confined its
adjudication to the question whether grant of injunction was justified or
unjustified in the facts and circumstances of the case. The  22 Division Bench
ought not to have examined the counter claim itself usurping the jurisdiction
of the Single Judge to decide unpatentability of the process claims 1­24 also
in the summary manner done. Summary adjudication of a technically complex suit
requiring expert evidence also, at the stage of injunction in the manner done,
was certainly neither desirable or permissible in the law. The suit involved
complicated mixed questions of law and facts with regard to patentability and
exclusion of patent which could be examined in the suit on basis of evidence.

23\. Section 64 of the Act provides for revocation of patent based on a
counter claim in a suit. It necessarily presupposes a valid consideration of
the claims in the suit and the counter claim in accordance with law and not
summary adjudication sans evidence by abstract consideration based on text
books only. The Civil Procedure Code provides a detailed procedure with regard
to the manner in which a suit instituted under Section 9, including a counter
claim has to be considered and adjudicated. The Code mandates a procedure by
settlement of issues,  23 examination and cross examination of witnesses by
the parties, including discovery/inspection of documents, culminating in the
hearing of the suit and decree. A suit can be disposed of at the initial stage
only on an admission inter alia under Order 12 Rule 6 or when the parties are
not in issue under Order 16 Rule 1 and the other grounds mentioned therein,
none of which are applicable herein. We are therefore satisfied that the
Division Bench ought not to have disposed of the suit in a summary manner by
relying on documents only, extracted from the public domain, and not even
filed as exhibits in the suit, much less examination of expert witnesses, in
the facts of the present case. There is no gain saying that the issues raised
were complicated requiring technological and expert evidence with regard to
issues of chemical process, biochemical, biotechnical and micro­ biological
processes and more importantly whether the nucleic acid sequence trait once
inserted could be removed from that variety or not and whether the patented
DNA sequence was a plant or a part of a plant etc. are again all matters which
were required to be considered at the final hearing of the suit.

24

24\. The manner in which a suit instituted under Section 9 of the Code is
required to be dealt with and decided, fell for consideration in Alka Gupta
vs. Narender Kumar Gupta, (2010) 10 SCC 141, observing as follows:­ “27. The
Code of Civil Procedure is nothing but an exhaustive
compilation­cum­enumeration of the principles of natural justice with
reference to a proceeding in a court of law. The entire object of the Code is
to ensure that an adjudication is conducted by a court of law with appropriate
opportunities at appropriate stages. A civil proceeding governed by the Code
will have to be proceeded with and decided in accordance with law and the
provisions of the Code, and not on the whims of the court. There are no
short­cuts in the trial of suits, unless they are provided by law. A civil
suit has to be decided after framing issues and trial permitting the parties
to lead evidence on the issues, except in cases where the Code or any other
law makes an exception or provides any exemption.

……….

30\. But where the summons have been issued for settlement of issues, and a
suit is listed for consideration of a preliminary issue, the court cannot make
a roving enquiry into the alleged conduct of the plaintiff, tenability of the
claim, the strength and validity and contents of documents, without a trial
and on that basis dismiss a suit. A suit cannot be short­circuited by deciding
issues of fact merely on pleadings and documents produced without a trial.

31\. In this case, the learned Single Judge has adjudicated and decided
questions of fact and  25 rendered a judgment, without evidence tested by
cross­examination….”

25\. The Division Bench ought to have confined itself to examination of the
validity of the order of injunction granted by the learned Single Judge only.
But we are not inclined to remand the matter for that purpose to the Division
Bench as we are satisfied in the facts and circumstances of the case that the
nature of the injunctive relief granted by the Single Judge was in order and
merits no interference during the pendency of the suit.

26\. The order of the Division Bench is set aside. The order of the Single
Judge dated 28.03.2017 is restored and the suit is remanded to the learned
Single Judge for disposal in accordance with law. In view of the importance of
the question involved, we expect the parties to cooperate and facilitate the
learned Single Judge in early disposal of the suit.

26

27\. The appeals and the intervention applications stand disposed of.

…………............................J.

[ROHINTON FALI NARIMAN] …………............................J.

[NAVIN SINHA] NEW DELHI JANUARY 08, 2019.

27

