

Madras High Court

Seeranga Goundan vs Saranga Goundan on 10 December, 1952

Equivalent citations: AIR 1954 Mad 156

Author: C Reddi

Bench: C Reddi, Ramaswami

JUDGMENT Chandra Reddi, J.

1\. This second appeal has been placed before a Bench at the instance of
Satyanarayana Rao J. who thought that it should be heard by a Bench as the
correctness of the statement of law relat­ing to improvements Dy a mortgagee
in posses­sion under anomalous mortgage in -- 'Pandiyan Pillai v. Vellayappa
Rowther', AIR 1918 Mad 572 (A), was canvassed before him. The facts giving
rise to this question may be briefly set out. The plaintiff created a mortgage
over the suit proper­ties on 20-11-1930, to secure a sum of Rs. 3400 under Ex.
D-1. The mortgagee was put in possession of the property on the understanding
that he should enjoy the income of the property in lieu of interest for a
period of two years. Under the terms of Ex. D-1, the mortgagor could redeem
the mortgage within a period of two years. In default thereof it was
stipulated that the mortgagee could hold and enjoy all the properties with
powers of alienation such as gifts, sale, etc. The mort­gagor failed to pay
the principal amount within the period of two years and take possession of the
property as provided for in the document. Consequently the mortgagee continued
to be in pos­session of the property and treated himself as the owner thereof.
The mortgagor filed a suit on 14-10-4945 for the redemption of the mortgage
and deposited the principal amount into Court.

2\. The main defence to the suit was that the defendant being under a 'bona
fide' belief that he became the owner of the property by virtue of the failure
of the mortgagor to redeem the mortgage within the period of two years as
stipulated in Ex. D-l effected improvements to the property and the plaintiff
was not entitled to redeem the mortgage without paying the improvements also.
The trial Court decreed the suit for redemption of the mortgage holding that
the defendant was entitl­ed to the principal amount and not to the
improve­ments as this case did not fall within Section 63-A, T. P. Act.

3\. On appeal the District Judge considered that although the case was not
covered by Section 63-A, T. P. Act, still the mortgagee could get that re­lief
by invoking Section 51, T. P. Act in his favour in view of the terms of the
mortgage and the belief induced in the mortgagee that he had become the owner
of the properly by the omission of the mortgagor to redeem the mortgage within
two years. In that view he called for a find­ing as to the value of the
improvements from the trial Court. On the finding that the improvements could
be estimated at Rs. 1,000. the lower appellate Court modified, the decree of
the trial Court by granting the mortgagee the relief for improvements.

4\. The aggrieved plaintiff preferred the second appeal to this Court against
that judgment of the learned District Judge contending that the mort­gagee
could not claim the value of the improve­ments for the reasons contained in
the Memoran­dum of grounds of appeal.

5\. Pending this appeal Act 23 of 1948 was passed which 'inter alia', amended
Section 9, Madras Agri­culturists Relief Act, 1938, by inserting some
provi­sions to give relief to the debtors in respect of usufructuary mortgages
also. This was numbered as Section 9(A). But it is not necessary to advert w
this section as it was replaced in 1950 by Amend­ing Act 24 of 1950 which came
into force on 31-10-1950. The provisions of Section 9-A (as amended in 1950)
so far as they are material to this case may be set out here:

"9-A(1) This section applies to all mortgages exe­cuted at any time before
30-9-1947, and by virtue of which the mortgagee is in possession of the
property mortgaged to him or any portion thereof (a) where no rate of interest
is stipulated for as due to the mortgagee or (b) where a rate of interest is
stipulated for as due to the mort­gagee in respect of the principal amount
secured by the mortgage or any portion thereof, in ad­dition to the usufruct
from the property, or in respect of any other sum payable to the mort­gagee by
the mortgagor in his capacity as such. Explanation : A mortgagee shall be
deemed to be in possession of the property mortgaged to him or any portion
thereof, notwithstanding that he has leased it to the mortgagor or any other
per­son .....

(3) Where the mortgagee has been in possession of the whole of the property
mortgaged to him for an aggregate period of less than thirty years, the
mortgagor shall not be entitled to redeem the mortgage, unless he pays to the
mortgagee (i) the difference between the principal amount secured by the
mortgage and an amount bearing to the principal amount the same proportion as
the period during which the mortgagee has been in possession bears to thirty
years.

(ii) .....

(iii) .....

(8) The mortgagor shall not be entitled to redeem a mortgage under Sub-section
(2) or obtain posses­sion of the mortgaged property by virtue of Sub-section
(5) (a), unless he pays to the mortgagee the cost of the improvements, if any,
effected by him to the mortgaged property."

There is another section of that Amending Act which has to be alluded to in
this connection. Section 9 of the Amending Act 24 of 1950 is made appli­cable
to

(i) all suits and proceedings instituted after the commencement of this Act;

(ii) all suits and proceedings instituted before the commencement of this Act
in which no decree or order passed has not become final, before such
commencement;

(iii) all suits and proceedings in which the decree or order passed has not
been executed or satis­fied in full before the commencement of this Act;

Provided that no creditor shall be required to re­fund any sum which has been
paid to or realised by him before the commencement of this Act."

6\. After this Act came into force the appellant claimed relief under this
Act. If the appellant is to get benefits of this section ha would be liable to
pay only half the principal in view of the provi­sions of Section 9-A(3),
Madras Agriculturists Re­lief Act, 1938, as the mortgages was in possession of
the property for nearly 15 years. In fact it was contended before
Satyanarayana Rao J. that even if Section 63-A, T. P. Act applied to the case,
the mortgagee was entitled to rely upon the pro­visions of Act 4 of 1938,
which were introduced in 1950. The learned Judge in the order of re­ference
has also set out this contention and stated that the amount due on that basis
also had to be determined.

7\. If the contention of the appellant that he is entitled to the benefit of
the provisions of the Amending Act 21 of 1950 is to be accepted it will be
unnecessary for us to consider the provisions of the Transfer of Property Act
bearing on the question of improvements. Under Section 9-A(8) as amended by
this Amending Act 24 of 1950 if the mortgagor could claim relief under that
section he is liable to pay the improvements to the mortgagee. So if we should
come to the conclusion that the Amending Act is applicable to this case 'ipso
facto' the mortgagee would be entitled to the improve­ments effected by him.

8\. As the question whether the plaintiff is an agriculturist or not was not
gone into by the trial Court since it did not arise then, we called for a
finding as to whether the plaintiff is an agricul­turist within the meaning of
the Madras Agricul­turists Relief Act. The finding submitted is that he is an
agriculturist.

9\. On this the first question that arises for con­sideration is whether he
could claim the benefit of the Amending Act 24 of 1950. Mr. Subramania Pillai
appearing for the respondent contends that the Amending Act has no application
to this case for the reason that the decree for redemption was passed long
before the Act came into force, that the respondent had withdrawn the amount
deposit­ed into Court and even possession was delivered to the appellant and
that there was nothing pend­ing so far as the suit for redemption was
concerned at the commencement of the Act. We do not think we can agree with
this argument. This argument overlooks the provisions of Section 9 of the
Amend­ing Act which makes the Act applicable, 'inter alia', to ail suits in
which the decree had not become final. Could it be said that the decree had
become final when it is the subject-matter of the second appeal merely because
the decree for redemption was passed by the trial Court? The defendant filed
an appeal against the decree granting the re­demption claiming a further sum
of Rs. 1000 as part of the decree directing the redemption of the mortgage. As
already stated above, this appeal was allowed and the decree of the trial
Court was modified by allowing the claim of the mortgagee for improvements
effected by him. The modified decree is the subject-matter of the second
appeal and the question is still pending whether the judg­ment and decree of
the lower appellate Court are correct or not. Bo we cannot see how it could be
said that the decree in the suit had become final. We cannot subscribe to the
proposition stated by the counsel for the respondent that merely because the
right of the mortgagor for redemption of the mortgage has not been questioned
either in the lower appellate Court or before us the decree should be
considered to have become final. The decree contemplated under Section 9 of
the Amend­ing Act is the whole decree and not portions of it. It follows that
at the commencement of the Amending Act 24 of 1950 the decree in the suit had
not become final with the consequence that the plaintiff is entitled to the
benefits of the Act.

10\. A further point that arises for determination in this case is whether the
plaintiff is entitled to call upon the mortgagee defendant to bring back the
amount which was withdrawn by him. What is contended by Mr. Chanipakesa
Ayyangar learned counsel for the appellant is that his client is liable to pay
only Rs. 1700 in view of the provisions of Section 9A(3) as amended by the
Amending Act having regard to the fact that the mortgagee was in possession of
the property for nearly 15 years and that as more than this amount was
deposited into Court to the credit of the suit and was with­drawn by the
respondent, he is bound to refund the excess amount. We do not think we can
give effect to this contention either. The proviso to Section 9 of the
Amending Act 24 of 1950 makes it clear that a creditor shall not be required
to re­fund any amount which has been paid to him be­fore the commencement of
this Act. There might have been force in the argument, if the amount was
deposited into Court subject to the result of the suit. It has no substance at
all when the de­posit was made unconditionally and without any reservation.
According to the plaintiff, this was the only amount that was due and payable
to him as condition precedent to his redeeming the mort­gage while the
contention of the respondent was that the plaintiff was liable to pay a
further sum of Rs. 1000 before he could ask for redemption. No issue was
raised by the plaintiff as to his liability to pay the principal amount, the
only point at issue between the two parties being whether the mort­gagee could
claim the value of the improvements effected by him. The deposit into Court
was made by the plaintiff as the mortgagee refused to receive the amount and
redeliver possession of the property and the necessary documents. So this
admitted amount was deposited into Court to be paid to the mortgagee and there
was no question of requiring the mortgagee to bring back the money to Court in
the event of an adverse decision against him. We think it is an obvious case
which is covered by the proviso to Section 9 of the Amending Act 24 of 1950'
and hence the mortgagee-respondent can­not be required to refund any amount
which he had already withdrawn although it is in excess of the sum due to him
calculated with reference to Section 9 (A) (3). Agriculturists Relief Act and
the value of the improvements. The sum of Rs. 3400 withdrawn by the respondent
must be deemed to Include the cost of improvements. Hence the ap­pellant will
not be required to pay the value of im­provements separately. The result is
that the plaintiff is under no obligation to pay anything more to the
respondent and the latter will not be required to pay back any portion of the
amount which he drew out from the Court.

    
    
     11. In the result the second appeal is allowed as indicated above.    In view of the fact that the plaintiff is getting relief under an enactment which was passed since the filing of the second appeal, we do not think it necessary to direct the respon­dent to pay the costs of the appellant. The parties will bear their own costs in the Courts below also. 
     
    
    

