

Supreme Court of India

Surender Kumar Aggarwal vs Satyapal Varshneya on 7 August, 1979

Equivalent citations: AIR 1979 SC 1234, 1981 CriLJ 740, (1979) 4 SCC 750, 1979
(11) UJ 645 SC

Bench: D Desai, O C Reddy, R Sarkaria

JUDGMENT

1\. This judgment shall dispose of Criminal Appeals 180-A, 180-B, 180 C, 180 D
and 180-E of 1973. They arise out of common facts: Satyapal Varshneya,
respondent herein, a publisher and bookseller of Chandni Chowk, Delhi made
complaints 12, in the Court of Sub Divisional Magistrate, Pahargang, Delhi
against Surendar Kumar Aggarwal appellant herein, resident of Allahabad, Om
Prakash Sharma, resident of Meerut and one other alleging the commission of an
offence under Section 63 of the Copyright Act 1957. The Magistrate examined
the complainant under Section 200, Criminal Procedure Code and thereafter
issued summonses to the accused. The accused persons appeared before the
Magistrate and made an application under Section 177, Criminal Procedure Code
alleging that the Magistrate had no territorial jurisdiction to hear the
complaint as the alleged offences were not committed within the limits of the
jurisdiction of the Magistrate. The Magistrate overruled the objections.
Sunder Kumar Aggarwal and his coaccused filed revision petitions (414 to 418
of 1971) in the Court of Session. The Revisions were heard by the Additional
Sessions Judge who reported these cases to the High Court of Delhi with the
recommendations that since the material so far on record did not disclose that
the alleged offence was committed within the jurisdiction of the Magistrate,
the orders of the Magistrate be quashed and the complaints dismissed. In the
alternative, he recommended that the trial court be direct to treat the
objections raised by the petitioner as a preliminary one and dispose it of on
merits after affording an opportunity to the complainant to adduce further
evidence in the matter.

2\. A learned Judge of the High Court by a common judgment dated March 9, 1972
accepted this alternative recommendation of the Additional Sessions judge, and
disposed of the Revisions accordingly.

3\. Against those orders of the High Court, Surender Kumar Aggarwal has filed
these appeals by special leave.

4\. Learned Counsel for the appellant submits that subsequent to the High
Court decision under appeals, the Civil Court has, in a suit under Section 55
of the Copyright Act, for rendition of accounts filed by the respondents,
herein against the appellant, held that the respondent had no copy-right. A
copy of that judgment is also sought to be produced.

5\. This is an entirely new plea. In the Courts below the objection taken by
the appellant was that the Magistrates Delhi hid no territorial jurisdiction.
But now the stand taken is that the complaint is foredoomed to failure because
the complainant has DO copyright. We do not think it proper to go into this
new plea. It marks a complete departure from the grounds of appeal adumbrated
in the Special Leave Petition. We therefore dismiss these appeals subject to
the observation that the appellant shall be at liberty to raise this new plea
before the Magistrate.

