

Delhi High Court

Century Traders vs Roshan Lal Duggar Co. on 27 April, 1977

Equivalent citations: AIR 1978 Delhi 250, 15 (1979) DLT 269

Author: P Narain

Bench: P Narain, P S Safeer

JUDGMENT Prakash Narain, J.

(1) This appeal is directed against the order of a learned Single Judge of
this court dismissing an application under Order 39, rules I and 2, read with
Section 151 of the Code of Civil Procedure, moved by the appellant in Suit No.
381 of 1976, filed by it in this court claiming that the respondents herein
were guilty of passing off their goods bearing the appellant's trade-mark and
in consequence praying for the issue of a permanent injunction restraining
respondents from using the trade mark of the appellant and holding that they
arc liable to render accounts, pay damages and surrender all goods bearing the
appellant's trade mark. Pending the disposal of the suit, the appellant prayed
for issue of temporary injunction interms of its prayer for permanent
injunction against the respondent.

(2) The appellant manufactures and markets various textiles including voiles
and mulls. Respondent No. 1 is also a manufacturer of textiles, including
voiles and mulls. Respondent No. 2 is the proprietor of respondent No. 1.
Respondent No. 3 is a processor who is supplied unbleached textiles, including
voiles, by manufacturers for being processed, dyed and printed with marks
which are ultimately marketed by the manufacturers.

(3) The appellant's case is that it is manufacturing voiles and from the year
1973 up to the end of 1975 got the same processed by respondent No. 3.
Thereafter it is getting goods manufactured by it processed from another
party. It is claimed that the appellant directed respondent No. 3 after
processing to put the trade mark in question on its voiles and respondent No.
3 complied with that direction. From 1976 the appellant gave this processing
work to another party and is getting the same trade mark placed n its goods.
However, in the middle of 1976 it came to know that respondents 1 and 2 arc
using the identical mark for voiles manufactured by it by getting it processed
from respondent No. 3.

(4) The respondents' case is that the said trade mark is a mark developed by
and belongs to respondent No. 3. It is a processor's mark which it used to
previously affix on the voiles processed by it for the appellant but is now
affixed by it on the voiles processed by it for respondents 1 and 2. It is
also claimed by respondents that the said mark is common to the trade.

(5) There was some confusion caused as to what the mark in suit is. We would
first like to clarify that. The mark in question are the words "RAJARANI" and
these two words arc written or embossed or printed or stamped in a particular
manner. The proprietory interested claimed by the appellant is only to the
extent mentionedabove. The appellant docs not claim any proprietary interest
in any pictures printed or embossed or stamped on textile goods including
voils. No proprietorship in any device of "Man and Woman" or "Kings or Queen"
is claimed by the appellant.

(6) As noticed earlier, the proprietary interest in the aforesaid trade mark
is claimed by the appellant by virtue of user. This claim is contested on the
grounds, (a) that the mark belongs to respondent No. 3, (b) that the mark is
common to the trade, and (c) there have been registrations of this mark prior
to 1973 in one case even with a disclaimer in the use of the words "RAJARANI".

(7) The learned Single Judge on the material placed before him came to the
conclusion that although, prima facic, the trade mark cannot be said to be the
processor's mark, as claimed by the respondents; yet the appellant would not
be entitled to the discretionary relief of injunction inasmuch as (a) the
words "RAJARANI" were common to- the trade, (b) there have been cases where
applications for registration of the words "RAJARANI" have been declined by
the trade mark registry, and (c) it appeared that both the appellant and
respondent No. 3 were guilty of piracy in adopting a mark which was well known
earlier. It may be noticed that the learned Single Judge, has observed that
the appellant had used the mark in question even prior to 1973 and
tharespondent No. 3 cannot be said to be the originator of the mark when it
started processing the goods of the appellant. In short, therefore, the
learned Single Judge was, prima facie, of the view that neither of the
respondents can claim proprietary interest in the mark in question but then
the appellant also could not claim proprietary interest on account of the
prima facie evidence of earlier registrations of the mark "RAJARANI" and the
view of the trade mark registry that no proprietary interest can be given in.
the words "RAJARANI" or "King and Queen".

(8) In granting or not granting ad interim injunction, it is settled law.
three factors have to be kept in view, namely, the establishment of a prima
facie case, the balance of convenience between the parties and whether if the
interim injunction is not issued it will cause irreparable injury to the
applicant.

(9) The prima facie case in favor of the appellant stands established by
admitted user of the mark by the appellant on voiles produced and marketed by
it. It has been rightly so held even by the learned Single Judge. But this
prima facie case made out by the appellant is said to be considerably watered
down or weakened by the fact that the mark is alleged to be common to the
trade and the various registrations adverted to in the learned Single Judge's
order. The first point, therefore, that arises for consideration is whether
this approach is correct. It must be remembered that the suit is one based on
a claim of passing off. It is not a suit for infringement of a registered
trade-mark. In a passing off action registration of the trade mark is
immaterial. Section 27 of the Trade and Merchandise Marks Act; 1958,
hereinafter referred to as the Act, reads as under :-

"27.No action for infringement of unregistered trade mark :--

(1)No person shall be entitled to institute any proceeding to prevent, or
recover damages for the infringement of an unregistered trade mark.

(2)Nothing in this Act shall be deemed to affect rights of action against any
person for passing off goods as the goods of another person or the remedies in
respect thereof."

The relevant parts of Section 106 of the Act read as under :--

"106.Reliefs in suits for infringement or for passing off :-

(1)The relief which a court may grant in any suit for infringement or for
passing off referred to in Section 105 includes an injunction (subject to such
terms, if any, as the court thinks fit) and at the option of the plaintiff,
either damages or an account of profits, together with or without any order
for delivery-up of the infringing labels and marks for destruction or erasure.

(2)Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the court shall not
grant relief by way of damages (other than nominal damages) or an account of
profits in any case-

(A)...

(B)...

(C)where in a suit for passing off the defendant satisfies the court-

(I)that at the time he commenced to use the trade mark complained of in the
suit he was unaware and had no reasonable ground for believing that the trade
mark of the plaintiff was in use; and (II)that when he came aware of the
existence and nature of the plaintiff's trade mark, he forthwith ceased to use
the trade mark complained of."

From a reading of the above sections it is clear that registration of mark in
the trade mark registry would be irrelevant in an action for passing off.
Furthermore, it will be clear that in deciding whether a particular mark is
common to the trade use of that mark would be extremely relevant. Mere
registration would not be enough.

(10) In M/s. L. D. Malhotra Industries v. M/s. Ropi Industries, I.L.R. 1976
(1) Delhi 278 (1), the law regarding registered and unregistered trade marks
has been very succinctly enunciated by Avadh Behari, J. and this we say with
great respect. In that case two industries were engaged in the manufacture of
dress hooks which are generally used in garments. One was M/s. Ropi Industries
and the other was M/s. L. D. Malhotra Industries, respectively referred to in
the judgment as Ropis and Malhotras. The latter, i.e. Malhotras got their mark
Kismat (word per se) registered with the Registrar of Trade Marks in December,
1967. In December, 1969 Ropis made an application for registration of their
trade mark KISMAT. This application was advertised in the trade mark journal
in November, 1970. In February, 1971 Malhotras filed an opposition. Ropis had
sought registration of a label mark of which the word Kismat was the dominant
part claiming that 'they were using the label mark Kismat since 1963. The
Assistant Registrar held that Ropis were prior users of the trade mark KISMAT.
In April, 1971 Ropis made an application for rectification of the register
under Section 56(2) of the Act vis-a-vis the registration granted to
Malhotras. That is how the matter came before Avadh Behari, J. He observed :-

"NOWit will appear that Ropis were first in the field. Their user dates back
to April 1, 1963. But they are later in registration. Malhotras were the first
to get their trade mark registered. In other words Ropis were prior in use and
anterior in Registration while Malhotras were prior in registration but
posterior in use. Who has got a better right of the two. That is the question.

"INthis appeal against the order of rectification four points arise for
decision. First is the question of use of the trade mark. Use plays an all
important part. A trader acquires a right of property in a distinctive mark
merely by using it upon or in connection with his goods irrespective of the
length of such user and the extent of his trade. The trader who adopts such a
mark is entitled to protection directly the article having assumed a vendible
character is launched upon the market. Registration under the statute does not
confer any new right to the mark claimed or any greater right than what
already existed at common law and at equity without registration. It does,
however, facilitate a remedy which may be enforced and obtained throughout
"THEState and it established the record of facts affecting the right to the
mark. Registration itself does not create a trade mark. The trade mark exists
independently of the registration which merely affords further protection
under the statute. Common law rights are left wholly unaffected."

(11) In Consolidated Foods Corporation v. Brandon and Co., Private Ltd., , it
was observed that "A trader acquires a right of property, in a distinctive
mark merely by using it upon or in connection with his goods irrespective of
the length of such user and the extent of his trade- The trader who adopts
such a mark is entitled to protection directly the article having assumed a
vendible character is launched upon the market. Registration under the statute
does not confer any new right to the mark claimed or any greater rights than
what already existed at common law and at equity without registration. It
does, however, facilitate a remedy which may be enforced ana obtained
throughout the State and it established the record of facts affecting the
right to the mark. Registration itself does not create a trade mark. The trade
mark exists independently of the registration which merely affords further
protection under the Statute. Common law rights are left wholly unaffected.
Priority in adoption and use of a trade mark is superior to priority in
registration.

(12) For the purpose of claiming such proprietorship of a mark, it is not
necessary that the mark should have been used for considerable length of time.
As a matter of fact, a single actual use with intent to continue such use eo
instanti confers a right to such mark as a trademark. It is sufficient if the
article with the mark upon it has actually become a vendible article in the
market with instent on the part of the proprietor to continue its production
and sales. It is not necessary that the goods should have acquired a
reputation for quality under that mark. Actual use of the mark under such
circumstances as showing an intention to adopt and use it as a trade-mark is
the test rather than the extent or duration of the use. A mere casual,
intermittent or experimental use may be insufficient to show an intention to
adopt the mark as a trade mark for specific article or goods. ."

(13) The Supreme Court in Corn Products Refining Co. v. Shangrila Food
Products Ltd., laid down the rule vis-a-vis user of a mark as opposed to
registration of mark. It observed that the onus of proving user is on the
person who claims it. It did not approve of looking into the register of trade
marks where a mark may be entered to be any proof of user. To quote from the
speech of A.K. Sarkar, J. : "Now, of course, the presence of a mark in the
register does not prove its user at all. It is possible that the mark may have
been registered but not used. It is not permissible to draw any inference as
to their user from the presence of marks in the register (14) Thus, the law is
pretty well-settled that in order to succeed at this stage the appellant had
to establish user of the aforesaid mark prior in point of time than the
impugned user by the respondents. The registration of the said mark or similar
mark prior in point of time to user by the appellant is irrelevant in an
action passing off and the merepresence of the mark in the register maintaned
by the trade mark registry did not prove its user by the persons in whose
names the mark was registered and was irrelevant for the purposes of deciding
the application for interim injunction unless evidence had been led or was
available of user of the registered trade marks. In our opinion, these clear
rules of law were not kept in view by the learned Single Judge and led him to
commit an error.

(15) It has been urged on behalf of the respondents that inasmuch as the
appellant had failed to show exclusive user, no prima facie case had been made
out by it for issue of an interim injunction. The gist of the law relating to
a passing off action was said to be as enunciated in T. Oertli AG. v. E. J.
Bowman (London), Ld., Page, W. & Cov. (Turmix Sales) Ltd., H.G.H. Farnsworth
S. S. Parness and F. A. Marlow, 1957 R.P.C. 388(4) and T. Oertli A.G. v. E. J.
Bowman (London) Ld. and others, 1959 R.P.C.I.(5) (16) In T. Oertli AG's case
while dismissing an action based on passing off it was observed that the
plaintiffs had not made out the requisite association in England of the word
"Turmix" with the machine of the plaintiffs' manufacture. When the above
matter went to the House of Lords, whose decision is reported in 1959 R.P.C.
I, the decision of the Court of Appeal was upheld.

(17) From a reading of the judgments in T. Oertli AG's case we cannot accept
the contention that there is any rule of law laid down by any court that
exclusive user must be shown before a case can be said to have made out for
issue of an interim injuction. Mr. Anoop Singh has invited our attention to
Kaviraj Pandit Durga Dutt Sharma v. Navaratna Pharmaceutical Laboratories, to
Emphasise the need for establishment of exclusive user by the appellant. The
decision relied upon has no bearing on this aspect. Indeed, this was a
decision arising out of a claim for infringement of a registered trade mark
and also of alleged passing off.

(18) It was next contended that a passing off action is an action in deceit
and the appellant had to prove that either there has been actual passing off
or the use of the mark by the respondents has actually caused confusion or
damage to the appellant. This proposition also, in our opinion, cannot be
accepted. As was held in T. Oertli AG's case, referred to above :-
"WEemphasise that this appeal is concerned solely with passing off and not
with the infringement of Trade Mark or Patent rights. It is, of course,
essential to the success of any claim in respect of passing off based on the
use of a given mark or get up that the plaintiff should be able to show that
the disputed mark or get up has become by user in this country distinctive of
the plaintiff's goods so that the use in relation to any goods of the kind
dealt in by the plaintiff or that mark or get up will be understood by the
trade and the public in this country as meaning that the goods are the
plaintiff's goods. The gist of the action is that the plaintiff, by using and
making known the mark or get up in relation to his goods, and thus causing it
to be associated or identified with those goods, has acquired a quasi-
proprietary right to the exclusive use of the mark or get up in relation to
goods of that kind, which right is invaded by any person who, by using the
same or some deceptively similar mark or get up in relation to goods not of
the plaintiff's manufacture, induces customers to buy from him goods not of
the plaintiff's manufacture as goods of the plaintiff's manufacture, thereby
diverting to himself orders intended for and rightfully belonging to the
plaintiff."

(19) Even the Supreme Court in Kaviraj Pandit Durga Dutt Sharma's case,
referred to earlier, observed that the use by the defendant of a trade mark of
the plaintiff is not essential in an action for passing off, but is the sine
qua non in an action for infringement. Salmond in his Law of torts (Twelfth
Edition) described the basis of passing off action in the following words :-
"THEcourts have wavered between two conceptions of a passing off action-as a
remedy for the invasion of a quasiproprietary right in a trade name or trade
mark, and as a remedy analogous to the action on the case for deceit. for
invasion of the personal right not to be injured by fraudulent competition. It
has recently been said that 'the true basis of the action is that the passing
off.... injures the right of property in the plaintiff, that right of property
being his right to the goodwill of his business'. In general the violation of
a right to property 19 actionable, even though it is innocent and though no
damage has been proved. At common law it was necessary to prove an 'actual
fraudulent intention' but a different view was taken in equity, and since the
Judicature Acts it has been generally accepted that it is not necessary in an
action for passing off to prove fraud that is to say, an intent to deceive. It
is sufficient in all cases to prove that the practice complained of is
calculated (that is to say, likely) to deceive."

In our view the proof of actual damage or fraud is unnecessary in a passing
off action whether the relief asked for is injunction alone or injunction,
accounts and damages. If there is a likelihood of the offending trade mark
invading the proprietary right, a case for injunction is made out. We are
fortified in coming to this conclusion by the observations in a bench decision
of this court in Prina Chemical Works and others v. Sukndayal and others,
I.L.R. 1974 (1) Delhi 545(7).

(20) Mr. Anoop Singh, learned counsel for the respondents has relied on Prina
Chemical Works, case, referred to above, to contend that a pirated mark cannot
be protected. His contention is that in view of the appellant and, perhaps
also respondent No. 3, having pirated the mark "RAJARANI" from the proprietors
of the same registered trade mark, namely, M/s. Karam Setty Venkataratnam of
Chirala, Andhra Pradesh and Raj Mal Pahar Chand of Amritsar, the appellant
cannot claim protection of this court. The reliance by the learned counsel on
Prina Chemical Works' case is misplaced. In that case as a matter of fact it
was found that the plaintiff was not the proprietor of the mark but someone
else. In the present case relying on the observations of Avadh Behari, J. in
the case of M/s. L. D. Malhotra Industries, v. M/s. Ropi Industries, I.L.R.
1976 (1) Delhi 278(1), we are of the opinion that the appellant has made out a
case which requires consideration. In any case even on the evidence on record
till now the registration in favor of M/s. Karam Setty Venkataratnam of
Chirala, Andhra Pradesh, is restricted to Andhra Pradesh whereas the
registration in favor of Raj Mal Pahar Chand of Amritsar is with a disclaimer
to the use of the words "RAJARANI". It may be noticed that the registered
trade marks of Andhra Pradesh and Amritsar are not the trade marks which are
pleaded by the appellant and which we have already described. The appellant
is, admittedly, a prior user of this mark vis-a-vis the respondents. That the
said mark has some novelty and attractiveness is evident from the fact that
both the appellant and the respondents have applied for registration of that
mark in their favor. That the applications of the parties are still pending is
neither here nor there. The registration of the mark in favor of either party
would create a situation in which an action for infringement may be relevant.
We are only concerned with the prima facie case in an action for passing off.
We are in agreement with the learned Single Judge that the appellant has made
out a prima facie case.

(21) We now come to the question of balance of convenience. It has been urged
on behalf of the respondents that the mark "RAJA- RANI" is common to the trade
and for this purpose reliance has been placed on the registration in Andhra
Pradesh and Amritsar. There is a distinction between a mark being "common on
the register" and "common to the trade". There is no evidence on record to
show that there is actual user of this mark by any party other than the
parties before us. Inasmuch as trade mark is property right, an invasion of it
should be protected and the balance of convenience would obviously be in favor
of the appellant who was admittedly the first user of this mark. We cannot
accept that there is any prima facie evidence of respondent No. 3 being the
owner of the mark. Indeed, this is belied by the registration applications
filed by respondent No. 2. As was observed by Goddard, L. J. in Draper v.
Trist and others, 1939(3) A.E.R. 513(8) - "INpassing off cases, however, the
true basis of the action is that the passing off by the defendant of his goods
as the goods of the plaintiff injures the right of property in the plaintiff,
that right of property being his right to the goodwill of his business. . . .
".

This right is to be protected and the balance of convenience is in favor of
the person who has established a prime facie right, to property.

(22) We now come to the question of irreparable injury. It is said that there
is nothing on the record to show that any loss has been occasioned to the
appellant and, in any case, the respondents can be ordered to keep accounts.
We do not agree. The irreparable injury would be the likely confusion that may
be caused if respondents arc allowed to use the mark which we have held prima
facie as being the mark of the appellant. It will take some time before the
suit is decided. If the respondents are not restrained by means of an interim
injunction they would continue to market their goods with the offending mark.
That ultimately might be held to be long user and the ultimate relief of
permanent injunction may be refused on the plea of common or concurrent user.
At the moment no plea of common or concurrent user has been raised by the
respondents but there is nothing to prevent them from doing so in future if
they are allowed to use the trade mark for the duration of the pendency of the
suit. The likelihood of confusion being caused and the likelihood of the plea
of common or concurrent user being raised by a later stage would be the
irreparable injury to the appellant.

(23) We, therefore, accept this appeal, reverse the judgment of the learned
Single Judge and issue an interim injunction against the respondents
restraining them from using the trade mark described by us earlier on any
voiles that they may manufacture or market or process. We are restricting this
injunction to voiles only, as is claimed by the appellant.

(24) Before we part, we may notice one other submission on behalf of the
respondents and that is that voiles is textile goods and the trade mark is
registered or accepted under the Act for textile goods. The contention is
irrelevant, for the present suit is confined to an action regarding voiles
only. Rule 137 of the Rules framed under the Act is relevant in this behalf.

(25) The appeal is disposed of with the above observations but we do not make
any order as to costs at this stage.

