

Gujarat High Court

Bhavnesh Mohanlal Amin vs Nirma Chemical Works Ltd. on 9 May, 2005

Equivalent citations: (2005) 2 GLR 1557, 2005 (3) PTC 31 Guj

Author: K Jhaveri

Bench: K Jhaveri

JUDGMENT K.S. Jhaveri, J.

1\. This appeal is directed against the judgment and order dated 11.2.2000
passed by the City Civil Judge, Ahmedabad, below Exh.5/6 in Notice of Motion
in Civil Suit No. 1952/1999, whereby the defendants-appellants were restrained
from manufacturing and marketing their products i.e. flour mills (Ghar Ghanti)
by using the word NIMA till hearing and final disposal of the suit.

2\. The respondents-original plaintiffs filed Civil Suit No. 1952/1999 for a
declaration and permanent injunction. The case of the respondents-original
plaintiffs is as under:

2.1 The plaintiff No. 1 is a Company incorporated under the provisions of the
Indian Companies Act, 1956 and plaintiff No. 2 is a Trust registered under the
provisions of the Indian Trusts Act. Plaintiff No. 2 is the owner and
proprietor of the trade mark NIRMA and the same trade mark has been assigned
in favour of plaintiff No. 1 by way of assignment deed. The assignment deed is
filed for registration under the provisions of the Trade Marks Act and
plaintiff No. 1 is engaged in the business of manufacturing and marketing
various consumer products in India and elsewhere.

2.2 The plaintiff's predecessor-in-title started manufacturing and marketing
detergent powder, detergent cake and other products in India and elsewhere.
The word NIRMA has been coined and invented from the name of NIRUPAMA,
daughter of Smt. Shantaben K. Patel, a partner of the said partnership firm
and as trade mark NIRMA has been registered. The same is continuously used in
various packing materials for different products i.e. soap, detergent powder,
detergent cake, cleaning preparations, etc..

2.3 Trade mark NIMA is also used and got registered under the Trade Marks Act
in respect of various classes i.e. like spices, match box and other consumer
items. Plaintiffs' products are sold throughout India and the name NIRMA has
acquired reputation and goodwill in the market. The plaintiffs have applied
for registration of similar names NIRMAL, NIMA and also applied for exclusive
right to use the same word. According to them, the plaintiffs have got some of
the registration which includes registration of mark NIMA. The plaintiff No. 1
is registered at Registration No. 422839 in respect of the goods covered in
Class 7, and therefore, the use of the same or any other identical or
deceptively similar by any other person more particularly by the defendants
amounts to infringement to the plaintiffs' trade marks. Trade mark NIMA is
also registered bearing Registration No. 396185/B of 1982.

2.4 It is alleged that the appellants-defendants have adopted and started
using the word NIMA for marketing their flour mills. Therefore, Notice was
served on 22.9.1998 calling upon the defendants to stop using the trade mark
NIMA. The defendants replied to the Notice on 07.10.1998. Again, another
notice was served to which there was no reply. According to the plaintiffs, by
using the word NIMA the defendants are creating confusion and deception in the
mind of general public because the word NIMA is identical and deceptively
similar to the plaintiff No. 1's very popular trade mark NIRMA. However, the
defendants declined to stop using the word NIMA for their products. Under
these circumstances, the plaintiffs preferred the aforesaid Civil Suit. In the
suit proceedings, notice of motion was taken out at Exhs.5/6.

2.5 The trial Court after hearing the parties passed an order on 11.2.2000,
whereby the plaintiffs-defendants were restrained by an order of temporary
injunction from manufacturing and marketing their products i.e. flour mills
(Ghar Ghanti) by using the word NIMA till hearing and final disposal of the
suit.

2.6 It is against the aforesaid order the present appeal has been filed by the
original defendants.

3\. Mr. P M Thakkar learned Senior Counsel appearing with Mr. Premal S. Rachh
and Mr. Y M Thakkar learned advocates for the appellants has submitted that
the appellants are using the mark NIMA since 12.02.1997 with respect to flour
mills, whereas the respondents have never used either the mark NIRMA nor the
mark NIMA for the said product at all. He has submitted that the respondents
have not used the mark NIRMA for any product other than detergent in the form
of bar, cake or powder.

3.1 Learned counsel has submitted that in the impugned order there is a
reference that the respondents have used the mark NIMA for a residential house
and in relation to a Trust. He has submitted that the usage is wholly
irrelevant as the residential house or the Trust is not a "product" and the
mark is required to be used in relation to goods in respect of which it is
registered, and therefore, the same cannot be relied for seeking injunction.

3.2 Learned counsel has submitted that the findings of the trial Court in
favour of the plaintiffs-respondents with respect to the Associated mark and
Defensive mark is wholly erroneous, since it is not even the case of the
respondents-plaintiffs that the word NIMA is an Associated trademark of NIRMA
nor that the mark NIRMA is registered as Defensive trade mark u/s.47(3) of the
Trade & Merchandise Act, 1958 (for short, "the Act"). Learned counsel has,
therefore, submitted that in the result the mark NIMA is not used as a
trademark with any goods of the respondents either in Class 3 or Class 7.

3.3 Learned counsel has further submitted that the respondents' suit for
infringement of trademark and for passing off was based on the Registration of
the trademark NIRMA in Para-A of the Register in respect of the goods, inter
alia, "washing powder and washing soap" - which are included in Class 3, the
Registration of the trademark NIMA in Part-B of the Register in respect of the
goods, inter alia, "washing soap and detergents in the form of power, cake and
bar, cleaning powder" - which are included in Class 3 and the Registration of
the trademark NIRMA in respect of the goods "machines and machine tools,
motors (except for land vehicles) machine couplings other than belting (except
for land vehicles)" - which are included in Class 7 on 25/06/1984.

3.4 Learned counsel has submitted that though the respondents-plaintiffs had
obtained registration of the trademark NIRMA in respect of the aforesaid goods
included in Class 7 in the year 1984, they have not been used so far, and
therefore, the suit filed by the respondents-plaintiffs for infringement of
trademark, against the use of the trademark NIMA for flour mills by the
appellants-defendants is not tenable in view of the rights of registration
conferred by registration within the meaning of Section 28(1) of the said Act.
The said provision reads as under;

"Section 28(1) : Subject to the other provisions of this Act, the registration
of a trademark in Part-A or Part-B of the register shall, if valid, give to
the registered proprietor of the trade mark the exclusive right to the use of
the trademark in relation to the goods in respect of which the trademark is
registered and to obtain relief in respect of infringement of the trademark in
the manner provided by this Act."

3.5 Learned counsel has, therefore, submitted that the trial Court has grossly
erred in granting injunction in favour of the respondents since the
registration obtained by the respondents in Class 7 does not include "flour
mills" and that the registration of the trademark NIMA is in respect of the
goods included in Class 3 and not in Class 7.

3.6 Learned counsel has further submitted that in view of the provisions of
Section 29(2) of the said Act, the suit filed by the respondents-plaintiffs is
basically of the nature of "passing off" since the respondents have obtained
registration of the trade mark NIMA in respect of goods included in Class 3
only and that too in Part-B of the register. Therefore, the respondents are
not entitled to maintain an action for infringement against the appellants
herein for the use of the trade mark NIMA for flour mills.

4\. Learned counsel has submitted that the suit for "passing off" based on the
user of the trade mark NIMA and NIRMA for the goods included in Class 3 only
against the use of the trade mark NIMA for flour mills by the appellants is to
be considered as per the ratio laid down by the Apex Court in a decision of
the Gujarat High Court in the case of Cadila Health Care v. Cadila
Pharmaceuticals, [2001 PTC - 300 (SC), 2001 (1) CTMR 288 (SC), J.T. 2001 (4)
S.C. 243], wherein it has been held that factors like the nature of the goods,
the similarity in the nature, the class of purchasers, the mode of purchasing
the goods or placing orders for goods, degree of skill to be exercised in
purchasing the rival goods and the price of the respective goods are to be
considered. Learned counsel has, therefore, submitted that the learned trial
Judge has committed a serious error in granting injunction in favour of the
respondents since there didn't exist even a remote chance of deception or
confusion or passing off and accordingly, it cannot be said that the
appellants have infringed any right or passed off their goods with that of the
respondents' goods.

4.1 Learned counsel has relied upon a decision of the Bombay High Court in the
case of Macmillan & Co. v. K.& J. Cooper, A.I.R. 1924 Privy Council 75, and
more particularly, on the following observations made in page 85;

"The word 'original' does not in this connection mean that the work must be
the expression of original or inventive thought. Copyright Acts are not
concerned with the origin of ideas but with the expression of thought; and in
the case of 'literary work', with the expression of thought in print or
writing. The originality which is required relates to the expression of the
thought; but the Act does not require that the expression must be in an
original or novel form, but that the work must not be copied from another work
that it should originate from the author."

4.2 Learned counsel for the appellants has next relied upon a decision of the
Allahabad High Court in the case of Thomas Bear & Sons (India) Ltd. v. Prayag
Narain and another, A.I.R. 1940 Privy Council pg. 86, wherein it has been held
that in trademark cases, conditions peculiar to India must be borne in mind in
applying any doctrine of English Law and English decisions which turn or
partly turn on questions of fact, as do most cases of common law, trade marks
and passing off can only be applied with care and circumspection.

4.3 Learned counsel has next relied upon a decision in the case of Edwards v.
Dennis, 1885 Chancery Division Vol.30 pg.454, and more particularly on the
observations of the Court in page 477 of the decision. It reads as under;

"... In my opinion, it is perfectly ridiculous to suppose it means that a
trademark is to be registered as belonging to goods which the man does not
manufacture at all. It must mean that the mark is to be registered, not in
connection with nothing, but in connection with the particular trade in
respect of which he desires to use it."

4.4 Learned counsel has next relied upon a decision of the Delhi High Court in
the case of Three-N-Products (P) Ltd. v. Pardesi General Store and Ors., 2000
(20) PTC 489, wherein it has been held that there shall be no passing off, if
the color scheme and the manner of reproduction of the logo are not similar.

4.5 Learned counsel has next relied upon a decision of the Bombay High Court
in the case of Alkem Laboratories Pvt. Ltd v. Alchem (India) Ltd., I.P.L.R.
1999 October 352. In that case, the plaintiff, a pharmaceutical company, was
at the material time carrying on business of manufacturing drugs and medicines
under the registered trade marks "Alkem" and "Alfakem" while the defendant was
selling chemical products under the registered corporate name "Alchem (India)
Ltd.". It was held therein that there was no likelihood of passing off, as the
rivalry was between different types of products, i.e. between medicines and
chemicals and that the features of the respective trading and marketing were
also vastly different.

4.6 Learned counsel has relied upon a decision of the Delhi High Court in the
case of Relaxo Rubber Limited and another v. Aman Cable Industries and
another, 1998 PTC (18) 759, wherein it has been held that the use of the
registered mark by any person in any manner in any place or in any
circumstance not covered by the scope of registration does not constitute
infringement.

4.7 Learned counsel has next relied upon a decision of the Bombay High Court
in the case of Reliance Industries Ltd. v. Reliance Polycrete Ltd., 1997 PTC
(17) 581. In that case, the plaintiff was using the word "Reliance" as part of
their corporate name and the defendants were in the business of manufacturing
sanitary wares. It was held therein that an Undertaking by the defendant that
they would not sell their products under the mark "Reliance" in the market was
a "sufficient protection" against any likelihood of deception and confusion in
the public.

4.8 Learned counsel has next relied upon a decision in the case of in the case
of Vishnudas Trading as Vishnudas Kishandas v. Vazir Sultan Tobacco Co. Otd.,
Hyderabad and another, [A.I.R. 1996 S.C. 2275, 1997 (4) S.C.C. 201], and more
particularly, on Paras 22, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46 & 48\. In that case, it has been
held that if a trader or manufacturer actually trades in or manufactures only
one or some of the articles coming under a broad classification, such trader
or manufacturer should not be permitted to enjoy monopoly in respect of all
the articles which may come under such broad classification and by that
process preclude the other traders or manufacturers to get registration of
separate and distinct goods which may also be grouped under the broad
classification.

4.9 Learned counsel has next relied upon a decision of the Delhi High Court in
the case of Kellogg Company v. Pravin Kumar Bhadabhai, 1996 PTC (16) 187,
wherein it has been held that there shall be no passing off of the goods
merely on an allegation that they were in the similar trade dress and that in
determining the similarity of get-up, the whole thing must be seen in its
entirety and not in parts.

4.10 Learned counsel has relied upon a decision in the case of Exxon
Corporation, 1251 Avenue of the America, New York, U.S.A. v. Exxon Packing
Systems Pvt. Ltd., Hyderabad, A.I.R. 1989 Madras 182, wherein it has been held
that the word "otherwise" appearing in Section 120(1) of the Trade and
Merchandise Marks Act, 1958, includes a "legal notice of an Advocate", and
therefore, an application for grant of injunction, directly or indirectly by
issuance of notice, advertisement, circular etc., was maintainable.

4.11 Learned counsel has next relied upon a decision in the case of Soni
Kabushiki Kaisha v. Shamrao Maskar and others, A.I.R. 1985 Bombay 327, wherein
it has been held that the factors creating confusion would be the nature of
the mark itself, the class of customers, the extent of the reputation, the
trade channel, the existence of any connection in the course of trade and
several other circumstances which are required to be taken into consideration
in combination, before recording a conclusion as to whether there is a
likelihood of deception or confusion by use of the mark.

4.12 Learned counsel has next relied upon a decision of the Delhi High Court
in the case of R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Co. v. I.T.C. Limited, [I.P.L.R. 1990
pg.85, 1987 PTC 57 (DEL)]. In that case, the plaintiff was a manufacturer of
cigarettes under a registered trade mark in several countries including India.
The mark was not used by the plaintiff in India because of Govt. of India
restrictions on import of cigarettes. It was held therein that when the
plaintiff had applied for registration of the mark, the Government ban on
import of cigarettes was already in existence for about 18 years, and,
therefore, the plaintiff's application for registration on the plea that the
mark would be put into use as and when the ban was lifted could only mean that
they had no bona fide intention to use the mark at the time of application.

4.13 Learned counsel has next relied upon a decision in the case of American
Home Products Corporation v. Mac Laboratories Pvt. Ltd. and another, A.I.R.
1986 S.C., pg.137, wherein it has been held that an application u/s.46(1)(a)
of the Trade and Merchandise Marks Act, 1958 to have the trade mark in
question removed on the ground that it was not at any relevant point of time
being used as a trade mark itself and that permitting its use would amount to
permitting trafficking in the trade marks is liable to be quashed and set
aside.

4.14 Learned counsel has next relied upon a decision of the Calcutta High
Court in the case of London Rubber Co. v. Durex Products Incorporated and
another, A.I.R. 1963 S.C., pg.1882, wherein a comparison was made between the
provisions of Section 8(a) and Section 10(1) of the Trade Marks Act, 1940. It
was held therein that the object of both the above provisions was to prohibit
from registration, marks which are likely to deceive or cause confusion. It
was further held therein that there was no likelihood of confusion or
deception in the marks because the respondent's goods were confined to
contraceptives for use by women which could only be used with medical
assistance while the appellant's contraceptives were essentially for men.

4.15 Learned counsel has next relied upon a decision in the case of Corn
Products Refining Co. v. Shangrila Food Products Ltd., A.I.R. 1960 S.C. 142 [
1960(1) S.C.R. 968, 1960 S.C.J. 509], wherein it has been held that the
absolute identity of the two competing marks or their close resemblance is
only one of the tests for determining the question of likelihood of deception
or confusion. Trade connection between different goods is another such test.
Ex-hypothesis test applies only when the goods are different. These tests are
independent tests. There is no reason why the test of trade connection between
different goods should not apply where the competing marks closely resemble
each other just as much as it applied. Whether by applying these tests in a
particular case the conclusion that there is likelihood of deception or
confusion should be arrived at would depend on all the facts of the case.

4.16 Learned counsel has relied upon a decision in the case of Rustom Ali
Molla and others v. Bata Shoe Co. Ltd., A.I.R. 1957 Calcutta 120, wherein it
has been held that the acquisition of an exclusive right to a mark or name in
connection with a particular article of commerce, cannot entitle the owner of
that right to prohibit the use by others of such mark or name in connection
with goods of a totally different character; and that such use by others can
as little interfere with his acquisition of the right.

4.17 Learned counsel has relied upon a decision in the case of Gaw Kan Lye v.
Saw Kyone Saing, A.I.R. 1939 Rangoon 343. In that case, since there was no
statutory provision for the registration of trade marks in Burma, no action
could be brought for infringement of a trade mark, but the Courts can
entertain passing off suits.

4.18 Learned counsel has next relied upon a decision in the case of Anglo
Indian Drug and Chemical Co. v. Swastik Oil Mills Co. Ltd., A.I.R. 1935 Bombay
101, wherein it has been held that in actions for infringement of trade marks,
the plaintiff has to prove that his goods are known to the public by some
distinct name, mark, badge, get up or appearance and that the defendant's use
or imitation of the same is likely to mislead the public into a belief that
the defendant's goods are those of the plaintiff. It was further held that the
actual length of time during which a trade mark is used or employed is not
important element for consideration and that it must have been used or
employed long enough to render it probable that a reputation in the market has
been acquired.

4.19 Learned counsel has next relied upon a decision in the case of Nestle's
Products Ltd. and others v. M/s.Milkmade Corporation and another, A.I.R. 1974
Delhi 40, wherein it has been held that if the essential features of the trade
mark of the plaintiff have been adopted by the defendant, the fact that the
get up, packing and other writing or marks on the goods or on the packets in
which he offers his goods for sale show marked differences, or indicate
clearly a trade origin different from that of the registered proprietor of the
mark would be immaterial in an action for infringement; whereas, in the case
of passing off the defendant may escape liability if he can show that the
added matter is sufficient to distinguish his goods from those of the
plaintiff.

5\. Mr. Kamal B Trivedi learned Senior Advocate appearing with Mr. Y J Trivedi
and Mr. Tejas Barot learned advocates for the respondents-plaintiffs has
submitted that the contention raised by the appellants-defendants that the
respondents-plaintiffs are using the mark NIRMA only in respect of bars, cakes
and powders is wholly incorrect, since the said mark is also being used by the
respondents for products like salts, SSPs, watches, stationery, educational
services, scales etc.. He has, therefore, submitted that the contention raised
by the appellants that the mark NIRMA is not used by the respondents for any
other product except bars, cakes or powders is absolutely false and incorrect.

5.1 Learned counsel has submitted that so long as the mark NIRMA of the
respondents is subsisting on the register, the appellants or any other person
cannot be permitted to trade under the same name, since an action for passing
off is maintainable in law, even in cases where the goods being traded under
deceptively and / or phonetically similar mark are different in character with
different trade channels and different prices. Learned counsel has submitted
that registration of a mark is not to be made qua particular goods falling
under a class in which registration is sought.

5.2 He has submitted that registration is conferred in respect of a class of
goods and not in respect of particular goods, and therefore, the contention
raised by the appellants that though the respondents have obtained
registration of trade mark NIRMA in respect of the goods included in Class 7
in the year 1984, as proposed to be used, but not at all used in respect of
any of the goods and that the suit of the respondents-plaintiffs for
infringement of trade mark is not tenable, is wholly misconceived. Learned
counsel has submitted that so long as the mark NIMA of the respondents-
plaintiffs was concerned, the suit is for 'passing off' and not for
'infringement' as submitted by the appellants-defendants.

5.3 Learned counsel has further submitted that if such a person is aggrieved
by the existence of such a mark on the register, the appropriate remedy
available to him was to initiate rectification proceedings under Section 46
read with Section 45 of the said Act before the appropriate authority and not
to infringe the mark which is already being used by a person on the ground
that the said mark was registered in respect of a particular class of goods
and that the person was not using the said mark in respect of the said class
of goods. Learned counsel has, therefore, submitted that the trial Court has
rightly granted injunction in favour of the respondents since the goods of the
appellants and the respondents fall under different classes, different trade
channels and even the prices of the goods were also different and the
defendants had used the mark NIMA which is registered in the name of the
plaintiffs.

5.4 Learned counsel has submitted that in an action of passing off the state
of mind of the public at large is to be taken into consideration in arriving
at a conclusion as to whether the mark is confusing, instead of looking to the
external objective test of making comparison of the activities of the parties.
He has submitted that in an action of passing off, there is no need to show or
prove prejudice or actual damage and that a probability of confusion is
sufficient. He has submitted that the fact that the goods of the parties are
different, their trade channels are different and that their prices are also
different are wholly immaterial since a probability of confusion is sufficient
to establish an action of passing off.

5.5 Learned counsel has further submitted that the Court has to visualize a
customer or a tradesman who may happen to have dealings with the Company
complaining or who may happen to want to purchase the goods manufactured by
such Company and has to decide whether such a customer or tradesman would get
confused by the said mark or not. He has submitted that for finding out
phonetic similarity between two trade marks in an action of passing off, the
test to be applied is the test of an average person with imperfect
recollection and not of a man of extraordinary memory who remembers the
spelling of the name of the mark of each Company or a person who jots down
meticulously and methodically the names of Companies in his diary and
contemplates whether he is dealing with one Company or the other. He has,
therefore, submitted that since the defendants had adopted a mark similar to
the plaintiffs, the trial Court was justified in granting injunction.

5.6 Learned counsel has submitted that the mark NIMA was got registered on
08.10.1982 in respect of Class 3 and on 20.12.2004, with effect from
15.10.1998, in respect of Class 7. On coming to know on 22.03.1998, that the
appellants had adopted the mark NIMA and that they were manufacturing and
marketing flour mills by using the said mark NIMA, Notices were issued to the
appellants to stop the use of the said mark. However, no heed was paid by the
appellants-defendants to the requests made by the respondents-plaintiffs. He
has, therefore, submitted that the plea of the defendants that there was a
delay in bringing action in the Court, after the commencement of its business,
cannot have any bearing in the matter for grant of injunction since the
defendants were put to notice at the earliest available opportunity.

5.7 Mr. Trivedi learned counsel has, therefore, submitted that the conclusion
of the trial Court is not only based on Associated trade mark and Defensive
trade mark. Even otherwise, under the statute the plaintiffs-respondents have
a right to restrain any person/s from using the said words "NIRMA" and "NIMA".

6\. Learned counsel has further submitted that the jurisdiction of the
appellate Court is very limited in that it cannot seek to reach a conclusion
different from the one reached by the trial Court, if the said conclusion has
been arrived in a reasonable manner.

6.1 Learned counsel appearing for the respondents-plaintiffs has placed
reliance on the difference between the provisions of Sections 16 & 47 of the
said Act. The said Sections 16 & 47 read as under;

"Section 16 : Registration of trade marks as associated trade marks.

(1) Where a trade mark which is registered, or is the subject of an
application for registration, in respect of any goods is identical with
another trade mark which is registered, or is the subject of an application
for registration, in the name of the same proprietor in respect of the same
goods or description of goods or so nearly resembles it as to be likely to
deceive or cause confusion if used by a person other than the proprietor, the
Registrar may, at any time, require that the trade marks shall be entered on
the register as associated trade marks.

(2) Where a trade mark and any part thereof are, in accordance with the
provisions of sub-section (1) of Section 15, registered as separate trade
marks in the name of the same proprietor, they shall be deemed to be, and
shall be registered as, associated tarde marks.

(3) All trade marks registered in accordance with the provisions of sub-
section (3) of Section 15 as a series in one registration shall be deemed to
be, and shall be registered as, associated trade marks.

(4) On application made in the prescribed manner by the registered proprietor
of two or more trade marks registered as associated trade marks, the Registrar
may dissolve the association as respects any of them if he is satisfied that
there would be no likelihood of deception or confusion being caused if that
trade mark were used by any other person in relation to any of the goods in
respect of which it is registered, and may amend the register accordingly.
Section 47 : Defensive registration of well-known trade marks:-

(1) Where a trade mark consisting of any invented word has become so well
known as respects any goods in relation to which it is registered and has been
used, that the use thereof in relation to other goods would be likely to be
taken as indicating a connection in the course of trade between those goods
and a person entitled to use the trade mark in relation to the first mentioned
goods, then, notwithstanding that the proprietor registered in respect of the
first mentioned goods does not use or purpose to use the trade mark in
relation to those other goods does not use or propose to use the trade mark in
relation to those other goods and notwithstanding anything in Section 48, the
trade mark may, on application in the prescribed manner by such proprietor, be
registered in his name in respect of those other goods as a defensive trade
mark, and while so registered, shall not be liable to be taken off the
register in respect of those goods under the said Section.

(2) The registered proprietor of trade mark may apply for the registration
thereof in respect of any goods as a defensive trade mark notwithstanding that
it is already registered in his name in respect of those goods otherwise than
a defensive trade mark, or may apply for the registration thereof, in respect
of any goods otherwise than as a defensive trade mark notwithstanding that it
is already registered in his name in respect of those goods as defensive trade
mark, in lieu in each case of the existing registration.

(3) A trade mark registered a defensive trade mark and that trade mark as
otherwise registered in the name of the same proprietor shall, notwithstanding
that the respective registrations are in respect of different goods, be deemed
to be and shall be registered as associated trade marks.

(4) On application made in the prescribed manner to a High Court or to the
Registrar, by any person, aggrieved, the registrations of a trade mark as a
defensive trade mark may be cancelled on the ground that the requirements of
sub-section (1) are no longer satisfied in respect of any goods in relation to
which the trade mark is registered in the name of the same proprietor
otherwise than as a defensive trade mark, or may be cancelled as respects any
goods in relation to which it is registered as a defensive trade mark on the
ground that there is no longer any likelihood that the use of the trade mark
in relation to those goods, would be taken as giving the indication mentioned
in sub-section (1).

(5) The Registrar may at any time cancelled the registration as a defensive
trade mark of a trade mark of which there is no longer any registration in the
name of the same proprietor otherwise than as a defensive trade mark.

(6) Except as otherwise expressly provided in this Section, the provisions of
this Act shall apply in respect of the registration of trade marks as
defensive trade marks and of trade marks so registered as they apply in other
cases."

6.2 He has, therefore, submitted that on comparing the said two Sections,
there is clear reason to believe that respondents-plaintiffs have got
registration of mark NIRMA in all classes of goods as a defensive trade mark
and NIMA as an associated trade mark, even though the two registrations were
in respect of different goods. Learned counsel has, therefore, submitted that
prima facie, it is well established that proprietary rights with regard to the
above referred two trade marks were vested with the plaintiffs and the trial
Court has rightly granted injunction in their favour. In support of his
contentions, learned counsel has placed reliance upon the various decisions of
the Apex Court and various other High Courts.

7\. Learned counsel appearing for the respondents-plaintiffs has relied upon
the decision of the Bombay High Court in the case of Mahendra & Mahendra Paper
Mills Ltd. v. Mahindra & Mahindra Ltd., [A.I.R. 2000 S.C. 117, 2001 (2) CTMR
597 (SC)], and more particularly, on Paragraphs 7, 8, 18 & 23\. In that case,
the plaintiff Company was using the name "Mahindra" and "Mahindra & Mahindra"
in its business concern since five decades and the defendant Company which was
yet to commence its business used the name "Mahendra & Mahendra" as its
corporate name. The following observations made in Para 23 of the decision are
relevant;

"... The name has acquired a distinctiveness and a secondary meaning in the
business or trade circles. People have come to associate the name "Mahindra"
with a certain standard of goods and services. Any attempt by another person
to use the name in business and trade circles is likely to and in probability
will create an impression of a connection with the plaintiffs' group of
companies. Such user may also effect the plaintiff prejudicially in its
business and trading activities."

7.1 Another decision relied upon by the learned counsel was rendered in a
decision of the Karnataka High Court in the case of Satyam Infoway Ltd. v.
Sifynet Solutions (P) Ltd., (2004) 6 S.C.C. 145, and, more particularly, on
the observations made in Paragraphs 1, 3 & 12 to 15. In that case, three
elements of passing off action were suggested by the Apex Court in order to
establish an action of "passing off". (a) The first element in an action for
passing off, as the phrase "passing off" itself suggests, is to restrain the
defendant from passing off its goods or services to the public as that of the
plaintiff's. It is an action not only to preserve the reputation of the
plaintiff but also to safeguard the public. The defendant must have sold its
goods or offered its services in a manner which has deceived or would be
likely to deceive the public into thinking that the defendant's goods or
services are the plaintiffs. (b) The second element that must be established
by the plaintiff is misrepresentation by the defendant to the public and what
has to be established is the likelihood of confusion in the minds of the
public that the goods or services offered by the defendant are the goods or
the services of the plaintiff. In assessing the likelihood of such confusion
the Courts must allow for the "imperfect recollection of a person of ordinary
memory". (c) The third element of a passing off action is loss or the
likelihood of it.

7.1.1. Learned counsel has submitted that in the present case, the aforesaid
three elements for a passing off action are existing, and therefore, the trial
Court has rightly granted injunction in favour of the respondents.

7.2 Learned counsel has next relied upon the decision of the Delhi High Court
in the case of M/s. Jugmug Electric & Radio Co. v. M/s. Telerad Pvt. Ltd.,
A.I.R. 1977 Delhi 152. In that case, the appellant / Company, manufacturers of
electrical goods and appliances were using trade mark "Telerad" to sell their
goods. The said "Telerad" trade mark was registered by the respondent Company
for their radio sets. It was held that the respondent who had coined the word,
"Telerad" and extensively used it and acquired reputation for his products,
was entitled to protect his trade name against its unauthorized use. It was
further held that the use of the expression "Telerad" by the appellant was
clearly not bona fide and no appreciable evidence had been shown by the
appellant for use of the respondent's registered trade mark in relation to his
goods, except with the intention to cause confusion and with an obvious
intention to pass off their goods as originating from the respondent's
manufacture or at least as of a collaborator of respondent. 7.3 Another
decision relied upon by learned counsel for the respondents is in the case of
Ellora Industries v. Banarasi Dass, A.I.R. 1980 Delhi 254, and, more
particularly, on Paragraphs 5, 12 & 13 of the said decision. The following
observations made in Para 12 of the decision are relevant;

"Passing Off : The purpose of this tort is to protect commercial goodwill; to
ensure that people's business reputations are not exploited. Since business
"goodwill" is an asset, and therefore species of property the law protects it
against encroachment as such. The tort is based on economic policy, the need
to encourage enterprise and to ensure commercial stability. It secures a
reasonable area of monopoly to traders. It is thus complimentary to trade mark
law which is founded upon statute rather than common law."

7.4 Next learned counsel has relied upon the decision in the case of Surjit
Singh v. M/s. Alembic Glass Industries Ltd., A.I.R. 1987 Delhi 319, and, more
particularly, on Paragraphs 5 & 6\. In that case, the petitioner applied for
registration of trade mark consisting of the word "YERA" in respect of
perfumery and cosmetics. The opponent Company objected to the same. It was
held that the word "YERA" was being copied by the petitioner in order to take
advantage of the reputation acquired by the trade mark. Perfumery and
cosmetics manufactured by the petitioner are sold in bottles and glass
containers and if the trade mark "YERA" appears on those bottles and glass
containers, there is likelihood that a common man who would go to buy these
perfumery and cosmetics would be led to believe that these goods were
manufactured by the opponent company. The petitioner was, therefore, not
entitled to registration under S.11(a) of the said Act.

7.5 Next decision relied upon by the learned counsel for the respondent is in
the case of Daimler Benz Aktiegesellschaft v. Hybo Hindustan, A.I.R. 1994
Delhi 239, and, more particularly, on paragraphs 15 to 18. In that case,
petitioners used the word "Benz" for a very high priced and extremely well
engineered car and the defendant used the said name to undergarments. It was
held therein that if despite legal notice, any one, big or small, continues to
carry the illegitimate use of a significant world wide renowned name / mark,
there cannot be any reason for not stopping the use of a world reputed name
and that none should be continued to be allowed to use a world famed name to
goods which have no connection with the type of goods which have generated the
world wide reputation.

7.6 Learned counsel has next relied upon the decision of the Bombay High Court
in the case of Sunder Parmanand Lalwani v. Caltex (India) Ltd., A.I.R. 1969
Bombay 24, and, more particularly, on Paragraphs 49, 50 & 56\. In that case
the appellant Company had applied to use the mark "Caltex" for their watches
which was already being used by the respondent Company. The Court held that a
large number of persons, if they saw or heard about the mark "Caltex" in
connection with the applicant's watches, would be led to think that the
watches were in some way connected with the opponents who were dealing in
petrol and various oil products with the Caltex mark, or they would at least
wonder whether they were in any way connected with the opponents'. Persons
seeing the mark attached to watches, which was a new class of goods, would
assume, or were most likely to assume that they originated from the opponents.
If, therefore, the application for registration was granted and the mark was
used in connection with the watches in respect of which the application was
made, it was likely to cause deception and confusion.

7.7 Learned counsel has next relied upon a decision in the case of Kirloskar
Diesel Recon Pvt. Ltd. v. Kirloskar Proprietory Ltd., A.I.R. 1996 Bombay 149,
and, more particularly, on Paragraphs 13 & 14\. The following observations
made in Para 14 are relevant;

"14. In the case of trading name which has become almost a household word and
under which trading name a variety of activities are undertaken, a passing off
can successfully lie if the defendant has adopted identical or similar trading
name and even when the defendant does not carry on similar activity. Even if
the defendant's activities in such circumstances, are remote, the same are
likely to be presumed a possible extension of plaintiff's business or
activities."

7.7.1 Learned counsel has, therefore, contented that the mark of the
plaintiffs has achieved such a reputation in the market that the action of the
defendants in the present case would lead to presume a possible extension of
the plaintiff's business or activities.

7.8 Learned counsel has relied upon a decision in the case of Essel Packaging
Ltd. v. Essel Tea Exports Ltd., A.I.R. 1998 Bombay 102, wherein it has been
held that with the passage of time the law on requirement of common field of
activity in a passing of action has radically undergone a change and there is
no requirement for a common field of activity to find a claim in passing off
because the real question in each of such cases is whether there is, as a
result of misrepresentation, a real likelihood of confusion or deception of
the public and consequent damage to the plaintiffs is likely to be caused and
if that is the test, then the focus is shifted from the external objective
test of making comparison of activities of parties to the state of mind of
public in deciding whether it will be confused.

7.9 Learned counsel has next relied upon the decision of the Allahabad High
Court rendered in the case of Bata India Ltd. v. Pyarelal & Co., A.I.R. 1985
Allahabad 242 [Relevant Paragraphs on pages 243, 250 & 252]. In that case, the
plaintiff "BATA" Company filed a suit for temporary injunction against the
defendants restraining them from using the mark "BATAFOAM" or otherwise
associating the name of "BATA" in any manner or form etc.. The Court held that
the plaintiffs had cause of action for instituting the proceedings for passing
off. The plaintiff had made out a case for issuance of an interim order of
injunction in respect of the user of the name "BATA" to any of their products
by the defendants. The name "BATA" was well known in the market and the user
of such name was likely to cause not only deception in the mind of ordinary
customer but could also cause injury to the plaintiff company and the fact
that the plaintiff was not producing foam was not enough to hold that there
could be no passing off action in respect of the user of the name "BATA" to
the products marketed by the defendants.

7.10 Learned counsel has placed reliance on the decision in the case of Honda
Motors Co. Ltd. v. Charanjit Singh and Ors., 2003 (26) P.T.C. 1 (Delhi). In
that case, the defendants used the mark "HONDA" for their product "Pressure
Cooker". It was held that the plaintiff's business was of international
character, and therefore, the reputation and good will attached to its trade
mark HONDA was also of international repute. Its use by the defendants for a
product like pressure cooker, to acquire the benefit of its goodwill and
reputation so as to create deception for the public who are likely to buy
defendant's product believing the same as coming from the house of HONDA or
associated with the plaintiff in some manner would dilute the goodwill and
reputation of the plaintiff and the wrong committed by the defendants would
certainly be an actionable wrong and the plaintiff was within its right to ask
for restraint against the defendants from using its mark HONDA for their
products.

7.11 Learned counsel has next relied upon the decision delivered by the
Intellectual Property Appellate Board, Chennai in the case S. K. Patel v.
Deputy Registrar of Trade Marks and Ors., 2004 (29) PTC 634 (IPAB), wherein it
has been held that where a registered trade mark has got the reputation and
goodwill, such trade marks cannot be permitted to be used by another person as
the same would cause confusion in the mind of the general public, that the
goods being manufactured with the identical trade mark has some connection
with the registered proprietor of that trade mark. Such confusion cannot be
totally ruled out. Accordingly, the order of the Registrar of Trade Marks was
quashed and set aside.

7.12 Learned counsel has next relied upon the decision of the Madras High
Court in the case of Caterpillar Inc. U.S.A. v. Jorange and Anr., [1998 (1)
Arb. L.R. 670, CTMR 1998 (1) 670, 1998 (18) PTC 31], and, more particularly,
on Paragraph 22. It reads as under;

"22. In the normal course, in appeals, the discretionary orders passed in the
matter of granting or refusing injunction are not interfered with. But in the
case on hand, the exercise of discretion by the learned single Judge in
dismissing the application filed by the plaintiff for grant of injunction was
the result of non-application of the settled principles of law governing
exercise of such discretion. In our view, the plaintiff has made out a prima
facie case having regard to the trans-border reputation established by it,
undoubtedly with regard to heavy duty vehicles all over the world, and in
several countries even with regard to garments in the trade mark of
"CATERPILLAR" and "CAT"."

7.13 Learned counsel has next relied upon a decision of the Bombay High Court
in the case of Poddar Tyres Ltd. v, Bedrock Sales Corporation Ltd., A.I.R.
1993 Bombay 237, wherein it has been held that any trader who exclusively
sells goods bearing registered trade mark belonging to another person, has no
right to adopt trade name which would include the said trade mark; and, such
adoption would amount to both infringement and passing off action prima facie.
It has been further held that the pendency of a rectification application does
not prevent the registered proprietors of the trade mark from exercising
statutory rights under the Act or from seeking interim relief based thereon.

7.14 The Apex Court in the cases of Vishnudas v. Vazir Sultan, [A.I.R. 1996
S.C. pg.2275, 1997 (4) S.C.C. pg.201] and Tube Investments of India Ltd. v.
Trade Industries, Rajasthan, (1997) 6 S.C.C. pg.35 has expressed the same
view.

7.15 The Delhi High Court in the case of the plaintiff-Trust in Shantaben
Karsanbhai Patel and Ors. v. S.C.Jain and Anr., 2001 (2) CTMR pg.47 (Delhi),
after relying on the decision in the case of Sunder Permanand Lalwani's
(supra), has laid down in Para 8 & 10 of the decision as under;

"8. From the aforesaid unrebutted testimony of the plaintiffs it is amply
proved that the plaintiffs are the registered owner of the trade mark NIRMA in
respect of various goods including coffee, tea and other related goods. The
plaintiffs have also been able to demonstrate that NIRMA is their invented
word. It has acquired great reputation. The plaintiffs have been spending huge
amount on the advertisement in relation to the trade mark NIRMA. Sales in
relation to their various goods i.e., soap and detergent cakes etc. are
mounting every year by leaps and bounds. The plaintiffs are extending their
company and they have a scheme to enter into cognate and allied goods of the
consumer products of all types like tea, rice, coffee, biscuits, cake,
agarbatties and pharmaceutical goods etc. Since the plaintiffs are the
registered trade mark owner of NIRMA in relation to coffee, tea as well, use
by the defendants of the trade mark NIRMA TIGER TEA in respect of their
product is clear infringement of the plaintiff's trade mark under Sections 28
and 29 of the Trade and Merchandise Marks Act..."

"10. The plaintiffs are therefore entitled to the reliefs prayed in the suit.
A decree of permanent injunction is accordingly passed restraining the
defendants, their servants, agents, stockists and all other persons on their
behalf from using or infringing the registered trade mark of the plaintiffs -
NIRMA under No. 422815-B either in respect of tea or other cognate or allied
goods. They are also restrained from passing off and enabling others to pass
off their goods as the goods of the plaintiffs. The defendants are directed to
deliver the offending trade mark, its plates, blocks, stationery and
advertising and printing material, if any in their possession, bearing trade
mark NIRMA for the purpose of distribution or obliteration. Since the
defendants have not been using the trade mark NIRMA in respect of tea, since
11th November, 1992 in view of the restraining order passed in the suit, the
decree for rendition of accounts is passed for a period of three years from
the date of filing of the suit. Since the suit was filed on 5th November,
1992, the decree for rendition of account is passed for the period w.e.f. 6th
November, 1989 till 11th November, 1992 when the interim injunction was
passed. The plaintiff shall also be entitled to costs. Decree sheet be
prepared accordingly."

7.16 Similar view has been adopted by the Court in Polson Ltd. v. Polson Dairy
Ltd., 1996 PTC (16) pg.709 and in a decision of the Chancery Division in the
case of Second Sight Ltd. v. Novell UK Ltd. and Novell INC., [1995] R.P.C.
pg.423.

7.17 Learned counsel has next relied upon a decision in the case of Ruston &
Hornby Ltd., A.I.R. 1970 S.C. 1649, wherein it has been held that in an action
for infringement where the defendant's trade mark is identical with the
plaintiff's mark, the Court may not enquire whether the infringement is such
as is likely to deceive or cause confusion. But where the alleged infringement
consists of using not the exact mark on the Register, but something similar to
it, the test of infringement is the same as in an action for passing off. In
other words, the test as to likelihood of confusion or deception arising from
similarity of marks is the same both in infringement and passing-off actions.

7.18 The Apex Court in the case of Laxmikant V. Patel v. Chetanbhat Shah and
another, A.I.R. 2002 S.C. page 275 had adopted the same view.

7.19 Learned counsel has next relied upon a decision in the case of Simatul
Chemical Industries Pvt. Ltd. v. Cibatul, A.I.R. 1978 Guj pg.216, wherein it
has been held that where no trade marks are used for the products and a
manufacturer complaints that the likely customer of his goods is apt to be
confused by the similarity between the name of his Company and the name of
some other Company which has subsequently started production, though the Court
has to apply the test whether such hypothetical consumer would be confused in
selecting the goods of rival Companies by the similarities in their names, the
Court has ultimately to form its own opinion on the matter and the test to be
applied is the test of an average person with imperfect recollection.

7.20 Learned counsel for the plaintiffs has next relied upon a decision of the
Gujarat High Court in the case of Cadila Healthcare Ltd. v. Cadila
Pharmaceuticals Ltd., JT 2001 (4) S.C. 243, wherein the Apex Court had laid
down certain factors in order to decide an action of passing off on the basis
of unregistered trade mark. It has held that factors like the nature of the
marks i.e. whether the marks are word marks or label marks, the degree of
resembleness between the marks phonetically similar and hence similar in idea,
the nature of the goods in respect of which they are used as trade marks, the
similarity in the nature, character and performance of the goods of the rival
traders, the class of purchasers who are likely to buy the goods bearing the
marks they require, the mode of purchasing the goods or placing orders for the
goods and the any other surrounding circumstances which may be relevant in the
extent of dissimilarity between the competing marks are to be considered.

7.21 Learned counsel has next relied upon a decision in the case of Ciba Ltd.
v. M. Ramalingam, A.I.R. 1958 Bombay 56, wherein the Court has dealt with the
question of delay. It has been held therein that delay cannot be a ground for
refusing to exercise discretion by the trial Court in the matter of granting
temporary injunction and the Court must protect the public interest
irrespective of what hardship or inconvenience it may cause to a particular
party whose trade mark is likely to deceive or cause confusion.

7.22 Similar view has been adopted by the Apex Court in the case of Laxmikant
Patel v. Chetanbhai Shah, A.I.R. 2001 S.C.W. 4989, in Rupa & Co. Ltd. v. Dawn
Mills Co. Ltd., A.I.R. 1998 Gujarat 247, in Midas Hygiene Industries P. Ltd.
v. Sudhir Bhatia, [2004 (3) SCC 90, 2004 (28) PTC 121 and by the Madras High
Court in the case of J.Zeenath Bivi v. M. Khader Ibrahim and Ors., CTMR 2004
(1) 162.

7.23 Learned counsel appearing for the respondents has next relied upon a
decision of the Delhi High Court in the case of N.R. Dongre v. Whirlpool
Corpn., 1996 PTC (16) 583, wherein it has been held that where the trial Court
has granted interlocutory injunction in favour of the plaintiff, on the basis
of conclusions arrived at with the help of the material on record, the
appellate Court cannot re-assess the material on record and reach a different
conclusion, if the conclusion reached by the trial Court is reasonably
possible.

7.24 Learned counsel has next relied upon a decision of the Bombay High Court
in the case of Hindustan Embroidery Mills Pvt. Ltd. v. K. Ravindra & Co., 1967
(76) B.L.R. 146, wherein the test for determing whether a trade mark claimed
by a person, other than the manufacturer of the goods, is registrable under
the Trade and Merchandise Marks Act or not was laid down. It was held therein
that if any essential feature of a plaintiff's registered trade mark is
reproduced or appears in a mark used by the defendant, in respect of which the
plaintiff's application for its registration is pending, the defendant could
be restrained from using the same.

7.25 In a decision of the Kerala High Court in the case of National Garments,
Kaloor, Cochin v. National Apparels, Ernakulam, Cochin, A.I.R. 1990 Kerala
pg.119, it was held that while considering an application for prohibitory
injunction in an action for passing off, the principle applicable for granting
interlocutory injunction is slightly different from the principle applicable
in ordinary cases. For a temporary order in an action for passing off, the
plaintiff need not in general show a strong prima facie case. However, the
prima facie case that is required to be shown must be something more than a
case that will avoid the action being struck out as frivolous or vexatious.
Generally stated "even if the chance of success at the trial are only 20 per
cent" the interim relief sought for is required to be granted. There is
another reason for the grant of the interlocutory injunction under such
circumstances. Such an order would stop the infringement without delay. Not
only that from experience it is clear that a successful motion for
interlocutory injunction "normally puts an end to the litigation and the
infringement, with a great saving in expense compared with a full trial" and
that is the reason why the law insists upon a hearing of such a motion in
every case.

7.26 Similar view has been adopted in a decision of this Court in the case of
Cadila Pharmaceuiticals v. Torrent Pharmaceuticals rendered in Appeal from
Order No. 275 of 1998 dated 11/06/1996.

7.27 Mr. Kamal B Trivedi learned counsel appearing for the respondents-
plaintiffs has, therefore, submitted that the decisions relied upon by Mr. P M
Thakkar learned counsel appearing for the appellants-defendants shall not
apply to the case on hand, inasmuch as an action of passing off is
maintainable in law, even in cases where goods being traded under deceptively
and / or phonetically similar mark were different in character with different
trade channels and different prices, so long as the mark in question was
subsisting on the Register. He has submitted that in an action of passing off,
there is no need to show or prove prejudice or actual damage and that a
probability of confusion in the mind of the general public was sufficient. He
has submitted that the appropriate remedy available to the appellants-
defendants was to initiate rectification proceedings under Section 46 read
with Section 45 of the said Act before the appropriate authority and not to
infringe a mark which is already being used by a person. He has, therefore,
submitted that the trial Court has rightly granted injunction in favour of the
plaintiffs.

8\. Mr. P M Thakkar learned counsel appearing for the appellants-defendants
has submitted that the trial Court has committed grave error by granting
injunction in favour of the respondents-plaintiffs since the appellants-
defendants are using the mark NIMA from 12.02.1997 onwards with respect to
flour mills, whereas the respondents-plaintiffs have used either the mark
NIRMA or NIMA for the said product at all. He has submitted that since the
mark NIMA is not used as a trade mark with respect to any of the goods of the
respondents-plaintiffs, either in Class 3 or Class 7, the findings recorded by
the trial Court as regards Associated and Defensive trade marks are illusory.
He has submitted that the suit filed by the plaintiffs is not tenable in law
since they had obtained registration of the mark NIRMA, which is included in
Class 7, in the year 1984, but had not till today used the said mark in
respect of the said goods. He has, therefore, submitted that the trial Court
has committed a serious error by granting injunction in favour of the
plaintiffs.

8.1 Mr. Thakkar learned counsel appearing for the appellants-defendants has,
therefore, submitted that the learned trial Judge has committed a serious
error in granting injunction in favour of the respondents-plaintiffs, since
their didn't exist even a remotest possibility of deception or confusion or
passing off with that of the goods of the plaintiffs, as has been held in
Cadila Health Care's case (supra). Learned counsel has submitted that since
the said mark NIMA has been used by the defendants in respect of "flour
mills", there is no likelihood of passing off, as the rivalry is between
different types of products and the features of the respective trading and
marketing of the products were also vastly different [Alkem Laboratories Pvt.
Ltd.'s case] & [Nestle's Product Ltd.'s case] (supra). Learned counsel has
submitted that since the mark NIMA was registered only in respect of goods
included in Class 3, the use of the said registered mark by any person in any
manner or in any circumstances, not covered by the scope of registration, does
not constitute infringement [Relaxo Rubber Limited] (supra). Learned counsel
has further submitted that the marks of the plaintiffs should not be permitted
to enjoy monopoly in respect of all the articles which may come under a broad
classification, since it would preclude the other traders or manufacturers to
get registration of separate and distinct goods, like that of the defendants,
which may also be grouped under the said broad classification [Vishnudas
Trading's case] & [Rustom Ali Molla's case] (supra). Learned counsel has
submitted that factors like the nature of the mark, the class of customers,
the extent of reputation etc. are required to be taken into consideration
before recording a conclusion as to whether there is a likelihood of deception
or confusion by use of the said mark [Soni Kabushiki Kaisha's case] & [Corn
Products Refining Co.'s case] (supra). Learned counsel has, therefore,
submitted that the exercise of discretion in favour of the plaintiffs is
required to be quashed and set aside.

9\. I have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the documents
placed on record. It is required to be noted that the present appeal from
order is directed against the interlocutory order in so far as injunction was
granted by the trial Court. At this stage, it will not be appropriate to
consider the matter on merits. The only limited question which requires
consideration by this Court is whether the trial Court has committed any error
in exercising its discretionary power while deciding the interim application
and whether the principles for deciding notice of motion applications i.e.,
the existence of a prima facie case, balance of convenience and irreparable
loss were followed or not.

9.1 On considering the evidence on record and the decisions relied upon by
both the sides it is not in dispute that the mark NIMA was registered in the
year 1982 and the products with the said mark were marketed in the year
1998-1999. Since the said mark was registered, any resemblance to the said
mark shall amount to infringement of the right given by registration and may
attract an action of passing off. Once the trade mark is registered, legal
protection is available to the proprietor of such registered trade mark and
the user of the mark is not the conditional requirement of such protection.

9.2 As regards the contention raised by the learned counsel for the appellants
to the effect that the suit of the respondents-plaintiffs for passing off is
to be considered in the facts of the present case where the respondents-
plaintiffs, though have got registration of the trade mark NIRMA in respect of
the goods included in Class 7, but have not till today used the said mark in
any of the goods, it is required to be noted that registration of a mark is
not to be made qua particular goods falling under a Class in which
registration is sought. Registration is conferred in respect of a Class of
goods and not in respect of particular goods. In an action of passing off, it
is immaterial whether the goods of the parties are different, their trade
channels are different or that the prices are different. As per the settled
legal position, with the passage of time, law on the requirement of common
field of activity in a passing off action has radically changed. The focus has
now shifted to the state of mind of the public at large in deciding as to
whether the said mark will be confusing or deceptive. The aggrieved party has
not to show or prove any prejudice or actual damage and a probability of
confusion in the mind of the public at large is sufficient to prove an action
of passing off. Therefore, the trial Court was justified in granting
injunction in favour of the plaintiffs though the trade channels, prices etc
of the goods in question were different.

9.3 On perusal of the documentary evidence on record, it appears that the
marks of the plaintiffs were registered and renewed from time to time, bearing
Registration No. 422839 for NIRMA and No. 396185 for NIMA. It is undisputed
that the plaintiff's trade mark NIRMA is registered in all Classes of goods
and the trade mark NIMA is registered in Class 3 of goods. Therefore, prima
facie, it is established that proprietary rights with respect to the above
referred two marks i.e. NIRMA and NIMA, vested with the plaintiffs.

9.4 It is pertinent to note that non-user of a registered trade mark can be a
ground for moving a rectification application before the appropriate
authority. However, the same would not entitle the defendants, in the present
case, to start infringing the mark of the plaintiffs, when the said mark is
subsisting on the register. If the appellants are aggrieved by the presence of
a mark on the register, the only course available to them, is to get the said
mark scored off of the register. Without the prior permission of the
proprietor of the registered trade mark, no one can use and adopt the said
mark which is deceptively similar to the said registered mark. Therefore, the
intention of the appellants in adopting the mark NIMA, can under no
circumstances, be said to be bonafide or genuine, inasmuch as the application
for registration of the said mark was moved by the appellants, only after the
plaintiffs had served a cease and desist notice followed by attempts to
amicably solve the dispute.

9.5 As regards the contention raised with respect to delay is concerned, it is
required to be noted that the mark NIMA was got registered on 08.10.1982 in
respect of Class 3 and on 20.12.2004, with effect from 15.10.1998, in respect
of Class 7. On coming to know on 22.03.1998, that the appellants had adopted
the mark NIMA and that they were manufacturing and marketing flour mills by
using the said mark NIMA, Notices were issued to the appellants to stop the
use of the said mark. However, no heed was paid by the appellants-defendants
to the said requests made by the respondents-plaintiffs. He has, therefore,
submitted that the plea of the defendants that there was a delay in bringing
action in the Court, after commencement of its business, cannot have any
bearing in the matter for grant of injunction, since the defendants were put
to notice at the earliest available opportunity. Moreover, the point of delay
as raised by the defendants is not acceptable in view of the decision of the
Apex Court in the case of Rupa & Co. v. Dawn Mills Co. Ltd. (supra), wherein
it has been held that delay cannot be a ground for refusing or grant of
injunction.

10.1 Before concluding the judgment, it is required to be noted that the
jurisdiction of the appellate Court is very limited. This has been asserted in
the decision, 1942 Appeal Cases page 130. At page 138 of the said decision it
is stated as under:

"... The appellate tribunal is not at liberty merely to substitute its own
exercise of discretion for the discretion already exercised by the judge. In
other words, appellate authorities ought not to reverse the order merely
because they would themselves have exercised the original discretion, had it
attached to them, in a different way. But if the appellate tribunal reaches
the clear conclusion that there has been a wrongful exercise of discretion in
that no weight, or no sufficient weight, has been given to relevant
considerations such as those urged before us by the appellant, then the
reversal of the order on appeal may be justified. This matter was elaborately
discussed in the decision of this House in Evans Vs. Bartlam (2), where the
proposition was stated by my noble and learned friend, Lord Wright, as follows
(3): "It is clear that the Court of Appeal should not interfere with the
discretion of a judge acting within his jurisdiction unless the court is
clearly satisfied that he was wrong. But the court is not entitled simply to
say that if the judge had jurisdiction and had all the facts before him, the
Court of Appeal cannot review his order unless he is shown to have applied a
wrong principle. The court must if necessary examine a new the relevant facts
and circumstances in order to exercise a discretion by way of review which may
reverse or vary the order. Otherwise in interlocutory matters the judge might
be regarded as independent of supervision. Yet an interlocutory order of the
judge may often be of decisive importance on the final issue of the case, and
one which requires a careful examination by the Court of Appeal. Thus in
Gardner Vs. Jay (I), Bowen L.J. in discussing the discretion of the judge as
regards mode of trial says: "That discretion, like other judicial discretions,
must be exercised according to common sense and according to justice, and if
there is a miscarriage in the exercise of it, it will be reviewed."

10.2 The above view has been followed by the Apex Court in the case of U. P.
Cooperative Federation Ltd. Vs. Sunder Bros, Delhi, AIR 1967 SC 249 (=1996
Supp SCR 215). Paragraph 8 of the said decision is relevant which reads as
under:

"(8) It is well established that where the discretion vested in the Court
under S.34 of the Indian Arbitration Act has been exercised by the lower court
the appellate court should be slow to interfere with the exercise of that
discretion. In dealing with the matter raised before it at the appellate stage
the appellate court would normally not be justified in interfering with the
exercise of the discretion under appeal solely on the ground that if it had
considered the matter at the trial stage it may have come to a contrary
conclusion. If the discretion has been exercised by the trial court reasonably
and in a judicial manner the fact that the appellate court would have taken a
different view may not justify interference with the trial court's exercise of
discretion. As is often said, it is ordinarily not open to the appellate court
to substitute its own exercise of discretion for that of the trial judge; but
if it appears to the appellate court that in exercising its discretion the
trial court has acted unreasonably or capriciously or has ignored relevant
facts then it would certainly be open to the appellate court to interfere with
the trial court's exercise of jurisdiction."

10.3 Similar view has been reiterated by the Apex Court in cases of The
Printers (Mysore) Pvt. Ltd. v. Pothan Joseph, AIR 1960 SC 1156, 1960(3) S.C.R.
pg.713, Wander Ltd. v. Antox India Pvt. Ltd, 1990 (Supp) SCC 727, N.R.Dongre
v. Whirlpool Corp., 1996 P.T.C.(16) pg.583 and in Laxmikant V.Patel v.
Chetanbhai Shah, AIR 2002 SC 275.

10.4 Mr. Trivedi learned counsel for the respondents-plaintiffs has also
relied upon a decision of this Court in the case of Adani Export Ltd. v.
Marketing Service Incorporated & other, [2005] 8 G.H.J. pg.517, wherein the
principle laid down in the aforesaid decisions was followed by this Court.

11.0 From the above discussions, it is clearly established that the plaintiffs
have statutory rights since they have registration of the trade marks NIRMA
and NIMA. If injunction was not granted in favour of the plaintiffs, it would
have amounted to infringement of the trade mark of the plaintiffs. The trial
Court has rightly concluded that if the defendants were restrained from using
the mark NIMA, it would not cause any irreparable loss to the defendants since
the defendants had entered the market only before a couple of years, whereas
against that, the plaintiffs were doing business with the said marks since the
last two decades. Moreover, the total turnover of the plaintiffs is more than
900 crores and average annual budget for advertisement is about 11-12 crores.
Therefore, if the defendants are not restrained from using the said mark, it
would cause irreparable loss to the business, reputation, goodwill etc. of the
plaintiffs. As said above, if the defendants are aggrieved by the presence of
the said mark on the register, the only course available to them is to prefer
rectification application before the appropriate authority in order to get the
said mark scored off of the register.

12\. In above view of the matter, I am of the opinion that the impugned order
passed by the trial Court is just and proper.

12.1 The trial Court was, therefore, perfectly justified in granting
injunction in favour of the plaintiffs. Under the circumstances, I am of the
opinion that no case is made out by the defendants to cause interference by
this Court in the impugned order. In the result, this appeal from order is
dismissed. Interim relief granted earlier stands vacated. No orders as to
costs.

12.2 However, since the suit in question is of the year 1999, the City Civil
Court, Ahmedabad, is directed to expedite its hearing and to dispose it of
within a period of six months, if it is already ripe for hearing; otherwise,
within a period of two years from the receipt of writ of this order. Office is
directed to send writ of this order forthwith. With the above observations and
directions, this appeal from order stands disposed of. Interim relief granted
earlier stands vacated. No order as to costs.

ORDER IN CIVIL APPLICATIONS

1\. In view of the order passed in the main matter, both the civil
applications shall not survive. They stand disposed of accordingly. 1. At this
stage, Mr. Navin Pahwa learned advocate appearing for Mr. P M Thakkar for the
appellant-defendants requests for time to prefer appeal. Mr. Y J Trivedi
learned advocate appearing for the respondents-plaintiffs has strongly
objected towards the grant of time.

2\. Initially, this Court was not inclined to grant the request made by the
learned advocate for the appellant. However, since Mr. Pahwa learned advocate
has stated that the opportunity to prefer an appeal should not be taken away
from the appellant, I am of the opinion that some time can be granted to the
appellant to prefer the same. 3. In above view of the matter, interim relief
granted earlier is extended upto 23/05/2005.

