

Customs, Excise and Gold Tribunal - Delhi

P And B Pharmaceuticals Pvt. Ltd. vs Collector Of C. Ex. on 17 October, 1994

Equivalent citations: 1995 (76) ELT 616 Tri Del

ORDER K.S. Venkataramani, Member (T)

1\. This appeal is directed against the order dated 26-9-1991 issued on
21-10-1991 passed by the Collector of Central Excise, Ahmedabad. The
appellants herein manufacturer of Patent or Proprietary medicines falling
under Tariff Item 14E prior to 1-3-1986 and thereafter under sub-heading
3003.10 of the Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985. They filed classification and
price lists claiming exemption under Notification No. 175/86 as a Small Scale
Industries Unit. The Department found that they were affixing a brand name and
logo (P/B) which is also the brand name used by one M/s. P & B Laboratories of
Bombay who are themselves not eligible for benefit under Notification No.
175/86 as amended by Notification No. 223/87. Another point according to the
Department is that the appellants were selling their product Patent or
Proprietary medicines to M/s. Pharma Chem Distributors of Bombay with a large
price difference as between the assessable value declared by the appellants
and the selling price of same goods by M/s. Pharma Chem Distributors of
Bombay. As a follow up the Departmental Officer visited the premises of the
appellants on 4-1-1990. One Shri K.P. Patel, Director of the Appellant Firm
and that of M/s. P & B Laboratories was present. It was found that the M/s. P
& B Laboratories are not having the exemption under Notification No. 175/86
since March, 1986 as their clearance value had exceeded 1.5 crores. The brand
name P & B is owned by P & B Laboratories of Bombay who marketed their product
with the same brand name and logo. The sales of both the units is being done
through M/s. Pharma Chem Distributors situated in the same compound and having
inter-linking door. The Directors and partners of the three units concerned
were found to be related as under :-

    
    
     
     _______________________________________________________________________________
    S.    M/s. P & B Pharm    P & B Lab. Pvt. Ltd.    M/s. Pharma Chem Dis-
    No.   Pvt. Ltd. Cambay    Bombay, 11 Chakravarty  tributors, 11 Chakravarty
          (Regd. office 11,   Ashok Road, Kandivali   Ashok Road,
          Chakravarty         (East) Bombay           Kandivali (East), Bombay
          Ashok Road,
          Kandivali (East)
             Director             Director                Partner
    _______________________________________________________________________________
    1.    Shri H.P. Patel     Mrs. S.H. Patel (w/o     Shri H.P. Patel
                              Shri H.P. Patel)
    2.    Shri K.R Patel      Shri K.P. Patel          Shri D.K. Patel (s/o Shri
                                                       K.P. Patel)
    3.    Shri G.P. Patel     Mrs. U.C. Patel (w/o     Shri G.P. Patel
                              Shri G.P. Patel)
    _______________________________________________________________________________
     
    
    

All the Directors of P & B Pharmaceutical Pvt. Ltd. are real brothers. Both
the Companies have 10 shareholders common out of 12 only therein, the other
two shareholders are related to the Directors in the above Companies as such
all the Directors and shareholders in both the companies and partners in the
firm were relatives. Shri K.P. Patel on being asked gave a statement under
Section 14 of the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944 that the logo was
originally owned by P & B Laboratories but had been transferred to the
appellants in 1983, He further stated regarding difference between assessable
value declared by the appellants and the sale price of their goods by M/s.
Pharma Chem Distributors, that the latter firm was undertaking sales
promotions, marketing etc. on behalf of the appellants. In a further follow
up, a search was made on 5/6-1-1990 in the premises of the appellants and
Pharma Chem Distributors, both at Bombay and certain documents were withdrawn
and Patent or Proprietary medicines affixed with the logo P/B manufactured and
cleared by the appellants at concessional rate of duty lying in the premises
of Pharma Chem Distributors were seized which were later on provisionally
released. From the scrutiny of the relevant records and documents, it was
found that the logo P/B was being used both by the appellants and by P & B
Laboratories. It was further found that P & B Laboratories have made an
investment by way of insecured loan to the appellants as indicated in their
Balance Sheet for the years 1986-87 and 1985-86 and further loans were given
at interest rate below the normal prevailing rates to the appellants in the
year ended 31-12-1987. The Department found that both the units, the
appellants and the P & B Laboratories are managed by the same management which
is evident from the Balance Sheets of the unit for P & B Laboratories for the
year ended 31-12-1987 and in Schedule 7 thereof it was stated as under or the
sundry amount of Rs. 5,80,783/- "Sundry debits includes amount due from the P
& B Pharmaceuticals Pvt. Ltd., Cambay, a company under same management".
Similarly in the Balance-sheet of the appellants ended on 30-9-1987 at
Schedule 6 thereof, the entry was "Purchased 10 equity shares of Rs. 100/-
each of M/s. P & B Pharmaceuticals Pvt. Ltd., Bombay Rs. 1,000/- (a company
under same management)". The Department also obtained a statement dated
5-1-1990 of Shri G.M. Govekar, Works Manager in the P & B Laboratories saying
that he was having general supervision over production and Central Excise work
of P & B Laboratories and that they were not availing of exemption under
Notification No. 175/86. He also said that certain medicines were originally
manufactured by P & B Laboratories but they were subsequently produced by the
appellants as the appellants were a family concern of P & B Laboratories who
also continue to use the same logo of their product manufactured and marketed.

In regard to the other units M/s. Pharma Chem Distributors, it was found that
they have invested or given fixed deposits to the appellants in connection
with their business which has been categorised as unsecured loans in the
Balance Sheet of the appellants. There was also evidence in the Balance Sheet
of the appellants of the financial interest in them of Pharma Chem
Distributors who were also undertaken other activities on behalf of the
appellants like advertisement and sale promotion, appointing approximate 100
medical representatives and 4 Area Managers to supervise the work of the
representatives in their respective jurisdiction. The Department also gathered
the figures spent on sales promotions by Pharma Chem Distributors on behalf of
the appellants. They further found that the appellants were despatching the
goods to Pharma Chem Distributors in non-marketable condition and these are
despatched in consignments of different sizes. At Bombay, in the premises of
Pharma Chem Distributors, the goods are being verified, sealed, strapped and
made available for marketing in trade packaging. All the expenses for sealing,
strapping, packing in cartons or wooden boxes and packing material are borne
by Pharma Chem Distributors which the Department feel would have normally
being on the manufacturer-appellants. The Department found that the sale is
not at arms length because of the large differential in the sale price by
Pharma Chem Distributors who are a family concern of the appellants. The
Department concluded that in view of the above fact, Pharma Chem Distributors
was a favoured buyer of the goods manufactured by the appellants and the
appellants sold the goods to them at concessional price of extra commercial
consideration, therefore, the sale price of Pharma Chem Distributors should be
the price at which excise duty is to be assessed according to the Department.
The Department also found that the appellants herein were not eligible for
exemp-tion for Small Scale Industries under Notification No. 175/86 as they
were using the same logo brand name which is also used by P & B Laboratories
who are themselves not eligible for the exemption under notification. Para 7
of Notification No. 175/86 as amended lays down that the exemption contained
in the notification will not apply to the specified goods where a manufacturer
affixes the specified goods with a brand name or trade name (Registered or
not) of another person who is not eligible for the grant of exemption under
Notification No. 175/86. Brand name or trade name according to the Explanation
VIII to the notification shall mean, a brand name or trade name whether
Registered or not that is to say a name or a mark such as monogram label or
writing which is used in relation to such specified goods for the purposes
indicating connection between the goods and the persons using the brand name
or trade name. After issuing of show cause notice and considering the reply
thereto and hearing the appellants during which certain persons were also
cross-examined, the Collector passed the impugned order holding the appellants
ineligible for exemption under Notification No. 175/86 and also that the
assessable value of the goods should be fixed at the selling price of the
related persons. He confirmed the demand for Rs. 79,67,267.05 under Section
11A of Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944 and held the goods seized to be
liable to confiscation and accordingly appropriated the security amount in
lieu of confiscation in terms of the bond executed at the time provisional
release of the goods. The Collector also imposed personal penalty of Rs. 20
lakhs on the appellants under Rule 173Q of Central Excise Rules, 1944 and
[Salt Act, 1944].

2\. Shri Paresh M. Dave, the learned Counsel appearing for the appel- lants
herein submitted that the demand in this case for the period 1-5-1985 to
31-12-1989 for which the show cause notice has been issued on 12-6-1990, the
longer period cannot be invoked. The learned Counsel contended for the reason
that even earlier Department had taken up the issue of the relationship
between appellants and the Pharma Chem Distributors which had resulted in
decision in favour of the appellants. The learned Counsel referred to the
order-in-Original No. 1/85 dated 10-5-1985 passed by the Jurisdictional
Assistant Collector, wherein the Assistant Collector had approved the price
list of the appellants in Part-I holding that Pharma Chem Distributors was not
a related person under Section 4 of the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944.
Again another show cause notice was issued on 27-11-1988 for the period
1-7-1986 to 31-12-1987 by the Assistant Collector on the ground that the M/s.
Pharma Chem Distributors was favoured buyers and related person. Show cause
notice was again issued on 26-7-1988 by the Assistant Collector for the period
1-1-1988 to 30-6-1988 for the same reason. In the subsequent adjudication
orders passed on 26-9-1988 and 12-9-1989 on these two show cause notices, the
Assistant Collector dropped the charges against the appellants holding that
they and Pharma Chem Distributors were not related persons or favoured buyers.
The learned Counsel referred to the show cause notice by the Assistant
Collector on 27-1-1988 wherein the same grounds that 98-99% of the sales are
to Pharma Chem Distributors was noted as well as the price differential in the
hands of Pharma Chem Distributors. The show cause notice by the Assistant
Collector had also noted the Balance Sheet entries as on 31-3-1985 showing
fixed deposits by Pharma Chem Distributors that the appellants as an evidence
of extra commercial consideration and of interest in each other's business.
The learned Counsel also submitted at one stage the Assistant Collector had
referred the matter to his Headquarters and the reply to the reference is also
in the appellant's favour. The present show cause notice by the Collector also
covers the same ground and the same period during which the Assistant
Collector had more than once raised the demand and for the same reason but had
dropped them. The learned Counsel submitted that it cannot be said that the
Collector's order is based on the fresh evidence which was not before the
Assistant Collector. The learned Counsel stated that the Collector's findings
that there was no co-relation in respect of each bill is unsound because it is
the usal practice of accounts adjustment in trade and in such condition, there
may not be Bill to Bill co-relation. The other fresh point said to be taken up
by the Collector, is regarding element of cost which can be grouped as
marketing expenses. However, the learned Counsel pointed out that the
appellants have furnished the details of buyers which was also checked by the
Department in 1985-1988 showing incurring of expenses of marketing, the
learned Counsel argued when the fundamental issue of whether the appellants
and Pharma Chem Distributors were related persons or not has been decided
finally by the Assistant Collector and when no appeal is filed against these
orders, in such a context, the Department cannot be permitted to take the same
plea again and again. The learned Counsel referred to the Civil Code
Procedure, 1908 Explanation IV and argued that the bar of res judicata will
apply even if the earlier decisions are of an authority subordinate to the
Collector. The learned Counsel also submitted that during the period
subsequent to the adjudication by the Assistant Collector also, there were
various queries by the Department which were answered, audit parties had also
gone into the aspect of relationship and Explanation of this question had been
given by the appellants. Therefore, there was no deliberate holding back of
information by the appellants and in such a situation, the longer period for
demanding duty cannot be invoked as has been well-settled by the Supreme Court
in the case of Collector of Central Excise v. Chemphar Drugs & Liniments \-
1989 (40) E.L.T. 276 . In regard to the charge that the appellants and Pharma
Chem Distributors are related persons, the learned Counsel submitted as
follows :

In this case, it was submitted certain percentage of factory gate sale is
available which is a fact recorded by the Collector in his order while
referring to the reply to show cause notice. There is no finding by the
Collector that such sales to others, were not genuine sales. The learned
Counsel submitted that the goods have been sold to all at the same price and
such sales were to the extent of 2% out of their total sale. Therefore, there
was no need to determine the question whether the appellants and Pharma Chem
Distributors were related persons. It was further contended that the quantum
of factory gate sales to others is not material and cited the case law 1977
(1) E.L.T. (J 177) in the case of A.K. Roy and Anr. v. Voltas Limited, 1988
(36) E.L.T. 723 (S.C.) in the case of Indian Oxygen Ltd. v. Collector of
Central Excise and 1991 (52) E.L.T. 460 (Tri.) in the case of Fenner (I) Ltd.
v. Collector of Central Excise. Further, the learned Counsel submitted that in
this case the manufacturing firm is a Private Limited Company and the buyer is
the partnership firm and the two are not interested in the business of each
other. It is not the case of the Department that the buyer is a dummy of the
manufacturer. They cannot be relative because one being a Private Limited
Company and the others is a partnership firm. Referring to the Supreme Court
decision in the Bombay Tyre International Ltd. etc., [1983 (14) E.L.T. 1896
(S.C)] the learned Counsel pointed out that only that distributors who is a
relative, would come under the purview of the related persons. Therefore, the
proviso of Section 4(l)(a) of Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944 is not
attracted. The case law considered in the Collector's order relating to
certain aspects like common Directors etc. for all, is relevant only in a case
of clubbing of clearance and they do not have any application in a case under
Section 4(l)(a) for the purposes of this Section what has to be established is
mutuality of interest. The learned Counsel cited and relied upon the Union of
India and Ors. v. Atic Industries Ltd., reported in 1984 (17) E.L.T. 323
(S.C.) and 1988 (35) E.L.T. 8 (S.C.) in the case of Collector of Central
Excise, Madras v. T.I. Millers Ltd., Madras and Anr.. In respect of the
grounds for denial of exemption under Notification No. 175/86 on account of
common trade mark, the learned Counsel contended that P & B Laboratories is a
large scale manufacturer and the appellants are a Small Scale Unit. As regards
the brand name in 1983, the registration of the brand name and logo was
assigned by P & B Laboratories to the appellants. There is a deed in this
regard dated 1-7-1984 and application for registration of the trade mark was
made on 21-9-1990 and registration order obtained on 24-1-1992. The Collector
has not considered the deed of asigning trade mark, pleaded the Counsel. It
was further argued that registration is not material for eligibility to the
exemption because from the time of the assignment of the trade mark, it become
their unregistered brand name which is also covered by the Explanation to the
Notification No. 175/86. Registration in that sense, the learned Counsel
urged, is a mere formality. He cited the case in the Court of Session in
Scotland in the case of Blighty Industries Association Ltd. v. The Scottish
Home Industries Association, Ltd. to say that assignment being only the
completion of title to a right substantially vested. It was further argued,
there cannot be any suppression of facts regarding use of the brand name since
classification list was filed alongwith samples of the labels.

3\. Shri A.K. Singhal, the learned Departmental Representative submitted that
res judicata is not applicable to tax matters and relied upon AIR 1964 S.C.
318; 1981 E.L.T. 328 (Delhi) and 1988 (34) E.L.T. 571 (S.C). Res judicata is
not applicable when new facts come to light and proceedings are initiated
thereon. Relying upon 1994 (71) E.L.T. 106 (Tri.) in the case of Collector of
Customs & Central Excise, Madras v. General Marketing & Mfg. Co. Ltd., the
learned Departmental Representative argued that proceedings can be reopened
which stands concluded previously in the event of fresh material giving a new
dimension to the case come to light. In the present case the Collector has
referred to the set of sufficient facts which have come up before him for
justifying the present adjudication irrespective of the previous orders of the
Assistant Collector. On the question of eligibility to the Notification No.
175/86, the learned Departmental Representative pointed out that the original
owner of the logo is not SSI Unit eligible for the exemption. The appellants
herein are using the same trade mark as the ineligible manufacturer and are
clearly hit by the condition in Para 7 of Notification No. 175/86. As regards
the deed of assignment of the trade mark, the learned Departmental
Representative submitted that it lacked authenticity, the stamp paper on which
it is typed does not bear any date of purchase of the stamp paper and the
vendor thereof. Even if it were to be accepted, the learned Departmental
Representative argued, the trade marks were still being used by P & B
Laboratories even after the transfer. This is further supported by the
evidence of the statement of Shri G.M. Govekar about the use of the logo by
both the units. The certificate regarding the trade mark also shows renewal
thereof after expiry in 1987 which raises the question as to who was the owner
of the trade mark meanwhile. On the question of the appellants and the
distributor firm are the related persons, the learned Departmental
Representative referred to the details evidence in this regard as set out in
the Collector's order and chart giving the relationship of each of the
partner. The medicines manufactured by the appellants are marked by the common
distributors using the same logo by both the manufacturers, there are other
features like loans and fix deposit interest free and rate of interest far
below the market rates. The two companies are infact one, being managed by the
same family and controlled by them. Sales, promotions and other expenses
incurred by Pharma Chem Distributors, the learned Departmental Representative
pointed out is an additional consideration which has to be borne by the
manufacturers. There is the evidence of statement of Shri K.P. Patel saying
that the marketing expenses were met from the large discount. This clearly
forms an extra consideration for the price. The criterion of mutuality of
interest is established and the learned Departmental Representative relied
upon the case law 1988 (34) E.L.T. 239 (Tri.) in the case of Prabhat Zarda
Factory Limited, Muzaffarpur v. Collector of Central Excise, Patna wherein
distributors and manufacturing firms were held to be related. The learned
Departmental Representative further stated the case reported in 1987 (29)
E.L.T. 523 (Tri.) in the case of Pilco Pharma, Kanpur v. Collector of Central
Excise, Kanpur and submitted that on facts that the case is closely comparable
of the present case wherein it was held that the goods were to be assessed at
the selling price of the distributors which is the related person.

Further case law cited was 1994 (71) E.L.T. 1053 (Tri.) in the case of Peico
Electronics and Electricals Ltd. v. Collector of Central Excise, Pune and 1987
(31) E.L.T. 756 (Tri.) in the case of Rakesh Bulb Industries and Ors. to say
that two partnership firms with common partner can be held to be related
persons and that distributor is a related person. On the aspect of interest
free deposit and for the distributor bearing the advertisement expenses, case
law reported in 1991 (52) E.L.T. 59 (Tri.) in the case of Collector of Central
Excise v. VST Industries and 1988 (35) E.L.T. 354 (Tri.) in the case of
Hindustan Photo Films Mfg. Co. Ltd. v. Collector of Central Excise, Coimbatore
were cited. Further, the learned Departmental Representative contended, the
factory gate sale is at a depressed price and there is no evidence that the
other buyers were genuine. The Department also relies upon the statement of
Shri G.M. Govekar of this aspect which support the case of the Department that
the units are inter connected undertaking. The longer period of demand can be
invoked in this case according to the learned Departmental Representative for
which he referred to the reasoning in the adjudication order and the point
that there was clearly non-disclosure of relevant information regarding their
marketing pattern. The seizer of the goods some of which in transit is also
against the appellants contention and yet another feature which should be
noted according to the learned Departmental Representative is that the
manufactured goods were packed for marketing purposes only at the premises of
the Pharma Chem Distributors after being removed from the appellants premises.

4\. The submissions made by both the sides have been carefully considered. The
main charges against the parties are that (1) M/s. P & B Pharmaceuticals Pvt.
Ltd., at Cambay; (2) M/s. P & B Laboratories Pvt. Ltd. at Bombay; and (3) M/s.
Pharma Chem Distributors are belonging to the different members of one family
and thereby the excisable goods, viz., P or P medicines manufactured and
removed from the factory of M/s. P & B Pharmaceuticals Pvt. Ltd., Cambay with
the Logo "P/B" owned by M/s. P & B Laboratories Pvt. Ltd. of Bombay (not
entitled to exemption under Notification No. 175/86-C.E., as amended), were
not entitled to concessional rate under the said Notification No. 175/86-C.E.,
as amended by Notification No. 223/87-C.E.; and that M/s. Pharma Chem
Distributors, as stated above, were the "favoured buyers" and "related
persons" and therefore the duty of excise was required to be paid on the price
at which such "favoured and related buyers" had sold the said excisable goods,
subject to deduction of the duty element, local taxes and freight admissible.

The duty of excise evaded on the first ground for the period from 1-10-1987 to
31-12-1989 works out to Rs. 16,00,333.13 P while the same on the second
grounds (including the duty on first ground) for the period from 1-5-1985 to
31-12-1989 works out to Rs. 79,47,034.87P.

The evidences brought on record revealed as under :

The directors/partners in the three companies/firms are common or having blood
relation with each other as under :

    
    
     _______________________________________________________________________________
    Sr.   Directors of M/s.     Directors of M/s. P & B    Partners of M/s. Pharma
    No.   P&B Pharmaceuti-      Laboratories Pvt. Ltd.,    Chem Distributors,11
          cals Pvt. Ltd., Cam-  11, Chakravorty Ashok      Chakravorty Ashok
          bay (Regd. off., 11,  Rd., Kandivalli (East),    Road, Kandivalli (East),
          Chakravorty           Bombay.                    Bombay.
          Ashok Rd., Kan-
          divalli (East),
          Bombay.
    _______________________________________________________________________________
     1.    Shri H.P. Patel       Mrs. S.H. Patel            Shri H.P. Patel
                                (w/o Shri H.P. Patel)
    2.    Shri K.P. Patel       Shri K.P. Patel            Shri D.K. Patel (s/o Shri
                                                           K.P. Patel)
    3.    Shri G.P. Patel       Mrs. U.C Patel             Shri G.P. Patel
                                (w/o Shri G.P. Patel)
     _______________________________________________________________________________
      
    
    (1) S/Shri H.P. Patel, K.P. Patel and G.P. Patel are brothers, while S/Shri H.P. Patel and K.P. Patel are the acting and main persons in dealing with the affairs of all the three companies/firms.
     
    
    (2) Regarding the use of Logo "P/B" it has been clarified by Shri K.P. Patel, common Director in both the manufacturing companies and Shri H.P. Patel, common Director and partner in company at Cambay and Pharm Chem Distributors, that the same had been transferred to Cambay unit in 1983 but no written documents were made to that effect or available.
     
    
    (3) The cartons/packing materials with Logo "P/B" were also being used by the Bombay company even t(4) The more common among the common medicines using Logo "P/B" by both the companies were (i) Furrecin Liquid; (ii) Sorbizyme liquid; (iii) San-ga-ree liquid; and (iv) Benicort Oral Drops.
     
    
    (5) The medicines of both the companies were marketed by M/s. Pharm Chem Distributors, Bombay.
     
    
    (6) (i) The Bombay Company has made investment by way of unsecured loan to the company at Cambay to the tune of Rs. 2,43,443.00 (Balance-Sheet 1986-87 ended on 30-9-1987); Rs. 7,26,146.00 (Balance-sheet 1985-86 ended on 30-9-1986) at the interest of 12%/15% PA. i.e. below the normal prevailing rate of 18%.
     
    
    (ii) The Director of Company at Cambay made investment in Bombay company by deposit to the tune of Rs. 3,94,714.00 (in 1986 ended on 31-12-1986) and Rs. 4,49,011/- (in 1987 ended on 31-12-1987).
     
    
    (iii) M/s. Pharm Chem Distributors (where two partners out of three, are Directors of Bombay and Cambay companies) has deposited with Cambay company an amount of Rs. 10 lakh from March, 1985 to March, 1986 interest free and Rs. 15 lakh from April, 1986 to June, 1987 and then continued the same at 12% interest; i.e. lower rate than the prevailing in the market on unsecured loans. Likewise, the said firm has made investment by interest free deposit of Rs. 10 lakh for the year ending 31-12-1986 and 31-12-1987 and continued thereafter.
     
    
    (iv) The Bombay Company and Cambay Company are commonly managed by the common Director, Shri K.P. Patel.
     
    
    (v) M/s. Pharm Chem Distributors, Bombay have undertaken following activities on behalf of Cambay company
    :
    

(A) Advertisement and sales promotion of products for which (a) they have
appointed approximately 100 representatives and Area Managers, who are paid
employees and being paid commission also; (b) they have advertised the
products in Newspapers, News Bulletins, through literature, brochures,
Magazines, Medical Journals, Calenders, etc.; (c) they have appointed over 150
stockists all over the country, who are given the discount at the rate of 9%
of retailers' price; (d) they have also introduced free goods scheme for
stockists, for which the payment is made to the company at Cam-bay but the
goods are supplied only on recovery of excise duty paid thereon. Likewise the
free gift articles are also offered on behalf of the company at Cambay; (e)
they are providing free transport from their premises to the stockists
premises; (f) they have also incurred expenses on printing of stationery, viz.
visiting cards for Representatives, Area Managers and Sales-Executives,
letter-heads covers, inland letters, literature for medicines, files, greeting
cards, daily reports on behalf of company at Cambay; (g) the goods received in
open/unmarketable condition are packed by them (M/s Pharma Chem) and strapped
with the tapes generally bearing the name of M/s. Pharm Chem.

It has been contended by the appellants that the question of whether the
appellants, herein, and Pharm Chem Distributors are favoured buyers and
related persons, has been gone into thrice by the jurisdictional Assistant
Collector and have resulted in findings in favour of the appellants. In such
circumstances, the department having not challenged those orders, cannot seek
to disturb the position through adjudication order by the Collector now. The
principle of res judicata would operate. The arguments against invoking the
longer period for demanding the duty under Section 11A of the Central Excises
and Salt Act, 1944 are also on same lines. However, the Revenue has contended
that the present adjudication order invoking the longer period for demand is
valid because fresh facts have come to light which were not there before the
Assistant Collectors when they passed the orders. Examining these contentions,
it is found that the first order of the Assistant Collector, which is relied
upon Order-in-Original No. 01/85 dated 10-5-1985. A perusal of the order shows
that it arose out of a price list 56/84-85 submitted by the appellants. The
department issued a show cause notice seeking to adopt the sale price of M/s.
Pharm Chem Distributors as the assessable value treating Pharm Chem
Distributors as related persons. The main contentions, in reply, were that
there are sales to independent buyers other than M/s. Pharm Chem Distributors.
All the sales, including Pharm Chem Distributors, are at factory gate at the
same price and that there was no mutuality of interest in each others
business. The Assistant Collector took the view that since the appellants are
a private limited company and M/s. Pharm Chem Distributors are a partnership
firm, they cannot be held to be a related person. He, further, observed that
"Further the notice alleges that the assessee and M/s. Pharm Chem of Bombay
have substantial mutual interest in each other's business but I find that no
evidence has been led to bring home the said allegation either in the form of
document or in any other manner. In absence of such an evidence, I find enough
force in the submission of the assessee that the allegation is merely a
presumption and that no evidence has been disclosed in support of the said
presumption in the notice which was squarely a burden cast on the Department."
The Assistant Collector also observed that there is nothing on record to
conclude that both the parties are so associated in business as to have
interest in the business of each other. He also, further, observed that there
does not appear to exist any financial or managerial association and interest
in the business among the parties. Accordingly, the Assistant Collector held
that M/s. Pharm Chem Distributors cannot be treated as related person of the
appellants. The subsequent orders of the Assistant Collectors dated 26-9-1988
and 12-9-1989 have, accordingly, followed the order No. 1/85 to hold that the
appellants M/s. Pharm Chem Distributors cannot be treated as related persons.
But in these orders there is no discussion on the evidence set out in the show
cause notice. The evidence mentioned in the show cause notice is that 98% to
99% of the products manufactured by the appellants are sold to M/s. Pharm Chem
Distributors. There is 100% margin between the prices charged to duty of
excise and the retail price for the consumers, and the price at which the
goods are sold by the appellants to M/s. Pharm Chem Distributors are extremely
low. The show cause notice also referred to the fact that the Directors of the
appellants and partners of M/s. Pharm Chem Distributors were close relations.
It was also alleged that as per the Balance-Sheet as on 31-3-1985 of M/s Pharm
Chem Distributors there were assets of fixed deposits for previous year and
for the current year with the appellants indicative of the interest in the
business of each other. A perusal of the records, as above, would show that
while Order No. 1/85 of the Assistant Collector noted absence of documentary
evidence to establish mutuality of interest, the subsequent orders of the
Assistant Collectors merely followed that order without, in any way,
discussing the evidence of such mutuality of interest set out in the show
cause notice. In this background, the present show cause notice issued by the
Collector will have to be seen to find out whether the present show cause
notice also traverses the same ground or whether it is based on fresh evidence
not before the Assistant Collector.

In this context, the show cause notice dated 12-6-1990 issued by the Collector
would show that the Departmental Officers had visited the premises of P&B
Laboratories on enquiry about wrong availing of the exemption under
Notification 175/86 by appellants and also regarding their assessable value
being low. It is for the first time in the proceedings before the Collector
that the wrong availing of the exemption by the appellants by use of a common
trade mark of P&B Laboratories who were themselves ineligible for the
exemption came to light and alongwith these investigations further fresh
evidence regarding assessable value, which was not all before the Assistant
Collectors, were also discovered. These were in the nature of financial tie-up
between the appellants and M/s. Pharm Chem Distributors and the latter
undertaking marketing costs of the appellants' products as well as the fact
that the goods were cleared from the appellants' factory and latter repacked
for marketing by the Pharm Chem Distributors at Bombay. In this context, there
is also the other evidence of the interception and seizure of a truck on
9-2-1990 by the Department while on its way to Bombay from the appellants'
premises. The truck contained medicines manufactured by the appellants in
cartons, but these cartons did not have any marking or writing and were not
sealed or strapped. This goes to support the allegation of Department that the
further sealing and strapping of the goods for marketing is done by M/s. Pharm
Chem Distributors. There were also evidence of the statements of the
Directors/Partners of the appellants and M/s. Pharm Chem Distributors as well
as their employees stating that the price differential was being used to
finance the marketing and sales promotion of the appellants' product. It is,
in the above setting that the plea of the appellants that the present
proceedings by Collector is hit by res judicata, has to be seen and
considering the fresh evidence that has come for consideration before the
Collector in the present proceedings and the circumstances in which the
proceedings originated, the plea in this regard by the appellants does not
have much force. So also on the question of limitation, the evidence relating
to use of common Logo with P&B Laboratories have been revealed only on
investigation and not expressly declared by the appellants so also in the case
of marketing and sales promotion activities M/s. Pharm Chem Distributors and
the mode of financing it. As has been observed by the Supreme Court in the
case of Elson Machines Pvt. Ltd. v. Collector of Central Excise \- 1988 (38)
E.L.T. 571 (S.C.) that "Plainly there can be no estoppel against the law. The
claim raised before us is a claim based on the legal effect of a provision of
law and, therefore, this contention must be rejected." In such a view of the
matter, when it is seen that the expenses regarding advertisement, marketing &
sales promotion had not at all been considered in the previous proceedings,
these can be rightly considered as fresh facts before the Collector for
adjudication. On the question of whether the appellants and M/s. Pharm Chem
Distributors were related persons or that they were favoured buyers, the
factual setting has been given by the Collector in appeal in his order. The
three Directors of the appellants are brothers and two out of the three are
also partners in M/s. Pharm Chem Distributors and the 3rd in that firm is only
the son of the Director, Sh. K.P. Patel of the appellants. The fact that there
were financial flow back between the two firms is also brought out in the
evidence. Besides, the distributing firm has undertaken the marketing and
sales promotion for the products of the appellants, 99% of which are sold to
them which means that the appellants have said so arranged that they generally
sell their goods only through M/s. Pharm Chem Distributors, which satisfied
proviso under Section 4(l)(a) of the Central Excises & Salt Act, 1944.

Further, Shri K.P. Patel, who is a common Director of both the appellants and
P&B Laboratories and whose son is the 3rd partner in the distributing firm, in
a statement of 4-1-1990 said whatever expenses M/s. Pharm Chem Distributors
had undertaken in terms of sales promotion activity were being met from the
quantity of discount given to M/s. Pharm Chem Distributors by the appellants
for selling their products. This has been, further, confirmed by the statement
of Shri Govekar, who is the Works Manager in P&B Laboratories and there is an
evidence of the Balance-Sheet of these two firms to say that P&B Laboratories
and the appellants are under a common management as has been brought out in
the Collector's order. In such circumstances, the financial transactions
between the appellants and the distributing firm have also to be viewed. M/s.
Pharm Chem Distributors had invested or given fixed deposit to the appellants
in connection with their business which has been categorised as unsecured loan
in the Balance-Sheet of the appellants. In 1985-86 and 1986-87, amounts to the
extent of Rs. 10 lakh in each year have been invested as such fixed deposit
interest-free for no obvious reasons. In 1987-88 and 1988-89, a sum of Rs. 15
lakh in each year had been deposited as fixed deposit either interest free or
at rates of interest much below the prevailing rate of about 18% whereas the
rate of interest charged was also 12%. In such a set up of facts, the reliance
placed by the 1d. D.R. on the decision of the Tribunal in the case of Pilco
Pharma v. Collector of Central Excise \- 1987 (29) E.L.T. 523 (Tribunal) is
well-founded. There the Tribunal had held that in similar circumstances, that
the distributing firm undertaking advertisement and publicity activity is a
related person, and observed that advertisement and publicity are activities
which rightly belong to the manufacturers as they make the goods marketable
and promote their sales. The Tribunal, further, observed that on that ground
the Supreme Court had held that advertisement expenses are includible in the
assessable value in the Bombay Tyre International case. In coming to these
decisions, the Tribunal drew strength from the Supreme Court decision in the
case of Mohanlal Manganlal Bhavsar v. Union of India \- 1986 (23) E.L.T. 3
(S.C.). In that case there were two separate partnership firms - the
manufacturing firm and the chief distributing firm, the three partners of the
manufacturing firms along-with a son of each of them were also the partners of
chief distributing firm. From this fact, the Supreme Court observed that there
was "identity of interest" between the two firms. In such circumstances, the
Supreme Court concluded that the two firms could not be said to be at arm's
length or independent parties and the price at which the goods were sold by
the manufacturing firm to the distributing firm could not be taken to be the
real value of the goods. The ratio of the above decision of the Tribunal,
which follows Supreme Court decision, as cited above, are fully applicable to
the present case. Therefore, the Collector is right in holding that the price
at which the appellants sell their goods to M/s. Pharm Chem Distributors
cannot be treated as assessable value and that it should be determined on the
basis of the price at which the goods are sold by the distributors. However,
the appellants, herein, at one stage before the Tribunal, had submitted that
the department has demanded duty not only on the difference of price between
price at Cambay and Bombay, but has by an error arrived at the assessable
value by deducting only the amount of duty paid at Cambay. According to the
appellants there is a need for correct calculation of duty by arriving at the
correct assessable value at the hands of M/s. Pharm Chem Distributors at
Bombay. They have also referred to the detailed working on the basis of actual
figures of assessable value in an affidavit dated 31-1-1992 before the
Tribunal. This is, however, a matter of detail which can reasonably be looked
into by the Collector. The assessable value should be determined on the basis
of the sale price at the hands of M/s. Pharm Chem Distributors, but in
arriving at such assessable value permissible deductions as per law, have to
be made. If there is any error, the appellants may be given an opportunity to
put-forth their point before the Collector who may examine whether there is a
case for such re-determination or not.

In respect of the eligibility of the appellants for the Notification 175/86,
the evidence on record clearly shows that Logo and trade name was being used
in respect of four medicines produced by the appellants and M/s. P&B
Laboratories even at the time or seizure in this case which took place in 1990
although the appellants' claim is that from February, 1984 they have been
using the trade mark and Logo. They have also produced certain documents such
as registration from the trade mark authorities assigning the trade mark to
them but the fact remains that there were material evidence by way of seizure
of goods manufactured by M/s. P&B Laboratories bearing the same Logo much
after the alleged transfer of trade mark to the appellants. The connected fact
that the appellants and P&B Laboratories are under a common management as
reflected in the Balance-Sheet of the appellants would also go to support the
case of the Department that the appellants were using the trade mark of P&B
Laboratories who are themselves not eligible for exemption under Notification
No. 175/86.There is the evidence by way of statement of Sh. Govekar, who is an
employee of P&B Laboratories who had said in his statement dated 5-1-1990 that
both the units were using the same logo, being the family concern and he also
produced a batch production sheet to show such use of common Logo by both the
units. In this context the terms of para 7 of Notification No. 175/86, as
amended by Notification No. 223/87 dated 22-9-1987 have to be considered. This
para lays down that exemption contained in Notification shall not apply to the
goods where the manufacturer affixed the goods with brand name or trade name
(registered or not) of another person who is not eligible for the exemption
under the notification. Explanation VIII to the Notification has defined brand
name or trade name to mean brand name trade name whether registered or not
that is to say the name or a mark such as symbol, monogram, label etc., which
is used in relation to such goods for the purpose of indicating a connection
in the course of trade between the goods and some person using such name or
mark with or without any indication of the identity of that person. The above
definition has wide scope covering any Logo or symbol or monogram which is
used by another person and in this wide sense, the use of the same Logo P/B by
the appellants when it was also being used by the P&B Laboratories who are
ineligible for the exemption can, therefore, be a valid ground for denying the
exemption to the appellants in terms of para 7 of Notification 175/86. The
Collector's order in this regard is, therefore, up-held. However, having
regard to the circumstances of the case and the duty involved, some relief in
the matter of personal penalty can reasonably be given which is, accordingly,
reduced to Rs. 15 lakh. The appeal is disposed of in the above terms. The
Misc. applications also stand disposed of.

