

Supreme Court of India

Justice K.S.Puttaswamy(Retd) vs Union Of India on 26 September, 2018

Author: A Sikri

Bench: A Bhushan, A Khanwilkar, A Sikri, D Misra

    
    
                                                                                            REPORTABLE
    
                                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
    
                                                      CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION
    
                                               WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 494 OF 2012
    
    
                             JUSTICE K.S. PUTTASWAMY (RETD.)
                             AND ANOTHER                                                  .....PETITIONER(S)
    
                                                                          VERSUS
    
                             UNION OF INDIA AND OTHERS                                   .....RESPONDENT(S)
    
                                                                        WITH
    
                                           TRANSFERRED CASE (CIVIL) NO. 151 OF 2013
    
                                           TRANSFERRED CASE (CIVIL) NO. 152 OF 2013
    
                                               WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 833 OF 2013
    
                                               WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 829 OF 2013
    
                                       TRANSFERRED PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 1797 OF 2013
    
                                               WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 932 OF 2013
    
                                       TRANSFERRED PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 1796 OF 2013
    
                                          CONTEMPT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 144 OF 2014
                                                             IN
                                            WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 494 OF 2012
    
                                        TRANSFERRED PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 313 OF 2014
    
    Signature Not Verified              TRANSFERRED PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 312 OF 2014
    Digitally signed by
    CHETAN KUMAR
    
                                   SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CRIMINAL) NO. 2524 OF 2014
    Date: 2018.09.26
    13:36:51 IST
    Reason:
    
    
    
    
                                                WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 37 OF 2015
    
                             Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters          Page 1 of 567
                      WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 220 OF 2015
    
                 CONTEMPT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 674 OF 2015
                                    IN
                   WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 829 OF 2013
    
               TRANSFERRED PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 921 OF 2015
    
                 CONTEMPT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 470 OF 2015
                                    IN
                   WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 494 OF 2012
    
                      WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 231 OF 2016
    
                  CONTEMPT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 444 OF 2016
                                     IN
                    WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 494 OF 2012
    
                 CONTEMPT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 608 OF 2016
                                    IN
                   WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 494 OF 2012
    
                      WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 797 OF 2016
    
                 CONTEMPT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 844 OF 2017
                                    IN
                   WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 494 OF 2012
    
                      WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 342 OF 2017
    
                      WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 372 OF 2017
    
                      WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 841 OF 2017
    
                      WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 1058 OF 2017
    
                      WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 966 OF 2017
    
                      WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 1014 OF 2017
    
                      WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 1002 OF 2017
    
    
    Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters   Page 2 of 567
                      WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 1056 OF 2017
    
                                               AND
    
                   CONTEMPT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 34 OF 2018
                                     IN
                    WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 1014 OF 2017
    
    
                                    JUDGMENT
    

A.K. SIKRI, J.

(For Chief Justice, himself and A.M. Khanwilkar, J.) Introduction and
Preliminaries:

> It is better to be unique than the best. Because, being the best makes you
> the number one, but being unique makes you the only one.

2) ‘Unique makes you the only one’ is the central message of Aadhaar, which is
on the altar facing constitutional challenge in these petitions. ‘Aadhaar’
which means, in English, ‘foundation’ or ‘base’, has become the most talked
about expression in recent years, not only in India but in many other
countries and international bodies. A word from Hindi dictionary has assumed
secondary significance. Today, mention of the word ‘Aadhaar’ would not lead a
listener to the dictionary meaning of this word. Instead, every person on the
very mentioning of this word ‘Aadhaar’ would associate it with the card that
is issued to a Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page
3 of 567 person from where he/she can be identified. It is described as an
‘Unique Identity’ and the authority which enrols a person and at whose behest
the Aadhaar Card is issued is known as Unique Identification Authority of
India (hereinafter referred to as ‘UIDAI’ or ‘Authority’). It is described as
unique for various reasons. UIDAI claims that not only it is a foolproof
method of identifying a person, it is also an instrument whereby a person can
enter into any transaction without needing any other document in support. It
has become a symbol of digital economy and has enabled multiple avenues for a
common man. Aadhaar scheme, which was conceptualised in the year 2006 and
launched in the year 2009 with the creation of UIDAI, has secured the
enrolment of almost 1.1 billion people in this country. Its use is spreading
like wildfire, which is the result of robust and aggressive campaigning done
by the Government, governmental agencies and other such bodies. In this way it
has virtually become a household symbol. The Government boasts of multiple
benefits of Aadhaar.

3) At the same time, the very scheme of Aadhaar and the architecture built
thereupon has received scathing criticism from a section of the society.
According to them, Aadhaar is a serious invasion into the right to privacy of
persons and it has the Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected
matters Page 4 of 567 tendency to lead to a surveillance state where each
individual can be kept under surveillance by creating his/her life profile and
movement as well on his/her use of Aadhaar. There has been no other subject
matter in recent past which has evoked the kind of intensive and heated debate
wherein both sides, for and against, argue so passionately in support of their
respective conviction. The petitioners in these petitions belong to the latter
category who apprehend the totalitarian state if Aadhaar project is allowed to
continue. They are demanding scrapping and demolition of the entire Aadhaar
structure which, according to them, is anathema to the democratic principles
and rule of law, which is the bedrock of the Indian Constitution. The
petitioners have challenged the Aadhaar project which took off by way of
administrative action in the year 2009. Even after Aadhaar got a shield of
statutory cover, challenge persists as the very enactment known as Aadhaar
(Targeted Delivery of Financial and Other Subsidies, Benefits and Services)
Act, 2016 (hereinafter referred to as the ‘Aadhaar Act’) is challenged as
constitutionally impermissible. The wide range of issues involved in this case
is evident from the fact that it took almost four months for the parties to
finish their arguments in these cases, and the Court witnessed highly skilled,
suave, brilliant and intellectual advocacy, with the traces of passions as
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 5 of 567 well.

4) The issue has generated heated public debate as well. Even outside the
Court, there are groups advocating in favour of the Aadhaar scheme and those
who are stoutly opposing the same. Interestingly, it is not only the commoners
who belong to either of the two groups but intelligentsia is also equally
divided. There have been number of articles, interviews for discourses in
favour of or against Aadhaar. Those in favour see Aadhaar project as ushering
the nation into a regime of good governance, advancing socio-economic rights,
economic prosperity etc. and in the process they claim that it may make the
nation a world leader. Mr. K.K. Venugopal, learned Attorney General for India,
referred to the commendations by certain international bodies, including the
World Bank. We clarify that we have not been influenced by such views
expressed either in favour or against Aadhaar. Those opposing Aadhaar are
apprehensive that it may excessively intrude into the privacy of citizenry and
has the tendency to create a totalitarian state, which would impinge upon the
democratic and constitutional values. Some such opinions of various
persons/bodies were referred to during the arguments. Notwithstanding the
passions, emotions, annoyance, despair, Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012
& connected matters Page 6 of 567 ecstasy, euphoria, coupled with rhetoric,
exhibited by both sides in equal measure during the arguments, this Court
while giving its judgment on the issues involved is required to have a posture
of calmness coupled with objective examination of the issues on the touchstone
of the constitutional provisions.

5) Initiative in spearheading the attack on the Aadhaar structure was taken by
the petitioners, namely, Justice K.S. Puttaswamy (Retd.) and Mr. Pravesh
Khanna, by filing Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012\. At that time,
Aadhaar scheme was not under legislative umbrella. In the writ petition the
scheme has primarily been challenged on the ground that it violates
fundamental rights of the innumerable citizens of India, namely, right to
privacy falling under Article 21 of the Constitution of India. Few others
joined the race by filing connected petitions. Series of orders were passed in
this petition from time to time, some of which would be referred to by us at
the appropriate stage. In 2016, with the passing of the Aadhaar Act, these
very petitioners filed another writ petition challenging the vires of the Act.
Here again, some more writ petitions have been filed with the same objective.
All these writ petitions were clubbed together. There are number of
interventions as well by various individuals, groups, NGOs, etc., some
opposing the petitions and some supporting the Aadhaar Writ Petition (Civil)
No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 7 of 567 scheme.

6) Before we go into the premise on which the attack is laid on the
constitutional validity of the Aadhaar project and the Aadhaar Act, it would
be apposite to take note of the events in chronological order that shaped the
formulation, take off and implementation of the Aadhaar scheme.

7) On March 03, 2006, approval was given by the Department of Information
Technology, Ministry of Communications and Information Technology, Government
of India for the project titled ‘Unique Identification for BPL Families’ to be
implemented by the National Informatics Centre (NIC) for over a period of
twelve months. As a result, a Processes Committee was set up on July 03, 2006
to suggest the process for updation, modification, addition and deletion of
data and fields from the core database to be created under the Unique
Identification for BPL Families project. This Committee, on November 26, 2006,
prepared a paper known as ‘Strategic Vision Unique Identification of
Residents’. Based thereupon, the Empowered Group of Ministers (EGoM) was set
up on December 04, 2006, to collate the National Population Register under the
Citizenship Act, 1955 and the Unique Identification Number project of the
Department Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 8 of
567 of Information Technology. The EGoM was also empowered to look into the
methodology and specific milestones for early and effective completion of
projects and to take a final view on these projects. The EGoM was composed of
the then Ministers of External Affairs, Home Affairs, Law, Panchayati Raj and
Communications and Information Technology and the then Deputy Chairman,
Planning Commission.

8) Various meetings on the Unique Identification (hereinafter referred to as
‘UID’) project were held from time to time. In the fourth meeting held on
December 22, 2006, various aspects of proposed data elements and their formats
were discussed. Thereafter, in its fifth meeting held on April 27, 2007, it
was decided that the evolution of UID database would be in three stages in
principle. The Committee further decided that linkage with major partner
databases such as Household Survey of RD and the individual State Public
Distribution System (PDS) databases should be taken up in a phased manner. On
June 11, 2007, at the final stage of the project, a presentation on the UID
project was made to the then Prime Minister by the Cabinet Secretary. The
sixth meeting of the UID project was held on June 15, 2007. The Committee,
inter alia, took the following decisions: Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of
2012 & connected matters Page 9 of 567

(i) The numbering format of 11 digits was approved.

(ii) The need for UID authority to be created by an executive order under the
aegis of the Planning Commission was appreciated in order to ensure pan-
departmental and neutral identity for the authority.

(iii) The proposal for creation of Central and State UIDs was approved.

(iv) Department of Information Technology (DIT) was directed to work out
modalities for linkage with Election Commission and initiate discussions with
MoRD and PDS for linkage.

(v) In principle, approval of proposed sequence for phasing plan was granted.

9) In the seventh meeting held on August 30, 2007, the proposed administrative
framework and structure of UID authority and manpower requirement, including
financial implications, was discussed. It was decided that a detailed proposal
based on the resource model be presented to the Committee for its ‘in
principle’ approval. At this stage, EGoM convened its first meeting on
November 27, 2007. At this meeting, a consensus emerged on the following
points:

(i) There is a clear need for creating an identity related Writ Petition
(Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 10 of 567 resident database,
regardless of whether the database is created on a de novo collection of data
or is based on an already existing data (such as the Election Commission’s
Voter List).

(ii) Additionally, there is a critical need to create an institutional
mechanism that would ‘own’ the database and be responsible for its maintenance
and updating.

(iii) The next meeting is to consider topics relating to collating the
National Population Register (NPR) and UID schemes, including methodology,
effective implementation techniques, identification of the institutional
mechanism stated above, and the time schedule for putting the scheme into
operation.

A series of meetings took place thereafter to work out the modalities of the
programme. Certain issues were raised therein and to address those issues, a
Committee of Secretaries was formed. The said Committee gave its
recommendations which were discussed by EGoM. After approving the Aadhaar
Scheme in principle, it instructed the Cabinet Secretary to convene a meeting
to finalise the detailed organisational structure of the UID.

10) After considering the recommendation of the Cabinet Secretary,
Notification No. A-43011/02/2009-Admn.I was issued on January Writ Petition
(Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 11 of 567 28, 2009 by the
Government of India which constituted and notified the UIDAI as an attached
office under the aegis of the Planning Commission. Consequent to the
constitution of UIDAI, allocation of Rs.147.31 crores for Phase I of Aadhaar
enrolments was approved by the Finance Minister on the recommendation of the
Standing Committee on Finance. Demo-Official letter dated February 25, 2009,
was sent by the Secretary, Planning Commission to all Chief Secretaries of 35
States/Union Territories apprising them of their roles and responsibilities of
the States/Union Territories in implementation of UIDAI, such as appointment
of the State/UT UID Commissioners, logistics support and coordination with
various departments and State units.

As they say, rest is history, which we recapitulate in brief hereinafter.

11) A core group was set up to advice and further the work related to UIDAI.
Budgets were allocated to UIDAI to enable it to undertake its task. Staff was
also allocated to it. Meetings of the core group took place from time to time.
The core group, inter alia, decided that it was better to start with the
electoral roll database of 2009 for undertaking the UIDAI project. The status
of digitisation of Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters
Page 12 of 567 PDS records, state-wise, was sought to be sent from the
Department of Food and Public Distribution to the Standing Commission/UID.
This and other steps taken in this direction culminated in issuance of
Notification dated July 02, 2009 whereby Mr. Nandan Nilekani was appointed as
the Chairman of UIDAI for an initial tenure of five years in the rank and
status of a Cabinet Minister. He assumed charge on July 24, 2009. Thereafter,
the Prime Minister’s Council of UIDAI was constituted on July 30, 2009 which
held its first meeting on August 12, 2009 where the Chairman of UIDAI made
detailed representation on the broad strategy and approach of the proposed UID
project. One of the proposals was to provide a legislative framework for UID
at the earliest so that it could have the legal sanction to perform its
function. Some other Committees like the Biometrics Standard Committee,
Demographic Data Standards and Verification Procedure Committee were set up as
a support system to the project, which submitted their respective reports in
December 2009. Even a Cabinet Committee on UID was constituted vide orders
dated October 22, 2009 which was headed by the Prime Minister with the aim to
cover all issues relating to UIDAI, including its organisation, policies,
programmes, schemes, funding and methodology to be adopted Writ Petition
(Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 13 of 567 for achieving its
objectives.

12) The matter was addressed in the Seventeenth Finance Commission Report also
which was tabled in the Parliament on February 25, 2010. In this report, the
Finance Commission suggested targeting of subsidies through UIDAI. By April
2010, UIDAI came out with its Strategy Overview. This Overview describes the
features, benefits, revenue model and timelines of the UIDAI project.
Furthermore, it outlined the goal of the UID to serve as a universal proof of
identity, allowing residents to prove their identities anywhere in the
country. The project would give the Government a clear view of India’s
population, enabling it to target and deliver services effectively, achieve
greater returns on social investments and monitor money and resource flows
across the country. It was felt that crucial to the achievement of this goal
is the active participation of the central, state and local Governments as
well as public and private sector entities. Only with their support will the
project be able to realise a larger vision of inclusion and development in
India.

13) A Cabinet Note bearing No. 4(4)/57/2010/CC-UIDAI for the Cabinet Committee
on UIDAI was submitted on May 12, 2010. The Note outlined a brief background
of UIDAI, proposed an Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected
matters Page 14 of 567 approach for collection of demographic and biometric
attributes of residents for the UID project and sought approval of the Cabinet
Committee for adoption of the aforesaid approach and suggested that the same
standards and processes be adhered to by the Registrar General of India for
the NPR exercise and all other Registrars in the UID system. Rationale for
inclusion of iris biometrics was also submitted with the aforesaid Cabinet
Note to explain the need for capturing iris scans at the time of capturing
biometric details.

14) By September 2010 enrolment process of Aadhaar began with the nationwide
launch of the Aadhaar project. In December 2010, UIDAI came out with a report
on enrolment process known as ‘UID Enrolment Proof-of-Concept Report’ studying
enrolment proof-of-concept in three rural areas of Karnataka, Bihar and Andhra
Pradesh published by the UIDAI. According to this report, ‘the biometric
matching analysis of 40,000 people showed that the accuracy levels achieved by
both iris and ten fingerprints were more than an order of magnitude better
compared to using either of the two individually. The multi-modal enrolment
was adequate to carry out de-duplication on a much larger scale, with
reasonable expectations of extending it to all residents of India’. Writ
Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 15 of 567

15) Going by the recommendation of the Chairman of UIDAI for providing
legislative framework to UIDAI, a Bill was introduced in the Rajya Sabha on
December 03, 2010 known as ‘National Identification Authority of India Bill,
2010’.

16) Various other steps were taken to smoothen the process of enrolment. There
were studies from time to time on the effectiveness of the enrolment process.
Notifications/orders were also issued by the Reserve Bank of India stating
that an Aadhaar letter would be recognised by Banks to open bank accounts for
a resident. Similar Orders/Notifications were issued by other authorities as
well. On the first anniversary of Aadhaar launch, which fell on September 29,
2011, announcement was made that 10 crores enrolments and generation of more
than 3.75 crores of Aadhaar had taken place. Some of the reports submitted in
due course of time, which are relevant for our purposes, are taken note of at
this stage:

(i) Report of the Task Force on an Aadhaar-Enabled Unified Payment
Infrastructure for the direct transfer of subsidies on Kerosene, LPG and
Fertilizer.

(ii) In March 2012, Fingerprint Authentication Report was submitted to UIDAI.
This Report showcased the high accuracy Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012
& connected matters Page 16 of 567 rates of using fingerprints to authenticate
identities. The study conducted in the rural setting representing typical
demography of the population established that it is technically possible to
use fingerprint to authenticate a resident in 98.13% of the population. The
accuracy of 96.5% can be achieved using one best finger and 99.3% can be
achieved using two fingers. Further improvement is possible if the device
specifications are tightened to include only the best devices and certain
mechanical guide is used to aid proper placement of the finger. It was also
demonstrated through benchmarking that the authentication infrastructure is
able to sustain one million authentications per hour.

(iii) Fifty Third Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on the ‘Demands
for Grants (2012-13)’ of the Ministry of Planning was presented to the Lok
Sabha and Rajya Sabha on April 24, 2012\. This Report summarises the
objectives and financial implications of the UID scheme being implemented
under the aegis of the Planning Commission.

(iv) Iris Authentication Accuracy Report was submitted to UIDAI on September
12, 2012. This Report based on an empirical study of 5833 residents
demonstrated iris authentication to be viable in Indian context. With current
level of device readiness for Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 &
connected matters Page 17 of 567 iris capture, it is capable of providing
coverage for 99.67% of population with authentication accuracy of above 99.5%.
Suggestions made in this document for the vendors, once implemented, will
improve the rates further. The overall systems – network and software – have
shown to meet desired requirements in real life condition. Finally, six
different devices with variety of form and function are available to provide
competitive vendor eco-system.

(v) Background Note on Introduction to Cash Transfers was prepared by the
National Committee on Direct Cash Transfers in its first meeting on November
26, 2012. This Report outlines the advantages of cash transfers in the Indian
context stating that a unique ID for all is a prerequisite for this purpose.

17) At this juncture, Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 was filed in which
show-cause notice dated November 30, 2012 was issued by this Court. As pointed
out above, this writ petition assailed Aadhaar scheme primarily on the ground
that it violates right to privacy which is a facet of fundamental rights
enshrined in Article 21 of the Constitution.

18) Counter affidavit thereto was filed by the Union of India as well as
UIDAI. The stand taken by the respondents, inter alia, was that Writ Petition
(Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 18 of 567 right to privacy is
not a fundamental right, which was so held by the eight Judge Bench judgment
in M.P. Sharma and 4 Others v. Satish Chandra Distt. Magistrate, Delhi and 4
Others 1. This is notwithstanding the fact that thereafter in many judgments
rendered by this Court, right to privacy was accepted as a facet of Article
21. Contention of the respondents, however, was that those judgments were
contrary to the dicta laid down in M.P. Sharma and were, therefore, per in
curium. The matter on this aspect was heard by a three Judge Bench and after
hearing the parties, the Bench deemed it appropriate to make the reference to
the Constitution Bench. A five Judge Bench was constituted, which after
considering the matter, referred the same to a nine Judge Bench to resolve the
controversy in an authoritative manner. The nine Judge Bench judgment has
given an unanimous answer to the Reference with conclusive, unambiguous and
emphatic determination that right to privacy is a part of fundamental rights
which can be traced to Articles 14, 19 and 21 of the Constitution of India.

19) We may also record at this stage that in this petition certain interim
orders were passed from time to time. We may give the gist of some of the
relevant orders:

1 1954 SCR 1077 Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page
19 of 567

(a) Order dated September 23, 2013 (two Judge Bench) “All the matters require
to be heard finally. List all matters for final hearing after the Constitution
Bench is over. In the meanwhile, no person should suffer for not getting the
Aadhaar card in spite of the fact that some authority had issued a circular
making it mandatory and when any person applies to get the Aadhaar card
voluntarily, it may be checked whether that person is entitled for it under
the law and it should not be given to any illegal immigrant.”

(b) Order dated November 26, 2013 (two Judge Bench) “After hearing the matter
at length, we are of the view that all the States and Union Territories have
to be impleaded as respondents to give effective directions. In view thereof,
notice be issued to all the States and Union Territories through standing
counsel.

xx xx xx Interim order to continue, in the meantime.”

(c) Order dated March 16, 2015 (three Judge Bench) “In the meanwhile, it is
brought to our notice that in certain quarters, Aadhaar identification is
being insisted upon by the various authorities, we do not propose to go into
the specific instances.

Since Union of India is represented by learned Solicitor General and all the
States are represented through their respective counsel, we expect that both
the Union of India and States and all their functionaries should adhere to the
order passed by this Court on 23rd September, 2013.”

(d) Order dated August 11, 2015 (three Judge Bench) “Having considered the
matter, we are of the view that the balance of interest would be best served,
till the matter is finally decided by a larger Bench, if the Union of India or
the UIDAI proceed in the following manner:

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 20 of 567

1\. The Union of India shall give wide publicity in the electronic and print
media including radio and television networks that it is not mandatory for a
citizen to obtain an Aadhaar card.

2\. The production of an Aadhaar card will not be condition for obtaining any
benefits otherwise due to a citizen.

3\. The Unique Identification Number or the Aadhaar card will not be used by
the respondents for any purpose other than the PDS Scheme and in particular
for the purpose of distribution of food grains, etc. and cooking fuel, such as
kerosene. The Aadhaar card may also be used for the purpose of LPG
Distribution Scheme.

4\. The information about an individual obtained by the Unique Identification
Authority of India while issuing an Aadhaar card shall not be used for any
other purpose, save as above, except as may be directed by a Court for the
purpose of criminal investigation.”

(d) Order dated October 15, 2015 (Constitution Bench) “3. After hearing the
learned Attorney General for India and other learned senior counsels, we are
of the view that in paragraph 3 of the order dated 11.08.2015, if we add,
apart from the other two Schemes, namely, P.D.S. Scheme and L.P.G.
Distribution Scheme, the Schemes like The Mahatma Gandhi National Social
Assistance Programme (Old Age Pensions, Widow Pensions, Disability Pensions),
Prime Minister’s Jan Dhan Yojana (PMJDY) and Employees’ Provident Fund
Organisation (EPFO) for the present, it would not dilute earlier order passed
by this Court. Therefore, we now include the aforesaid Schemes apart from the
other two Schemes that this Court has permitted in its earlier order dated
11.08.2015.

4\. We impress upon the Union of India that it shall strictly follow all the
earlier orders passed by this Court commencing from 23.09.2013.

5\. We will also make it clear that the Aadhaar card scheme is purely
voluntary and it cannot be made mandatory till the matter is finally decided
by this Court one way or the other.” Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 &
connected matters Page 21 of 567

(e) Order dated September 14, 2016 in WP (C) No. 686/2016 “Having regard to
the facts and circumstances of the case, the material evidence available on
record and the submissions made by learned senior counsel, we stay the
operation and implementation of letters dated 14.07.2006 (i.e. Annexure P-5,
P-6, P-7) for Pre-Matric Scholarship Scheme, Post-Matric Scholarship Scheme
and Merit-cum- Means Scholarship Scheme to the extent they have made
submission of Aadhaar mandatory and direct the Ministry of Electronics and
Information Technology, Government of India, i.e. respondent No.2, to remove
Aadhaar number as a mandatory condition for student registration form at the
National Scholarship Portal of Ministry of Electronics and Information
Technology, Government of India at the website...”

20) It is also relevant to point out that against an order passed by the High
Court of Bombay at Panaji, in some criminal proceedings, wherein the Authority
was directed to pass on biometric information on a person, UIDAI had filed
Special Leave Petition (Criminal) No. 2524 of 2014 challenging the said order
with the submission that such a direction for giving biometric information was
contrary to the provisions of the Aadhaar Act and the Authority was not
supposed to give such an information, which was confidential. In the said
special leave petition, order dated March 24, 2014 was passed staying the
operation of the orders of the Bombay High Court. This order reads as under:

> “Issue notice.

> In addition to normal mode of service, dasti service, is permitted.

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 22 of 567

Operation of the impugned order shall remain stayed.

In the meanwhile, the present petitioner is restrained from transferring any
biometric information of any person who has been allotted the Aadhaar number
to any other agency without his consent in writing.

More so, no person shall be deprived of any service for want of Aadhaar number
in case he/she is otherwise eligible/entitled. All the authorities are
directed to modify their forms/circulars/likes so as to not compulsorily
require the Aadhaar number in order to meet the requirement of the interim
order passed by this Court forthwith. Tag and list the matter with main matter
i.e. WP (C) No. 494 of 2012.”

21) Likewise, in Writ Petition (Civil) No. 1002 of 2017 titled Dr. Kalyan
Menon Sen v. Union of India and Others, where constitutional validity of
linking bank accounts and mobile phones with Aadhaar linkage was challenged,
interim order was passed on November 03, 2017 extending the last date of
linking to December 31, 2017 and February 06, 2018 respectively. This order
was extended thereafter and continues to operate.

22) We would also like to refer to the order dated September 14, 2011 passed
in People’s Union for Civil Liberties (PDS Matter) v. Union of India & Ors.2,
wherein various directions were given to ensure effective implementation of
the PDS Scheme and in the process to also undertake the exercise of
eliminating the task and 2 (2011) 14 SCC 331 Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of
2012 & connected matters Page 23 of 567 ghost ration cards. In the same
manner, vide order dated March 16, 2012 it was noted that the Government had
set up a task force under the Chairmanship of Mr. Nandan Nilekani to
recommend, amongst others, an IT strategy for the PDS. Mr. Nilekani was
requested to suggest ways and means by which computerization process of the
PDS can be expedited. Computerisation of PDS system was directed to be
prepared and in this hue the process of computerisation with Aadhaar
registration was also suggested.

In the same very case above, which also pertained to providing night shelters
to homeless destitute persons, some orders were passed on February 10, 2010 3
as well as on September 14, 20114.

23) Again, in the case of State of Kerala & Ors. v. President, Parent Teachers
Association SNVUP School and Ors. 5, where the Court was concerned with the
problem of fake or bogus admissions, it was felt that instead of involving the
Police in schools to prevent fake admissions, more appropriate method of
verification would be Unique Identification (UID) card as means of
verification. Architecture of the Aadhaar Project and the Aadhaar Act: 3
(2010) 5 SC 318 4 (2010) 13 SCC 45 5 (2013) 2 SCC 705 Writ Petition (Civil)
No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 24 of 567

24) Before adverting to the discussion on various issues that have been raised
in these petitions, it would be apposite to first understand the structure of
the Aadhaar Act and how it operates, having regard to various provisions
contained therein. UIDAI was established in the year 2009 by an administrative
order i.e. by resolution of the Govt. of India, Planning Commission, vide
notification dated January 28, 2009. The object of the establishment of the
said Authority was primarily to lay down policies to implement the Unique
Identification Scheme (for short the ‘UIS’) of the Government, by which
residents of India were to be provided unique identity number. The aim was to
serve this as proof of identity, which is unique in nature, as each individual
will have only one identity with no chance of duplication. Another objective
was that this number could be used for identification of beneficiaries for
transfer of benefits, subsidies, services and other purposes. This was the
primary reason, viz. to ensure correct identification of targeted
beneficiaries for delivery of various subsidies, benefits, services, grants,
wages and other social benefits schemes which are funded from the Consolidated
Fund of India. It was felt that the identification of real and genuine
beneficiaries had become a challenge for the Government. In the Writ Petition
(Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 25 of 567 absence of a
credible system to authenticate identity of beneficiaries, it was becoming
difficult to ensure that the subsidies, benefits and services reach to
intended beneficiaries. As per the Government, failure to establish identity
was proving to be major hindrance for the successful implementation of the
welfare programmes and it was hitting hard the marginalised section of the
society and, in particular, women, children, senior citizens, persons with
disabilities, migrant unskilled and organised workers, and nomadic tribes.
After the establishment of the Authority, vide the aforesaid notification, it
started enrolling the residents of this country under the UIS. These residents
also started using Aadhaar number allotted to them. It was found that over a
period of time, the use of Aadhaar number had increased manifold. This
necessitated ensuring security of the information contained in Aadhaar number
as well as the information that generated as a result of the use of Aadhaar
numbers. It was, thus, felt desirable to back the system with a Parliamentary
enactment.

25) With this intention, the Aadhaar Bill was introduced with the following
Introduction:

> “The Unique Identification Authority of India was established by a
> resolution of the Government of India in 2009\. It was meant primarily to
> lay down policies and to Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected
> matters Page 26 of 567 implement the Unique Identification Scheme, by which
> residents of India were to be provided unique identity number. This number
> wold serve as proof of identity and could be used for identification of
> beneficiaries for transfer of benefits, subsidies, services and other
> purposes.

> Later on, it was felt that the process of enrollment, authentication,
> security, confidentiality and use of Aadhaar related information be made
> statutory so as to facilitate the use of Aadhaar number for delivery of
> various benefits, subsidies and services, the expenditures of which were
> incurred from or receipts therefrom formed part of the Consolidated Fund of
> India.

The Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of Financial and Other Subsidies, Benefits and
Services) Bill, 2016 inter alia, provides for establishment of Unique
Identification Authority of India, issuance of Aadhaar number to individuals,
maintenance and updating of information in the Central Identities Data
Repository, issues pertaining to security, privacy and confidentiality of
information as well as offences and penalties for contravention of relevant
statutory provisions.”

26) After mentioning the reasons recorded above, Statement of Objects and
Reasons for introducing the Bill also highlight the salient features thereof
in the following manner:

> “5. The Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of Financial and Other Subsidies,
> Benefits and Services) Bill, 2016, inter alia, seeks to provide for—

> (a) issue of Aadhaar numbers to individuals on providing his demographic and
> biometric information to the Unique Identification Authority of India;

> (b) requiring Aadhaar numbers for identifying an individual for delivery of
> benefits, subsidies, and services the expenditure is incurred from or the
> receipt therefrom forms part of the Consolidated Fund of India;

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 27 of 567

(c) authentication of the Aadhaar number of an Aadhaar number holder in
relation to his demographic and biometric information;

(d) establishment of the Unique Identification Authority of India consisting
of a Chairperson, two Members and a Member-Secretary to perform functions in
pursuance of the objectives above;

(e) maintenance and updating the information of individuals in the Central
Identities Data Repository in such manner as may be specified by regulations;

(f) measures pertaining to security, privacy and confidentiality of
information in possession or control of the Authority including information
stored in the Central Identities Data Repository; and

(g) offences and penalties for contravention of relevant statutory
provisions.”

27) The Bill having been passed by the Legislature, received the assent of the
President on March 25, 2016 and, thus, became Act (18 of 2016). Preamble to
this Act again emphasises the aim and objective which this Act seeks to
achieve. It reads:

> “An Act to provide for, as a good governance, efficient, transparent, and
> targeted delivery of subsidies, benefits and services, the expenditure for
> which is incurred from the Consolidated Fund of India, to individuals
> residing in India through assigning of unique identity numbers to such
> individuals and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto”

> 28) Section 2 of the Act provides certain definitions. Some of the
> definitions can be noted at this stage itself, while other relevant
> definitions would be mentioned at the appropriate stage.

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 28 of 567

“(a) “Aadhaar number” means an identification number issued to an individual
under sub-section (3) of Section 3;

(b) “Aadhaar number holder” means an individual who has been issued an Aadhaar
number under this Act;

(c) “authentication” means the process by which the Aadhaar number along with
demographic information or biometric information of an individual is submitted
to the Central Identities Data Repository for its verification and such
Repository verifies the correctness, or the lack thereof, on the basis of
information available with it;

(d) “authentication record” means the record of the time of authentication and
identity of the requesting entity and the response provided by the Authority
thereto;

xx xx xx

(f) “benefit” means any advantage, gift, reward, relief, or payment, in cash
or kind, provided to an individual or a group of individuals and includes such
other benefits as may be notified by the Central Government;

(g) “biometric information” means photograph, finger print, Iris scan, or such
other biological attributes of an individual as may be specified by
regulations;

(h) “Central Identities Data Repository” means a centralised database in one
or more locations containing all Aadhaar numbers issued to Aadhaar number
holders along with the corresponding demographic information and biometric
information of such individuals and other information related thereto;

xx xx xx

(j) “core biometric information” means finger print, Iris scan, or such other
biological attribute of an individual as may be specified by regulations;

(k) “demographic information” includes information relating to the name, date
of birth, address and other relevant information of an individual, as may be
specified by regulations for the purpose of issuing an Aadhaar number, but
shall not include race, religion, caste, tribe, ethnicity, Writ Petition
(Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 29 of 567 language, records
of entitlement, income or medical history;

(l) “enrolling agency” means an agency appointed by the Authority or a
Registrar, as the case may be, for collecting demographic and biometric
information of individuals under this Act;

(m) “enrollment” means the process, as may be specified by regulations, to
collect demographic and biometric information from individuals by the
enrolling agencies for the purpose of issuing Aadhaar numbers to such
individuals under this Act;

(n) “identity information” in respect of an individual, includes his Aadhaar
number, his biometric information and his demographic information;

xx xx xx

(r) “records of entitlement” means records of benefits, subsidies or services
provided to, or availed by, any individual under any programme;

xx xx xx (u) “requesting entity” means an agency or person that submits the
Aadhaar number, and demographic information or biometric information, of an
individual to the Central Identities Data Repository for authentication;

(v) “resident” means an individual who has resided in India for a period or
periods amounting in all to one hundred and eighty-two days or more in the
twelve months immediately preceding the date of application for enrolment; (w)
“service” means any provision, facility, utility or any other assistance
provided in any form to an individual or a group of individuals and includes
such other services as may be notified by the Central Government;

(x) “subsidy” means any form of aid, support, grant, subvention, or
appropriation, in cash or kind, to an individual or a group of individuals and
includes such other subsidies as may be notified by the Central Government.”
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 30 of 567

29) Chapter II of the Act deals with enrolment. Section 3 in this Chapter
entitles every resident to obtain the Aadhaar number by submitting his
demographic information and biometric information. As noted above, demographic
information includes information relating to the name, date of birth, address
and ‘other relevant information of an individual, as may be specified by
regulations for the purpose of issuing an Aadhaar number’. Photograph,
fingerprint, iris scan, ‘or such other biological attribute of an individual
as may be specified by regulations’ are treated as biometric information. Sub-
section (2) of Section 3 stipulates that the enrolling agency shall, at the
time of enrolment, inform the individual undergoing enrolment of the following
details in such manner as may be specified by regulations, namely:

(a) the manner in which the information shall be used;

(b) the nature of recipients with whom the information is intended to be
shared during authentication; and

(c) the existence of a right to access information, the procedure for making
requests for such access, and details of the person or department in-charge to
whom such requests can be made.

30) Section 4, inter alia, provides that Aadhaar number issued to an
individual shall not be reassigned to any individual. In this sense, Writ
Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 31 of 567 it makes
an Aadhaar number given to a particular individual ‘unique’. Section 5
delineates special measures for issuance of Aadhaar number to certain
categories of persons and reads as under:

> “5. Special measures for issuance of Aadhaar number to certain category of
> persons.— The Authority shall take special measures to issue Aadhaar number
> to women, children, senior citizens, persons with disability, unskilled and
> unorganised workers, nomadic tribes or to such other persons who do not have
> any permanent dwelling house and such other categories of individuals as may
> be specified by regulations.”

> 31) Section 6 enables the Authority to update demographic and biometric
> information of the Aadhaar number holders from time to time.

32) Chapter III deals with ‘authentication’, which has generated the maximum
debate in these proceedings. Section 7 falling under this Chapter mandates
that proof of Aadhaar number would be necessary for receipt of certain
subsidies, benefits and services etc. meaning thereby for availing such
subsidies, benefits and services, it would be necessary for the intended
beneficiary to possess Aadhaar number. In case of an individual to whom no
Aadhaar number has been assigned, he/she would be required to show that
application for enrolment has been given. Where the Aadhaar number is not
assigned, proviso to Section 7 lays down Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012
& connected matters Page 32 of 567 that the individual shall be offered
alternate and viable means of identification for delivery of subsidy, benefit
or service. Section 8 deals with authentication of Aadhaar number and provides
that on submission of request by any requesting entity, the Authority shall
perform authentication of Aadhaar number. This authentication is in relation
to biometric information or demographic information of an Aadhaar number
holder. Before collecting identity information for the purpose of
authentication, the requesting entity is to obtain consent of an individual
and also to ensure that the identity information of that individual is only
used for submission to the Central Identities Data Repository (CIDR) for
authentication. Sections 7 and 8 read as under:

> “7. Proof of Aadhaar number necessary for receipt of certain subsidies,
> benefits and services, etc.— The Central Government or, as the case may be,
> the State Government may, for the purpose of establishing identity of an
> individual as a condition for receipt of a subsidy, benefit or service for
> which the expenditure is incurred from, or the receipt therefrom forms part
> of, the Consolidated Fund of India, require that such individual undergo
> authentication, or furnish proof of possession of Aadhaar number or in the
> case of an individual to whom no Aadhaar number has been assigned, such
> individual makes an application for enrolment:

> Provided that if an Aadhaar number is not assigned to an individual, the
> individual shall be offered alternate and viable means of identification for
> delivery of the subsidy, benefit or service.

8\. Authentication of Aadhaar number.— (1) The Authority shall perform
authentication of the Aadhaar number of an Aadhaar number holder submitted by
any Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 33 of 567
requesting entity, in relation to his biometric information or demographic
information, subject to such conditions and on payment of such fees and in
such manner as may be specified by regulations.

(2) A requesting entity shall—

(a) unless otherwise provided in this Act, obtain the consent of an individual
before collecting his identity information for the purposes of authentication
in such manner as may be specified by regulations; and

(b) ensure that the identity information of an individual is only used for
submission to the Central Identities Data Repository for authentication.

(3) A requesting entity shall inform, in such manner as may be specified by
regulations, the individual submitting his identity information for
authentication, the following details with respect to authentication, namely—

(a) the nature of information that may be shared upon authentication;

(b) the uses to which the information received during authentication may be
put by the requesting entity; and

(c) alternatives to submission of identity information to the requesting
entity.

(4) The Authority shall respond to an authentication query with a positive,
negative or any other appropriate response sharing such identity information
excluding any core biometric information.”

33) Under Section 10, the Authority is given power to engage one or more
entities to establish and maintain the CIDR and to perform any other functions
as may be specified by regulations.

34) Chapter IV deals with the Establishment of the Authority. As per Section
11, the Central Government, by notification, shall Writ Petition (Civil) No.
494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 34 of 567 establish an Authority to be
known as the Unique Identification Authority of India. Notification dated July
12, 2016 was issued by the Central Government establishing the Authority.
Other provisions in this Chapter deal with the composition of the Authority,
qualifications for appointment of the Chairperson and Members of Authority;
term of their office and their removal; and restrictions on their employment
after cessation of office. It also provides for the functions of Chairperson
as well as office of the Chief Executive Officer (CEO) and his functions and
the meetings of the Authority etc. Powers and functions of the Authority are
stipulated in Section 23.

35) Chapter V talks of grants to the Authority by the Central Government as
well as accounts and audit and annual report of the Authority.

36) Chapter VI deals with the important aspects pertaining to ‘protection of
information’. Section 28 of the Aadhaar Act puts an obligation on the
Authority to ensure the security of identity information and authentication
records of individuals. Likewise, Section 29 imposes certain restrictions on
sharing information i.e. core biometric information collected or created under
the Act or the identity information. The biometric information collected and
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 35 of 567
stored in electronic form, in accordance with this Act and regulations made
thereunder, is treated as ‘electronic record’ and ‘sensitive personal data or
information’ by virtue of Section 30 of the Act. As these are very material
and significant provisions of the Act, the same are reproduced verbatim in
their entirety:

> “28. Security and confidentiality of information.— (1) The Authority shall
> ensure the security of identity information and authentication records of
> individuals.

> (2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Authority shall ensure
> confidentiality of identity information and authentication records of
> individuals.

> (3) The Authority shall take all necessary measures to ensure that the
> information in the possession or control of the Authority, including
> information stored in the Central Identities Data Repository, is secured and
> protected against access, use or disclosure not permitted under this Act or
> regulations made thereunder, and against accidental or intentional
> destruction, loss or damage.

> (4) Without prejudice to sub-sections (1) and (2), the Authority shall—

> (a) adopt and implement appropriate technical and organisational security
> measures;

> (b) ensure that the agencies, consultants, advisors or other persons
> appointed or engaged for performing any function of the Authority under this
> Act, have in place appropriate technical and organisational security
> measures for the information; and

> (c) ensure that the agreements or arrangements entered into with such
> agencies, consultants, advisors or other persons, impose obligations
> equivalent to those imposed on the Authority under this Act, and require
> such agencies, consultants, advisors and other persons to act only on
> instructions from the Authority.

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 36 of 567

29\. Restriction on sharing information.— (1) No core biometric information,
collected or created under this Act, shall be—

(a) shared with anyone for any reason whatsoever; or

(b) used for any purpose other than generation of Aadhaar numbers and
authentication under this Act. (2) The identity information, other than core
biometric information, collected or created under this Act may be shared only
in accordance with the provisions of this Act and in such manner as may be
specified by regulations. (3) No identity information available with a
requesting entity shall be—

(a) used for any purpose, other than that specified to the individual at the
time of submitting any identity information for authentication; or

(b) disclosed further, except with the prior consent of the individual to whom
such information relates. (4) No Aadhaar number or core biometric information
collected or created under this Act in respect of an Aadhaar number holder
shall be published, displayed or posted publicly, except for the purposes as
may be specified by regulations.

30\. Biometric information deemed to be sensitive personal information.— The
biometric information collected and stored in electronic form, in accordance
with this Act and regulations made thereunder, shall be deemed to be
“electronic record” and “sensitive personal data or information”, and the
provisions contained in the Information Technology Act, 2000 (21 of 2000) and
the rules made thereunder shall apply to such information, in addition to, and
to the extent not in derogation of the provisions of this Act.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, the expressions—

(a) “electronic form” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause
(r) of sub-section (1) of Section 2 of the Information Technology Act, 2000
(21 of 2000); Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page
37 of 567

(b) “electronic record” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in
clause (t) of sub-section (1) of Section 2 of the Information Technology Act,
2000 (21 of 2000);

(c) “sensitive personal data or information” shall have the same meaning as
assigned to it in clause (iii) of the Explanation to Section 43-A of the
Information Technology Act, 2000 (21 of 2000).”

37) Section 32 provides that the Authority shall maintain authentication
records in such manner and for such period as may be specified by regulations
and enables every Aadhaar number holder to obtain his authentication record in
such manner as may be specified by regulations. This provision also puts an
embargo upon the Authority to collect, keep or maintain any information about
‘purpose of authentication’. Section 33, however, creates an exception to the
provisions of Section 28(ii) and (v) as well as Section 29(ii) by stipulating
that the information can be disclosed pursuant to an order of a court not
inferior to that of a District Judge. It also carves out another exception in
those cases where it becomes necessary to disclose the information in the
interest of national security in pursuance of a direction of an officer not
below the rank of Joint Secretary to the Government of India specially
authorised in this behalf by an order of the Central Government.

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 38 of 567

38) Sections 34 to 47 in Chapter VII of the Act enumerate various kinds of
offences and provide penalties for such offences. For our purposes, relevant
Section is Section 37 which makes act of disclosing identity information as
offence which is punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to
three years or with a fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees. In the
case of a company, this fine can extend to one lakh rupees. Likewise, Section
38 provides for penalty for unauthorised access to the CIDR. Penalties for
tampering with data in CIDR (Section 39) and unauthorised use by requesting
entity (Section 40) are also stipulated.

Cognizance of offences under this Chapter can be taken by a court only on a
complaint made by the Authority or any officer or person authorised by it.

39) Section 50 of the Act empowers the Central Government to issue directions
to the Authority in writing from time to time and the Authority shall be bound
to carry out such directions on questions of policy. Section 53 empowers the
Central Government to make rules to carry out the provisions of the Act
generally as well as the specific matters enumerated in sub-section (2)
thereof. Section 54 empowers the Authority to make regulations consistent with
the Act and Rules made thereunder, for carrying out the Writ Petition (Civil)
No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 39 of 567 provisions of the Act and,
in particular, the matters mentioned in sub-section (2). Such Rules and
Regulations are to be laid before the Parliament, as provided in Section 55.

40) Section 57 provides that the Aadhaar Act would not prevent the use of
Aadhaar number for establishing the identity of an individual for any purpose
and reads as under:

> “57. Act not to prevent use of Aadhaar number for other purposes under law.—
> Nothing contained in this Act shall prevent the use of Aadhaar number for
> establishing the identity of an individual for any purpose, whether by the
> State or any body corporate or person, pursuant to any law, for the time
> being in force, or any contract to this effect:

> Provided that the use of Aadhaar number under this section shall be subject
> to the procedure and obligations under Section 8 and Chapter VI.”

> 41) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of the Act,
> the Central Government is empowered to make provisions to remove those
> difficulties, provided that such provisions are not inconsistent with the
> provisions of the Act. Section 59, which is the last provision in the Act,
> is an attempt to save all the acts and actions of the Central Government
> under Notification dated January 28, 2009 vide which the Authority was
> established or the Department of Electronics and Information Technology
> under the Cabinet Secretariat Notification dated September 12, 2015. This
> Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 40 of 567
> provision is couched in the following language:

> “59. Savings.— Anything done or any action taken by the Central Government
> under the Resolution of the Government of India, Planning Commission bearing
> Notification Number A-43011/02/2009-Admin. I, dated the 28th January, 2009,
> or by the Department of Electronics and Information Technology under the
> Cabinet Secretariat Notification bearing Notification Number S.O. 2492(E),
> dated the 12th September, 2015, as the case may be, shall be deemed to have
> been validly done or taken under this Act.”

> 42) Regulations have been framed under the Act, namely, (1) The Aadhaar
> (Enrolment and Update) Regulations, 2016; (2) The Aadhaar (Authentication)
> Regulations, 2016; (3) The Aadhaar (Data Security) Regulations, 2016; and
> (4) The Aadhaar (Sharing of Information) Regulations, 2016. The relevant
> provisions in these Regulations are reproduced below:

> “The Aadhaar (Enrolment and Update) Regulations, 2016

> 4\. Demographic information required for enrolment. — (1) The following
> demographic information shall be collected from all individuals undergoing
> enrolment (other than children below five years of age):

> (i) Name;

> (ii) Date of Birth;

> (iii) Gender;

> (iv) Residential Address.

> (2) The following demographic information may also additionally be collected
> during enrolment, at the option of the individual undergoing enrolment:

> (i) Mobile number

> (ii) Email address (3) In case of Introducer-based enrolment, the following
> additional information shall be collected:

> (i) Introducer name;

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 41 of 567

> (ii)Introducer’s Aadhaar number.

> (4) In case of Head of Family based enrolment, the following additional
> information shall be collected:

> (i) Name of Head of Family;

> (ii) Relationship;

> (iii) Head of Family’s Aadhaar number;

> (iv) One modality of biometric information of the Head of Family.

> (5) The standards of the above demographic information shall be as may be
> specified by the Authority for this purpose.

> (6) The demographic information shall not include race, religion, caste,
> tribe, ethnicity, language, record of entitlement, income or medical history
> of the resident.

> The Aadhaar (Authentication) Regulations, 2016

> 3\. Types of Authentication.— There shall be two types of authentication
> facilities provided by the Authority, namely—

> (i) Yes/No authentication facility, which may be carried out using any of
> the modes specified in regulation 4(2); and

> (ii) e-KYC authentication facility, which may be carried out only using OTP
> and/ or biometric authentication modes as specified in regulation 4(2).

> 4\. Modes of Authentication. — (1) An authentication request shall be
> entertained by the Authority only upon a request sent by a requesting entity
> electronically in accordance with these regulations and conforming to the
> specifications laid down by the Authority.

> (2) Authentication may be carried out through the following modes:

> (a) Demographic authentication: The Aadhaar number and demographic
> information of the Aadhaar number holder obtained from the Aadhaar number
> holder is matched with the demographic information of the Aadhaar number
> holder in the CIDR.

(b) One-time pin based authentication: A One Time Pin (OTP), with limited time
validity, is sent to the mobile Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 &
connected matters Page 42 of 567 number and/ or e-mail address of the Aadhaar
number holder registered with the Authority, or generated by other appropriate
means. The Aadhaar number holder shall provide this OTP along with his Aadhaar
number during authentication and the same shall be matched with the OTP
generated by the Authority.

(c) Biometric-based authentication: The Aadhaar number and biometric
information submitted by an Aadhaar number holder are matched with the
biometric information of the said Aadhaar number holder stored in the CIDR.
This may be fingerprints-based or iris-based authentication or other biometric
modalities based on biometric information stored in the CIDR.

(d) Multi-factor authentication: A combination of two or more of the above
modes may be used for authentication. (3) A requesting entity may choose
suitable mode(s) of authentication from the modes specified in sub-regulation
(2) for a particular service or business function as per its requirement,
including multiple factor authentication for enhancing security. For the
avoidance of doubt, it is clarified that e-KYC authentication shall only be
carried out using OTP and/ or biometric authentication.

xx xx xx

7\. Capturing of biometric information by requesting entity.— (1) A requesting
entity shall capture the biometric information of the Aadhaar number holder
using certified biometric devices as per the processes and specifications laid
down by the Authority.

(2) A requesting entity shall necessarily encrypt and secure the biometric
data at the time of capture as per the specifications laid down by the
Authority. (3) For optimum results in capturing of biometric information, a
requesting entity shall adopt the processes as may be specified by the
Authority from time to time for this purpose.

xx xx xx

9\. Process of sending authentication requests.— (1) After collecting the
Aadhaar number or any other identifier Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 &
connected matters Page 43 of 567 provided by the requesting entity which is
mapped to Aadhaar number and necessary demographic and / or biometric
information and/ or OTP from the Aadhaar number holder, the client application
shall immediately package and encrypt these input parameters into PID block
before any transmission, as per the specifications laid down by the Authority,
and shall send it to server of the requesting entity using secure protocols as
may be laid down by the Authority for this purpose.

(2) After validation, the server of a requesting entity shall pass the
authentication request to the CIDR, through the server of the Authentication
Service Agency as per the specifications laid down by the Authority. The
authentication request shall be digitally signed by the requesting entity
and/or by the Authentication Service Agency, as per the mutual agreement
between them. (3) Based on the mode of authentication request, the CIDR shall
validate the input parameters against the data stored therein and return a
digitally signed Yes or No authentication response, or a digitally signed
e-KYC authentication response with encrypted e-KYC data, as the case may be,
along with other technical details related to the authentication transaction.

(4) In all modes of authentication, the Aadhaar number is mandatory and is
submitted along with the input parameters specified in sub-regulation (1)
above such that authentication is always reduced to a 1:1 match. (5) A
requesting entity shall ensure that encryption of PID Block takes place at the
time of capture on the authentication device as per the processes and
specifications laid down by the Authority.

xx xx xx

18\. Maintenance of logs by requesting entity. — (1) A requesting entity shall
maintain logs of the authentication transactions processed by it, containing
the following transaction details, namely:—

(a) the Aadhaar number against which authentication is sought;

(b) specified parameters of authentication request submitted;

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 44 of 567

(c) specified parameters received as authentication response;

(d) the record of disclosure of information to the Aadhaar number holder at
the time of authentication; and

(e) record of consent of the Aadhaar number holder for authentication, but
shall not, in any event, retain the PID information.

(2) The logs of authentication transactions shall be maintained by the
requesting entity for a period of 2 (two) years, during which period an
Aadhaar number holder shall have the right to access such logs, in accordance
with the procedure as may be specified.

(3) Upon expiry of the period specified in sub-regulation (2), the logs shall
be archived for a period of five years or the number of years as required by
the laws or regulations governing the entity, whichever is later, and upon
expiry of the said period, the logs shall be deleted except those records
required to be retained by a court or required to be retained for any pending
disputes.

(4) The requesting entity shall not share the authentication logs with any
person other than the concerned Aadhaar number holder upon his request or for
grievance redressal and resolution of disputes or with the Authority for audit
purposes. The authentication logs shall not be used for any purpose other than
stated in this sub-regulation. (5) The requesting entity shall comply with all
relevant laws, rules and regulations, including, but not limited to, the
Information Technology Act, 2000 and the Evidence Act, 1872, for the storage
of logs.

(6) The obligations relating to authentication logs as specified in this
regulation shall continue to remain in force despite termination of
appointment in accordance with these regulations.

xx xx xx

26\. Storage and Maintenance of Authentication Transaction Data. — (1) The
Authority shall store and maintain authentication transaction data, which
shall contain the following information:—

(a) authentication request data received including PID block;

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 45 of 567

(b) authentication response data sent;

> (c) meta data related to the transaction;

> (d) any authentication server side configurations as necessary Provided that
> the Authority shall not, in any case, store the purpose of authentication.

> The Aadhaar (Data Security) Regulations, 2016

> 3\. Measures for ensuring information security. — (1) The Authority may
> specify an information security policy setting out inter alia the technical
> and organisational measures to be adopted by the Authority and its
> personnel, and also security measures to be adopted by agencies, advisors,
> consultants and other service providers engaged by the Authority, registrar,
> enrolling agency, requesting entities, and Authentication Service Agencies.

> (2) Such information security policy may provide for:—

> (a) identifying and maintaining an inventory of assets associated with the
> information and information processing facilities;

> (b) implementing controls to prevent and detect any loss, damage, theft or
> compromise of the assets;

> (c) allowing only controlled access to confidential information;

> (d) implementing controls to detect and protect against virus/malwares;

> (e) a change management process to ensure information security is maintained
> during changes;

> (f) a patch management process to protect information systems from
> vulnerabilities and security risks;

> (g) a robust monitoring process to identify unusual events and patterns that
> could impact security and performance of information systems and a proper
> reporting and mitigation process;

> (h) encryption of data packets containing biometrics, and enabling
> decryption only in secured locations;

> (i) partitioning of CIDR network into zones based on risk and trust;

> (j) deploying necessary technical controls for protecting CIDR network;

> (k) service continuity in case of a disaster;

> (l) monitoring of equipment, systems and networks;

> (m) measures for fraud prevention and effective remedies in case of fraud;

> (n) requirement of entering into non-disclosure agreements with the
> personnel;

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 46 of 567

(o) provisions for audit of internal systems and networks;

> (p) restrictions on personnel relating to processes, systems and networks.

> (q) inclusion of security and confidentiality obligations in the agreements
> or arrangements with the agencies, consultants, advisors or other persons
> engaged by the Authority.

> (3) The Authority shall monitor compliance with the information security
> policy and other security requirements through internal audits or through
> independent agencies.

> (4) The Authority shall designate an officer as Chief Information Security
> Officer for disseminating and monitoring the information security policy and
> other security-related programmes and initiatives of the Authority.

> xx xx xx

> 5\. Security obligations of service providers, etc. — The agencies,
> consultants, advisors and other service providers engaged by the Authority
> for discharging any function relating to its processes shall:

> (a) ensure compliance with the information security policy specified by the
> Authority;

> (b) periodically report compliance with the information security policy and
> contractual requirements, as required by the Authority;

> (c) report promptly to the Authority any security incidents affecting the
> confidentiality, integrity and availability of information related to the
> Authority’s functions;

> (d) ensure that records related to the Authority shall be protected from
> loss, destruction, falsification, unauthorised access and unauthorised
> release;

> (e) ensure confidentiality obligations are maintained during the term and on
> termination of the agreement;

> (f) ensure that appropriate security and confidentiality obligations are
> provided for in their agreements with their employees and staff members;

> (g) ensure that the employees having physical access to CIDR data centers
> and logical access to CIDR data centers undergo necessary background checks;

(h) define the security perimeters holding sensitive information, and ensure
only authorised individuals are allowed access to such areas to prevent any
data leakage or misuse; and Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected
matters Page 47 of 567

(i) where they are involved in the handling of the biometric data, ensure that
they use only those biometric devices which are certified by a certification
body as identified by the Authority and ensure that appropriate systems are
built to ensure security of the biometric data.

The Aadhaar (Sharing of Information) Regulations, 2016.

3\. Sharing of information by the Authority. — (1) Core biometric information
collected by the Authority under the Act shall not be shared with anyone for
any reason whatsoever.

(2) The demographic information and photograph of an individual collected by
the Authority under the Act may be shared by the Authority with a requesting
entity in response to an authentication request for e-KYC data pertaining to
such individual, upon the requesting entity obtaining consent from the Aadhaar
number holder for the authentication process, in accordance with the
provisions of the Act and the Aadhaar (Authentication) Regulations, 2016\.

(3) The Authority shall share authentication records of the Aadhaar number
holder with him in accordance with regulation 28 of the Aadhaar
(Authentication) Regulations, 2016\.

(4) The Authority may share demographic information and photograph, and the
authentication records of an Aadhaar number holder when required to do so in
accordance with Section 33 of the Act.

xx xx xx

6\. Restrictions on sharing, circulating or publishing of Aadhaar number. —
(1) The Aadhaar number of an individual shall not be published, displayed or
posted publicly by any person or entity or agency.

(2) Any individual, entity or agency, which is in possession of Aadhaar
number(s) of Aadhaar number holders, shall ensure security and confidentiality
of the Aadhaar numbers and of any record or database containing the Aadhaar
numbers.

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 48 of 567 (3)
Without prejudice to sub-regulations (1) and (2), no entity, including a
requesting entity, which is in possession of the Aadhaar number of an Aadhaar
number holder, shall make public any database or record containing the Aadhaar
numbers of individuals, unless the Aadhaar numbers have been redacted or
blacked out through appropriate means, both in print and electronic form. (4)
No entity, including a requesting entity, shall require an individual to
transmit his Aadhaar number over the Internet unless such transmission is
secure and the Aadhaar number is transmitted in encrypted form except where
transmission is required for correction of errors or redressal of grievances.

(5) No entity, including a requesting entity, shall retain Aadhaar numbers or
any document or database containing Aadhaar numbers for longer than is
necessary for the purpose specified to the Aadhaar number holder at the time
of obtaining consent.”

43) To sum up broadly, the Authority is established under the Act as a
statutory body which is given the task of developing the policy, procedure and
system for issuing Aadhaar numbers to individuals and also to perform
authentication thereof as per the provisions of the Act. For the purpose of
enrolment and assigning Aadhaar numbers, enrolling agencies are recruited by
the Authority. All the residents in India are eligible to obtain an Aadhaar
number. To enable a resident to get Aadhaar number, he is required to submit
demographic as well as biometric information i.e., apart from giving
information relating to name, date of birth and address, biometric information
in the form of photograph, fingerprint, iris scan is also to be provided.
Aadhaar number given to a particular Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 &
connected matters Page 49 of 567 person is treated as unique number as it
cannot be reassigned to any other individual.

Insofar as subsidies, benefits or services to be given by the Central
Government or the State Government, as the case may be, is concerned, these
Governments can mandate that receipt of these subsidies, benefits and services
would be given only on furnishing proof of possession of Aadhaar number (or
proof of making an application for enrolment, where Aadhaar number is not
assigned). An added requirement is that such individual would undergo
authentication at the time of receiving such benefits etc. A particular
institution/body from which the aforesaid subsidy, benefit or service is to be
claimed by such an individual, the intended recipient would submit his Aadhaar
number and is also required to give her biometric information to that agency.
On receiving this information and for the purpose of its authentication, the
said agency, known as Requesting Entity, would send the request to the
Authority which shall perform the job of authentication of Aadhaar number. On
confirming the identity of a person, the individual is entitled to receive
subsidy, benefit or service. Aadhaar number is permitted to be used by the
holder for other purposes as well.

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 50 of 567

44) In this whole process, any resident seeking to obtain an Aadhaar number
is, in the first instance, required to submit her demographic information and
biometric information at the time of enrolment. She, thus, parts with her
photograph, fingerprint and iris scan at that stage by giving the same to the
enrolling agency, which may be a private body/person. Likewise, every time
when such Aadhaar holder intends to receive a subsidy, benefit or service and
goes to specified/designated agency or person for that purpose, she would be
giving her biometric information to that requesting entity, which, in turn,
shall get the same authenticated from the Authority before providing a
subsidy, benefit or service. Whenever request is received for authentication
by the Authority, record of such a request is kept and stored in the CIDR. At
the same time, provisions for protection of such information/data have been
made, as indicated above. Aadhaar number can also be used for purposes other
than stated in the Act i.e. purposes other than provided under Section 7 of
the Act, as mentioned in Section 57 of the Act, which permit the State or any
body corporate or person, pursuant to any law, for the time being in force, or
any contract to this effect, to use the Aadhaar number for establishing the
identity of an individual. It can be used as a proof of identity, like other
identity Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 51 of
567 proofs such as PAN card, ration card, driving licence, passport etc.

45) Piercing into the aforesaid Aadhaar programme and its formation/structure
under the Aadhaar Act, foundational arguments are that it is a grave risk to
the rights and liberties of the citizens of this country which are secured by
the Constitution of India. It militates against the constitutional abiding
values and its foundational morality and has the potential to enable an
intrusive state to become a surveillance state on the basis of information
that is collected in respect of each individual by creation of a joint
electronic mesh. In this manner, the Act strikes at the very privacy of each
individual thereby offending the right to privacy which is elevated and given
the status of fundamental right by tracing it to Articles 14, 19 and 21 of the
Constitution of India by a nine Judge Bench judgment of this Court in K.S.
Puttaswamy & Anr. v. Union of India & Ors.6. Most of the counsel appearing for
different petitioners (though not all) conceded that there cannot be a serious
dispute insofar as allotment of Aadhaar number, for the purpose of unique
identification of the residents, is concerned. However, apprehensions have
been expressed about the manner in which the Scheme has been rolled out and 6
(2017) 10 SCC 1 Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page
52 of 567 implemented. The entire edifice of the aforesaid projection is based
on the premise that it forces a person, who intends to enrol for Aadhaar, to
part with his core information namely biometric information in the form of
fingerprints and iris scan. These are to be given to the enrolment agency in
the first instance which is a private body and, thus, there is risk of misuse
of this vital information pertaining to an individual. Further, it is argued
that the most delicate and fragile part, susceptible to misuse, is the
authentication process which is to be carried out each time the holder of
Aadhaar number wants to establish her identity. At that stage, not only the
individual parts with the biometric information again with the RE (which may
again be a private agency as well), the purpose for which such a person
approaches the RE would also be known i.e. the nature of transaction which is
supposed to be undertaken by the said person at that time. Such information
relating to different transactions of a person across the life of the citizen
is connected to a central database. This record may enable the State to
profile citizens, track their movements, assess their habits and silently
influence their behaviour. Over a period of time, the profiling would enable
the State to stifle dissent and influence political decision making. It may
also enable the State to act as a surveillant state and there is a propensity
for it to Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 53 of
567 become a totalitarian state. It is stressed that at its core, Aadhaar
alters the relationship between the citizen and the State. It diminishes the
status of the citizen. Rights freely exercised, liberties freely enjoyed,
entitlements granted by the Constitution and laws are all made conditional, on
a compulsory barter. The barter compels the citizen to give up her biometrics
‘voluntarily’, allow her biometrics and demographic information to be stored
by the State and private operators and then used for a process termed
‘authentication’.

To put it in nutshell, provisions of the Aadhaar Act are perceived by the
petitioners as giving away of vital information about the residents to the
State not only in the form of biometrics but also about the movement as well
as varied kinds of transactions which a resident would enter into from time to
time. The threat is in the form of profiling the citizens by the State on the
one hand and also misuse thereof by private agencies whether it is enrolling
agency or requesting agency or even private bodies mentioned in Section 57 of
the Act. In essence, it is stated that not only data of aforesaid nature is
stored by the CIDR, which has the threat of being leaked, it can also be
misused by non-State actors. In other words, it is sought to be highlighted
that there is no assurance of any data protection at Writ Petition (Civil) No.
494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 54 of 567 any level.

46) The respondents, on the other hand, have attempted to shake the very
foundation of the aforesaid structure of the petitioners’ case. They argue
that in the first instance, minimal biometric information of the applicant,
who intends to have Aadhaar number, is obtained which is also stored in CIDR
for the purpose of authentication. Secondly, no other information is stored.
It is emphasised that there is no data collection in respect of religion,
caste, tribe, language records of entitlement, income or medical history of
the applicant at the time of Aadhaar enrolment. Thirdly, the Authority also
claimed that the entire Aadhaar enrolment eco- system is foolproof inasmuch as
within few seconds of the biometrics having been collected by the enrolling
agency, the said information gets transmitted the Authorities/CIDR, that too
in an encrypted form, and goes out of the reach of the enrolling agency. Same
is the situation at the time of authentication as biometric information does
not remain with the requesting agency. Fourthly, while undertaking the
authentication process, the Authority simply matches the biometrics and no
other information is received or stored in respect of purpose, location or
nature or transaction etc. Therefore, the question of profiling does Writ
Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 55 of 567 not arise
at all. A powerpoint presentation was given by Dr. Ajay Bhushan Pandey, CEO of
the Authority, in the Court, while explaining various nuances of the whole
process. In this presentation, the enrolment process has been projected in the
following manner:

47) Insofar as Aadhaar authentication service is concerned, it was explained
that the same is e-KYC wherein following process is involved:

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 56 of 567

48) It was asserted with all vehemence that while doing the aforesaid
authentication, no other information is collected or stored by the
Authority/CIDR, specifically pointing that:

(a) The Authority does not collect purpose, location or details of
transaction. Thus, it is purpose blind.

(b) The information collected as aforesaid remains in silos.

    
    
           (c)     Merging of silos is prohibited.
    
           (d)     The RE is provided answer only in Yes or No about the
    
           authentication of the person concerned.
    
           (e)     The authentication process is not exposed to the internet
    
           world.
    
           (f)     Security measures as per the provisions of Section 29(3)
    
    

read with Section 38(g) as well as Regulation 17(1)(d) of the Writ Petition
(Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 57 of 567 Authentication
Regulations are strictly followed and adhere to.

The Aadhaar Authentication Security has been described in the following
manner:

49) In this hue, the Authority has projected that the Aadhaar design takes
full care of privacy and security of the persons. It is sought to be
demonstrated by pointing out the following features:

(i) Privacy is ensured by the very design of Aadhaar which was conceived by
the Authority from very inception and is now even incarnated in the Aadhaar
Act because : (a) it is backed by minimal data, federated databases, optimal
ignorance; and (b) there is no transaction/pooling data coupled with the fact
that resident authorised access to identity data is available.

(ii) Aadhaar is designed for inclusion inasmuch as : (a) there is flexibility
of demographic data, multi-modal biometrics, and Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494
of 2012 & connected matters Page 58 of 567 flexible processes; (b) DDSVP
Committee by Dr. V.N. Vittal, former CVC; and (c) Biometric design and
Standards Committee by Dr. Gairola, Former DG, NIC.

(iii) All security numbers are followed which can be seen from:

(a) PKI-2048 encryption from the time of capture, (b) adoption of best-in-
class security standards and practices, and (c) strong audit and traceability
as well as fraud detection.

50) It was explained that the security and data privacy is ensured in the
following way:

(i) The data sent to ABIS is completely anonymised. The ABIS systems do not
have access to resident’s demographic information as they are only sent
biometric information of a resident with a reference number and asked to de-
duplicate. The de-duplication result with the reference number is mapped back
to the correct enrolment number by the Authorities own enrolment server.

(ii) The ABIS providers only provide their software and services. The data is
stored in UIDAI storage and it never leaves the secure premises.

(iii) The ABIS providers do not store the biometric images (source). They only
store template for the purpose of de- Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 &
connected matters Page 59 of 567 duplication (with reference number).

(iv) The encrypted enrolment packet sent by the enrolment client software to
the CIDR is decrypted by the enrolment server but the decrypted packet is
never stored.

(v) The original biometric images of fingerprints, iris and face are archived
and stored offline. Hence, they cannot be accessed through an online network.

(vi) The biometric system provides high accuracy of over 99.86%. The mixed
biometric have been adopted only t enhance the accuracy and to reduce the
errors which may arise on account of some residents either not having
biometrics or not having some particular biometric.

51) Above all, there is an oversight by Technology and Architecture Review
Board (TARB) and Security Review Committee. This Board and Committee consists
of very high profiled officers. The aforesaid security measures are shown by
the Authority in the following manner:

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 60 of 567 Writ
Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 61 of 567

52) We may point out at this stage that to the powerpoint presentation by Dr.
Pandey on the aforesaid lines, certain questions were put to him by Mr. Shyam
Divan as well as Mr. Vishwanathan, senior advocates, and the answers thereto
were given by Dr. Pandey. In order to have the complete picture, we will be
well advised to reproduce these questions and their answers as well, which are
as follows:

53) Questions and Answers to the queries raised by the petitioners in W.P. (C)
No. 1056 of 2017 entitled ‘Nachiket Udupa & Anr. v. Union of India (1) What
are the figures for authentication failures, both at the national and state
level? Please provide a breakup, between fingerprints and iris.

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 62 of 567

Ans.: UIDAI cannot provide authentication failure rates at the state level
since it does not track the location of the authentication transactions.
Authentication failure rate at national level is as below:

> Modality Unique UID Failed Unique ID Failed Percentage Participated IRIS
> 1,08,50,391 9,27,132 8.54% FINGER 61,63,63,346 3,69,62,619 6.00% It must be
> stated that authentication failures do not mean exclusion or denial from
> subsidies, benefits or services since the requesting entities are obliged
> under the law to provide for exception handling mechanisms.

(2) In case a person who is claiming a biometric exception (e.g. a person
suffering from leprosy) does not have a mobile phone number, or has not given
it in the enrolment form, or if the phone number changes – how will her
Aadhaar enrolment and subsequent authentication occur and under which
provision of law?

Ans.: Aadhaar enrolment is done for all residents, even of residents with
leprosy. Biometric exception process is defined in the UIDAI resident
enrolment process. In the case of a leprosy patient, who may not be able to do
fingerprint authentication, iris Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 &
connected matters Page 63 of 567 authentication can be used for update (and
add the mobile number). This was the reason for multi-modal enrolment and
authentication being selected for use in Aadhaar.

Only in an unlikely scenario where both iris and fingerprint cannot be used
for authentication, the mobile number is one of the methods for
authentication. In cases where authentication through mobile number is not
possible or feasible, the requesting entities have to provide their own
exception and backup mechanism to ensure services to Aadhaar holders. As part
of the exception handling mechanism, UIDAI has already implemented a digitally
signed QR code into e-Aadhaar which allows agencies to verify the Aadhaar card
in an off-line manner and trust the data (based on digital signature
validation) without accessing e-KYC API service of UIDAI. This is a simple
off-line mechanism to quickly verify the legitimacy of the Aadhaar card. But,
it does not ensure that the person holding the card is the owner of that
Aadhaar number. It needs either manual check of photo against the face of the
individual (like the way ID is verified at the entry of airports) or some form
of electronic authentication using Aadhaar authentication API or agency
specific authentication scheme. QR code based verification allows Aadhaar
number holders to use their ID on a day-to-day purpose without using online
e-KYC Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 64 of 567
authentication. The verification through offline QR code can be used for those
purposes or cases where proof of presence or proof of ownership of card is not
required.

The Aadhaar Act and Aadhaar (Enrolment and Update) Regulations, 2016 define
special provision for enrolment of residents with biometric exception.
Further, as per Regulation 14(i) of the Authentication Regulations, RE shall
implement exception-handling mechanisms and backup identity authentication
mechanisms to ensure seamless provision of authentication services to Aadhaar
number holders. Accordingly, DBT Mission Cabinet Secretariat has issued a
detailed circular dated December 19, 2017 regarding exception handling during
use of Aadhaar in the benefit schemes of the Government. (3) Are there any
surprise checks, field studies done to check the authenticity of the exemption
registers? Ans.: As per Regulation 14(i) of the Authentication Regulations,
this exception handling mechanism is to be implemented and monitored by the
requesting entities and in case of the Government, their respective
Ministries. Further, the DBT Mission Cabinet Secretariat had issued Circular
dated December 19, 2017 on exception handling and audit of exceptions. Writ
Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 65 of 567 (4)
Between the ages of 5-15 years, can a school, as an ‘introducer’, enrol a
child without parental consent? Ans.: School officials, if permitted to act as
‘introducer’, can enrol only when there is a parental consent to enrol. The
disclosure requirement as per Section 3(2) of the Aadhaar Act and the Aadhaar
(Enrolment and Update) Regulations, 2016 (Schedule-I) is implemented through
the enrolment form which is signed by the resident making it informed
disclosure. In case of children, the consent form will be signed by the
parent/guardian. (5) Once a child attains the age of 18 years, is there any
way for them to opt out or revoke consent?

Ans.: It is not permissible under the Aadhaar Act. However, residents have the
option of permanently locking their biometrics and only temporarily unlock it
when needed for biometric authentication as per Regulation 11 of the
Authentication Regulations.

(6) What is the status of the enrolments done by the 49,000 blacklisted
enrolment operators? Please provide the number of enrolments done by them?

Ans.: UIDAI has a policy to enforce the process guidelines and Writ Petition
(Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 66 of 567 data quality check
during the enrolment process. 100% of the enrolment done by operators
undergoes a quality assurance check, wherein every enrolment passes through a
human eye. Any Aadhaar enrolment found to be contrary to the UIDAI process,
the enrolment itself gets rejected and Aadhaar is not generated. The resident
is advised to re-enroll. Once an operator is blacklisted or suspended, further
enrolments cannot be carried out by him during the time the order of
blacklisting/suspension is valid.

(7) What are the total number of biometric De-duplication rejections that have
taken place till date? In case an enrolment is rejected either for: (a)
duplicate enrolment and (b) other technical reason under Regulation 14 of the
Aadhaar Enrolment Regulations, what happens to the data packet that contains
the stored biometric and demographic information? Ans.: The total number of
biometric de-duplication rejections that have taken place are 6.91 crores as
on March 21, 2018. These figures do not pertain to the number of unique
individuals who have been denied Aadhaar enrolment resulting in no Aadhaar
issued to them. This figure merely pertains to the number of applications
which have been identified by the Aadhaar de- Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of
2012 & connected matters Page 67 of 567 duplication system as having matching
biometrics to an existing Aadhaar number holder. The biometric de-duplication
system is designed to identify as duplicate those cases where any one of the
biometrics (ten fingers and two irises) match. However, very often it is found
that all the biometrics match. It is highly improbable for the biometrics to
match unless the same person has applied again. There are a number of reasons
why the same person might apply more than once. For instance, many individuals
innocently apply for enrolment multiple times because of the delay in getting
their Aadhaar cards due to postal delays, loss or destruction of their cards
or confusion about how the system works. Each time one applies for Aadhaar,
the system identifies her as a new enrolment but when it recognises that the
individual’s biometrics match with already those in the database, thereafter
further checks, including manual check through experienced personnels, are
done. After that exercise, if it is found that the person is already
registered, it rejects the enrolment application. One of their main reasons
for rejection is that multiple people would put their biometric details like
fingerprints for Aadhaar generation either as a fraudulent exercise or by
mistake, which also would get rejected. There were many fakes and frauds in
the earlier systems and several reports have Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of
2012 & connected matters Page 68 of 567 found that almost 50% of the subsidies
were getting pilfered away by fakes and duplicates in the system. Then, there
would also be several such people who may have tried to defraud the Aadhaar
enrolment system as well but failed get multiple Aadhaar numbers due to the
stringent Aadhaar de-duplication process. Thus, the mere fact that 6.23 crore
enrolments have been rejected as biometric duplicates does not mean that 6.23
crore people have been denied an Aadhaar number as has been alleged by the
petitioners. Any genuine person who does not have an Aadhaar number and whose
enrolment has been rejected can always apply again for enrolment. It is worth
noting that none of the de- duplication rejects have come forward to lodge
complaints either with the Authority or with the Government about denial of
Aadhaar number. None of them have even approached any Court of law. Evidently,
the genuine residents have got themselves re-enrolled and the rest are those
who were trying to reach the Aadhaar system by fraudulent means. That explains
why no one has approached a court of law complaining denial of Aadhaar number.
All the enrolment packets received by UIDAI (accepted/rejected) are archived
in the CIDR irrespective of its status. (8) If the figure of rejection of
enrolment packets was 8 crore, Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 &
connected matters Page 69 of 567 as on 2015, what is the total rejection
figure for enrolment packets as on date? How many field studies/physical
verification have been done to ensure that these persons (who have been
rejected) are indeed “False or duplicate” enrolments? Ans.: The total
rejection figure for enrolment packets is 18.0 cr. as on March 26, 2018. These
rejections are due to various technical reasons like: (i) data quality reject
such as address incomplete, name incomplete, use of expletives in names,
address etc. photo is of object, photo of photo, age photo mismatch etc.; and
(ii) OSI validation reject such as operator / supervisor / introducer
validation failed, operator / supervisor / introducer / Head of Family
biometric validation failed etc. Those whose enrolments have been rejected for
any reason and who do not have Aadhaar can re-enrol and obtain Aadhaar.
Rejection of enrolments do not mean that the person will never be able to get
Aadhaar.

(9) What does “any other appropriate response” under Section 8(4) of the
Aadhaar Act include?

Ans.: “Any other appropriate responses” includes e-KYC or limited e-KYC data.
As per Regulation 3 of Authentication Regulations, UIDAI provides two types of
authentication facilities, Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected
matters Page 70 of 567 namely -

    
    
           (i)     Yes/No authentication facility; and
    
           (ii)    e-KYC authentication facility.
    
    

In Yes/No authentication, UIDAI provides the response as Yes or No along with
relevant error codes, if any.

In e-KYC authentication, UIDAI provides the demographic data along with
photograph and in case of mismatch/error, the relevant error codes.

54) Questions and Answers to the queries raised by the petitioners in W.P. (C)
No. 829 of 2013 entitled ‘S.G. Vombatkere & Anr. v. Union of India (1) Please
confirm that no UIDAI official verifies the correctness of documents offered
at the stage of enrolment/updating. Ans.: As per UIDAI process, the
verification of the documents is entrusted to the Registrar. For Verification
based on Documents, the verifier present at the Enrolment Centre will verify
the documents. Registrars/Enrolment agency must appoint personnel for the
verification of documents.

(2) Please confirm that UIDAI does not know whether the documents shown at the
time of enrolment/updating are genuine or false.

Ans.: The answer is same as in (1) above.

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 71 of 567

    
    
           (3)     Please confirm:
    
           (a)     UIDAI does not identify the persons it only matches the
    
    

biometric information received at the time of authentication with its records
and provides a Yes/No response; Ans.: Biometric authentication of an Aadhaar
number holder is always performed as 1:1 biometric match against his/her
Aadhaar number (identity) in CIDR. Based on the match, UIDAI provides Yes or
No response. A “Yes” response means a positive identification of the Aadhaar
number holder.

Each enrolment is biometrically de-duplicated against all (1.2 billion)
residents to issue the Aadhaar number (or Unique Identity).

(b) UIDAI takes no responsibility with respect to the correctness of the name,
date of birth or address of the person enrolled. Ans.: The Name/Address/DOB
are derived from the Proof of Identity (POI)/Proof of Address (POA) documents
submitted during enrolments.

The enrolment/update packet (encrypted) retains a scanned copy of the POI/POA
documents used for the enrolment which can be reviewed in case of dispute.

UIDAI maintains the update history of each Aadhaar Writ Petition (Civil) No.
494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 72 of 567 number related to changes in
name, address, date of birth etc. (4) Please confirm:

(a) UIDAI takes no responsibility with respect to the correct identification
of a person.

Ans.: Please refer to Answer (1) above. Additionally, it may be stated that
enrolment of Aadhaar is done through a resident enrolment process and
verification of the POI/POA document is done against the acceptable documents,
as per the UIDAI valid list of documents as provided in Schedule II and III
Aadhaar (Enrolment and Update) Regulations, 2016 read with Regulation

10\. UIDAI takes responsibility in creating and implementing standards,
ensuring matching systems installed in CIDR work as they are designed to do,
and providing options to Aadhaar holders in terms of controlling their
identity (such as updating their data, locking their biometrics, etc.) and
accessing their own authentication records. One of the key goals of Aadhaar is
to issue a unique identity for the residents of India. Hence, each enrolment
is biometrically de-duplicated against all (1.2 billion) residents to issue
the Aadhaar number (or Unique Identity).

Section 4 of Aadhaar lays down the properties of an Writ Petition (Civil) No.
494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 73 of 567 Aadhaar number. Sub-section (3)
of Section 4 reads as under:

> “(3) An Aadhaar number, in physical or electronic form subject to
> authentication and other conditions, as may be specified by regulations, may
> be accepted as proof of identity of the Aadhaar number holder for any
> purpose.” The requesting entities are at liberty to use any or multiple of
> authentication mode available under Regulation 4 of Aadhaar (Authentication)
> Regulation, 2016 as per their requirements and needs of security etc.

> (b) The biometric authentication is based on a probabilistic match of the
> biometric captured during authentication and the record stored with CIDR.

> Ans.: Biometric authentication is based on 1:1 matching and, therefore, in
> that sense it is not probabilistic. If biometrics are captured it will lead
> to successful authentication. If biometrics are not well captured during
> authentication or an impostor tries authentication, it will lead to
> authentication failure. Aadhaar Proof of Concept studies show that a vast
> majority of residents (>98%) can successfully authenticate using biometric
> modalities such fingerprints and/or iris.

However, the Aadhaar Act and Regulations provides that an Aadhaar number
holder cannot be denied service due to the failure of Aadhaar authentication.
Hence, all Aadhaar Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters
Page 74 of 567 applications must implement exception processes. Possible
methods to implement the exception process include:

(i) Family Based Authentication: Family based applications such as PDS or
Health applications may allow authentication by family members to allow
resident to avail services.

(ii) Alternate Modalities: Some applications may use different modalities for
exception handling. Alternate modalities include:

(a) Iris Authentication

(b) OTP Authentication (if allowed by policy)

(iii) Biometric Fusion: UIDAI is introducing face authentication as secondary
authentication factor to reduce the rate of authentication failures,
especially for senior citizens. At this time, face authentication will be used
only conjunction with another authentication factor such as finger/iris/OTP.

(a) Face + Finger Fusion

(b) Face + Iris Fusion

(c) Face + OTP Fusion

(iv) Non Aadhaar Based Exception process: Applications may implement non-
Aadhaar based exception process to ensure that no resident is denied service.
Applications need to monitor the use of exceptions in their applications to
prevent misuse of the exception process.

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 75 of 567

(v) Accordingly, DBT Mission Cabinet Secretariat had issued a detailed
circular dated December 19, 2017 regarding use of Aadhaar in benefit schemes
of Government – exception handling. (5) Please confirm that with respect to
individuals under 15 years and over 60 years of age, biometric authentication
is likely to fail due to changes in/fading of biometrics such as fingerprints.
Ans.: Though there is no conclusive evidence to say that biometric
authentication success is dependent upon age, slightly higher authentication
failure rates have been observed only for fingerprints for senior citizens
above the age of 70. A number of exception processes are provided in answer to
Question 4(b) above to prevent denial of service for failure of
authentication. Further, in case of any issue in biometric authentication, an
Aadhaar number holder may update his/her biometric at any of the Aadhaar
enrolment centres, which is also provided for in the Aadhaar Act.

(6) Please confirm that the reasons why over 49000 enrolment operators were
blacklisted include: (i) failure to verify documents presented; (ii) failure
to maintain records of documents submitted;

(iii) misuse of information submitted; and (iv) aiding or abetting false
enrolments?

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 76 of 567 Ans.:
UIDAI has a policy to enforce the process guidelines and data quality check
during the enrolment process. 100% of the enrolments done by operators
undergoes a quality assurance check. If any Aadhaar enrolment is found to be
not as per the UIDAI process, the enrolment itself gets rejected and Aadhaar
is not generated. If such mistake by an operator crosses a threshold defined
in the policy, the operator is blacklisted/ removed from the UIDAI ecosystem.
As such, of the 49,000 operators who have been blacklisted/removed from the
UIDAI eco-system, all the enrolments which were in violation of the process
were rejected in the QA stage. Enrolment operators may be blacklisted for the
following reasons:

>  illegally charging the resident for Aadhaar enrolment  poor demographic
> data quality  invalid biometric exceptions  other process malpractice (7)
> Please confirm:

(a) At the stage of enrolment, there is no verification as to whether a person
is an illegal immigrant.

(b) At the stage of enrolment, there is no verification about a person being
resident in India for 182 days or more in the past 12 Writ Petition (Civil)
No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 77 of 567 months.

(c) Foreign nationals may enrol and are issued Aadhaar numbers.

(d) Persons retain their Aadhaar number even after they cease to be resident.
This is true of foreign nationals as well. Ans.:

(a) At the time of enrolment, verification is done based upon documents
provided by the resident. In case any violation of prescribed guidelines comes
to light, the concerned Aadhaar is omitted/deactivated.

(b) This has been included through the enrolment form where resident
undertakes and signs the disclosure:

> “Disclosure under Section 3(2) of the Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of
> Financial And Other Subsidies, Benefits and Services) Act, 2016 I confirm
> that I have been residing in India for at least 182 days in the preceding 12
> months & information (including biometrics) provided by me to the UIDAI is
> my own and is true, correct and accurate. I am aware that my information
> (including biometrics) will be used for generation of Aadhaar and
> authentication. I understand that my identity information (except core
> biometric) may be provided to an agency only with my consent during
> authentication or as per the provisions of the Aadhaar Act. I have a right
> to access my identity information (except core biometrics) following the
> procedure laid down by UIDAI.”

> (c) Aadhaar is issued to the resident of India and the word ‘resident’ is
> defined in Section 2(v) of the Aadhaar Act. Aadhaar numbers may be issued to
> foreign nationals who are resident in Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012
> & connected matters Page 78 of 567 India. Section 2(v) reads as under:

> “ ‘resident’ means an individual who has resided in India for a period or
> periods amounting in all to one hundred and eighty-two days or more in the
> twelve months immediately preceding the date of application for enrolment;”
> A foreign national fulfilling the above criteria is eligible for Aadhaar,
> provided he submits the acceptable POI/POA document as per the UIDAI valid
> list of documents.

> (d) As per the Aadhaar Act, an Aadhaar number is issued to a resident who
> has been residing in India for at least 182 days in the preceding 12 months.
> An Aadhaar number is issued to an individual for life and may be
> omitted/deactivated in case of violation of prescribed guidelines only.
> Ineligibility of a person to retain an Aadhaar number owing to become non-
> resident may be treated as a ground for deactivation of Aadhaar number and
> Regulation 28(l)(f) of the Aadhaar Enrolment Regulations. This is in keeping
> with Section 31(1) and (3) of the Aadhaar Act wherein it is an obligation on
> an Aadhaar number holder to inform the UIDAI of changes in demographic
> information and for the Authority to make the necessary alteration.

> (8) Please confirm the Points Of Service (POS) biometric readers are capable
> of storing biometric information.

> Ans.: UIDAI has mandated use of Registered Devices (RD) for Writ Petition
> (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 79 of 567 all
> authentication requests. With RDs, biometric data is signed within the
> device/RD service using the provider key to ensure it is indeed captured
> live. The device provider RD service encrypts the PID block before returning
> to the host application. This RD service encapsulates the biometric capture,
> signing and encryption of biometrics all within it. Therefore, introduction
> of RD in Aadhaar authentication system rules out any possibility of use of
> stored biometric and replay of biometrics captured from other source.
> Requesting entities are not legally allowed to store biometrics captured for
> Aadhaar authentication under Regulation 17(1)(a) of the Authentication
> Regulations.

(9) Referring to slide/page 13, please confirm that the architecture under the
Aadhaar Act includes: (i) authentication user agencies (e.g. Kerala Dairy
Farmers Welfare Fund Board);

(ii) authentication service agencies (e.g. Airtel); and (iii) CIDR. Ans.:
UIDAI appoints Requesting Entities (AUA/KUA) and Authentication Service Agency
(ASA) as per Regulation 12 of Authentication Regulations. List of Requesting
Entitles (AUA/KUA) and Authentication Service Agency appointed by UIDAI is
available on UIDAI’s website. An AUA/KUA can do authentication on behalf of
other entities under Regulation 15 and Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 &
connected matters Page 80 of 567 Regulation 16.

(10) Please confirm that one or more entitles in the Aadhaar architecture
described in the previous paragraph record the date and time of the
authentication, the client IP, the device ID and purpose of authentication.

Ans.: UIDAI does not ask requesting entities to maintain any logs related to
IP address of the device, GPS coordinates of the device and purpose of
authentication. However, AUAs like banks, telecom etc., in order to ensure
that their systems are secure, frauds are managed, they may store additional
information as per their requirement under their respective laws to secure
their system. Section 32(3) of the Aadhaar Act specifically prevents the UIDAI
from either by itself or through any entity under its control to keep or
maintain any information about the purpose of authentication.

Requesting entities are mandated to maintain following logs as per Regulation
18 of the Authentication Regulations. These are:

> (i) the Aadhaar number against which authentication is sought;

(ii) specified parameters of authentication request Writ Petition (Civil) No.
494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 81 of 567 submitted;

> (iii) specified parameters received as authentication response;

> (iv) the record of disclosure of information to the Aadhaar number holder at
> the time of authentication; and

> (v) record of consent of the Aadhaar number holder for authentication, but
> shall not, in any event, retain the PID information.

> Further, even if a requesting entity captures any other data as per their
> own requirement, UIDAI will only audit the authentication logs maintained by
> the requesting entity as per Regulation 18(1) of the Authentication
> Regulations.

> ASAs are not permitted to maintain any logs related to IP address of the
> device, GPS coordinates of the device etc. ASAs are mandated to maintain
> logs as per Regulation 20 of the Authentication Regulations:

> (i) identity of the requesting entity;

> (ii) parameters of authentication request submitted; and

> (iii) parameters received as authentication response.

> Provided that no Aadhaar number, PID information, device identity related
> data and e-KYC response data, where applicable, shall be retained.

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 82 of 567

(11) Referring to slide/page 7 and 14, please confirm that ‘traceability’
features enable UIDAI to track the specific device and its location from where
each and every authentication takes place.

Ans.: UIDAI gets the AUA code, ASA code, unique device code, registered device
code used for authentication. UIDAI does not get any information related to
the IP address or the GPS location from where authentication is performed as
these parameters are not part of authentication (v2.0) and e-KYC (v2.1) API
UIDAI would only know from which device the authentication has happened,
through which AUA/ASA etc. This is what the slides meant by traceability.
UIDAI does not receive any information about at what location the
authentication device is deployed, its IP address and its operator and the
purpose of authentication. Further, the UIDAI or any entity under its control
is statutorily barred from collecting, keeping or maintaining any information
about the purpose of authentication under Section 32(3) of the Aadhaar Act.

Summing up the Scheme:

55) The whole architecture of Aadhaar is devised to give unique identity to
the citizens of this country. No doubt, a person can Writ Petition (Civil) No.
494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 83 of 567 have various documents on the
basis of which that individual can establish her identify. It may be in the
form of a passport, Permanent Account Number (PAN) card, ration card and so
on. For the purpose of enrolment itself number of documents are prescribed
which an individual can produce on the basis of which Aadhaar card can be
issued. Thus, such documents, in a way, are also proof of identity. However,
there is a fundamental difference between the Aadhaar card as a mean of
identity and other documents through which identity can be established.
Enrolment for Aadhaar card also requires giving of demographic information as
well as biometric information which is in the form of iris and fingerprints.
This process eliminates any chance of duplication. It is emphasised that an
individual can manipulate the system by having more than one or even number of
PAN cards, passports, ration cards etc. When it comes to obtaining Aadhaar
card, there is no possibility of obtaining duplicate card. Once the biometric
information is stored and on that basis Aadhaar card is issued, it remains in
the system with the Authority. Wherever there would be a second attempt for
enrolling for Aadhaar and for this purpose same person gives his biometric
information, it would immediately get matched with the same biometric
information already in the system and the second Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494
of 2012 & connected matters Page 84 of 567 request would stand rejected. It is
for this reason the Aadhaar card is known as Unique Identification (UID). Such
an identity is unparalleled.

56) There is, then, another purpose for having such a system of issuing unique
identification cards in the form of Aadhaar card. A glimpse thereof is
captured under the heading ‘Introduction’ above while mentioning how and under
what circumstances the whole project was conceptualised. To put it tersely, in
addition to enabling any resident to obtain such unique identification proof,
it is also to empower marginalised section of the society, particularly those
who are illiterate and living in abject poverty or without any shelter etc. It
gives identity to such persons also. Moreover, with the aid of Aadhaar card,
they can claim various privileges and benefits etc. which are actually meant
for these people.

Identity of a person has a significance for every individual in his/her life.
In a civilised society every individual, on taking birth, is given a name. Her
place of birth and parentage also becomes important as she is known in the
society and these demographic particulars also become important attribute of
her personality. Throughout their lives, individuals are supposed to provide
such information: be it admission in a school or college or at the time of
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 85 of 567
taking job or engaging in any profession or business activity, etc. When all
this information is available in one place, in the form of Aadhaar card, it
not only becomes unique, it would also qualify as a document of empowerment.
Added with this feature, when an individual knows that no other person can
clone her, it assumes greater significance.

57) Thus, the scheme by itself can be treated as laudable when it comes to
enabling an individual to seek Aadhaar number, more so, when it is voluntary
in nature. Howsoever benevolent the scheme may be, it has to pass the muster
of constitutionality. According to the petitioners, the very architecture of
Aadhaar is unconstitutional on various grounds, glimpse whereof can be
provided at this stage:

Gist of the challenge to the Aadhaar Scheme as well as the Act:

58) The petitioners accept that the case at hand is unique, simply because of
the reason that the programme challenged here is itself without precedent.
According to them, no democratic society has adopted a programme that is
similar in its command and sweep. The case is about a new technology that the
Government seeks to deploy and a new architecture of governance that it seeks
to build on this technology. The Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 &
connected matters Page 86 of 567 petitioners are discrediting the Government’s
claim that biometric technology employed and the Aadhaar Act is greatly
beneficial. As per the petitioners, this is an inroad into the rights and
liberties of the citizens which the Constitution of India guarantees. It is
intrusive in nature. At its core, Aadhaar alters the relationship between the
citizen and the State. It diminishes the status of the citizens. Rights freely
exercised, liberties freely enjoyed, entitlements granted by the Constitution
and laws are all made conditional, on a compulsory barter. The barter compels
the citizens to give up their biometrics ‘voluntarily’, allow their biometrics
and demographic information to be stored by the State and private operators
and then used for a process termed ‘authentication’. According to them, by the
very scheme of the Act and the way it operates, it has propensity to cause
‘civil death’ of an individual by simply switching of Aadhaar of that person.
It is the submission of the petitioners that the Constitution balances rights
of individuals against State interest. The Aadhaar completely upsets this
balance and skews the relationship between the citizen and the State enabling
the State to totally dominate the individual.

59) The challenge is directed at the constitutional validity of the Writ
Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 87 of 567 following
facets of Aadhaar:

> (i) The Aadhaar programme that operated between January 28, 2009 until the
> bringing into force of the Aadhaar Act on July 12, 2016.

> (ii) The Aadhaar Act (and alternatively certain provisions of that Act).

> (iii) Elements of the Aadhaar project or programme that continues to
> operate, though not within the cover of the Aadhaar Act.

> (iv) Specific Regulations framed under the Aadhaar Act, illustratively the
> Aadhaar (Authentication) Regulations, 2016\.

> (v) A set of subordinate legislation in the form of statutory
> rules/regulations including the Money Laundering (Amendment) Rules, 2017.

> (vi) All notifications (nearly 139) issued under Section 7 of the Aadhaar
> Act (assuming the Act is upheld) insofar as they make Aadhaar mandatory for
> availing certain benefits/services/subsidies, including PDS, MGNREGA and
> social security pension.

(vii) Actions on the part of the authorities to make Aadhaar mandatory even
where not covered by Section 7, inter Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 &
connected matters Page 88 of 567 alia: Actions by CBSE, NEET, JEE and UGC
requirements for scholarship.

(viii) Specifically, actions on part of the Government mandating linking of
mobile phones and Aadhaar vide DoT circular dated March 23, 2017.

(ix) Section 139AA of the Income Tax Act, 1961 insofar as it violates Article
21 by mandating linking Aadhaar to PAN and requiring Aadhaar linkage for
filing returns.

60) Apart from the declaratory reliefs regarding ultra vires and certiorari to
quash the provisions/actions enumerated above, there are certain other reliefs
that are also sought, including:

(i) Suitable declarations regarding the physical autonomy of a person over her
own body qua the Indian State.

(ii) Mandatory directions requiring the respondents to give an option to
persons who are enrolled with the Aadhaar programme to opt out and to delete
the data with suitable certification for compliance.

(iii) Mandatory directions to all concerned authorities that should the
Aadhaar Act, etc. be upheld, nevertheless, every person must be entitled to
avail services, benefits etc. through alternative means of identification.
Negatively, nothing can be withheld from a citizen merely Writ Petition
(Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 89 of 567 because he/she does
not have an Aadhaar Card or does not wish to use their Aadhaar Card.

(iv) Mandatory directions consistent with the fundamental right to privacy and
the right of a citizen to be let alone that no electronic trial or record of
his/her authentication be maintained.

61) On the aforesaid premise, the petitioners point out following heads of
challenge:

Surveillance:

62) The project creates the architecture for pervasive surveillance and unless
the project is stopped, it will lead to an Orwellian State where every move of
the citizen is constantly tracked and recorded by the State. The architecture
of the project comprises a Central Identities Data Repository (CIDR) which
stores and maintains authentication transaction data. The authentication
record comprises the time of authentication and the identity of the requesting
entity. Based on this architecture it is possible for the State to track down
the location of the person seeking authentication. Since the requesting entity
is also identified, the activity that the citizen is engaging in is also
known. Violation of Fundamental Right to Privacy: Writ Petition (Civil) No.
494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 90 of 567

63) The fundamental right to privacy is breached by the Aadhaar project and
the Aadhaar Act in numerous ways. Following are the illustrations given by the
petitioners:

(a) Between 2009-10 and July 2016 the project violated the right to privacy
with respect to personal demographic as well as biometric information
collected, stored and shared as there was no law authorising these actions.

(b) During both the pre-Act and post-Act periods, the project continues to
violate the right to privacy by requiring individuals to part with demographic
as well as biometric information to private enrolling agencies.

(c) By enabling private entities to use the Aadhaar authentication platform,
the citizen’s right to informational privacy is violated inasmuch as the
citizen is compelled to ‘report’ his/her actions to the State.

(d) Even where a person is availing of a subsidy, benefit or service from the
State, mandatory authentication through the Aadhaar platform (without an
option to the citizen to use an alternative mode of identification) violates
the right to informational privacy.

(e) With Aadhaar being made compulsory for holding a bank account, operating a
cell phone, having a valid PAN, holding Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012
& connected matters Page 91 of 567 mutual funds, securing admission to school,
taking a board examination, etc. the citizen has no option but to obtain
Aadhaar. Compelling the citizen to part with biometric information violates
individual autonomy and dignity.

(f) In a digital society an individual has the right to protect himself by
controlling the dissemination of personal information, including biometric
information. Compelling an individual to establish his identity by planting
her biometric at multiple points of service violates privacy involving the
person.

(g) The seeding of Aadhaar in distinct databases enables the content of
information about an individual that is stored in different silos to be
aggregated. This enables the State to build complete profiles of individuals
violating privacy through the convergence of data.

Limited Government:

64) A fundamental feature of the Constitution is the sovereignty of the people
with limited Government authority. The Constitution limits governmental
authority in various ways, amongst them Fundamental Rights, the distribution
of powers amongst organs of the State and the ultimate check by way of
judicial review. The Aadhaar project is destructive of the limited Government.
The Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 92 of 567
Constitution is not about the power of the State, but about the limits on the
power of the State. Post Aadhaar, the State will completely dominate the
citizen and alter the relationship between citizen and the State. The features
of a totalitarian state is seen from:

(a) A person cannot conduct routine activities such as operating a bank
account, holding an investment in mutual funds, receiving government pension,
receiving scholarship, receiving food rations, operating a mobile phone
without the State knowing about these activities.

(b) The State can build a profile of the individual based on the trial of
authentication from which the nature of the citizen’s activity can be
determined.

(c) By disabling Aadhaar the State can cause civil death of the person.

(d) By making Aadhaar compulsory for other activities such as air travel, rail
travel, directorship in companies, services and benefits extended by the State
Governments and Municipal Corporations, etc. there will be virtually no zone
of activity left where the citizen is not under the gaze of the State. This
will have a chilling effect on the citizen.

(e) In such a society, there is little or no personal autonomy. Writ Petition
(Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 93 of 567 The State is
pervasive, and dignity of the individual stands extinguished.

(f) This is an inversion of the accountability in the Right to Information
age: instead of the State being transparent to the citizen, it is the citizen
who is rendered transparent to the State. Impugned Act illegally passed as a
‘Money Bill’:

65) The Bill No. 47 of 2016 introduced in the Lok Sabha and which upon passage
became the impugned Act was not a Money Bill in terms of Article 110 of the
Constitution of India. Even though the object and purpose of the impugned
legislation states that it is to be used for the delivery of subsidies,
benefits and services, expenditure for which is incurred from the Consolidated
Fund of India, the scope of the impugned Act is far beyond what is envisaged
under Article 110. Inasmuch as the impugned Act has not followed the
constitutional procedure mandated for the passage of a law by disguising the
statute as a ‘Money Bill’, there is no valid legislative process that has been
followed in this case. The legislative process being colourable and since
judicial review extends wherever Part III rights are violated, the Aadhaar Act
is liable to be struck down.

Procedure followed violates Articles 14 and 21 of the Constitution: Writ
Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 94 of 567

66) The procedure adopted by the respondents, both pre-Act and post-Act, is
arbitrary and in violation of Articles 14 and 21 of the Constitution because:

(a) There is no informed consent at the time of enrolment. Individuals are not
told about crucial aspects such as potential misuse of the information, the
commercial value of the information, the storage of information in a
centralised database, that the information supplied could be used against the
individual in criminal proceedings pursuant to a court order, there is no opt-
out option, the entire enrolment process is conducted by private entities
without any governmental supervision, etc.

(b) UIDAI has no direct relationship with the enrolling agency which collects
sensitive personal information (biometric and demographic).

(c) The data collected and uploaded in to the CIDR is not verified by any
Government official designated by the UIDAI. The data collected and stored
lacks integrity.

(d) The procedure at the stage of enrolment and authentication enables the
enrolling agency as well as the ‘requesting entity’ to capture, store and
misuse/use the biometric as well as demographic information without the UIDAI
having any control Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters
Page 95 of 567 over such misuse/use.

Unreliability of Biometrics and Exclusion:

67) The foundation of the project, i.e. biometrics, is an unreliable and
untested technology. Moreover, biometric exceptions severely erode
reliability. The biometric authentication system works on a probabilistic
model. Consequently, entitlements are reduced from certainty to a chance
delivery where the biometrics match. Across the country several persons are
losing out on their entitlements, for say food rations, because of a biometric
mismatch resulting in them being excluded from various welfare schemes. The
project is not an ‘identity’ project but an ‘identification’ exercise. Unless
the biometrics work, a person in flesh and blood, does not exist for the
State. Illegal Object:

68) It is submitted before us that the objective of creating a single
pervasive identification over time is itself illegal. There are several facets
to the illegality and amongst them is the very negation of an individual
citizen’s freedom to identify through different means. The coercive foundation
of the impugned Act is in substance an illegal objective that renders the
statute ultra vires Article 14 of the Constitution of India. Writ Petition
(Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 96 of 567 Democracy, Identity
and Choice:

69) A citizen or resident in a democratic society has a choice to identify
himself/herself through different modes in the course of his/her interactions
generally in society as well as his/her interactions with the State. Mandating
identification by only one highly intrusive mode is excessive,
disproportionate and violates Articles 14, 19 and 21.

Children:

70) As per the petitioners, there is no justification to include children in
the Aadhaar programme for various reasons.

71) It may also be recorded at this juncture itself that insofar as the
Aadhaar Act is concerned, following provisions thereof are specifically
attacked as unconstitutional:

(i) Section 2(c) and 2(d) \- authentication and authentication record, read
with Section 32

(ii) Section 2(h) read with Section 10 of CIDR

(iii) Section 2(l) read with Regulation 23 of the Aadhaar (Enrolment and
Updates) Regulation - ‘enrolling agency’

(iv) Section 2(v) \- ‘resident’

(v) Section 3 – Aadhaar Number Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 &
connected matters Page 97 of 567

(vi) Section 5 – Special treatment to children

(vii) Section 6 – Update of information

(viii) Section 7

(ix) Section 8

(x) Section 9

(xi) Chapter IV – Sections 11 to 23

(xii) Sections 23 and 54 – excessive delegation

(xiii) Section 23(2)(g) read with Chapter VI & VII – Regulations 27 to 32 of
the Aadhaar (Enrolment and Update) Regulations,  2016

(xiv) Section 29

(xv) Section 33 (xvi) Section 47 (xvii) Section 48 – Power of Central
Government to supersede UIDAI (xviii) Section 57 (xix) Section 59 Some
Introductory Remarks:

72) Before proceeding further, it would be necessary to state here the
approach which we have adopted in dealing with various issues that are raised
in these petitions. That may help in understanding the manner in which the
matter is dealt with. This necessitates Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012
& connected matters Page 98 of 567 some introductory remarks:

> (i) We may remark at this stage itself that many of the heads of challenge
> which are taken note of above are overlapping and, therefore, discussion on
> one aspect may provide substantial answers to the arguments advanced under
> the other head of challenge as well. Our endeavour, therefore, would be to
> eschew the repetitive discussion. However, our anxiety to bring clarity and
> also in order to have continuity of thought while discussing a particular
> head, may have led to some repetitions at different places. In any case, we
> would be dealing with the various heads of challenge, one by one, so as to
> cover the entire spectrum.

(ii) In order to have a smooth flow of discussion, we are going to formulate
the questions which arise in all these petitions and then decide those issues.
Since, number of advocates 7 appeared on both sides, many of the arguments
addressed by them were overlapping and repetitive. In this scenario, we deem
it proper to collate the arguments of all the counsel and present the same
while undertaking the discussion on each of the issues. Thus, in the process,
we would not be referring to each counsel and her arguments. We may, however,
intend to place on record that all 7 S/Shri Kapil Sibal, Gopal Subramaniam, P.
Chidambaram, Shyam Divan, K.V. Viswanathan, Neeraj Kishan Kaul, C.U. Singh,
Anand Grover, Sanjay R. Hegde, Arvind P. Datar, V. Giri, Rakesh Dwivedi,
Jayant Bhushan, Sajan Poovayya, P.V. Surendra Nath, Senior Advocates, K.K.
Venugopal, Attorney General for India, Tushar Mehta, Additional Solicitor
General of India, Gopal Sankaranarayanan and Zoheb Hossain, Advocates. Writ
Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 99 of 567 the
counsel on both sides had taken the advocacy to its highest level by
presenting all possible nuances of the complex issues involved. In the
process, plethora of literature on such issues, including the law prevailing
across the Globe was cited. We, therefore, place on record our appreciation of
the sublime nature of lawyering in this case.

(iii) As pointed out above, many number of foreign judgments were cited during
arguments. The history of this Court reflects that this Court has liberally
accepted the good practices, rules of interpretation and norms of
constitutional courts of other jurisdictions. In fact, in drafting Indian
Constitution itself, the framing fathers had studied various foreign models
and adopted provisions from different Constitutions after deep reflection.
Constitutional influences of system prevailing in some of the countries on
Indian Constitution can be summarised as under: From UK - Parliamentary Type
of Government

\- Cabinet System of Ministers

\- Bicameral Parliament

\- Lower House more powerful

\- Council of Minsters responsible to Lower House From US - Written
Constitution

\- Executive head of State known as President and his being the Supreme
Commander of the Armed Forces

\- Vice-President as the ex-officio Chairman of Rajya Sabha

\- Bill of Rights Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters
Page 100 of 567

\- Supreme Court

\- Provision of States

\- Independence of Judiciary and judicial review

\- Preamble

\- Removal of Supreme Court and High Court Judges From USSR - Fundamental
Duties

\- Five Year Plan From Australia - Concurrent List

\- Language of the preamble

\- Provision regarding trade, commerce and intercourse From Japan - Law on
which the Supreme Court function From Weimar - Suspension of Fundamental
Rights during Constitution of the emergency Germany From Canada - Scheme of
federation with a strong centre

\- Distribution of powers between the centre and the states and placing
residuary powers with the centre From Ireland - Concept of Directive
Principles of States Policy

\- Method of election of President

\- Nomination of members in the Rajya Sabha by the President It was,
therefore, but natural to find out the manner in which particular provisions
have been interpreted by the constitutional courts of the aforesaid countries.
Case law of this Court would reflect this for interpreting the provisions
relating to ‘Inter-State Trade, Commerce & Intercourse’. The case law of the
Australian High Court is liberally referred as this Chapter is influenced by
the provisions contained in the Australian Constitution. Likewise, for
interpreting provisions of Part IX of the Constitution on ‘Relations Writ
Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 101 of 567 between
the Union and the States’ where Canadian model is followed, the judgments of
Canadian Supreme Court have been cited by this Court from time to time.
Influence of U.S. Constitutionalism, tempered by the wish to preserve India’s
own characteristics, while interpreting chapter relating to fundamental rights
as well as power of judicial review is also discernible. A critical analysis
of the various judgments of this Court, where foreign precedents are cited8,
formulates four typologies of use, namely:

(a) Where the court relies on foreign precedents for guidance on general
constitutional principles and when necessary to;

(b) Where the court frames the issue posed for adjudication and/or to
formulate evaluative test and frameworks;

(c) To distinguish the country’s context from the foreign one 9;

(d) To ‘read’ in the Constitution implied or unenumerated rights10.

It can be said that though this Court has been liberally relying upon the
judgments of the constitutional courts of other countries, particularly when
it comes to human rights discourse, at the same time, in certain situations,
note of caution is also 8 Thiruvengadam, The Use of Foreign Law in
Constitutional Cases in India and Singapore (2010) 9 Basheshar Nath v.
Commissioner of Income Tax, Delhi and Rajasthan & Anr., 1959 Supp (1) SCR 528
10 Romesh Thappar v. State of Madras, 1950 SCR 594 Writ Petition (Civil) No.
494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 102 of 567 added to give a message that
the judgment of other jurisdiction cannot be relied blindly and it would
depend as to whether a particular judgment will fit in Indian context or not.
As a matter of fact, in Basheshar Nath, the Court discussed the doctrine of
waiver in force in the United States and rejected it firmly stating that:

> :...the doctrine of waiver enunciated by some American Judges in construing
> the American Constitution cannot be introduced in our Constitution...We are
> not for the moment convinced that this theory has any relevancy in
> construing the fundamental rights conferred by Part III of the
> Constitution.” On the contrary, in Romesh Thappar, the Court completely
> based its decision to strike down a law restricting the free circulation of
> newspapers on two US precedents, Ex parte Jackson11 and Lovell v. City of
> Griffin12, and affirmed that the protection of freedom of expression in
> India follows the maxim of Madison that the Court transposed from its
> quotation in Near v.

Minnesota13, according to which ‘it is better to leave a few of its noxious
branches to their luxuriant growth, than, by pruning them away, to injure the
vigour of those yielding the proper fruits’. Likewise, the role of foreign
precedents in a majority opinion is confirmed in the decision of His Holiness
Kesavananda Bharati 11 Ex Parte Jackson, 96 US 727 (1878).

12 Lovell v. City of Griffin, 303 US 444 (1938). 13 Near v. Minnesota, 282 US
607 (1931) 717-18. Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters
Page 103 of 567 Sripadagalvaru which clarifies Parliament’s power to amend the
Constitution. At the same time, looking to the use of foreign precedents in
this judgment, Justice S.M. Sikri (as His Lordship then was), dealing with the
interpretation of Article 368 of the Constitution, first of all, highlighted
that:

> “No other Constitution in the world is like ours. No other Constitution
> combines under its wings such diverse peoples, numbering now more than 550
> millions [sic], with different languages and religions and in different
> stages of economic development, into one nation, and no other nation is
> faced with such vast socio-economic problems.

After this premise, however, His Lordship accepts, in order to define what an
‘amendment’ is according to the Indian Constitution, the reasoning of Lord
Greene in Bidie v. General Accident, Fire and Life Assurance Corporation 14
and that of Justice Holmes in Towne v. Eisner15, which affirm that to
understand a word it is necessary to understand the context in which it is
inserted. To strengthen this, James v. Commonwealth of Australia16 is also
referred to.

We have stated the trend in brief with a purpose. Number of judgments of U.K.
Courts, German Supreme Court, European Commission of Human Rights (ECHR), U.S.
Supreme Court etc. were cited. However, there is no similarity in approach by
these 14 Bidie v. General Accident, Fire and Life Assurance Corporation (1948)
2 All ER 995, 998. 15 Towne v. Eisner, 245 US 418.

16 James v. Commonwealth of Australia, (1936) AC 578. Writ Petition (Civil)
No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 104 of 567 Courts in deciding a
particular issue by applying different principles, particularly when it comes
to the issues of data protection and privacy. In this backdrop, it becomes
necessary, while referring to these judgments, to keep in mind the ethos,
cultural background and vast socio-economic problems of this country and on
that basis to accept a particular norm, or for that matter, to formulate a
constitutional norm which is relevant in our context. That is the endeavour
which is made by us.

(iv) Many arguments of the petitioners relate to the working of the system.
The petitioners had argued that the architecture of Aadhaar, by its very
nature, is probabilistic and, therefore, it may result in exclusion, in many
cases. Therefore, rather than extending subsidies, benefits and services to
the section of society for which these are meant, it may have the tendency to
exclude them from receiving such subsidies, benefits and services. The
respondents, on the other hand, have stated on affidavit that the attempt of
the respondents would be to ensure that no individual who is eligible for such
benefits etc. is deprived form receiving those benefits, even when in a
particular case, it is found that on authentication, his fingerprints or iris
are not matching and is resulting into failure. It was clarified that since
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 105 of 567
Aadhaar project is an ongoing project, there may be some glitches in its
working and there is a continuous attempt to make improvements in order to
ensure that it becomes foolproof over a period of time. We have eschewed
detailed discussion in respect of those arguments, which may not have much
relevance when judging the constitutional validity of the Act and the scheme.
However, such arguments of exclusion etc. leading to violation of Articles 14
and 21 are dealt with at an appropriate stage. But the argument based on
alleged inaccurate claims of savings by the Authority/Union of India in
respect of certain programmes, like saving of USD 11 billion per annum due to
the Aadhaar project, as well as savings in the implementation of the MGNREGA
scheme, LPG subsidy, PDS savings need not detain us for long. Such rebuttals
raised by the petitioners may have relevance insofar as working of the Act is
concerned. That by itself cannot be a ground to invalidate the statute.

(v) As mentioned above, notwithstanding the passions and emotions evoked on
both sides in equal measure, this Court has adopted a lambent approach while
dealing with the issues raised, having a posture of calmness coupled with
objective examination of the issues on the touchstone of the constitutional
provisions. Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 106
of 567 We are in the age of constitutional democracy, that too substantive and
liberal democracy. Such a democracy is not based solely on the rule of people
through their representatives which is known as “formal democracy”. It also
has other precepts like rule of law, human rights, independence of judiciary,
separation of powers, etc. The framers of Indian Constitution duly recognized
the aforesaid precepts of liberal and substantive democracy with rule of law
as an important and fundamental pillar. At the same time, in the scheme of the
Constitution, it is the judiciary which is assigned the role of upholding rule
of law and protecting the Constitution and democracy.

The essence of rule of law is to preclude arbitrary action. Dicey, who
propounded the rule of law, gave distinct meaning to this concept and
explained that it was based on three kindered features, which are as follows:

(i) absence of arbitrary powers on the part of authorities;

(ii) equality before law; and

(iii) the Constitution is part of the ordinary law of the land.

There are three aspects of the rule of law, which are as follows:

(a) A formal aspect which means making the law rule. Writ Petition (Civil) No.
494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 107 of 567

(b) A jurisprudential or doctrinal aspect which is concerned with the minimal
condition for the existence of law in society.

(c) A substantive aspect as per which the rule of law is concerned with
properly balancing between the individual and society.

When we talk of jurisprudential rule of law, it includes certain minimum
requirements without which a legal system cannot exist and which distinguished
a legal system from an automatic system where the leader imposes his will on
everyone else. Professor Lon Fuller has described these requirements
collectively as the 'inner morality of law'. In addition to jurisprudential
concept, which is important and an essential condition for the rule of law,
the substantive concept of the rule of law is equally important and
inseparable norm of the rule of law in real sense. It encompasses the 'right
conception' of the rule of law propounded by Dworkin. It means guaranteeing
fundamental values of morality, justice, and human rights, with a proper
balance between these and the other needs of the society. Justice Aharon
Barak, former Chief Justice of Israel, has lucidly explained this facet of
rule of law in the following manner:

> “The rule of law is not merely public order, the rule of law is social
> justice based on public order. The law exists to ensure proper social life.
> Social life, however, is not a goal in itself but a means to allow the
> individual to live in dignity Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 &
> connected matters Page 108 of 567 and develop himself. The human being and
> human rights underlie this substantive perception of the rule of law, with a
> proper balance among the different rights and between human rights and the
> proper needs of society. The substantive rule of law “is the rule of proper
> law, which balances the needs of society and the individual”. This is the
> rule of law that strikes a balance between society's need for political
> independence, social equality, economic development, and internal order, on
> the one hand, and the needs of the individual, his personal liberty, and his
> human dignity on the other. The Judge must protect this rich concept of the
> rule of law.” The 'rule of law', which is a fine sonorous phrase, is dynamic
> and ever expanding and can be put alongside the brotherhood of man, human
> rights and human dignity. About the modern rule of law, Professor Garner
> observed:

> “The concept in its modern dress meets a need that has been felt throughout
> the history of civilization, law is not sufficient in itself and it must
> serve some purpose. Man is a social animal, but to live in society he has
> had to fashion for himself and in his own interest the law and other
> instruments of government, and as a consequence those must to some extent
> limit his personal liberties. The problem is how to control those
> instruments of government in accordance with the Rule of Law and in the
> interest of the governed.” Likewise, the basic spirit of our Constitution is
> to provide each and every person of the nation equal opportunity to grow as
> a human being, irrespective of race, caste, religion, community and social
> status. Granville Austin while analyzing the functioning of Indian
> Constitution in first 50 years has described three distinguished strands of
> Indian Constitution: (i) protecting national Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494
> of 2012 & connected matters Page 109 of 567 unity and integrity, (ii)
> establishing the institution and spirit of democracy; and (iii) fostering
> social reforms. The strands are mutually dependent and inextricably
> intertwined in what he elegantly describes as a 'seamless web'. And there
> cannot be social reforms till it is ensured that each and every citizen of
> this country is able to exploit his/her potentials to the maximum. The
> Constitution, although drafted by the Constituent Assembly, was meant for
> the people of India and that is why it is given by the people to themselves
> as expressed in the opening words “We the People...”. What is the most
> important gift to the common person given by this Constitution is
> “fundamental rights” which may be called human rights as well.

> Speaking for the vision of our founding fathers, in State of Karnataka &
> Anr. v. Shri Ranganatha Reddy & Anr. 17, this Court speaking through Justice
> Krishna Iyer observed:

> “The social philosophy of the Constitution shapes creative judicial vision
> and orientation. Our nation has, as its dynamic doctrine, economic democracy
> sans which political democracy is chimerical. We say so because our
> Constitution, in Parts III and IV and elsewhere, ensouls such a value
> system, and the debate in this case puts precisely this soul in peril….Our
> thesis is that the dialectics of social justice should not be missed if the
> synthesis of Parts III and Part IV is to influence State action and court
> pronouncements. Constitutional problems cannot be studied in a socio-
> economic vacuum, since socio-cultural changes are the source of the new
> values, and sloughing off old legal thought is part of the process the new
> equity-

> 17 (1977) 4 SCC 471 Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected
> matters Page 110 of 567 loaded legality. A judge is a social scientist in
> his role as constitutional invigilator and fails functionally if he forgets
> this dimension in his complex duties.” In Dattatraya Govind Mahajan v. State
> of Maharashtra18 the spirit of our Constitution was explained thus:

> “Our Constitution is a tryst with destiny, preamble with lucent solemnity in
> the words ‘Justice – social, economic and political.’ The three great
> branches of Government, as creatures of the Constitution, must remember this
> promise in their fundamental role and forget it at their peril, for to do so
> will be a betrayal of chose high values and goals which this nation set for
> itself in its objective Resolution and whose elaborate summation appears in
> Part IV of the Paramount Parchment. The history of our country’s struggle
> for independence was the story of a battle between the forces of socio-
> economic exploitation and the masses of deprived people of varying degrees
> and the Constitution sets the new sights of the nation…..Once we grasp the
> dharma of the Constitution, the new orientation of the karma of adjudication
> becomes clear. Our founding fathers, aware of our social realities, forged
> our fighting faith and integrating justice in its social, economic and
> political aspects. While contemplating the meaning of the Articles of the
> Organic Law, the Supreme Court shall not disown Social Justice.” In National
> Human Rights Commission v. State of Arunachal Pradesh19, the Supreme Court
> explained it again, as under:

> “We are a country governed by the Rule of Law. Our Constitution confers
> certain rights on every human being and certain other rights on citizens.
> Every person is entitled to equality before the law and equal protection of
> the laws.” Looking the matter from this angle, when the judiciary is
> assigned the role of upholding the rule of law, the first function of 18
> (1977) 2 SCC 548 19 (1996) 1 SCC 742 Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 &
> connected matters Page 111 of 567 the judiciary is to protect the democracy
> as well as the Constitution. At the same time, second role of the Court,
> which is equally important, is to bridge the gap between the law and the
> society. In the process of undertaking this role, a third role, which is of
> equal significance also springs up. Judiciary is also to ensure that social
> and economic justice is meted out to the deserving lot by affirmative action
> of the State. Our attempt has been to strive the balancing of competing
> Constitutional norms.

The complex issues are dealt with keeping in view this role of the Supreme
Court as assigned by the Constitution; albeit within the constitutional norms.

Scope of Judicial Review:

73) The aforesaid discussion leads us to pick up and discuss another strand
viz. the scope of judicial review in such matters.

74) Judicial review means the Supremacy of law. It is the power of the court
to review the actions of the Legislature, the Executive and the Judiciary
itself and to scrutinize the validity of any law or action. It has emerged as
one of the most effective instruments of protecting and preserving the
cherished freedoms in a constitutional democracy and upholding principles such
as separation of powers and rule of law. The Judiciary, through Writ Petition
(Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 112 of 567 judicial review,
prevents the decisions of other branches from impinging on the constitutional
values. The fundamental nature of the Constitution is that of a limiting
document, it curtails the powers of majoritarianism from hijacking the State.
The power of review is the shield which is placed in the hands of the most
judiciaries of constitutional democracies to enable the protection of the
supreme document.

75) In Binoy Viswam v. Union of India & Ors.20, scope of judicial review of
legislative Act was described in the following manner:

> “76. Under the Constitution, Supreme Court as well as High Courts are vested
> with the power of judicial review of not only administrative acts of the
> executive but legislative enactments passed by the legislature as well. This
> power is given to the High Courts under Article 226 of the Constitution and
> to the Supreme Court under Article 32 as well as Article 136 of the
> Constitution. At the same time, the parameters on which the power of
> judicial review of administrative act is to be undertaken are different from
> the parameters on which validity of legislative enactment is to be examined.
> No doubt, in exercises of its power of judicial review of legislative
> action, the Supreme Court, or for that matter, the High Courts can declare
> law passed by Parliament or the State Legislature as invalid. However, the
> power to strike down primary legislation enacted by the Union or the State
> Legislatures is on limited grounds.

Courts can strike down legislation either on the basis that it falls foul of
federal distribution of powers or that it contravenes fundamental rights or
other constitutional rights/provisions of the Constitution of India. No doubt,
since the Supreme Court and the High Courts are treated as the ultimate
arbiter in all matters involving interpretation of the Constitution, it is the
courts which have the final say on questions relating to rights and whether
such a right is violated or not. The basis of the aforesaid statement lies in
20 (2017) 7 SCC 59 Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters
Page 113 of 567 Article 13(2) of the Constitution which proscribes the State
from making “any law which takes away or abridges the right conferred by Part
III”, enshrining fundamental rights. It categorically states that any law made
in contravention thereof, to the extent of the contravention, be void.

77\. We can also take note of Article 372 of the Constitution at this stage
which applies to pre-constitutional laws. Article 372(1) reads as under:

“372. Continuance in force of existing laws and their adaptation.—(1)
Notwithstanding the repeal by this Constitution of the enactments referred to
in Article 395 but subject to the other provisions of this Constitution, all
the laws in force in the territory of India immediately before the
commencement of this Constitution shall continue in force therein until
altered or repealed or amended by a competent legislature or other competent
authority.” In the context of judicial review of legislation, this provision
gives an indication that all laws enforced prior to the commencement of the
Constitution can be tested for compliance with the provisions of the
Constitution by courts. Such a power is recognised by this Court in Union of
India v. SICOM Ltd. In that judgment, it was also held that since the term
“laws”, as per Article 372, includes common law the power of judicial review
of legislation, which is a part of common law applicable in India before the
Constitution came into force, would continue to vest in the Indian courts.

78\. …These contours of the judicial review are spelled out in the clear terms
in Rakesh Kohli, and particularly in the following paragraphs: (SCC pp. 321-22
& 325-27, paras 16-17, 26-28 & 30) “16. The statute enacted by Parliament or a
State Legislature cannot be declared unconstitutional lightly. The court must
be able to hold beyond any iota of doubt that the violation of the
constitutional provisions was so glaring that the legislative provision under
challenge cannot stand. Sans flagrant violation of the constitutional
provisions, the law made by Parliament or a State Legislature is not declared
bad. Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 114 of 567

17\. This Court has repeatedly stated that legislative enactment can be struck
down by court only on two grounds, namely (i) that the appropriate legislature
does not have the competence to make the law, and

(ii) that it does not (sic) take away or abridge any of the fundamental rights
enumerated in Part III of the Constitution or any other constitutional
provisions. In McDowell and Co. while dealing with the challenge to an
enactment based on Article 14, this Court stated in para 43 of the Report as
follows: (SCC pp. 737-38) ‘43. … A law made by Parliament or the legislature
can be struck down by courts on two grounds and two grounds alone viz. (1)
lack of legislative competence, and (2) violation of any of the fundamental
rights guaranteed in Part III of the Constitution or of any other
constitutional provision. There is no third ground. … if an enactment is
challenged as violative of Article 14, it can be struck down only if it is
found that it is violative of the equality clause/equal protection clause
enshrined therein. Similarly, if an enactment is challenged as violative of
any of the fundamental rights guaranteed by sub-clauses (a) to

(g) of Article 19(1), it can be struck down only if it is found not saved by
any of the clauses (2) to (6) of Article 19 and so on. No enactment can be
struck down by just saying that it is arbitrary or unreasonable. Some or the
other constitutional infirmity has to be found before invalidating an Act. An
enactment cannot be struck down on the ground that court thinks it
unjustified. Parliament and the legislatures, composed as they are of the
representatives of the people, are supposed to know and be aware of the needs
of the people and what is good and bad for them. The court cannot sit in
judgment over their wisdom.’ xx xx xx

26\. In Mohd. Hanif Quareshi, the Constitution Bench further observed that
there was always a presumption in favour of constitutionality of an enactment
and the burden is upon him, who attacks it, to show that there has been a
clear violation of the constitutional principles. It stated in para 15 of the
Report as under: (AIR pp. 740-41) Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 &
connected matters Page 115 of 567 ‘15. … The courts, it is accepted, must
presume that the legislature understands and correctly appreciates the needs
of its own people, that its laws are directed to problems made manifest by
experience and that its discriminations are based on adequate grounds. It must
be borne in mind that the legislature is free to recognise degrees of harm and
may confine its restrictions to those cases where the need is deemed to be the
clearest and finally that in order to sustain the presumption of
constitutionality the court may take into consideration matters of common
knowledge, matters of common report, the history of the times and may assume
every state of facts which can be conceived existing at the time of
legislation.’

27\. The above legal position has been reiterated by a Constitution Bench of
this Court in Mahant Moti Das v. S.P. Sahi.

28\. In Hamdard Dawakhana v. Union of India, inter alia, while referring to
the earlier two decisions, namely, Bengal Immunity Co. Ltd. and Mahant Moti
Das, it was observed in para 8 of the Report as follows: (Hamdard Dawakhana
case, AIR p. 559) ‘8. Therefore, when the constitutionality of an enactment is
challenged on the ground of violation of any of the articles in Part III of
the Constitution, the ascertainment of its true nature and character becomes
necessary i.e. its subject-matter, the area in which it is intended to
operate, its purport and intent have to be determined. In order to do so it is
legitimate to take into consideration all the factors such as history of the
legislation, the purpose thereof, the surrounding circumstances and
conditions, the mischief which it intended to suppress, the remedy for the
disease which the legislature resolved to cure and the true reason for the
remedy….’ In Hamdard Dawakhana, the Court also followed the statement of law
in Mahant Moti Das and the two earlier decisions, namely, Charanjit Lal
Chowdhury v. Union of India and State of Bombay v. F.N. Balsara and reiterated
the principle that presumption was always in favour of constitutionality of an
enactment. Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 116
of 567

xx xx xx

30\. A well-known principle that in the field of taxation, the legislature
enjoys a greater latitude for classification, has been noted by this Court in
a long line of cases. Some of these decisions are Steelworth Ltd. v. State of
Assam [Steelworth Ltd. v. State of Assam, 1962 Supp (2) SCR 589], Gopal Narain
v. State of U.P. [Gopal Narain v. State of U.P., AIR 1964 SC 370], Ganga Sugar
Corpn. Ltd. v. State of U.P. [Ganga Sugar Corpn. Ltd. v. State of U.P., (1980)
1 SCC 223 : 1980 SCC (Tax) 90], R.K. Garg v. Union of India [R.K. Garg v.
Union of India, (1981) 4 SCC 675 : 1982 SCC (Tax) 30] and State of W.B. v.
E.I.T.A. India Ltd. [State of W.B. v. E.I.T.A. India Ltd., (2003) 5 SCC 239]”
(emphasis in original) xx xx xx

83\. It is, thus, clear that in exercise of power of judicial review, the
Indian courts are invested with powers to strike down primary legislation
enacted by Parliament or the State Legislatures. However, while undertaking
this exercise of judicial review, the same is to be done at three levels. In
the first stage, the Court would examine as to whether impugned provision in a
legislation is compatible with the fundamental rights or the constitutional
provisions (substantive judicial review) or it falls foul of the federal
distribution of powers (procedural judicial review). If it is not found to be
so, no further exercise is needed as challenge would fail. On the other hand,
if it is found that legislature lacks competence as the subject legislated was
not within the powers assigned in the List in Schedule VII, no further enquiry
is needed and such a law is to be declared as ultra vires the Constitution.
However, while undertaking substantive judicial review, if it is found that
the impugned provision appears to be violative of fundamental rights or other
constitutional rights, the Court reaches the second stage of review. At this
second phase of enquiry, the Court is supposed to undertake the exercise as to
whether the impugned provision can still be saved by reading it down so as to
bring it in conformity with the constitutional provisions. If that is not
achievable then the enquiry enters the third stage. If the offending portion
of the statute is severable, it is severed and the Court strikes down the Writ
Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 117 of 567 impugned
provision declaring the same as unconstitutional.”

76) In support of the aforesaid proposition that an Act of the Parliament can
be invalidated only on the aforesaid two grounds, passages from various
judgments were extracted 21. The Court also noted the observations from State
of A.P. & Ors. v. MCDOWELL & Co. & Ors.22 wherein it was held that apart from
the aforesaid two grounds, no third ground is available to validate any piece
of legislation. In the process, it was further noted that in Rajbala & Ors. v.
State of Haryana & Ors.23 (which followed MCDOWELL & Co. case), the Court held
that a legislation cannot be declared unconstitutional on the ground that it
is ‘arbitrary’ inasmuch as examining as to whether a particular Act is
arbitrary or not implies a value judgment and courts do not examine the wisdom
of legislative choices, and, therefore, cannot undertake this exercise.

77) The issue whether law can be declared unconstitutional on the ground of
arbitrariness has received the attention of this Court in a Constitution Bench
judgment in the case of Shayara Bano v. Union of India & Ors.24. R.F. Nariman
and U.U. Lalit, JJ. 21 State of M.P. v. Rakesh Kohli, (2012) 6 SCC 312; Ashoka
Kumar Thakur v. Union of India, (2008) 6 SCC 1 22 (1996) 3 SCC 709 23 (2016) 2
SCC 445 24 (2017) 9 SCC 1 Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected
matters Page 118 of 567 discredited the ratio of the aforesaid judgments
wherein the Court had held that a law cannot be declared unconstitutional on
the ground that it is arbitrary. The Judges pointed out the larger Bench
judgment in the case of Dr. K.R. Lakshmanan v. State of T.N. & Anr.25 and
Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India & Anr.26 where ‘manifest arbitrariness’ is
recognised as the third ground on which the legislative Act can be
invalidated. Following discussion in this behalf is worthy of note:

> “87. The thread of reasonableness runs through the entire fundamental rights
> chapter. What is manifestly arbitrary is obviously unreasonable and being
> contrary to the rule of law, would violate Article 14. Further, there is an
> apparent contradiction in the three-Judge Bench decision in McDowell [State
> of A.P. v. McDowell and Co., (1996) 3 SCC 709] when it is said that a
> constitutional challenge can succeed on the ground that a law is
> “disproportionate, excessive or unreasonable”, yet such challenge would fail
> on the very ground of the law being “unreasonable, unnecessary or
> unwarranted”. The arbitrariness doctrine when applied to legislation
> obviously would not involve the latter challenge but would only involve a
> law being disproportionate, excessive or otherwise being manifestly
> unreasonable. All the aforesaid grounds, therefore, do not seek to
> differentiate between State action in its various forms, all of which are
> interdicted if they fall foul of the fundamental rights guaranteed to
> persons and citizens in Part III of the Constitution.

> 88\. We only need to point out that even after McDowell [State of A.P. v.
> McDowell and Co., (1996) 3 SCC 709] , this Court has in fact negated
> statutory law on the ground of it being arbitrary and therefore violative of
> Article 14 of the Constitution of India. In Malpe Vishwanath Acharya v.

State of Maharashtra [Malpe Vishwanath Acharya v. State of Maharashtra, (1998)
2 SCC 1] , this Court held that after passage of time, a law can become
arbitrary, and, 25 (1996) 2 SCC 226 26 (1978) 1 SCC 248 Writ Petition (Civil)
No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 119 of 567 therefore, the freezing of
rents at a 1940 market value under the Bombay Rent Act would be arbitrary and
violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India (see paras 8 to 15 and
31).

xx xx xx

99\. However, in State of Bihar v. Bihar Distillery Ltd. [State of Bihar v.
Bihar Distillery Ltd., (1997) 2 SCC 453] , SCC at para 22, in State of M.P. v.
Rakesh Kohli [State of M.P. v. Rakesh Kohli, (2012) 6 SCC 312 : (2012) 3 SCC
(Civ) 481], SCC at paras 17 to 19, in Rajbala v. State of Haryana [Rajbala v.
State of Haryana, (2016) 2 SCC 445], SCC at paras 53 to 65 and in Binoy Viswam
v. Union of India [Binoy Viswam v. Union of India, (2017) 7 SCC 59], SCC at
paras 80 to 82, McDowell [State of A.P. v. McDowell and Co., (1996) 3 SCC 709]
was read as being an absolute bar to the use of “arbitrariness” as a tool to
strike down legislation under Article 14. As has been noted by us earlier in
this judgment, McDowell [State of A.P. v. McDowell and Co., (1996) 3 SCC 709]
itself is per incuriam, not having noticed several judgments of Benches of
equal or higher strength, its reasoning even otherwise being flawed. The
judgments, following McDowell [State of A.P. v. McDowell and Co., (1996) 3 SCC
709] are, therefore, no longer good law.”

78) The historical development of the doctrine of arbitrariness has been
noticed by the said Judges in Shayara Bano in detail. It would be suffice to
reproduce paragraphs 67 to 69 of the said judgment as the discussion in these
paras provide a sufficient guide as to how a doctrine of arbitrariness is to
be applied while adjudging the constitutional validity of a legislation.

“67. We now come to the development of the doctrine of arbitrariness and its
application to State action as a distinct doctrine on which State action may
be struck down as being violative of the rule of law contained in Article 14.
In a significant passage, Bhagwati, J., in E.P. Royappa v. State of T.N.
stated: (SCC p. 38, para 85) Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected
matters Page 120 of 567 “85. The last two grounds of challenge may be taken up
together for consideration. Though we have formulated the third ground of
challenge as a distinct and separate ground, it is really in substance and
effect merely an aspect of the second ground based on violation of Articles 14
and 16. Article 16 embodies the fundamental guarantee that there shall be
equality of opportunity for all citizens in matters relating to employment or
appointment to any office under the State. Though enacted as a distinct and
independent fundamental right because of its great importance as a principle
ensuring equality of opportunity in public employment which is so vital to the
building up of the new classless egalitarian society envisaged in the
Constitution, Article 16 is only an instance of the application of the concept
of equality enshrined in Article 14. In other words, Article 14 is the genus
while Article 16 is a species. Article 16 gives effect to the doctrine of
equality in all matters relating to public employment. The basic principle
which, therefore, informs both Articles 14 and 16 is equality and inhibition
against discrimination. Now, what is the content and reach of this great
equalising principle? It is a founding faith, to use the words of Bose, J., “a
way of life”, and it must not be subjected to a narrow pedantic or
lexicographic approach. We cannot countenance any attempt to truncate its all-
embracing scope and meaning, for to do so would be to violate its activist
magnitude. Equality is a dynamic concept with many aspects and dimensions and
it cannot be “cribbed, cabined and confined” within traditional and
doctrinaire limits. From a positivistic point of view, equality is antithetic
to arbitrariness. In fact equality and arbitrariness are sworn enemies; one
belongs to the rule of law in a republic while the other, to the whim and
caprice of an absolute monarch. Where an act is arbitrary, it is implicit in
it that it is unequal both according to political logic and constitutional law
and is therefore violative of Article 14, and if it effects any matter
relating to public employment, it is also violative of Article 16. Articles 14
and 16 strike at arbitrariness in State action and ensure fairness and
equality of treatment. They require that State action must be based on valid
relevant principles applicable alike to all similarly situate and it must not
be guided by any extraneous Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected
matters Page 121 of 567 or irrelevant considerations because that would be
denial of equality. Where the operative reason for State action, as
distinguished from motive inducing from the antechamber of the mind, is not
legitimate and relevant but is extraneous and outside the area of permissible
considerations, it would amount to mala fide exercise of power and that is hit
by Articles 14 and 16. Mala fide exercise of power and arbitrariness are
different lethal radiations emanating from the same vice: in fact the latter
comprehends the former. Both are inhibited by Articles 14 and 16.” (emphasis
supplied)

68\. This was further fleshed out in Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India, where,
after stating that various fundamental rights must be read together and must
overlap and fertilise each other, Bhagwati, J., further amplified this
doctrine as follows: (SCC pp. 283-84, para 7) “The nature and requirement of
the procedure under Article 21

7\. Now, the question immediately arises as to what is the requirement of
Article 14: what is the content and reach of the great equalising principle
enunciated in this article? There can be no doubt that it is a founding faith
of the Constitution. It is indeed the pillar on which rests securely the
foundation of our democratic republic. And, therefore, it must not be
subjected to a narrow, pedantic or lexicographic approach. No attempt should
be made to truncate its all-embracing scope and meaning, for to do so would be
to violate its activist magnitude. Equality is a dynamic concept with many
aspects and dimensions and it cannot be imprisoned within traditional and
doctrinaire limits. We must reiterate here what was pointed out by the
majority in E.P. Royappa v. State of T.N. , namely, that: (SCC p. 38, para 85)
‘85. … From a positivistic point of view, equality is antithetic to
arbitrariness. In fact equality and arbitrariness are sworn enemies; one
belongs to the rule of law in a republic, while the other, to the whim and
caprice of an absolute monarch. Where an act is arbitrary, it is implicit in
it that it is unequal both according to political logic and constitutional law
and is therefore violative of Article 14….’ Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of
2012 & connected matters Page 122 of 567 Article 14 strikes at arbitrariness
in State action and ensures fairness and equality of treatment. The principle
of reasonableness, which legally as well as philosophically, is an essential
element of equality or non-arbitrariness pervades Article 14 like a brooding
omnipresence and the procedure contemplated by Article 21 must answer the test
of reasonableness in order to be in conformity with Article 14. It must be
“right and just and fair” and not arbitrary, fanciful or oppressive;
otherwise, it would be no procedure at all and the requirement of Article 21
would not be satisfied.” (emphasis supplied)

69\. This was further clarified in A.L. Kalra v. Project and Equipment Corpn.,
following Royappa and holding that arbitrariness is a doctrine distinct from
discrimination. It was held: (A.L. Kalra case, SCC p. 328, para 19) “19. … It
thus appears well settled that Article 14 strikes at arbitrariness in
executive/administrative action because any action that is arbitrary must
necessarily involve the negation of equality. One need not confine the denial
of equality to a comparative evaluation between two persons to arrive at a
conclusion of discriminatory treatment. An action per se arbitrary itself
denies equal of (sic) protection by law. The Constitution Bench pertinently
observed in Ajay Hasia case and put the matter beyond controversy when it
said: (SCC p. 741, para 16) ‘16. … Wherever therefore, there is arbitrariness
in State action whether it be of the legislature or of the executive or of an
“authority” under Article 12, Article 14 immediately springs into action and
strikes down such State action.’ This view was further elaborated and affirmed
in D.S. Nakara v. Union of India . In Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India it was
observed that Article 14 strikes at arbitrariness in State action and ensures
fairness and equality of treatment. It is thus too late in the day to contend
that an executive action shown to be arbitrary is not either judicially
reviewable or within the reach of Article 14.” Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494
of 2012 & connected matters Page 123 of 567 The same view was reiterated in
Babita Prasad v. State of Bihar , SCC at p. 285, para 31.” This doctrine is,
thus, treated as a facet of both Articles 14 and 21 of the Constitution.

79) We would like to record that we have proceeded on the premise that
manifest arbitrariness also furnishes a ground on the basis on which a
legislative enactment can be judicially reviewed. In the process, even the
constitutional validity of Section 139AA of the Income Tax Act, 1961 is given
a fresh look on the touchstone of this norm.

Explaining the doctrine/principles on which the cases are to be decided:

80) Our discussion up to this stage, which gives a glimpse of the attack to
the Aadhaar scheme and the Aadhaar Act, spearheaded by the petitioners, would
reveal that in the forefront is the right to privacy and that forms the main
pillar on which the edifice of arguments is substantially constructed 27.
Inbuilt in this right to privacy is the right to live with dignity, which is a
postulate of right to privacy. In the process, discussion leads to the issue
of proportionality, viz. whether measures taken under the Aadhaar Act satisfy
the doctrine of proportionality. We would, therefore, 27 There are few other
incidental and ancillary issues raised by the petitioners as well, which we
propose to discuss and deal with after answering these fundamental
submissions. Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page
124 of 567 be well advised to explain these concepts, so that their
application to the fact situation is undertaken with clear and stable norms in
mind.

Contours of Right to Privacy:

81) It stands established, with conclusive determination of the nine Judge
Bench judgment of this Court in K.S. Puttaswamy that right to privacy is a
fundamental right. The majority judgment authored by Dr. D.Y. Chandrachud, J.
(on behalf of three other Judges) and five concurring judgments of other five
Judges have declared, in no uncertain terms and most authoritatively, right to
privacy to be a fundamental right. This judgment also discusses in detail the
scope and ambit of right to privacy. The relevant passages in this behalf have
been reproduced above while taking note of the submissions of the learned
counsel for the petitioners as well as respondents. One interesting phenomenon
that is discerned from the respective submissions on either side is that both
sides have placed strong reliance on different passages from this very
judgment to support their respective stances. A close reading of this judgment
brings about the following features:

(i) Privacy has always been a natural right: The correct position in this
behalf has been established by a number of Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of
2012 & connected matters Page 125 of 567 judgments starting from Gobind v.
State of M.P.28 Various opinions conclude that:

(a) privacy is a concomitant of the right of the individual to exercise
control over his or her personality.

(b) Privacy is the necessary condition precedent to the enjoyment of any of
the guarantees in Part III.

(c) The fundamental right to privacy would cover at least three aspects – (i)
intrusion with an individual’s physical body, (ii) informational privacy, and
(iii) privacy of choice.

(d) One aspect of privacy is the right to control the dissemination of
personal information. And that every individual should have a right to be able
to control exercise over his/her own life and image as portrayed in the world
and to control commercial use of his/her identity.

Following passages from different opinions reflect the aforesaid proposition:

Dr. D.Y. Chandrachud, J.:

42\. Privacy is a concomitant of the right of the individual to exercise
control over his or her personality. It finds an origin in the notion that
there are certain rights which are natural to or inherent in a human being.
Natural rights are inalienable because they are inseparable from the human
personality. The human element in life is impossible to conceive without the
existence of natural rights. In 1690, John Lockehad in his Second Treatise of
Government observed that the lives, liberties and estates of individuals 28
(1975) 2 SCC 148 Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters
Page 126 of 567 are as a matter of fundamental natural law, a private
preserve. The idea of a private preserve was to create barriers from outside
interference. In 1765, William Blackstone in his Commentaries on the Laws of
England spoke of a “natural liberty”. There were, in his view, absolute rights
which were vested in the individual by the immutable laws of nature. These
absolute rights were divided into rights of personal security, personal
liberty and property. The right of personal security involved a legal and
uninterrupted enjoyment of life, limbs, body, health and reputation by an
individual.

xx xx xx

46\. Natural rights are not bestowed by the State. They inhere in human beings
because they are human. They exist equally in the individual irrespective of
class or strata, gender or orientation.

xx xx xx

318\. Life and personal liberty are inalienable rights. These are rights which
are inseparable from a dignified human existence. The dignity of the
individual, equality between human beings and the quest for liberty are the
foundational pillars of the Indian Constitution.

S.A. Bobde, J. :

415\. Therefore, privacy is the necessary condition precedent to the enjoyment
of any of the guarantees in Part III. As a result, when it is claimed by
rights bearers before constitutional courts, a right to privacy may be
situated not only in Article 21, but also simultaneously in any of the other
guarantees in Part III. In the current state of things, Articles 19(1), 20(3),
25, 28 and 29 are all rights helped up and made meaningful by the exercise of
privacy. This is not an exhaustive list. Future developments in technology and
social ordering may well reveal that there are yet more constitutional sites
in which a privacy right inheres that are not at present evident to us. R.F.
Nariman, J. :

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 127 of 567

521\. In the Indian context, a fundamental right to privacy would cover at
least the following three aspects:

>  Privacy that involves the person i.e. when there is some invasion by the
> State of a person's rights relatable to his physical body, such as the right
> to move freely;

>  Informational privacy which does not deal with a person's body but deals
> with a person's mind, and therefore recognises that an individual may have
> control over the dissemination of material that is personal to him.
> Unauthorised use of such information may, therefore lead to infringement of
> this right; and  The privacy of choice, which protects an individual's
> autonomy over fundamental personal choices.

For instance, we can ground physical privacy or privacy relating to the body
in Articles 19(1)(d) and (e) read with Article 21; ground personal information
privacy under Article 21; and the privacy of choice in Articles 19(1)(a) to

(c), 20(3), 21 and 25. The argument based on “privacy” being a vague and
nebulous concept need not, therefore, detain us.

xx xx xx

532\. The learned counsel for the petitioners also referred to another
important aspect of the right to privacy. According to the learned counsel for
the petitioner this right is a natural law right which is inalienable. Indeed,
the reference order itself, in para 12, refers to this aspect of the
fundamental right contained. It was, therefore, argued before us that given
the international conventions referred to hereinabove and the fact that this
right inheres in every individual by virtue of his being a human being, such
right is not conferred by the Constitution but is only recognised and given
the status of being fundamental. There is no doubt that the petitioners are
correct in this submission. However, one important roadblock in the way needs
to be got over.

533\. In ADM, Jabalpur v. Shivakant Shukla, a Constitution Bench of this Court
arrived at the conclusion (by majority) that Article 21 is the sole repository
of all rights to life and personal liberty, and, when suspended, takes away
those Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 128 of
567 rights altogether. A remarkable dissent was that of Khanna, J. [ Khanna,
J. was in line to be Chief Justice of India but was superseded because of this
dissenting judgment. Nani Palkhivala in an article written on this great
Judge's supersession ended with a poignant sentence, “To the stature of such a
man, the Chief Justiceship of India can add nothing.” Seervai, in his
monumental treatise Constitutional Law of India had this to say:“53. If in
this Appendix the dissenting judgment of Khanna, J. has not been considered in
detail, it is not for lack of admiration for the judgment, or the courage
which he showed in delivering it regardless of the cost and consequences to
himself. It cost him the Chief Justiceship of India, but it gained for him
universal esteem not only for his courage but also for his inflexible judicial
independence. If his judgment is not considered in detail it is because under
the theory of precedents which we have adopted, a dissenting judgment, however
valuable, does not lay down the law and the object of a critical examination
of the majority judgments in this Appendix was to show that those judgments
are untenable in law, productive of grave public mischief and ought to be
overruled at the earliest opportunity. The conclusion which Justice Khanna has
reached on the effect of the suspension of Article 21 is correct. His reminder
that the rule of law did not merely mean giving effect to an enacted law was
timely, and was reinforced by his reference to the mass murders of millions of
Jews in Nazi concentration camps under an enacted law. However, the legal
analysis in this Chapter confirms his conclusion though on different grounds
from those which he has given.” (at Appendix p. 2229).] The learned Judge
held: (SCC pp. 747 & 751, paras 525 & 531) “525. The effect of the suspension
of the right to move any court for the enforcement of the right conferred by
Article 21, in my opinion, is that when a petition is filed in a court, the
court would have to proceed upon the basis that no reliance can be placed upon
that article for obtaining relief from the court during the period of
emergency. Question then arises as to whether the rule that no one shall be
deprived of his life or personal liberty without the authority of law still
survives during the period of emergency despite the Presidential Order
suspending the right to move any court for the enforcement of the right
contained in Article 21. The answer to this question is linked with the answer
to the question as Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters
Page 129 of 567 to whether Article 21 is the sole repository of the right to
life and personal liberty. After giving the matter my earnest consideration, I
am of the opinion that Article 21 cannot be considered to be the sole
repository of the right to life and personal liberty. The right to life and
personal liberty is the most precious right of human beings in civilised
societies governed by the rule of law. Many modern Constitutions incorporate
certain fundamental rights, including the one relating to personal freedom.
According to Blackstone, the absolute rights of Englishmen were the rights of
personal security, personal liberty and private property. The American
Declaration of Independence (1776) states that all men are created equal, and
among their inalienable rights are life, liberty, and the pursuit of
happiness. The Second Amendment to the US Constitution refers inter alia to
security of person, while the Fifth Amendment prohibits inter alia deprivation
of life and liberty without due process, of law. The different Declarations of
Human Rights and fundamental freedoms have all laid stress upon the sanctity
of life and liberty. They have also given expression in varying words to the
principle that no one shall be derived of his life or liberty without the
authority of law. The International Commission of Jurists, which is affiliated
to UNESCO, has been attempting with, considerable success to give material
content to “the rule of law”, an expression used in the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights. One of its most notable achievements was the Declaration of
Delhi, 1959. This resulted from a Congress held in New Delhi attended by
jurists from more than 50 countries, and was based on a questionnaire
circulated to 75,000 lawyers. “Respect for the supreme value of human
personality” was stated to be the basis of all law (see p. 21 of the
Constitutional and Administrative Law by O. Hood Phillips, 3rd Edn.).

xx xx xx

531\. I am unable to subscribe to the view that when right to enforce the
right under Article 21 is suspended, the result would be that there would be
no remedy against deprivation of a person's life or liberty by the State even
though such deprivation is without the authority of law or even in flagrant
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 130 of 567
violation of the provisions of law. The right not to be deprived of one's life
or liberty without the authority of law was not the creation of the
Constitution. Such right existed before the Constitution came into force. The
fact that the Framers of the Constitution made an aspect of such right a part
of the fundamental rights did not have the effect of exterminating the
independent identity of such right and of making Article 21 to be the sole
repository of that right. Its real effect was to ensure that a law under which
a person can be deprived of his life or personal liberty should prescribe a
procedure for such deprivation or, according to the dictum laid down by
Mukherjea, J. in Gopalan case [A.K. Gopalan v. State of Madras, AIR 1950 SC 27
: 1950 SCR 88] , such law should be a valid law not violative of fundamental
rights guaranteed by Part III of the Constitution. Recognition as fundamental
right of one aspect of the pre- constitutional right cannot have the effect of
making things less favourable so far as the sanctity of life and personal
liberty is concerned compared to the position if an aspect of such right had
not been recognised as fundamental right because of the vulnerability of
fundamental rights accruing from Article 359. I am also unable to agree that
in view of the Presidential Order in the matter of sanctity of life and
liberty, things would be worse off compared to the state of law as it existed
before the coming into force of the Constitution.” (emphasis in original) S.K.
Kaul, J.:

574\. I have had the benefit of reading the exhaustive and erudite opinions of
Rohinton F. Nariman and Dr D.Y. Chandrachud, JJ. The conclusion is the same,
answering the reference that privacy is not just a common law right, but a
fundamental right falling in Part III of the Constitution of India. I agree
with this conclusion as privacy is a primal, natural right which is inherent
to an individual. However, I am tempted to set out my perspective on the issue
of privacy as a right, which to my mind, is an important core of any
individual existence.

xx xx xx Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 131 of
567

620\. I had earlier adverted to an aspect of privacy — the right to control
dissemination of personal information. The boundaries that people establish
from others in society are not only physical but also informational. There are
different kinds of boundaries in respect to different relations. Privacy
assists in preventing awkward social situations and reducing social frictions.
Most of the information about individuals can fall under the phrase “none of
your business”. On information being shared voluntarily, the same may be said
to be in confidence and any breach of confidentiality is a breach of the
trust. This is more so in the professional relationships such as with doctors
and lawyers which requires an element of candour in disclosure of information.
An individual has the right to control one's life while submitting personal
data for various facilities and services. It is but essential that the
individual knows as to what the data is being used for with the ability to
correct and amend it. The hallmark of freedom in a democracy is having the
autonomy and control over our lives which becomes impossible, if important
decisions are made in secret without our awareness or participation. [ Daniel
Solove, “10 Reasons Why Privacy Matters” published on 20-1-2014
<https://www.teachprivacy.com/10-reasons-

    
    
                   privacy-matters/>.]
    
                                       xx             xx        xx
    
    

625\. Every individual should have a right to be able to exercise control over
his/her own life and image as portrayed to the world and to control commercial
use of his/her identity. This also means that an individual may be permitted
to prevent others from using his image, name and other aspects of his/her
personal life and identity for commercial purposes without his/her consent. [
The Second Circuit's decision in Haelan Laboratories Inc. v. Topps Chewing Gum
Inc., 202 F 2d 866 (2d Cir 1953) penned by Jerome Frank, J. defined the right
to publicity as “the right to grant the exclusive privilege of publishing his
picture”.]” xx xx xx

646\. If the individual permits someone to enter the house it does not mean
that others can enter the house. The only check and balance is that it should
not harm the other individual or affect his or her rights. This applies both
to the physical form and to technology. In an era where there are Writ
Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 132 of 567 wide,
varied, social and cultural norms and more so in a country like ours which
prides itself on its diversity, privacy is one of the most important rights to
be protected both against State and non-State actors and be recognised as a
fundamental right. How it thereafter works out in its inter- play with other
fundamental rights and when such restrictions would become necessary would
depend on the factual matrix of each case. That it may give rise to more
litigation can hardly be the reason not to recognise this important, natural,
primordial right as a fundamental right.”

(ii) The sanctity of privacy lies in its functional relationship with dignity:
Privacy ensures that a human being can lead a life of dignity by securing the
inner recesses of the human personality from unwanted intrusions. While the
legitimate expectation of privacy may vary from intimate zone to the private
zone and from the private to the public arena, it is important to underscore
that privacy is not lost or surrendered merely because the individual is in a
public place. Further, privacy is a postulate of dignity itself. Also, privacy
concerns arise when the State seeks to intrude into the body and the mind of
the citizen. This aspect is discussed in the following manner:

> Dr. D.Y. Chandrachud, J. :

> 127\. The submission that recognising the right to privacy is an exercise
> which would require a constitutional amendment and cannot be a matter of
> judicial interpretation is not an acceptable doctrinal position. The
> argument assumes that the right to privacy is independent of the liberties
> guaranteed by Part III of the Constitution.

There lies the error. The right to privacy is an element of human dignity. The
sanctity of privacy lies in its functional relationship with dignity. Privacy
ensures that a human Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters
Page 133 of 567 being can lead a life of dignity by securing the inner
recesses of the human personality from unwanted intrusion. Privacy recognises
the autonomy of the individual and the right of every person to make essential
choices which affect the course of life. In doing so privacy recognises that
living a life of dignity is essential for a human being to fulfill the
liberties and freedoms which are the cornerstone of the Constitution. To
recognise the value of privacy as a constitutional entitlement and interest is
not to fashion a new fundamental right by a process of amendment through
judicial fiat. Neither are the Judges nor is the process of judicial review
entrusted with the constitutional responsibility to amend the Constitution.
But judicial review certainly has the task before it of determining the nature
and extent of the freedoms available to each person under the fabric of those
constitutional guarantees which are protected. Courts have traditionally
discharged that function and in the context of Article 21 itself, as we have
already noted, a panoply of protections governing different facets of a
dignified existence has been held to fall within the protection of Article 21.

xx xx xx

297\. What, then, does privacy postulate? Privacy postulates the reservation
of a private space for the individual, described as the right to be let alone.
The concept is founded on the autonomy of the individual. The ability of an
individual to make choices lies at the core of the human personality. The
notion of privacy enables the individual to assert and control the human
element which is inseparable from the personality of the individual. The
inviolable nature of the human personality is manifested in the ability to
make decisions on matters intimate to human life. The autonomy of the
individual is associated over matters which can be kept private. These are
concerns over which there is a legitimate expectation of privacy. The body and
the mind are inseparable elements of the human personality. The integrity of
the body and the sanctity of the mind can exist on the foundation that each
individual possesses an inalienable ability and right to preserve a private
space in which the human personality can develop. Without the ability to make
choices, the inviolability of the personality would be in doubt. Recognising a
zone of privacy is but an acknowledgment that each individual must be entitled
to chart and pursue the course of development Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of
2012 & connected matters Page 134 of 567 of personality. Hence privacy is a
postulate of human dignity itself. Thoughts and behavioural patterns which are
intimate to an individual are entitled to a zone of privacy where one is free
of social expectations. In that zone of privacy, an individual is not judged
by others. Privacy enables each individual to take crucial decisions which
find expression in the human personality. It enables individuals to preserve
their beliefs, thoughts, expressions, ideas, ideologies, preferences and
choices against societal demands of homogeneity. Privacy is an intrinsic
recognition of heterogeneity, of the right of the individual to be different
and to stand against the tide of conformity in creating a zone of solitude.
Privacy protects the individual from the searching glare of publicity in
matters which are personal to his or her life. Privacy attaches to the person
and not to the place where it is associated. Privacy constitutes the
foundation of all liberty because it is in privacy that the individual can
decide how liberty is best exercised. Individual dignity and privacy are
inextricably linked in a pattern woven out of a thread of diversity into the
fabric of a plural culture.

xx xx xx

322\. Privacy is the constitutional core of human dignity. Privacy has both a
normative and descriptive function. At a normative level privacy subserves
those eternal values upon which the guarantees of life, liberty and freedom
are founded. At a descriptive level, privacy postulates a bundle of
entitlements and interests which lie at the foundation of ordered liberty.

323\. Privacy includes at its core the preservation of personal intimacies,
the sanctity of family life, marriage, procreation, the home and sexual
orientation. Privacy also connotes a right to be left alone. Privacy
safeguards individual autonomy and recognises the ability of the individual to
control vital aspects of his or her life. Personal choices governing a way of
life are intrinsic to privacy. Privacy protects heterogeneity and recognises
the plurality and diversity of our culture. While the legitimate expectation
of privacy may vary from the intimate zone to the private zone and from the
private to the public arenas, it is important to underscore that privacy is
not lost or surrendered merely because the individual is in a public place.
Privacy attaches to the person since it is an essential facet of the dignity
of the human being. Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters
Page 135 of 567 S.A. Bobde, J. :

> 407\. Undoubtedly, privacy exists, as the foregoing demonstrates, as a
> verifiable fact in all civilised societies. But privacy does not stop at
> being merely a descriptive claim. It also embodies a normative one. The
> normative case for privacy is intuitively simple. Nature has clothed man,
> amongst other things, with dignity and liberty so that he may be free to do
> what he will consistent with the freedom of another and to develop his
> faculties to the fullest measure necessary to live in happiness and peace.
> The Constitution, through its Part III, enumerates many of these freedoms
> and their corresponding rights as fundamental rights. Privacy is an
> essential condition for the exercise of most of these freedoms. Ex facie,
> every right which is integral to the constitutional rights to dignity, life,
> personal liberty and freedom, as indeed the right to privacy is, must itself
> be regarded as a fundamental right.

> 408\. Though he did not use the name of “privacy”, it is clear that it is
> what J.S. Mill took to be indispensable to the existence of the general
> reservoir of liberty that democracies are expected to reserve to their
> citizens. In the introduction to his seminal On Liberty (1859), he
> characterised freedom in the following way:

> “This, then, is the appropriate region of human liberty. It comprises,
> first, the inward domain of consciousness; demanding liberty of conscience,
> in the most comprehensive sense; liberty of thought and feeling; absolute
> freedom of opinion and sentiment on all subjects, practical or speculative,
> scientific, moral, or theological. The liberty of expressing and publishing
> opinions may seem to fall under a different principle, since it belongs to
> that part of the conduct of an individual which concerns other people; but,
> being almost of as much importance as the liberty of thought itself, and
> resting in great part on the same reasons, is practically inseparable from
> it. Secondly, the principle requires liberty of tastes and pursuits; of
> framing the plan of our life to suit our own character;

of doing as we like, subject to such consequences as may follow: without
impediment from our fellow creatures, so long as what we do does not harm
them, even though they should think our conduct foolish, perverse, or wrong.
Thirdly, from this liberty of Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 &
connected matters Page 136 of 567 each individual, follows the liberty, within
the same limits, of combination among individuals; freedom to unite, for any
purpose not involving harm to others: the persons combining being supposed to
be of full age, and not forced or deceived.

No society in which these liberties are not, on the whole, respected, is free,
whatever may be its form of Government; and none is completely free in which
they do not exist absolute and unqualified. The only freedom which deserves
the name, is that of pursuing our own good in our own way, so long as we do
not attempt to deprive others of theirs, or impede their efforts to obtain it.
Each is the proper guardian of his own health, whether bodily, or mental and
spiritual. Mankind are greater gainers by suffering each other to live as
seems good to themselves, than by compelling each to live as seems good to the
rest. Though this doctrine is anything but new, and, to some persons, may have
the air of a truism, there is no doctrine which stands more directly opposed
to the general tendency of existing opinion and practice. Society has expended
fully as much effort in the attempt (according to its lights) to compel people
to conform to its notions of personal, as of social excellence.” [John Stuart
Mill, On Liberty and Other Essays (Stefan Collini Edition, 1989) (1859)]
(emphasis supplied)

409\. The first and natural home for a right to privacy is in Article 21 at
the very heart of “personal liberty” and life itself. Liberty and privacy are
integrally connected in a way that privacy is often the basic condition
necessary for exercise of the right of personal liberty. There are innumerable
activities which are virtually incapable of being performed at all and in many
cases with dignity unless an individual is left alone or is otherwise
empowered to ensure his or her privacy. Birth and death are events when
privacy is required for ensuring dignity amongst all civilised people. Privacy
is thus one of those rights “instrumentally required if one is to enjoy” [
Laurence H. Tribe and Michael C. Dorf, “Levels of Generality in the Definition
of Rights”, 57 U CHI L REV 1057 (1990) at p. 1068.] rights specified and
enumerated in the constitutional text.

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 137 of 567

410\. This Court has endorsed the view that “life” must mean “something more
than mere animal existence” [Munn v. Illinois, 1876 SCC OnLine US SC 4 : 24 L
Ed 77 : 94 US 113 (1877) (Per Field, J.) as cited in Kharak Singh, (1964) 1
SCR 332 at pp. 347-48] on a number of occasions, beginning with the
Constitution Bench in Sunil Batra (1) v. Delhi Admn. [Sunil Batra v. Delhi
Admn., (1978) 4 SCC 494 : 1979 SCC (Cri) 155] Sunil Batra [Sunil Batra v.
Delhi Admn., (1978) 4 SCC 494 : 1979 SCC (Cri) 155] connected this view of
Article 21 to the constitutional value of dignity. In numerous cases,
including Francis Coralie Mullin v. UT of Delhi [Francis Coralie Mullin v. UT
of Delhi, (1981) 1 SCC 608 : 1981 SCC (Cri) 212] , this Court has viewed
liberty as closely linked to dignity. Their relationship to the effect of
taking into the protection of “life” the protection of “faculties of thinking
and feeling”, and of temporary and permanent impairments to those faculties.
In Francis Coralie Mullin[Francis Coralie Mullin v. UT of Delhi, (1981) 1 SCC
608 : 1981 SCC (Cri) 212] , Bhagwati, J. opined as follows: (SCC p. 618, para
7) “7. Now obviously, the right to life enshrined in Article 21 cannot be
restricted to mere animal existence. It means something much more than just
physical survival. In Kharak Singh v. State of U.P. [Kharak Singh v. State of
U.P., AIR 1963 SC 1295 : (1963) 2 Cri LJ 329 : (1964) 1 SCR 332], Subba Rao,
J.

quoted with approval the following passage from the judgment of Field, J. in
Munn v. Illinois [Munn v. Illinois, 1876 SCC OnLine US SC 4 : 24 L Ed 77 : 94
US 113 (1877)] to emphasise the quality of life covered by Article 21: (Kharak
Singh case [Kharak Singh v. State of U.P., AIR 1963 SC 1295 : (1963) 2 Cri LJ
329 : (1964) 1 SCR 332] , AIR p. 1301, para

15)

15\. … “By the term “life” as here used something more is meant than mere
animal existence. The inhibition against its deprivation extends to all those
limbs and faculties by which life is enjoyed. The provision equally prohibits
the mutilation of the body or amputation of an arm or leg or the putting out
of an eye or the destruction of any other organ of the body through which the
soul communicates with the outer world.” ’ Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of
2012 & connected matters Page 138 of 567 and this passage was again accepted
as laying down the correct law by the Constitution Bench of this Court in the
first Sunil Batra case [Sunil Batra v. Delhi Admn., (1978) 4 SCC 494 : 1979
SCC (Cri) 155]. Every limb or faculty through which life is enjoyed is thus
protected by Article 21 and a fortiori, this would include the faculties of
thinking and feeling. Now deprivation which is inhibited by Article 21 may be
total or partial, neither any limb or faculty can be totally destroyed nor can
it be partially damaged. Moreover it is every kind of deprivation that is hit
by Article 21, whether such deprivation be permanent or temporary and,
furthermore, deprivation is not an act which is complete once and for all: it
is a continuing act and so long as it lasts, it must be in accordance with
procedure established by law. It is therefore clear that any act which damages
or injures or interferes with the use of, any limb or faculty of a person,
either permanently or even temporarily, would be within the inhibition of
Article 21.” (emphasis supplied) Privacy is, therefore, necessary in both its
mental and physical aspects as an enabler of guaranteed freedoms.

411\. It is difficult to see how dignity—whose constitutional significance is
acknowledged both by the Preamble and by this Court in its exposition of
Article 21, among other rights —can be assured to the individual without
privacy. Both dignity and privacy are intimately intertwined and are natural
conditions for the birth and death of individuals, and for many significant
events in life between these events. Necessarily, then, the right to privacy
is an integral part of both “life” and “personal liberty” under Article 21,
and is intended to enable the rights bearer to develop her potential to the
fullest extent made possible only in consonance with the constitutional values
expressed in the Preamble as well as across Part III.

R.F. Nariman, J:

525\. But most important of all is the cardinal value of fraternity which
assures the dignity of the individual. [ In 1834, Jacques-Charles Dupont de
l'Eure associated the three terms liberty, equality and fraternity together in
the Revue Républicaine, which he edited, as follows:“Any man aspires to
liberty, to equality, but he cannot achieve it Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494
of 2012 & connected matters Page 139 of 567 without the assistance of other
men, without fraternity.”Many of our decisions recognise human dignity as
being an essential part of the fundamental rights chapter. For example, see
Prem Shankar Shukla v. Delhi Admn., (1980) 3 SCC 526 at para 21, Francis
Coralie Mullin v. UT of Delhi, (1981) 1 SCC 608 at paras 6, 7 and 8, Bandhua
Mukti Morcha v. Union of India, (1984) 3 SCC 161 at para 10, Maharashtra
University of Health Sciences v. Satchikitsa Prasarak Mandal, (2010) 3 SCC 786
at para 37, Shabnam v. Union of India, (2015) 6 SCC 702 at paras 12.4 and 14
and Jeeja Ghosh v. Union of India, (2016) 7 SCC 761 at para 37.] The dignity
of the individual encompasses the right of the individual to develop to the
full extent of his potential. And this development can only be if an
individual has autonomy over fundamental personal choices and control over
dissemination of personal information which may be infringed through an
unauthorised use of such information. It is clear that Article 21, more than
any of the other articles in the fundamental rights chapter, reflects each of
these constitutional values in full, and is to be read in consonance with
these values and with the international covenants that we have referred to. In
the ultimate analysis, the fundamental right to privacy, which has so many
developing facets, can only be developed on a case-to-case basis. Depending
upon the particular facet that is relied upon, either Article 21 by itself or
in conjunction with other fundamental rights would get attracted.

S.K. Kaul, J. :

618\. Rohinton F. Nariman, and Dr D.Y. Chandrachud, JJ., have emphasised the
importance of the protection of privacy to ensure protection of liberty and
dignity. I agree with them and seek to refer to some legal observations in
this regard:

618.1. In Robertson and Nicol on Media Law [ Geoffrey Robertson, QC and Andrew
Nicol, QC, Media Law, 5th Edn., p. 265.] it was observed:

“Individuals have a psychological need to preserve an intrusion-free zone for
their personality and family and suffer anguish and stress when that zone is
violated. Democratic societies must protect privacy as part of their
facilitation of individual freedom, and offer some legal support for the
individual choice as to what Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected
matters Page 140 of 567 aspects of intimate personal life the citizen is
prepared to share with others. This freedom in other words springs from the
same source as freedom of expression: a liberty that enhances individual life
in a democratic community.” 618.2. Lord Nicholls and Lord Hoffmann in their
opinion in Naomi Campbell case[Campbell v. MGN Ltd., (2004) 2 AC 457 : (2004)
2 WLR 1232 : (2004) UKHL 22 (HL)] recognised the importance of the protection
of privacy. Lord Hoffman opined as under: (AC p. 472 H & 473 A-D, paras 50-51)
“50. What human rights law has done is to identify private information as
something worth protecting as an aspect of human autonomy and dignity. And
this recognition has raised inescapably the question of why it should be worth
protecting against the state but not against a private person. There may of
course be justifications for the publication of private information by private
persons which would not be available to the state — I have particularly in
mind the position of the media, to which I shall return in a moment — but I
can see no logical ground for saying that a person should have less protection
against a private individual than he would have against the state for the
publication of personal information for which there is no justification. Nor,
it appears, have any of the other Judges who have considered the matter.

51\. The result of these developments has been a shift in the centre of
gravity of the action for breach of confidence when it is used as a remedy for
the unjustified publication of personal information. … Instead of the cause of
action being based upon the duty of good faith applicable to confidential
personal information and trade secrets alike, it focuses upon the protection
of human autonomy and dignity — the right to control the dissemination of
information about one's private life and the right to the esteem and respect
of other people.” 618.3. Lord Nicholls opined as under: (Naomi Campbell case
[Campbell v. MGN Ltd., (2004) 2 AC 457 : (2004) 2 WLR 1232 : (2004) UKHL 22
(HL)] , AC p. 464 D-F, para

12) Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 141 of 567
“12. The present case concerns one aspect of invasion of privacy: wrongful
disclosure of private information. The case involves the familiar competition
between freedom of expression and respect for an individual's privacy. Both
are vitally important rights. Neither has precedence over the other. The
importance of freedom of expression has been stressed often and eloquently,
the importance of privacy less so. But it, too, lies at the heart of liberty
in a modern state. A proper degree of privacy is essential for the well-being
and development of an individual. And restraints imposed on government to pry
into the lives of the citizen go to the essence of a democratic state: see La
Forest J. in R. v. Dyment [R. v. Dyment, 1988 SCC OnLine Can SC 86 : (1988) 2
SCR 417] , SCC OnLine Can SC para 17 : SCR p.

426.”

619\. Privacy is also the key to freedom of thought. A person has a right to
think. The thoughts are sometimes translated into speech but confined to the
person to whom it is made. For example, one may want to criticise someone but
not share the criticism with the world.

Chelameswar, J.:

372\. History abounds with examples of attempts by Governments to shape the
minds of subjects. In other words, conditioning the thought process by
prescribing what to read or not to read; what forms of art alone are required
to be appreciated leading to the conditioning of beliefs; interfering with the
choice of people regarding the kind of literature, music or art which an
individual would prefer to enjoy. [Stanleyv. Georgia, 1969 SCC OnLine US SC 78
: 22 L Ed 2d 542 : 394 US 557 (1969)“3. … that the mere private possession of
obscene matter cannot constitutionally be made a crime.***9. … State has no
business telling a man, sitting alone in his own house, what books he may read
or what films he may watch. Our whole constitutional heritage rebels at the
thought of giving Government the power to control men's minds.” (SCC OnLine US
SC paras 3 & 9)] Such conditioning is sought to be achieved by screening the
source of information or prescribing penalties for making choices which
Governments do not approve. [Bijoe Emmanuel v. State of Kerala, (1986) 3 SCC
615] Insofar as religious beliefs are concerned, a good deal of the misery our
species suffer Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page
142 of 567 owes its existence to and centres around competing claims of the
right to propagate religion. Constitution of India protects the liberty of all
subjects guaranteeing [“25. Freedom of conscience and free profession,
practice and propagation of religion.—(1) Subject to public order, morality
and health and to the other provisions of this Part, all persons are equally
entitled to freedom of conscience and the right freely to profess, practice
and propagate religion.(2) Nothing in this article shall affect the operation
of any existing law or prevent the State from making any law—(a) regulating or
restricting any economic, financial, political or other secular activity which
may be associated with religious practice;(b) providing for social welfare and
reform or the throwing open of Hindu religious institutions of a public
character to all classes and sections of Hindus.Explanation I.—The wearing and
carrying of kirpans shall be deemed to be included in the profession of the
Sikh religion. Explanation II.—In sub-clause (b) of clause (2), the reference
to Hindus shall be construed as including a reference to persons professing
the Sikh, Jaina or Buddhist religion, and the reference to Hindu religious
institutions shall be construed accordingly.”] the freedom of conscience and
right to freely profess, practice and propagate religion. While the right to
freely “profess, practice and propagate religion” may be a facet of free
speech guaranteed under Article 19(1)(a), the freedom of the belief or faith
in any religion is a matter of conscience falling within the zone of purely
private thought process and is an aspect of liberty. There are areas other
than religious beliefs which form part of the individual's freedom of
conscience such as political belief, etc. which form part of the liberty under
Article 21.

373\. Concerns of privacy arise when the State seeks to intrude into the body
of subjects. [Skinner v. Oklahoma, 1942 SCC OnLine US SC 125 : 86 L Ed 1655 :
316 US 535 (1942)“20. There are limits to the extent to which a legislatively
represented majority may conduct biological experiments at the expense of the
dignity and personality and natural powers of a minority—even those who have
been guilty of what the majority defines as crimes.” (SCC OnLine US SC para
20)—Jackson, J.] Corporeal punishments were not unknown to India, their
abolition is of a recent vintage. Forced feeding of certain persons by the
State raises concerns of privacy. An individual's rights to refuse life
prolonging medical treatment or terminate his life is another freedom which
falls within the zone of the right to Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 &
connected matters Page 143 of 567 privacy. I am conscious of the fact that the
issue is pending before this Court. But in various other jurisdictions, there
is a huge debate on those issues though it is still a grey area. [ For the
legal debate in this area in US, See Chapter 15.11 of American Constitutional
Law by Laurence H. Tribe, 2nd Edn.] A woman's freedom of choice whether to
bear a child or abort her pregnancy are areas which fall in the realm of
privacy. Similarly, the freedom to choose either to work or not and the
freedom to choose the nature of the work are areas of private decision-making
process. The right to travel freely within the country or go abroad is an area
falling within the right to privacy. The text of our Constitution recognised
the freedom to travel throughout the country under Article 19(1)(d). This
Court has already recognised that such a right takes within its sweep the
right to travel abroad. [Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India, (1978) 1 SCC 248] A
person's freedom to choose the place of his residence once again is a part of
his right to privacy [Williams v. Fears, 1900 SCC OnLine US SC 211 : 45 L Ed
186 : 179 US 270 (1900)—“8. Undoubtedly the right of locomotion, the right to
remove from one place to another according to inclination, is an attribute of
personal liberty….” (SCC OnLine US SC para 8)] recognised by the Constitution
of India under Article 19(1)(e) though the predominant purpose of enumerating
the abovementioned two freedoms in Article 19(1) is to disable both the
federal and State Governments from creating barriers which are incompatible
with the federal nature of our country and its Constitution. The choice of
appearance and apparel are also aspects of the right to privacy. The freedom
of certain groups of subjects to determine their appearance and apparel (such
as keeping long hair and wearing a turban) are protected not as a part of the
right to privacy but as a part of their religious belief. Such a freedom need
not necessarily be based on religious beliefs falling under Article 25.
Informational traces are also an area which is the subject-matter of huge
debate in various jurisdictions falling within the realm of the right to
privacy, such data is as personal as that of the choice of appearance and
apparel. Telephone tappings and internet hacking by State, of personal data is
another area which falls within the realm of privacy. The instant reference
arises out of such an attempt by the Union of India to collect biometric data
regarding all the residents of this country. The abovementioned are some of
the areas where some interest of privacy exists. The examples given above Writ
Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 144 of 567 indicate
to some extent the nature and scope of the right to privacy.

374\. I do not think that anybody in this country would like to have the
officers of the State intruding into their homes or private property at will
or soldiers quartered in their houses without their consent. I do not think
that anybody would like to be told by the State as to what they should eat or
how they should dress or whom they should be associated with either in their
personal, social or political life. Freedom of social and political
association is guaranteed to citizens under Article 19(1)(c). Personal
association is still a doubtful area. [The High Court of A.P. held that
Article 19(1)

(c) would take within its sweep the matrimonial association in T. Sareetha v.
T. Venkata Subbaiah, 1983 SCC OnLine AP 90 : AIR 1983 AP 356. However, this
case was later overruled by this Court in Saroj Rani v. Sudarshan Kumar
Chadha, (1984) 4 SCC 90 : AIR 1984 SC 1562.] The decision-making process
regarding the freedom of association, freedoms of travel and residence are
purely private and fall within the realm of the right to privacy. It is one of
the most intimate decisions.

375\. All liberal democracies believe that the State should not have
unqualified authority to intrude into certain aspects of human life and that
the authority should be limited by parameters constitutionally fixed.
Fundamental rights are the only constitutional firewall to prevent State's
interference with those core freedoms constituting liberty of a human being.
The right to privacy is certainly one of the core freedoms which is to be
defended. It is part of liberty within the meaning of that expression in
Article 21.

376\. I am in complete agreement with the conclusions recorded by my learned
Brothers in this regard.”

(iii) Privacy is intrinsic to freedom, liberty and dignity: The right to
privacy is inherent to the liberties guaranteed by Part-III of the
Constitution and privacy is an element of human dignity. The fundamental right
to privacy derives from Part-III of the Constitution and recognition of this
right does not require a Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected
matters Page 145 of 567 constitutional amendment. Privacy is more than merely
a derivative constitutional right. It is the necessary basis of rights
guaranteed in the text of the Constitution. Discussion in this behalf is
captured in the following passages:

> Dr. D.Y. Chandrachud, J. :

> 127\. The submission that recognising the right to privacy is an exercise
> which would require a constitutional amendment and cannot be a matter of
> judicial interpretation is not an acceptable doctrinal position. The
> argument assumes that the right to privacy is independent of the liberties
> guaranteed by Part III of the Constitution. There lies the error. The right
> to privacy is an element of human dignity. The sanctity of privacy lies in
> its functional relationship with dignity. Privacy ensures that a human being
> can lead a life of dignity by securing the inner recesses of the human
> personality from unwanted intrusion. Privacy recognises the autonomy of the
> individual and the right of every person to make essential choices which
> affect the course of life. In doing so privacy recognises that living a life
> of dignity is essential for a human being to fulfill the liberties and
> freedoms which are the cornerstone of the Constitution. To recognise the
> value of privacy as a constitutional entitlement and interest is not to
> fashion a new fundamental right by a process of amendment through judicial
> fiat. Neither are the Judges nor is the process of judicial review entrusted
> with the constitutional responsibility to amend the Constitution. But
> judicial review certainly has the task before it of determining the nature
> and extent of the freedoms available to each person under the fabric of
> those constitutional guarantees which are protected. Courts have
> traditionally discharged that function and in the context of Article 21
> itself, as we have already noted, a panoply of protections governing
> different facets of a dignified existence has been held to fall within the
> protection of Article 21.

> S.A. Bobde, J. :

416\. There is nothing unusual in the judicial enumeration of one right on the
basis of another under the Constitution. In Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of
2012 & connected matters Page 146 of 567 the case of Article 21's guarantee of
“personal liberty”, this practice is only natural if Salmond's formulation of
liberty as “incipient rights” [ P.J. Fitzgerald, Salmond on Jurisprudence at
p. 228.] is correct. By the process of enumeration, constitutional courts
merely give a name and specify the core of guarantees already present in the
residue of constitutional liberty. Over time, the Supreme Court has been able
to imply by its interpretative process that several fundamental rights
including the right to privacy emerge out of expressly stated fundamental
rights. In Unni Krishnan, J.P. v. State of A.P. [Unni Krishnan, J.P. v. State
of A.P., (1993) 1 SCC 645] , a Constitution Bench of this Court held that
“several unenumerated rights fall within Article 21 since personal liberty is
of widest amplitude” [Unni Krishnan, J.P. v. State of A.P., (1993) 1 SCC 645
at p. 669, para 29] on the way to affirming the existence of a right to
education. It went on to supply the following indicative list of such rights,
which included the right to privacy: (SCC pp. 669-70, para 30) “30. The
following rights are held to be covered under Article 21:

1\. The right to go abroad. Satwant Singh v. D. Ramarathnam [Satwant Singh
Sawhney v. D.

Ramarathnam, (1967) 3 SCR 525 : AIR 1967 SC 1836] .

2\. The right to privacy. Gobind v. State of M.P. [Gobind v. State of M.P.,
(1975) 2 SCC 148 : 1975 SCC (Cri) 468] In this case reliance was placed on the
American decision in Griswold v. Connecticut [Griswold v. Connecticut, 1965
SCC OnLine US SC 124 : 14 L Ed 2d 510 : 85 S Ct 1678 : 381 US 479 (1965)] , US
at p. 510.

3\. The right against solitary confinement. Sunil Batra (1) v. Delhi Admn.
[Sunil Batra v. Delhi Admn., (1978) 4 SCC 494 : 1979 SCC (Cri) 155] , SCC at
p. 545.

4\. The right against bar fetters. Charles Sobhraj v. Supt., Central Jail
[Charles Sobraj v. Supt., Central Jail, (1978) 4 SCC 104 : 1978 SCC (Cri)
542].

5\. The right to legal aid. M.H. Hoskot v. State of Maharashtra [M.H. Hoskot
v. State of Maharashtra, (1978) 3 SCC 544 : 1978 SCC (Cri) 468].

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 147 of 567

6\. The right to speedy trial. Hussainara Khatoon (1) v. State of
Bihar[Hussainara Khatoon (1) v. State of Bihar, (1980) 1 SCC 81 : 1980 SCC
(Cri) 23] .

7\. The right against handcuffing. Prem Shankar v. Delhi Admn. [Prem Shankar
Shukla v. Delhi Admn., (1980) 3 SCC 526 : 1980 SCC (Cri) 815]

8\. The right against delayed execution. T.V. Vatheeswaran v. State of T.N.
[T.V. Vatheeswaran v. State of T.N., (1983) 2 SCC 68 : 1983 SCC (Cri) 342]

9\. The right against custodial violence. Sheela Barse v. State of Maharashtra
[Sheela Barse v. State of Maharashtra, (1983) 2 SCC 96 : 1983 SCC (Cri) 353].

10\. The right against public hanging. Attorney General of India v. Lachma
Devi [Attorney General of India v. Lachma Devi, 1989 Supp (1) SCC 264 : 1989
SCC (Cri) 413].

11\. Doctor's assistance. Paramananda Katara v. Union of India [Parmanand
Katara v. Union of India, (1989) 4 SCC 286 : 1989 SCC (Cri) 721].

12\. Shelter. Santistar Builders v. Narayan Khimalal Totame [Shantistar
Builders v. Narayan Khimalal Totame, (1990) 1 SCC 520] .” In the case of
privacy, the case for judicial enumeration is especially strong. It is no
doubt a fair implication from Article 21, but also more. Privacy is a right or
condition, “logically presupposed” [ Laurence H. Tribe And Michael C. Dorf,
“Levels Of Generality in the Definition of Rights”, 57 U CHI L REV 1057 (1990)
at p. 1068.] by rights expressly recorded in the constitutional text, if they
are to make sense. As a result, privacy is more than merely a derivative
constitutional right. It is the necessary and unavoidable logical entailment
of rights guaranteed in the text of the Constitution.

R.F. Nariman, J:

482\. Shri Sundaram has argued that rights have to be traced directly to those
expressly stated in the fundamental rights chapter of the Constitution for
such rights to receive Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected
matters Page 148 of 567 protection, and privacy is not one of them. It will be
noticed that the dignity of the individual is a cardinal value, which is
expressed in the Preamble to the Constitution. Such dignity is not expressly
stated as a right in the fundamental rights chapter, but has been read into
the right to life and personal liberty. The right to live with dignity is
expressly read into Article 21 by the judgment in Jolly George Varghesev. Bank
of Cochin [Jolly George Varghese v. Bank of Cochin, (1980) 2 SCC 360] , at
para 10. Similarly, the right against bar fetters and handcuffing being
integral to an individual's dignity was read into Article 21 by the judgment
in Sunil Batra v. Delhi Admn. [Sunil Batra v. Delhi Admn., (1978) 4 SCC 494 :
1979 SCC (Cri) 155] , at paras 192, 197-B, 234 and 241 and Prem Shankar Shukla
v. Delhi Admn. [Prem Shankar Shukla v. Delhi Admn., (1980) 3 SCC 526 : 1980
SCC (Cri) 815] , at paras 21 and 22. It is too late in the day to canvas that
a fundamental right must be traceable to express language in Part III of the
Constitution. As will be pointed out later in this judgment, a Constitution
has to be read in such a way that words deliver up principles that are to be
followed and if this is kept in mind, it is clear that the concept of privacy
is contained not merely in personal liberty, but also in the dignity of the
individual.”

(iv) Privacy has both positive and negative content: The negative content
restrains the State from committing an intrusion upon the life and personal
liberty of a citizen. Its positive content imposes an obligation on the State
to take all necessary measures to protect the privacy of the individual.

Dr. D.Y. Chandrachud, J.:

326\. Privacy has both positive and negative content. The negative content
restrains the State from committing an intrusion upon the life and personal
liberty of a citizen. Its positive content imposes an obligation on the State
to take all necessary measures to protect the privacy of the individual.” Writ
Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 149 of 567

(v) Informational Privacy is a facet of right to privacy: The old adage that
‘knowledge is power’ has stark implications for the position of individual
where data is ubiquitous, an all- encompassing presence. Every transaction of
an individual user leaves electronic tracks without her knowledge.
Individually these information silos may seem inconsequential. In aggregation,
information provides a picture of the beings. The challenges which big data
poses to privacy emanate from both State and non-State entities. This
proposition is described in the following manner:

> Dr. D.Y. Chandrachud, J.:

> 300\. Ours is an age of information. Information is knowledge. The old adage
> that “knowledge is power” has stark implications for the position of the
> individual where data is ubiquitous, an all-encompassing presence.
> Technology has made life fundamentally interconnected. The internet has
> become all-pervasive as individuals spend more and more time online each day
> of their lives. Individuals connect with others and use the internet as a
> means of communication. The internet is used to carry on business and to buy
> goods and services. Individuals browse the web in search of information, to
> send e-mails, use instant messaging services and to download movies. Online
> purchases have become an efficient substitute for the daily visit to the
> neighbouring store. Online banking has redefined relationships between
> bankers and customers. Online trading has created a new platform for the
> market in securities. Online music has refashioned the radio. Online books
> have opened up a new universe for the bibliophile. The old-fashioned travel
> agent has been rendered redundant by web portals which provide everything
> from restaurants to rest houses, airline tickets to art galleries, museum
> tickets to music shows. These are but a few of the reasons people access the
> internet each day of their lives.

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 150 of 567

Yet every transaction of an individual user and every site that she visits,
leaves electronic tracks generally without her knowledge. These electronic
tracks contain powerful means of information which provide knowledge of the
sort of person that the user is and her interests [See Francois Nawrot,
Katarzyna Syska and Przemyslaw Switalski, “Horizontal Application of
Fundamental Rights — Right to Privacy on the Internet”, 9th Annual European
Constitutionalism Seminar (May 2010), University of Warsaw, available at
<http://en.zpc.wpia.uw.edu.pl/wp-
content/uploads/2010/04/9_Horizontal_Application_of_Fun damental_Rights.pdf>.]
. Individually, these information silos may seem inconsequential. In
aggregation, they disclose the nature of the personality: food habits,
language, health, hobbies, sexual preferences, friendships, ways of dress and
political affiliation. In aggregation, information provides a picture of the
being: of things which matter and those that do not, of things to be disclosed
and those best hidden.

xx xx xx

304\. Data mining processes together with knowledge discovery can be combined
to create facts about individuals. Metadata and the internet of things have
the ability to redefine human existence in ways which are yet fully to be
perceived. This, as Christina Moniodis states in her illuminating article,
results in the creation of new knowledge about individuals; something which
even she or he did not possess. This poses serious issues for the Court. In an
age of rapidly evolving technology it is impossible for a Judge to conceive of
all the possible uses of information or its consequences:

“… The creation of new knowledge complicates data privacy law as it involves
information the individual did not possess and could not disclose, knowingly
or otherwise. In addition, as our State becomes an “information State” through
increasing reliance on information—such that information is described as the
“lifeblood that sustains political, social, and business decisions. It becomes
impossible to conceptualize all of the possible uses of information and
resulting harms. Such a situation poses a challenge for courts who are
effectively asked to anticipate and remedy invisible, evolving harms.” [
Christina P. Moniodis, “Moving from Nixon to NASA: Privacy's Second Writ
Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 151 of 567 Strand —
A Right to Informational Privacy”, Yale Journal of Law and Technology (2012),
Vol. 15 (1), at p. 154.] The contemporary age has been aptly regarded as “an
era of ubiquitous dataveillance, or the systematic monitoring of citizen's
communications or actions through the use of information technology” [Yvonne
McDermott, “Conceptualizing the Right to Data Protection in an Era of Big
Data”, Big Data and Society (2017), at p. 1.] . It is also an age of “big
data” or the collection of data sets. These data sets are capable of being
searched; they have linkages with other data sets; and are marked by their
exhaustive scope and the permanency of collection. [Id, at pp. 1 and 4.] The
challenges which big data poses to privacy interests emanate from State and
non-State entities. Users of wearable devices and social media networks may
not conceive of themselves as having volunteered data but their activities of
use and engagement result in the generation of vast amounts of data about
individual lifestyles, choices and preferences. Yvonne McDermott speaks about
the quantified self in eloquent terms:

“… The rise in the so-called ‘quantified self’, or the self-tracking of
biological, environmental, physical, or behavioural information through
tracking devices, Internet-of-things devices, social network data and other
means (?Swan.2013) may result in information being gathered not just about the
individual user, but about people around them as well. Thus, a solely consent-
based model does not entirely ensure the protection of one's data, especially
when data collected for one purpose can be repurposed for another.” [Id, at p.
4.] xx xx xx

328\. Informational privacy is a facet of the right to privacy. The dangers to
privacy in an age of information can originate not only from the State but
from non-State actors as well. We commend to the Union Government the need to
examine and put into place a robust regime for data protection. The creation
of such a regime requires a careful and sensitive balance between individual
interests and legitimate concerns of the State. The legitimate aims of the
State would include for instance protecting national Writ Petition (Civil) No.
494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 152 of 567 security, preventing and
investigating crime, encouraging innovation and the spread of knowledge, and
preventing the dissipation of social welfare benefits. These are matters of
policy to be considered by the Union Government while designing a carefully
structured regime for the protection of the data. Since the Union Government
has informed the Court that it has constituted a Committee chaired by Hon'ble
Shri Justice B.N. Srikrishna, former Judge of this Court, for that purpose,
the matter shall be dealt with appropriately by the Union Government having
due regard to what has been set out in this judgment.

S.K. Kaul, J.:

585\. The growth and development of technology has created new instruments for
the possible invasion of privacy by the State, including through surveillance,
profiling and data collection and processing. Surveillance is not new, but
technology has permitted surveillance in ways that are unimaginable. Edward
Snowden shocked the world with his disclosures about global surveillance.
States are utilising technology in the most imaginative ways particularly in
view of increasing global terrorist attacks and heightened public safety
concerns. One such technique being adopted by the States is “profiling”. The
European Union Regulation of 2016 [ Regulation No. (EU) 2016/679 of the
European Parliament and of the Council of 27-4- 2016 on the protection of
natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free
movement of such data, and repealing Directive No. 95/46/EC (General Data
Protection Regulation).] on data privacy defines “profiling” as any form of
automated processing of personal data consisting of the use of personal data
to evaluate certain personal aspects relating to a natural person, in
particular to analyse or predict aspects concerning that natural person's
performance at work, economic situation, health, personal preferences,
interests, reliability, behaviour, location or movements [ Regulation No. (EU)
2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27-4-2016 on the
protection of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data
and on the free movement of such data, and repealing Directive No. 95/46/EC
(General Data Protection Regulation).] . Such profiling can result in
discrimination based on religion, ethnicity and caste. However, “profiling”
can also be used to further public interest and for the benefit of national
security.

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 153 of 567

586\. The security environment, not only in our country, but throughout the
world makes the safety of persons and the State a matter to be balanced
against this right to privacy.

587\. The capacity of non-State actors to invade the home and privacy has also
been enhanced. Technological development has facilitated journalism that is
more intrusive than ever before.

588\. Further, in this digital age, individuals are constantly generating
valuable data which can be used by non-State actors to track their moves,
choices and preferences. Data is generated not just by active sharing of
information, but also passively, with every click on the “world wide web”. We
are stated to be creating an equal amount of information every other day, as
humanity created from the beginning of recorded history to the year 2003 —
enabled by the “world wide web”. [ Michael L. Rustad, SannaKulevska,
“Reconceptualizing the right to be forgotten to enable transatlantic data
flow”, (2015) 28 Harv JL & Tech 349.]

589\. Recently, it was pointed out that “ “Uber”, the world's largest taxi
company, owns no vehicles. “Facebook”, the world's most popular media owner,
creates no content. “Alibaba”, the most valuable retailer, has no inventory.
And “Airbnb”, the world's largest accommodation provider, owns no real estate.
Something interesting is happening.” [ Tom Goodwin “The Battle is for Customer
Interface”, <https://techcrunch.com/2015/03/03/in-the-age-of-
disintermediation-the-battle-is-all-for-the-customer- interface/>.] “Uber”
knows our whereabouts and the places we frequent. “Facebook” at the least,
knows who we are friends with. “Alibaba” knows our shopping habits. “Airbnb”
knows where we are travelling to. Social network providers, search engines,
e-mail service providers, messaging applications are all further examples of
non-State actors that have extensive knowledge of our movements, financial
transactions, conversations — both personal and professional, health, mental
state, interest, travel locations, fares and shopping habits. As we move
towards becoming a digital economy and increase our reliance on internet-
based services, we are creating deeper and deeper digital footprints —
passively and actively.

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 154 of 567

590\. These digital footprints and extensive data can be analysed
computationally to reveal patterns, trends, and associations, especially
relating to human behaviour and interactions and hence, is valuable
information. This is the age of “big data”. The advancement in technology has
created not just new forms of data, but also new methods of analysing the data
and has led to the discovery of new uses for data. The algorithms are more
effective and the computational power has magnified exponentially. A large
number of people would like to keep such search history private, but it rarely
remains private, and is collected, sold and analysed for purposes such as
targeted advertising. Of course, “big data” can also be used to further public
interest. There may be cases where collection and processing of big data is
legitimate and proportionate, despite being invasive of privacy otherwise.

591\. Knowledge about a person gives a power over that person. The personal
data collected is capable of effecting representations, influencing decision-
making processes and shaping behaviour. It can be used as a tool to exercise
control over us like the “big brother” State exercised. This can have a
stultifying effect on the expression of dissent and difference of opinion,
which no democracy can afford.

592\. Thus, there is an unprecedented need for regulation regarding the extent
to which such information can be stored, processed and used by non-State
actors. There is also a need for protection of such information from the
State. Our Government was successful in compelling Blackberry to give to it
the ability to intercept data sent over Blackberry devices. While such
interception may be desirable and permissible in order to ensure national
security, it cannot be unregulated. [ Kadhim Shubber, “Blackberry gives Indian
Government ability to intercept messages” published by Wired on 11-7-2013
<http://www.wired.co.uk/article/blackberry-india>.]

593\. The concept of “invasion of privacy” is not the early conventional
thought process of “poking ones nose in another person's affairs”. It is not
so simplistic. In today's world, privacy is a limit on the Government's power
as well as the power of private sector entities. [ Daniel Solove, “10 Reasons
Why Privacy Matters” published on 20-1-2014
<https://www.teachprivacy.com/10-reasons-privacy- matters/>.] Writ Petition
(Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 155 of 567

594\. George Orwell created a fictional State in Nineteen Eighty-Four. Today,
it can be a reality. The technological development today can enable not only
the State, but also big corporations and private entities to be the “big
brother”.

xx xx xx

629\. The right of an individual to exercise control over his personal data
and to be able to control his/her own life would also encompass his right to
control his existence on the internet. Needless to say that this would not be
an absolute right. The existence of such a right does not imply that a
criminal can obliterate his past, but that there are variant degrees of
mistakes, small and big, and it cannot be said that a person should be
profiled to the nth extent for all and sundry to know.

630\. A high school teacher was fired after posting on her Facebook page that
she was “so not looking forward to another [school] year” since the school
district's residents were “arrogant and snobby”. A flight attendant was fired
for posting suggestive photos of herself in the company's uniform. [ Patricia
Sánchez Abril, “Blurred Boundaries: Social Media Privacy and the Twenty-First-
Century Employee”, 49 Am Bus LJ 63 at p. 69 (2012).] In the pre- digital era,
such incidents would have never occurred. People could then make mistakes and
embarrass themselves, with the comfort that the information will be typically
forgotten over time.

631\. The impact of the digital age results in information on the internet
being permanent. Humans forget, but the internet does not forget and does not
let humans forget. Any endeavour to remove information from the internet does
not result in its absolute obliteration. The footprints remain. It is thus,
said that in the digital world preservation is the norm and forgetting a
struggle [ Ravi Antani, “ THE RESISTANCE OF MEMORY : COULD THE EUROPEAN
UNION'S RIGHT TO BE FORGOTTEN EXIST IN THE UNITED STATES?”, 30 Berkeley Tech
LJ 1173 (2015).] .

632\. The technology results almost in a sort of a permanent storage in some
way or the other making it difficult to begin life again giving up past
mistakes. People are not static, they change and grow through their lives.
They evolve. They make mistakes. But they are entitled to re-invent themselves
and reform and correct their Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected
matters Page 156 of 567 mistakes. It is privacy which nurtures this ability
and removes the shackles of unadvisable things which may have been done in the
past.

633\. Children around the world create perpetual digital footprints on social
network websites on a 24/7 basis as they learn their “ABCs”: Apple, Bluetooth
and chat followed by download, e-mail, Facebook, Google, Hotmail and
Instagram. [ Michael L. Rustad, SannaKulevska, “Reconceptualizing the right to
be forgotten to enable transatlantic data flow”, (2015) 28 Harv JL & Tech
349.] They should not be subjected to the consequences of their childish
mistakes and naivety, their entire life. Privacy of children will require
special protection not just in the context of the virtual world, but also the
real world.

634\. People change and an individual should be able to determine the path of
his life and not be stuck only on a path of which he/she treaded initially. An
individual should have the capacity to change his/her beliefs and evolve as a
person. Individuals should not live in fear that the views they expressed will
forever be associated with them and thus refrain from expressing themselves.

635\. Whereas this right to control dissemination of personal information in
the physical and virtual space should not amount to a right of total eraser of
history, this right, as a part of the larger right to privacy, has to be
balanced against other fundamental rights like the freedom of expression, or
freedom of media, fundamental to a democratic society.

636\. Thus, the European Union Regulation of 2016 [Regulation No. (EU)
2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27-4-2016 on the
protection of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data
and on the free movement of such data, and repealing Directive No. 95/46/EC
(General Data Protection Regulation).] has recognised what has been termed as
“the right to be forgotten”. This does not mean that all aspects of earlier
existence are to be obliterated, as some may have a social ramification. If we
were to recognise a similar right, it would only mean that an individual who
is no longer desirous of his personal data to be processed or stored, should
be able to remove it from the system where the personal data/information is no
longer necessary, relevant, or is incorrect and serves no legitimate interest.
Such a right Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page
157 of 567 cannot be exercised where the information/data is necessary, for
exercising the right of freedom of expression and information, for compliance
with legal obligations, for the performance of a task carried out in public
interest, on the grounds of public interest in the area of public health, for
archiving purposes in the public interest, scientific or historical research
purposes or statistical purposes, or for the establishment, exercise or
defence of legal claims. Such justifications would be valid in all cases of
breach of privacy, including breaches of data privacy.”

(vi) Right to privacy cannot be impinged without a just, fair and reasonable
law: It has to fulfill the test of proportionality i.e. (i) existence of a
law; (ii) must serve a legitimate State aim; and (iii) proportionality.

“Dr. D.Y. Chandrachud, J. :

310\. While it intervenes to protect legitimate State interests, the State
must nevertheless put into place a robust regime that ensures the fulfilment
of a threefold requirement. These three requirements apply to all restraints
on privacy (not just informational privacy). They emanate from the procedural
and content-based mandate of Article 21. The first requirement that there must
be a law in existence to justify an encroachment on privacy is an express
requirement of Article 21. For, no person can be deprived of his life or
personal liberty except in accordance with the procedure established by law.
The existence of law is an essential requirement. Second, the requirement of a
need, in terms of a legitimate State aim, ensures that the nature and content
of the law which imposes the restriction falls within the zone of
reasonableness mandated by Article 14, which is a guarantee against arbitrary
State action. The pursuit of a legitimate State aim ensures that the law does
not suffer from manifest arbitrariness. Legitimacy, as a postulate, involves a
value judgment. Judicial review does not reappreciate or second guess the
value judgment of the legislature but is for deciding whether the aim which is
sought to be pursued suffers from palpable or manifest arbitrariness. The
third requirement ensures that the means which are adopted by the legislature
are Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 158 of 567
proportional to the object and needs sought to be fulfilled by the law.
Proportionality is an essential facet of the guarantee against arbitrary State
action because it ensures that the nature and quality of the encroachment on
the right is not disproportionate to the purpose of the law. Hence, the
threefold requirement for a valid law arises out of the mutual interdependence
between the fundamental guarantees against arbitrariness on the one hand and
the protection of life and personal liberty, on the other. The right to
privacy, which is an intrinsic part of the right to life and liberty, and the
freedoms embodied in Part III is subject to the same restraints which apply to
those freedoms.

311\. Apart from national security, the State may have justifiable reasons for
the collection and storage of data. In a social welfare State, the Government
embarks upon programmes which provide benefits to impoverished and
marginalised sections of society. There is a vital State interest in ensuring
that scarce public resources are not dissipated by the diversion of resources
to persons who do not qualify as recipients. Allocation of resources for human
development is coupled with a legitimate concern that the utilisation of
resources should not be siphoned away for extraneous purposes. Data mining
with the object of ensuring that resources are properly deployed to legitimate
beneficiaries is a valid ground for the State to insist on the collection of
authentic data. But, the data which the State has collected has to be utilised
for legitimate purposes of the State and ought not to be utilised
unauthorisedly for extraneous purposes. This will ensure that the legitimate
concerns of the State are duly safeguarded while, at the same time, protecting
privacy concerns. Prevention and investigation of crime and protection of the
revenue are among the legitimate aims of the State. Digital platforms are a
vital tool of ensuring good governance in a social welfare State. Information
technology—legitimately deployed is a powerful enabler in the spread of
innovation and knowledge.

312\. A distinction has been made in contemporary literature between anonymity
on one hand and privacy on the other. [See in this connection, Jeffrey M.
Skopek, “Reasonable Expectations of Anonymity”, Virginia Law Review (2015),
Vol. 101, at pp. 691-762.] Both anonymity and privacy prevent others from
gaining access to pieces of personal information yet they do so in opposite
ways. Privacy involves hiding information whereas anonymity Writ Petition
(Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 159 of 567 involves hiding
what makes it personal. An unauthorised parting of the medical records of an
individual which have been furnished to a hospital will amount to an invasion
of privacy. On the other hand, the State may assert a legitimate interest in
analysing data borne from hospital records to understand and deal with a
public health epidemic such as malaria or dengue to obviate a serious impact
on the population. If the State preserves the anonymity of the individual it
could legitimately assert a valid State interest in the preservation of public
health to design appropriate policy interventions on the basis of the data
available to it.

313\. Privacy has been held to be an intrinsic element of the right to life
and personal liberty under Article 21 and as a constitutional value which is
embodied in the fundamental freedoms embedded in Part III of the Constitution.
Like the right to life and liberty, privacy is not absolute. The limitations
which operate on the right to life and personal liberty would operate on the
right to privacy. Any curtailment or deprivation of that right would have to
take place under a regime of law. The procedure established by law must be
fair, just and reasonable. The law which provides for the curtailment of the
right must also be subject to constitutional safeguards.

xx xx xx

325\. Like other rights which form part of the fundamental freedoms protected
by Part III, including the right to life and personal liberty under Article
21, privacy is not an absolute right. A law which encroaches upon privacy will
have to withstand the touchstone of permissible restrictions on fundamental
rights. In the context of Article 21 an invasion of privacy must be justified
on the basis of a law which stipulates a procedure which is fair, just and
reasonable. The law must also be valid with reference to the encroachment on
life and personal liberty under Article 21. An invasion of life or personal
liberty must meet the threefold requirement of (i) legality, which postulates
the existence of law; (ii) need, defined in terms of a legitimate State aim;
and (iii) proportionality which ensures a rational nexus between the objects
and the means adopted to achieve them.

S.A. Bobde, J. :

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 160 of 567

426\. There is no doubt that privacy is integral to the several fundamental
rights recognised by Part III of the Constitution and must be regarded as a
fundamental right itself. The relationship between the right to privacy and
the particular fundamental right (or rights) involved would depend on the
action interdicted by a particular law. At a minimum, since privacy is always
integrated with personal liberty, the constitutionality of the law which is
alleged to have invaded into a rights bearer's privacy must be tested by the
same standards by which a law which invades personal liberty under Article 21
is liable to be tested. Under Article 21, the standard test at present is the
rationality review expressed in Maneka Gandhi case [Maneka Gandhi v. Union of
India, (1978) 1 SCC 248] . This requires that any procedure by which the State
interferes with an Article 21 right to be “fair, just and reasonable, not
fanciful, oppressive or arbitrary” [Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India, (1978) 1
SCC 248 at p. 323, para 48].

R.F. Nariman, J. :

526\. But this is not to say that such a right is absolute. This right is
subject to reasonable regulations made by the State to protect legitimate
State interests or public interest. However, when it comes to restrictions on
this right, the drill of various articles to which the right relates must be
scrupulously followed. For example, if the restraint on privacy is over
fundamental personal choices that an individual is to make, State action can
be restrained under Article 21 read with Article 14 if it is arbitrary and
unreasonable; and under Article 21 read with Article 19(1)

(a) only if it relates to the subjects mentioned in Article 19(2) and the
tests laid down by this Court for such legislation or subordinate legislation
to pass muster under the said article. Each of the tests evolved by this
Court, qua legislation or executive action, under Article 21 read with Article
14; or Article 21 read with Article 19(1)(a) in the aforesaid examples must be
met in order that State action pass muster. In the ultimate analysis, the
balancing act that is to be carried out between individual, societal and State
interests must be left to the training and expertise of the judicial mind.

S.K. Kaul, J. :

638\. The concerns expressed on behalf of the petitioners arising from the
possibility of the State infringing the right to Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494
of 2012 & connected matters Page 161 of 567 privacy can be met by the test
suggested for limiting the discretion of the State:

“(i) The action must be sanctioned by law;

(ii) The proposed action must be necessary in a democratic society for a
legitimate aim;

(iii) The extent of such interference must be proportionate to the need for
such interference;

(iv) There must be procedural guarantees against abuse of such interference.”
Chelameswar, J.:

377\. It goes without saying that no legal right can be absolute. Every right
has limitations. This aspect of the matter is conceded at the Bar. Therefore,
even a fundamental right to privacy has limitations. The limitations are to be
identified on case-to-case basis depending upon the nature of the privacy
interest claimed. There are different standards of review to test infractions
of fundamental rights. While the concept of reasonableness overarches Part
III, it operates differently across Articles (even if only slightly
differently across some of them). Having emphatically interpreted the
Constitution's liberty guarantee to contain a fundamental right to privacy, it
is necessary for me to outline the manner in which such a right to privacy can
be limited. I only do this to indicate the direction of the debate as the
nature of limitation is not at issue here.

378\. To begin with, the options canvassed for limiting the right to privacy
include an Article 14 type reasonableness enquiry [A challenge under Article
14 can be made if there is an unreasonable classification and/or if the
impugned measure is arbitrary. The classification is unreasonable if there is
no intelligible differentia justifying the classification and if the
classification has no rational nexus with the objective sought to be achieved.
Arbitrariness, which was first explained at para 85 of E.P. Royappa v. State
of T.N., (1974) 4 SCC 3 : 1974 SCC (L&S) 165 : AIR 1974 SC 555, is very simply
the lack of any reasoning.] ; limitation as per the express provisions of
Article 19; a just, fair and reasonable basis (that is, substantive due
process) for limitation per Article 21; and finally, a just, fair and Writ
Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 162 of 567
reasonable standard per Article 21 plus the amorphous standard of “compelling
State interest”. The last of these four options is the highest standard of
scrutiny [ A tiered level of scrutiny was indicated in what came to be known
as the most famous footnote in constitutional law, that is, fn 4 in United
States v. Carolene Products Co., 1938 SCC OnLine US SC 93 : 82 L Ed 1234 : 304
US 144 (1938). Depending on the graveness of the right at stake, the court
adopts a correspondingly rigorous standard of scrutiny.] that a court can
adopt. It is from this menu that a standard of review for limiting the right
to privacy needs to be chosen.

379\. At the very outset, if a privacy claim specifically flows only from one
of the expressly enumerated provisions under Article 19, then the standard of
review would be as expressly provided under Article 19. However, the
possibility of a privacy claim being entirely traceable to rights other than
Article 21 is bleak. Without discounting that possibility, it needs to be
noted that Article 21 is the bedrock of the privacy guarantee. If the spirit
of liberty permeates every claim of privacy, it is difficult, if not
impossible, to imagine that any standard of limitation other than the one
under Article 21 applies. It is for this reason that I will restrict the
available options to the latter two from the above described four.

380\. The just, fair and reasonable standard of review under Article 21 needs
no elaboration. It has also most commonly been used in cases dealing with a
privacy claim hitherto. [District Registrar and Collector v. Canara Bank,
(2005) 1 SCC 496 : AIR 2005 SC 186] , [State of Maharashtra v. Bharat Shanti
Lal Shah, (2008) 13 SCC 5] Gobind [Gobind v. State of M.P., (1975) 2 SCC 148 :
1975 SCC (Cri) 468] resorted to the compelling State interest standard in
addition to the Article 21 reasonableness enquiry. From the United States,
where the terminology of “compelling State interest” originated, a strict
standard of scrutiny comprises two things—a “compelling State interest” and a
requirement of “narrow tailoring” (narrow tailoring means that the law must be
narrowly framed to achieve the objective). As a term, “compelling State
interest” does not have definite contours in the US. Hence, it is critical
that this standard be adopted with some clarity as to when and in what types
of privacy claimsit is to be used. Only in privacy claims which deserve the
strictest scrutiny is the standard of compelling State interest to be used. As
for Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 163 of 567
others, the just, fair and reasonable standard under Article 21 will apply.
When the compelling State interest standard is to be employed, must depend
upon the context of concrete cases. However, this discussion sets the ground
rules within which a limitation for the right to privacy is to be found.”

82) In view of the aforesaid detailed discussion in all the opinions penned by
six Hon’ble Judges, it stands established, without any pale of doubt, that
privacy has now been treated as part of fundamental rights. The Court has
held, in no uncertain terms, that privacy has always been a natural right
which gives an individual freedom to exercise control over his or her
personality. The judgment further affirms three aspects of the fundamental
right to privacy, namely:

> (i) intrusion with an individual’s physical body;

> (ii) informational privacy; and

> (iii) privacy of choice.

83) As succinctly put by Nariman, J. first aspect involves the person
himself/herself and guards a person’s rights relatable to his/her physical
body thereby controlling the uncalled invasion by the State. Insofar as the
second aspect, namely, informational privacy is concerned, it does not deal
with a person’s body but deals with a person’s mind. In this manner, it
protects a person by giving her control over the dissemination of material
that is Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 164 of
567 personal to her and disallowing unauthorised use of such information by
the State. Third aspect of privacy relates to individual’s autonomy by
protecting her fundamental personal choices. These aspects have functional
connection and relationship with dignity. In this sense, privacy is a
postulate of human dignity itself. Human dignity has a constitutional value
and its significance is acknowledged by the Preamble. Further, by catena of
judgments, human dignity is treated as a fundamental right and as a facet not
only of Article 21 but that of right to equality (Article 14) and also part of
bouquet of freedoms stipulated in Article 19. Therefore, privacy as a right is
intrinsic of freedom, liberty and dignity. Viewed in this manner, one can
trace positive and negative contents of privacy. The negative content
restricts the State from committing an intrusion upon the life and personal
liberty of a citizen. Its positive content imposes an obligation on the State
to take all necessary measures to protect the privacy of the individual.

84) A brief summation of the judgment on privacy would indicate that privacy
is treated as fundamental right. It is predicated on the basis that privacy is
a postulate of dignity and the concept of dignity can be traced to the
preamble of the Constitution as well as Article 21 thereof. Further, privacy
is considered as a subset Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected
matters Page 165 of 567 of personal liberty thereby accepting the minority
opinion in Kharak Singh v. State of U.P. & Ors.29 Another significant
jurisprudential development of this judgment is that right to privacy as a
fundamental right is not limited to Article 21. On the contrary, privacy
resonates through the entirety of Part III of the Constitution which pertains
to fundamental rights and, in particular, Articles 14, 19 and 21. Privacy is
also recognised as a natural right which inheres in individuals and is, thus,
inalienable. In developing the aforesaid concepts, the Court has been
receptive to the principles in international law and international
instruments. It is a recognition of the fact that certain human rights cannot
be confined within the bounds of geographical location of a nation but have
universal application. In the process, the Court accepts the concept of
universalisation of human rights, including the right to privacy as a human
right and the good practices in developing and understanding such rights in
other countries have been welcomed. In this hue, it can also be remarked that
comparative law has played a very significant role in shaping the aforesaid
judgment on privacy in Indian context, notwithstanding the fact that such
comparative law has only a persuasive value.

29 AIR 1963 SC 1295 Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters
Page 166 of 567

85) The whole process of reasoning contained in different opinions of the
Hon’ble Judges would, thus, reflect that the argument that it is difficult to
precisely define the common denominator of privacy, was rejected. While doing
so, the Court referred to various approaches in formulating privacy30. An
astute and sagacious analysis of the judgment by the Centre for Internet and
Society brings about the following approaches which contributed to formulating
the following right to privacy:

(a) Classifying privacy on the basis of ‘harms’, thereby adopting the approach
conceptualised by Daniel Solove. In his book, Understanding Privacy31, Daniel
Solove makes a case for privacy being a family resemblance concept.

(b) Classifying privacy on the basis of ‘interests’: Gary Bostwick’s taxonomy
of privacy is among the most prominent amongst the scholarship that sub-areas
within the right to privacy protect different ‘interests’ or ‘justifications’.
This taxonomy is adopted in Chelameswar, J.’s definition of ‘privacy’ and
includes the three interests of privacy of repose, privacy of sanctuary and
privacy of intimate decision. Repose is the ‘right to be let alone’, sanctuary
is the interest which prevents others from knowing, 30 See the analysis of
this judgment by the Centre for Internet and Society, https://cis-
india.org/internet-governance/blog/the-fundamental-right-to-privacy-an-
analysis 31 Daniel Solove, Understanding Privacy, Cambridge, Massachusetts:
Harvard University Press, 2008\.

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 167 of 567

seeing and hearing thus keeping information within the private zone, and
finally, privacy of intimate decision protects the freedom to act
autonomously.

(c) Classifying privacy as an ‘aggregation of rights’: This approach in
classifying privacy as a right, as highlighted above, is not limited to one
particular provision in the Chapter of Fundamental Rights under the
Constitution but is associated with amalgam of different but connected rights.
In formulating this principle, the Court has referred to scholars like Roger
Clarke, Anita Allen etc. It has led to the recognition of private spaces or
zones as protected under the right to privacy (thereby extending the ambit and
scope of spatial privacy), informational privacy and decisional autonomy.

86) The important question that arises, which is directly involved in these
cases, is:

What is the scope of the right to privacy and in what circumstances such a
right can be limited?

87) Concededly, fundamental rights are not absolute. The Constitution itself
permits State to impose reasonable restrictions on these rights under certain
circumstances. Thus, extent and scope of the right to privacy and how and when
it can be limited Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters
Page 168 of 567 by the State actions is also to be discerned. As noted above,
Nariman, J. has led the path by observing that “when it comes to restrictions
on this right, the drill of various Articles to which the right relates must
be scrupulously followed”. Therefore, examination has to be from the point of
view of Articles 14, 19 and 21 for the reason that right to privacy is treated
as having intimate connection to various rights in Part III and is not merely
related to Article 21. Looked from this angle, the action of the State will
have to be tested on the touchstone of Article 14. This judgment clarifies
that the ‘classification’ test adopted earlier has to be expanded and instead
the law/action is to be tested on the ground of ‘manifest arbitrariness’. This
aspect has already been discussed in detail under the caption ‘Scope of
Judicial Review’ above. When it comes to examining the ‘restrictions’ as per
the provisions of Article 19 of the Constitution, the judgment proceeds to
clarify that a law which impacts dignity and liberty under Article 21, as well
as having chilling effects on free speech which is protected by Article
19(1)(a), must satisfy the standards of judicial review under both provisions.
Therefore, such restriction must satisfy the test of judicial review under:
(i) one of the eight grounds mentioned under Article 19(2); and (ii) the
restriction should be reasonable. This Court has applied multiple standards
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 169 of 567 to
determine reasonableness, including proximity, arbitrariness, and
proportionality. Further, the reasonable restrictions must be in the interests
of: (i) the sovereignty and integrity of India, (ii) the security of the
State, (iii) friendly relations with foreign States, (iv) public order, (v)
decency or morality or (vi) in relation to contempt of court, (vii) defamation
or (viii) incitement to an offence.

88) The judgment further lays down that in the context of Article 21, the test
to be applied while examining a particular provision is the ‘just, fair and
reasonable test’ thereby bringing notion of proportionality.

89) The petitioners have sought to build their case on the aforesaid
parameters of privacy and have submitted that this right of privacy, which is
now recognised as a fundamental right, stands violated by the very fabric
contained in the scheme of Aadhaar. It is sought to be highlighted that the
data which is collected by the State, particularly with the authentication of
each transaction entered into by an individual, can be assimilated to
construct a profile of such an individual and it particularly violates
informational privacy. No doubt, there can be reasonable restrictions on this
right, which is conceded by the petitioners. It is, however, argued that right
to privacy cannot be impinged Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 &
connected matters Page 170 of 567 without a just, fair and reasonable law.
Therefore, in the first instance, any intrusion into the privacy of a person
has to be backed by a law. Further, such a law, to be valid, has to pass the
test of legitimate aim which it should serve and also proportionality i.e.
proportionate to the need for such interference. Not only this, the law in
question must also provide procedural guarantees against abuse of such
interference.

90) At the same time, it can also be deduced from the reading of the aforesaid
judgment that the reasonable expectation of privacy may vary from the intimate
zone to the private zone and from the private zone to the public arena.
Further, privacy is not lost or surrendered merely because the individual is
in a public place. For example, if a person was to post on Facebook vital
information about himself, the same being in public domain, he would not be
entitled to claim privacy right. This aspect is highlighted by some of the
Hon’ble Judges as under:

Dr. D.Y. Chandrachud, J.:

“297. What, then, does privacy postulate? Privacy postulates the reservation
of a private space for the individual, described as the right to be let alone.
The concept is founded on the autonomy of the individual. The ability of an
individual to make choices lies at the core of the human personality. The
notion of privacy enables the individual to assert and control the human
element which is inseparable from the personality of the individual. The
inviolable nature of the human personality is manifested in Writ Petition
(Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 171 of 567 the ability to
make decisions on matters intimate to human life. The autonomy of the
individual is associated over matters which can be kept private. These are
concerns over which there is a legitimate expectation of privacy. The body and
the mind are inseparable elements of the human personality. The integrity of
the body and the sanctity of the mind can exist on the foundation that each
individual possesses an inalienable ability and right to preserve a private
space in which the human personality can develop. Without the ability to make
choices, the inviolability of the personality would be in doubt. Recognising a
zone of privacy is but an acknowledgment that each individual must be entitled
to chart and pursue the course of development of personality. Hence privacy is
a postulate of human dignity itself. Thoughts and behavioural patterns which
are intimate to an individual are entitled to a zone of privacy where one is
free of social expectations. In that zone of privacy, an individual is not
judged by others. Privacy enables each individual to take crucial decisions
which find expression in the human personality. It enables individuals to
preserve their beliefs, thoughts, expressions, ideas, ideologies, preferences
and choices against societal demands of homogeneity. Privacy is an intrinsic
recognition of heterogeneity, of the right of the individual to be different
and to stand against the tide of conformity in creating a zone of solitude.
Privacy protects the individual from the searching glare of publicity in
matters which are personal to his or her life. Privacy attaches to the person
and not to the place where it is associated. Privacy constitutes the
foundation of all liberty because it is in privacy that the individual can
decide how liberty is best exercised. Individual dignity and privacy are
inextricably linked in a pattern woven out of a thread of diversity into the
fabric of a plural culture.

xx xx xx

299\. Privacy represents the core of the human personality and recognises the
ability of each individual to make choices and to take decisions governing
matters intimate and personal. Yet, it is necessary to acknowledge that
individuals live in communities and work in communities. Their personalities
affect and, in turn are shaped by their social environment. The individual is
not a hermit. The lives of individuals are as much a social phenomenon. In
their interactions with others, individuals are constantly engaged in
behavioural patterns and in relationships impacting on Writ Petition (Civil)
No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 172 of 567 the rest of society.
Equally, the life of the individual is being consistently shaped by cultural
and social values imbibed from living in the community. This state of flux
which represents a constant evolution of individual personhood in the
relationship with the rest of society provides the rationale for reserving to
the individual a zone of repose. The lives which individuals lead as members
of society engender a reasonable expectation of privacy. The notion of a
reasonable expectation of privacy has elements both of a subjective and
objective nature. Privacy at a subjective level is a reflection of those areas
where an individual desires to be left alone. On an objective plane, privacy
is defined by those constitutional values which shape the content of the
protected zone where the individual ought to be left alone. The notion that
there must exist a reasonable expectation of privacy ensures that while on the
one hand, the individual has a protected zone of privacy, yet on the other,
the exercise of individual choices is subject to the rights of others to lead
orderly lives. For instance, an individual who possesses a plot of land may
decide to build upon it subject to zoning regulations. If the building bye-
laws define the area upon which construction can be raised or the height of
the boundary wall around the property, the right to privacy of the individual
is conditioned by regulations designed to protect the interests of the
community in planned spaces. Hence while the individual is entitled to a zone
of privacy, its extent is based not only on the subjective expectation of the
individual but on an objective principle which defines a reasonable
expectation.

xx xx xx

307\. The sphere of privacy stretches at one end to those intimate matters to
which a reasonable expectation of privacy may attach. It expresses a right to
be left alone. A broader connotation which has emerged in academic literature
of a comparatively recent origin is related to the protection of one's
identity. Data protection relates closely with the latter sphere. Data such as
medical information would be a category to which a reasonable expectation of
privacy attaches. There may be other data which falls outside the reasonable
expectation paradigm. Apart from safeguarding privacy, data protection regimes
seek to protect the autonomy of the individual. This is evident from the
emphasis in the European data protection regime on the centrality of consent.
Related to the issue of consent is the requirement of transparency which
requires a Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 173
of 567 disclosure by the data recipient of information pertaining to data
transfer and use.” S.A. Bobde, J:

“421. Shri Rakesh Dwivedi, appearing for the State of Gujarat, while referring
to several judgments of the Supreme Court of the United States, submitted that
only those privacy claims which involve a “reasonable expectation of privacy”
be recognised as protected by the fundamental right. It is not necessary for
the purpose of this case to deal with the particular instances of privacy
claims which are to be recognised as implicating a fundamental right. Indeed,
it would be premature to do so. The scope and ambit of a constitutional
protection of privacy can only be revealed to us on a case-by-case basis.”

91) Though Nariman, J. did not subscribe to the aforesaid view in totality,
however, His Lordship has also given an example that if a person has to post
on Facebook vital information, the same being in public domain, she would not
be entitled to the claim of privacy right.

92) We would also like to reproduce following discussion, in the opinion
authored by Nariman, J., giving the guidance as to how a law has to be tested
when it is challenged on the ground that it violates the fundamental right to
privacy:

> “...Statutory provisions that deal with aspects of privacy would continue to
> be tested on the ground that they would violate the fundamental right to
> privacy, and would not be struck down, if it is found on a balancing test
> that the social or public interest and the reasonableness of the
> restrictions would outweigh the particular aspect of privacy claimed. If
> this is so, then statutes which would enable the State to contractually
> obtain information about persons would pass muster in given circumstances,
> provided they safeguard the individual right to privacy as well. A Writ
> Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 174 of 567 simple
> example would suffice. If a person was to paste on Facebook vital
> information about himself/herself, such information, being in the public
> domain, could not possibly be claimed as a privacy right after such
> disclosure. But, in pursuance of a statutory requirement, if certain details
> need to be given for the statutory purpose concerned, then such details
> would certainly affect the right to privacy, but would on a balance, pass
> muster as the State action concerned has sufficient inbuilt safeguards to
> protect this right—viz. the fact that such information cannot be
> disseminated to anyone else, save on compelling grounds of public interest.”

> 93) One important comment which needs to be made at this stage relates to
> the standard of judicial review while examining the validity of a particular
> law that allegedly infringes right to privacy.

The question is as to whether the Court is to apply ‘strict scrutiny’ standard
or the ‘just, fair and reasonableness’ standard. In the privacy judgment,
different observations are made by different Hon’ble Judges and the aforesaid
aspect is not determined authoritatively, may be for the reason that the Bench
was deciding the reference on the issue as to whether right to privacy is a
fundamental right or not and, in the process, it was called upon to decide the
specific questions referred to it. We have dealt with this aspect at the
appropriate stage. Principles of Human Dignity:

94) While undertaking the analysis of the judgment in K.S.

Puttaswamy, we have mentioned that one of the attributes laid down therein is
that the sanctity of privacy lies in its functional Writ Petition (Civil) No.
494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 175 of 567 relationship with dignity.
Privacy is the constitutional core of human dignity. In the context of Aadhaar
scheme how the concept of human dignity is to be applied assumes significance.

95) In Common Cause v. Union of India32, the concept of human dignity has been
explained in much detail 33. The concept of human dignity developed in the
said judgment was general in nature which is based on right to autonomy and
right of choice and it has become a constitutional value. In the last 40 years
or so, this Court has given many landmark judgments wherein concept of human
dignity is recognised as an attribute of fundamental rights. In the earlier
years, though the meaning and scope of human dignity by itself was not
expanded, this exercise has been undertaken in last few years. Earlier
judgments have mentioned that human dignity is the intrinsic value of every
human being and, in the process, a person’s autonomy as an attribute of
dignity stands recognised. The judgments rendered in the last few years have
attempted to provide jurisprudential basis to the concept of human dignity
itself.

96) In National Legal Services Authority v. Union of India & Ors. 34 while
recognising the right of transgenders of self determination 32 (2018) 5 SCC 1
33 See paras 72-79 of the judgment 34 (2014) 5 SCC 438 Writ Petition (Civil)
No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 176 of 567 of their sex, the Court
explained the contours of human dignity in the following words:

> “106. The basic principle of the dignity and freedom of the individual is
> common to all nations, particularly those having democratic set up.
> Democracy requires us to respect and develop the free spirit of human being
> which is responsible for all progress in human history. Democracy is also a
> method by which we attempt to raise the living standard of the people and to
> give opportunities to every person to develop his/her personality. It is
> founded on peaceful co-existence and cooperative living. If democracy is
> based on the recognition of the individuality and dignity of man, as a
> fortiori we have to recognize the right of a human being to choose his
> sex/gender identity which is integral to his/her personality and is one of
> the most basic aspect of self-determination, dignity and freedom. In fact,
> there is a growing recognition that the true measure of development of a
> nation is not economic growth; it is human dignity.

> 107\. More than 225 years ago, Immanuel Kant propounded the doctrine of free
> will, namely, the free willing individual as a natural law ideal. Without
> going into the detailed analysis of his aforesaid theory of justice (as we
> are not concerned with the analysis of his jurisprudence) what we want to
> point out is his emphasis on the “freedom” of human volition. The concepts
> of volition and freedom are “pure”, that is not drawn from experience. They
> are independent of any particular body of moral or legal rules. They are
> presuppositions of all such rules, valid and necessary for all of them.

108\. Over a period of time, two divergent interpretations of the Kantian
criterion of justice came to be discussed. One trend was an increasing stress
on the maximum of individual freedom of action as the end of law. This may not
be accepted and was criticised by the protagonist of “hedonist
utilitarianism”, notably Bentham. This school of thought laid emphasis on the
welfare of the society rather than an individual by propounding the principle
of maximum of happiness to most of the people. Fortunately, in the instant
case, there is no such dichotomy between the individual freedom/liberty we are
discussing, as against public good. On the contrary, granting the right to
choose gender leads to public good. The second tendency of the Writ Petition
(Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 177 of 567 Kantian criterion
of justice was found in reinterpreting “freedom” in terms not merely of
absence of restraint but in terms of attainment of individual perfection. It
is this latter trend with which we are concerned in the present case and this
holds good even today. As pointed out above, after the Second World War, in
the form of the UN Charter and thereafter there is more emphasis on the
attainment of individual perfection. In that united sense at least there is a
revival of the natural law theory of justice. Blackstone, in the opening pages
in his “Vattelian Fashion” said that the principal aim of society “is to
protect individuals in the enjoyment of those absolute rights which were
vested in them by the immutable laws of nature….”

97) Thus, right of choice and right of self determination were accepted as
facets of human dignity. It was also emphasised that in certain cases, like
the case at hand (that of transgenders), recognition of this aspect of human
dignity would yield happiness to the individuals and, at the same time, also
be in public good.

98) Advancement in conceptualising the doctrine of human dignity took place in
the case of Shabnam v. Union of India & Ors. 35 wherein this Court has gone to
the extent of protecting certain rights of death convicts by holding that they
cannot be executed till they exhaust all available constitutional and
statutory remedies. In the process, the Court held as under:

> ““15. This right to human dignity has many elements. First and foremost,
> human dignity is the dignity of each human being 'as a human being'. Another
> element, which needs to be highlighted, in the context of the present case,
> is that human dignity is infringed if a person's life, physical or mental
> welfare is harmed. It is in this sense torture, 35 (2015) 6 SCC 702 Writ
> Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 178 of 567
> humiliation, forced labour, etc. all infringe on human dignity.

> It is in this context many rights of the accused derive from his dignity as
> a human being. These may include the presumption that every person is
> innocent until proven guilty; the right of the accused to a fair trial as
> well as speedy trial; right of legal aid, all part of human dignity. Even
> after conviction, when a person is spending prison life, allowing humane
> conditions in jail is part of human dignity. Prisons reforms or Jail reforms
> measures to make convicts a reformed person so that they are able to lead
> normal life and assimilate in the society, after serving the jail term, are
> motivated by human dignity jurisprudence.

16\. In fact, this principle of human dignity has been used frequently by
Courts in the context of considering the death penalty itself. Way back in the
year 1972, the United States Supreme Court kept in mind this aspect in the
case of Furman v. Georgia 408 US 238 (1972). The Court, speaking through
Brennan, J., while considering the application of Eighth Amendment's
prohibition on cruel and unusual punishments, summed up the previous
jurisprudence on the Amendment as 'prohibit(ing) the infliction of uncivilized
and inhuman punishments. The State, even as it punishes, must treat its
members with respect for their intrinsic worth as human beings. A punishment
is 'cruel and unusual', therefore, if it does not comport with human dignity'.
In Gregg v. Georgia 428 US 153 (1976), that very Court, again through Brennan,
J., considered that 'the fatal constitutional infirmity in the punishment of
death is that it treats “members of the human race as non-humans, as objects
to be toyed with an discarded. (It is), thus, inconsistent with the
fundamental premise of the clause that even the vilest criminal remains a
human being possessed of common human dignity'. The Canadian Supreme Court,
the Hungarian Constitutional Court and the South African Supreme Court have
gone to the extent of holding that capital punishment constitutes a serious
impairment of human dignity and imposes a limitation on the essential content
of the fundamental rights to life and human dignity and on that touchstone
declaring that dignity as unconstitutional.”

99) Next judgment in this line of cases would be that of Jeeja Ghosh Writ
Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 179 of 567 & Another
v. Union of India & Ors.36 wherein the Court, while expanding the
jurisprudential basis, outlined three models of dignity which have been
discussed by us above. These were referred to while explaining the normative
role of human dignity, alongside, in the following manner:

> “37. The rights that are guaranteed to differently-abled persons under the
> 1995 Act, are founded on the sound principle of human dignity which is the
> core value of human right and is treated as a significant facet of right to
> life and liberty. Such a right, now treated as human right of the persons
> who are disabled, has it roots in Article 21 of the Constitution.
> Jurisprudentially, three types of models for determining the content of the
> constitutional value of human dignity are recognised. These are: (i)
> Theological Models, (ii) Philosophical Models, and (iii) Constitutional
> Models. Legal scholars were called upon to determine the theological basis
> of human dignity as a constitutional value and as a constitutional right.
> Philosophers also came out with their views justifying human dignity as core
> human value. Legal understanding is influenced by theological and
> philosophical views, though these two are not identical.

Aquinas and Kant discussed the jurisprudential aspects of human dignity based
on the aforesaid philosophies. Over a period of time, human dignity has found
its way through constitutionalism, whether written or unwritten. Even right to
equality is interpreted based on the value of human dignity. Insofar as India
is concerned, we are not even required to take shelter under theological or
philosophical theories. We have a written Constitution which guarantees human
rights that are contained in Part III with the caption “Fundamental Rights”.
One such right enshrined in Article 21 is right to life and liberty. Right to
life is given a purposeful meaning by this Court to include right to live with
dignity. It is the purposive interpretation which has been adopted by this
Court to give a content of the right to human dignity as the fulfilment of the
constitutional value enshrined in Article 21. Thus, human dignity is a
constitutional value and a constitutional goal. What are the dimensions of
constitutional value of human dignity? It is 36 (2016) 7 SCC 761 Writ Petition
(Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 180 of 567 beautifully
illustrated by Aharon Barak (former Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of
Israel) in the following manner: “The constitutional value of human dignity
has a central normative role. Human dignity as a constitutional value is the
factor that unites the human rights into one whole. It ensures the normative
unity of human rights. This normative unity is expressed in the three ways:
first, the value of human dignity serves as a normative basis for
constitutional rights set out in the Constitution; second, it serves as an
interpretative principle for determining the scope of constitutional rights,
including the right to human dignity; third, the value of human dignity has an
important role in determining the proportionality of a statute limiting a
constitutional right.”

38\. All the three goals of human dignity as a constitutional value are
expanded by the author in a scholarly manner. Some of the excerpts thereof,
are reproduced below which give a glimpse of these goals:

“The first role of human dignity as a constitutional value is expressed in the
approach that it comprises the foundation for all of the constitutional
rights. Human dignity is the central argument for the existence of human
rights. It is the rationale for them all. It is the justification for the
existence of rights. According to Christoph Enders, it is the constitutional
value that determines that every person has the right to have rights… The
second role of human dignity as a constitutional value is to provide meaning
to the norms of the legal system. According to purposive interpretation, all
of the provisions of the Constitution, and particularly all of the rights in
the constitutional bill of rights, are interpreted in light of human dignity…
Lastly, human dignity as a constitutional value influences the development of
the common law. Indeed, where common law is recognised, Judges have the duty
to develop it, and if necessary, modify it, so that it expresses
constitutional values, including the constitutional value of human dignity. To
the extent that common law determines rights and duties between individuals,
it might limit the human dignity of Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 &
connected matters Page 181 of 567 one individual and protect the human dignity
of the other.”

100) The concept was developed and expanded further in K.S.

Puttaswamy. The Court held that privacy postulates the reservation of a
private space for an individual, described as the right to be let alone, as a
concept founded on autonomy of the individual. In this way, right to privacy
has been treated as a postulate of human dignity itself. While defining so,
the Court also remarked as under:

> “298. Privacy of the individual is an essential aspect of dignity. Dignity
> has both an intrinsic and instrumental value. As an intrinsic value, human
> dignity is an entitlement or a constitutionally protected interest in
> itself. In its instrumental facet, dignity and freedom are inseparably
> intertwined, each being a facilitative tool to achieve the other. The
> ability of the individual to protect a zone of privacy enables the
> realisation of the full value of life and liberty... The family, marriage,
> procreation and sexual orientation are all integral to the dignity of the
> individual.

Above all, the privacy of the individual recognises an inviolable right to
determine how freedom shall be exercised...”

101) This concept of dignity took a leap forwarded in the case of Common Cause
v. Union of India37 pertaining to passive euthanasia. Though this right was
earlier recognised in Aruna Ramachandra Shanbaug v. Union of India & Ors.38, a
totally new dimension was given to this right, based on freedom of choice 37
(2018) 5 SCC 1 38 (2011) 4 SCC 454 Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 &
connected matters Page 182 of 567 which is to be given to an individual
accepting his dignity. There were four concurring opinions. In one of the
opinions 39, the aspects of dignity are succinctly brought out in the
following manner:

> “154. Dignity of an individual has been internationally recognised as an
> important facet of human rights in the year 1948 itself with the enactment
> of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Human dignity not only finds
> place in the Preamble of this important document but also in Article 1 of
> the same. It is well known that the principles set out in UDHR are of
> paramount importance and are given utmost weightage while interpreting human
> rights all over the world. The first and foremost responsibility fixed upon
> the State is the protection of human dignity without which any other right
> would fall apart. Justice Brennan in his book The Constitution of the United
> States: Contemporary Ratification has referred to the Constitution as “a
> sparkling vision of the supremacy of the human dignity of every individual”.

> 155\. In fact, in Christine Goodwin v. United Kingdom the European Court of
> Human Rights, speaking in the context of the Convention for the Protection
> of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, has gone to the extent of stating
> that “the very essence of the Convention is respect for human dignity and
> human freedom”. In the South African case of S. v. Makwanyane, O’Regan, J.
> stated in the Constitutional Court that “without dignity, human life is
> substantially diminished”.

> xx xx xx

> 157\. The concept and value of dignity requires further elaboration since we
> are treating it as an inextricable facet of right to life that respects all
> human rights that a person enjoys. Life is basically self-assertion. In the
> life of a person, conflict and dilemma are expected to be normal phenomena.
> Oliver Wendell Holmes, in one of his addresses, quoted a line from a Latin
> poet who had uttered the message, “Death plucks my ear and says, Live—I am
> coming”. That is the significance of living. But when a 39 Rendered by Dipak
> Misra, CJI Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page
> 183 of 567 patient really does not know if he/she is living till death
> visits him/her and there is constant suffering without any hope of living,
> should one be allowed to wait? Should she/he be cursed to die as life
> gradually ebbs out from her/his being? Should she/he live because of
> innovative medical technology or, for that matter, should he/she continue to
> live with the support system as people around him/her think that science in
> its progressive invention may bring about an innovative method of cure? To
> put it differently, should he/she be “Guinea pig” for some kind of
> experiment? The answer has to be an emphatic “No” because such futile
> waiting mars the pristine concept of life, corrodes the essence of dignity
> and erodes the fact of eventual choice which is pivotal to privacy.

> xx xx xx

> 159\. In Mehmood Nayyar Azam v. State of Chhattisgarh, a two-Judge Bench
> held thus: (SCC p. 6, para 1) “1. … Albert Schweitzer, highlighting on Glory
> of Life, pronounced with conviction and humility, “the reverence of life
> offers me my fundamental principle on morality”. The aforesaid expression
> may appear to be an individualistic expression of a great personality, but,
> when it is understood in the complete sense, it really denotes, in its
> conceptual essentiality, and connotes, in its macrocosm, the fundamental
> perception of a thinker about the respect that life commands. The reverence
> of life is insegregably associated with the dignity of a human being who is
> basically divine, not servile. A human personality is endowed with potential
> infinity and it blossoms when dignity is sustained. The sustenance of such
> dignity has to be the superlative concern of every sensitive soul. The
> essence of dignity can never be treated as a momentary spark of light or,
> for that matter, “a brief candle”, or “a hollow bubble”. The spark of life
> gets more resplendent when man is treated with dignity sans humiliation, for
> every man is expected to lead an honourable life which is a splendid gift of
> “creative intelligence”.” xx xx xx

> 166\. The purpose of saying so is only to highlight that the law must take
> cognizance of the changing society and Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012
> & connected matters Page 184 of 567 march in consonance with the developing
> concepts. The need of the present has to be served with the interpretative
> process of law. However, it is to be seen how much strength and sanction can
> be drawn from the Constitution to consummate the changing ideology and
> convert it into a reality. The immediate needs are required to be addressed
> through the process of interpretation by the Court unless the same totally
> falls outside the constitutional framework or the constitutional
> interpretation fails to recognise such dynamism. The Constitution Bench in
> Gian Kaur [Gian Kaur v. State of Punjab, (1996) 2 SCC 648 : 1996 SCC (Cri)
> 374] , as stated earlier, distinguishes attempt to suicide and abetment of
> suicide from acceleration of the process of natural death which has
> commenced. The authorities, we have noted from other jurisdictions, have
> observed the distinctions between the administration of lethal injection or
> certain medicines to cause painless death and non-administration of certain
> treatment which can prolong the life in cases where the process of dying
> that has commenced is not reversible or withdrawal of the treatment that has
> been given to the patient because of the absolute absence of possibility of
> saving the life. To explicate, the first part relates to an overt act
> whereas the second one would come within the sphere of informed consent and
> authorised omission. The omission of such a nature will not invite any
> criminal liability if such action is guided by certain safeguards. The
> concept is based on non-prolongation of life where there is no cure for the
> state the patient is in and he, under no circumstances, would have liked to
> have such a degrading state. The words “no cure” have to be understood to
> convey that the patient remains in the same state of pain and suffering or
> the dying process is delayed by means of taking recourse to modern medical
> technology. It is a state where the treating physicians and the family
> members know fully well that the treatment is administered only to
> procrastinate the continuum of breath of the individual and the patient is
> not even aware that he is breathing. Life is measured by artificial
> heartbeats and the patient has to go through this undignified state which is
> imposed on him. The dignity of life is denied to him as there is no other
> choice but to suffer an avoidable protracted treatment thereby thus
> indubitably casting a cloud and creating a dent in his right to live with
> dignity and face death with dignity, which is a preserved concept of bodily
> autonomy and right to privacy. In such a stage, he has no old memories or
> any future hopes but he is in a state of misery which nobody ever desires to
> have.

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 185 of 567

Some may also silently think that death, the inevitable factum of life, cannot
be invited. To meet such situations, the Court has a duty to interpret Article
21 in a further dynamic manner and it has to be stated without any trace of
doubt that the right to life with dignity has to include the smoothening of
the process of dying when the person is in a vegetative state or is living
exclusively by the administration of artificial aid that prolongs the life by
arresting the dignified and inevitable process of dying. Here, the issue of
choice also comes in. Thus analysed, we are disposed to think that such a
right would come within the ambit of Article 21 of the Constitution.”

102) In the other opinion40, four facets of euthanasia were discussed, namely:
(i) philosophy of euthanasia, (ii) morality of euthanasia,

(iii) dignity in euthanasia, and (iv) economics of euthanasia. While
discussing dignity in euthanasia, the three models of dignity, namely,
theological, philosophical and constitutional model, were highlighted.
Thereafter, postulates of dignity have been explained in the following manner:

> “292. Aharon Barak, former Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of Israel,
> attributes two roles to the concept of human dignity as a constitutional
> value, which are:

> 292.1. Human dignity lays a foundation for all the human rights as it is the
> central argument for the existence of human rights.

292.2. Human dignity as a constitutional value provides meaning to the norms
of the legal system. In the process, one can discern that the principle of
purposive interpretation exhorts us to interpret all the rights given by the
Constitution, in the light of the human dignity. In this sense, human dignity
influences the purposive interpretation of the Constitution. Not only this, it
also influences the interpretation of every sub-constitutional norm in the
legal system. Moreover, human dignity as a 40 Rendered by A.K. Sikri, J.

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 186 of 567

constitutional value also influences the development of the common law.

xx xx xx

295\. Dworkin, being a philosopher-jurist, was aware of the idea of a
Constitution and of a constitutional right to human dignity. In his book,
Taking Rights Seriously, he noted that everyone who takes rights seriously
must give an answer to the question why human rights vis-à-vis the State
exist. According to him, in order to give such an answer one must accept, as a
minimum, the idea of human dignity. As he writes:

“Human dignity … associated with Kant, but defended by philosophers of
different schools, supposes that there are ways of treating a man that are
inconsistent with recognising him as a full member of the human community, and
holds that such treatment is profoundly unjust.”41

296\. In his Book, Is Democracy Possible Here?42 Dworkin develops two
principles about the concept of human dignity. First principle regards the
intrinsic value of every person viz. every person has a special objective
value which value is not only important to that person alone but success or
failure of the lives of every person is important to all of us. The second
principle, according to Dworkin, is that of personal responsibility. According
to this principle, every person has the responsibility for success in his own
life and, therefore, he must use his discretion regarding the way of life that
will be successful from his point of view. Thus, Dworkin's jurisprudence of
human dignity is founded on the aforesaid two principles which, together, not
only define the basis but the conditions for human dignity. Dworkin went on to
develop and expand these principles in his book, Justice for Hedgehogs
(2011)43.

297\. When speaking of rights, it is impossible to envisage it without
dignity. In his pioneering and all-inclusive Justice for Hedgehogs, he
proffered an approach where respect for human dignity, entails two
requirements; first, self- respect i.e. taking the objective importance of
one's own 41 Ronald Dworkin, Taking Rights Seriously (A&C Black, 2013) 239. 42
Ronald Dworkin, Is Democracy Possible Here? Principles for a New Political
Debate (Princeton University Press, 2006) 43 Harvard University Press, 2011.

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 187 of 567

life seriously; this represents the free will of the person, his capacity to
think for himself and to control his own life and second, authenticity i.e.
accepting a “special, personal responsibility for identifying what counts as
success” in one's own life and for creating that life “through a coherent
narrative” that one has chosen44. According to Dworkin, these principles form
the fundamental criteria supervising what we should do in order to live
well.45 They further explicate the rights that individuals have against their
political community,46 and they provide a rationale for the moral duties we
owe to others. This notion of dignity, which Dworkin gives utmost importance
to, is indispensable to any civilised society. It is what is constitutionally
recognised in our country and for good reason. Living well is a moral
responsibility of individuals; it is a continuing process that is not a static
condition of character but a mode that an individual constantly endeavours to
imbibe. A life lived without dignity, is not a life lived at all for living
well implies a conception of human dignity which Dworkin interprets includes
ideals of self-respect and authenticity.”

103) In summation, it can be said that the concept of human dignity dates back
to thousands of years. Historically, human dignity, as a concept, found its
origin in different religions which is held to be an important component of
their theological approach. Jurists have given this approach as ‘theological
model’ of dignity. It is primarily based on the premise that human beings are
the creation of God and cannot be treated as mere material beings. Human
identity is more ethical than spiritual because man is creation of God; harm
to a human being is harm to God. God, thus, wishes to grant human being
recognition, dignity and 44 Kenneth W. Simons, “Dworkin's Two Principle of
Dignity: An Unsatisfactory Non- Consequentialist Account of Interpersonal
Moral Duties”, 90 Boston Law Rev. 715 (2010)] 45 Footnote 33 above.

46 Footnote 32 above.

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 188 of 567

authority. It is also religious belief that God is rational and determines his
goals for himself. Likewise, human being created by God too is rational and
determines his own goal. Therefore, man has freedom of will. A couple of
centuries ago, philosophical approach was given to the conception of human
dignity. This sphere was headed by German Philosopher Immanuel Kant whose
moral theory is divided into two parts: ethics and right. According to Kant, a
person acts ethically when he acts by force of a duty that a rational agent
self-legislates onto his own will. Thus, he talked of free will of the human
being. For Kant, ethics include duties of oneself (for example - to develop
one's talents) and to others (for example - to contribute to their happiness).
This ability is the human dignity of man. Philosophical approach, thus, is
metaethical one, which is a journey from ‘human being’ and ‘remaining human’.
This is explained by Professor Upendra Baxi as the relationship between
‘self’, ‘others’ and ‘society’. In this philosophical sense, dignity is
‘respect’ for an individual person based on the principle of freedom and
capacity of making choices and a good or just social order is one which
respects dignity via assuring ‘contexts’ and ‘conditions’ as the ‘source of
free and informed choice’. To put it philosophically, each individual has a
right to live her life the way she wants, without Writ Petition (Civil) No.
494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 189 of 567 any subjugation. One can rule
others, but then it is never noble.

It is immoral because the other is not a means to you, the other is an end to
herself. Kant also maintains that to use the other as a means is the basic
immoral act. Everything else that is immoral is immoral because of this, so
this should be the criterion: Are you using the other as a means? Someone has
put this remarkably in the following words:

> “Alexander the Great is not noble, only Gautam the Buddha is noble, for the
> simple reason that Buddha has no rule over others but he is a matter of
> himself.

> There is no part of his being which is not in tune with him.

He has come to attain absolute harmony. There is no conflict in him, there is
a reign of absolute peace. And his consciousness is supreme, nothing is above
it – no instinct, no intellect, nothing is higher than his consciousness.”

104) Historically, a transition has taken place into the idea of dignity by
transforming the amalgam of theological approach (man as creation of God
deserving dignity) and philosophical approach based on morality, by elevating
human dignity as a constitutional norm attaching constitutional value to it.
It is a transition from ‘respect’ to ‘right’ by making respect as enforceable
right. The manner in which it has happened in India has been traced above.

105) From the aforesaid discussion, it follows that dignity as a
jurisprudential concept has now been well defined by this Court. Writ Petition
(Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 190 of 567 Its essential
ingredients can be summarised as under:

> The basic principle of dignity and freedom of the individual is an attribute
> of natural law which becomes the right of all individuals in a
> constitutional democracy. Dignity has a central normative role as well as
> constitutional value. This normative role is performed in three ways:

> First, it becomes basis for constitutional rights;

> Second, it serves as an interpretative principle for determining the scope
> of constitutional rights; and, Third, it determines the proportionality of a
> statute limiting a constitutional right. Thus, if an enactment puts
> limitation on a constitutional right and such limitation is
> disproportionate, such a statute can be held to be unconstitutional by
> applying the doctrine of proportionality.

106) As per Dworkin, there are two principles about the concept of human
dignity. First principle regards an ‘intrinsic value’ of every person, namely,
every person has a special objective value, which value is not only important
to that person alone but success or failure of the lives of every person is
important to all of us. It can also be described as self respect which
represents the free will of the person, her capacity to think for herself and
to control her own life. The second principle is that of ‘personal Writ
Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 191 of 567
responsibility’, which means every person has the responsibility for success
in her own life and, therefore, she must use her discretion regarding the way
of life that will be successful from her point of view.

107) Sum total of this exposition is well defined by Professor Baxi by
explaining that as per the aforesaid view, dignity is to be treated as
‘empowerment’ which makes a triple demand in the name of ‘respect’ for human
dignity, namely:

(i) respect for one's capacity as an agent to make one's own free choices;

(ii) respect for the choices so made; and

(iii) respect for one's need to have a context and conditions in which one can
operate as a source of free and informed choice.

108) In this entire formulation, ‘respect’ for an individual is the fulcrum,
which is based on the principle of freedom and capacity to make choices and a
good or just social order is one which respects dignity via assuring
‘contexts’ and ‘conditions’ as the ‘source of free and informed choice’.

109) The aforesaid discourse on the concept of human dignity is from an
individual point of view. That is the emphasis of the petitioners as well.
That would be one side of the coin. A very important Writ Petition (Civil) No.
494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 192 of 567 feature which the present case
has brought into focus is another dimension of human dignity, namely, in the
form of ‘common good’ or ‘public good’. Thus, our endeavour here is to give
richer and more nuanced understanding to the concept of human dignity. Here,
dignity is not limited to an individual and is to be seen in an
individualistic way. A reflection on this facet of human dignity was stated in
National Legal Services Authority (Transgenders’ case), which can be discerned
from the following discussion:

> “103. A corollary of this development is that while so long the negative
> language of Article 21 and use of the word “deprived” was supposed to impose
> upon the State the negative duty not to interfere with the life or liberty
> of an individual without the sanction of law, the width and amplitude of
> this provision has now imposed a positive obligation (Vincent Panikurlangara
> v. Union of India) upon the State to take steps for ensuring to the
> individual a better enjoyment of his life and dignity e.g.:

> (i) Maintenance and improvement of public health (Vincent Panikurlangara v.
> Union of India).

> (ii) Elimination of water and air pollution (M.C. Mehta v. Union of India).

> (iii) Improvement of means of communication (State of H.P. v. Umed Ram
> Sharma).

> (iv) Rehabilitation of bonded labourers (Bandhua Mukti Morcha v. Union of
> India).

> (v) Providing human conditions in prisons (Sher Singh v. State of Punjab)
> and protective homes (Sheela Barse v. Union of India).

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 193 of 567

(vi) Providing hygienic condition in a slaughterhouse (Buffalo Traders Welfare
Assn. v. Maneka Gandhi).

104\. The common golden thread which passes through all these pronouncements
is that Article 21 guarantees enjoyment of life by all citizens of this
country with dignity, viewing this human right in terms of human development.

105\. The concepts of justice social, economic and political, equality of
status and of opportunity and of assuring dignity of the individual
incorporated in the Preamble, clearly recognise the right of one and all
amongst the citizens of these basic essentials designed to flower the
citizen's personality to its fullest. The concept of equality helps the
citizens in reaching their highest potential. Thus, the emphasis is on the
development of an individual in all respects.”

110) Christopher McCrudden, an Oxford Academic, in his article ‘Human Dignity
and Judicial Interpretation of Human Rights’ 47 published in the European
Journal of International Law on September 01, 2008 traces the evolution of
concept of human dignity. In substance, his analysis is that in the early
stages of social evolution, human dignity was understood as a concept
associated with ‘status’. Only those individuals were considered worthy of
respect who enjoyed a certain status within the social construct. Though one
finds statements about dignity of humans as human beings on account of the
human being the highest creation of God and his possession of mind and the
power of reason in the Oration of Marcus Tullius Cicero, a Roman Politician
and Philosopher (63 BC), and in the works of Pico della 47 Published in the
European Journal of International Law on September 01, 2008 Writ Petition
(Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 194 of 567 Mirandola, a
Reformation Humanist (1486) ‘On the dignity of man’, yet there existed human
beings who were not considered as human beings. There were slaves who were
treated at par with animals.

111) Kant expounded the theory that humans should be treated as an end in
themselves and not merely as a means to an end with ability to choose their
destiny. Emphasis was laid on the intrinsic worth of the human being. Based on
this philosophy emerged the initial declaration of rights. Kant wrote thus:

> “Humanity itself is a dignity; for a human being cannot be used merely as a
> means by any human being (...) but must always be used at the same time as
> an end. It is just in this that his dignity (personality) consists, by which
> he raises himself above all other beings in the world that are not human
> beings and yet can be used, and so overall things.”

> 112) Charles Bernard Renouvier, a French Philosopher, said:

> “Republic is a State which best reconciles dignity of individual with
> dignity of everyone.”

> 113) Dignity extended to all citizens involves the idea of communitarism. A
> little earlier in 1798, Friedrich Schiller, a German poet of freedom and
> philosophy, brought out the connection between dignity and social condition
> in his work “Wurde des Menschen”. He said “(g)ive him food and shelter;

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 195 of 567

when you have covered his nakedness, dignity will follow by itself.” It was
during the period that abolition of slavery became an important political
agenda. Slavery was considered as an affront to human dignity.

114) The Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) recorded in the Preamble
recognition of the inherent dignity and of the equal and inalienable rights of
all members of the human family as the foundation of freedom, justice and
peace. It included freedom from fear and want as amongst the highest
aspirations of the common people. This is of course subject to resources of
each State. But the realisation is contemplated through national effort and
international cooperation. Evidently, the UDHR adopts a substantive or
communitarian concept of human dignity. The realisation of intrinsic worth of
every human being, as a member of society through national efforts as an
indispensable condition has been recognised as an important human right. Truly
speaking, this is directed towards the deprived, downtrodden and have nots.

115) We, therefore, have to keep in mind humanistic concept of human dignity
which is to be accorded to a particular segment of the society and, in fact, a
large segment. Their human dignity is Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 &
connected matters Page 196 of 567 based on the socio-economic rights that are
read in to the fundamental rights, as already discussed above.

116) When we read socio-economic rights into human dignity, the community
approach also assumes importance along with individualistic approach to human
dignity. It has now been well recognised that at its core, human dignity
contains three elements, namely, intrinsic value, autonomy and community
value. These are known as core values of human dignity. These three elements
can assist in structuring legal reasoning and justifying judicial choices in
‘hard cases’. It has to be borne in mind that human dignity is a
constitutional principle, rather than free standing fundamental rights.
Insofar as intrinsic value is concerned, here human dignity is linked to the
nature of being. We may give brief description of these three contents of the
idea of human dignity as below:

(I) Intrinsic Value:

The uniqueness of human kind is the product of a combination of inherent
traits and features – including intelligence, sensibility, and the ability to
communicate – that give humans a special status in the world, distinct from
other species.48 The intrinsic value of all individuals results in two 48 See
George Kateb, Human Dignity 5 (2011) (“[W]e can distinguish between the
dignity of every Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters
Page 197 of 567 basic postulates: anti-utilitarian and anti-authoritarian. The
former consists of the formulation of Kant’s categorical imperative that every
individual is an end in him or herself, not a means for collective goals or
the purposes of others. The latter is synthesized in the idea that the State
exists for the individual, not the other way around. As for its legal
implications, intrinsic value is the origin of a set of fundamental rights.
The first of these rights is the right to life, a basic precondition for the
enjoyment of any other right. A second right directly related to the intrinsic
value of each and every individual is equality before and under the law. All
individuals are of equal value and, therefore, deserve equal respect and
concern. This means not being discriminated against due to race, colour,
ethnic or national origin, sex, age or mental capacity (the right to non-
discrimination), as well as respect for cultural, religious, or linguistic
diversity (the right to recognition). Human dignity fulfills only part of the
content of the idea of equality, and in many situations it may be acceptable
to differentiate among people. In the contemporary world, this is particularly
at issue in cases involving affirmative action and the rights of religious
minorities. Intrinsic value also leads to the right to integrity, both
physical and mental. The right to physical human individual and the dignity of
the human species as a whole.”). Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 &
connected matters Page 198 of 567 integrity includes the prohibition of
torture, slave labour, and degrading treatment or punishment. Discussions on
life imprisonment, interrogation techniques, and prison conditions take place
within the scope of this right. The right to mental integrity comprises the
right to personal honour and image and includes the right to privacy.

(II) Autonomy:

Autonomy is the ethical element of human dignity. It is the foundation of the
free will of individuals, which entitles them to pursue the ideals of living
well and having a good life in their own ways. The central notion is that of
self-determination: An autonomous person establishes the rules that will
govern his or her life. Kantian conception of autonomy is the will governed by
the moral law (moral autonomy). Here, we are concerned with personal autonomy,
which is value neutral and means the free exercise of the will according to
one’s own values, interests, and desires. Autonomy requires the fulfillment of
certain conditions, such as reason (the mental capacity to make informed
decisions), independence (the absence of coercion, manipulation and severe
want), and choice (the actual existence of alternatives). Autonomy, thus, is
the ability to make personal decisions and choices in life based on one’s
conception of the good, without Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 &
connected matters Page 199 of 567 undue external influences. As for its legal
implications, autonomy underlies a set of fundamental rights associated with
democratic constitutionalism, including basic freedoms (private autonomy) and
the right of political participation (public autonomy).

It would be pertinent to emphasise here that with the rise of the welfare
state, many countries in the world (and that includes India) also consider a
fundamental right to minimum living conditions (the existential minimum) in
the balancing that results into effective autonomy. Thus, there are three
facets of autonomy, namely: private autonomy, public autonomy and the
existential minimum. Insofar as the last component is concerned, it is also
referred to as social minimum or the basic right to the provision of adequate
living conditions has its roots in right to equality as well. In fact,
equality, in a substantive sense, and especially autonomy (both private and
public), are dependent on the fact that individuals are “free from want,”
meaning that their essential needs are satisfied. To be free, equal, and
capable of exercising responsible citizenship, individuals must pass minimum
thresholds of well-being, without which autonomy is a mere fiction. This
requires access to some essential utilities, such as basic education and
health care services, as well as some elementary necessities, such as food,
water, clothing, and Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters
Page 200 of 567 shelter. The existential minimum, therefore, is the core
content of social and economic rights. This concept of minimum social right is
protected by the Court, time and again.

(III) Community Value:

This element of human dignity as community value relates to the social
dimension of dignity. The contours of human dignity are shaped by the
relationship of the individual with others, as well as with the world around
him. English poet John Donne expresses the same sentiments when he says ‘no
man is an island, entire of itself’ 49. The individual, thus, lives within
himself, within a community, and within a state. His personal autonomy is
constrained by the values, rights, and morals of people who are just as free
and equal as him, as well as by coercive regulation. Robert Post identified
three distinct forms of social order: community (a “shared world of common
faith and fate”), management (the instrumental organization of social life
through law to achieve specific objectives), and democracy (an arrangement
that embodies the purpose of individual and collective self-determination.
These three forms of social order presuppose and depend on each other, but are
also in constant tension.

49 See John Donne, XVII. Mediation, in Devotions upon Emergent Occasions 107,
108-09 (Uyniv. Of Mich. Press 1959) (1624) Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of
2012 & connected matters Page 201 of 567 Dignity as a community value,
therefore, emphasises the role of the state and community in establishing
collective goals and restrictions on individual freedoms and rights on behalf
of a certain idea of the good life. The relevant question here is in what
circumstances and to what degree should these actions be regarded as
legitimate in a constitutional democracy? The liberal predicament that the
state must be neutral with regard to different conceptions of the good in a
plural society is not incompatible, of course, with limitation resulting from
the necessary coexistence of different views and potentially conflicting
rights. Such interferences, however, must be justified on grounds of a
legitimate idea of justice, an “overlapping consensus” 50 that can be shared
by most individuals and groups. Whenever such tension arises, the task of
balancing is to be achieved by the Courts.

We would like to highlight one more significant feature which the issues
involved in the present case bring about. It is the balancing of two facets of
dignity of the same individual. Whereas, on the one hand, right of personal
autonomy is a part of dignity (and right to privacy), another part of dignity
of the same individual is to lead a dignified life as well (which is again a
50 “Overlapping consensus” is a term coined by John Rawls that identifies
basic ideas of justice that can be shared by supporters of different
religious, political, and moral comprehensive doctrines.

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 202 of 567

facet of Article 21 of the Constitution). Therefore, in a scenario where the
State is coming out with welfare schemes, which strive at giving dignified
life in harmony with human dignity and in the process some aspect of autonomy
is sacrificed, the balancing of the two becomes an important task which is to
be achieved by the Courts. For, there cannot be undue intrusion into the
autonomy on the pretext of conferment of economic benefits. Precisely, this
very exercise of balancing is undertaken by the Court in resolving the complex
issues raised in the petitions. Doctrine of Proportionality:

117) As noted above, whenever challenge is laid to an action of the State on
the ground that it violates the right to privacy, the action of the State is
to be tested on the following parameters:

    
    
           (a)     the action must be sanctioned by law;
    
           (b)     the proposed action must be necessary in a democratic
    
           society for a legitimate aim; and
    
           (c)     the extent of such interference must be proportionate to the
    
           need for such interference.
    
    
    

118) Doctrine of proportionality was explained by the Constitution Bench
judgment of this Court in Modern Dental College and Research Centre & Ors. v.
State of Madhya Pradesh & Ors. 51. In 51 (2016) 7 SCC 353 Writ Petition
(Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 203 of 567 the first
instance, therefore, it would be apt to reproduce the said discussion:

> “60. ...Thus, while examining as to whether the impugned provisions of the
> statute and rules amount to reasonable restrictions and are brought out in
> the interest of the general public, the exercise that is required to be
> undertaken is the balancing of fundamental right to carry on occupation on
> the one hand and the restrictions imposed on the other hand. This is what is
> known as “doctrine of proportionality”. Jurisprudentially, “proportionality”
> can be defined as the set of rules determining the necessary and sufficient
> conditions for limitation of a constitutionally protected right by a law to
> be constitutionally permissible. According to Aharon Barak (former Chief
> Justice, Supreme Court of Israel), there are four sub-components of
> proportionality which need to be satisfied [Aharon Barak, Proportionality:
> Constitutional Rights and Their Limitation (Cambridge University Press
> 2012)], a limitation of a constitutional right will be constitutionally
> permissible if:
    
    
                   (i)    it is designated for a proper purpose;
    
                   (ii)    the measures undertaken to effectuate such a
    

> limitation are rationally connected to the fulfilment of that purpose;

> (iii) the measures undertaken are necessary in that there are no alternative
> measures that may similarly achieve that same purpose with a lesser degree
> of limitation; and finally

> (iv) there needs to be a proper relation (“proportionality stricto sensu” or
> “balancing”) between the importance of achieving the proper purpose and the
> social importance of preventing the limitation on the constitutional right.

61\. Modern theory of constitutional rights draws a fundamental distinction
between the scope of the constitutional rights, and the extent of its
protection. Insofar as the scope of constitutional rights is concerned, it
marks the outer boundaries of the said rights and defines its contents. The
extent of its protection prescribes the limitations on the exercises of the
rights within its scope. In Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected
matters Page 204 of 567 that sense, it defines the justification for
limitations that can be imposed on such a right.

62\. It is now almost accepted that there are no absolute constitutional
rights [ Though, debate on this vexed issue still continues and some
constitutional experts claim that there are certain rights, albeit very few,
which can still be treated as “absolute”. Examples given are:(a) Right to
human dignity which is inviolable,(b) Right not to be subjected to torture or
to inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment. Even in respect of such
rights, there is a thinking that in larger public interest, the extent of
their protection can be diminished. However, so far such attempts of the
States have been thwarted by the judiciary.] and all such rights are related.
As per the analysis of Aharon Barak [Aharon Barak, Proportionality:
Constitutional Rights and Their Limitation (Cambridge University Press 2012).]
, two key elements in developing the modern constitutional theory of
recognising positive constitutional rights along with its limitations are the
notions of democracy and the rule of law. Thus, the requirement of
proportional limitations of constitutional rights by a sub- constitutional law
i.e. the statute, is derived from an interpretation of the notion of democracy
itself. Insofar as the Indian Constitution is concerned, democracy is treated
as the basic feature of the Constitution and is specifically accorded a
constitutional status that is recognised in the Preamble of the Constitution
itself. It is also unerringly accepted that this notion of democracy includes
human rights which is the cornerstone of Indian democracy. Once we accept the
aforesaid theory (and there cannot be any denial thereof), as a fortiori, it
has also to be accepted that democracy is based on a balance between
constitutional rights and the public interests. In fact, such a provision in
Article 19 itself on the one hand guarantees some certain freedoms in clause
(1) of Article 19 and at the same time empowers the State to impose reasonable
restrictions on those freedoms in public interest. This notion accepts the
modern constitutional theory that the constitutional rights are related. This
relativity means that a constitutional licence to limit those rights is
granted where such a limitation will be justified to protect public interest
or the rights of others. This phenomenon—of both the right and its limitation
in the Constitution—exemplifies the inherent tension between democracy's two
fundamental elements. On the one hand is the right's element, which
constitutes a fundamental component of substantive democracy; on the Writ
Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 205 of 567 other
hand is the people element, limiting those very rights through their
representatives. These two constitute a fundamental component of the notion of
democracy, though this time in its formal aspect. How can this tension be
resolved? The answer is that this tension is not resolved by eliminating the
“losing” facet from the Constitution. Rather, the tension is resolved by way
of a proper balancing of the competing principles. This is one of the
expressions of the multi-faceted nature of democracy. Indeed, the inherent
tension between democracy's different facets is a “constructive tension”. It
enables each facet to develop while harmoniously coexisting with the others.
The best way to achieve this peaceful coexistence is through balancing between
the competing interests. Such balancing enables each facet to develop
alongside the other facets, not in their place. This tension between the two
fundamental aspects—rights on the one hand and its limitation on the other
hand—is to be resolved by balancing the two so that they harmoniously coexist
with each other. This balancing is to be done keeping in mind the relative
social values of each competitive aspects when considered in proper context.

63\. In this direction, the next question that arises is as to what criteria
is to be adopted for a proper balance between the two facets viz. the rights
and limitations imposed upon it by a statute. Here comes the concept of
“proportionality”, which is a proper criterion. To put it pithily, when a law
limits a constitutional right, such a limitation is constitutional if it is
proportional. The law imposing restrictions will be treated as proportional if
it is meant to achieve a proper purpose, and if the measures taken to achieve
such a purpose are rationally connected to the purpose, and such measures are
necessary. This essence of doctrine of proportionality is beautifully captured
by Dickson, C.J. of Canada in R. v. Oakes [R. v. Oakes, (1986) 1 SCR 103 (Can
SC)] , in the following words (at p. 138): ‘To establish that a limit is
reasonable and demonstrably justified in a free and democratic society, two
central criteria must be satisfied. First, the objective, which the measures,
responsible for a limit on a Charter right or freedom are designed to serve,
must be “of” sufficient importance to warrant overriding a constitutional
protected right or freedom … Second … the party invoking Section 1 must show
that the means chosen are reasonable and Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012
& connected matters Page 206 of 567 demonstrably justified. This involves “a
form of proportionality test…” Although the nature of the proportionality test
will vary depending on the circumstances, in each case courts will be required
to balance the interests of society with those of individuals and groups.
There are, in my view, three important components of a proportionality test.
First, the measures adopted must be … rationally connected to the objective.
Second, the means … should impair “as little as possible” the right or freedom
in question … Third, there must be a proportionality between the effects of
the measures which are responsible for limiting the Charter right or freedom,
and the objective which has been identified as of “sufficient importance”. The
more severe the deleterious effects of a measure, the more important the
objective must be if the measure is to be reasonable and demonstrably
justified in a free and democratic society.’

64\. The exercise which, therefore, is to be taken is to find out as to
whether the limitation of constitutional rights is for a purpose that is
reasonable and necessary in a democratic society and such an exercise involves
the weighing up of competitive values, and ultimately an assessment based on
proportionality i.e. balancing of different interests.

65\. We may unhesitatingly remark that this doctrine of proportionality,
explained hereinabove in brief, is enshrined in Article 19 itself when we read
clause (1) along with clause (6) thereof. While defining as to what
constitutes a reasonable restriction, this Court in a plethora of judgments
has held that the expression “reasonable restriction” seeks to strike a
balance between the freedom guaranteed by any of the sub-clauses of clause (1)
of Article 19 and the social control permitted by any of the clauses (2) to
(6). It is held that the expression “reasonable” connotes that the limitation
imposed on a person in the enjoyment of the right should not be arbitrary or
of an excessive nature beyond what is required in the interests of public.
Further, in order to be reasonable, the restriction must have a reasonable
relation to the object which the legislation seeks to achieve, and must not go
in excess of that object (see P.P. Enterprises v. Union of India). At the same
time, reasonableness of a restriction has to be determined in an objective
manner and from the standpoint of the interests Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494
of 2012 & connected matters Page 207 of 567 of the general public and not from
the point of view of the persons upon whom the restrictions are imposed or
upon abstract considerations (see Mohd. Hanif Quareshi v. State of Bihar). In
M.R.F. Ltd. v. State of Kerala, this Court held that in examining the
reasonableness of a statutory provision one has to keep in mind the following
factors: (1) The directive principles of State policy. (2) Restrictions must
not be arbitrary or of an excessive nature so as to go beyond the requirement
of the interest of the general public.

(3) In order to judge the reasonableness of the restrictions, no abstract or
general pattern or a fixed principle can be laid down so as to be of universal
application and the same will vary from case to case as also with regard to
changing conditions, values of human life, social philosophy of the
Constitution, prevailing conditions and the surrounding circumstances.

(4) A just balance has to be struck between the restrictions imposed and the
social control envisaged by Article 19(6). (5) Prevailing social values as
also social needs which are intended to be satisfied by the restrictions. (6)
There must be a direct and proximate nexus or reasonable connection between
the restrictions imposed and the object sought to be achieved. If there is a
direct nexus between the restrictions, and the object of the Act, then a
strong presumption in favour of the constitutionality of the Act will
naturally arise.” (emphasis in original)

119) We may note at this stage that there is a growing awareness of the
practical importance of the principle of proportionality for rights
adjudication and it has sparked a wave of academic scholarship as well. The
first integrates the doctrine of proportionality into a broader theoretical
framework. It is Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters
Page 208 of 567 propounded by Robert Alexy, premised on the theory of rights
as principles and optimisation requirements52. For Alexy, all norms are either
rules or principles. Constitutional rights are principles, which means that
they must be realised to the greatest extent factually and legally possible.
For Alexy, the principle of proportionality follows logically from the nature
of constitutional rights as principles. On the other hand, Mattias Kumm
presented his theory of rights adjudication as Socratic contestation, with
proportionality principle at its centre. As per Kumm, proportionality is the
doctrinal tool which allows Judges to assess the reasonableness or
plausibility, of a policy and thus to determine whether it survives Socratic
contestation 53. Recently, Kai Moller has proposed another theory, which is an
autonomy- based theory of what he calls ‘the global model of constitutional
rights’, at the core of which lies the obligation of the State to take the
autonomy interests of every person adequately into account 54. In this
process, his understanding of autonomy leads to one consequence, viz., there
will often be conflicts of autonomy interests, which have to be resolved in
line with each agent’s 52 Robert Alexy, A Theory of Constitutional Rights,
(Oxford, Oxford University Press, 2002) 53 M Kumm, ‘The Idea of Socratic
Contestation and the Right to Justification: The Point and Purpose of Rights-
Based Proportionality Review’ (2010) 4 Law & Ethics of Human Rights 141; M
Kumm, ‘Institutionalising Socratic Contestation: The Rationalist Human Rights
Paradigm, Legitimate Authority and the point of Judicial Review’ (2007) 1
European Journal of Legal Studies.

54 K Moller, The Global Model of Constitutional Rights (Oxford, Oxford
University Press, 2012). Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected
matters Page 209 of 567 status as an equal. Here, the proportionality
principle becomes the doctrinal tool which guides Judges through the process
of resolving those conflicts.

One thing is clear from the above, i.e. jurisprudential explanations of
proportionality principle. There may be some differences about the approach on
the application of proportionality doctrine, it is certain that
proportionality has become the lingua franca of judicial systems across
borders, concerning the circumstances under which it is appropriate to limit
fundamental rights.

120) The proportionality test which is stated in the aforesaid judgment,
accepting Justice Barak’s conceptualisation, essentially takes the version
which is used by the German Federal Constitutional Court and is also accepted
by most theorists of proportionality. According to this test, a measure
restricting a right must, first, serve a legitimate goal (legitimate goal
stage); it must, secondly, be a suitable means of furthering this goal
(suitability or rational connection stage); thirdly, there must not be any
less restrictive but equally effective alternative (necessity stage); and
fourthly, the measure must not have a disproportionate impact on the right-
holder (balancing stage).

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 210 of 567

121) Many issues arise while undertaking the exercise of proportionality
inquiry. At legitimate goal stage, question arises as to what does it mean to
speak of the goal of a policy, and what does it mean to require a goal to be
legitimate? 55 With regard to the suitability and necessity stages, some of
the open issues are how to deal with empirical uncertainty: should this lead
to wide- ranging deference to the elected branches? 56 At the balancing stage,
we have to ask the question of what it means to say that a right is ‘balanced’
against a competing right or public interest. One remarkable feature of the
German test is that it tends to push most of the important issues into the
last stage, viz., the balancing stage. At the legitimate goal stage, any goal
that is legitimate will be accepted. At the suitability stage, even a marginal
contribution to the achievement of the goal will suffice. At the necessity
stage, it is very rare for a policy to fail because less restrictive
alternatives normally come with some disadvantage and cannot, therefore, be
considered equally effective. Thus, the balancing stage dominates the legal
analysis and is usually determinative of the outcome. 55 On this issue there
is a detailed discussion in M Kumm, ‘Political Liberalism and the Structure of
Rights: On the Place and Limits of the Proportionality Requirement’ in
Pavlakos (ed), Law, Rights and Discourse: The Legal Philosophy of Robert Alexy
(Oxford, Hart Publishing, 2007) 131; Moller, the Global Model of
Constitutional Rights (Oxford, Oxford University Press, 2012) ch

7\. 56 As a proposal of how to deal with uncertainty, see Alexy’s ‘Second Law
of Balancing’, which he proposes in the Postscript to A Theory of
Constitutional Rights (Oxford, Oxford University Press, 2002).

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 211 of 567

122) In contrast, Canadian Supreme Court has chartered different course while
using proportionality test. R. v. Oakes57 (popularly known as Oakes test), has
held that the objective must be ‘of sufficient importance to warrant
overriding a constitutionally protected right or freedom’; there must be a
rational connection between measure and objective; the means must ‘impair “as
little as possible” the right or freedom in question’; and finally, ‘there
must be a proportionality between the effects of the measures which are
responsible for limiting the Charter right or freedom, and the objective which
has been identified as of “sufficient importance”’. Under this test, arguably
more issues are addressed at the earlier stages. Instead of accepting any
legitimate goal, Oakes requires a goal ‘of sufficient importance to warrant
overriding a constitutionally protected right or freedom’. And the minimal
impairment test is different from the German necessity test both in the way in
which it is formulated (there is no requirement that the less restrictive
measure be equally effective) and in the way it is applied in practice: the
Canadian Supreme Court tends to resolve cases at that stage and not, as the
German Federal Constitutional Court, at the balancing stage.

123) There is a great debate as to which out of the aforesaid two 57 (1986) 1
SCR 103 Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 212 of
567 approaches is a better approach. Some jurists are of the view that the
proper application of the German test leads to a practice of constitutional
review with two connected problems: first, as pointed about above, usually
almost all the moral work is done at the balancing stage, arguably rendering
the earlier stages largely useless and throwing doubt on the truth of the
popular argument that proportionality is a valuable doctrine partly because it
structures the analysis of rights issues in a meaningful way. Secondly, the
balancing act at the final stage is often carried out in an impressionistic
fashion which seems to be largely unguided by principle and thus opens the
door for subjective, arbitrary and unpredictable judgments encroaching on what
ought to be the proper domain of the democratic legislature. These concerns
can, however, be addressed. According to Bilchitz 58, first concern can be
addressed by focusing on the necessity stage of the test. He takes issue with
both the German test – according to which almost all policies are necessary
because any alternative policy will usually have some disadvantage which means
that it cannot be considered equally effective – and the Canadian minimal
impairment test – which, taken seriously, narrows down the range of
constitutionally acceptable policies far too much: ‘minimal 58 ‘Necessity and
Proportionality: Towards A Balanced Approach?’, Hart Publishing, Oxford and
Portland, Oregon, 2016.

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 213 of 567

impairment’ can be read as insisting that only one measure could pass
constitutional scrutiny, namely the measure which impairs the right least.59
So the alternatives seem to be either to construct the necessity (minimal
impairment) test as filtering out almost nothing or to allow only one policy,
thus rendering the elected branches partly superfluous. In order to preserve a
meaningful but not unduly strict role for the necessity stage, Bilchitz
proposes the following inquiry. First, a range of possible alternatives to the
measure employed by the Government must be identified. Secondly, the
effectiveness of these measures must be determined individually; the test here
is not whether each respective measure realises the governmental objective to
the same extent, but rather whether it realises it in a ‘real and substantial
manner’. Thirdly, the impact of the respective measures on the right at stake
must be determined. Finally, an overall judgment must be made as to whether in
light of the findings of the previous steps, there exists an alternative which
is preferable; and this judgment will go beyond the strict means- ends
assessment favoured by Grimm and the German version of the proportionality
test; it will also require a form of balancing to 59 On the various problems
which the Canadian Supreme Court created for itself because of its early
unfortunate statements on proportionality see S Choudhry, ‘So What Is the Real
Legacy of Oakes? Two Decades of Proportionality Analysis under the Canadian
Charter’s Section 1’ (2006) 34 Supreme Court Law Review 501.

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 214 of 567

be carried out at the necessity stage.

124) Insofar as second problem in German test is concerned, it can be taken
care of by avoiding ‘ad-hoc balancing’ and instead proceeding on some ‘bright-
line rules’ i.e. by doing the act of balancing on the basis of some
established rule or by creating a sound rule. We may point out that whereas
Chandrachud, J. has formulated the test of ‘legitimate state interest’, other
two of the Judges, namely, Chelameswar and Sapre, JJ. have used the test of
‘compelling state interest’ and not ‘legitimate state interest’. On the other
hand, S.K. Kaul, J. has held that the test to be applied is whether the law
satisfies ‘public interest’. Nariman, J., on the other hand, pointed out that
the Right to Information Act, 2005 has provided for personal information being
disclosed to third parties subject to ‘larger public interest’ being
satisfied. If this test is applied, the result is that one would be entitled
to invoke ‘large public interest’ in lieu of ‘legitimate state aim’ or
‘legitimate state interest’, as a permissible restriction on a claim to
privacy of an individual – a more lenient test. However, since judgment of
Chandrachud, J. is on behalf of himself and three other Judges and S.K. Kaul,
J. has also virtually adopted the same test, we can safely adopt the test of
‘legitimate state interest’ as the majority opinion, instead of applying the
test of Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 215 of
567 ‘compelling state interest’.

125) In Modern Dental College & Research Centre, four sub components or
proportionality which need to be satisfied were taken note of. These are:

(a) A measure restricting a right must have a legitimate goal (legitimate goal
stage).

(b) It must be a suitable means of furthering this goal (suitability or
rationale connection stage).

(c) There must not be any less restrictive but equally effective alternative
(necessity stage).

(d) The measure must not have a disproportionate impact on the right holder
(balancing stage).

126) This has been approved in K.S. Puttaswamy as well. Therefore, the
aforesaid stages of proportionality can be looked into and discussed. Of
course, while undertaking this exercise it has also to be seen that the
legitimate goal must be of sufficient importance to warrant overriding a
constitutionally protected right or freedom and also that such a right impairs
freedom as little as possible. This Court, in its earlier judgments, applied
German approach while applying proportionality test to the case at hand. We
would like to proceed on that very basis which, however, is Writ Petition
(Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 216 of 567 tempered with more
nuanced approach as suggested by Bilchitz.

This, in fact, is the amalgam of German and Canadian approach. We feel that
the stages, as mentioned in Modern Dental College & Research Centre and
recapitulated above, would be the safe method in undertaking this exercise,
with focus on the parameters as suggested by Bilchitz, as this projects an
ideal approach that need to be adopted.

Issues:

127) After setting the tone of the case, it is now time to specify the precise
issues which are involved that need to be decided in these matters:

(1) Whether the Aadhaar Project creates or has tendency to create surveillance
state and is, thus, unconstitutional on this ground?

(a) What is the magnitude of protection that needs to be accorded to
collection, storage and usage of biometric data?

(b) Whether the Aadhaar Act and Rules provide such protection, including in
respect of data minimisation, purpose limitation, time period for data
retention and data protection and security?

(2) Whether the Aadhaar Act violates right to privacy and is unconstitutional
on this ground?

{This issue is considered in the context of Sections 7 and 8 of the Aadhaar
Act. Incidental issue of ‘Exclusion’ is also considered here} (3) Whether
children can be brought within the sweep of Sections 7 and 8 of the Aadhaar
Act?

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 217 of 567

(4) Whether the following provisions of the Aadhaar Act and Regulations suffer
from the vice of unconstitutionality:

(i) Sections 2(c) and 2(d) read with Section 32

(ii) Section 2(h) read with Section 10 of CIDR

(iii) Section 2(l) read with Regulation 23

(iv) Section 2(v)

(v) Section 3

(vi) Section 5

(vii) Section 6

(viii) Section 8

(ix) Section 9

(x) Sections 11 to 23

(xi) Sections 23 and 54

(xii) Section 23(2)(g) read with Chapter VI & VII – Regulations 27 to 32

(xiii) Section 29

(xiv) Section 33

(xv) Section 47 (xvi) Section 48 (xvii) Section 57 (xviii) Section 59 (5)
Whether the Aadhaar Act defies the concept of Limited Government, Good
Governance and Constitutional Trust? (6) Whether the Aadhaar Act could be
passed as ‘Money Bill’ within the meaning of Article 110 of the Constitution?
(7) Whether Section 139AA of the Income Tax Act, 1961 is violative of right to
privacy and is, therefore, unconstitutional?

(8) Whether Rule 9(a)(17) of the Prevention of Money Laundering (Maintenance
of Records) Rules, 2005 and the notifications issued thereunder, which mandate
linking of Aadhaar with bank accounts, are unconstitutional? (9) Whether
Circular dated March 23, 2017 issued by the Department of Telecommunications
mandating linking of mobile number with Aadhaar is illegal and
unconstitutional? Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters
Page 218 of 567 (10) Whether certain actions of the respondents are in
contravention of the interim orders passed by the Court, if so, the effect
thereof?

128) We now proceed to discuss the arguments on these grounds, as advanced by
the petitioners, reply thereto and our conclusions thereupon.

Surveillance:

> Whether the Aadhaar Project creates or has tendency to create surveillance
> state and is, thus, unconstitutional on this ground?

> Education took us from thumb impression to signature Technology has taken us
> from signature to thumb impression, again

> 129) It may be remarked at the outset that the argument of surveillance
> draws sustenance, to a larger extent, from privacy rights as well.
> Therefore, the arguments which were addressed under this caption have traces
> of privacy also. However, these are discussed in the context of surveillance
> state argument.

130) It was submitted that Aadhaar project creates the architecture of a
‘cradle to grave’ surveillance state and society. This means that it enables
the State to profile citizens, track their movements, assess their habits and
silently influence their behaviour throughout their lives. Over time, the
profiling enables the State to stifle dissent and influence political decision
making. The Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 219
of 567 architecture of the project comprises a Central Identities Data
Repository which stores and maintains authentication transaction data. The
authentication record comprises the time of authentication and the identity of
the requesting entity. The UIDAI and the Authentication Service Agency (ASA)
is permitted to store this authentication record for 2 + 5 years (as per
Regulations 20 and 26/27 of the Authentication Regulations). Based on this
architecture it is possible for the State to track down the location of the
person seeking authentication. Since the requesting entity is also identified,
the activity that the citizen is engaging in is also known. (Sections 2(d),
2(h), 8, 10, 32 of the Act read with Regulations 18, 20, 26 of the Aadhaar
(Authentication) Regulation, 2016).

131) According to the petitioners, the Authority has the following information
(according to the document on technical specification of Aadhaar registered
devices published by the Authority in February 2017) – Aadhaar number, name of
Aadhaar holder, whether authentication failed or was successful, reason for
such failure, requesting entities’ Internet Protocol (IP) address, date and
time of authentication, device ID and its unique ID of authentication device
which can be used to locate the individual. Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of
2012 & connected matters Page 220 of 567

132) Authentication of Aadhaar number enables tracking, tagging and profiling
of individuals as the IP Address of the authentication device gives an idea of
its geographical location (determinable within the range of 2 kilometres),
country, city, region, pin code/zip code). Mr. Divan submits that an
individual is on an electronic leash, tethered to a central data repository
that has the architecture to track all activities of an individual. The
Aadhaar Act creates a database of all Indian residents and citizens with their
core biometric information, demographic information and meta data. In light of
the enormous potential of information, concentration of information in a
single entity, i.e., the Authority, enabling easier access to aggregated
information puts the State in a position to wield enormous power. Given that
with advancements in technology, such information can affect every aspect of
an individual’s personal, professional, religious and social life, such power
is a threat to individual freedoms guaranteed under Articles 19(1)(a) to
19(1)(g) of the Constitution and other fundamental rights guaranteed under
Article 21 (Right to informational privacy) and Article 25 of the
Constitution. It was submitted that the Aadhaar Act treats the entire populace
of the country as potential criminals ignoring the necessity to balance the
State’s mandate of protection against crime with the right to Writ Petition
(Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 221 of 567 personal bodily
integrity which is envisaged under Article 21 read with Article 20(3) of the
Constitution. It does not require the collection of data to have a nexus with
a crime. Mr. Sibal submits that in the decision in Selvi & Ors. v. State of
Karnataka60, this Court has held:

> “The theory of interrelationship of rights mandates that the right against
> self-incrimination should also be read as a component of “personal liberty”
> under Article 21. Hence, our understanding of the “right to privacy” should
> account for its intersection with Article 20(3)”

> 133) It is argued that the Aadhaar Act, therefore, violates the right to
> protection from self-incrimination, and the right to privacy and personal
> dignity/bodily integrity under Article 20(3) and Article 21.

134) It was argued that the Constitution of India repudiates mass surveillance
as enabled by Aadhaar and the project ought to be struck down on this ground
alone. There is no question of balancing or justification in case of a
surveillance architecture.

135) Passages from various judgments were quoted in an attempt to establish
that surveillance causes interference with right to privacy, life and liberty.
From Kharak Singh v. State of U.P. 61, dissenting opinion of Subba Rao, J.
(which has been upheld in K.S. Puttaswamy) was relied upon. With respect to
how 60 (2010) 7 SCC 263 61 (1964) 1 SCR 332 Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of
2012 & connected matters Page 222 of 567 surveillance constricts right to life
and liberty, His Lordship held that:

> “Now let us consider the scope of Article 21. The expression "life" used in
> that Article cannot be confined only to the taking away of life, i.e.,
> causing death. In Munn v. Illinois (1), Field, J., defined "life" in the
> following words:

> “Something more than mere animal existence. The inhibition against its
> deprivation extends to all those limbs and faculties by which life is
> enjoyed. The provision equally prohibits the mutilation of the body by the
> amputation of an arm or leg, or the putting out of an eye, or the
> destruction of any other organ of the body through which the soul
> communicates with the outer world. The expression "'liberty" is given a very
> wide meaning in America. It takes in all the freedoms. In Bolling v. Sharpe
> (2), the Supreme Court of America observed that the said expression was not
> confined to mere freedom from bodily restraint and that liberty under law
> extended to the full range of conduct which the individual was free to
> pursue. But this absolute right to liberty was regulated to protect other
> social interests by the State exercising its powers such as police power,
> the power of eminent domain, the power of taxation etc. The proper exercise
> of the power which is called the due process of law is controlled by the
> Supreme Court of America. In India the word "liberty" has been qualified by
> the word "Personal", indicating thereby that it is confined only to the
> liberty of the person. The other aspects of the liberty have been provided
> for in other Articles of the Constitution xx xx xx It is true our
> Constitution does not expressly declare a right to privacy as a fundamental
> right, but the said right is an essential ingredient of personal liberty.

Every democratic country sanctifies domestic life; it is expected to give him
rest, physical happiness, peace of mind and security. In the last resort, a
person's house, where he lives with his family, is his “castle”; it is his
rampart against encroachment on his personal liberty. The pregnant words of
that famous Judge, Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters
Page 223 of 567 Frankfurter J., in Wolf v. Colorado [[1949] 238 US 25]
pointing out the importance of the security of one's privacy against arbitrary
intrusion by the police, could have no less application to an Indian home as
to an American one. If physical restraints on a person's movements affect his
personal liberty, physical encroachments on his private life would affect it
in a larger degree. Indeed, nothing is more deleterious to a man's physical
happiness and health than a calculated interference with his privacy. We
would, therefore, define the right of personal liberty in Article 21 as a
right of an individual to be free from restrictions or encroachments on his
person, whether those restrictions or encroachments are directly imposed or
indirectly brought about by calculated measures.

xx xx xx The freedom of movement in clause (d) of Article 19 therefore must be
a movement in a free country i.e. in a country where he can do whatever he
likes, speak to whomsoever he wants, meet people of his own choice without any
apprehension, subject of course to the law of social control. The petitioner
under the shadow of surveillance is certainly deprived of this freedom. He can
move physically, but he cannot do so freely, for all his activities are
watched and noted. The shroud of surveillance cast upon him perforce engender
inhibitions in him and he cannot act freely as he would like to do. ”

136) In the case of District Registrar and Collector, Hyderabad and Anr. v.
Canara Bank and Ors.62, this Court struck down provisions of a legislation on
grounds that it was too intrusive of citizens’ right to privacy. The case
involved an evaluation of the Andhra Pradesh Stamp Act which authorized the
collector to delegate “any person” to enter any premises in order to search
for and 62 (2005) 1 SCC 496 Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected
matters Page 224 of 567 impound any document that was found to be improperly
stamped.

After an exhaustive analysis of privacy laws across the world, and in India,
the Court held that in the absence of any safeguards as to probable or
reasonable cause or reasonable basis, this provision was violative of the
constitutionally guaranteed right to privacy “both of the house and of the
person”. The Court held:

> “The A.P. amendment permits inspection being carried out by the Collector by
> having access to the documents which are in private custody i.e. custody
> other than that of a public officer. It is clear that this provision
> empowers invasion of the home of the person in whose possession the
> documents 'tending' to or leading to the various facts stated in sec. 73 are
> in existence and sec. 73 being one without any safeguards as to probable or
> reasonable cause or reasonable basis or materials violates the right to
> privacy both of the house and of the person. We have already referred to R.
> Rajagopal's case wherein the learned judges have held that the right to
> personal liberty also means the life free from encroachments unsustainable
> in law and such right flowing from Article 21 of the Constitution.”

> 137) Reference was made to the U.S Supreme Court case of U.S. v.

Jones63 where the court held that installing a Global Positioning System (GPS)
tracking device on a vehicle and using the device to monitor the vehicle's
movements constitutes an unlawful search under the Fourth Amendment.
Sotomayor, J. in her concurring judgment observed that Fourth Amendment search
and seizure is not only concerned with physical trespassory intrusions on
property but also non-physical violation of privacy 63 132 S.Ct. 945 (2012)
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 225 of 567 that
society recognizes as reasonable. She notes that GPS data can reveal an entire
profile of a person simply by knowing the places she visits and that the
Government can mine this data in the future:

> “With increasing regularity, the Government will be capable of duplicating
> the monitoring undertaken in this case by enlisting factory or owner-
> installed vehicle tracking devises or GPS enabled smart-phones … In cases of
> electronic or other novel modes of surveillance that do not depend upon a
> physical invasion on property, the trespassory test may provide little
> guidance.

> xx xx xx GPS monitoring generates a precise, comprehensive record of a
> person’s public movements that reflects a wealth of detail about her
> familial, political, professional, religious, and sexual associations …
> disclosed GPS data will be trips to the psychiatrist, plastic surgeon,
> abortion clinic, AIDS treatment centre, strip club, criminal defence
> attorney … Government can store such records and efficiently mine them for
> information years into the future… awareness that the government may be
> watching chills associational and expressive freedom … it may alter the
> relationship between citizen and government in a way that is inimical to
> democratic society.

> xx xx xx I would not assume that all information voluntarily disclosed to
> some member of the public for a limited purpose is, for that reason alone,
> disentitled to Fourth Amendment protection … (“Privacy is not a discrete
> commodity, possessed absolutely or not at all. Those who disclose certain
> facts to a bank or phone company for a limited business purpose need not
> assume that this information will be released to other persons for other
> purposes”) ...

(“[W]hat [a person] seeks to preserve as private, even in an area accessible
to the public, may be constitutionally protected”).” Writ Petition (Civil) No.
494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 226 of 567

138) The judgment of the ECtHR in Zakharov v. Russia64 was also referred to
where the ECtHR examined an application claiming violation of Article 8 of the
Convention (right to respect for private and family life) alleging that the
mobile operators had permitted unrestricted interception of all telephone
communications by the security services without prior judicial authorisation,
under the prevailing national law. The Court observed that:

> “Mr Zakharov was entitled to claim to be a victim of a violation of the
> European Convention, even though he was unable to allege that he had been
> the subject of a concrete measure of surveillance. Given the secret nature
> of the surveillance measures provided for by the legislation, their broad
> scope (affecting all users of mobile telephone communications) and the lack
> of effective means to challenge them at national level… Russian law did not
> meet the “quality of law” requirement and was incapable of keeping the
> interception of communications to what was “necessary in a democratic
> society”. There had accordingly been a violation of Article 8 of the
> Convention… existence of arbitrary and abusive surveillance practices, which
> appear to be due to inadequate safeguards provided by law”.

139) The Court held that any interference with the right to privacy under
Article 8 can only be justified under Article 8(2) if it is in accordance with
law, pursues one or more legitimate aims and is necessary in a democratic
society to achieve such aim. “In accordance with the law” requires the
impugned measure both to have some basis in domestic law and to be compatible
with the 64 (2015) Application No. 47143/2006 Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of
2012 & connected matters Page 227 of 567 rule of law, which is expressly
mentioned in the Preamble to the Convention and inherent in the object and
purpose of Article 8. The law must, thus, meet quality requirements: it must
be accessible to the person concerned and foreseeable as to its effects. With
respect to foreseeability of surveillance, the court held:

> “Foreseeability in the special context of secret measures of surveillance,
> such as the interception of communications, cannot mean that an individual
> should be able to foresee when the authorities are likely to intercept his
> communications so that he can adapt his conduct accordingly. However,
> especially where a power vested in the executive is exercised in secret, the
> risks of arbitrariness are evident. It is therefore essential to have clear,
> detailed rules on interception of telephone conversations, especially as the
> technology available for use is continually becoming more sophisticated. The
> domestic law must be sufficiently clear to give citizens an adequate
> indication as to the circumstances in which and the conditions on which
> public authorities are empowered to resort to any such measures.

> xx xx xx Since the implementation in practice of measures of secret
> surveillance of communications is not open to scrutiny by the individuals
> concerned or the public at large, it would be contrary to the rule of law
> for the discretion granted to the executive or to a judge to be expressed in
> terms of an unfettered power. Consequently, the law must indicate the scope
> of any such discretion conferred on the competent authorities and the manner
> of its exercise with sufficient clarity to give the individual adequate
> protection against arbitrary interference.”

> 140) The Court observed that the following minimum safeguards that should be
> set out in law in order to avoid abuses of power for Writ Petition (Civil)
> No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 228 of 567 surveillance are: the
> nature of offences which may give rise to an interception order; a
> definition of the categories of people liable to have their telephones
> tapped; a limit on the duration of telephone tapping; the procedure to be
> followed for examining, using and storing the data obtained; the precautions
> to be taken when communicating the data to other parties; and the
> circumstances in which recordings may or must be erased or destroyed.

141) For establishing if the measures were “necessary in a democratic society”
in pursuit of a legitimate aim, the Court observed:

> “When balancing the interest of the respondent State in protecting its
> national security through secret surveillance measures against the
> seriousness of the interference with an applicant’s right to respect for his
> or her private life, the national authorities enjoy a certain margin of
> appreciation in choosing the means for achieving the legitimate aim of
> protecting national security. However, this margin is subject to European
> supervision embracing both legislation and decisions applying it. In view of
> the risk that a system of secret surveillance set up to protect national
> security may undermine or even destroy democracy under the cloak of
> defending it, the Court must be satisfied that there are adequate and
> effective guarantees against abuse. The assessment depends on all the
> circumstances of the case, such as the nature, scope and duration of the
> possible measures, the grounds required for ordering them, the authorities
> competent to authorise, carry out and supervise them, and the kind of remedy
> provided by the national law.

The Court has to determine whether the procedures for supervising the ordering
and implementation of the restrictive measures are such as to keep the
“interference” to what is “necessary in a democratic society”.”

142) Two other cases of violation of Article of the European Writ Petition
(Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 229 of 567 Convention of
Human Rights were cited, namely Digital Rights Ireland Ltd. v. Minister for
Communication, Marine and Natural Resources65 and S and Marper v. United
Kingdom66. In Digital Ireland, the European Parliament and the Council of the
European Union adopted Directive 2006/24/EC (Directive), which regulated
Internet Service Providers’ storage of telecommunications data. It could be
used to retain data generated or processed in connection with the provision of
publicly available electronic communications services or of public
communications network for the purpose of fighting serious crime in the
European Union (EU). The data included data necessary to trace and identify
the source of communication and its destination, to identify the date, time
duration, type of communication, IP address, telephone number and other
fields. The European Court of Justice (ECJ) evaluated the compatibility of the
Directive with Articles 7 and 8 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the
European Union and declared the Directive to be invalid. According to the ECJ,
the Directive interfered with the right to respect for private life under
Article 7 and with the right to the protection of personal data under Article

8\. It allowed very precise conclusion to be drawn concerning the 65 [2014]
All ER (D) 66 (Apr) 66 (2008) ECHR 1581 Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012
& connected matters Page 230 of 567 private lives of the persons whose data
had been retained, such as habits of everyday life, permanent or temporary
places of residence, daily and other movements, activities carried out, social
relationships and so on. The invasion of right was not proportionate to the
legitimate aim pursued.

143) In S and Marper, the storing of DNA profiles and cellular samples of any
person arrested in the United Kingdom was challenged before the ECtHR. Even if
the individual was never charged, if criminal proceedings were discontinued,
or if the person was later acquitted of any crime, their DNA profile could
nevertheless be kept permanently on record. It held that there had been a
violation of Article 8 of the ECHR. Fingerprints, DNA profiles and cellular
samples, constituted personal data and their retention was capable of
affecting private life of an individual. Retention of such data without
consent, thus, constitutes violation of Article 8 as they relate to identified
and identifiable individuals. The Court held that invasion of privacy was not
“necessary in a democratic society as it did not fulfill any pressing social
need. The blanket and indiscriminate nature of retention of data was excessive
and did not strike a balance between private and public interest.

144) The respondents, on the other hand, rebutted the arguments of Writ
Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 231 of 567 the
petitioners that the architecture of the Aadhaar Act enables State
surveillance. It was submitted that bare minimal information was obtained from
the individual who enrolled for Aadhaar. Insofar as demographic information is
concerned, it included name, date of birth, address, gender, mobile number and
email address. The latter two are optional and meant for transmitting relevant
information to the AMH and for One Time Password (OTP) based authentication.
This information was in respect of an individual and is always in public
domain. Section 2(k) of the Aadhaar Act specifically provides that regulations
cannot include race, religion, caste, tribe, ethnicity, language, records of
entitlement, income or medical history. Therefore, sensitive information
specifically stands excluded. This specific exclusion, in the context, ensures
that the scope of including additional demographic information is very narrow
and limited. It was also argued that even the biometric information was
limited to the fingerprints and iris scan, which is considered to be the core
biometric information. Such information is, again, frequently utilised
globally to ascertain the identity of a person. The argument was, thus, that
the information gathered was non- invasive and non-intrusive identity
information. Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page
232 of 567

145) It was also argued that the very scheme of the Aadhaar and the manner in
which it operates excludes every possibility of data profiling and, therefore,
the question of State surveillance would not arise. The powerpoint
presentation which was given by Dr. Pandey, as has been stated above, was
referred to, on the basis of which it was argued that the Aadhaar design takes
full care of security of persons.

146) It was also argued by the respondents that identity information data
resides in the CIDR which is not in the control of the Government or the
police force. The Authority is a body constituted as a body corporate having
perpetual succession and a common seal. It is regulated by substantive and
procedural checks to protect the identity information and authentication
record. This information cannot be published, displayed or posted publicly. It
does not have the authority to carry out surveillance. The State Governments
and the police forces cannot obtain the information contained in the CIDR or
the authentication records except in two situations contemplated by Section 33
– (i) When the District Judge orders so after giving an opportunity of hearing
to the authority (even in this situation core biometric information will not
be shared; and (ii) in the interest of National Security Writ Petition (Civil)
No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 233 of 567 where a Joint Secretary or
a superior officer of the Government of India specially authorizes in this
behalf, and in this case every direction is reviewed by an oversight committee
chaired by the Cabinet Secretary. Further, this direction is limited for three
months and extendable by a further period of 3 months.

147) It was submitted that surveillance, if at all, can only be carried out by
unauthorised use of CIDR information, despite its statutory prohibition and
punitive injunctions or by other means such as physical surveillance. That is,
however, an illegal surveillance. The architecture of the Act does not allow
surveillance. It was submitted that the petitioners have not made out a case
of surveillance by the Authority but points out a mere possibility of
surveillance.

148) We may reiterate that the argument of surveillance also has the
reflections of privacy and in fact the argument is structured on the basis
that the vital information which would be available with the Government can be
utilised to create the profiling of individuals and retention of such
information in the hands of the respondents is a risky affair which may enable
the State to do the surveillance of any individual it wants.

149) Insofar as the aspect of privacy of individual is concerned, that Writ
Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 234 of 567 would be
dealt with in detail while addressing that issue. To segregate issue of
surveillance from privacy, we are focusing the discussion to the aspect
whether there is sufficient data available with the respondents which may
facilitate the profiling and misuse thereof or whether there are sufficient
safeguards to ward off the same. In the process, we would be discussing the
issues pertaining to data protection as well. At the same time, there would be
some overlapping of discussion inasmuch as it will have to be seen as to the
collection, storage and use of biometric data satisfies the proportionality
principle.

150) It is clear that the argument of the petitioners is that on the basis of
the data available with the Authority, there can be a profiling of an
individual which may make the surveillance state. And such a mass surveillance
is not permitted by the Constitution of India. The entire foofaraw about the
Aadhaar architecture is the so- called enormous information that would be
available to the Government on using Aadhaar card by residents. Two issues
arise from the respective arguments of the parties:

(a) whether the architecture of the Aadhaar project enables the Sate to create
a regime of surveillance?; and

(b) whether there are adequate provisions for data protection? Writ Petition
(Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 235 of 567

151) Insofar as issue (a) above is concerned, after going through the various
aspects of the Aadhaar project, the provisions of the Aadhaar Act and the
manner in which it operates, it is difficult to accept the argument of the
petitioners. The respondents have explained that the enrolment and
authentication processes are strongly regulated so that data is secure. The
enrolment agency, which collects the biometric and demographic of the
individuals during enrolment, is appointed either by UIDAI or by a Registrar
[Section 2(s)]. The Registrars are appointed through MoUs or agreements for
enrolment and are to abide by a code of conduct and processes, policies and
guidelines issued by the Authority. They are responsible for the process of
enrolment. Categories of persons eligible for appointment are limited by the
Regulations. The agency employs a certified supervisor, an operator and a
verifier under Enrolment and Update Regulations. Registrars and the enrolling
agencies are obliged to use the software provided or authorized by UIDAI for
enrolment purpose. The standard software has security features as specified by
the Authority. All equipment used is as per the specification issued by the
Authority. The Registrars are prohibited from using the information collected
for any purpose other than uploading the information to CIDR. Sub-contracting
of enrolment function is not Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected
matters Page 236 of 567 allowed. The Code of Conduct contains specific
directions for following the confidentiality, privacy and security protocols
and submission of periodic reports of enrolment. Not only there are directions
prohibiting manipulation and fraudulent practices but the Act contains penal
provisions for such violations in Chapter VII of the Regulations. The
enrolment agencies are empanelled by the Authority. They are given an
enrolling agency code using which the Registrar can onboard such agency to the
CIDR. The enrolment data is uploaded to the Central Identities Data Repository
(CIDR) certified equipment and software with a digital signature of the
Registrar/enrolling agency. The data is encrypted immediately upon capture.
The decryption key is with the UIDAI solely. Section 2(ze) of the Information
Technology Act, 2000 (hereinafter referred to as the ‘IT Act’) which defines
‘secure systems’ and Section 2(w) of the Act, which defines ‘intermediaries’
apply to the process. Authentication only becomes available through the
Authentication Service Agency (ASA). They are regulated by the Aadhaar
(Authentication) Regulations, 2016. Their role and responsibilities are
provided by Regulation 19 of the Authentication Regulations. They are to use
certified devices. The equipment or software has to be duly registered with or
approved or certified by the Authority/agency. Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494
of 2012 & connected matters Page 237 of 567 The systems and operations are
audited by information system auditor. The requesting entities pass the
encrypted data to the CIDR through the ASA and the response (Yes/No
authentication or e-KYC information) also takes the same route back. The
server of the ASA has to perform basic compliance and completeness checks on
the authentication data packet before forwarding it to the CIDR. The Act
prohibits sharing and disclosure of core biometric data under Section 8 and
29. Other identity information is shared with requesting entity (AUAs and
KUAs) only for the limited purpose of authentication. The data is transferred
from the requesting entity to the ASA to the CIDR in an encrypted manner
through a leased line circuitry using secure Protocols (Regulation 9 of the
Authentication Regulations). The storage of data templates is in safely
located servers with no public internet inlet/outlet, and offline storage of
original encrypted data (PID blocks). There are safety and security provisions
such as audit by Information Systems Auditor. Requesting entities are
appointed through agreement. They can enter into agreement with sub-AUA or
sub-KUA with permission of the UIDAI. Whatever identity information is
obtained by the requesting entity is based on a specific consent of the
Aadhaar number holder. The e-KYC data shared with the requesting entity Writ
Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 238 of 567 can only
be after prior consent of the Aadhaar holder. Such data cannot be shared and
has to be stored in encrypted form. The biometric information used is not
permitted to be stored. Only the logs of authentication transactions are
maintained for a short period. Full identity information is never transmitted
back to the requesting entity. There is a statutory bar from sharing biometric
information (Section 29(1)(a)/Section 29(4)). Data centres of ASA, requesting
entities and CIDR should be within the territory of India. There are various
other provisions for monitoring, auditing, inspection, limits on data sharing,
data protection, punishments etc., grievance redressal mechanism, suspension
and termination of services, etc. so that all actions the entities involved in
the process are regulated. Regulation 3(i) & (j) of Aadhaar (Data Security)
Regulation, 2016 enables partitioning of CIDR network into zones based on risk
and trust and other security measures. CIDR being a computer resource is
notified to be a “Protected System” under Section 70 of the IT Act by the
Central Government on December 11, 2015. Anyone trying to unlawfully gain
access into this system is liable to be punished with 10 years imprisonment
and fine. The storage involves end to end encryption, logical partitioning,
firewalling and anonymisation of decrypted biometric data. Breaches of penalty
are made Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 239 of
567 punitive by Chapter VII of the Act. Biometric information is deemed to be
an “electronic record”, and “Sensitive personal data or information” under the
IT Act. There are further guards under the Aadhaar (Data Security)
Regulations, 2016.

152) That apart, we have recorded in detail the powerpoint presentation that
was given by Dr. Ajay Bhushan Pandey, CEO of the Authority, which brings out
the following salient features:

(a) During the enrolment process, minimal biometric data in the form of iris
and fingerprints is collected. The Authority does not collect purpose,
location or details of transaction. Thus, it is purpose blind. The information
collected, as aforesaid, remains in silos. Merging of silos is prohibited. The
requesting agency is provided answer only in ‘Yes’ or ‘No’ about the
authentication of the person concerned. The authentication process is not
exposed to the Internet world. Security measures, as per the provisions of
Section 29(3) read with Section 38(g) as well as Regulation 17(1)(d) of the
Authentication Regulations are strictly followed and adhered to.

(b) There are sufficient authentication security measures taken as well, as
demonstrated in Slides 14, 28 and 29 of the presentation.

(c) The Authority has sufficient defence mechanism, as Writ Petition (Civil)
No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 240 of 567 explained in Slide 30. It
has even taken appropriate protection measures as demonstrated in Slide 31.

(d) There is an oversight by Technology and Architecture Review Board (TARB)
and Security Review Committee.

(e) During authentication no information about the nature of transaction etc.
is obtained.

(f) The Authority has mandated use of Registered Devices (RD) for all
authentication requests. With these, biometric data is signed within the
device/RD service using the provider key to ensure it is indeed captured live.
The device provider RD service encrypts the PID block before returning to the
host application. This RD service encapsulates the biometric capture, signing
and encryption of biometrics all within it. Therefore, introduction of RD in
Aadhaar authentication system rules out any possibility of use of stored
biometric and replay of biometrics captured from other source. Requesting
entities are not legally allowed to store biometrics captured for Aadhaar
authentication under Regulation 17(1)(a) of the Authentication Regulations.

(g) The Authority gets the AUA code, ASA code, unique device code, registered
device code used for authentication. It does not get any information related
to the IP address or the GPS location from where authentication is performed
as these parameters are Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected
matters Page 241 of 567 not part of authentication (v2.0) and e-KYC (v2.1)
API. The Authority would only know from which device the authentication has
happened, through which AUA/ASA etc. It does not receive any information about
at what location the authentication device is deployed, its IP address and its
operator and the purpose of authentication. Further, the authority or any
entity under its control is statutorily barred from collecting, keeping or
maintaining any information about the purpose of authentication under Section
32(3) of the Aadhaar Act.

153) After going through the Aadhaar structure, as demonstrated by the
respondents in the powerpoint presentation from the provisions of the Aadhaar
Act and the machinery which the Authority has created for data protection, we
are of the view that it is very difficult to create profile of a person simply
on the basis of biometric and demographic information stored in CIDR. Insofar
as authentication is concerned, the respondents rightly pointed out that there
are sufficient safeguard mechanisms. To recapitulate, it was specifically
submitted that there were security technologies in place (slide 28 of Dr.
Pandey’s presentation), 24/7 security monitoring, data leak prevention,
vulnerability management programme and independent audits (slide 29) as Writ
Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 242 of 567 well as
the Authority’s defence mechanism (slide 30). It was further pointed out that
the Authority has taken appropriate pro- active protection measures, which
included disaster recovery plan, data backup and availability and media
response plan (slide

31). The respondents also pointed out that all security principles are
followed inasmuch as: (a) there is PKI-2048 encryption from the time of
capture, meaning thereby, as soon as data is given at the time of enrolment,
there is an end to end encryption thereof and it is transmitted to the
Authority in encrypted form. The said encryption is almost foolproof and it is
virtually impossible to decipher the same; (b) adoption of best-in-class
security standards and practices; and (c) strong audit and traceability as
well as fraud detection. Above all, there is an oversight of Technology and
Architecture Review Board (TARB) and Security Review Committee. This Board and
Committee consist of very high profiled officers. Therefore, the Act has
endeavoured to provide safeguards67.

67 We may also take on record responsible statements of the learned Attorney
General and Mr. Dwivedi who appeared for UIDAI that no State would be
interested in any mass surveillance of 1.2 Billion people of the country or
even the overwhelming majority of officers and employees or professionals. The
very idea of mass surveillance by State which pursues what an ANH does all the
time and based on Aadhaar is an absurdity and an impossibility. According to
them, the petitioners submission is based on too many imaginary possibilities,
viz.:

(i) Aadhaar makes it possible for the State to obtain identity information of
all ANH. It is possible that UIDAI would share identity
information/authentication records in CIDR notwithstanding statutory
prohibition and punitive injunctions in the Act. It is possible that the State
would unleash its investigators to surveil a sizeable section of the ANH, if
not all based on the authentication records. It is submitted that given the
architecture of the Aadhaar Act, there are no such possibilities and in any
event, submission based on imaginary possibility do not provide any basis for
questioning the validity of Aadhaar Act. (ii) None of the writ petitions set
forth specific facts and even allegations that any Aadhaar number holder is
being subjected to Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters
Page 243 of 567

154) Issue (b) relates to data protection. According to the petitioners there
is no data protection and there is a likelihood of misuse of data/personal
information of the individuals.

155) The question to be determined is whether the safeguards provided for the
protection of personal biometric data in the Aadhaar Act and Rules are
sufficient. The crucial tasks that the Court needs to undertake are – (i) to
discuss the significance of data in the world of technology and its impact;
(ii) to determine the magnitude of protection that should be accorded to
collection, storage and use of sensitive biometric data, so that they can
qualify as proportionate; and (iii) to determine whether the Aadhaar Act and
Rules provide such data protection, thereby obviating any possibility of
surveillance.

(i) Significance of Data:

156) Alvin Toffler in his illuminating article titled ‘What will our future be
like?’ has presented mind boggling ideas. Toffler traces the transition – from
agriculture society to industry society to knowledge based society. If we go
back to the beginnings of time, surveillance by UIDAI or the Union/States. The
emphasis during the argument was only on the possibility of surveillance based
on electronic track trails and authentication records. It was asserted that
there are tools in the market for track back. The entire case was speculative
and conjectural. In Clapper, Director of National Intelligence v. Amnesty
International USA, the majority judgment did not approve the submissions in
the context of Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act and one of the reason was
that the allegations were conjectural and speculative. There were no facts
pleaded on the basis of which the asserted threat could be fairly traced to.
However, we have not deliberated on this argument. Writ Petition (Civil) No.
494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 244 of 567 agriculture was the prime
source and the entire mankind was based on agriculture. 350 years later with
the invention of steam engines came the industrialized age and now what we are
living through is the third gigantic wave, which is way more powerful than
industrialized age. An age that is based on knowledge. Toffler emphasises that
in today’s society the only thing that leads to creation of wealth is
knowledge. Unlike the past wherein economics was described as the science of
the allocation of scarce resources, today we are primarily dependent on
knowledge and that is not a scarce resource. Times are changing, we can no
longer trust the straight line projection. His view is that we are going from
a society which is more and more uniform to a highly de-massified society.
Knowledge is power. We are in the era of information. Probably what Toffler is
hinting is that access to this vast reservoir of information is available in
digital world. Information is available online, at the touch of a button. With
this, however, we usher into the regime of data.

157) In a recent speech by Mr. Benjamin Netanyahu, Prime Minister of Israel,
while talking about innovation and entrepreneurship, he brought out an
interesting phenomena in the world of free market principles, i.e. in the era
of globalisation, in the following words: Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of
2012 & connected matters Page 245 of 567 “Look at the ten leading companies in
2006, five energy companies, one IT company Microsoft and a mere ten years
later, in 2016, a blink of an eye, in historical terms, its completely
reversed, five IT companies one energy company left. The true wealth is in
innovation - you know these companies - Apple, Google, Microsoft, Amazon,
Facebook.”

158) He adds by making a significant statement as the reason behind this
change:

> “...there is a reason something is going on, it’s a great change - you want
> to hear a jargan – it’s a one sentence, this is a terrible sentence, but I
> have no other way to say, it’s a confluence of big data, connectivity and
> artificial intelligence. Ok, you get that? You know what that does – it
> revolutionises old industries and it creates entirely new industries, so
> here is an old industry that Israel was always great in – Agriculture. We
> are always good in agriculture but now we have precision agriculture. You
> know what that is? See that drone in the sky is connected to a big database
> and there is sensor at the field and in the field there is drip irrigation
> and drip fertilization and now we can target with this technology the water
> that we give, the fertilizer that we give down to the individual plant that
> needs it. That’s precision agriculture, that’s Israel.

Unbelievable.”

159) This brings us to the world of data – big data. It has its own advantages
of tremendous nature. It is making life of people easier. People can connect
with each other even when they are located at places far away from each other.
Not only they can converse with each other but can even see each other while
talking. There is a wealth of information available on different networks to
which they can easily access and satisfy their quest for knowledge within
seconds by getting an answer. People can Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012
& connected matters Page 246 of 567 move from one place to the other with the
aid of Global Positioning System (GPS). They can hear music and watch movies
on their handy gadgets, including smart cellphones. We are in the age of
digital economy which has enabled multiple avenues for a common man. Internet
access is becoming cheaper by the day, which can be accessed not only through
the medium of desktop computers or laptops and even other handy gadgets like
smart phones. Electronic transactions like online shopping, bill payments,
movie/train/air ticket bookings, funds transfer, e-wallet payments, online
banking and online insurance etc. are happening with extreme ease at the touch
of a finger. Such tasks can be undertaken sitting in drawing rooms. Even while
travelling from one place to the other in their car, they can indulge in all
the aforesaid activities. In that sense, technology has made their life so
easy.

160) However, there is another side to do as well, like any coin which has two
sides. The use of such technologies is at the cost of giving away personal
information, which is in the realm of privacy. In order to connect with such
technologies and avail their benefits, the users are parting with their
biometric information like fingerprints and iris as well as demographic
information like their Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected
matters Page 247 of 567 names, parentage, family members, their age, even
personal information like their sex, blood group or even the ailments they are
suffering from. Not only this, use of aforesaid facilities on net or any
portal like Apple, Google, Facebook etc. involves tracking their movements,
including the nature of activities, like the kind of shopping, the places from
where shopping is done, the actual money spent thereon, the nature of movies
watched etc. All this data is there with the companies in respect of its users
which may even turn into metadata. In fact, cases after cases are reported
where such data of users is parted with various purposes. Interestingly, for
using such facilities, people knowingly and willingly, are ready to part with
their vital personal information. Every transaction on a digital platform is
linked with some form of sensitive personal information. It can be an
individual’s user name, password, account number, PAN number, biometric
details, e-mail ID, debit/credit card number, CVV number and transaction OTP
etc.

161) These have raised concerns about the privacy and protection of data,
which has become a matter of great concern. Problem is not limited to data
localisation but has become extra-territorial. There are issues of cross-
border transfers of personal data, Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 &
connected matters Page 248 of 567 regulation whereof is again a big challenge
with which various opinions are grappling. There are even talks of convergence
of regulatory regime in this behalf so that uniform approach is adopted in
providing a legal ecosystem to regulate cross-border data transfer. Asian
Business Law Institute (ABLI), in collaboration with Singapore Academy of Law
(SAL) has, after undertaking in-depth study, compiled 14 country reports in
their respective jurisdictions on the regulation of cross-border data transfer
and data localisation in Asia.

162) In the aforesaid scenario, interesting issue is posed by the respondents,
viz., when so much personal information about people is already available in
public domain, how can there be an expectancy of data privacy. That aspect is
dealt with while discussing the issue of privacy. Here, we are concerned with
data protection under Aadhaar that is available with the State. As pointed out
above, even in respect of private players, the data protection has become a
matter of serious concern. When it comes to the State or the instrumentality
of the State, the matter has to be taken with all seriousness, on the
touchstone of constitutionalism and the concept of limited Government.

(ii) Law on Data Protection:

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 249 of 567

163) In order to determine this aspect, i.e. the nature and magnitude of data
protection that is required to enable legal collection and use of biometric
data, reliance can be placed on – (a) various existing legislations – both in
India and across the world; and (b) case law including the judgment in K.S.
Puttaswamy.

    
    
    (a)    Legislation in India:
    
    (i)    Information Technology Act, 2000
    

The only existing legislation covering data protection related to biometric
information are Section 43A and Section 72A of the IT Act and the Information
Technology (Reasonable Security Practices and Procedures and Sensitive
Personal Data or Information) Rules, 2011 (hereinafter “Sensitive Personal
Data Rules”). Although the IT Act and Rules do not determine the
constitutionality of use of biometric data and information by the Aadhaar Act
and Rules, they are instructive in determining the safeguards that must be
taken to collect biometric information 68.

164) Following are the provisions which cover biometric information under the
IT Act:

Section 43A of the IT Act attaches liability to a body corporate, which is
possessing, handling and dealing with any 68 A challenge to the Aadhaar
project for violation of IT Act and Rules has been filed in the Delhi High
Court in the matter of Shamnad Basheer v UIDAI and Ors. Therefore, we are not
dealing with this aspect, nor does it arise for consideration in these
proceedings. Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page
250 of 567 ‘sensitive personal information or data’ and is negligent in
implementing and maintaining reasonable security practices resulting in
wrongful loss or wrongful gain to any person. ‘Sensitive personal information
or data’ is defined under Rule 3 of the Sensitive Personal Data Rules to
include information relating to biometric data. Section 43A reads as follows:

> “43A. Compensation for failure to protect data. -Where a body corporate,
> possessing, dealing or handling any sensitive personal data or information
> in a computer resource which it owns, controls or operates, is negligent in
> implementing and maintaining reasonable security practices and procedures
> and thereby causes wrongful loss or wrongful gain to any person, such body
> corporate shall be liable to pay damages by way of compensation to the
> person so affected.

> Explanation. -For the purposes of this section,-

> (i) "body corporate" means any company and includes a firm, sole
> proprietorship or other association of individuals engaged in commercial or
> professional activities;

> (ii) "reasonable security practices and procedures" means security practices
> and procedures designed to protect such information from unauthorised
> access, damage, use, modification, disclosure or impairment, as may be
> specified in an agreement between the parties or as may be specified in any
> law for the time being in force and in the absence of such agreement or any
> law, such reasonable security practices and procedures, as may be prescribed
> by the Central Government in consultation with such professional bodies or
> associations as it may deem fit;

(iii) "sensitive personal data or information" means such personal information
as may be prescribed by the Central Government in consultation with such
professional bodies or associations as it may deem fit.]” Writ Petition
(Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 251 of 567

165) Similarly, Section 72A of the IT Act makes intentional disclosure of
‘personal information’ obtained under a contract, without consent of the
parties concerned and in breach of a lawful contract, punishable with
imprisonment and fine. Rule 2(i) of the Sensitive Personal Data Rules define
"personal information" to mean any information that relates to a natural
person, which, either directly or indirectly, in combination with other
information available or likely to be available with a body corporate, is
capable of identifying such person. Thus, biometrics will form a part of
“personal information”. The Section reads as under-

> “72A. Punishment for disclosure of information in breach of lawful contract
> - Save as otherwise provided in this Act or any other law for the time being
> in force, any person including an intermediary who, while providing services
> under the terms of lawful contract, has secured access to any material
> containing personal information about another person, with the intent to
> cause or knowing that he is likely to cause wrongful loss or wrongful gain
> discloses, without the consent of the person concerned, or in breach of a
> lawful contract, such material to any other person, shall be punished with
> imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine which
> may extend to five lakh rupees, or with both.”

> 166) The Sensitive Personal Data Rules provide for additional requirements
> on commercial and business entities (body corporates as defined under
> Section 43A of the IT Act) relating to the collection and disclosure of
> sensitive personal data (including biometric information). The crucial
> requirements, which are Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected
> matters Page 252 of 567 indicative of the principles for data protection
> that India adheres to, inter alia include:

(i) The body corporate or any person who on behalf of body corporate collects,
receives, possesses, stores, deals or handle information of provider of
information, shall provide a privacy policy for handling of or dealing in
personal information including sensitive personal data or information and
ensure that the same are available for view.

(ii) Body corporate or any person on its behalf shall obtain consent in
writing from the provider of the sensitive personal data or information
regarding purpose of usage before collection of such information.

(iii) Body corporate or any person on its behalf shall not collect sensitive
personal data or information unless — (a) the information is collected for a
lawful purpose connected with a function or activity of the body corporate or
any person on its behalf; and (b) the collection of the sensitive personal
data or information is considered necessary for that purpose

(iv) The person concerned has the knowledge of — (a) the fact that the
information is being collected; (b) the purpose for which the information is
being collected; (c) the intended recipients of the information; and (d) name
and address of the agency Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected
matters Page 253 of 567 collecting and retaining the information.

(v) Body corporate or any person on its behalf holding sensitive personal data
or information shall not retain that information for longer than is required
for the purposes for which the information may lawfully be used or is
otherwise required under any other law for the time being in force.

(vi) Information collected shall be used for the purpose for which it has been
collected.

(vii) Body corporate or any person on its behalf shall, prior to the
collection of information, including sensitive personal data or information,
provide an option to the provider of the information to not to provide the
data or information sought to be collected.

(viii) Body corporate shall address any discrepancies and grievances of their
provider of the information with respect to processing of information in a
time bound manner.

(ix) Disclosure of sensitive personal data or information by body corporate to
any third party shall require prior permission from the provider of such
information, who has provided such information under lawful contract or
otherwise, unless such disclosure has been agreed to in the contract between
the body corporate and provider of information, or where the disclosure is
necessary for compliance of a legal obligation.

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 254 of 567

(x) A body corporate or a person on its behalf shall comply with reasonable
security practices and procedure i.e. implement such security practices and
standards and have a comprehensive documented information security programme
and information security policies that contain managerial, technical,
operational and physical security control measures that are commensurate with
the information assets being protected with the nature of business. In the
event of an information security breach, the body corporate or a person on its
behalf shall be required to demonstrate, as and when called upon to do so by
the agency mandated under the law, that they have implemented security control
measures as per their documented information security programme and
information security policies.

The above substantive and procedural safeguards are required for legal
collection, storage and use of biometric information under the IT Act. They
indicate the rigour with which such processes need to be carried out.

Position in other countries:

(a) EUGDPR (European Union General Data Protection Regulation)69 69 Regulation
(EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 April 2016
on the protection of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal
data and on the free movement of such data, and repealing Directive 95/46/EC
(General Data Protection Regulation) Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 &
connected matters Page 255 of 567 EUGDPR which was enacted by the EU in 2016
came into force on May 25, 2018 replacing the Data Protection Directive of
1995\. It is an exhaustive and comprehensive legal framework that is aimed at
protection of natural persons from the processing of personal data and their
right to informational privacy. It deals with all kinds of processing of
personal data while delineating rights of data subjects and obligations of
data processors in detail. The following fundamental principles of data
collection, processing, storage and use reflect the proportionality principle
underpinning the EUGDPR -

(i) the personal data shall be processed lawfully, fairly, and in a
transparent manner in relation to the data subject (principle of lawfulness,
fairness, and transparency);

(ii) the personal data must be collected for specified, explicit, and
legitimate purposes (principle of purpose limitation);

(iii) processing must also be adequate, relevant, and limited to what is
necessary (principle of data minimization) as well as accurate and, where
necessary, kept up to date (principle of accuracy);

(iv) data is to be kept in a form that permits identification of data subjects
for no longer than is necessary for the purposes for Writ Petition (Civil) No.
494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 256 of 567 which the personal data are
processed (principle of storage limitation);

(v) data processing must be secure (principle of integrity and
confidentiality); and

(vi) data controller is to be held responsible (principle of accountability).

167) The EUGDPR under Article 9 prohibits the collection of biometric data
unless except in few circumstances which include (but are not limited to) -

(a) there is an explicit consent by the party whose data is being collected.
The consent should be freely given, which is clearly distinguishable in an
intelligible and easily accessible form, using clear and plain language. This
consent can be withdrawn at any time without affecting the actions prior to
the withdrawal;

(b) processing is necessary for the purposes of carrying out the obligations
and exercising specific rights of the controller or of the data subject in the
field of employment and social security and social protection law;

(c) processing relates to personal data which is manifestly made public by the
data subject; and

(d) processing is necessary for reasons of substantial public Writ Petition
(Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 257 of 567 interest, and it
shall be proportionate to the aim pursued, respect the essence of the right to
data protection and provide for suitable and specific measures to safeguard
the fundamental rights and the interests of the data subject.

168) The Regulation also institutes rights of the data subject (the person
whose data is collected), subject to exceptions, which include the data
subject’s right of access to information about the purpose of collection of
data, details of data controller and subsequent use and transfer of data, the
data subject’s right to rectification of data, right to erasure or right to be
forgotten, the data subject’s right to restriction of processing, the right to
be informed, the right to data portability and the data subject’s right to
object to illegitimate use of data.

(b) Biometric Privacy Act in the United States of America

169) Some States in the United States of America have laws regulating
collection and use of biometric information. Illinois has passed Biometric
Information Privacy Act (740 ILCS 14/1 or BIPA) in 2008. Texas has also
codified the law for capture of use of biometric identifier (Tex. Bus. & Com.
Code Ann. §503.001) in 2009\. The Governor of the Washington State signed into
law House Bill 1493 (“H.B. 1493”) on May 16, 2017, which sets forth Writ
Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 258 of 567
requirements for businesses who collect and use biometric identifiers for
commercial purposes. BIPA, Illinois, for example makes it unlawful for private
entities to collect, store, or use biometric information, such as retina/iris
scans, voice scans, face scans, or fingerprints, without first obtaining
individual consent for such activities. BIPA also requires that covered
entities take specific precautions to secure the information.

(b) Case Laws:

170) In K.S. Puttaswamy’s judgment, all the Judges highlighted the importance
of informational privacy in the age of easy access, transfer, storage and
mining of data. The means of aggregation and analysis of data of individuals
through various tools are explained. Chandrachud, J. observed that with the
increasing ubiquity of electronic devices, information can be accessed, stored
and disseminated without notice to the individual. Metadata and data mining
make the individual’s personal information subject to private companies and
the state. In this background, His Lordship discusses the necessity of a data
protection regime for safeguarding privacy and protecting the autonomy of the
individual. The following observations in the conclusion of the judgment are
worth quoting: Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page
259 of 567 “328. Informational privacy is a facet of the right to privacy.

The dangers to privacy in an age of information can originate not only from
the state but from non-state actors as well. We commend to the Union
Government the need to examine and put into place a robust regime for data
protection. The creation of such a regime requires a careful and sensitive
balance between individual interests and legitimate concerns of the state. The
legitimate aims of the state would include for instance protecting national
security, preventing and investigating crime, encouraging innovation and the
spread of knowledge, and preventing the dissipation of social welfare
benefits. These are matters of policy to be considered by the Union government
while designing a carefully structured regime for the protection of the data.
Since the Union government has informed the Court that it has constituted a
Committee chaired by Hon’ble Shri Justice B N Srikrishna, former Judge of this
Court, for that purpose, the matter shall be dealt with appropriately by the
Union government having due regard to what has been set out in this judgment.”

171) S.K. Kaul, J. cited the European Union General Data Protection
Regulations70 to highlight the importance of data protection and the
circumstances in which restrictions on the right to privacy may be justifiable
subject to the principle of proportionality. These include balance against
other fundamental rights, legitimate national security interest, public
interest including scientific or historical research purposes or statistical
purposes, criminal offences, tax purposes, etc.

172) There are numerous case laws – both American and European – presented by
the petitioners and the respondents with respect to 70 Regulation (EU)
2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on the
protection of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data
and on the free movement of such data, and repealing Directive 95/46/EC
(General Data Protection Regulation) Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 &
connected matters Page 260 of 567 the collection, storage and use of biometric
data which have been taken note of above. They are illustrative of the method
and safeguards required to satisfy the proportionality principle while dealing
with biometric data. The first set of cases cited by the petitioners are cases
from European Human Rights Courts.

173) The European Human Rights legislations have both explicitly and through
case laws recognized the right to informational privacy and data protection.
The EU Charter of Fundamental Rights states in Article 7 that ‘everyone has
the right to respect for his or her private and family life, home and
communications’ and in Article 8 it grants a fundamental right to protection
of personal data. The first article of the EU Charter affirms the right to
respect and protection of human dignity. The ECHR also recognises the right to
respect for private and family life, home and his correspondence which have
been read to include protection of right to control over personal biometric
information.

174) As pointed out above as well, a prominent case which addresses the
question of storage of biometric data, i.e. whether storage and retention of
DNA samples and fingerprints violates Article 8 of the ECHR, is S and
Marper71. In this case, the storing of DNA 71 S and Marper v. United Kingdom
[2008] ECHR 1581 Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters
Page 261 of 567 profiles and cellular samples of any person arrested in the
United Kingdom was challenged before the ECtHR. Even if the individual was
never charged or if criminal proceedings were discontinued or if the person
was later acquitted of any crime, their DNA profile could nevertheless be kept
permanently on record without their consent.

175) In a unanimous verdict, the seventeen-judge bench held that there had
been a violation of Article 8 of the ECHR. Fingerprints, DNA profiles and
cellular samples, constituted personal data and their retention was capable of
affecting private life of an individual. The retention of such data without
consent, thus, constitutes violation of Article 8 as they relate to identified
and identifiable individuals. It held that:

> “84. …fingerprints objectively contain unique information about the
> individual concerned allowing his or her identification with precision in a
> wide range of circumstances. They are thus capable of affecting his or her
> private life and retention of this information without the consent of the
> individual concerned cannot be regarded as neutral or insignificant.”

> 176) It articulated the proportionality principle in the following words:

> “101. An interference will be considered “necessary in a democratic society”
> for a legitimate aim if it answers a “pressing social need” and, in
> particular, if it is proportionate to the legitimate aim pursued and if the
> reasons adduced by the national authorities to justify it are "relevant and
> sufficient xx xx xx Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected
> matters Page 262 of 567 The protection of personal data is of fundamental
> importance to a person's enjoyment of his or her right to respect for
> private and family life, as guaranteed by Article 8 of the Convention. The
> domestic law must afford appropriate safeguards to prevent any such use of
> personal data as may be inconsistent with the guarantees of this Article.
> The need for such safeguards is all the greater where the protection of
> personal data undergoing automatic processing is concerned, not least when
> such data are used for police purposes. The domestic law should notably
> ensure that such data are relevant and not excessive in relation to the
> purposes for which they are stored; and preserved in a form which permits
> identification of the data subjects for no longer than is required for the
> purpose for which those data are stored … The domestic law must also afford
> adequate guarantees that retained personal data was efficiently protected
> from misuse and abuse.”

> 177) The issue in the case according to the Court was whether the retention
> of the fingerprints and DNA data of the applicants, as persons who had been
> suspected but not convicted of certain criminal offences, was justified
> under Article 8 of the Convention.

> 178) The Court held that such invasion of privacy was not proportionate as
> it was not “necessary in a democratic society” as it did not fulfill any
> pressing social need. The blanket and indiscriminate nature of retention of
> data was excessive and did not strike a balance between private and public
> interest. It held:

> “125. the blanket and indiscriminate nature of the powers of retention of
> the fingerprints, cellular samples and DNA profiles of persons suspected but
> not convicted of offences, as applied in the case of the present applicants,
> fails to strike a fair balance between the competing public and Writ
> Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 263 of 567 private
> interests and that the respondent State has overstepped any acceptable
> margin of appreciation in this regard. Accordingly, the retention at issue
> constitutes a disproportionate interference with the applicants' right to
> respect for private life and cannot be regarded as necessary in a democratic
> society. This conclusion obviates the need for the Court to consider the
> applicants' criticism regarding the adequacy of certain particular
> safeguards, such as too broad an access to the personal data concerned and
> insufficient protection against the misuse or abuse of such data.”

> 179) The two crucial aspects of the case that need to be kept in mind are –
> First, in that case, the fingerprints were collected for criminal purposes
> and without the consent of the individual to whom the fingerprints belonged.
> Second, the fingerprints were to be stored indefinitely without the consent
> of the individual and that the individual did not have an option to seek
> deletion. These aspects were vital for the Court to decide that the
> retention violated the citizen’s right to privacy.

> 180) Similarly, in the Digital Ireland case72, the European Parliament and
> the Council of the European Union adopted Directive 2006/24/EC (Directive),
> which regulated Internet Service Providers’ storage of telecommunications
> data. It could be used to retain data which was generated or processed in
> connection with the provision of publicly available electronic
> communications services or of public communications network, for the purpose
> of 72 Digital Rights Ireland Ltd v Minister for Communication, Marine and
> Natural Resources [2014] All ER (D) 66 (Apr) Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494
> of 2012 & connected matters Page 264 of 567 fighting serious crime in the
> European Union. The data included data necessary to trace and identify the
> source of communication and its destination, to identify the date, time
> duration, type of communication, IP address, telephone number and other
> fields.

The Court of Justice of European Court (CJEU) evaluated the compatibility of
the Directive with Articles 7 and 8 of the Charter and declared the Directive
to be invalid.

181) According to the CJEU, the Directive interfered with the right to respect
for private life under Article 7 and with the right to the protection of
personal data under Article 8 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the
European Union. It allowed very precise conclusion to be drawn concerning the
private lives of the persons whose data had been retained, such as habits of
everyday life, permanent or temporary places of residence, daily and other
movements, activities carried out, social relationships and so on. The
invasion of right was not proportionate to the legitimate aim pursued for the
following reasons:

(i) Absence of limitation of data retention pertaining to a particular time
period and/or a particular geographical zone and/or to a circle of particular
persons likely to be involved.

(ii) Absence of objective criterion, substantive and procedural Writ Petition
(Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 265 of 567 conditions to
determine the limits of access of the competent national authorities to the
data and their subsequent use for the purposes of prevention, detection or
criminal prosecutions. There was no prior review carried out by a court or by
an independent administrative body whose decision sought to limit access to
the data and their use to what is strictly necessary for attaining the
objective pursued.

(iii) Absence of distinction being made between the categories of data
collected based on their possible usefulness.

(iv) Period of retention i.e. 6 months was very long being not based on an
objective criterion.

(v) Absence of rules to protect data retained against the risk of abuse and
against any unlawful access and use of that data.

(vi) Directive does not require the data in question to be retained within the
European Union.

182) In Tele2 Sverige AB vs. Post-och telestyrelsen73, the CJEU was seized
with the issue as to whether in light of Digital Rights Ireland, a national
law which required a provider of electronic communications services to retain
meta-data (name, address, telephone number and IP address) regarding
users/subscribers for the purpose of fighting crime was contrary to Article 7,
8 and 73 Tele2 Sverige AB v. Post-och telestyrelsen and Secretary of State for
the Home Department v. Tom Watson, Peter Brice, Geoffrey Lewis, Joined Cases
C-203/15 and C-698/15, 2016 Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected
matters Page 266 of 567 11 of the EU Charter. The CJEU struck down the
provision allowing collection of such meta data on grounds of lack of purpose
limitation, data differentiation, data protection, prior review by a court or
administrative authority and consent, amongst other grounds. It held:

> “103. While the effectiveness of the fight against serious crime, in
> particular organised crime and terrorism (…) cannot in itself justify that
> national legislation providing for the general and indiscriminate retention
> of all traffic and location data should be considered to be necessary for
> the purposes of that fight.

> xx xx xx

> 105\. Second, national legislation (…) provides for no differentiation,
> limitation or exception according to the objective pursued. It is
> comprehensive in that it affects all persons using electronic communication
> services, even though those persons are not, even indirectly, in a situation
> that is liable to give rise to criminal proceedings. It therefore applies
> even to persons for whom there is no evidence capable of suggesting that
> their conduct might have a link, even an indirect or remote one, with
> serious criminal offences. Further, it does not provide for any exception,
> and consequently it applies even to persons whose communications are
> subject, according to rules of national law, to the obligation of
> professional secrecy.

> xx xx xx if it is to be ensured that data retention is limited to what is
> strictly necessary, it must be observed that, while those conditions may
> vary according to the nature of the measures taken for the purposes of
> prevention, investigation, detection and prosecution of serious crime, the
> retention of data must continue nonetheless to meet objective criteria, that
> establish a connection between the data to be retained and the objective
> pursued. In particular, such conditions must be shown to be such as actually
> to circumscribe, in practice, the extent of that measure and, thus, the
> public affected.” Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters
> Page 267 of 567

> 183) With respect to measures for data security and data protection the
> court held :

> “122. Those provisions require those providers to take appropriate technical
> and organisational measures to ensure the effective protection of retained
> data against risks of misuse and against any unlawful access to that data.
> Given the quantity of retained data, the sensitivity of that data and the
> risk of unlawful access to it, the providers of electronic communications
> services must, in order to ensure the full integrity and confidentiality of
> that data, guarantee a particularly high level of protection and security by
> means of appropriate technical and organisational measures. In particular,
> the national legislation must make provision for the data to be retained
> within the European Union and for the irreversible destruction of the data
> at the end of the data retention period.”

> 184) In BVerfG74, the German Constitutional Court rendered on March 02, 2010
> a decision by which provisions of the data retention legislation adopted
> for, inter alia, the prevention of crime were rendered void because of lack
> of criteria for rendering the data retention proportional.

> 185) In Maximillian Schrems v. Data Protection Commissioner75, the CJEU
> struck down the transatlantic US-EU Safe Harbor agreement that enabled
> companies to transfer data from Europe to the United States on the ground
> that there was not an adequate level of safeguard to protect the data. It
> held that the 74 2.03. 2010, 1 BvR 256 / 08 , 1 BvR 263 / 08 , 1 BvR 586 /
> 08 75 [2016] 2 W.L.R. 873 Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected
> matters Page 268 of 567 U.S. authorities could access the data beyond what
> was strictly necessary and proportionate to the protection of national
> security.

The subject had no administrative or judicial means of accessing, rectifying
or erasing their data.

186) In Szabo and Vissy v. Hungary76, the ECtHR held unanimously that there
had been a violation of Article 8 (right to respect for private and family
life, the home and correspondence) of the European Convention on Human Rights.
The case concerned Hungarian legislation on secret anti-terrorist surveillance
introduced in 2011. The court held that the legislation in question did not
have sufficient safeguards to avoid abuse. Notably, the scope of the measures
could include virtually anyone in Hungary, with new technologies enabling the
Government to intercept masses of data easily concerning even persons outside
the original range of operation. Furthermore, the ordering of such measures
was taking place entirely within the realm of the executive and without an
assessment of whether interception of communications was strictly necessary.
There were no effective remedial measures in place, let alone judicial ones.
The court held:

“77. … Rule of law implies, inter alia, that an interference by the executive
authorities with an individual right should 76 Eur. Ct. H.R. 2016 Writ
Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 269 of 567 be
subject to an effective control which should normally be assured by the
judiciary, at least in the last resort…”

187) Thus, it is evident from various case laws cited above, that data
collection, usage and storage (including biometric data) in Europe requires
adherence to the principles of consent, purpose and storage limitation, data
differentiation, data exception, data minimization, substantive and procedural
fairness and safeguards, transparency, data protection and security. Only by
such strict observance of the above principles can the State successfully
discharge the burden of proportionality while affecting the privacy rights of
its citizens.

188) The jurisprudence with respect to collection, use and retention of
biometric information in the United States differs from the EU. In the US
context, there is no comprehensive data protection regime. This is because of
the federal system of American government, there are multiple levels of law
enforcement―federal, state, and local. Different states have differing
standards for informational privacy. Moreover, the U.S. has a sectoral
approach to privacy, i.e. laws and regulations related to data differ in
different sectors such as health sector or student sector. In most cases,
however, the Fourth Amendment which prohibits “unreasonable searches and
seizures” by the Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters
Page 270 of 567 government has been read by courts to envisage various levels
data protection.

189) At this juncture, we are not entering the debate as to whether the
jurisprudence developed in United States is to be preferred or E.U. approach
would be more suitable. Fact remains that importance to data protection in
processing the data of the citizens is an accepted norm.

190) Observance of this fundamental principle is necessary to prevent a
disproportionate infringement of the Fundamental Right of Privacy of a
citizen. The question which now needs to be addressed is whether the Aadhaar
Act and Rules incorporate these principles of data protection. We have already
taken note of the provisions in the Act, which relate to data protection.
However, a detailed analysis of the provisions of the Act needs to be
undertaken for this purpose having regard to the principles that have emerged
from case law in other jurisdiction and noted in paragraph 187 above.

Data Minimisation:

191) The petitioners have argued that the Act enables data collection
indiscriminately regarding all aspects of a person (biometrics, Writ Petition
(Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 271 of 567 demographic
details, authentication records, meta-data related to transaction) even though
such data has no nexus to the purported object of subsidies, thus violating
the principle of data minimization. The data collected is sufficient to
indicate religion, class, social status, income, education and intimate
personal details. Under Section 32 of the Act, authentication records are
stored in the central database in the manner prescribed under the Regulations.
Regulation 26 of the Authentication Regulations requires UIDAI to store
“authentication transaction data” consisting of: (a) authentication request
data received including PID block; (b) authentication response data sent; (c)
meta data related to the transaction; and (d) any authentication server side
configurations as necessary. The authentication record affords access to
information that can be used and analyzed to systematically track or profile
an individual and her activities.

192) As per the respondents, Aadhaar involves minimal identity information for
effective authentication. Four types of information collected for providing
Aadhaar:

(i) Mandatory demographic information comprising name, date of birth, address
and gender [Section 2(k) read with Regulation 4(1) of the Aadhaar (Enrolment
and Update) Regulations, 2016];

(ii) Optional demographic information [Section 2(k) read with Writ Petition
(Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 272 of 567 Regulation 4(2) of
the Aadhaar (Enrolment and Update) Regulations, 2016];

(iii) Non-core biometric information comprising photograph;

(iv) Core biometric information comprising finger print and iris scan.

193) Demographic information, both mandatory and optional, and photographs
does not raise a reasonable expectation of privacy under Article 21 unless
under special circumstances such as juveniles in conflict of law or a rape
victim’s identity. Today, all global ID cards contain photographs for
identification alongwith address, date of birth, gender etc. The demographic
information is readily provided by individuals globally for disclosing
identity while relating with others and while seeking benefits whether
provided by government or by private entities, be it registration for
citizenship, elections, passports, marriage or enrolment in educational
institutions. Email ids and phone numbers are also available in public domain,
For example in telephone directories. Aadhaar Act only uses demographic
information which are not sensitive and where no reasonable expectation of
privacy exists - name, date of birth, address, gender, mobile number and e
mail address. Section 2(k) specifically provides that Regulations Writ
Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 273 of 567 cannot
include race, religion, caste, tribe, ethnicity, language, records of
entitlement, income or medical history. Thus, sensitive information
specifically stand excluded.

194) We find that Section 32 (3) of the Aadhaar Act specifically prohibits the
authority from collecting, storing or maintaining, either directly or
indirectly any information about the purpose of authentication. The proviso to
Regulation 26 of Authentication Regulations is also to the same effect.

195) Thus, the principle of data minimization is largely followed.

196) With this, we advert to some other provisions, challenge whereof is based
on threat to security of the data. These are Section 2(c), Section 2(g) and
Section 2(h) read with Section 10 of the Aadhaar Act. Section 2(c) pertains to
authentication. It is a process by which Aadhaar number along with demographic
information or biometric information of an individual is submitted to the CIDR
for its verification. On submission thereof, the CIDR verifies the correctness
or lack of it. CIDR is defined in Section 2(h). Section 10 lays down that the
Authority may engage one or more entities to establish or maintain the CIDR
and to perform any other functions as may be specified by regulations. Writ
Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 274 of 567

197) Insofar as authentication process is concerned, that has already been
taken note of above. The manner in which it is explained by the respondent
authority, that may not pose much of a problem. As noted earlier, while
seeking authentication, neither the location of the person whoso identity is
to be verified nor the purpose for which authentication of such identity is
needed, comes to the knowledge of the Authority and, therefore, such data
collected by the Authority. Therefore, the threat to real time surveillance
and profiling may be far-fetched. The respondents have explained that Section
2(d) defines “authentication record” to mean the record of the time of
authentication, identity of the RE and the response provided by the
authority”, Regulation 26 (a) to (d) does not go beyond the scope of Section
2(d). None of the four clauses of Regulation 26 entitle the authority to store
data about the purpose for which authentication is being done. The device can
therefore only tell the authority the identity of the RE, the PID, the time
and nature of response, the code of the device and the authentication server
side configurations. Identity of the RE does not include details of the
organization which is seeking authentication as an RE provides authentication
service to large number of government organizations who have agreements with
it. Such a mechanism preventing the authority from tracking the Writ Petition
(Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 275 of 567 nature of activity
for which the authentication was required. To illustrate nic.in is an RE which
provides authentication service to large number of Government organisations
who have agreements with it. The authentication record would only contain
information about the identity about the RE. It will give information only
about the RE (nic.in) and not about the organisation which is requiring
authentication through the RE. In most cases the authentication is one time.
Mr. Dwivedi has also explained that yet again, there may be organisations,
which have branches in different part of India. Assuming Apollo Hospital
(although in fact it is not an RE) has five branches in India. If Apollo
Hospital seeks authentication as an RE, the authentication record will merely
tell the identity of Apollo Hospital and its device code, but it will not
indicate which branch of Apollo was seeking authentication and from which part
of the country. Further, assuming that the Indira Gandhi International Airport
is an RE and there is requirement of authentication at the point of entry
and/or exit. All that the record will show that the ANH has entered the
airport at a particular time but it will not show by which plane he is flying
and to what destination. At the time of exit, it will only show that the
person has exited the airport at a particular time. It will not show from
which flight he has arrived and from which Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of
2012 & connected matters Page 276 of 567 destination and at what time he has
arrived or with whom he travelled.

198) However, other apprehension of the petitioners is that storing of data
for a period of seven years as per Regulations 20 and 26/27 of the Aadhaar
(Authentication) Regulations, 2016 is too long a period. We may reproduce
Regulations 26 and 27 of the Aadhaar (Authentication) Regulations, 2016
hereunder:

> “26. Storage and Maintenance of Authentication Transaction Data – (1) The
> Authority shall store and maintain authentication transaction data, which
> shall contain the following information:-

> (a) authentication request data received including PID block;

> (b) authentication response data sent;

> (c) meta data related to the transaction;

> (d) any authentication server side configurations as necessary:

> Provided that the Authority shall not, in any case, store the purpose of
> authentication.

> 27\. Duration of storage – (1) Authentication transaction data shall be
> retained by the Authority for a period of 6 months, and thereafter archived
> for a period of five years.

> (2) Upon expiry of the period of five years specified in sub-

regulation (1), the authentication transaction data shall be deleted except
when such authentication transaction data are required to be maintained by a
court or in connection with any pending dispute.”

199) It is also submitted that Section 10 which authorises the Authority to
engage one or more entities, which may be private entities, to Writ Petition
(Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 277 of 567 establish and
maintain CIDR is a serious threat to privacy and it even amounts to compromise
on national sovereignty and security. Insofar as first argument is concerned,
there appears to be some force in that. If authentication is the only purpose,
we fail to understand why this authentication record is needed to be kept for
a period of 2+5 years. No satisfactory explanation in this behalf was given.

200) Insofar as information regarding metadata is concerned, we may note that
the respondents distinguished between three types of meta-data :technical,
business and process metadata. Process metadata describes the results of
various operations such as logs key data, start time, end time, CPU seconds
used, disk reads, disk writes, and rows processed. This data is valuable for
purposes of authenticating transaction, troubleshooting , security, compliance
and monitoring and improving performance. They submit that the metadata
contemplated under this Regulation is Process metadata.

201) However, metadata is not defined in the Aadhaar Act. In common parlance,
it is understood as information about data, example whereof was given by Mr.
Sibal that the text of a message exchanged between two persons would be the
data itself. Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page
278 of 567 However, surrounding circumstances like when the message was sent;
from whom and to whom the message was sent; and location from which the
message was sent would include meta data. As noted above, Mr. Dwivedi had
tried to explain it away by stating that there are three types of meta data,
namely, technical, business and process meta data. According to him, meta data
under the Aadhaar Act refers to only process meta data. In support, he had
referred to Section 2(d) of the Aadhaar Act which defines ‘authentication
record’ to mean the record of the time of authentication, identity of
requesting entity and the response provided by the Authority. He, thus,
submitted that Regulation 26 would not go beyond Section 2(d). However,
aforesaid explanation that meta data refers to process data only does not find
specific mention. There is, thus, need to amend Regulation 26 to restrict it
to process meta data, and to exclude other type of meta data specifically.

Purpose Limitation:

202) As per the petitioners, there is no purpose limitation. Identity
information collected for one purpose under the Act can be used for any other
(new) purpose. Definition of “benefit” (Section 2(f)) and “service” (Section
2(w)) and “subsidy” (Section Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected
matters Page 279 of 567 2(x)), to which the personal data collected is
supposed to be applied is not identifiable. It is open to the executive to
notify that any advantage, gift, reward, relief, payment, provision, facility,
utility or any other assistance aid, support, grant subvention, or
appropriation may be made conditional on Aadhaar Authentication. Moreover,
under Section 57, the State, a body corporate or any person can avail
authentication facility and access information under CIDR. This creates an
open ended and unspecified set of laws and contracts for which Aadhaar can be
used and defeats the principle of informed consent at the time of enrolment
and purpose limitation.

203) Respondents controvert the aforesaid submission by arguing that there is
purpose limitation under the Aadhaar Act as purpose of use of biometric data
in the CIDR is limited to authentication for identification. The Aadhaar
holder is made aware of such use of the Aadhaar card at the time of enrolment.
The enrolling agency is obliged under the Enrolment Regulations to inform the
individual about the manner in which the information shall be used, the nature
of recipients with whom the information is to be shared during authentication;
and the existence of a right to access information, the procedure for making
request for such Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters
Page 280 of 567 access and details of the person/ department to whom request
can be made. This information to individual is the basis for his consent for
enrolment.

204) As per the respondents, Section 57 is not an enabling provision which
allows Aadhaar to be used for purposes other than Section 7, but is a limiting
provision. It limits its use by State, Body Corporate or a person by requiring
it to be sanctioned by any law in force or any contract and making the use
subject to the proviso to Section 57. The proviso requires the use of Aadhaar
under this Section to be subject to procedure and obligations under Section 8
and Chapter VI of penalties. Section 8(2)(a) requires Requesting Entities (RE)
(parties authorized to carry out authentication under Section 57) to obtain
the consent of an individual before collecting her identity information for
the purposes of authentication in such manner as may be specified by
regulations. Section 8(3) enables this consent to be informed consent by
requiring that an individual submitting her identity information for
authentication shall be informed of the nature and the use of the information
that may be shared upon authentication and the alternatives to submission of
identity information to the requesting entity. This aspect is discussed in
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 281 of 567
detail at a later stage, as it touches upon privacy aspects as well.

Suffice it is to mention here that we have found some portion of Section 57 as
offending and declared that unconstitutional.

Insofar as Sections 2(f), (w) and (x) are concerned, these provisions are
discussed at a later stage 77. We would like to mention here that we have read
down these provisions. The aforesaid measure would subserve the purpose
limitation as well. Time Period for Data Retention:

205) We have touched upon this aspect hereinabove. According to petitioners,
the data is allowed to be retained for an unreasonable long period of time.
Regulation 27 of the Authentication Regulations requires the UIDAI to retain
the “authentication transaction data” (which includes the meta data) for a
period of 6 months and to archive the same for a period of 5 years thereafter.
Regulation 18(3) and 20(3) allow Requesting entities (RE) and Authentication
Service Agencies to retain the authentication logs for a period of 2 years and
then archive them for 5 years. It is required to be deleted only after 7 years
unless retained by a court. The right of the citizen to erasure of data or
right to be forgotten is severely affected by such regulation. There is no
provision to delete the biometric information in any 77 See paragraphs 320 to
322 Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 282 of 567
eventuality once a person is enrolled.

We do not find any reason for archiving the authentication transaction data
for a period of five years. Retention of this data for a period of six months
is more than sufficient after which it needs to be deleted except when such
authentication transaction data are required to be maintained by a Court or in
connection with any pending dispute. Regulations 26 and 27 shall, therefore,
be amended accordingly.

Data Protection and Security:

206) Petitioners argued that there are not enough safeguards for data
protection and security in the Act. Section 28 of the Act which addresses
security and confidentiality of information is vague and fails to lay down any
standard of data security or prescribe any cogent measures which are to be
taken to prevent data breaches. Section 54 empowers UIDAI to make regulations
related to various data management processes, security protocol and other
technology safeguards. The Aadhaar (Data Security) Regulations, 2016 passed by
UIDAI under Section 54, vest in the authority a discretion to specify “an
information security policy” (Regulation 3). This leads to excessive
delegation. Alternatively, it has not been subject to parliamentary oversight
which Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 283 of
567 Regulations under Section 54 require. Further, the CIDR central database,
unlike the ASAs and REs (under Authentication Regulation 22(1)), are not
required to be located in data centres. The personal data is accessible by
private entities such as AUAs and KUAs and other private entities such as
banks, insurance companies and telecom service providers. There have been
numerous data breaches in the Aadhaar system. These establish its
vulnerability. There are not enough safeguards from data hack and data leak.
The data is being used by private parties to build comprehensive databases
containing information and profiles of individuals. Thus the project also
lacks transparency of data and its use.

207) The Respondents contend that strong measures for data protection and
security, taken at all stages of data collection, transfer, storage and use.

After deliberating over respective contentions, we are of the opinion that the
following explanation furnished by the respondents on various facets ensures
data protection and security to a considerable extent:

(a) CIDR

208) Regulation 3(i) & (j) of Aadhaar (Data Security) Regulation 2016 Writ
Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 284 of 567 enables
partitioning of CIDR network into zones based on risk and trust and other
security measures. CIDR being a computer resource is notified to be a
“Protected System” under Section 70 of the IT Act, 2000 by the Central
Government on 11.12.2015. Anyone trying to unlawfully gain access into this
system is liable to be punished with 10 years imprisonment and fine. The
storage involves end to end encryption, logical partitioning, firewalling and
anonymisation of decrypted biometric data. Breaches of penalty are made
punitive by Chapter VII of the Act. Biometric information is deemed to be an
“electronic record”, and “Sensitive personal data or information” under the IT
Act, 2000. There are further guards under The Aadhaar ( Data Security
)Regulation, 2016.

(b) Requesting Entities (AUA and KUA)

209) Other identity information is shared with Requesting Entity (AUAs and
KUAs) only for the limited purpose of authentication. The data is transferred
from the RE to the ASA (Authentication Service Agency) to the CIDR in an
encrypted manner through a leased line circuitry using secure Protocols
(Regulation 9 of the Authentication Regulations). The storage of data
templates is in safely located servers with no public internet inlet/outlet,
and offline storage of original encrypted data (PID blocks). There are Writ
Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 285 of 567 safety
and security provisions such as audit by Information Systems Auditor. REs are
appointed through agreement. REs can enter into agreement with sub-AUA or sub-
KUA with permission of the of UIDAI. Whatever identity information is obtained
by the requesting entity is based on a specific consent of the Aadhaar number
holder. The e-KYC data shared with the RE can only be after prior consent of
the Aadhaar holder. Such data cannot be shared and has to be stored in
encrypted form. The biometric information used is not permitted to be stored
only the logs of authentication transactions are maintained for a short
period. Full identity information is never transmitted back to RE. There is a
statutory bar from sharing Biometric information [Section 29(1)(a)/ Section
29(4)]. The Data centres of ASA, REs and CIDR should be within the territory
of India.

(c) Enrolment Agencies and Registrars

210) The enrolment and Authentication processes are strongly regulated so that
data is secure. The Enrolment agency, which collects the biometric and
demographic of the individuals during enrolment, is appointed either by UIDAI
or by a Registrar [Section 2(s)]. The registrar are appointed through MoUs or
agreements for enrolment and are to abide by a code of conduct and Writ
Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 286 of 567
processes, policies and guidelines issued by the authority. They are
responsible for the process of enrolment. Categories of persons eligible for
appointment are limited by the Regulations. The agency employees a certified
supervisor, an operator and a verifier under Enrolment and Update Regulations.
Registrars, enrolling agencies are obliged to use the software provided or
authorized by UIDAI for enrolment purpose. The standard software has security
features as specified by Authority. All equipment used are as per the
specification issued by the authority. The Registrars are prohibited from
using the information collected for any purpose other than uploading the
information to CIDR. Sub-contracting of enrolment function is not allowed. The
Code of Conduct contains specific directions for following the
confidentiality, privacy and security protocols and submission of periodic
reports of enrolment. Not only there are directions prohibiting manipulation
and fraudulent practices but the Act contains penal provisions for such
violations in Chapter VII of the Regulations. The enrolment agencies are
empanelled by the authority. They are given an enrolling agency code using
which the Registrar can onboard such agency to the CIDR. The enrolment data is
uploaded to the Central Identities Data Repository (CIDR) certified equipment
and software with a digital Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected
matters Page 287 of 567 signature of the registrar/enrolling agency. The data
is encrypted immediately upon capture. The decryption key is with the UIDAI
solely. Section 2(ze) of the IT Act, which defines ‘secure systems’ and
Section 2(w) of the Act, which defines ‘intermediaries’ apply to the process.

(d) Authentication Service Agency

211) Authentication only becomes available through the Authentication Service
Agency (ASA). They are regulated by the Aadhaar (Authentication) Regulations,
2016. Their role and responsibilities are provided by Authentication
Regulation 19. They are to use certified devices, equipment, or software are
duly registered with or approved or certified by the Authority/agency. The
systems and operations are audited by information system auditor. The REs pass
the encrypted data to the CIDR through the ASA and the response (Yes/No
authentication or e-KYC information) also takes the same route back. The
server of the ASA has to perform basic compliance and completeness checks on
the authentication data packet before forwarding it to the CIDR.

(e) Hacking

212) As far as hacking is concerned, the respondents submit that the authority
has involved adequate firewalling and other safety Writ Petition (Civil) No.
494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 288 of 567 features. The biometric data
stored in the CIDR is stored offline.

Only templates are online. So far there has been no incidence of hacking.
However, the authority is conscious of the hackers and it constantly updates
itself to safe guard the data.

It may, however, be mentioned that of late certain reports have appeared in
newspapers to the effect that some people could hack the website of CIDR,
though it is emphatically denied by the UIDAI. Since there are only newspapers
reports to this effect which appeared after the conclusion of hearing in these
cases and, therefore, parties could not be heard on this aspect, we leave this
aspect of the matter at that with a hope that CIDR would find out the ways and
means to curb any such tendency.

(f) Biometric Solution Providers

213) With respect to foreign companies owning software, Respondents submit
that UIDAI has entered into licensing agreements with foreign biometric
solution providers (BSP) for software. Even thought the source code of the
software are retained by the BSP as it constitutes their Intellectual
property, the data in the server rooms is secure as the software operates
automatically and the biometric data is stored offline. There is no
opportunity available to BSP to extract data as they have no access to it.
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 289 of 567
Substantive, Procedural or Judicial Safeguards:

214) Another grievance of the petitioners is that the Act lacks any
substantive, procedural or judicial safeguards against misuse of individual
data. Section 23(2)(k) which allows sharing information of Aadhaar holders, in
such manner as may be specified by regulations. This means individual’s
identity information can be shared with the government. This may include
demographic and core biometric information, include aspects such as DNA
profiles, handwriting, voice-print etc., (in the future). Subsequent linkage
with various state and non-state actors that interact with such individual may
enable UIDAI to share greater information. The police can easily gain access
to all biometric information, bank accounts of the individual, all mobile
phones, and meta data associated with any associated linkages, information
relating to all mutual funds, policies etc., information relating to travel by
air or by rail by such person and so on.

215) In other cases of collection of information of this kind under other
laws, there are exhaustive legal procedures. For example, Section 73 of the
Indian Evidence Act, 1872 which allows the taking of handwriting samples only
if necessary “for the purposes of any (specific ) investigation”, or in order
to compare writing or Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected
matters Page 290 of 567 signature that appears in relation to the facts of a
particular case.

Section 53 of the CrPC allows medical examination of a person arrested on a
charge of committing an offence if reasonable grounds exist for believing that
an examination of his person will afford evidence as to the commission of the
offence. Similarly provisions in various other statutes such as of the Foreign
Exchange Regulation Act, 1973 (Sections 34-48); the Prevention of Money-
Laundering Act, 2002 (Sections 17-19); the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic
Substances Act, 1985 (Sections 41-42) and the Customs Act, 1962 (Chapter 13)
which allow for search, seizure or even arrest, and thereby provide access to
personal information also bear a nexus with a particular crime under
investigation.

216) As per the petitioners, the Investigating Agency can presently access
fingerprints, only limited to cases of citizens who were arrested on the
reasonable basis of having committed a crime, or were convicted of a crime, as
per provisions of the Identification of Prisoners Act. In all such
circumstances, not only are there adequate safeguards- such as permission from
the Magistrate that collection is necessary for the purpose of investigation,
but persons accused of an offence presently can claim protection Writ Petition
(Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 291 of 567 under Article
20(3), thereby making it incumbent upon the investigating agency to obtain
such information in accordance with law, as described above. Further, unlike
the Aadhaar Act, present day criminal statutes contain provisions for
destruction of some kinds of core biometric data obtained [Section 7 of the
Identification of Prisoners Act, 1920]. No such safeguards exist under the
Aadhaar Act.

217) It is also argued that Section 33(2), which permits disclosure of
identity information and authentication records under direction of an officer
not below the rank of Jt. Secretary to Central Government in the interest of
national security, has no provision for judicial review. The Oversight
Committee does not have a judicial member.

218) Respondents submitted that Section 29 of the Aadhaar Act provides
protection against disclosure of core biometric information. The biometric
information cannot shared with anyone for any reason whatsoever; or used for
any purpose other than generation of Aadhaar numbers and authentication under
this Act. Section 8 ensure that the during authentication, biometric
information of an individual is only used for submission to the Central
Identities Data Repository.

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 292 of 567

219) We are of the view that most of the apprehensions of the petitioners
stand assuaged with the treatment which is given by us to some of the
provisions. Some of these are already discussed above and some provisions are
debated in the next issue. Summary thereof, however, can be given hereunder:

(a) Authentication records are not to be kept beyond a period of six months,
as stipulated in Regulation 27(1) of the Authentication Regulations. This
provision which permits records to be archived for a period of five years is
held to be bad in law.

(b) Metabase relating to transaction, as provided in Regulation 26 of the
aforesaid Regulations in the present form, is held to be impermissible, which
needs suitable amendment.

(c) Section 33 of the Aadhaar Act is read down by clarifying that an
individual, whose information is sought to be released, shall be afforded an
opportunity of hearing.

(d) Insofar as Section 33(2) of the Act in the present form is concerned, the
same is struck down.

(e) That portion of Section 57 of the Aadhaar Act which enables body corporate
and individual to seek authentication is held to be unconstitutional. Writ
Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 293 of 567

(f) We have also impressed upon the respondents, as the discussion hereinafter
would reveal, to bring out a robust data protection regime in the form of an
enactment on the basis of Justice B.N. Srikrishna (Retd.) Committee Report
with necessary modifications thereto as may be deemed appropriate.

220) With the removal of the aforesaid provisions from the statute and the
Rules, coupled with the statement of the Authority on affidavit that there is
no record of any transactions carried out by the individuals which is even
known (and, therefore, no question of the same being retained by the
Authority), most of the apprehensions of the petitioners are taken care of. At
the same time, we may remind ourselves of the judgment in G. Sundarrajan v.
Union of India & Ors.78. In that case, the Court noted the safety and security
risk in the setting up of the nuclear power plant in the backdrop of Fukushima
disaster and Bhopal Gas tragedy. Yet, keeping in view the importance of
generation of nuclear energy, the Court observed that a balance should be
struck between production of nuclear energy which was of extreme importance
for the economic growth, alleviation of poverty, generation of employment, and
the smaller violation to 78 (2013) 6 SCC 620 Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of
2012 & connected matters Page 294 of 567 right to life under Article 21. It
took note of the opinion of experts committee and observed that ‘adequate
safety measure’ have been taken. It noted huge expenditure of money running
into crores and observed ‘apprehension however legitimate it may be, cannot
override the justification of the project. Nobody on this earth can predict
what would happen in future and to a larger extent we have to leave it to the
destiny. But once the justification test is satisfied, the apprehension test
is bound to fail. Apprehension is something we anticipate with anxiety or
fear, a fearful anticipation, which may vary from person to person’. The Court
also held that ‘nuclear power plant is being established not to negate right
to life but to protect the right to life guaranteed under Article 21 of the
Constitution. No doubt, the Court took a view that this interest of people
needed to be respected for their human dignity which was divinity. However, it
was also stressed that generation of nuclear energy was a nuclear necessity
and the project was for larger public benefit and consequently, individual
interest or smaller public interest must yield. In such a situation, necessity
for ‘adequate care, caution, and monitoring at every stage’ and ‘constant
vigil’ was emphasised. Safety and security was read into Article 21.
Acknowledging that proportionality of risk may not be ‘zero’, regard being had
to the Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 295 of
567 nature’s unpredictability, the Court ruled that all efforts must be made
to avoid disaster by observing the highest degree of constant alertness. In
the directions of the Court, it was observed that ‘maintaining safety is an
ongoing process not only at the design level but also during the operation’.
In the present case as well, we have come to the conclusion that Aadhaar Act
is a beneficial legislation which is aimed at empowering millions of people in
this country. The justification of this project has been taken note of in
detail, which the subsequent discussion shall also demonstrate. In such a
scenario only on apprehension, the project cannot be shelved. At the same
time, data protection and data safety is also to be ensured to avoid even the
remote possibility of data profiling or data leakage.

221) Notwithstanding the statutory provision discussed above, we are of the
view that there is a need for a proper legislative mechanism for data
protection. The Government is not unmindful of this essential requirement.
During the arguments it was stated by Mr. K.K. Venugopal, learned Attorney
General, that an expert committee heading by Justice B.N. Srikrishna (Retd.)
was constituted which was looking into the matter. The said Committee has
since given its report.

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 296 of 567

222) In this behalf, it may be worthwhile to mention that one of the first
comprehensive reports on data protection and informational privacy was
prepared by the Group of Experts 79 constituted by the Planning Commission of
India under the Chairmanship of Retd. Justice A.P. Shah, which submitted a
report on 16 October, 2012\. The five salient features of this report were
expected to serve as a conceptual foundation for legislation protecting
privacy. The framework suggested by the expert group was based on five salient
features: (i) Technological neutrality and interoperability with international
standards; (ii) Multi-Dimensional privacy; (iii) Horizontal applicability to
state and non-state entities;

(iv) Conformity with privacy principles; and (v) A co-regulatory enforcement
regime.

223) The Union Government, on 31 July 2017, had constituted a committee
chaired by Retd.Justice B N Srikrishna, former Judge of the Supreme Court of
India to review data protection norms in the country and to make
recommendations. The Committee recently released its report and the first
draft of the Personal Data Protection Bill, 2018 which comprehensively
addresses the processing of personal data where such data has been collected,
79 “Report of the Group of Experts on Privacy” (16 October, 2012), Government
of India, available at
http://planningcommission.nic.in/reports/genrep/rep_privacy.pdf Writ Petition
(Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 297 of 567 disclosed, shared
or otherwise processed within the territory of India. The bill has
incorporated provisions and principles from the Europe’s General Data
Protection Regulation (EUGDPR).

224) The Draft Bill replaces the traditional concepts of data controller i.e.
the entity which processes data and data subject i.e. the natural person whose
data is being collected, with data ‘fiduciary’ and data ‘principal’. It aims
to create a trust-based relationship between the two.

225) The Bill largely incorporates data protection principles from the EUGDPR
and EU data protection jurisprudence, including fair and reasonable processing
of data, purpose limitation, collection limitation, lawful processing, storage
limitation, data quality and accountability. The Draft bill and the report
cull out rights and obligations of the data fiduciary and data controller
respectively. These rights include the right to access and correction, the
right to data portability and right to be forgotten – a right to prevent or
restrict disclosure of personal data by a fiduciary. Most importantly, consent
has been given a crucial status in the draft data protection law. Thus, a
primary basis for processing of personal data must be individual consent. This
consent is required to be free, informed, specific, clear and, in an important
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 298 of 567
addition, capable of being withdrawn. The Authority under the Bill is
obligated and empowered to ensure protection of data from misuse and
compromise.

226) Processing of biometric data, classified as ‘Sensitive Personal Data’
(SPD), by the data fiduciary mandates additional safeguards (mentioned under
Chapter IV of the Bill). For example, the data fiduciary is required to
undertake Data Protection Impact Assessment under the provisions of the Bill.
The Draft Bill allows processing of biometric data for the exercise of any
function of the State authorised by law for the provision of any service or
benefit to the data principal. Special provisions to protect sensitive and
personal data of children also exist. For example, Data fiduciaries shall be
barred from profiling, tracking, or behavioural monitoring of, or targeted
advertising directed at, children and undertaking any other processing of
personal data that can cause significant harm to the child.

227) For security of data and protection of breach, the Draft Bill has
separate provisions which require use of methods such as de- identification
and encryption and other steps necessary to protect the integrity of personal
data and to prevent misuse, unauthorised access to, modification, disclosure
or destruction of personal Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected
matters Page 299 of 567 data. The data fiduciary is required to immediately
notify the Authority of any personal data breach relating to any personal data
processed by the data fiduciary where such breach is likely to cause harm to
any data principal. It also incorporates a provision for Grievance Redressal.

228) The Draft Bill creates several exceptions and exemptions for processing
data by the State. These are situations where rights and obligations of data
principals and data fiduciaries may not apply in totality. Such situations
include national security, prevention of crime, allocation of resources for
human development, protection of revenue, etc. The committee asserts that such
exceptions have been envisaged in the Puttaswamy judgement as legitimate
interests of the state and satisfy the proportionality test.

229) The Srikrishna Committee Report and the Draft Data Protection Bill are
the first articulation of a data protection law in our country. They have
incorporated many of the progressive data protection principles inspired by
the EUGDPR. There may be indeed be scope for further fine tuning of this law
through a consultative process, however, we are not far away from a
comprehensive data protection regime which entrenches informational and data
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 300 of 567
privacy within our laws and legal system. We hope that there would be a robust
statutory regime in place in near future.

230) The aforesaid discussion leads us to hold that the protection that there
is going to be a surveillance state created by the Aadhaar project is not well
founded, and in any case, taken care of by the diffluence exercise carried out
with the striking down certain offending provisions in their present form.
Privacy:

> Whether Aadhaar Act violates right to privacy and is unconstitutional on
> this ground?

> (This issue is considered in the context of Section 7 and Section 8 of the
> Act.)

> 231) The petitioners submit that right to privacy and dignity and individual
> autonomy have been established by various cases. In Gobind v. State of
> M.P.80, this Court held:

> “the significance of man's spiritual nature, of his feelings and of his
> intellect and that only a part of the pain, pleasure, satisfaction of life
> can be found in material things and therefore they must be deemed to have
> conferred upon the individual as against the Government, a sphere where he
> should be let alone.

> xx xx xx

> 24\. Any right to privacy must encompass and protect the personal intimacies
> of the home, the family, marriage, motherhood, procreation and child
> rearing. This catalogue approach to the question is obviously not as
> instructive as it does not give analytical picture of the distinctive
> characteristics of the right of privacy. Perhaps, the only 80 (1975) 2 SCC
> 148 Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 301 of
> 567 suggestion that can be offered as unifying principle underlying the
> concept has been the assertion that a claimed right must be a fundamental
> right implicit in the concept of ordered liberty.

> 25\. Rights and freedoms of citizens are set forth in the Constitution in
> order to guarantee that the individual, his personality, and those things
> stamped with his personality shall be free from official interference except
> where a reasonable basis for intrusion exists. “Liberty against Government”
> a phrase coined by Professor Corwin expresses this idea forcefully. In this
> sense, many of the fundamental rights of citizens can be described as
> contributing to the right to privacy.

> 26\. As Ely says:

> “There is nothing to prevent one from using the word ‘privacy’ to mean the
> freedom to live one's life without governmental interference. But the Court
> obviously does not so use the term. Nor could it, for such a right is at
> stake in every case.”

> 232) To recapitulate briefly, the judgment of K.S. Puttaswamy has affirmed
> the following –

> (i) privacy has always been a natural right, and the correct position has
> been established by a number of judgments starting from Gobind. Privacy is a
> concomitant of the right of the individual to exercise control over his or
> her personality. Equally, privacy is the necessary condition precedent to
> the enjoyment of any of the guarantees in Part III. The fundamental right to
> privacy would cover at least three aspects—(i) intrusion with an
> individual’s physical body, (ii) informational privacy and (iii) privacy of
> choice. Further, one aspect of privacy is the right to Writ Petition (Civil)
> No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 302 of 567 control the
> dissemination of personal information. Every individual should have a right
> to be able to control exercise over his/her own life and image as portrayed
> in the world and to control commercial use of his/her identity.

> (ii) The sanctity of privacy lies in its functional relationship with
> dignity. Privacy ensures that a human being can lead a life of dignity by
> securing the inner recesses of the human personality from unwanted
> intrusions. While the legitimate expectation of privacy may vary from
> intimate zone to the private zone and from the private to the public arena,
> it is important to underscore that privacy is not lost or surrendered merely
> because the individual is in a public place. Privacy is a postulate of
> dignity itself. Privacy concerns arise when the State seeks to intrude into
> the body and the mind of the citizen.

> (iii) Privacy as intrinsic to freedom, liberty and dignity. The right to
> privacy is inherent to the liberties guaranteed by Part-III of the
> Constitution and privacy is an element of human dignity. The fundamental
> right to privacy derives from Part-III of the Constitution and recognition
> of this right does not require a constitutional amendment. Privacy is more
> than merely a derivative constitutional right. It is the necessary basis of
> rights guaranteed in the text of the Constitution.

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 303 of 567

(iv) Privacy has both positive and negative content. The negative content
restrains the State from committing an intrusion upon the life and personal
liberty of a citizen. Its positive content imposes an obligation on the State
to take all necessary measures to protect the privacy of the individual.

(v) Informational Privacy is a facet of right to privacy. The old adage that
‘knowledge is power’ has stark implications for the position of individual
where data is ubiquitous, an all- encompassing presence. Every transaction of
an individual user leaves electronic tracks, without her knowledge.
Individually these information silos may seem inconsequential. In aggregation,
information provides a picture of the beings. The challenges which big data
poses to privacy emanate from both State and non-State entities.

(vi) Right to privacy cannot be impinged without a just, fair and reasonable
law. It has to fulfil the test of proportionality i.e. (i) existence of a law
(ii) must serve a legitimate State aim and (iii) proportionate.

233) We have also remarked, in paragraph 85 above, the taxonomy of privacy,
namely, on the basis of ‘harms’, ‘interest’ and ‘aggregation of rights’. We
have also discussed the scope of right to privacy with reference to the cases
at hand and the Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page
304 of 567 circumstances in which such a right can be limited. In the process,
we have also taken note of the passage from the judgment rendered by Nariman,
J. in K.S. Puttaswamy stating the manner in which law has to be tested when it
is challenged on the ground that it violates the fundamental right to privacy.
Keeping in mind all these considerations and parameters, we proceed to deal
with the argument on right to privacy.

234) It is argued that the Aadhaar project, during the pre-Act period (2009/10
– July, 2016), violated the Right to Privacy with respect to personal
demographic as well as biometric information collected, stored and shared as
there was no law authorizing these actions. In a digital society an individual
has the right to protect herself by controlling the dissemination of such
personal information. Compelling an individual to establish her identity by
planting her biometric at multiple points of service violates privacy
involving the person. The seeding of Aadhaar in distinct data bases enables
the content of information about an individual that is stored in different
silos to be aggregated. This enables the State to build complete profiles of
individuals violating privacy through the convergence of data.

235) It is also contended that the citizen’s right to informational privacy
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 305 of 567 is
violated by authentication under the Aadhaar Act inasmuch as the citizen is
compelled to ‘report’ her actions to the State. Even where a person is
availing of a subsidy, benefit or service from the State under Section 7 of
the Act, mandatory authentication through the Aadhaar platform (without an
option to the citizen to use an alternative mode of identification) violates
the right to informational privacy. An individual’s rights and entitlements
cannot be made dependent upon an invasion of his or her bodily integrity and
his or her private information which the individual may not be willing to
share with the State. The bargain underlying section 7 is an unconscionable,
unconstitutional bargain. Section 7 is against the constitutional morality
contained in both Part III as well the Part IV of the Constitution of India.

236) It was also highlighted that today the fastest growing businesses are
network orchestrators, the likes of Facebook and Uber, which recreate a
network of peers in which participants interact and share value in creation.
The most important assets for these network orchestrators is information.
Although, individuals share information with these entities, such information
is scattered, not concentrated in a single authority or aggregated. If
information, collected in different silos is aggregated and centralized, it
can afford easy access to a person’s complete profile, including her Writ
Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 306 of 567 social
groups, proclivities, habits, inclinations, tastes etc. The entity that holds
the key to such information would then be in an extremely powerful position,
especially if such entity is the State. Since informational privacy is a part
of Right to Privacy, it had to be saved. The peittioners pointed out that the
significance of information being aggregated was noted by Hon’ble Court in
K.S. Puttaswamy as follows:

> “300 ...Yet every transaction of an individual user and every site that she
> visits, leaves electronic tracks generally without her knowledge. These
> electronic tracks contain powerful means of information which provide
> knowledge of the sort of person that the user is and her interests.
> Individually, these information silos may seem inconsequential. In
> aggregation, they disclose the nature of the personality: food habits,
> language, health, hobbies, sexual preferences, friendships, ways of dress
> and political affiliation. In aggregation, information provides a picture of
> the being: of things which matter and those that don't, of things to be
> disclosed and those best hidden… xx xx xx

> 305\. Daniel J Solove deals with the problem of "aggregation". Businesses
> and governments often aggregate a variety of information fragments,
> including pieces of information which may not be viewed as private in
> isolation to create a detailed portrait of personalities and behaviour of
> individuals. Yet, it is now a universally accepted fact that information and
> data flow are "increasingly central to social and economic ordering".
> Individuals are identified with reference to tax records, voting
> eligibility, and government-provided entitlements.

There is what is now described as "'veillant panoptic assemblage', where data
gathered through the ordinary citizen's veillance practices finds its way to
state surveillance mechanisms, through the corporations that hold that data.”
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 307 of 567

237) It was further argued that test of proportionality was not satisfied as
the extent of information collected is not proportionate to the ‘compelling
interest of the State’. Various judgments were citied where the principle of
proportionality has been established by this court. In Chairman, All India
Railway Recruitment Board v. K Shyam Kumar and others81, this Court held as
follows:

> “37. ...Proportionality requires the court to judge whether action taken was
> really needed as well as whether it was within the range of courses of
> action which could reasonably be followed. Proportionality is more concerned
> with the aims and intention of the decision-maker and whether the decision-
> maker has achieved more or less the correct balance or equilibrium. The
> court entrusted with the task of judicial review has examine whether
> decision taken by the authority is proportionate i.e. well balanced and
> harmonious, to this extent the court may indulge in a merit review and if
> the court finds that the decision is proportionate, it seldom interferes
> with the decision taken and if it finds that the decision is
> disproportionate i.e. if the court feels that it is not well balanced or
> harmonious and does not stand to reason it may tend to interfere.”

> 238) Attention was also drawn to the judgment in Modern Dental College &
> Research Centre, wherein this Court established the four-limb test of
> proportionality. It was argued that Aadhaar failed to meet the test laid
> down therein.

239) According to the petitioners, there is no compelling state interest for
State to know the details of the location and time of using Aadhaar
authentication. Likewise, there are various other 81 (2010) 6 SCC 614 Writ
Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 308 of 567 methods
available for identification. Submission was that one of the objects of the
Aadhaar project is to ensure targeted delivery in the disbursement of
government subsidies benefits and services in India. Identification for this
purpose can be carried out by various other identity documents issued by the
government of India, such as passport, voting card, ration card, driving
license, job card issued by NREGA duly signed by an officer of the State
government, employment certificate by a public authority, birth certificate,
school leaving certificate, PAN card, overseas Indian citizen card/PIO/OCI of
Indian origin card. There is no justification to impose Aadhaar under as the
exclusive means of identification under Section 7, without which a person
would be unable to secure her entitlements. Such mandate would not only
infringe upon the privacy of a person and violate a person’s fundamental
rights, but would also unreasonably deprive a person of her entitlements on a
ground that has little connection with her right to receive such entitlements.

240) Judgment in the case of Jordan & Ors v. State82 was also cited wherein
Sachs & O’Regan JJ. concurringly held that continuum of privacy rights start
with the inviolable inner self, move to the home, and end with the public
realm; and that 82 (2002) ZACC 22 Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 &
connected matters Page 309 of 567 commitment to dignity invests great value in
the inviolability and worth of the body. Decisional privacy allows individuals
to make decisions about their own body, and is an aspect of right to self
determination. It is underscored by personal autonomy, which prevents the
State from using citizens as puppets and controlling their body and decisions.
Informational privacy deals with a person’s mind and comprises of (i)
anonymity, (ii) secrecy, and (iii) freedom. It is premised on the assumption
that all information about a person is in a fundamental way her own, for her
to communicate or retain for herself as she sees fit.

241) It was submitted that privacy rights against both the State and non-State
actors. There is a qualitative difference between right to privacy against the
State and against Non-state actors. Subba Rao. J’s dissent in Kharak Singh,
was relied upon wherein it was stated that the existence of concentrated and
centralized State power, rather than its actual or potential use that creates
the chilling effect and leads to psychological restraint on the ability of
citizens to think freely. Therefore, individuals have a higher expectation of
privacy from the State. In the vein, it was further submitted that the State
was imposing disproportionate and unreasonable State compulsion. States do not
have the power to Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters
Page 310 of 567 compel their citizens to do particular acts, except in a
narrow range of defined circumstances. As sentinels on the qui vive, Courts
are duty bound to protect citizens against State compulsion, whether in the
context of forcibly undergoing narco-analysis/lie detectors tests or forcibly
undergoing sterilization. Compulsion can be used in limited circumstances such
as punishment for law-breaking, compulsion in the aid of law enforcement, and
compulsion to prevent potential law-breaking. These include fines,
imprisonment, fingerprint collection for criminals and prisoners. Even in
medical jurisprudence, the case of Common Cause v. Union of India83 elaborates
on the concepts of dignity, bodily integrity and decisional autonomy. For DNA
tests and blood tests to be conducted a high standard of evidence is required.
Similarly ‘refusal of treatment’ is a constitutionally protected liberty
interest in the United States of America as stated in the case of Cruzan v.
Director, Missouri Dept. of Health84.

242) The petitioners further submitted that although the Aadhaar Act is
ostensibly framed as a voluntary entitlement to establish one’s identity under
section 3 read with Section 4(3) of the Aadhaar Act, the actions of the
Executive and private entities 83 Writ Petition (Civil) No. 215 of 2005 84 497
US 361 (1990) Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page
311 of 567 under sections 7 and 57 have made possession of Aadhaar de facto
mandatory. Residents have thus been forced to obtain an Aadhaar number, for
continued access to statutory entitlements and services. 252 government
schemes have been notified by various Ministries/Departments of the Central
Government under section 7 (as on 30.11.2017) requiring Aadhaar as a condition
precedent for availing services, subsidies and benefits including for persons
with disabilities, for SC/STs, and for rehabilitation of Manual Scavengers. It
has also been made mandatory for mobile services, banking and tax payments,
registration of students of CBSE, amongst other things. It thus pervades every
aspect of an individual’s life. Concomitantly, there is no opt out option in
the Aadhaar Act, which makes consent irrevocable and deprives individuals the
ability to make decisions about their life.

243) As per the petitioners, this kind of mandatory nature of Section 7
violates Article 14. They submit that mandatory authentication has caused, and
continues to cause, exclusion of the most marginalized sections of society.
Proof of possession of an enrolment number or undergoing Aadhaar
authentication is a mandatory pre-requisite for receiving subsidised food
grain under the National Food Security Act. It creates “undue Writ Petition
(Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 312 of 567 burden” on citizen
which is unconstitutional. Successful monthly authentication is contingent on
harmonious working of all attendant Aadhaar processes and technologies–i.e.
correct Aadhaar-seeding, successful fingerprint recognition, mobile and
wireless connectivity, electricity, functional POS machines and server
capacity–each time. It is also dependant on age, disability (e.g.leprosy),
class of work (e.g. manual labour), and the inherently probabilistic nature of
biometric. Economic Survey of India 2016 reports that authentication failures
have been as high as 49% in Jharkhand and 37% in Rajasthan, recognising that
“failure to identify genuine beneficiaries results in exclusion error”.

244) The exclusion is not simply a question of poor implementation that can be
administratively resolved, but stems from the very design of the Act, i.e. the
use of biometric authentication as the primary method of identification.
Determination of legal entitlements is contingent on a positive authentication
response from the UIDAI. Biometric technology does not guarantee 100% accuracy
and is fallible, with inevitable false positives and false negatives that are
design flaws of such a probabilistic system, especially because biometrics
also change over time. Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected
matters Page 313 of 567

245) Classification caused by the Act lacks rational nexus. The entitlement of
an individual depends upon status, and not proof of identity. At the point of
use, The Biometric Authentication divides residents into two classes: those
who have and do not have Aadhaar; and those who authenticate successfully, and
those who do not. Given that the probability of biometric mismatch is greatest
for the aged, disabled, and individuals engaging in manual labour – amongst
the most vulnerable sections of society–the decision to use periodic biometric
authentications has a direct and disparate effect of violating fundamental
rights of this class. This division bears no rational nexus with the question
of status for receiving benefits. It leads to under- inclusion, and is thus
arbitrary, causing an Article 14 violation.

246) It is also argued that mandatory nature of Section 7 violates Article 21
as well. The Aadhaar Act alters the entire design & institutional structure
through which residents were receiving entitlements. Mandatory imposition of
Aadhaar violates their rights to choose how to identify themselves to the
government in a reasonable and non-intrusive fashion. On Writ Petition (Civil)
No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 314 of 567 making Aadhaar mandatory,
instead of the citizen’s right to food and a correlative duty on the State to
take action to ensure the proper fulfilment of such rights, the State is
exercising its power to convert the constitutional rights of its citizens into
liabilities.

247) As per the petitioners, having established the infringement of Article
21, the invasion is not justified under the principle of proportionality. The
State’s primary justification of eliminating welfare leakages and ensuring
“better targeting” does not stand up to judicial scrutiny.

First, it has failed to discharge its burden of showing that the purported
leakages were exclusively caused due to identity fraud, and that those
leakages would not exist if Aadhaar is implemented. The state has not given
any empirical data. Leakages exist due to eligibility frauds, quantity frauds
and identity frauds. Studies filed in Petitioner’s affidavits show that
eligibility and quantity frauds are the substantial cause for leakages.
Assuming that the Aadhaar Act prevents leakages, the biometric identification
system can, at best, only cure leakages related to identity fraud. The
government’s claims of savings inter alia of Rs. 14,000 crores in the PDS
system, due to the deletion of 2.33 crore ration cards is incorrect, inflated,
and Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 315 of 567
based on wrong assumptions for the following reasons:

> (a) it admittedly does not have estimates of leakages in PDS, nor has any
> study been done to see if POS machines are effective in removing PDS
> irregularities;

> (b) it conflates issue of “bogus /ineligible ration cards” (eligibility
> fraud) with identity fraud;

> (c) the figure of 2.33 crore includes West Bengal, where ration cards are
> issued to each person, as opposed to each household;

> (d) a large number of these 2.33 crore cards were deleted even before
> Aadhaar-integration and seeding came into effect;

> (e) the savings figure includes even those eligible beneficiaries who have
> been removed from the list due to failure to link Aadhaar properly; and

> (f) it does not value the cost of loss of privacy. Most importantly, the
> basis for reaching such savings figure has not been disclosed.

> Similarly, incorrect averments have been made in the context of LPG savings,
> using Aadhaar-enabled Direct Benefit Transfer (‘DBT’) scheme known as PAHAL.

Secondly, it has failed to show how the introduction of Writ Petition (Civil)
No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 316 of 567 Aadhaar will stop the
losses causes on any of the grounds above. Aadhaar is susceptible to its own
unique forms of mischief by the vendor.

Thirdly, the State has failed to demonstrate that other, less invasive ways
would be significantly worse at addressing the problem, especially given
recent studies that found a significant reduction in PDS leakages, due to
innovations devised to work within the PDS system; alternatives such as food
coupons, digitisation of records, doorstep delivery, SMS alerts, social
audits, and toll-free helplines have not been looked at.

Fourthly, the absence of proportionality is further established by the fact of
systematic exclusion.

248) The respondents refuted, in strongest possible manner, all the aforesaid
submissions in the following manner:

(i) No reasonable expectation of privacy At the outset it was argued that
Right to Privacy exists when there is a reasonable expectation of privacy.
K.S. Puttaswamy judgment, US case law, UK case laws and the European cases on
Article 8 of ECHR were referred to to determine the contours of reasonable
expectation of privacy. Submission was that the Act Writ Petition (Civil) No.
494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 317 of 567 operates in the public and
relational sphere and not in the core, private or personal sphere of
residents. It involves minimal identity information for effective
authentication. The purpose is limited to authentication for identification.
Section 29 of the Aadhaar Act, 2016 provides protection against disclosure of
identity information without the prior consent of the ANH concerned. Sharing
is intended only for authentication purposes. It was also submitted that there
is no reasonable expectation of privacy with respect to identity information
collected under the Aadhaar Act for the purposes of authentication and
therefore Article 21 is not attracted.

249) The respondents point out that four types of information collected for
providing Aadhaar (i). Mandatory demographic information comprising name, date
of birth, address and gender [Section 2(k) read with Regulation 4(1) of the
Aadhaar (Enrolment and Update) Regulations, 2016]; (ii) Optional demographic
information [Section 2(k) read with Regulation 4(2) of the Aadhaar (Enrolment
and Update) Regulations, 2016]. (iii) Non-core biometric information
comprising photograph. (iv) Core biometric information comprising finger print
and iris scan.

250) Demographic information, both mandatory and optional, and Writ Petition
(Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 318 of 567 photographs does
not raise a reasonable expectation of privacy under Article 21 unless under
special circumstances such as juveniles in conflict of law or a rape victim’s
identity. Today, all global ID cards contain photographs for identification
alongwith address, date of birth, gender etc. The demographic information is
readily provided by individuals globally for disclosing identity while
relating with others and while seeking benefits whether provided by government
or by private entities, be it registration for citizenship, elections,
passports, marriage or enrolment in educational institutions. Email ids and
phone numbers are also available in public domain, For example in telephone
directories. Aadhaar Act only uses demographic information which are not
sensitive and where no reasonable expectation of privacy exists - name, date
of birth, address, gender, mobile number and e mail address. Section 2(k)
specifically provides that Regulations cannot include race, religion, caste,
tribe, ethnicity, language, records of entitlement, income or medical history.
Thus, sensitive information specifically stand excluded.

251) Face Photographs for the purpose of identification are not covered by a
reasonable expectation of privacy. Barring unpublished intimate photographs
and photographs pertaining to confidential situations there will be no zone of
privacy with Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page
319 of 567 respect to normal facial photographs meant for identification.

Face-photographs are given by people for driving license, passport, voter id,
school admissions, examination admit cards, employment cards, enrolment in
professions and even for entry in courts. In our daily lives we recognize each
other by face which stands exposed to all, all the time. The face photograph
by itself reveals no information.

252) There is no reasonable expectation of privacy with respect to fingerprint
and iris scan as they are not dealing with the intimate or private sphere of
the individual but are used solely for authentication. Iris scan is nothing
but a photograph of the eye, taken in the same manner as a face photograph.
Fingerprints and iris scans are not capable of revealing any personal
information about the individual except for serving the purpose of
identification. Fingerprints are largely used in biometric attendance, laptops
and mobiles. Even when a privacy right exists on a fingerprint, it will be
weak. Finger print and iris scan have been considered to be the most accurate
and non-invasive mode of identifying an individual. They are taken for
passports, visa and registration by the State and also used in mobile phones,
laptops, lockers etc for private use. Biometrics are being used for unique
identification in e passports by 120 countries. Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494
of 2012 & connected matters Page 320 of 567

(ii) Least intrusive and strict scrutiny tests do not apply in the
proportionality test.

Learned Attorney General argued that the “least intrusive test” is not
applicable while asserting the test of proportionality. He relied on various
U.S. Supreme Court judgments which explicitly rejected the test and the case
of Modern Dental College & Research Centre which does not use the least
intrusive measure test while undertaking the proportionality test.

Mr.Dwivedi contends that the least intrusive means of achieving the state
object, while carrying out the proportionality test, has been rejected by
Indian courts in a catena of decisions as it involves a value judgment or
second guessing of the Legislation. Such a test violates the separation of
powers between the legislature and the judiciary. Even assuming that the
‘least intrusive method’ test applies, the exercise of determining the least
intrusive method of identification is a technical exercise and cannot be
undertaken in the court of law. Moreover, the Petitioners, who have furnished
smartcards as an alternative, have not established that smartcards are less
intrusive than the Aadhaar card authentication process.

The argument of applying the ‘Strict Scrutiny Test’ to test the
Constitutionality of the Aadhaar Act by the Petitioners was Writ Petition
(Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 321 of 567 flawed. Strict
scrutiny test is a test conceptualised in the United States, only applied to
‘super suspect legislations’. This compulsion arises because the scope of
reasonable restrictions not having been specified specifically in the U.S.
Constitution. That leaves the scrutiny of the Legislations by the courts based
on the due process clause in the U.S. Constitution. Such a test does not have
applicability in India. In Ashoka Kumar Thakur (2008) 6 SCC 1, the court
referred to the test of strict scrutiny, narrow tailoring and compelling
interest and observed that these principles cannot be applied directly to
India as affirmative action is Constitutionally supported.

(iii) Act satisfies Proportionality Test Ld. Attorney General submitted that
the legitimate state interest that the Aadhaar Act fulfils are prevention of
leakages and dissipation of subsidies and social welfare benefits that are
covered under Section 7 of the Aadhaar Act. He also submits that the larger
public/state interest is to be decided by the State and cannot be second
guessed by the Judiciary. The state had rejected the idea of ‘smart cards’ and
other alternative models after due deliberations.

The learned Attorney General cited various reports highlighting leakages,
wastage, high costs and inefficiencies in Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of
2012 & connected matters Page 322 of 567 the Public Distribution System,
MGNREGA scheme and fuel subsidy. He cited the Thirteenth Finance Commission
Report 2010-2015 which stated that creation of a biometric-based unique
identity for all residents in the country has potential to address need of the
government to ensure that only eligible persons are provided subsidies and
that all eligible persons are covered. He also cited the Economic Surveys of
2014-15 and 2015-16 both of which dilated upon the benefits of Aadhaar. The
2015-16 Survey says that the use of Aadhaar has significantly reduced leakages
in LPG and MGNREGA with limited exclusion of the poor by linking households'
LPG customer numbers with Aadhaar numbers to eliminate ‘ghosts’ and duplicate
households from beneficiary rolls. The United Nations, in its report titled
‘Leaving No One Behind: the imperative of inclusive development’, praised
India’s decision of launching Aadhaar as it will be a step forward in ensuring
inclusion of all people especially the poorest and the most marginalized.

This court in the case of PUCL v. Union of India85 has approved the
recommendations of the High-powered committee headed by Justice D.P Wadhwa,
which recommended linking 85 (2011) 14 SCC 331 Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494
of 2012 & connected matters Page 323 of 567 of Aadhaar with PDS and encouraged
State Governments to adopt the same. The court also lauded the efforts of
State government for using biometric identification. He also referred to the
case of Binoy Viswam v. Union of India86 where the economic rationale for and
benefits of Aadhaar was discussed and validated.

Mr. Dwivedi has argued that 3% of GDP amounting to trillions of rupees is
allocated by Governments towards subsidies, scholarships, pensions, education,
food and other welfare programmes. But approximately half of if does not reach
the intended beneficiaries. Aadhaar is necessary for fixing this problem as
there is no other identification document which is widely and commonly
possessed by the residents of the country and most of the identity documents
do not enjoy the quality of portability. Moreover, Aadhaar lends assurance and
accuracy on account of existence of fake, bogus and ghost cards, vide the
process of de-duplication and authentication. De-duplication is ensured by the
three sub systems are :- (i) demographic de- duplication (ii) multi-ABIS
multi-modal biometric de-duplication (iii) manual adjudication. Biometric
system provides high accuracy of over 99.86 %. The mixed biometric have been
adopted only to 86 (2017) 7 SCC 59 Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 &
connected matters Page 324 of 567 enhance the accuracy and to reduce the
errors which may arise on account of some residents either not having
biometrics or not having some particular biometric.

(iv) Act empowers various facets of right to life under Article 21 The Ld.
Attorney General submitted that Section 7 of the Act is traceable to Article
21 of the Constitution. Right to life is not a mere animal existence but the
right to live with human dignity which includes the right to food, the right
to shelter, right to employment, right to medical care, etc. Fulfilling these
rights will justify the minimal invasion of the right to privacy of the
citizens.

The counsel for the respondent also referred to the case of G. Sundarrajan v.
Union of India87 in which the petitioner therein challenged the violation of
their Right to the Life due to the risk posed by the Kudanakulam Nuclear
Plant. The court struck a balance between production of nuclear energy, which
was of extreme importance for the economic growth, alleviation of poverty,
generation of employment , and the violation of right to life and dignity
under Article 21 posed by the threat of a nuclear disaster. The court observed
that adequate safety measure – both in design and operation - had been taken
hence the violation of right to life was justified.

87 (2013) 6 SCC 670 Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters
Page 325 of 567

253) The argument of ‘illusory consent’ was refuted with the submission that
Section 7 of the Act which mandatorily requires Aadhaar for receipt of
benefit, service or subsidy linked to the Consolidated Fund of India, does not
violate any Fundamental Rights. It involves a balancing of two Fundamental
Rights: the Right to Privacy and the positive obligation of the State to
ensure right to food, shelter and employment under Article 21 of the
Constitution. Aadhaar enables furtherance of Article 21 by eliminating
leakages and ensuring that no deserving individual is denied her/his
entitlement. The object of the Act i.e. the efficient, transparent and
targeted delivery of subsidies, benefits and services to genuine beneficiaries
is in, furtherance of various facets of Article 21 of the poor people of India
and in furtherance of the Directive Principles of State Policy inter alia
Articles 38,39, 41, 43, 47 and 48.

254) It was further argued that Section 7 is not a restriction at all and it
does not require any surrender of Fundamental Rights. It is merely a
regulatory procedure to receipt of subsidy, benefit or service. Section 7
purports to enliven the Fundamental Right under Article 21 , and Article 14.
To achieve the goal of enlivening Fundamental Rights of the poor and the
deprived and to prevent Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected
matters Page 326 of 567 siphoning off the benefits, service or subsidy, it
becomes necessary to require compliance with the condition of undergoing
authentication.

255) Section 7 of the Aadhaar Act protects right to human dignity recognized
by Article 21 of the Constitution. Aadhaar is used as means of authentication
for availing services, benefits and subsidies. Welfare schemes funded from the
consolidated fund of India such as PDS, scholarship, mid day meals, LPG
subsidies, free education ensure that the Right to Life and Dignity of
citizens are being enforced, which includes Justice (Social, Political and
Economic). It also eliminates inequality with a view to ameliorate the poor,
Dalits and other downtrodden classes and sections of the society.

256) In response to the argument that Fundamental Right to Privacy cannot be
waived, the Mr.Dwivedi submits that Section 7 of the Aadhaar Act does not
involve any issue of waiver. When an individual undergoes any authentication
to establish his identity to receive benefits, services or subsidy, he does so
to enliven his Fundamental Right to life and personal liberty under Article
21. When an individual makes a choice to enter into a relational sphere then
his choice as to mode of identification would Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of
2012 & connected matters Page 327 of 567 automatically get restricted on
account of the autonomy of the individuals or institution with whom he wishes
to relate. This is more so where the individual seeks employment, service ,
subsidy or benefits. Moreover, Aadhaar is of a Universal nature, unlike any
other identification card which are not portable. They generally have a
localized value and limited purpose.

257) In response to the arguments of the petitioners that Aadhaar reduces
individuals to numbers, it was submitted that the Aadhaar number is absolutely
necessary for authentication and it is solely used for that purpose. It was
argued that the petitioner have conflated the concepts of identity and
identification. Authentication is merely an identification process and does
not alter the identity of an individual. Further Aadhaar number is a randomly
generated number and bears no relation to the attributes of individuals. It is
similar to an examiner allotting codes to examinees for administrative
convenience.

258) It was also argued that the State has an obligation to enlivening right
to food, right to shelter etc envisaged under Article 21 and for this purpose
they may encroach upon the right of privacy of the beneficiaries. The state
requires to strike a fair balance between the right of privacy and right to
life of beneficiaries. An Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected
matters Page 328 of 567 example furnished by the counsel for this is the
Prohibition Of Employment as Manual Scavengers and their Rehabilitation Act,
2013, which restricts a scavenger’s right to practice any profession,
occupation, trade or business under Article 19(g) is order to enliven Article
21 and 17. The counsel also gave the example of the practice of dwarftossing,
which was banned in France. The law was challenged on ground that it
interferes with the economic right of one practicing it. The challenge was
negatived on the ground that permitting such a practice even though voluntary
will be degrading of human dignity by Human Right Committee. Certain choices
are restricted /prohibited by the Constitution itself (Articles 17,18, 23 and
24). Article 23 abolishes forced labour so it prohibits even those choosing to
indulge in forced labour from doing so. The aforesaid actually result in
enhancement of the Fundamental Right. The person is emancipated from a social
condition which is below human dignity. Similarly Section 7 of the Act
involves an identification for the purpose of enhancing human dignity.

259) In response to the argument of Aadhaar causing exclusion, the learned
Attorney General responded by saying that if authentication fails, despite
more than one attempt, then the possession of Aadhaar number can be proved
otherwise i.e. by Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters
Page 329 of 567 producing the Aadhaar card. And those who do not have Aadhaar
number can make an application for enrolment and produce the enrolment id
number).

260) Before we proceed to analyse the respective submissions, it has also to
be kept in mind that all matters pertaining to an individual do not qualify as
being an inherent part of right to privacy. Only those matters over which
there would be a reasonable expectation of privacy are protected by Article
21. This can be discerned from the reading of Paras 297 to 307 of the
judgment, relevant portions whereof have already been quoted above.

261) We may also clarify that the arguments of privacy are examined in the
context of Sections 7 and 8 and the provisions related thereto under the
Aadhaar Act. Validity of the other provisions of the Aadhaar Act, which is
questioned in these proceedings, is dealt with separately. As per Section 7 of
the Aadhaar Act in case an individual wants to avail any subsidy benefit or
services, she is required to produce the Aadhaar number and, therefore, it
virtually becomes compulsory for such a person. To that extent the petitioners
may be right in submitting that even if enrolment in Aadhaar is voluntary, it
assumes the character of compulsory enrolment for those who want to avail the
benefits under Section Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected
matters Page 330 of 567

7\. Likewise, authentication, as mentioned in Section 8, also becomes
imperative. The relevant question, therefore, is as to whether invasion into
this privacy meets the triple requirements or right to privacy.

(i) Requirement of law : The Parliament has now passed Aadhaar Act, 2016.
Therefore, law on the subject in the form of a statute very much governs the
field and, thus, first requirement stands satisfied. We may point out at this
stage that insofar as period from 2009 (when the Aadhaar scheme was launched
with the creation of Authority vide notification No. A-43011/02/2009- Admin. I
dated January 28, 2009 till the date Aadhaar Act came into force i.e. March
26, 2016, it is the argument of the petitioners that insofar as this period is
concerned, it is not backed by any law and, therefore, notification dated
January 28, 2009 should be struck down on this ground itself and all acts done
including enrolment under the Aadhaar scheme from 2009 to 2016 should be
invalidated. This aspect we propose to deal at a later stage. At this
juncture, we are looking into the vires of Aadhaar Act. In that context, the
first requirement stands fulfilled.

(ii) Whether Aadhaar Act serves legitimate State aim?

‘Introduction’ to the said Act gives the reasons for passing that Act and the
‘Statement of Objects and Reasons’ mentions Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of
2012 & connected matters Page 331 of 567 the objectives sought to be achieved
with the enactment of the Aadhaar Act. ‘Introduction’ reads as under:

> “The Unique Identification Authority of India was established by a
> resolution of the Government of India in 2009. It was meant primarily to lay
> down policies and to implement the Unique Identification Scheme, by which
> residents of India were to be provided unique identity number. This number
> would serve as proof of identity and could be used for identification of
> beneficiaries for transfer of benefits, subsidies, services and other
> purposes.

> Later on, it was felt that the process of enrolment, authentication,
> security, confidentiality and use of Aadhaar related information be made
> statutory so as to facilitate the use of Aadhaar number for delivery of
> various benefits, subsidies and services, the expenditures of which were
> incurred from or receipts therefrom formed part of the Consolidated Fund of
> India.

The Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of Financial and Other Subsidies, Benefits and
Services) Bill, 2016 inter alia, provides for establishment of Unique
Identification Authority of India, issuance of Aadhaar number to individuals,
maintenance and updating of information in the Central Identities Data
Repository, issues pertaining to security, privacy and confidentiality of
information as well as offences and penalties for contravention of relevant
statutory provisions.” In the Statement of Objects and Reasons, it is inter
alia mentioned that though number of social benefits schemes have been floated
by the Government, the failure to establish identity of an individual has
proved to be a major hindrance for successful implementation of those
programmes as it was becoming difficult to ensure that subsidies, benefits and
services reach the Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters
Page 332 of 567 unintended beneficiaries in the absence of a credible system
to authenticate identity of beneficiaries. The Statement of Objects and
Reasons also discloses that over a period of time, the use of Aadhaar number
has been increased manifold and, therefore, it is also necessary to take
measures relating to ensuring security of the information provided by the
individuals while enrolling for Aadhaar card. Having these parameters in mind,
Para 5 of the Statement of Objects and Reasons enumerates the objectives which
the Aadhaar Act seeks to achieve. It reads as under:

> “5. The Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of Financial and Other Subsidies,
> Benefits and Services) Bill, 2016 inter alia, seeks to provide for—

> (a) issue of Aadhaar numbers to individuals on providing his demographic and
> biometric information to the Unique Identification Authority of India;

> (b) requiring Aadhaar numbers for identifying an individual for delivery of
> benefits, subsidies, and services the expenditure is incurred from or the
> receipt therefrom forms part of the Consolidated Fund of India;

> (c) authentication of the Aadhaar number of an Aadhaar number holder in
> relation to his demographic and biometric information;

> (d) establishment of the Unique Identification Authority of India consisting
> of a Chairperson, two Members and a Member-Secretary to perform functions in
> pursuance of the objectives above;

> (e) maintenance and updating the information of individuals in the Central
> Identities Data Repository in such manner as may be specified by
> regulations;

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 333 of 567

(f) measures pertaining to security, privacy and confidentiality of
information in possession or control of the Authority including information
stored in the Central Identities Data Repository; and

(g) offences and penalties for contravention of relevant statutory
provisions.”

262) After taking into consideration the Statement of Objects and Reasons, a
two Judge Bench of this Court in Binoy Viswam v. Union of India & Ors.88,
recapitulated the objectives of Aadhaar in the following manner:

> “125. By making use of the technology, a method is sought to be devised, in
> the form of Aadhaar, whereby identity of a person is ascertained in a
> flawless manner without giving any leeway to any individual to resort to
> dubious practices of showing multiple identities or fictitious identities.
> That is why it is given the nomenclature “unique identity”. It is aimed at
> securing advantages on different levels some of which are described, in
> brief, below:

> 125.1. In the first instance, as a welfare and democratic State, it becomes
> the duty of any responsible Government to come out with welfare schemes for
> the upliftment of poverty-stricken and marginalised sections of the society.
> This is even the ethos of Indian Constitution which casts a duty on the
> State, in the form of “directive principles of State policy”, to take
> adequate and effective steps for betterment of such underprivileged classes.
> State is bound to take adequate measures to provide education, health care,
> employment and even cultural opportunities and social standing to these
> deprived and underprivileged classes. It is not that Government has not
> taken steps in this direction from time to time. At the same time, however,
> harsh reality is that benefits of these schemes have not reached those
> persons for whom that are actually meant.

125.1.1. India has achieved significant economic growth since Independence. In
particular, rapid economic growth has been achieved in the last 25 years,
after the country 88 (2017) 7 SCC 59 Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 &
connected matters Page 334 of 567 adopted the policy of liberalisation and
entered the era of, what is known as, globalisation. Economic growth in the
last decade has been phenomenal and for many years, the Indian economy grew at
highest rate in the world. At the same time, it is also a fact that in spite
of significant political and economic success which has proved to be sound and
sustainable, the benefits thereof have not percolated down to the poor and the
poorest. In fact, such benefits are reaped primarily by rich and upper middle
classes, resulting into widening the gap between the rich and the poor.

125.1.2. Jean Dreze and Amartya Sen pithily narrate the position as under [An
Uncertain Glory : India and its Contradictions] :

“Since India's recent record of fast economic growth is often celebrated, with
good reason, it is extremely important to point to the fact that the societal
reach of economic progress in India has been remarkably limited. It is not
only that the income distribution has been getting more unequal in recent
years (a characteristic that India shares with China), but also that the rapid
rise in real wages in China from which the working classes have benefited
greatly is not matched at all by India's relatively stagnant real wages. No
less importantly, the public revenue generated by rapid economic growth has
not been used to expand the social and physical infrastructure in a determined
and well-planned way (in this India is left far behind by China). There is
also a continued lack of essential social services (from schooling and health
care to the provision of safe water and drainage) for a huge part of the
population. As we will presently discuss, while India has been overtaking
other countries in the progress of its real income, it has been overtaken in
terms of social indicators by many of these countries, even within the region
of South Asia itself (we go into this question more fully in Chapter 3, ‘India
in Comparative Perspective’). To point to just one contrast, even though India
has significantly caught up with China in terms of GDP growth, its progress
has been very much slower than China's in indicators such as longevity,
literacy, child undernourishment and maternal mortality. In South Asia itself,
the much poorer economy of Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected
matters Page 335 of 567 Bangladesh has caught up with and overtaken India in
terms of many social indicators (including life expectancy, immunisation of
children, infant mortality, child undernourishment and girls' schooling). Even
Nepal has been catching up, to the extent that it now has many social
indicators similar to India's, in spite of its per capita GDP being just about
one third. Whereas twenty years ago India generally had the second best social
indicators among the six South Asian countries (India, Pakistan, Bangladesh,
Sri Lanka, Nepal and Bhutan), it now looks second worst (ahead only of
problem-ridden Pakistan). India has been climbing up the ladder of per capita
income while slipping down the slope of social indicators.” 125.1.3. It is in
this context that not only sustainable development is needed which takes care
of integrating growth and development, thereby ensuring that the benefit of
economic growth is reaped by every citizen of this country, it also becomes
the duty of the Government in a welfare State to come out with various welfare
schemes which not only take care of immediate needs of the deprived class but
also ensure that adequate opportunities are provided to such persons to enable
them to make their lives better, economically as well as socially. As
mentioned above, various welfare schemes are, in fact, devised and floated
from time to time by the Government, keeping aside substantial amount of money
earmarked for spending on socially and economically backward classes. However,
for various reasons including corruption, actual benefit does not reach those
who are supposed to receive such benefits. One of the main reasons is failure
to identify these persons for lack of means by which identity could be
established of such genuine needy class. Resultantly, lots of ghosts and
duplicate beneficiaries are able to take undue and impermissible benefits. A
former Prime Minister of this country [ Late Shri Rajiv Gandhi] has gone on
record to say that out of one rupee spent by the Government for welfare of the
downtrodden, only 15 paisa thereof actually reaches those persons for whom it
is meant. It cannot be doubted that with UID/Aadhaar much of the malaise in
this field can be taken care of.

263) It may be highlighted at this stage that the petitioners are making their
claim on the basis of dignity as a facet of right to privacy. On Writ Petition
(Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 336 of 567 the other hand,
Section 7 of the Aadhaar Act is aimed at offering subsidies, benefits or
services to the marginalised section of the society for whom such welfare
schemes have been formulated from time to time. That also becomes an aspect of
social justice, which is the obligation of the State stipulated in Para IV of
the Constitution. The rationale behind Section 7 lies in ensuring targeted
delivery of services, benefits and subsidies which are funded from the
Consolidated Fund of India. In discharge of its solemn Constitutional
obligation to enliven the Fundamental Rights of life and personal liberty
(Article 21) to ensure Justice, Social, Political and Economic and to
eliminate inequality (Article

14) with a view to ameliorate the lot of the poor and the Dalits, the Central
Government has launched several welfare schemes. Some such schemes are PDS,
scholarships, mid day meals, LPG subsidies, etc. These schemes involve 3%
percentage of the GDP and involve a huge amount of public money. Right to
receive these benefits, from the point of view of those who deserve the same,
has now attained the status of fundamental right based on the same concept of
human dignity, which the petitioners seek to bank upon. The Constitution does
not exist for a few or minority of the people of India, but “We the people”.
The goals set out in the Preamble of the Constitution do not Writ Petition
(Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 337 of 567 contemplate
statism and do not seek to preserve justice, liberty, equality an fraternity
for those who have the means and opportunity to ensure the exercise of
inalienable rights for themselves. These goals are predominantly or at least
equally geared to “secure to all its citizens”, especially, to the
downtrodden, poor and exploited, justice, liberty, equality and “to promote”
fraternity assuring dignity. Interestingly, the State has come forward in
recognising the rights of deprived section of the society to receive such
benefits on the premise that it is their fundamental right to claim such
benefits. It is acknowledged by the respondents that there is a paradigm shift
in addressing the problem of security and eradicating extreme poverty and
hunger. The shift is from the welfare approach to a right based approach. As a
consequence, right of everyone to adequate food no more remains based on
Directive Principles of State Policy (Art 47), though the said principles
remain a source of inspiration. This entitlement has turned into a
Constitutional fundamental right. This Constitutional obligation is reinforced
by obligations under International Convention. The Universal Declaration of
Human Rights (Preamble, Article 22 & 23) and International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights to which India is a signatory, also casts
responsibilities on all State parties to Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012
& connected matters Page 338 of 567 recognize the right of everyone to
adequate food. Eradicating extreme poverty and hunger is one of the goals
under the Millennium Development Goals of the United Nations. The Parliament
enacted the National Security Food Act, 2013 to address the issue of food
security at the household level. The scheme of the Act designs a targeted
public distribution system for providing food grains to those below BPL. The
object is to ensure to the people adequate food at affordable prices so that
people may live a life with dignity. The reforms contemplated under Section 12
of the Act include, application of information and communication technology
tools with end to end computerization to ensure transparency and to prevent
diversion, and leveraging Aadhaar for unique biometric identification of
entitled beneficiaries. The Act imposes obligations on the Central Government,
State Government and local authorities vide Chapter VIII, IX and X. Section 32
contemplates other welfare schemes. It provides for nutritional standards in
Schedule II and the undertaking of further steps to progressively realize the
objectives specified in Schedule III.

264) At this juncture, we would also like to mention that historic judgment of
this Court in His Holiness Kesavananda Bharati Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494
of 2012 & connected matters Page 339 of 567 Sripadagalvaru v. State of Kerala
& Anr.89 emphasised on the attainment of socio-economic rights and its
interplay with fundamental rights. Following passages from the opinion
rendered by Khanna, J. need a specific mention:

> “1477. I may also refer to another passage on p. 99 of Grammar of Politics
> by Harold Laski:

> “The state, therefore, which seeks to survive must continually transform
> itself to the demands of men who have an equal claim upon that common
> welfare which is its ideal purpose to promote.

> We are concerned here, not with the defence of anarchy, but with the
> conditions of its avoidance. Men must learn to subordinate their self-
> interest to the common welfare. The privileges of some must give way before
> the rights of all. Indeed, it may be urged that the interest of the few is
> in fact the attainment of those rights, since in no other environment is
> stability to be assured.” 1478\. A modern State has to usher in and deal
> with large schemes having social and economic content. It has to undertake
> the challenging task of what has been called social engineering, the
> essential aim of which is the eradication of the poverty, uplift of the
> downtrodden, the raising of the standards of the vast mass of people and the
> narrowing of the gulf between the rich and the poor. As occasions arise
> quite often when the individual rights clash with the larger interests of
> the society, the State acquires the power to subordinate the individual
> rights to the larger interests of society as a step towards social justice.
> As observed by Roscoe Pound on p. 434 of Volume I of Jurisprudence under the
> heading “Limitations on the Use of Property”:

“Today the law is imposing social limitations — limitations regarded as
involved in social life. It is endeavouring to delimit the individual interest
better with respect to social interests and to confine the 89 (1973) 4 SCC 225
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 340 of 567
legal right or liberty or privilege to the bounds of the interest so
delimited.” To quote the words of Friedmann in Legal Theory: “But modern
democracy looks upon the right to property as one conditioned by social
responsibility by the needs of society, by the ‘balancing of interests’ which
looms so large in modern jurisprudence, and not as pre-ordained and
untouchable private right.” (Fifth Edition, p. 406).”

265) It would also be worthwhile to mark, in continuity with the aforesaid
thought, what Dwivedi, J. emphasised.

“...The Nation stands to-day at the cross-roads of history and exchanging the
time-honoured place of the phrase, may I say that the Directive Principles of
State Policy should not be permitted to become “a mere rope of sand”. If the
State fails to create conditions in which the fundamental freedoms could be
enjoyed by all, the freedom of the few will be at the mercy of the many and
then all freedoms will vanish. In order, therefore, to preserve their freedom,
the privileged few must part with a portion of it.”

266) By no stretch of imagination, therefore, it can be said that there is no
defined State aim in legislating Aadhaar Act. We may place on record that even
the petitioners did not seriously question the purpose bona fides of the
legislature in enacting this law. In a welfare State, where measures are taken
to ameliorate the sufferings of the downtrodden, the aim of the Act is to
ensure that these benefits actually reach the populace for whom they are
meant. This is naturally a legitimate State aim. Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494
of 2012 & connected matters Page 341 of 567

(iii) Whether Aadhaar Act meets the test of proportionality?

267) The concept and contours of doctrine of proportionality have already been
discussed in detail. We have also indicated the approach that we need to adopt
while examining the issue of proportionality. This discussion bring out that
following four sub- components of proportionality need to be satisfied:

(a) A measure restricting a right must have a legitimate goal (legitimate goal
stage).

(b) It must be a suitable means of furthering this goal (suitability or
rationale connection stage).

(c) There must not be any less restrictive but equally effective alternative
(necessity stage).

(d) The measure must not have a disproportionate impact on the right holder
(balancing stage).

268) We now proceed to examine as to whether these components meet the
required parameters in the instant case.

(a) Legitimate Goal Stage: At this stage, the exercise which needs to be
undertaken is to see that the State has legitimate goal in restricting the
right. It is also to be seen that such a goal is of sufficient importance
justifying overriding a constitutional right of freedom. Further, it impairs
freedom as little as possible. Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 &
connected matters Page 342 of 567

269) In our preceding discussion, we have already pointed out above that
Aadhaar Act serves the legitimate state aim. That, in fact, provides answer to
this component as well. Some additions to the said discussion is as follows:

It is a matter of common knowledge that various welfare schemes for
marginalised section of the society have been floated by the successive
governments from time to time in last few decades. These include giving ration
at reasonable cost through ration shops (keeping in view Right to Food),
according certain benefits to those who are below poverty line with the
issuance of BPL Cards, LPG connections and LPG cylinders at minimal costs, old
age and other kinds of pensions to deserving persons, scholarships, employment
to unemployed under Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act,
2005 (MGNREGA) Scheme. There is an emergence of socio- economic rights, not
only in India but in many other countries world-wide. There is, thus,
recognisation of civil and political rights on the one hand and emergence of
socio-economic rights on the other hand. The boundaries between civil and
political rights review as well as socio-economic rights review are rapidly
crumbling. This rights jurisprudence created in India is a telling example.

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 343 of 567

270) This Court has developed a reputation as both a protector of Human Rights
and an engine of economic and social reforms. In People’s Union for Civil
Liberties (PUCL) v. Union of India90, the Court’s treatment of Right to Food
as a fundamental right has been seen as victory for India’s impoverished
population. The Court had passed orders enforcing the Government to take steps
to ensure the effective implementation of the Food Distribution Schemes
created by the Famine Code. Series of interim orders were passed aimed at
bringing immediate relief to the drought affected individuals. The benefits of
the schemes were converted into legal entitlements by orders dated November
28, 2001 passed in the said case. Amongst other things, the Court ordered
government to complete the identification of people who fell into the groups
targeted for food distribution, issue cards to allow these people to collect
the grain and distribute the grain to the relevant centres. The order also
provided for governmental inspections to ensure fair quality grain. In this
and subsequent orders, the court set the requirements on reporting,
accountability, monitoring, transparency and dissemination of court orders
aimed at ensuring that its orders are followed.

271) The purpose behind these orders was to ensure that the 90 (2001) 5 Scale
303 Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 344 of 567
deserving beneficiaries of the scheme are correctly identified and are able to
receive the benefits under the said scheme, which is their entitlement. The
orders also aimed at ensuring ‘good governance’ by bringing accountability and
transparency in the distribution system with the pious aim in mind, namely,
benefits actually reached those who are rural, poor and starving.

272) Again, in People’s Union for Civil Liberties (PUCL) case, orders dated
January 20, 2010 were passed by the Division Bench of this Court directing the
Government of Delhi to respond to the extreme weather conditions ‘by setting
up more shelters and protecting homeless people from the cold’. The assurance
was extracted from the then Additional Solicitor General on behalf of the
Government that affected people would be provided with shelter as a matter of
priority and that arrangement should be made for this within a day.

273) In the context of Right to Education, this Court in State of Bihar & Ors.
v. Project Uchcha Vidya, Sikshak Sangh & Ors.91 passed orders on January 3,
2006 thereby directing that a committee be appointed to investigate departures
from the State of Bihar’s policy concerning the establishment of ‘Project
Schools’ aimed at improving its poor education record. The Court appointed a
91 Civil Appeal No. 6626-6675 of 2001 Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 &
connected matters Page 345 of 567 committee to investigate the matter. The
Court’s order included details as to the composition and functions of the
committee, guidelines as to what would constitute irregularities in the
implementation of the policy and an expectation that the State of Bihar would
take remedial action if the committee found any irregularities. The Court’s
approach to affirmative action in education is also instructive.

274) In Ashoka Thakur v. Union of India92, the Court upheld the Ninety-

> Third Amendment to the Constitution, which allows for certain educational
> institutions to put in place special admissions rules in order to advance
> India’s ‘socially or educationally backward classes of citizens or for the
> Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes’.93 The Court held that people who
> are wealthier and better educated (the ‘creamy layer’) should be excluded
> from the 27 per cent quota for ‘Other Backward Classes’ (OBC). This step was
> needed to ensure that benefits reached those people living in desperate
> poverty. In addition, the inclusion of particular groups in the OBC category
> had to be reviewed every five years.

275) In Paschim Banga Ket Mazdoor Samity v. State of West Bengal94, the Court
found that Article 21 encompasses a right to adequate 92 Writ Petition (Civil)
No. 265 of 2006, judgment delivered on April 10, 2008. 93 The challenge made
in the case related to ‘Other Backward Classes’ rather than the Scheduled
Castes or Tribes.

94 (1996) 4 SCC 37 Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters
Page 346 of 567 medical facilities or health care. It also interpreted other
fundamental rights in light of directive principles. Likewise, in Mohini Jain
v. State of Kerala & Ors.95, the Court held that the right to equality before
the law in Article 14 includes a right to education. In the subsequent case,
Unnikrishnan v. State of Andhra Pradesh96, the Court clarified its findings in
Mohini Jain, stating that Article 14 gave rise to a right to primary
education. Following the cases on education, in 1997 the Indian government
proposed a constitutional Amendment recognising education for children under
14 as a fundamental right. This Amendment was passed in 2002 as Article 21A.
One of the Court’s earliest cases dealing with the role of the directive
principles in constitutional interpretation is arguably also its most
celebrated judgment. Some commentators see the decision in Olga Tellis & Ors.
v. Bombay Municipal Corporation & Ors.97 as a recognition of enforceable right
to shelter.

276) The purpose of citing aforesaid judgments is to highlight that this Court
expanded the scope of Articles 14 and 21 of the Constitution by recognising
various socio-economic rights of the poor and marginalised section of the
society and, in the process, 95 (1992) 3 SCC 666 96 (1993) 1 SCC 645 97 1985
SCR Supl. (2) 51 Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters
Page 347 of 567 transforming the constitutional jurisprudence by putting a
positive obligation on the State to fulfill its duty as per the Charter of
Directive Principles of the State Policy, contained in Part IV of the
Constitution. It is to be kept in mind that while acknowledging that economic
considerations would play a role in determining the full content of the right
to life, the Court also held that right included the protection of human
dignity and all that is attached to it, ‘namely, the bare necessities of life
such as adequate nutrition, clothing and shelter and facilities for reading,
writing and expressing oneself in diverse forms’ (See Francis Coralie Mullin
v. The Administrator, Union Territory of Delhi & Ors. 98). It is, thus, of
some significance to remark that it is this Court which has been repeatedly
insisting that benefits to reach the most deserving and should not get
frittered mid-way. We are of the opinion that purpose of Aadhaar Act, as
captured in the Statement of Objects and Reasons and sought to be implemented
by Section 7 of the Aadhaar Act, is to achieve the stated objectives. This
Court is convinced by its conscience that the Act is aimed at a proper
purpose, which is of sufficient importance.

(b) Suitability or rationale connection stage:

277) We are also of the opinion that the measures which are 98 (1981) 2 SCR
516 Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 348 of 567
enumerated and been taken as per the provisions of Section 7 read with Section
5 of the Aadhaar Act are rationally connected with the fulfillment of the
objectives contained in the Aadhaar Act. It may be mentioned that the scheme
for enrolling under the Aadhaar Act and obtaining the Aadhaar number is
optional and voluntary. It is given the nomenclature of unique identity. A
person with Aadhaar number gets an identity. No doubt, there are many other
modes by which a person can be identified. However, certain categories of
persons, particularly those living in abject poverty and those who are
illiterate will not be in a position to get other modes of identity like Pan
Card, Passport etc. That apart giving unique identity of each resident of the
country is a special feature of this scheme, more so, when it comes with the
feature stated above, namely, no person can have more than one Aadhaar number;
Aadhaar number given to a particular person cannot be reassigned again to any
individual even if that is cancelled and there is hardly any possibility to
have fake identity.

278) As pointed out above, enrolling for Aadhaar is not the serious concern of
the petitioners. It is only the process of authentication and other related
issues which bothers the petitioners which shall be considered at the
appropriate stage. At this point of time, we are discussing the issue as to
whether the limitation on the rights Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 &
connected matters Page 349 of 567 of the individuals is rationally connected
to the fulfillment of the purpose contained in the Aadhaar Act. Here, Section
5 talks of special measures for issuance of Aadhaar number to certain
categories of persons. It gives identity to those persons who otherwise may
not have any such identity. In that manner, it recognises them as residents of
this nation and in that form gives them their ‘dignity’.

279) Section 7, which provides for necessity of authentication for receipt of
certain subsidies, benefits and services has a definite purpose and this
authentication is to achieve the objectives for which Aadhaar Act is enacted,
namely, to ensure that such subsidies, benefits and services reach only the
intended beneficiaries. We have seen rampant corruption at various levels in
implementation of benevolent and welfare schemes meant for different classes
of persons. It has resulted in depriving the actual beneficiaries to receive
those subsidies, benefits and services which get frittered away though on
papers, it is shown that they are received by the persons for whom they are
meant. There have been cases of duplicate and bogus ration cards, BPL cards,
LPG connections etc. Some persons with multiple identities getting those
benefits manifold. Aadhaar scheme has been successful, to a great extent, in
curbing the aforesaid Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected
matters Page 350 of 567 malpractices. By providing that the benefits for
various welfare schemes shall be given to those who possess Aadhaar number and
after undergoing the authentication as provided in Section 8 of the Aadhaar
Act, the purpose is to ensure that only rightful persons receive these
benefits. Non-action is not costly. It’s the affirmative action which costs
the Government. And that money comes from exchequer. So, it becomes the duty
of the Government to ensure that it goes to deserving persons. Therefore,
second component also stands fulfilled.

(c) Necessity Stage:

280) Insofar as third component is concerned, most of it stands answered while
in the discussion that has ensued in respect of component No. 1 and 2. The
manner in which malpractices have been committed in the past leaves us to hold
that apart from the system of unique identity in Aadhaar and authentication of
the real beneficiaries, there is no alternative measure with lesser degree of
limitation which can achieve the same purpose. In fact, on repeated query by
this Court, even the petitioners could not suggest any such method.

(d) Balancing Stage:

281) With this, we now advert to the most important component of Writ Petition
(Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 351 of 567 proportionality
i.e. balancing between importance of achieving the proper purpose and the
social importance of preventing the limitation on the constitutional right.

282) Argument of the petitioners is that Aadhaar project creates the architect
of surveillance state and society, which is antithetical to the principles of
democracy. It is premised on the basis that the Aadhaar project enables the
State to profile citizens, track their movements, assess their habits and
silently influence their behaviour throughout their lives. It may stifle
dissent and influence political decision making. It is also argued that
aggregation, storage and use of such stored information is violative of
fundamental right to privacy, dignity and individual autonomy. Informational
privacy is expected as part of right to privacy. The Act allows data
aggregation as well. Such an Act is unconstitutional as there is violation of
a fundamental rights but there is absence of procedural safeguards to protect
data in the Act. It is also argued that extent of information collected with
the use of Aadhaar, specially by the methodology of authentication, is not
proportionate to the ‘compelling interest of the State’ and there are various
other methods available for identification. It is, thus, disproportionate and
unreasonable state compulsion. Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 &
connected matters Page 352 of 567

283) The respondents, on the other hand, have argued that there cannot be any
reasonable expectation of privacy inasmuch as the Aadhaar Act operates in the
public and relationally sphere and not in the core, private or personal sphere
of the residents. Moreover, it involves minimal identity information for
effective authentication which stands the test of reasonableness. The Act is,
thus, least intrusive and strict scrutiny test does not apply in the
proportionality test. It is also the case of the respondents that the Aadhaar
Act does not allow aggregation at all and, therefore, all the apprehension are
ill-founded and have no basis. It is also submitted that the Aadhaar Act is,
in fact, the facilitator in empowering various facets of right to life under
Article 21 and thereby ensures that unprivileged class is also able to live
with human dignity.

284) Before undertaking this exercise of balancing, we would like to point out
that we are not convinced with the argument of the respondents that there
cannot be any reasonable expectation of privacy. No doubt, the information
which is gathered by the UIDAI (whether biometric or demographic) is parted
with by the individuals to other agencies/body corporates etc. in many other
kinds of transactions as well, as pointed out by the respondents. Writ
Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 353 of 567 However,
the matter is to be looked into from the angle that this information is
collected and stored by the State or instrumentality of the State. Therefore,
it becomes important to find out as to whether it meets the test of
proportionality, and satisfies the condition that the measure must not have
disproportionate impact on the right-holder (balancing stage). However, at the
same time, the fact that such information about individuals is in public
domain may become a relevant factor in undertaking the exercise of balancing.

285) We have already traced the objectives with which the Aadhaar Act has been
enacted. No doubt, there is a right to privacy, which is now entrenched in
fundamental rights. On the other hand, we are also concerned with the rights
of those persons whose dignity is sought to be ensured by giving them the
facilities which are necessary to live as dignified life. Therefore, balancing
has to be done at two levels:

(i) Whether, ‘legitimate state interest’ ensures ‘reasonable tailoring’? There
is a minimal intrusion into the privacy and the law is narrowly framed to
achieve the objective. Here the Act is to be tested on the ground that whether
it is found on a balancing test that the social or public interest and the
reasonableness of the restrictions outweigh the particular aspect of privacy,
as Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 354 of 567
claimed by the petitioners. This is the test we have applied in the instant
case.

(ii) There needs to be balancing of two competing fundamental rights, right to
privacy on the one hand and right to food, shelter and employment on the other
hand. Axiomatically both the rights are founded on human dignity. At the same
time, in the given context, two facets are in conflict with each other. The
question here would be, when a person seeks to get the benefits of welfare
schemes to which she is entitled to as a part of right to live life with
dignity, whether her sacrifice to the right to privacy, is so invasive that it
creates imbalance?

286) In a way, both the aforesaid questions have some overlapping inasmuch as
even while finding answer to the second question, it will have to be
determined as to whether there is a least intrusion into the privacy of a
person while ensuring that the individual gets the benefits under the welfare
schemes.

287) The respondents seemed to be right when they argue that all matters
pertaining to an individual do not qualify as being an inherent part of right
to privacy. Only those which concern matters over which there can be a
reasonable expectation of privacy would be protected by Article 21. In this
behalf, we may Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page
355 of 567 recapitulate the discussion on some significant aspects in
Puttaswamy:

Privacy postulates the reservation of a private space, described as the right
to be let alone. The integrity of the body and the sanctity of the mind can
exist on the foundation of the individual’s ‘right to preserve a private space
in which the human personality can develop’ and this involves the ability to
make choices. In this sense privacy is a postulate of human dignity itself.
The inviolable nature of the human personality is manifested in the ability to
make decisions on matters intimate to human life. The autonomy of the
individual is associated ‘over matters which can be kept private. These are
concerns over which there is a legitimate expectation of privacy’. Thoughts
and behavioral patterns which are intimate to an individual are entitled to a
zone of privacy where one is free of social expectations. In that zone of
privacy an individual is not judged by others. The judgment refers to the
expert group report and identifies nine privacy principles pertaining to
notice, choice and consent, collection limitation, purpose limitation, access
and correction, non disclosure of information, security of data, openness or
proportionality as to the scale, scope and sensitivity to the data collected,
and accountability. At the same time, privacy is a Writ Petition (Civil) No.
494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 356 of 567 subset of liberty. All
liberties may not be exercised in privacy. It lies across the spectrum of
protected freedoms. Further, the notion of reasonable expectation of privacy
has both subjective and objective elements. At a subjective level it means ‘an
individual desires to be left alone’. On an objective plain privacy is defined
by those Constitutional values which shape the content of the protected zone
where the individual ‘ought to be left alone’. Further, the notion of
reasonable expectation of privacy ensures that while on the one hand, the
individual has a protected zone of privacy, yet on the other ‘the exercise of
individual choices is subject the right of others to lead orderly lives’. The
extent of the zone of privacy would, therefore, depend upon both the
subjective expectation and the objective principle which defines a reasonable
expectation.

It is pertinent to point out that while dealing with informational privacy,
the judgment notes that privacy concerns are seriously an issue in the age of
information. It also notes the data mining processes together with knowledge
discovery, and the age of big data. The court finds that data regulation and
individual privacy raises complex issues requiring delicate balances to be
drawn between the legitimate concerns of the State and individual interest in
the protection of privacy, and in Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 &
connected matters Page 357 of 567 this sphere, data protection assumes
significance. Data such as medical information would be a category to which a
reasonable expectation of privacy attaches. There may be other data which
falls outside the reasonable expectation paradigm. Data protection regimes
seek to protect the autonomy of the individual. This is a complex exercise
involving careful balancing. In this balancing process, following parameters
are to be kept in mind:

(i) The judgment also holds that the legitimate expectation of privacy may
vary from the intimate zone to the private zone and from the private to the
public arenas. However, ‘the privacy is not lost or surrendered merely because
the individual is in a public space’.

(ii) One of the chief concerns is that ‘while the web is a source of lawful
activity – both personal and commercial, concerns of National security
intervene since the seamless structure of the web can be exploited by
terrorist to wreak havoc and destruction on civilized societies.’ Noting an
article of Richard A. Posner, which says ‘privacy is the terrorist’s best
friend..’ It is observed that this formulation indicates that State has
legitimate interest when it monitors the web to secure the Nation.

(iii) Apart from National security, State may have justifiable reasons for the
collection and storage of data as where it Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of
2012 & connected matters Page 358 of 567 embarks upon programs to provide
benefits to impoverished and marginalized sections of society and for ensuring
that scarce public resources are not dissipated and diverted to non-eligible
recipients. Digital platforms are a vital tool of ensuring good governance in
a social welfare State and technology is a powerful enabler.

288) In the first instance, therefore, it is to be seen as to whether the
petitioners claim on the information supplied while authentication to be
protected is based on reasonable expectation.

289) ‘Reasonable Expectation’ involves two aspects. First, the individual or
individuals claiming a right to privacy must establish that their claim
involves a concern about some harm likely to be inflicted upon them on account
of the alleged act. This concern ‘should be real and not imaginary or
speculative’. Secondly, ‘the concern should not be flimsy or trivial’. It
should be a reasonable concern. It has to be borne in mind that the concept of
‘reasonable expectation’ has its genesis in the US case laws. UK judgments
adopted the test of reasonable expectation from the US jurisprudence. The ECHR
and ECJ judgments reveal a little divergence with regard to right of privacy.
The ECHR in general adopts the approach that ‘a person’s reasonable
expectation as Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page
359 of 567 to privacy may be significant, although, not necessarily conclusive
factor’. This perhaps explains the apparent conflict as regards finger prints.

290) In the leading case Katz v. US99 Reasonable Expectation was stated to
embrace two distinct questions. The first was whether the individual, by his
conduct has exhibited an actual (subjective expectation of privacy), and the
second, whether the subjective expectation is one that the society is prepared
to recognize as reasonable. This was also followed in Smith v. Marlyand100.

291) In the judgment of Court of Appeal in R. Wood v.

Commissioner101, the appellant complained against taking and retention of his
photograph in Central London in the context of a meeting by the police force
to enable identification at a later time in the event of eruption of disorder
and commission of offence. The concept of reasonable expectation was examined
after surveying a series of judgments which sought to consider violation of
Article 8 of the ECHR. The following pertinent aspects emerge:

(i) Whether information related to private or public matter?

(ii) Whether the material obtained was envisaged for a limited 99 389 U.S. 347
100442 US 735 101(2010) 1 WLR 123 Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 &
connected matters Page 360 of 567 use or was likely to be made available to
general public?

> (iii) Private life was a broad term covering physical and psychological
> integrity of a person.

> (iv) Storing of data relating to private life of an individual interferes
> with Article 8. However, in determining whether information retained
> involves any private life aspect would have to be determined with due regard
> to the specific context.

> (v) Article 8, however protean, should not be so construed widely that its
> claims become unreal and unreasonable. Firstly, the threat to individuals
> personal autonomy must attain a certain level of seriousness. Secondly, the
> claimant must enjoy on the facts a reasonable expectation of privacy.
> Thirdly, the breadth of Article 8(1) may in many instances be greatly
> curtailed by scope of justifications available to the State.

> (vi) Reasonable expectation of privacy is a broad concept which takes into
> account all the circumstances of the case. They include attributes of the
> claimants, the nature of the activity in which the claimant was engaged, the
> place at which it was happening, the nature and purpose of the intrusion,
> the absence (or presence) of consent, the effect on the claimant and the
> purpose for which information is taken.

292) Therefore, when a claim of privacy seeks inclusion in Article 21 of Writ
Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 361 of 567 the
Constitution of India, the Court needs to apply the reasonable expectation of
privacy test. It should, inter alia, see:

(i) What is the context in which a privacy claim is set up?

(ii) Does the claim relate to private or family life, or a confidential
relationship?

(iii) Is the claim a serious one or is it trivial?

(iv) Is the disclosure likely to result in any serious or significant injury
and the nature and extent of disclosure?

(v) Is disclosure relates to personal and sensitive information of an
identified person?

(vi) Does disclosure relate to information already disclosed publicly? If so,
its implication?

293) Under the Aadhaar Act Architecture, four types of information is to be
given at the time of enrolment:

(i) Mandatory demographic information comprising name, date of birth, address
and gender (Section 2(k) read with Regulation 4(1) of the Aadhaar (Enrolment
and Update) Regulations, 2016).

(ii) Optional demographic information (Section 2(k) read with Regulation 4(2)
of the Aadhaar (Enrolment and Update) Regulations, 2016).

(iii) Non core biometric information comprising photograph.

(iv) Core biometric information comprising finger print and iris Writ Petition
(Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 362 of 567 scan.

294) Insofar as demographic information is concerned, it is required by the
provisions of many other enactments as well like Companies Act, Special
Marriage Act, Central Motor Vehicle Rules, Registration of Electoral Rules,
The Citizenship Rules, The Passport Act and even Supreme Court Rules.

295) As regards core biometric information which comprises finger prints, iris
scan, for the purpose of enrolling in Aadhaar scheme, we have already held
earlier that it is minimal information required for enrolment. This
information becomes essential for authentication use in a public sphere and in
relational context.

296) It may also be mentioned that with the advent of science and technology,
finger print and iris scan have been considered to be the most accurate and
non invasive mode of identifying an individual. It is for this reason that
these are taken also for driving licenses, passports, visa as well as at the
time of registration of documents by the State. These are also used in mobile
phones, laptops, lockers etc. for private use. International Civil Aviation
Organisation (ICAO) has recommended use of biometric passports. Many civilized
countries with robust democratic Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 &
connected matters Page 363 of 567 regime have also introduced biometric based
identity cards.

Therefore, collection of information in the four different categories
mentioned above may not be unreasonable. However, as stated earlier as well,
the issue is not of taking the aforesaid information for the purpose of
enrolling in Aadhaar and for authentication. It is the storage and retention
of this data, whenever authentication takes place, about which the concerns
are raised by the petitioners. The fears expressed by the petitioners are that
with the storage and retention of such data, profile of the persons can be
created which is susceptible to misuse.

297) This aspect has already been dealt with earlier and apprehension of the
petitioners are taken care of. To recapitulate, at the time of enrolment, the
data collected is minimal and there is no data collection in respect of
religion, caste, tribe, language of records of entitlement income or medical
history of the applicant at the time of Aadhaar enrolment. Full care is taken
that even the minimal data collected at the time of enrolment does not remain
with the enrolment agency and immediately gets transmitted to CIDR. Even at
the time of authentication, the only exercise which is undertaken by the
Authority is to see that the finger prints and/or iris scan of the concerned
person sent for authentication Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 &
connected matters Page 364 of 567 match with the one which is in the system of
Authority.

298) Let us advert to the second facet of balancing, namely, balancing of two
fundamental rights. As already pointed out above, the Aadhaar Act truly seeks
to secure to the poor and deprived persons an opportunity to live their life
and exercise their liberty. By ensuring targeted delivery through digital
identification, it not only provides them a nationally recognized identity but
also attempts to ensure the delivery of benefits, service and subsidies with
the aid of public exchequer/Consolidated Fund of India. National Security Food
Act, 2013 passed by the Parliament seeks to address the issue of food,
security at the household level. The scheme of that Act is aimed at providing
food grains to those belonging to BPL categories. Like the MGNREGA Act, 2005
takes care of employment. The MGNREGA Act has been enacted for the
enhancement, livelihood, security of the households in rural areas of the
country. It guarantees at least 100 days of wage employment in every financial
year to at least one able member of every household in the rural area on
assets creating public work programme. Sections 3 and 4 of the MGNREGA Act
contain this guarantee. The minimum facilities to be provided are set out by
Section 5 read with Schedule II. Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 &
connected matters Page 365 of 567 Section 22 provides for funding pattern and
Section 23 provides for transparency and accountability. This Act is another
instance of a rights based approach and it enlivens the Fundamental Right to
life and personal liberty of Below Poverty Line people in rural areas.

299) We may mention here that Mr. Dwivedi had pointed out not only India but
several other countries including western nations which have read socio-
economic rights into human dignity and right to life. Hungary and South Africa
have gone to the extent of making express provisions in their Constitutions.

The Federal Constitution Court of Germany in a decision dated February 09,
2010 while deciding the question whether the amount of standard benefit aid is
compatible with the Basic Law held that:

> “The Fundamental Right to the guarantee of a subsistence minimum is in line
> with human dignity emerges from Article 1.1 of the Basic Law in conjunction
> with Article 20.1 of the Basic Law… Article 1.1 of the Basic Law established
> this claim. The principle of the social welfare State contained in Article
> 20.1 of the Basic Law, in turn grants to the Legislature the mandate to
> ensure a subsistence minimum for all that is in line with human dignity”.

It is further held that:

> “if a person does not have the material means to guarantee an existence that
> is in line with human dignity because he or she is unable to obtain it
> either out of his or her gainful employment, or from own property or by
> benefits from third parties, the State is obliged within its mandate to
> protect Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 366
> of 567 human dignity and to ensure, in the implementation of its social
> welfare state mandate, that the material prerequisites for this are at the
> disposal of the person in need of assistance.” Similarly, in a latter
> judgment dated July 18, 2012 while deciding whether the amount of the cash
> benefit provided for in the Asylum Seekers Benefits Act was constitutional
> it reiterated that:

> “the direct constitutional benefit claim to the guarantee of a dignified
> minimum existence does only cover those means that are absolutely necessary
> to maintain a dignified life. It guarantees the entire minimum existence as
> a comprehensive fundamental rights guarantee, that encompasses both humans’
> physical existence, that is food, clothing, household items, housing,
> heating, hygiene, and health, and guarantees the possibility maintain
> interpersonal relationships and a minimal degree of participation in social,
> cultural and political life, since a human as a person necessarily exists in
> a social context..”

> 300) The Constitutional Court of South Africa in Government of the Republic
> of South Africa & Ors. v. Grootboom102 held that:

> “...these rights need to be considered in the context of the socio-economic
> rights enshrined in the Constitution. They entrench the right to access to
> land, to adequate housing and to health care, food, water and social
> security..”

> 301) In 1995, Hungary’s Constitutional Court ruled that the right to social
> security as contained in Article 70/E of the Constitution obligated the
> State to secure a minimum livelihood through all of the welfare benefits
> necessary for the realization of the right to 102(2000) ZACC 19 Writ
> Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 367 of 567 human
> dignity.

302) Even in Italy, the Courts have emphasized on the right to social
security.

303) In Budina v. Russia103, the European Court of Human Rights has
recognized, in principle, that inadequate benefits could fall under Article 3
of the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR) on the right to be free from
inhuman and degrading treatment.

304) In 1996, the Swiss Federal Court ruled that three Czechs illegally
residing in Switzerland are entitled to social benefit in order to have a
minimal level of subsistence for a life in dignity to prevent a situation
where people “are reduced to beggars, a condition unworthy of being called
human. It held:

> “...The federal constitution does not (though the 1995 draft new
> constitution is now different) explicitly provide for a fundamental right to
> a subsistence guarantee. One can however also derive unwritten
> constitutional right from it. A guarantee of freedoms not mentioned in the
> constitution by unwritten constitutional law was assumed by the exercise of
> other freedoms (mentioned in the constitution), or otherwise evidently
> indispensable components of the democratic constitutional order of the
> Federation...” “...The guaranteeing of elementary human needs like food,
> clothing and shelter is the condition for human existence and development as
> such. It is at the same time an indispensable component of a constitutional,
> democratic polity.” 103 App. No. 45603/05 decided on 18.06.2009 Writ
> Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 368 of 567

> 305) Nelson Mandela in his speech at Trafalgar Square in London in 2005
> said:

> “...Massive poverty and obscene inequality are such terrible scourges of our
> times – times in which the world boasts breathtaking advances in science,
> technology, industry and wealth accumulation – that they have to rank
> alongside slavery and apartheid as social evils...And overcoming poverty is
> not a gesture of charity. It is an act of justice. It is the protection of a
> fundamental human right, the right to dignity and a decent life. While
> poverty persists, there is no true freedom.”

> 306) Following passages by James Griffin in his book on “Human Rights” are
> worth noting :

> “10.1 THE HISTORICAL GROWTH OF RIGHTS:

> Contrary to widespread belief, welfare rights are not a twentieth-century
> innovation, but are among the first human rights ever to be claimed. When in
> the twelfth and thirteenth centuries our modern conception of a right first
> appeared, one of the earliest examples offered was the right of those in
> dire need to receive aid from those in surplus. This right was used to
> articulate the attractive view of property prevalent in the medieval Church.
> God has given all things to us in common, but as goods will not be cared for
> and usefully developed unless assigned to particular individuals, we
> creatures have instituted systems of property. In these systems, however, an
> owner is no more than a custodian. We all thus have a right, if we should
> fall into great need, to receive necessary goods or, failing that, to take
> them from those in surplus.

> One finds, every occasionally, what seem to be human rights to welfare
> asserted in the Enlightenment, for example, by John Locke, Tom Paine, and
> William Cobbett.

> Following the Enlightenment, right to welfare have often appeared in
> national constitutions; for example, the French constitutions of the 1790s,
> the Prussian Civil Code (1794), the Constitutions of Sweden (1809), Norway
> (1814), The Netherlands (1814), Denmark (1849), and, skipping to the
> twentieth century, the Soviet Union (1936)-though it is not Writ Petition
> (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 369 of 567 always clear
> that the drafters of these various documents thought of these fundamental
> civil rights as also human rights. By the end of the nineteenth century,
> political theorists were beginning to make a case that welfare rights are
> basic in much the sense that Civil and political rights are. But it was
> Franklin Roosevelt who did most to bring welfare rights into public life.
> The Atlantic Charter (1941), signed by Roosevelt and Churchill but in this
> respect primarily Roosevelt’s initiative, declared that in addition to the
> classical civil and political freedoms here were also freedoms from want and
> fear. In his State of the Union message of 1944, Roosevelt averred :

> We have come to a clear realization of the fact that true individual freedom
> cannot exist without economic security and independence. ‘Necessitous men
> are not free men’… In our day these economic truths have become accepted as
> self evident. We have accepted, so to speak, a second Bill of Rights… Among
> these are : The right to a useful and remunerative job…. The right to earn
> enough to provide adequate food and clothing and recreation… The United
> Nations committee charged with drafting the Universal Declaration of Human
> Rights (1948), chaired by Eleanor Roosevelt, included most of the now
> standard welfare rights; rights to social security, to work, to rest and
> leisure, to medical care, to education, and ‘to enjoy the arts and to share
> in scientific advancements and its benefits’. The Universal Declaration is a
> good example of how extensive-some would say lavish-proposed welfare rights
> have become.

> ...If human rights are protections of a form of life that is autonomous and
> free, they should protect life as well as that form of it. But if they
> protect life, must they not also ensure the wherewithal to keep body and
> soul together- that is, some minimum material provision? And as mere
> subsistence-that is, keeping body and soul together-is too meager to ensure
> normative agency, must not human rights guarantee also whatever leisure and
> education and access to the thought of others that are also necessary to
> being a normative agent?

That is the heart of the case. It appeals to our picture of human agency and
argues that both life and certain supporting goods are integral to it. Life
and certain Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 370
of 567 supporting goods are necessary conditions of being autonomous and free.
Many philosophers employ this necessary – condition argument to establish a
human right to welfare-or, at least, to establish the right’s being as basic
as any other rights.

I too want to invoke the necessary-conditions arguments; I should only want to
strengthen it. It is now common to say that liberty rights and welfare rights
are ‘indivisible’. But that, also, is too weak. It asserts that one cannot
enjoy the benefits of liberty rights without enjoying the benefits of welfare
rights, and vice versa. But something stronger still may be said. There are
forms of welfare that are empirically necessary conditions of a person’s being
autonomous and free, but there are also forms that are logically necessary-
part of what we mean in saying that a person has these rights. The value in
which human rights are grounded is the value attaching to normative agency.
The norm arising from this value, of course, prohibits persons from attacking
another’s autonomy and liberty. But it prohibits more. The value concerned is
being a normative agent, a self-creator, made in god’s image…. The value
resides not simply in one’s having the undeveloped, unused capacities for
autonomy and liberty but also in exercising them-not just in being able to be
autonomous but also in actually being so. The norm associated with this more
complex value would address other ways of failing to be an agent. It would
require protecting another person from losing agency, at least if one can do
this without great cost to oneself; it would require helping to restore
another’s agency if it has already been lost, say through giving mobility to
the crippled or guidance to the blind, again with the same proviso. All of
this is involved simply in having a right to autonomy or to liberty. Welfare
claims are already part of the content of these rights. What, then, should we
think of the common division of basic rights into ‘classical’ liberty rights
and welfare rights? Into which of these two classes does the right to autonomy
or to liberty go? Into which of the two classes do the difficult, apparently
borderline cases go, such as rights to life, to property, to the pursuit of
happiness, to security of person, and to privacy? The sensible response would
be to drop the distinction. What is more, a right to welfare is a human right.

36\. Amartya Sen in his book “Development as Freedom” says:

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 371 of 567

Development requires the removal of major sources of unfreedom: poverty as
well as tyranny, poor economic opportunities as well as systematic social
deprivation, neglect of public facilities as well as intolerance or
overactivity of repressive states. Despite unprecedented increases in overall
opulence, the contemporary world denies elementary freedoms to vast numbers-
perhaps even the majority-of people. Sometimes the lack of substantive
freedoms relates directly to economic poverty, which robs people of the
freedom to satisfy hunger, or to achieve sufficient nutrition, or to obtain
remedies for treatable illnesses, or the opportunity to be adequately clothed
or sheltered, or to enjoy clean water or sanitary facilities. In other cases,
the unfreedom links closely to the lack of public facilities and social care,
such as the absence of epidemiological programs, or of organized arrangements
for health care or educational facilities, or of effective institutions for
the maintenance of local peace and order. In still other cases, the violation
of freedom results directly from a denial of political and civil liberties by
authoritarian regimes and from imposed restrictions on the freedom to
participate in the social, political and economic life of the community.”

307) In the aforesaid backdrop, this Court is called upon to find out whether
Aadhaar Act strikes a fair balance between the two rights. In this context, we
have to examine the importance of achieving the proper purpose and the social
importance of preventing the limitation on the constitutional rights. Insofar
as importance of achieving the proper purpose is concerned, that has already
been highlighted above. To reiterate some of the important features, it is to
be borne in mind that the State is using Aadhaar as an enabler for providing
deserving section of the society their right to food, right to livelihood,
right to receive Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters
Page 372 of 567 pension and other social assistance benefits like scholarships
etc. thereby bringing their right to life to fruition. This necessity of
Aadhaar has arisen in order to ensure that such benefits are given to only
genuine beneficiaries. The Act aims at efficient, transparent and targeted
delivery of subsidies, benefits and services. In the process, it wants to
achieve the objective of checking the corrupt practices at various levels of
distribution system which deprive genuine persons from receiving these
benefits. There have been reports relating to leakages in PDS as well as in
fuel subsidies and also in working of MGNREGA scheme. Mr. Venugopal, learned
Attorney General has given the following details about these reports:

(I) Reports relating to leakages in PDS Several studies initiated by the
Government as well as the World Bank and Planning Commission revealed that
food grains did not reach the intended beneficiaries and that there was large
scale leakages due to the failure to establish identity:

(a) The Comptroller and Auditor General of India in its Audit Report No. 3 of
2000 in its overview for the Audit Report observed that the Public
Distribution Scheme suffered from serious targeting problems. 1.93 Crore bogus
ration cards were found to be in circulation in 13 States and a significant
portion of the subsidized food- grains and other essential commodities did not
reach the beneficiaries due to their diversion in the open market.

(b) A Report titled “Budget Briefs: Targeted Public Distribution System
(TPDS), GOI 2011-2012” prepared by Avani Kapur and Anirvan Chowdhury and
published by the Accountability Initiative observed that there were large Writ
Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 373 of 567 number of
fake ration cards which were causing inefficiencies in targeting. Between July
2006 and July 2010, in Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh and Orissa, total
of 37 lakh ineligible/fake ration cards for households have been eliminated.
Additionally, in Maharashtra and Madhya Pradesh, 29 lakh and 25 lakh
ineligible ration cards were discovered and cancelled.

(c) World Bank published a Discussion Paper No. 380 titled “India’s Public
Distribution System: A National and International Perspective” dated November,
1997 co- authored by R. Radhakrishna and K. Subbarao, in which it was found
that in the year in 1986-87 for every one rupee (Re. 1) transferred under the
PDS, the expenditure incurred by the central government was Rs. 4.27.

(d) The Planning Commission of India in its Performance Evaluation Report
titled “Performance Evaluation Report of Targeted Public Distribution System
(TPDS)” dated March, 2005 found as follows:

(i) State-wise figure of excess Ration Cards in various states and the
existence of over 1.52 Crore excess Ration Cards issued.

(ii) Existence of fictitious households and identification errors leading to
exclusion of genuine beneficiaries.

(iii) Leakage through ghost BPL Ration Cards found to be prevalent in almost
all the states under study.

(iv) The Leakage of food grains through ghost cards has been tabulated and the
percentage of such leakage on an All India basis has been estimated at 16.67%.

(v) It is concluded that a large part of the subsidized food-grains were not
reaching the target group. (II) Report relating to Fuel subsidies

13\. With respect of Kerosene subsidies:

(a) A Report titled “Budgetary Subsidies in India – Subsidizing Social and
Economic Services” prepared by the National Institute of Public Finance and
Policy dated March, found that the key to lowering volume of subsidies was
better targeting without which, there was significant Writ Petition (Civil)
No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 374 of 567 leakage to unintended
beneficiaries, with only 70% of the kerosene reaching the poorer section of
society.

(b) The Economic Survey 2014-15 at Chapter 3 titled “Wiping Every Tear from
every Eye: The JAM Number Trinity Solution” dated February, 2015 noted that
only 59 percent of subsidized kerosene allocated via the PDS is actually
consumed by households, with the remainder lost to leakage and only 46 percent
of total consumption is by poor households.

14\. With respect to the MGNREGA Scheme the following reports have found large
scale leakages in the scheme:

(a) Report prepared by the V.V. Giri National Labour Institute and sponsored
by the Department of Rural Development, Ministry of Rural Development,
Government of India as “The study of Schedule of Rates for National Rural
Employment Guarantee Scheme” observes that there was great fraud in making
fake job cards and it was found that in many cases, it was found that workers
performed one day’s job, but their attendance was put for 33 days. The workers
got money for one day while wages for 32 days were misappropriated by the
people associated with the functioning of NREGS.

(b) The National Institute of Public Finance and Policy’s report titled as “A
Cost-benefit analysis of Aadhaar” dated 09.11.2012 estimated that a leakage of
approximately 12 percent is being caused to the government on account of ghost
workers and manipulated muster rolls and assumed that 5 percent of the
leakages can be plugged through wage disbursement using Aadhaar-enabled bank
accounts and 7 percent through automation of muster rolls. (III) It was also
pointed out that the Thirteenth Finance Commission Report for 2010-2015 dated
December, 2009 at page 218 in “Chapter 12 – Grants in Aid” states that the
creation of a biometric-based unique identity for all residents in the country
has the potential to address need of the government to ensure that only
eligible persons are provided subsidies and benefits and that all eligible
persons are covered.

The relevant findings of the above Report are as follows:

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 375 of 567

(i) Government of India’s expenditure on subsidies is expected to be about
Rs.1,11,000 Crore in 2009-10, or nearly 18 per cent of the non-plan revenue
expenditure.

(ii) The data base of eligible persons presently maintained has both Type I
(exclusion) and Type II (inclusion) errors. The first error arises from the
difficulty faced by the poor in establishing their identity in order to be
eligible for government subsidies and social safety net programmes. The second
error arises because of the inability to cross-verify lists of eligible
persons across district-level and state-level data bases to eliminate
duplicate and ghost entries. We need to ensure that only eligible persons are
provided subsidies and benefits and that all eligible persons are covered.

(iii) Creation of a biometric-based unique identity for all residents in the
country has the potential to address both these dimensions simultaneously. It
will provide the basis for focusing subsidies to target groups. Possession of
such an identity will also enable the poor and underprivileged to leverage
other resources like bank accounts, cell phones, which can empower them and
catalyse their income growth. These benefits cannot be accessed by them
presently due to their inability to provide acceptable identification. The
initiative to provide unique IDs has the potential to significantly improve
the governance and delivery framework of public services while substantially
reducing transaction costs, leakages and frauds.

308) As against the above larger public interest, the invasion into the
privacy rights of these beneficiaries is minimal. By no means it can be said
that it has disproportionate effect on the right holder.

309) Intensity of review depends upon the particular context of question in a
given case. There is yet another significant angle in these matters, which has
to be emphasised at this stage viz. dignity in the form of autonomy
(informational privacy) and dignity Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 &
connected matters Page 376 of 567 in the form of assuring better living
standards, of the same individual. In the instant case, a holistic view of the
matter, having regard to the detailed discussion hereinabove, would amply
demonstrate that enrolment in Aadhaar of the unprivileged and marginalised
section of the society, in order to avail the fruits of welfare schemes of the
Government, actually amounts to empowering these persons. On the one hand, it
gives such individuals their unique identity and, on the other hand, it also
enables such individuals to avail the fruits of welfare schemes of the
Government which are floated as socio-economic welfare measures to uplift such
classes. In that sense, the scheme ensures dignity to such individuals. This
facet of dignity cannot be lost sight of and needs to be acknowledged. We are,
by no means, accepting that when dignity in the form of economic welfare is
given, the State is entitled to rob that person of his liberty. That can never
be allowed. We are concerned with the balancing of the two facets of dignity.
Here we find that the inroads into the privacy rights where these individuals
are made to part with their biometric information, is minimal. It is coupled
with the fact that there is no data collection on the movements of such
individuals, when they avail benefits under Section 7 of the Act thereby
ruling out the possibility of creating their profiles. In Writ Petition
(Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 377 of 567 fact, this
technology becomes a vital tool of ensuring good governance in a social
welfare state. We, therefore, are of the opinion that the Aadhaar Act meets
the test of balancing as well.

310) We may profitably refer to the judgment of this Court in People’s Union
for Civil Liberties (PUCL) & Anr. v. Union of India & Anr.104 which dealt with
the issue of right to privacy vis-a-vis in public interest and leaned in
favour of public interest which can be seen from the following discussion:

> “121. It has been contended with much force that the right to information
> made available to the voters/citizens by judicial interpretation has to be
> balanced with the right of privacy of the spouse of the contesting candidate
> and any insistence on the disclosure of assets and liabilities of the spouse
> invades his/her right to privacy which is implied in Article 21. After
> giving anxious consideration to this argument, I am unable to uphold the
> same. In this context, I would like to recall the apt words of Mathew, J.,
> in Gobind v. State of M.P. [1969 UJ (SC) 616] While analysing the right to
> privacy as an ingredient of Article 21, it was observed: (SCC p. 155, para
> 22) “22. There can be no doubt that privacy-dignity claims deserve to be
> examined with care and to be denied only when an important countervailing
> interest is shown to be superior.” (emphasis supplied) It was then said
> succinctly: (SCC pp. 155-56, para

> 22) “If the court does find that a claimed right is entitled to protection
> as a fundamental privacy right, a law infringing it must satisfy the
> compelling State-interest test. Then the question would be whether a State
> 104(2003) 4 SCC 399 Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected
> matters Page 378 of 567 interest is of such paramount importance as would
> justify an infringement of the right.” It was further explained: (SCC p.
> 156, para 23) “[P]rivacy primarily concerns the individual. It therefore
> relates to and overlaps with the concept of liberty. The most serious
> advocate of privacy must confess that there are serious problems of defining
> the essence and scope of the right. Privacy interest in autonomy must also
> be placed in the context of other rights and values.” By calling upon the
> contesting candidate to disclose the assets and liabilities of his/her
> spouse, the fundamental right to information of a voter/citizen is thereby
> promoted. When there is a competition between the right to privacy of an
> individual and the right to information of the citizens, the former right
> has to be subordinated to the latter right as it serves the larger public
> interest. The right to know about the candidate who intends to become a
> public figure and a representative of the people would not be effective and
> real if only truncated information of the assets and liabilities is given.
> It cannot be denied that the family relationship and social order in our
> country is such that the husband and wife look to the properties held by
> them as belonging to the family for all practical purposes, though in the
> eye of law the properties may distinctly belong to each of them. By and
> large, there exists a sort of unity of interest in the properties held by
> spouses. The property being kept in the name of the spouse benami is not
> unknown in our country. In this situation, it could be said that a
> countervailing or paramount interest is involved in requiring a candidate
> who chooses to subject himself/herself to public gaze and scrutiny to
> furnish the details of assets and liabilities of the spouse as well. That is
> one way of looking at the problem. More important, it is to be noted that
> Parliament itself accepted in principle that not only the assets of the
> elected candidates but also his or her spouse and dependent children should
> be disclosed to the constitutional authority and the right of privacy should
> not come in the way of such disclosure;...” Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of
> 2012 & connected matters Page 379 of 567

> 311) In Vernonia School District 47J v. Acton et ux., Guardians Ad Litem for
> Acton105, the Supreme Court of United States, while repelling the Fourth
> Amendment challenge wherein the petitioner had adopted a Drug Policy which
> authorised random urinalysis drug testing of students participating in
> athletics programs, remarked as under:

> “Taking into account all the factors we have considered above- the decreased
> expectation of privacy, the relative unobtrusiveness of the search, and the
> severity of the need met by the search-we conclude Vernonia’s Policy is
> reasonable and hence constitutional.”

> 312) This very exercise of balancing of two fundamental rights was also
> carried out in Subramanian Swamy v. Union of India, Ministry of Law &
> Ors.106 where the Court dealt with the matter in the following manner:

> “122. In State of Madras v. V.G. Row [State of Madras v. V.G. Row, AIR 1952
> SC 196 : 1952 Cri LJ 966], the Court has ruled that the test of
> reasonableness, wherever prescribed, should be applied to each individual
> statute impugned and no abstract standard, or general pattern of
> reasonableness can be laid down as applicable to all cases. The nature of
> the right alleged to have been infringed, the underlying purpose of the
> restrictions imposed, the extent and urgency of the evil sought to be
> remedied thereby, the disproportion of the imposition, the prevailing
> conditions at the time, should all enter into the judicial verdict.
    
    
                                       xx             xx        xx
    
    
    
    105515 US 646 (1995)
    106(2016) 7 SCC 221
    Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters          Page 380 of 567
    

> 130\. The principles as regards reasonable restriction as has been stated by
> this Court from time to time are that the restriction should not be
> excessive and in public interest. The legislation should not invade the
> rights and should not smack of arbitrariness. The test of reasonableness
> cannot be determined by laying down any abstract standard or general
> pattern. It would depend upon the nature of the right which has been
> infringed or sought to be infringed. The ultimate “impact”, that is, effect
> on the right has to be determined. The “impact doctrine” or the principle of
> “inevitable effect” or “inevitable consequence” stands in contradistinction
> to abuse or misuse of a legislation or a statutory provision depending upon
> the circumstances of the case. The prevailing conditions of the time and the
> principles of proportionality of restraint are to be kept in mind by the
> court while adjudging the constitutionality of a provision regard being had
> to the nature of the right. The nature of social control which includes
> public interest has a role. The conception of social interest has to be
> borne in mind while considering reasonableness of the restriction imposed on
> a right. The social interest principle would include the felt needs of the
> society.

> xx xx xx Balancing of fundamental rights

> 136\. To appreciate what we have posed hereinabove, it is necessary to dwell
> upon balancing the fundamental rights. It has been argued by the learned
> counsel for the petitioners that the right conferred under Article 19(1)(a)
> has to be kept at a different pedestal than the individual reputation which
> has been recognised as an aspect of Article 21 of the Constitution. In fact
> the submission is that right to freedom of speech and expression which
> includes freedom of press should be given higher status and the individual's
> right to have his/her reputation should yield to the said right. In this
> regard a passage from Sakal Papers (P) Ltd. [Sakal Papers (P) Ltd. v. Union
> of India, (1962) 3 SCR 842 : AIR 1962 SC 305] has been commended to us.

> It says: (AIR pp. 313-14, para 36) “36. … Freedom of speech can be
> restricted only in the interests of the security of the State, friendly
> relations with foreign State, public order, decency or morality or in
> relation to contempt of court, defamation or incitement to an offence. It
> cannot, like Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page
> 381 of 567 the freedom to carry on business, be curtailed in the interest of
> the general public. If a law directly affecting it is challenged, it is no
> answer that the restrictions enacted by it are justifiable under clauses (3)
> to (6). For, the scheme of Article 19 is to enumerate different freedoms
> separately and then to specify the extent of restrictions to which they may
> be subjected and the objects for securing which this could be done. A
> citizen is entitled to enjoy each and every one of the freedoms together and
> clause (1) does not prefer one freedom to another. That is the plain meaning
> of this clause. It follows from this that the State cannot make a law which
> directly restricts one freedom even for securing the better enjoyment of
> another freedom.” (emphasis supplied)

> 137\. Having bestowed our anxious consideration on the said passage, we are
> disposed to think that the above passage is of no assistance to the
> petitioners, for the issue herein is sustenance and balancing of the
> separate rights, one under Article 19(1)(a) and the other, under Article 21.
> Hence, the concept of equipoise and counterweighing fundamental rights of
> one with other person. It is not a case of mere better enjoyment of another
> freedom. In Acharya Maharajshri Narendra Prasadji Anandprasadji Maharaj v.
> State of Gujarat [Acharya Maharajshri Narendra Prasadji Anandprasadji
> Maharaj v. State of Gujarat, (1975) 1 SCC 11], it has been observed that a
> particular fundamental right cannot exist in isolation in a watertight
> compartment.

One fundamental right of a person may have to coexist in harmony with the
exercise of another fundamental right by others and also with reasonable and
valid exercise of power by the State in the light of the directive principles
in the interests of social welfare as a whole. The Court's duty is to strike a
balance between competing claims of different interests… xx xx xx

194\. Needless to emphasise that when a law limits a constitutional right
which many laws do, such limitation is constitutional if it is proportional.
The law imposing restriction is proportional if it is meant to achieve a
proper purpose, and if the measures taken to achieve such a purpose are
rationally connected to the purpose, and such measures are necessary. Such
limitations should not be arbitrary or of an excessive nature beyond what is
required Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 382 of
567 in the interest of the public. Reasonableness is judged with reference to
the objective which the legislation seeks to achieve, and must not be in
excess of that objective (see P.P. Enterprises v. Union of India [P.P.
Enterprises v. Union of India, (1982) 2 SCC 33 : 1982 SCC (Cri) 341]).
Further, the reasonableness is examined in an objective manner from the
standpoint of the interest of the general public and not from the point of
view of the person upon whom the restrictions are imposed or abstract
considerations (see Mohd. Hanif Quareshi v. State of Bihar [Mohd. Hanif
Quareshi v. State of Bihar, AIR 1958 SC 731]).”

313) Thus, even when two aspects of the fundamental rights of the same
individual, which appear to be in conflict with each other, is done, we find
that the Aadhaar Act has struck a fair balance between the right of privacy of
the individual with right to life of the same individual as a beneficiary.

In the face of the all pervading prescript for accomplished socio-economic
rights, that need to be given to the deprived and marginalised section of the
society, as the constitutional imperative embodied in these provisions of the
Act, it is entitled to receive judicial imprimatur.

Re : Argument on Exclusion:

314) Some incidental aspects, however, remain to be discussed. It was argued
by the petitioners that the entire authentication process is probabilistic in
nature inasmuch as case of a genuine person for authentication can result in
rejection as biometric technology does not guarantee 100% accuracy. It may
happen Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 383 of
567 for various reasons, namely, advance age, damage to fingerprints due to
accident, etc. Even in case of children the fingerprints may change when they
grow up. The emphasis was that there was a possibility of failure in
authentication for various reasons and when it happens it would result in the
exclusion rather than inclusion. In such eventuality an individual would not
only be denied the benefits of welfare schemes, it may threaten his very
identity and existence as well and it would be violative of Articles 14 and 21
of the Constitution. The Authority has claimed that biometric accuracy is
99.76%. It was, however, submitted that where more than 110 crores of persons
have enrolled themselves, even 0.232% failure would be a phenomenal figure,
which comes to 27.60 lakh people. Therefore, the rate of exclusion is alarming
and this would result in depriving needy persons to enjoy their fundamental
rights, which is the so-called laudable objective trumpeted by the
respondents. TO DICTATE FURTHER Re. : Studies on exclusion Re. : Finger prints
of disabled, old persons etc. See other mode of identity

315) The aforesaid apprehensions are sought to be assuaged by the respondents
by submitting that Section 7 of the Act nowhere says Writ Petition (Civil) No.
494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 384 of 567 that if authentication fails,
the concerned person would be deprived of subsidies, benefits or services. It
is only an enabling provision. It also provides that in case of such a
failure, such an individual would be permitted to establish her identity by
any other means so that genuine persons are not deprived of their benefits
which are mentioned in Section 7 as the entire Act is to facilitate delivery
of those benefits to such persons. Learned Attorney General also referred to
the Circular dated October 24, 2017 in this behalf which is issued by the
Authority. That, according to us, takes care of the problem.

316) We understand and appreciate that execution of the Aadhaar scheme, which
has otherwise a laudable objective, is a ‘work in progress’. There have been
substantial improvements in the system over a period of time from the date of
its launch. It was stated by the learned Attorney General as well as Mr.
Rakesh Dwivedi, at the Bar, that whenever difficulties in implementation are
brought to the notice of the respondents, remedial measures are taken with
promptness. Cases of denial of services are specifically looked into which is
very much needed in a welfare State and there can be a genuine hope that with
the fine tuning of technology, i.e. the mode of advancement at rapid pace,
such problems and concerns shall also be completely taken care of. Writ
Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 385 of 567

317) In fairness to the petitioners, it is worth mentioning that they have
referred to the research carried out by some individuals and even NGOs which
have been relied upon to demonstrate that there are number of instances
leading to the exclusion i.e. the benefits are allegedly denied on the ground
of failure of authentication. The respondents have refuted such studies. These
become disputed question of facts. It will be difficult to invalidate
provisions of Parliamentary legislations on the basis of such material, more
particularly, when their credence has not been tested.

318) That apart, there is another significant and more important aspect which
needs to be highlighted. The objective of the Act is to plug the leakages and
ensure that fruits of welfare schemes reach the targeted population, for whom
such schemes are actually meant. This is the larger purpose, and very
important public purpose, which the Act is supposed to subserve. We have
already held that it fulfills legitimate aim and there is a rational
connection between the provisions of the Act and the goals which it seeks to
attain. The Act passes the muster of necessity stage as well when we do not
find any less restrictive measure which could be equally effective in
achieving the aim. In a situation like this where the Act is aimed at
achieving the aforesaid public purpose, Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012
& connected matters Page 386 of 567 striving to benefit millions of deserving
people, can it be invalidated only on the ground that there is a possibility
of exclusion of some of the seekers of these welfare schemes? Answer has to be
in the negative. We may hasten to add that by no means, we are accepting that
if such an exclusion takes place, it is justified. We are only highlighting
the fact that the Government seems to be sincere in its efforts to ensure that
no such exclusion takes place and in those cases where an individual who is
rightfully entitled to benefits under the scheme is not denied such a benefit
merely because of failure of authentication. In this scenario, the entire
Aadhaar project cannot be shelved. If that is done, it would cause much more
harm to the society.

319) We are also conscious of the situation where the formation of
fingerprints may undergo change for various reasons. It may happen in the case
of a child after she grows up; it may happen in the case of an individual who
gets old; it may also happen because of damage to the fingers as a result of
accident or some disease etc. or because of suffering of some kind of
disability for whatever reason. Even iris test can fail due to certain reasons
including blindness of a person. We again emphasise that no Writ Petition
(Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 387 of 567 person rightfully
entitled to the benefits shall be denied the same on such grounds. It would be
appropriate if a suitable provision be made in the concerned regulations for
establishing an identity by alternate means, in such situations. Furthermore,
if there is a 0.232% failure in authentication, it also cannot be said that
all these failures were only in those cases where authentication was for the
purpose of utilising for the benefit of the welfare schemes, i.e. with
reference to Section 7 of the Act. It could have happened in other cases as
well. Be as it may, there is yet another angle which has to be kept in mind
and cannot be ignored. We have already highlighted above as to how the Aadhaar
project is aimed at serving a much larger public interest. The Authority has
claimed that biometric accuracy is 99.76% and the petitioners have also
proceeded on that basis. In this scenario, if the Aadhaar project is shelved,
99.76% beneficiaries are going to suffer. Would it not lead to their
exclusion? It will amount to throwing the baby out of hot water along with the
water. In the name of 0.232% failure (which can in any case be remedied)
should be revert to the pre-Aadhaar stage with a system of leakages,
pilferages and corruption in the implementation of welfare schemes meant for
marginalised section of the society, the full fruits thereof were not reaching
to Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 388 of 567
such people? The Aadhaar programme was conceived and conceptualised by Mr.
Nandan Nilekani under the leadership of then Prime Minister, a great economist
himself. It went through rigorous process of testing about its effectiveness
before it is launched. This has been stated in the beginning. The entire aim
behind launching this programme is the ‘inclusion’ of the deserving persons
who need to get such benefits. When it is serving much larger purpose by
reaching hundreds of millions of deserving persons, it cannot be crucified on
the unproven plea of exclusion of some. We again repeat that the Court is not
trivialising the problem of exclusion if it is there. However, what we are
emphasising is that remedy is to plug the loopholes rather than axe a project,
aimed for the welfare of large section of the society. Obviously, in order to
address the failures of authentication, the remedy is to adopt alternate
methods for identifying such persons, after finding the causes of failure in
their cases. We have chosen this path which leads to better equilibrium and
have given necessary directions also in this behalf.

320) Another facet which needs examination at this stage is the meaning that
is to be assigned to the expression ‘benefits’ Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494
of 2012 & connected matters Page 389 of 567 occurring in Section 7 of the
Aadhaar Act, along with ‘subsidies’ and ‘services’. It was argued that the
expression ‘benefits’ is very lose and wide and the respondents may attempt to
bring within its sweep any and every kind of governmental activity in the name
of welfare of communities, which would result in making the requirement of
Aadhaar virtually mandatory. It was pointed out that by issuing various
circulars the Government has already brought within the sweep of Section 7,
almost 139 such subsidies, services and benefits.

321) No doubt, the Government cannot take umbrage under the aforesaid
provision to enlarge the scope of subsidies, services and benefits. ‘Benefits’
should be such which are in the nature of welfare schemes for which resources
are to be drawn from the Consolidated Fund of India.

Therefore actions by CBSE, NEET, JEE and UGC requirements for scholarship
shall not be covered under Section 7, unless it is demonstrated that the
expenditure is incurred from Consolidated Fund of India. Further, the
expression ‘benefit’ has to be read ejusdem generis with the preceding word
‘subsidies’.

322) We also make it clear that a benefit which is earned by an Writ Petition
(Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 390 of 567 individual (e.g.
pension by a government employee) cannot be covered under Section 7 of the
Act, as it is the right of the individual to receive such benefit.

At the same time, we have gone through the list of notifications which are
issued under Section 7 of the Aadhaar Act. We find that most of these
notifications pertain to various welfare schemes under which benefits,
subsidies or services are provided to the intending recipients. Moreover, in
order to avail the benefits, only one time verification is required except for
few services where annual verification is needed. It is only in respect of
fertilizer subsidy where authentication is required every time the fertilizer
is disbursed. However, it is clarified that fertilizer is also given on the
basis of other documents such as Kisan Credit Card, etc. At the same time, we
hope that the respondents shall not unduly expand the scope of ‘subsidies,
services and benefits’ thereby widening the net of Aadhaar, where it is not
permitted otherwise. Insofar as notifications relating to children are
concerned, we have already dealt with the same separately. We, thus, conclude
this aspect as under:

(a) ‘benefits’ and ‘services’ as mentioned in Section 7 should be those which
have the colour of some kind of subsidies etc., namely, welfare schemes of the
Government whereby Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters
Page 391 of 567 Government is doling out such benefits which are targeted at a
particular deprived class.

(b) The expenditure thereof has to be drawn from the Consolidated Fund of
India.

(c) On that basis, CBSE, NEET, JEE, UGC etc. cannot make the requirement of
Aadhaar mandatory as they are outside the purview of Section 7 and are not
backed by any law. Children:

323) Though, we have upheld, in general, the validity of Section 7 of the
Aadhaar Act, one specific aspect thereof is yet to be considered. Section 7
mandates requirement of Aadhaar for the purposes of receiving certain
subsidies, benefits and services. Thus, any individual who wants to seek any
of these subsidies, benefits and services is compulsorily required to have an
Aadhaar number. This will include children as well. Some of the petitioners as
well as some other applicants who have intervened in these petitions have
expressed their concern about the mandatory requirement of Aadhaar for
children and subsequent linking for realising their basic rights including
education. They have referred to various circulars and notifications issued
through various functionaries, schools, The Ministry of Human Resource Writ
Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 392 of 567
Development (MHRD) which have mandated production of Aadhaar card details for
the children seeking admission to schools and to link the Aadhaar of the
students already enrolled. We have held that Aadhaar is a voluntary scheme
and, therefore, the Aadhaar number is to be alloted to an individual on his
‘consent’. No doubt, for the purposes of utilising any of the benefits under
Section 7 of the Aadhaar Act, it becomes necessary to have Aadhaar number.
However, the question is as to whether it can be extended to children? It is
more so when they are not under legal capacity to provide any ‘consent’ under
the law.

324) Article 21A of the Constitution guarantees right to education and makes
it fundamental right of the children between 6 years and 14 years of age. Such
a right cannot be taken away by imposing requirement of holding Aadhaar card,
upon the children.

325) In view thereof, admission of a child in his school cannot be covered
under Section 7 of the Aadhaar Act as it is neither subsidy nor service. No
doubt, the expression ‘benefit’ occurring in Section 7 is very wide. At the
same time, it has to be given restrictive meaning and the admission of
children in the schools, when they have fundamental right to education, would
not be Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 393 of
567 covered by Section 7, in our considered view. The respondents made an
attempt to justify the linkage of Aadhaar with child information and records
by arguing that there have been several instances of either impersonations at
examinations or bogus admissions which have the potential to pilfer away
various scholarship schemes which the Government provides for weaker sections
from time to time. If this is the objective, then also requirement of Aadhaar
cannot insisted at the time of admission but only at the stage of application
for Government scholarships. Insofar as impersonation at examination is
concerned, that can be easily checked and contained by other means with
effective checks and balances. When there are alternative means, insistence on
Aadhaar would not satisfy the test or proportionality. This would violate the
privacy right of the children importance whereto is given by the Constitution
Bench in K.S. Puttaswamy in the following words:

> “633. Children around the world create perpetual digital footprints on
> social network websites on a 24/7 basis as they learn their ‘ABCs’: Apple,
> Bluetooth, and Chat followed by Download, E-Mail, Facebook, Google, Hotmail,
> and Instagram. They should not be subjected to the consequences of their
> childish mistakes and naivety, their entire life. Privacy of children will
> require special protection not just in the context of the virtual world, but
> also the real world.”

> 326) It is also important to note herein that the Juvenile Justice Act, Writ
> Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 394 of 567 2015
> while addressing children in need of care and protection and children in
> conflict with law enunciates that the records of the children are
> confidential and will not be parted with unless requested by the Children’s
> Court. In contrast, the submission of the Union justifying linking of
> Aadhaar with student records on malpractice in examinations and potential
> bogus admissions with no safeguards whatsoever.

327) It has to be kept in mind that when the children are incapable of giving
consent, foisting compulsion of having Aadhaar card upon them would be totally
disproportionate and would fail to meet the proportionality test. As the law
exists today, a child can hold property, operate a bank account, be eligible
to be a nominee in an insurance policy or a bank account or have any financial
transaction only through a legal guardian who has to be a major of sound mind.
In cases where a child is in conflict with the law, the child is given a
special criminal trial under the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of
Children) Act, 2015 and there is a mandatory requirement for the records to be
kept confidential and destroyed so that the criminal record of the child is
not maintained. This is the position in law contained in Section 11 of the
Indian Contract Act, 1872, Section 45ZA of the Banking Writ Petition (Civil)
No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 395 of 567 Regulation Act, 1949,
Section 39 of the Insurance Act, 1938, Section 90 of the Indian Penal Code
(which provides that consent of the child who is under 12 years of age shall
not be regarded as consent) etc. Thus, when a child is not competent to
contract; not in a position to consent; barred from transferring property;
prohibited from taking employment; and not allowed to open/operate bank
accounts and, as a consequence, not in a position to negotiate her rights,
thirsting upon compulsory requirement of holding Aadhaar would be an inviable
inroad into their fundamental rights under Article 21. The restriction imposed
on such a right in the form of an Aadhaar cannot be treated as
constitutionally justified. We may also mention here that State is supposed to
keep in mind the best interest of the children which is regarded as primary
consideration in our Constitution (See R.D. Upadhyay v. State of Andhra
Pradesh & Ors.107). The convention on the Rights of Child 108 reiterates that
the best interests of the child will be the basic concern of the parents or
legal guardians of the child. The Constitution affirms acting in the best
interest of the children and confers the responsibility on the State to not
only safeguard the best interests of children but also act in furtherance of
it. Therefore, we are of the opinion that the 107(2007) 15 SCC 49 108India
acceded to the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child in December 1992 to
reiterate its commitment to the cause of the children.

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 396 of 567

State is constitutionally bound to facilitate and enable the parents and
guardians of the children to assert their rights and act in their best
interest and this has to be done without having any mandatory directives to
it. The onus of overseeing and lawfully safeguarding the rights and
immunities, to which children are entitled to, rests on the State and the
authorities under it. Giving proper education to children and ensuring that
they become valuable citizens of this nation subserves public interest. This
is the mandate of Convention on the Rights of Child (CRC) as well. We may
reproduce Article 27 of the CRC:

> “States Parties recognize the right of every child to a standard of living
> adequate for the child’s physical, mental, spiritual, moral and social
> development.

> 2\. The parent(s) or others responsible for the child have the primary
> responsibility to secure, within their abilities and financial capacities,
> the conditions of living necessary for the child’s development.

3\. States Parties, in accordance with national conditions and within their
means, shall take appropriate measures to assist parents and others
responsible for the child to implement this right and shall in case of need
provide material assistance and support programmes, particularly with regard
to nutrition, clothing and housing.”

328) Article 8 of the CRC provides that:

> “(2) For the purpose of guaranteeing and promoting the rights set forth in
> the present Convention, States Parties shall render appropriate assistance
> to parents and legal guardians in the performance of their child-rearing
> responsibilities and shall ensure the development of institutions,
> facilities and services for the care of children.

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 397 of 567

(3) States Parties shall take all appropriate measures to ensure that children
of working parents have the right to benefit from child-care services and
facilities for which they are eligible.”

329) Further, Article 16 of the Convention on the Rights of Child, 1989 bars
children from being subject to arbitrary or unlawful interference in their
privacy, family, home, or correspondence. One of the principles espousing the
Juvenile Justice Act, 2015 is the principle of confidentiality. Section 24 of
the Act, dealing with children in conflict with law, further emphasizes:

> “(2) The Board shall make an order directing the Police, or by the
> Children’s court to its own registry that the relevant records of such
> conviction shall be destroyed after the expiry of the period of appeal or,
> as the case may be, a reasonable period as may be prescribed.”

> 330) Section 3 of the Juvenile Justice Act, 2015 expounds the principles
> underlying the process in dealing with children under the Statute. The
> principle of right to privacy and confidentiality emphasizes, “Every child
> shall have a right to protection of his privacy and confidentiality, by all
> means and throughout the judicial process.”

> 331) We would like to reproduce the following observations of English quote
> in Murray v. Big Pictures (UK) Ltd.109 where greatest 109(2008) 3 WLR 1360
> Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 398 of 567
> significance is attached to the privacy right when it comes to children.
> That was a case where photographer had taken a series of photographs of a
> writer’s infant son, which were later published in a newspaper. The issue
> was whether there was misuse of private information by taking photographs.
> It was held that:

> “The question of whether there is a reasonable expectation of privacy is a
> broad one, which takes account of all the circumstances of the case. They
> include the attributes of the claimant, the nature of the activity in which
> the claimant was engaged, the place at which it was happening, the nature
> and purpose of the intrusion, the absence of consent and whether it was
> known or could be inferred, the effect on the claimant and the circumstances
> in which and the purposes for which the information came into the hands of
> the publisher...It is at least arguable that David had a reasonable
> expectation of privacy. The fact that he is a child is in our view of
> greater significance than the judge thought.” We may also record at this
> stage that various circulars, orders and notifications are issued by
> different Ministries and Departments under Section 7 of the Aadhaar Act
> which pertain to children. Some of these are:

> (1) National Child Labour Project (NCLP).

(2) Scholarship schemes which are given to school students, like National
Means-cum-Merit Scholarship Scheme; National Scheme of Incentive to Girls for
Secondary Education; Benefit to 6 to 14 years children under Sarva Shiksha
Abhiyan; Inclusive Education of the Disabled at Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494
of 2012 & connected matters Page 399 of 567 Secondary State; and Mid-day Meal
for Children.

(3) Assistance/Scholarship given by the Department of Empowerment to the
Persons with Disabilities, which include Scholarship Schemes for education of
students with disabilities.

(4) Following Schemes floated by the Ministry of Women and Child Development,
some of which relate to children:

(a) Supplementary Nutrition Programme under ICDS Scheme.

(b) Payment of honorarium to AWWs & AWHs under ICDS Scheme.

(c) Supplementary Nutrition for children offered at Creche Centres.

(d) Honorarium paid towards the Creche Workers and Creche Helpers.

(e) Maternity Benefit Programme (MBP).

(f) Scheme for Adolescent Girls.

(g) National Mission for Empowerment of Women.

(h) ICDS Training Programme.

(i) Ujjawala Scheme.

(j) Swadhar Scheme.

(k) Integrated Child Protection Scheme.

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 400 of 567

(l) STEP programme.

(m) Rashtriya Mahila Kosh.

(n) Pradhan Mantri Matru Vanana Yojana.

(5) Painting and Essay competitions for school children under IEC component of
Human Resource Development and Capacity Building.

332) After considering the matter in depth and having regard to the discussion
aforesaid, we hold as under:

(a) For the enrolment of children under the Aadhaar Act, it would be essential
to have the consent of their parents/guardian.

(b) On attaining the age of majority, such children who are enrolled under
Aadhaar with the consent of their parents, shall be given the right to exit
from Aadhaar, if they so choose.

(c) Insofar as the school admissions of children are concerned, requirement of
Aadhaar would not be compulsory as it is neither a service nor subsidy.
Further, having regard to the fact that a child between the age of 6 to 14
years has the fundamental right to education under Article 21A of the
Constitution, school admission cannot be treated as ‘benefit’ as well.

(d) Benefits to children between 6 to 14 years under Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan,
likewise, shall not require mandatory Aadhaar Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of
2012 & connected matters Page 401 of 567 enrolment.

(e) For availing the benefits of other welfare schemes which are covered by
Section 7 of the Aadhaar Act, though enrolment number can be insisted, it
would be subject to the consent of the parents, as mentioned in (a) above.

(f) We also clarify that no child shall be denied benefit of any of these
schemes if, for some reasons, she is not able to produce the Aadhaar number
and the benefit shall be given by verifying the identity on the basis of any
other documents. We may record that a statement to this effect was also made
by Mr. K.K. Venugopal, learned Attorney General for India, at the Bar.
Challenge to the other provisions of the Aadhaar Act:

333) The petitioners have challenged the constitutionality of certain other
provisions of Aadhaar Act as well. They have submitted their reasons on the
basis of which they are seeking the declaration to the effect these provisions
are unconstitutional. We reproduce the provisions of Aadhaar Act as well as
reasons given by the petitioners in tabulated form, as under: S.No. Provisions
of the Reason for being unconstitutional Aadhaar Act

1\. Section 2(c) and 2(d) \- ‘Authentication Record’ includes the time of
authentication and authentication and the identity of the authentication
record, requesting entity. The UIDAI and the read with Section 32
Authentication Service Agency (ASA) is Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 &
connected matters Page 402 of 567 permitted to store this authentication
record for 2+5 years (as per Regulations 20 and 26/27 of the Authentication
Regulations).

By definition it provides for real-time surveillance and profiling. The record
stores both the time and the identity of the requesting entity.

2\. Section 2(h) read with The notion of CIDR is by itself an Section 10 of
CIDR unconstitutional database. The statute cannot operate without a CIDR. The
notion of a CIDR where every individual’s biometric as well as demographic
information is centrally stored is an authoritarian or police state construct
and has no place in a democracy that guarantees individual freedom. A CIDR
from where data can be backed, and which is operated not by the respondents
but by foreign entities, is conceptually and constitutionally an impermissible
compromise on national sovereignty and security.

Notably, Section 10 empowers UIDAI to appoint one or more entity to establish
and maintain the CIDR.

3\. Section 2(l) read with The notion of an enrolling agency as Regulation 23
of the defined in Section 2(l) is also Aadhaar (Enrolment unconstitutional
inasmuch as the agency, and Updates) as defined, need not be a Government
Regulation - ‘enrolling entity but could be a private entity. The agency’
collection of sensitive personal biometric and demographic data and
information for the purposes of storage must be conducted by a Government
agency alone since this is a bare minimum procedural safeguard against the
misuse and commercial exploitation of private personal information. The State,
acting as a trustee and fiduciary, cannot delegate or require private
enrolling agencies to discharge this non-delegable function. Moreover, an
enrolling agency that is operated privately cannot be entrusted with the
crucial tasks of explaining the voluntary nature of Aadhaar Writ Petition
(Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 403 of 567 enrolments and
securing informed consent.

4\. Section 2(v) \- ‘resident’ The expression ‘Resident’ defined in Section
2(v) is arbitrary and unconstitutional inasmuch as the Act creates no credible
machinery for evaluating a claim that a person has been residing in India for
a period of 182 days or more, in the 12 months immediately preceding the date
of application for enrolment. The forms being used by the respondents as also
proof of identification and proof of address requirement being used by the
respondents until enactment of the statute nowhere require any proof relating
to residence for 182 days. The impugned Act purports to validate all these
enrolments. The forms being used by the respondents do not even contain a
declaration regarding the enrolee being resident for 182 days. Further, there
is no requirement in the definition of ‘Resident’ that the person has to be
legally resident and the expression would wrongly take in illegal immigrants
as well.

    
    
       5.     Section 3 – Aadhaar It is an ‘entitlement’.    It cannot be
              Number              understood to be mandatory.           The
    

information provided under Section 3(2) is of no relevance if obtaining
Aadhaar is made mandatory. By design, Aadhaar was never meant to be mandatory.

6\. Section 5 – Special Section 5 of the Aadhaar Act, inasmuch as treatment to
children it extends to children and persons with disabilities, implies that
the State is securing biometric and demographic data even before the age of
consent insofar as children are concerned. The Act in its coercive reach and
application to children who have not attained the age of consent is per se
unconstitutional and violate of the fundamental rights of the children.

7\. Section 6 – Update of Section 6 of the Act is unconstitutional information
inasmuch as it enables the respondents to continually compel residents to
periodically furnish demographic and biometric information. This provision is
coercive in Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 404
of 567 operation and effect and not only undermines the so-called ‘voluntary’
nature of the programme (as falsely claimed by the respondents) but also
undermines the false claim with respect to the ‘reliability of biometrics’.

8\. Section 8 Section 8 is unconstitutional inasmuch as it enables tracking,
tagging and profiling of individuals through the authentication process. It is
a charter for surveillance in real time and with a degree of specificity that
enables persons’ physical movements to be traced in real time. The
authentication mandate in terms of Section 8 is not being worked by the
respondents through any proprietary technology and is outsourced to foreign
entities or entities under the ownership and control of foreign companies and
corporations. The entire framework and working of the authentication procedure
in terms of Section 8 is an impermissible, permanent and irreversible
compromise of national sovereignty and national security.

9\. Section 9 Section 9 of the Aadhaar Act is also unconstitutional inasmuch
as the Aadhaar number is de facto serving as proof of citizenship and
domicile. This is seen from various media reports where even in the absence of
any rigorous verification process, Aadhaar numbers are being issued. The
petitioners submit that equally subversive of national security and national
integrity is the practice of passports being issued based upon an Aadhaar
card. In other words, persons who may not be entitled to passports are having
Aadhaar numbers issued and thereafter securing passports in violation of the
citizenship provisions.

10\. Chapter IV – Sections The petitioners submit that the whole of 11 to 23
Chapter IV of the Act comprising Sections 11 to 23 is ultra vires and
unconstitutional. The Constitution does not permit the establishment of an
authority that in turn Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected
matters Page 405 of 567 through an invasive programme can chain every Indian
citizen/resident to a central data bank and maintain lifelong records and logs
of that individual. The Constitution of India when read as a whole is designed
for a nation of free individuals who enjoy a full range of rights and who are
entitled under the Constitution to lead their lives without any monitoring or
scrutiny or continuous oversight by the State or any of its organs. The high
value of personal freedom runs throughout the fabric of the Indian
Constitution and any authority created for the purpose of ‘cradle to grave’
scrutiny is directly violative of the personal freedom charter built into the
Indian Constitution. The Constitution of India does not contemplate a ‘nanny
state’ where the State oversees every individual’s conduct and maintains a
record of individual interactions. The UIDAI by design and function is created
for an absolutely unconstitutional objective of invading privacy,
electronically overseeing individuals and tethering them to a central data
repository that will maintain lifelong records. The notion of individual
freedom must entail the right to be alone; the right of an individual to be
free from any monitoring so long as that individual does not breach or
transgress any criminal law. Here, the establishment of the second respondent
is for an unconstitutional purpose of overseeing and monitoring individual
conduct even where the person does not remotely fall foul of any law. The
second respondent is a State organ designed to invade individual freedom and
whose purpose is to constrict individual freedom.

11\. Sections 23 and 54 – Section 23, read with Section 54 of the excessive
delegation Aadhaar Act, is unconstitutional on the ground of excessive
delegation.

A perusal of the sub-clauses in Section 23(2) and Section 54(2) indicate that
on every crucial aspect pertaining to biometric Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494
of 2012 & connected matters Page 406 of 567 data, demographic information, the
operation and working of the CIDR, generating and assigning Aadhaar numbers,
authentication of Aadhaar numbers, omitting and deactivating Aadhaar numbers,
commercial exploitation of information collected by the Government, etc. are
all left entirely to the UIDAI without any sufficient defined legislative
policy indicating the limits within which the UIDAI may legitimately operate.

Having regard to the invasive nature of the Aadhaar programme, its deep and
pervasive impact on civil liberties and the fiduciary/trusteeship principle
based on which data and information is being collected, it was incumbent upon
the legislature to set out detailed and adequate limits to restrict the
discretion conferred on the UIDAI. The impugned provisions virtually give an
unlimited charter to the UIDAI to ride rough shod over fundamental rights by
framing regulations as it pleases.

12\. Section 23(2)(g) read This empowers the UIDAI alone to omit and with
Chapter VI & VII – deactivate an Aadhaar number with almost Regulations 27 to
32 of no redressal to the individual Aadhaar the Aadhaar (Enrolment number
holder. Regulation 27(2) provides and Update) that upon cancellation of an
Aadhaar Regulations, 2016 number, all services provided by the authority shall
be permanently disabled.

Regulation 28(2) provides that upon deactivation of an Aadhaar number, all
numbers shall be temporarily suspended till such time that the Aadhaar number
holder updates or rectifies the alleged error.

Notably, as per Regulation 30, there shall be a post facto communication of
omission or deactivation of the Aadhaar number shall be informed to the
Aadhaar number holder.

The only redressal mechanism provided under the Aadhaar Act is under
Regulation 32 wherein a grievance redressal call centre shall be provided by
the UIDAI. This provision provides unbridled power to the Writ Petition
(Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 407 of 567 UIDAI to switch of
the life of an individual.

There is absolutely no redressal mechanism for the individual. He is not even
provided with an opportunity of hearing prior to deactivation, which violates
principles of natural justice.

13\. Section 29 This Section is liable to be struck down inasmuch as it
pertains sharing of identity information. The provisions suffer from the vice
of permitting the spread and dissemination of sensitive personal information
through a network of entities and individuals for commercial gain or otherwise
and allows for the sharing of information beyond the ostensible object of
targeted deliveries.

Both the biometric as well as the demographic information are entitled to the
highest degree of protection and the impugned provision, inasmuch as it draws
a distinction between core biometric information and other information,
creates an artificial distinction into two classes of information which in law
are both entitled to equal protection against sharing or dissemination.

Sub-section (4) permits UIDAI by regulation to permit ‘core biometric
information’ to be displayed publicly.

14\. Section 33 Section 33 is unconstitutional inasmuch as it provides for the
use of the Aadhaar database for police investigation pursuant to an order of a
competent court. Section 3 violates the protection against self-

incrimination as enshrined under Article 20(3) of the Constitution of India.

Furthermore, Section 33 does not afford an opportunity of hearing to the
concerned individual whose information is sought to be released by the UIDAI
pursuant to the Court’s order. This is contrary to the principles of natural
justice.

Section 33(2) provides for disclosure of Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012
& connected matters Page 408 of 567 information in the interest of national
security pursuant to a direction of a competent officer. The said provision is
also hit by the principles of protection against self-incrimination, as
enshrined under Article 20(3) of the Constitution.

Further, the impugned Act does not define ‘interest of national security’ or
otherwise limit the circumstances where the said provision can be invoked.
This makes the impugned provision unconstitutional as it suffers from the vice
of vagueness and arbitrariness.

15\. Section 47 Section 47 of the impugned Act is unconstitutional inasmuch as
it does not allow an individual citizen who finds that there is a violation of
the impugned Act to initiate the criminal process. There could be several
circumstances where UIDAI itself or some third party is guilty of having
committed offences under the Act. By restricting the initiation of the
criminal process, the Aadhaar Act renders the penal machinery ineffective and
sterile. The said section creates a bar on a court to take cognizance of any
offence under the impugned Act, save on a complaint made by the UIDAI or an
officer authorized by it.

In effect there is a bar of cognizance of a complaint made by an individual
for breach of his biometric or demographic information which has been
collected by the respondent. Such bar is unconstitutional as it forecloses
legal remedy to affected individuals.

16\. Section 48 – Power of This Section is vague and arbitrary Central
Government to inasmuch as it permits the Central supersede UIDAI Government to
take over the UIDAI. The Act does not define a ‘pubic emergency’.

This Section empowers the Central Government in an ‘emergency’ situation to be
in a position to completely control the life of every citizen who is enrolled
with the UIDAI.

17\. Section 57 Section 57 is patently unconstitutional Writ Petition (Civil)
No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 409 of 567 inasmuch as it allows an
unrestricted extension of the Aadhaar platform to users who may be Government
agencies or private sector operators. This provision clearly shows that the
impugned Act has a much wider scope than what may legitimately be considered
as a Money Bill. Moreover, this provision enables the seeding of the Aadhaar
number across service providers and other gateways and thereby enables the
establishment of a surveillance state. The impugned provision enables the
spread of applications and Aadhaar dependent delivery systems that are
provided not from Consolidated Fund of India resources but through any other
means.

It is submitted that Section 57 also enables commercial exploitation of an
individual’s biometrics and demographic information by the respondents as well
as private entities. It ensures that creation of a surveillance society, where
every entity assists the State to snoop upon an Aadhaar holder.

18\. Section 59 Section 59 of the impugned Act is unconstitutional inasmuch as
it seeks to validate all action undertaken by the Central Government pursuant
to the Notification dated January 28, 2009. It is submitted that there was no
consent, let alone informed consent obtained from individuals at the time of
enrolment under the said notification.

Such enrolment which has been conducted without obtaining adequate consent is
unconstitutional as it amounts to wrongful deprivation of the most intimate
personal information of an individual. Indeed, taking of an individual’s
biometric information without informed consent is a physical invasion of his
or her bodily integrity. The collection of demographic information through
private entities and without proper counselling or written informed consent is
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 410 of 567
illegal and incapable of being retrospectively ratified. All these records
which have been illegally obtained and created without necessary consent out
to be destroyed and cannot be said to be validated by the impugned provision.
The Parliament cannot create a legal fiction of ‘consent’ where there was
none.

The executive under the Constitution of India cannot take away someone’s
fundamental right to privacy and then support its action on the proposition of
law that ‘retrospectively’ deems consent must have been given.

The said provision seeks to validate any action taken by the Central
Government alone. The action of private enrolers is not even sought to be
protected. Therefore, all collections made by private entities under the said
notification should also stand invalidated and all data collected by private
entities should be destroyed forthwith.

334) We have already dealt with the issue of validity of some of the
provisions. We would now advert to the remaining provisions, validity whereof
is questioned.

Keeping in view the preceding discussion, challenge to most of these
provisions would fail. Insofar as Section 2(l) read with Regulation 23 of the
Aadhaar (Enrolment and Update) Regulations is concerned which deals with
‘enrolling agency’, main challenge is on the ground that the work of an
enrolment could not have been given to a private entity as private entity
cannot be entrusted with the crucial task of explaining the nature Writ
Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 411 of 567 of
Aadhaar enrolment and securing informed consent. Further, the task of
collection of sensitive personal biometric and demographic data and
information for the purpose of storage cannot be given to private hands.
However, having regard to the nature of process that has been explained by the
Authority, which ensures that immediately on enrolment, the concerned data
collected by the private entity is beyond its control; it gets encrypted; and
stands transmitted to CIDR, we do not find any basis of the apprehension
expressed by the petitioners.

335) Insofar as Section 2(v) is concerned which defines resident, there is
nothing wrong with the definition. The grievance of the petitioners is that
the Aadhaar Act creates no credible machinery for availing a claim that a
person has been residing in India for 182 days or more. Apprehension is
expressed that this expression may also facilitate the entry of illegal
immigrants. These aspects can be taken care of by the respondents by providing
appropriate mechanism. We direct the respondents to do the needful in this
behalf. However, that would not render the definition unconstitutional.

336) Section 3, by the very language thereof, mentions that it is an enabling
provision which ‘entitles’ every resident to obtain Aadhaar number. Therefore,
it is voluntary in nature. This is so Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 &
connected matters Page 412 of 567 held by Division Bench of this Court in
Binoy Viswam in the following words:

> “93. Before proceeding to discuss this argument, one aspect of the matter
> needs clarification. There was a debate as to whether the Aadhaar Act is
> voluntary or even that Act makes enrolment under Aadhaar mandatory.

> 94\. First thing that is to be kept in mind is that the Aadhaar Act is
> enacted to enable the Government to identify individuals for delivery of
> benefits, subsidies and services under various welfare schemes. This is so
> mentioned in Section 7 of the Aadhaar Act which states that proof of Aadhaar
> number is necessary for receipt of such subsidies, benefits and services. At
> the same time, it cannot be disputed that once a person enrols himself and
> obtains Aadhaar number as mentioned in Section 3 of the Aadhaar Act, such
> Aadhaar number can be used for many other purposes. In fact, this Aadhaar
> number becomes the Unique Identity (UID) of that person. Having said that,
> it is clear that there is no provision in the Aadhaar Act which makes
> enrolment compulsory. May be for the purpose of obtaining benefits, proof of
> Aadhaar card is necessary as per Section 7 of the Act. The proviso to
> Section 7 stipulates that if an Aadhaar number is not assigned to enable an
> individual, he shall be offered alternate and viable means of identification
> for delivery of the subsidy, benefit or service. According to the
> petitioners, this proviso, which acknowledges alternate and viable means of
> identification, and therefore makes Aadhaar optional and voluntary and the
> enrolment is not necessary even for the purpose of receiving subsidies,
> benefits and services under various schemes of the Government. The
> respondents, however, interpret the proviso differently and their plea is
> that the words “if an Aadhaar number is not assigned to an individual” deal
> with only that situation where application for Aadhaar has been made but for
> certain reasons Aadhaar number has not been assigned as it may take some
> time to give Aadhaar card. Therefore, this proviso is only by way of an
> interim measure till Aadhaar number is assigned, which is otherwise
> compulsory for obtaining certain benefits as stated in Section 7 of the
> Aadhaar Act. Fact remains that as per the Government and UIDAI itself, the
> requirement of obtaining Aadhaar number is voluntary.

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 413 of 567

It has been so claimed by UIDAI on its website and clarification to this
effect has also been issued by UIDAI.

95\. Thus, enrolment under Aadhaar is voluntary. However, it is a moot
question as to whether for obtaining benefits as prescribed under Section 7 of
the Aadhaar Act, it is mandatory to give Aadhaar number or not is a debatable
issue which we are not addressing as this very issue is squarely raised which
is the subject-matter of other writ petition filed and pending in this Court.”
Therefore, the apprehension of the petitioners that Section 3 is mandatory
stands assuaged.

337) Section 5 is a special measure for issuance of Aadhaar number to certain
category of persons which attempts to take care of certain disabilities with
which certain individuals may be suffering. Therefore, this provision is for
the benefit of the categories of persons mentioned in Section 5. No doubt, it
mentions children and persons with disabilities as well, that is an aspect is
already dealt with separately.

338) Section 6 deals only with the updation of demographic and biometric
information. This may become necessary under certain circumstances. That by
itself does not take away the voluntary nature of the programme.

339) Insofar Section 9 is concerned, validity thereof is challenged primarily
on the ground that it serves as a proof of citizenship and Writ Petition
(Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 414 of 567 domicile as well
and some apprehensions are expressed on that basis. Such apprehensions have
already been taken care of while discussing the issue no. 1 pertaining to
surveillance.

340) We have already discussed in detail the purpose of constituting the
Authority. In fact, the Act cannot operate without such an Authority and,
therefore, it’s constitution is imperative. Challenge to validity of Sections
11 to 23 is predicated on the arguments of surveillance etc. fails, having
regard to our detailed discussion on the said aspect.

341) Section 23 read with Section 54 give power to the Authority to make
certain Regulations. We do not find that this provision gives excessive
delegation to the Authority. These aspects have already been discussed while
determining the issue pertaining to surveillance.

342) Apprehension expressed qua Section 29 are equally unfounded.

This Section rather imposes restrictions on sharing information. No doubt,
sub-section (2) states that the identity information (and specifically
excludes core biometric information) can be shared only in accordance with the
provisions of the Act and in such a manner as may be specified by Regulations.
That would not Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page
415 of 567 make the provision unconstitutional when it is with the consent of
the individual. In case, any regulation is made which permits sharing of
information that may contain undesirable circumstance/reason for sharing
information, such a regulation can always be struck down. Insofar as sub-
section (4) is concerned, it is generally in favour of the
residents/individuals inasmuch as it states that information collected or
created under this Act shall not be published, displayed or posted publicly.
The is grievance, however, is that this provision enables the Authority to
publish or display etc. such an information ‘for the purposes as may be
specified by regulations’. The apprehension is that under this provision, the
Government can always make regulations permitting publication of such
information under certain circumstances. At present, regulations which are in
force are the Aadhaar (Sharing of Information) Regulations, 2016. Chapter II
thereof is titled ‘restriction on sharing of identity information’. Regulation
3(1) which falls under this chapter puts a categorical ban on sharing of core
biometric information collected by the Authority under the Act, by mandating
that it shall not be sharing with anyone for any reason whatsoever. Sub-
regulation (2) of Regulation 3 permits sharing of demographic information and
photograph of an individual collected by the Authority under the Writ Petition
(Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 416 of 567 Act, only with the
consent of the Aadhaar number holder, that too for authentication process in
accordance with Authentication Regulations. As already held by us, insofar as
utilisation of subsidies, benefits and services are concerned, the
authentication would be needed by the provider of such services which would be
the requesting entity and this provision has already been upheld. Sub-
regulation (3) permits sharing of authentication records of Aadhaar number
holder with him in accordance with Regulation 28 of the Authentication
Regulations. This provision facilitates obtaining the information from the
Authority by the Aadhaar number holder herself. We are, thus, of the opinion
that Section 29 and the sharing regulations are the provisions enacted to
protect the interest of Aadhaar card holders as they put restrictions on the
sharing of information, which may be described as provisions pertaining to
data protection and surveying legitimate state aim/interest as well. No doubt,
Section 29 gives power to the delegatee to make regulations. However, as
already clarified above, as and when a regulation is made, which impinges upon
the privacy right of the Aadhaar card holders, that can always be challenged.
As of now, sharing regulations do not contain any such provision. Writ
Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 417 of 567

343) Section 33 provides for disclosure of information in certain cases.

The challenge to this provision is predicated on the ground that it provides
for the use of Aadhaar database for police verification, which is against the
ethos of Article 20(3) of the Constitution of India, which is a rule against
self-incrimination. In order to appreciate this argument, we would like to
reproduce Section 33 in its entirety:

> “33. (1) Nothing contained in sub-section (2) or sub-section (5) of section
> 28 or sub-section (2) of section 29 shall apply in respect of any disclosure
> of information, including identity information or authentication records,
> made pursuant to an order of a court not inferior to that of a District
> Judge:

> Provided that no order by the court under this sub- section shall be made
> without giving an opportunity of hearing to the Authority.

> (2) Nothing contained in sub-section (2) or sub-section (5) of section 28
> and clause (b) of sub-section (1), sub-section (2) or sub-section (3) of
> section 29 shall apply in respect of any disclosure of information,
> including identity information or authentication records, made in the
> interest of national security in pursuance of a direction of an officer not
> below the rank of Joint Secretary to the Government of India specially
> authorised in this behalf by an order of the Central Government:

> Provided that every direction issued under this sub- section, shall be
> reviewed by an Oversight Committee consisting of the Cabinet Secretary and
> the Secretaries to the Government of India in the Department of Legal
> Affairs and the Department of Electronics and Information Technology, before
> it takes effect:

> Provided further that any direction issued under this sub-section shall be
> valid for a period of three months from the date of its issue, which may be
> extended for a further Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected
> matters Page 418 of 567 period of three months after the review by the
> Oversight Committee.”

> 344) A close look at sub-section (1) of Section 33 would demonstrate that
> the sub-section (1) is an exception to Section 28(2), Section 28(5) and
> Section 29(2) of the Act. Those provisions put a bar on the disclosure of an
> information thereby protecting the information available with the UIDAI in
> respect of any person. However, as per sub-section (1), such information can
> be disclosed if there is an order of a court which order is not inferior to
> that of a District Judge. This provision, therefore, only states that in
> suitable cases, if court passes an order directing an Authority to disclose
> such an information, then the Authority would be obliged to do so.

Thus, an embargo contained in Sections 28 and 29 is partially lifted only in
the eventuality on passing an order by the court not inferior to that of
District Judge. This itself is a reasonable safeguard. Obviously, in any
proceedings where the Court feels such an information is necessary for the
determination of controversy that is before the Court, before passing such an
order, it would hear the concerned parties which will include the person in
respect of whom the disclosure of information is sought. We, therefore,
clarify that provisions of sub-section (1) of Section 33 by reading into the
provisions that an individual whose Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 &
connected matters Page 419 of 567 information is sought to be released shall
be afforded an opportunity of hearing. There is a reasonable presumption that
the said court shall take into consideration relevant law including Article
20(3) of the Constitution as well as privacy rights or other rights of that
person before passing such an order. Moreover, a person in respect of whom
order is passed shall also be heard and will have right to challenge the order
in a higher forum. Not only this, proviso to Section 33(1) puts an additional
safeguard by providing that even UIDAI shall be heard before an order is
passed to this effect by the Court. In that sense, the Authority is to act as
trustee and it may object to passing of the order by the court. Such a
happening is actually taken place. We have already noticed that against the
order of the High Court of Bombay in some criminal proceedings, order was
passed directing the Authority to give biometric information of a person, the
Authority had filed Special Leave Petition (Criminal) No. 2524 of 2014
challenging the said order on the ground that giving of such biometric
information was contrary to the provisions of the Aadhaar Act as the
information was confidential. This Court stays the operation of the said order
which depicts that there are sufficient safeguards provided in sub-section (1)
of Section 33 itself.

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 420 of 567

345) Adverting to sub-section (2) of Section 33, it can be seen that this
provision enables disclosure of information including identity information
records in the interest of national security. This provision further states
that the Authority is obliged to disclose such information in pursuance of a
direction of an officer not below the rank of Joint Secretary to the
Government of India specially authorised in this behalf by an order of the
Central Government. Proviso thereto sub-section (2) puts an additional
safeguard by prescribing that every direction issued under this sub-section
shall be reviewed by an Oversight Committee consisting of the Cabinet
Secretary and the Secretaries to the Government of India in the Department of
Legal Affairs and the Department of Electronics and Information Technology
before it takes effect. Further, such a direction is valid only for a period
of three months from the date of its issue which can be extended by another
three months.

346) Main contention of the petitioners in challenging the provisions of sub-
section (2) of Section 33 are that no definition of national security is
provided and, therefore, it is a loose ended provision susceptible to misuse.
It is also argued that there is no independent oversight disclosure of such
data on the ground of Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected
matters Page 421 of 567 security and also that the provision is unreasonable
and disproportionate and, therefore, unconstitutional.

347) We may point out that this Court has held in Ex-Armymen’s Protection
Services Private Limited v. Union of India & Ors.110 that what is in the
interest of national security is not a question of law but it is a matter of
policy. We would like to reproduce following discussion therefrom:

> “16. What is in the interest of national security is not a question of law.
> It is a matter of policy. It is not for the court to decide whether
> something is in the interest of the State or not. It should be left to the
> executive. To quote Lord Hoffman in Secy. of State for Home Deptt. v. Rehman
> [(2003) 1 AC 153 : (2001) 3 WLR 877 : (2002) 1 All ER 122 (HL)] : (AC p.
> 192C) “… [in the matter] of national security is not a question of law. It
> is a matter of judgment and policy.

Under the Constitution of the United Kingdom and most other countries,
decisions as to whether something is or is not in the interests of national
security are not a matter for judicial decision. They are entrusted to the
executive.”

17\. Thus, in a situation of national security, a party cannot insist for the
strict observance of the principles of natural justice. In such cases, it is
the duty of the court to read into and provide for statutory exclusion, if not
expressly provided in the rules governing the field. Depending on the facts of
the particular case, it will however be open to the court to satisfy itself
whether there were justifiable facts, and in that regard, the court is
entitled to call for the files and see whether it is a case where the interest
of national security is involved. Once the State is of the stand that the
issue involves national security, the court shall not disclose the reasons to
the affected party.” 110 (2014) 5 SCC 409 Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of
2012 & connected matters Page 422 of 567

348) Even in K.S. Puttaswamy, this Court has recognised data retention by the
Government which may be necessitated in the public interest and in the
interest of national security. We may also usefully refer to the judgment of
People’s Union for Civil Liberties (PUCL) v. Union of India & Anr.111. In that
case, action of telephone tapping was challenged as serious invasion of
individual’s privacy. The Court found that Section 5(2) of the Telegraph Act,
1885 permits the interception of messages in circumstances mentioned therein
i.e. ‘occurrence of any public emergency’ or ‘in the interest of public
safety’. The Court explained these expressions in the following manner:

> “28. Section 5(2) of the Act permits the interception of messages in
> accordance with the provisions of the said section. “Occurrence of any
> public emergency” or “in the interest of public safety” are the sine qua non
> for the application of the provisions of Section 5(2) of the Act.

Unless a public emergency has occurred or the interest of public safety
demands, the authorities have no jurisdiction to exercise the powers under the
said section. Public emergency would mean the prevailing of a sudden condition
or state of affairs affecting the people at large calling for immediate
action. The expression “public safety” means the state or condition of freedom
from danger or risk for the people at large. When either of these two
conditions are not in existence, the Central Government or a State Government
or the authorised officer cannot resort to telephone-tapping even though there
is satisfaction that it is necessary or expedient so to do in the interests of
sovereignty and integrity of India etc. In other words, even if the Central
Government is satisfied that it is necessary or expedient so to do in the
interest of the sovereignty and integrity of India or the security of the
State or friendly relations with sovereign States or public order or for 111
(1997) 1 SCC 301 Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters
Page 423 of 567 preventing incitement to the commission of an offence, it
cannot intercept the messages or resort to telephone- tapping unless a public
emergency has occurred or the interest of public safety or the existence of
the interest of public safety requires. Neither the occurrence of public
emergency nor the interest of public safety are secretive conditions or
situations. Either of the situations would be apparent to a reasonable
person.”

349) Having regard to the aforesaid legal position, disclosure of information
in the interest of national security cannot be faulted with. However, we are
of the opinion that giving of such important power in the hands of Joint
Secretary may not be appropriate. There has to be a higher ranking officer
along with, preferably, a Judicial Officer. The provisions contained in
Section 33(2) of the Act to the extent it gives power to Joint Secretary is,
therefore, struck down giving liberty to the respondents to suitably enact a
provision on the aforesaid lines, which would adequately protect the interest
of individuals.

350) We now advert to the challenge laid to Section 47 of the Aadhaar Act,
which is captioned as ‘cognizance of offences’, it reads as under:

> “47. (1) No court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under this
> Act, save on a complaint made by the Authority or any officer or person
> authorised by it.

(2) No court inferior to that of a Chief Metropolitan Magistrate or a Chief
Judicial Magistrate shall try any offence punishable under this Act.” Writ
Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 424 of 567

351) Certain acts in Chapter VII are treated as offences and penalties are
also provided, from Section 34 to Section 43.

352) Section 44 clarifies that this Act would apply for offence or
contravention committed even outside India. Insofar as investigation of these
offences is concerned, Section 45 provides that a police officer not below the
rank of Inspector of Police shall investigate any offence under this Act.
Section 46, thereafter, clarifies that penalties imposed under this Act shall
not prevent the imposition of any other penalty or punishment under any other
law for the time being in force. This scheme of Chapter VII makes very strict
provisions in respect of enforcement of the Act which includes data protection
as well. Last provision in Chapter VII is Section 47 which provides that the
cognizance would be taken only on a complaint made by the Authority or any
officer or person authorised by it. Petitioners feel aggrieved by this
provision as it does not permit an individual citizen whose rights are
violated, to initiate the criminal process. Apprehensions are expressed by
submitting that there may be a possibility where the Authority itself or some
Governmental Authority may be guilty of committing the offences under the Act
and, in such a situation, the Authority or any officer or person authorised by
it may choose Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page
425 of 567 not to file any complaint.

353) According to the respondents, the rationale behind Section 47 is to
maintain purity and integrity of CIDR and the entire enrolment storage in the
CIDR and authentication exercise can be handled only by the Authority. For
this reason, it is the Authority which is empowered to lodge the complaint. It
is also pointed out that similar provisions akin to Section 47 of the Aadhaar
Act are contained in many other statutes. Reference is made to Section 22 of
the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957, Section 34 of
the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986, Section 34 of the Telecom Regulatory
Authority of India Act, 1997, Section 47 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949,
Section 26(1) of the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992, Section
19 of the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986, Section 43 of the Air
(Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981 and Section 57(1) of the
Petroleum and Natural Gas Regulatory Board Act, 2006. The respondents have
also submitted that validity of such provisions have been tested and affirmed
by this Court. Reference is made to the judgment in Raj Kumar Gupta v. Lt.
Governor, Delhi & Ors.112. The respondents have also taken support of the
decision of this Court in State (NCT of Delhi) v. 112(1997) 1 SCC 556 Writ
Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 426 of 567 Sanjay113
wherein Section 22 of the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act,
1957 was tested. Insofar as grievance and apprehension of the petitioners is
concerned, it can be taken care on interpreting the provisions by holding that
the Authority can lodge a complaint of its own motion or at the request of the
individual whose rights are affected thereby.

Notwithstanding the above, we are of the opinion that it would be in the
fitness of things if Section 47 is amended by allowing individual/victim whose
right is violated, to file a complaint and initiate the proceedings. We hope
that this aspect shall be addressed at the appropriate level and if considered
fit, Section 47 would be suitably amended.

354) Section 48 cannot be treated as vague or arbitrary. ‘Public Emergency’ is
the expression which has been used in several other enactments and held to be
constitutional. It can always be subject to scrutiny of the Courts.

355) With this, now we come to a provision which was highly debated.

At the time of arguments, the petitioners had taken strong exception to some
of its aspects. We may first take note of the exact language of this
provision:

113(2014) 9 SCC 772 Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters
Page 427 of 567 “57. Nothing contained in this Act shall prevent the use of
Aadhaar number for establishing the identity of an individual for any purpose,
whether by the State or any body corporate or person, pursuant to any law, for
the time being in force, or any contract to this effect: Provided that the use
of Aadhaar number under this section shall be subject to the procedure and
obligations under section 8 and Chapter VI.”

356) In first blush, the provision appears to be innocuous. It enables Aadhaar
holder to establish her identity for any purpose as well. In that sense, it
may amount to empowering the Aadhaar number holder, when she is carrying
unique identity. It is her identity card which she is able to use not only for
the purposes mentioned in the Aadhaar Act but also for any other purpose.

357) The petitioners, however, have pricked the provision with the submission
that it may be susceptible to making deep in-roads in the privacy of
individuals and is utterly disproportionate. The taint in the provision, as
projected by the petitioners, is that it brings in private parties as well,
apart from the State within the fold of Aadhaar network giving untrammeled
opportunity to them to invade the privacy of such user. The offending portion
of the provision, according to them, is that:

(a) It allows ‘any body corporate or person’ (thereby encompassing private
bodies/persons as well) to make use of authentication process, once an
individual offers Aadhaar number Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 &
connected matters Page 428 of 567 for establishing her identity.

(b) The expression ‘for any purpose’ is wide enough, which may be susceptible
to misuse.

(c) This is permitted not only pursuant to any law for time being in force but
also pursuant to ‘any contract to this effect’ which would mean that
individuals may be forced to give their consent in the form of contract for a
purpose that may be justified or not thereby permitting the private parties to
collect biometric information about the said individual.

358) It is argued that there are no procedural safeguards governing the
actions of the private entities. Equally no remedy is provided in case such
body corporate or person fails or denies services. In this hue, it is also
argued that it is an excessive piece of legislation inasmuch as taking the
umbrage of ‘any law’, the regulations etc. can be framed by including within
its fold much more than what is provided by Section 7 of the Aadhaar Act. It,
therefore, according to the petitioners, does not meet the test of
proportionality. Mr. Divan submits that Section 57 is also patently
unconstitutional inasmuch as it allows an unrestricted extension of the
Aadhaar platform to users who may be government agencies or private sector
operators. Moreover, this provision Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 &
connected matters Page 429 of 567 enables the seeding of the Aadhaar number
across service providers and other gateways and thereby enables the
establishment of a surveillance state. The impugned provision enables the
spread of applications and Aadhaar dependent delivery systems that are
provided not from Consolidated Fund of India resources but through any other
means. He also submits that section 57 also enables commercial exploitation of
an individual’s biometrics and demographic information by the Respondents as
well as private entities.

359) As mentioned above, the respondents contend that it is only an enabling
provision which gives further facilities to Aadhaar card holder, as per her
choice and is, thus, enacted for the benefit of such individuals.

360) We have already discussed in detail the principles on which doctrine of
proportionality is built upon and the test which need to be satisfied. To put
in nutshell, the proportionality principles seek to safeguard citizens from
excessive Government measures. The inquiry, in such cases, is that a
particular measure must not be disproportionate in two distinctive utilitarian
senses:

(i) The cost or burdens of the measure must not clearly exceed the likely
benefits, which can be described as ‘ends’ or ‘ends- Writ Petition (Civil) No.
494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 430 of 567 benefits’ proportionality.

(ii) The measure must not be clearly more costly or more burdensome than
equally alternative measures, which is also described by some jurists as a
concept of necessity and narrow tailoring and can be referred to as ‘means’ or
‘alternative-means’ proportionality.

361) We have also discussed in detail the principle of proportionality that is
developed in certain foreign legal regimes, particularly Germany and Canada.
The Supreme Court of Canada in R. v. Oakes114 developed a two-tier
constitutional control test. Once the claimant has proved a violation of a
right guaranteed in the charter, the government must satisfy two criteria to
establish that the limit on individual rights “can be demonstrably justified
in a free and democratic society.”

362) First, measures limiting a constitutionally protected right must serve an
important objective that “relate[s] to concerns which are pressing and
substantial in a free and democratic society.” Legislation limiting the rights
of English-speaking parents in Quebec to educate their children in English-
speaking schools 115 has been found lacking an important public objective.
Likewise, 114(1986) 1 SCR 103 115Quebec Ass’n of Protestant Sch. Bds. v.
Quebec (A.G.), (1984) 2 SCR 66 Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 &
connected matters Page 431 of 567 the Supreme Court of Canada was unable to
find any legitimate public objective that justified denying protection to gays
and lesbians under Alberta’s human rights law in Vriend v. Alberta116. In R.
v. Zundel117, it also prohibited an intrusive use of a law that was unrelated
to the objectives originally contemplated by the Parliament when that law was
enacted.

363) Secondly, once an important public objective or end has been established,
the selected means to attain it must be “reasonable and demonstrably
justified.” The Court said in R. v. Big M Drug Mart Ltd.118 that this
determination involves “a form of proportionality test”. Although, it varies
depending on the facts of the case, the test involves the balancing of public
and individual interests based on three principles, which are as follows:

(i) the means must be rationally related to the objective. The court has
infrequently struck down legislation for lack of any rational relation to the
objective pursued. It employs a rather deferential and contextual approach to
determine the rational relation of a provision to the desired end.

(ii) The means should “impair ‘as little as possible’ the right or freedom in
question.” This is believe to be the decisive element 116(1998) 1 SCR 493
117(1992) 2 SCR 731 118 (1985) 1 SCR 295 Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012
& connected matters Page 432 of 567 of proportionality review. It requires
that the legislature adopt the least intrusive measure capable of attaining
the desired objective.

(iii) The public objective and actual effects of the means adopted for its
attainment must be proportionate to an important public end or objective. The
court noted that even if the means satisfies the first two criteria, it may be
declared unconstitutional in view of its disproportionate harmful effects on
an individual.

364) Insofar as development of law in Germany is concerned, as already
discussed in detail, proportionality is defined “as an expression of general
right of the citizen towards the State that his freedom should be limited by
the public authorities only to the extent indispensable for the protection of
the public interest.” 119 The principle of proportionality in German law
incorporates three important subprinciples: suitability, necessity, and
proportionality in the narrower sense. According to the High Court of Germany,
any government interference with basic rights must be suitable and necessary
for reaching the ends sought. Its disadvantages to individuals “are generally
only permissible if the protection of others or of the public interest
requires them, after having due regard to the principle of proportionality.”
119 See Nicholas Emiliou, The Principle of Proportionality in European Law: A
comparative Study 5 (Kluwer Law Int’l. 1996).

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 433 of 567

365) The European Union has, by and large, adopted the German system. We have
also taken note of the development of doctrine of proportionality in India
through various judgments120.

366) We may mention here that insofar as U.S. Supreme Court is concerned, it
has refused to apply the least intrusive test 121 Though there was a debate at
the bar as to whether this Court should adopt European approach of applying
least intrusive test or go by American approach which repeatedly refused to
apply this test. Without going into this debate, even when we apply the
accepted norms laid down by this Court in Modern Dental College and Research
Centre and K.S. Puttaswamy cases, we are of the view that a part of Section 57
does not pass the muster of proportionality doctrine.

367) The respondents may be right in their explanation that it is only an
enabling provision which entitles Aadhaar number holder to take the help of
Aadhaar for the purpose of establishing his/her identity. If such a person
voluntary wants to offer Aadhaar card as a proof of his/her identity, there
may not be a problem. 120 Om Kumar & Ors. v. Union of India, (2001) 2 SCC 386
where R. v. Oakes was referred to and relied upon; Teri Oat Estates (P) Ltd.
v. U.T., Chandigarh & Ors., (2004) 2 SCC 130 where the Court stressed upon
maintaining a proper balance between adverse effect which the legislation or
the administrative order may have on the rights, liberties or interests of
persons keeping in mind the purpose which they were intended to serve; Modern
Dental College and Research Centre and K.S. Puttaswamy amongst others. 121
Vernonia School District v. Wayne Acton, 515 US 646, 132 L.Ed. 2D 564, Board
of Education of Independent School District v. Lindsay Earls, 536 US 822=153
L.Ed.2d. 735. Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page
434 of 567

368) Section 59, which is the last provision in the Act is aimed at validating
actions taken by the Central Government pursuant to notification dated January
28, 2009 till the passing of the Act. It reads as under:

> “59. Anything done or any action taken by the Central Government under the
> Resolution of the Government of India, Planning Commission bearing
> notification number A-

43011/02/2009-Admin. I, dated the 28th January, 2009, or by the Department of
Electronics and Information Technology under the Cabinet Secretariat
Notification bearing notification number S.O. 2492(E), dated the 12th
September, 2015, as the case may be, shall be deemed to have been validly done
or taken under this Act.”

369) The challenge to this provision is on the premise that in the regime
which prevailed prior to the passing of the Act and the enrolments into
Aadhaar scheme were done, that happened without the consent of the persons who
sought enrolment and, therefore, those enrolments cannot be validated by
making such a provision. It was argued that even the Act makes provisions for
informed consent which is to be obtained from individuals at the time of
enrolment and absence of such consent makes the very enrolment as
impermissible thereby violating the right to privacy and such acts cannot be
validated.

370) The contention of the respondents, on the other hand, is that by the very
nature of the provision, it is intended to be prospective in Writ Petition
(Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 435 of 567 nature with a
clear purport in mind, namely, to validate the notification dated August 21,
2009 vide which the Authority was created and the Aadhaar scheme was launched
by administrative fiat. The purpose is to give it a statutory backing.

371) We find that Section 59 uses the expression ‘anything done or any action
under the resolution’. According to us, this terminology used in the provision
by the legislature is clearly to cover all actions of the Authority including
enrolment of individuals into Aadhaar scheme. The words ‘shall be deemed to
have been validly done or taken under this Act’ at the end of the Section put
the things beyond any pale of doubt. The legislative intent is clear, namely,
to make the provision retrospective so as to cover the actions of the
Authority from the date of its establishment. Reading the provision in the
manner the petitioners suggest would have the effect of annulling Section 59
itself. Such an interpretation cannot be countenanced. We are of the opinion
that case is squarely covered by the Constitution Bench judgment of this Court
in West Ramnad Electric Distribution Co., Ltd. v. State of Madras & Anr.122as
well as Bishambhar Nath Kohli & Ors. v. State of Uttar Pradesh & Ors.123. 122
(1963) 2 SCR 747 123 (1966) 2 SCR 158 Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 &
connected matters Page 436 of 567

372) We would also like to point out that the submission of the petitioners
that a particular action or a provision or statute which is hit by Article 14
cannot be allowed to be validated is repelled by this Court in State of Mysore
& Anr. v. D. Achiah Chetty, Etc.124.

The legislature is, thus, empowered to incorporate deeming provisions in a
statute. This proposition has also been repeatedly affirmed by this Court. We
may refer in this behalf the decision in State of Karnataka v. State of Tamil
Nadu & Ors. 125 will be of relevance wherein the Court held as under:

> “72. The second limb of submission of Mr Rohatgi as regards the
> maintainability pertains to the language employed under Section 6(2) of the
> 1956 Act, which reads as follows:

“6. (2) The decision of the Tribunal, after its publication in the Official
Gazette by the Central Government under sub-section (1), shall have the same
force as an order or decree of the Supreme Court.”

73\. Relying on Section 6(2), which was introduced by way of the Amendment
Act, 2002 (Act 14 of 2002) that came into force from 6-8-2002, it is submitted
by Mr Rohatgi that the jurisdiction of this Court is ousted as it cannot sit
over in appeal on its own decree. The said submission is seriously resisted by
Mr Nariman and Mr Naphade, learned Senior Counsel contending that the said
provision, if it is to be interpreted to exclude the jurisdiction of the
Supreme Court of India, it has to be supported by a constitutional amendment
adding at the end of Article 136(2) the words “or to any determination of any
tribunal constituted under the law made by Parliament under Article 262(2)”
and, in such a situation, in all possibility such an amendment to the
Constitution may be ultra vires affecting the power of 124(1969) 1 SCC 248
125(2017) 3 SCC 362 Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters
Page 437 of 567 judicial review which is a part of basic feature of the
Constitution. The learned Senior Counsel for the respondent has drawn a
distinction between the conferment and the exclusion of the power of the
Supreme Court of India by the original Constitution and any exclusion by the
constitutional amendment. Be that as it may, the said aspect need not be
adverted to, as we are only required to interpret Section 6(2) as it exists
today on the statute book. The said provision has been inserted to provide
teeth to the decision of the Tribunal after its publication in the Official
Gazette by the Central Government and this has been done keeping in view the
Sarkaria Commission's Report on Centre-State Relations (1980). The relevant
extract of the Sarkaria Commission's Report reads as follows:

“17.4.19. The Act was amended in 1980 and Section 6-A was inserted. This
section provides for framing a scheme for giving effect to a Tribunal's award.
The scheme, inter alia provides for the establishment of the authority, its
term of office and other conditions of service, etc. But the mere creation of
such an agency will not be able to ensure implementation of a Tribunal's
award. Any agency set up under Section 6- A cannot really function without the
cooperation of the States concerned. Further, to make a Tribunal's award
binding and effectively enforceable, it should have the same force and
sanction behind it as an order or decree of the Supreme Court. We recommend
that the Act should be suitably amended for this purpose.

*** 17.6.05. The Inter-State Water Disputes Act, 1956 should be amended so
that a Tribunal's award has the same force and sanction behind it as an order
or decree of the Supreme Court to make a Tribunal's award really binding.”

74\. The Report of the Commission as the language would suggest, was to make
the final decision of the Tribunal binding on both the States and once it is
treated as a decree of this Court, then it has the binding effect. It was
suggested to make the award effectively enforceable. The language employed in
Section 6(2) suggests that the decision of the Tribunal shall have the same
force as the Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page
438 of 567 order or decree of this Court. There is a distinction between
having the same force as an order or decree of this Court and passing of a
decree by this Court after due adjudication. Parliament has intentionally used
the words from which it can be construed that a legal fiction is meant to
serve the purpose for which the fiction has been created and not intended to
travel beyond it. The purpose is to have the binding effect of the Tribunal's
award and the effectiveness of enforceability. Thus, it has to be narrowly
construed regard being had to the purpose it is meant to serve.

75\. In this context, we may usefully refer to the Principles of Statutory
Interpretation, 14th Edn. by G.P. Singh. The learned author has expressed
thus:

“In interpreting a provision creating a legal fiction, the court is to
ascertain for what purpose the fiction is created [State of Travancore-Cochin
v. Shanmugha Vilas Cashewnut Factory, AIR 1953 SC 333; State of Bombay v.
Pandurang Vinayak, AIR 1953 SC 244 : 1953 Cri LJ 1094] , and after
ascertaining this, the Court is to assume all those facts and consequences
which are incidental or inevitable corollaries to the giving effect to the
fiction. [East End Dwellings Co. Ltd.v. Finsbury Borough Council, 1952 AC 109
: (1951) 2 All ER 587 (HL); CIT v. S. Teja Singh, AIR 1959 SC 352] But in so
construing the fiction it is not to be extended beyond the purpose for which
it is created [Bengal Immunity Co. Ltd. v. State of Bihar, AIR 1955 SC 661;
CIT v. Amarchand N. Shroff, AIR 1963 SC 1448], or beyond the language of the
section by which it is created. [CIT v. Shakuntala, AIR 1966 SC 719; Mancheri
Puthusseri Ahmed v.

Kuthiravattam Estate Receiver, (1996) 6 SCC 185 : AIR 1997 SC 208] It cannot
also be extended by importing another fiction. [CIT v. Moon Mills Ltd., AIR
1966 SC 870] The principles stated above are ‘well- settled’. [State of W.B.
v. Sadan K. Bormal, (2004) 6 SCC 59 : 2004 SCC (Cri) 1739 : AIR 2004 SC 3666]
A legal fiction may also be interpreted narrowly to make the statute workable.
[Nandkishore Ganesh Joshi v. Commr., Municipal Corpn. of Kalyan and Dombivali,
(2004) 11 SCC 417 : AIR 2005 SC 34] ”

76\. In Aneeta Hada v. Godfather Travels and Tours [Aneeta Hada v. Godfather
Travels and Tours, (2012) 5 Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected
matters Page 439 of 567 SCC 661 : (2012) 3 SCC (Civ) 350 : (2012) 3 SCC (Cri)
241] , a three-Judge Bench has ruled thus: (SCC p. 681, paras 37-38) “37. In
State of T.N. v. Arooran Sugars Ltd. [State of T.N. v. Arooran Sugars Ltd.,
(1997) 1 SCC 326] the Constitution Bench, while dealing with the deeming
provision in a statute, ruled that the role of a provision in a statute
creating legal fiction is well settled. Reference was made to Chief Inspector
of Mines v. Karam Chand Thapar [Chief Inspector of Mines v. Karam Chand
Thapar, AIR 1961 SC 838 : (1961) 2 Cri LJ 1], J.K. Cotton Spg. and Wvg. Mills
Ltd. v. Union of India[J.K. Cotton Spg. and Wvg. Mills Ltd. v. Union of India,
1987 Supp SCC 350 : 1988 SCC (Tax) 26], M. Venugopal v. LIC [M. Venugopal v.
LIC, (1994) 2 SCC 323 : 1994 SCC (L&S) 664] and Harish Tandon v. ADM,
Allahabad [Harish Tandon v. ADM, Allahabad, (1995) 1 SCC 537] and eventually,
it was held that when a statute creates a legal fiction saying that something
shall be deemed to have been done which in fact and truth has not been done,
the Court has to examine and ascertain as to for what purpose and between
which persons such a statutory fiction is to be resorted to and thereafter,
the courts have to give full effect to such a statutory fiction and it has to
be carried to its logical conclusion.

38\. From the aforesaid pronouncements, the principle that can be culled out
is that it is the bounden duty of the court to ascertain for what purpose the
legal fiction has been created. It is also the duty of the court to imagine
the fiction with all real consequences and instances unless prohibited from
doing so. That apart, the use of the term “deemed” has to be read in its
context and further, the fullest logical purpose and import are to be
understood. It is because in modern legislation, the term “deemed” has been
used for manifold purposes. The object of the legislature has to be kept in
mind.”

77\. In Hari Ram [State of U.P. v. Hari Ram, (2013) 4 SCC 280 : (2013) 2 SCC
(Civ) 583] , the Court has held that (SCC p. 293, para 18) in interpreting the
provision creating a legal fiction, the court is to ascertain for what purpose
the fiction is created and after ascertaining the same, the court is to assume
all those facts and consequences which are Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of
2012 & connected matters Page 440 of 567 incidental or inevitable corollaries
for giving effect to the fiction.”

373) There is yet another angle from which the matter can be looked into. In
any case, when the Aadhaar scheme/project under the Act has been saved from
the challenge to its constitutionality, we see no reason to invalidate the
enrolments which were made prior to the passing of this Act as it would lead
to unnecessary burden and exercise of enrolling these persons all over again.
Instead the problem can be solved by eliciting ‘consent’ of all those persons
who were enrolled prior to the passing of the Act. Since, we have held that
enrolment is voluntary in nature, those who specifically refuse to give the
consent, they would be allowed to exit from Aadhaar scheme. After all, by
getting Aadhaar card, an individual so enrolled is getting a form of identity
card. It would still be open to such an individual to make use of the said
Aadhaar number or not. Those persons who need to avail any subsidy, benefit or
service would need Aadhaar in any case. It would not be proper to cancel their
Aadhaar cards. If direction is given to invalidate all those enrolments which
were made prior to 2016 then such persons will have to undergo the rigours of
getting themselves enrolled all over again. On the other hand, those who do
not get any benefit of the nature prescribed under Writ Petition (Civil) No.
494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 441 of 567 Section 7 of the Act, it would
always be open for them not to make use of Aadhaar card or to make use of this
card in a limited sense, namely, showing it as a proof of their identity,
without undergoing any authentication process. Therefore, to a large extent,
it does not harm this later category as well.

We, thus, uphold the validity of Section 59. As a corollary, Aadhaar for the
period from 2009 to 2016 also stands validated. LIMITED GOVERNMENT, GOOD
GOVERNANCE, CONSTITUTIONAL TRUST AND CONSTITUTIONALISM

374) Mr. Shyam Divan and Mr. Gopal Subramanium, learned senior counsel, submit
that a fundamental feature of the Constitution is the sovereignty of the
people with limited government authority. The Constitution limits governmental
authority in various ways, amongst them Fundamental Rights, the distribution
of powers amongst organs of the state and the ultimate check by way of
judicial review. Article 245 of the Constitution of India is an express
embodiment of the principle of limited government to the legislature inasmuch
as it subjects laws to the Constitution:

> “(1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Parliament may make
> laws for the whole or any part of the territory of India, and the
> Legislature of a State may make laws for the whole or any part of the
> State.”

> 375) The concept of limited government is the underlying difference Writ
> Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 442 of 567 between
> a ‘Constitution’ and ‘Constitutionalism’. Mr. Shyam Divan refers to the
> introductory chapter of his book Indian Constitutional Law, Prof. M.P. Jain
> writes:

> “Modern political thought draws a distinction between ‘Constitutionalism’
> and ‘Constitution’. A country may have the ‘Constitution’ but not necessary
> ‘Constitutionalism’. For example, a country with a dictatorship, where the
> dictator’s word is law, can be said to have a ‘Constitution’ but not
> ‘Constitutionalism’.

> The underlying difference between the two concepts is that a Constitution
> ought not merely to confer powers on the various organs of the government,
> but also seek to restrain those powers. Constitutionalism recognises the
> need for government but insists upon limitations being placed upon
> governmental powers. Constitutionalism envisages checks and balances and
> putting the powers of the legislature and the executive under some
> restraints and not making them uncontrolled and arbitrary. Unlimited powers
> jeopardise freedom of the people ... If the Constitution confers
> unrestrained power on either the legislature or the executive, it might lead
> to an authoritarian, oppressive government... to preserve the basic freedoms
> of the individual, and to maintain his dignity and personality, the
> Constitution should be permeated with ‘Constitutionalism’: it should have
> some in-built restrictions on the powers conferred by it on governmental
> organs.

> ‘Constitutionalism’ connotes in essence limited government or a limitation
> on government. Constitutionalism is the antithesis of arbitrary powers… ...
> As PROFESSOR VILE has remarked: “Western institutional theorists have
> concerned themselves with the problems of ensuring that the exercise of
> governmental power...should be controlled in order that it should not itself
> be destructive of the values it was intended to promote.”

> 376) Mr. Divan then cited various paragraphs from the cases of State of M.P.
> v. Thakur Bharat Singh126, (1967) 2 SCR 454, Gobind v.

126(1967) 2 SCR 454 Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters
Page 443 of 567 State of M.P.127, S.P. Sampath Kumar v. Union of India128,
Sub\-

> Committee on Judicial Accountability v. Union of India129, I.R.

> Coelho v. State of T.N.130, Nandini Sundar v. State of Chhattisgarh131,
> which have reiterated and upheld the principle of limited governments and
> constitutionalism as a fundamental principle of our constitutional scheme.

377) He submitted that limited government is also enshrined within our
Preamble, which is the essence of the Constitution of India, and entitles
every individual citizen and the citizenry collectively to live, work, and
enjoy their varied lives without being under the continuous gaze of the State.
He cites Chelameswar, J. in K.S. Puttaswamy wherein he observed:

> “The Constitution of any country reflects the aspirations and goals of the
> people of that country (…) The Constitution cannot be seen as a document
> written in ink to replace one legal regime by another. It is a testament
> created for securing the goals professed in the Preamble.

Part-III of the Constitution is incorporated to ensure achievement of the
objects contained in the Preamble. ‘We the People’ of this country are the
intended beneficiaries of the Constitution. Man is not a creature of the
State. Life and liberty are not granted by the Constitution. Constitution only
stipulates the limitations on the power of the State to interfere with our
life and liberty. Law is essential to enjoy the fruits of liberty; it is not
the source of liberty and emphatically not the exclusive source.” 127(1975) 2
SCC 148 128(1987) 1 SCC 124 129(1991) 4 SCC 699 130(2007) 2 SCC 1 131 (2011) 7
SCC 547 Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 444 of
567

378) The Directive Principles of State Policy also envisage a limited
government. Violation of fundamental rights cannot be justified by the State
on grounds of administrative convenience in meeting its obligations under the
Directive Principles of State Policy. Protection of fundamental rights is
essential for public welfare contemplated under the Directive Principles of
State Policy. This has been upheld in various cases such as Minerva Mills Ltd.
v. Union of India132, where Y.V. Chandrachud, C.J observed:

> “57. (…) just as the rights conferred by Part III would be without a radar
> and a compass if they were not geared to an ideal, in the same manner the
> attainment of the ideals set out in Part IV would become a pretence for
> tyranny if the price to be paid for achieving that ideal is human freedoms.”

> 379) Similarly, in Kesavananda Bharati v. State of Kerala133, S.M. Sikri,
> C.J., inter alia, held:

> “209. ...In my view that meaning would be appropriate which would enable the
> country to achieve a social and economic revolution without destroying the
> democratic structure of the Constitution and the basic inalienable rights
> guaranteed in Part III and without going outside the contours delineated in
> the Preamble.

> xx xx xx

> 299\. I am unable to hold that these provisions show that some rights are
> not natural or inalienable rights. As a matter of fact, India was a party to
> the Universal Declaration of Rights which I have already referred to and
> that Declaration describes some fundamental rights as 132 (1980) 3 SCC 625
> 133 (1973) 4 SCC 225 Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected
> matters Page 445 of 567 inalienable. Various decisions of this Court
> describe fundamental rights as ‘natural rights’ or ‘human rights’ ...”

> 380) Mr. Divan quotes Seervai in his book Constitutional Law of India134: A
> Critical Commentary where he writes:

> “17.14... In India “Public Welfare” and “Welfare State” became in the
> language of the Chaldean Oracle, “God- given names of unexplained power”,
> which absolved judges from a critical examination of the nature of
> fundamental rights, and why they were made legally enforceable and the
> nature of directive principles and why they were made legally unenforceable
> xx xx xx 17.20...it is simply not true that persons entrusted with the duty
> of implementing the directives will strive in good faith to implement them
> according to the expectations of the community.

> xx xx xx The question then arises: What is the agency for bringing about
> social and economic changes which would enable a welfare state to be
> created? The answer is, legislative and executive power controlled by
> constitutional limitations including fundamental rights … xx xx xx 17.30 ...
> the conferment of legally enforceable fundamental rights by our Constitution
> on persons, citizens and groups of persons was the most effective way of
> securing public welfare...Anything which enables those objectives to be
> realised as fully as is practicable must, broadly speaking, subserve public
> welfare...However, the Preamble, and to a large extent, Fundamental Rights,
> enable us to say that our Constitution has rejected a totalitarian form of
> government in favour of a liberal democracy. The emphasis of the Preamble is
> on securing the dignity of the individual … 134 H.M. Seervai, Constitutional
> Law of India: A Critical Commentary (N.M. Tripathi Private Limited, Bombay,
> 4th Ed., Vol. 2, 1993) at pages 1928-1937.

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 446 of 567

> xx xx xx 17.34 But can fundamental rights acting as limitations on
> legislative and executive power secure public welfare as the framers of our
> Constitution intended? The answer is “Yes”. For, when during the Emergency
> of 1975-77, almost all the fetters on legislative power became
> unenforceable, the public welfare suffered gravely and our free democratic
> constitution was twisted out of shape and came near to a dictatorship or a
> Police State ...”

> 381) The principles of constitutional trust, constitutional morality and
> good governance are also deeply intertwined with the principle of minimum
> government. In Manoj Narula v. Union of India135, the Court, inter alia,
> held:

> “1. … Democracy, which has been best defined as the government of the
> people, by the people and for the people, expects prevalence of genuine
> orderliness, positive propriety, dedicated discipline and sanguine sanctity
> by constant affirmance of constitutional morality which is the pillar stone
> of good governance.

> xx xx xx

> 75\. The principle of constitutional morality basically means to bow down to
> the norms of the Constitution and not to act in a manner which would become
> violative of the rule of law or reflectible of action in an arbitrary
> manner. It actually works at the fulcrum and guides as a laser beam in
> institution building. The traditions and conventions have to grow to sustain
> the value of such a morality. The democratic values survive and become
> successful where the people at large and the persons in charge of the
> institution are strictly guided by the constitutional parameters without
> paving the path of deviancy and reflecting in action the primary concern to
> maintain institutional integrity and the requisite constitutional
> restraints. Commitment to the Constitution is a facet of constitutional
> morality.” 135 (2014) 9 SCC 1 Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 &
> connected matters Page 447 of 567 xx xx xx

> 82\. In a democracy, the citizens legitimately expect that the Government of
> the day would treat the public interest as the primary one and any other
> interest secondary. The maxim salus populi suprema lex, has not only to be
> kept in view but also has to be revered. The faith of the people is embedded
> in the root of the idea of good governance which means reverence for
> citizenry rights, respect for fundamental rights and statutory rights in any
> governmental action, deference for unwritten constitutional values,
> veneration for institutional integrity, and inculcation of accountability to
> the collective at large. It also conveys that the decisions are taken by the
> decision-making authority with solemn sincerity and policies are framed
> keeping in view the welfare of the people, and including all in a
> homogeneous compartment. The concept of good governance is not a Utopian
> conception or an abstraction. It has been the demand of the polity wherever
> democracy is nourished. The growth of democracy is dependent upon good
> governance in reality and the aspiration of the people basically is that the
> administration is carried out by people with responsibility with service
> orientation.

> 83\. … The issue of constitutional trust arises in the context of the debate
> in the Constituent Assembly that had taken place pertaining to the
> recommendation for appointment of a Minister to the Council of Ministers.
> Responding to the proposal for the amendment suggested by Prof. K.T. Shah
> with regard to the introduction of a disqualification of a convicted person
> becoming a Minister, Dr B.R. Ambedkar had replied: (CAD Vol. VII, p. 1160)
> “His last proposition is that no person who is convicted may be appointed a
> Minister of the State.

> Well, so far as his intention is concerned, it is no doubt very laudable and
> I do not think any Member of this House would like to differ from him on
> that proposition. But the whole question is this: whether we should
> introduce all these qualifications and disqualifications in the Constitution
> itself. Is it not desirable, is it not sufficient that we should trust the
> Prime Minister, the legislature and the public at large watching the actions
> of the Ministers and the actions of the legislature to see that no such
> infamous thing is done by either of them?I think this is a case which Writ
> Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 448 of 567 may
> eminently be left to the good sense of the Prime Minister and to the good
> sense of the legislature with the general public holding a watching brief
> upon them. I therefore say that these amendments are unnecessary.”

> 382) It is submitted by Mr. Divan that the Aadhaar project is destructive of
> limited government, constitutionalism and constitutional trust.

The Constitution is not about the power of the State, but about the limits on
the power of the State. Post Aadhaar, the State will completely dominate the
citizen and alter the relationship between citizen and State. The features of
a Totalitarian State is seen from:

(a) A person cannot conduct routine activities such as operating a bank
account, holding an investment in mutual funds, receiving government pension,
receiving scholarship, receiving food rations, operating a mobile phone
without the State knowing about these activities.(Sections 7, 32 and 57 of the
Aadhaar Act).

(b) The State can build a profile of the individual based on the trail of
authentication from which the nature of the citizen’s activity can be
determined. (Sections 2(d) and 32 of the Aadhaar Act and Regulation 20, 26 and
27 of the Aadhaar (Authentication) Regulation, 2016.

(c) By disabling Aadhaar the State can cause the civil death of Writ Petition
(Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 449 of 567 the
person.(Sections 23(2)(g) of the Aadhaar Act and Regulation 27 and 28 of the
Aadhaar (Enrolment and Updates) Act, 2016).

(d) By making Aadhaar compulsory for other activities such as air travel, rail
travel, directorship in companies, services and benefits extended by State
governments and municipal corporations etc. there will be virtually no zone of
activity left where the citizen is not under the gaze of the State. This will
have a chilling effect on the citizen.

(e) In such a society, there is little or no personal autonomy. The State is
pervasive, and dignity of the individual stands extinguished.

(f) This is an inversion of the accountability in the Right to Information
age: instead of the State being transparent to the citizen, it is the citizen
who is rendered transparent to the State.

383) Mr. Sibal also added that accountability of governments and the state is
a phenomenon which is accepted across the world. In furtherance of the Right
to information Act, 2005 was passed intended to ensure transparency and state
accountability. Through Aadhaar, on the other hand, the state seeks
transparency and accountability of an individual’s multifarious Writ Petition
(Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 450 of 567 activities in the
course of his everyday life. This fundamentally alters the relationship
between the citizen and the State and skews the balance of power in favour of
the State, which is anathema to the Constitution.

384) There is no dispute about the exposition of the principles of limited
government and good governance, etc., as highlighted by the learned counsel
for the petitioners and noted above.

We may add that we are the Republic and it becomes the duty of the Court to
keep it. That can be achieved by asking the stakeholders to follow the
Constitution, which we have. There are six key constitutional notions, a
brilliant exposition whereof has been provided in the case of Manoj Narula v.
Union of India136. The idea of constitutional renaissance was first sounded in
the said judgment. It is further elaborated in the case of Government of NCT
of Delhi v. Union of India137 in the opinion penned down by one of us138. It
stands severally described now as “a constant awakening as regards the text,
context, perspective, purpose, and the rule of law”, an awakening that makes
space for a “resurgent constitutionalism” and “allows no room for absolutism”
nor any “space for anarchy”. It is held, therein the term “rational 136 (2014)
9 SCC 1 137 (2018) SCC Online SC 661 138 Dipak Misra, CJI Writ Petition
(Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 451 of 567 anarchism” has “no
entry in the field of constitutional governance or the rule of law” and by the
same token constitutional text and context resolutely repudiate the lineages
of absolutism or the itineraries of dictatorship. One may then say that
“constitutionalism” is the space between “absolutism” and “anarchy” and its
constant repair and renewal is the prime function of adjudication.

385) In an illuminating Article titled ‘A Constitutional Renaissance’ on the
aforesaid verdict authored by Prof. Upendra Baxi 139, the learned Professor
has made following pertinent comments:

> “Awakening is a constant process; renaissance has a beginning but knows no
> end because everyday fidelity to the vision, spirit and letter of the
> Constitution is the supreme obligation of all constitutional beings. One
> ought to witness in daily decisions an “acceptance of constitutional
> obligations” not just within the text of the Constitution but also its
> “silences”. To thus reawaken is to be “obeisant to the constitutional
> conscience with a sense of constitutional vision”. Second, courts should
> adopt that approach to interpretation which “glorifies the democratic spirit
> of the Constitution”. “Reverence” for the Constitution (or
> constitutionalism) is the essential first step towards constitutional
> renaissance. Third, people are the true sovereigns, never to be reduced to
> the servile status of being a subject; rather as beings with rights, they
> are the source of trust in governance and founts of legitimacy. The
> relatively autonomous legislative, executive, administrative and
> adjudicatory powers are legitimate only when placed at the service of
> constitutional ends. All forms of public power are held in trust. And
> political power is not an end but a means to constitutional governance.” 139
> Published in The Indian Express on July 16, 2018 Writ Petition (Civil) No.
> 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 452 of 567

> 386) Since the arguments on limited government advanced by Mr. Shyam Divan
> were the same as advanced by him during the hearing of Binoy Viswam, our
> purpose would be served by reproducing the following discussion from the
> said judgment:

> “85. There cannot be any dispute about the manner in which Mr Shyam Divan
> explained the concept of “limited Government” in his submissions.
> Undoubtedly, the Constitution of India, as an instrument of governance of
> the State, delineates the functions and powers of each wing of the State,
> namely, the Legislature, the Judiciary and the Executive. It also enshrines
> the principle of separation of powers which mandates that each wing of the
> State has to function within its own domain and no wing of the State is
> entitled to trample over the function assigned to the other wing of the
> State. This fundamental document of governance also contains principle of
> federalism wherein the Union is assigned certain powers and likewise powers
> of the State are also prescribed. In this context, the Union Legislature
> i.e. Parliament, as well as the State Legislatures are given specific areas
> in respect of which they have power to legislate. That is so stipulated in
> Schedule VII to the Constitution wherein List I enumerates the subjects over
> which Parliament has the dominion, List II spells out those areas where the
> State Legislatures have the power to make laws while List III is the
> Concurrent List which is accessible both to the Union as well as the State
> Governments. The scheme pertaining to making laws by Parliament as well as
> by the legislatures of the State is primarily contained in Articles 245 to
> 254 of the Constitution. Therefore, it cannot be disputed that each wing of
> the State has to act within the sphere delineated for it under the
> Constitution. It is correct that crossing these limits would render the
> action of the State ultra vires the Constitution. When it comes to power of
> taxation, undoubtedly, power to tax is treated as sovereign power of any
> State. However, there are constitutional limitations briefly described
> above.

> 86\. In a nine Judge Bench decision of this Court in Jindal Stainless Ltd. &
> Anr. v. State of Haryana & Ors. discussion on these constitutional
> limitations are as follows:

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 453 of 567

> “20. Exercise of sovereign power is, however, subject to Constitutional
> limitations especially in a federal system like ours where the States also
> to the extent permissible exercise the power to make laws including laws
> that levy taxes, duties and fees. That the power to levy taxes is subject to
> constitutional limitations is no longer res-integra. A Constitution Bench of
> this Court has in Synthetics and Chemicals Ltd. v. State of U.P. (1990) 1
> SCC 109 recognised that in India the Centre and the States both enjoy the
> exercise of sovereign power, to the extent the Constitution confers upon
> them that power. This Court declared:

> “56 … We would not like, however, to embark upon any theory of police power
> because the Indian Constitution does not recognise police power as such. But
> we must recognise the exercise of Sovereign power which gives the State
> sufficient authority to enact any law subject to the limitations of the
> Constitution to discharge its functions. Hence, the Indian Constitution as a
> sovereign State has power to legislate on all branches except to the
> limitation as to the division of powers between the Centre and the States
> and also subject to the fundamental rights guaranteed under the
> Constitution. The Indian States, between the Centre and the States, has
> sovereign power. The sovereign power is plenary and inherent in every
> sovereign State to do all things which promote the health, peace, morals,
> education and good order of the people.

> Sovereignty is difficult to define. This power of sovereignty is, however,
> subject to constitutional limitations.”This power, according to some
> constitutional authorities, is to the public what necessity is to the
> individual. Right to tax or levy impost must be in accordance with the
> provisions of the Constitution.”

> 21\. What then are the Constitutional limitations on the power of the State
> legislatures to levy taxes or for that matter enact legislations in the
> field reserved for them under the relevant entries of List II and III of the
> Seventh Schedule. The first and the foremost of these Writ Petition (Civil)
> No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 454 of 567 limitations appears in
> Article 13 of the Constitution of India which declares that all laws in
> force in the territory of India immediately before the commencement of the
> Constitution are void to the extent they are inconsistent with the
> provisions of Part III dealing with the fundamental rights guaranteed to the
> citizens. It forbids the States from making any law which takes away or
> abridges, any provision of Part III. Any law made in contravention of the
> said rights shall to the extent of contravention be void. There is no gain
> saying that the power to enact laws has been conferred upon the Parliament
> subject to the above Constitutional limitation. So also in terms of Article
> 248, the residuary power to impose a tax not otherwise mentioned in the
> Concurrent List or the State List has been vested in the Parliament to the
> exclusion of the State legislatures, and the States' power to levy taxes
> limited to what is specifically reserved in their favour and no more.

> 22\. Article 249 similarly empowers the Parliament to legislate with respect
> to a matter in the State List for national interest provided the Council of
> States has declared by a resolution supported by not less than two-thirds of
> the members present and voting that it is necessary or expedient in national
> interest to do so. The power is available till such time any resolution
> remains in force in terms of Article 249(2) and the proviso thereunder.

> 23\. Article 250 is yet another provision which empowers the Parliament to
> legislate with respect to any matter in the State List when there is a
> proclamation of emergency. In the event of an inconsistency between laws
> made by Parliament under Articles 249 and 250, and laws made by legislature
> of the States, the law made by Parliament shall, to the extent of the
> inconsistency, prevail over the law made by the State in terms of Article
> 251.

24\. The power of Parliament to legislate for two or more States by consent,
in regard to matters not otherwise within the power of the Parliament is
regulated by Article 252, while Article 253 starting with a non-obstante
clause empowers Parliament to make any law for the whole country or any part
of the territory of India for implementing any treaty, agreement or convention
with any other country Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected
matters Page 455 of 567 or countries or any decision made at any international
conference, association or other body.”

87\. Mr. Divan, however, made an earnest endeavour to further broaden this
concept of ‘limited Government’ by giving an altogether different slant. He
submitted that there are certain things that the States simply cannot do
because the action fundamentally alters the relationship between the citizens
and the State. In this hue, he submitted that it was impermissible for the
State to undertake the exercise of collection of bio-metric data, including
fingerprints and storing at a central depository as it puts the State in an
extremely dominant position in relation to the individual citizens. He also
submitted that it will put the State in a position to target an individual and
engage in surveillance thereby depriving or withholding the enjoyment of his
rights and entitlements, which is totally impermissible in a country where
governance of the State of founded on the concept of ‘limited Government’.
Again, this concept of limited government is woven around Article 21 of the
Constitution.

88\. Undoubtedly, we are in the era of liberalised democracy. In a democratic
society governed by the Constitution, there is a strong trend towards the
constitutionalisation of democratic politics, where the actions of
democratically elected Government are judged in the light of the Constitution.
In this context, judiciary assumes the role of protector of the Constitution
and democracy, being the ultimate arbiter in all matters involving the
interpretation of the Constitution.”

387) We may observe that the matter is examined keeping in view the
fundamental principles of constitutionalism in mind, and more particularly the
principle that the concept of ‘limited government’ is applicable having regard
to the fact that the three limbs of the State are to act within the framework
of a written Constitution which assigns specific powers to each of the wing of
the State and this presupposes that the sovereign power of the Parliament Writ
Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 456 of 567 is
circumscribed by the provisions of the Constitution and the legislature is
supposed to Act within the boundaries delineated by the Constitution. The
constitutionalism, which is the bedrock of rule of law, is to be necessarily
adhered to by the Parliament. Further, the power of judicial review which is
accorded to the courts can be exercised to strike down any legislation or
executive action if it is unconstitutional.

388) When we examine this issue in the context of discussion on various issues
already dealt with, it is difficult to agree with the sweeping proposition
advanced by the petitioners that the Aadhaar project is destructive of limited
government and constitutional trust. These submissions are premised on the
architecture of the Aadhaar being constitutionally intrusive which threatens
the autonomy of individuals and has a tendency of creating a surveillance
state. In support, the petitioners have referred to certain provisions of the
Aadhaar Act. Some provisions which we found offending are struck down, some
others have been read down and some are tweaked with. We feel that the
statutory regime that would now govern the citizenry, wards off such a danger,
if any.

MONEY BILL Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 457
of 567 Is the Aadhaar Act a validly enacted law having been passed as a Money
Bill?

389) Mr. Chidambaram and Mr. Datar had laid attack on the Act on the ground
that the Bill it could not have been introduced and passed by the Parliament
as Money Bill. It was argued that the Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of Financial
and Other Subsidies, Benefits and Services) Bill, 2016 (for short the ‘Bill’)
was wrongly certified as Money Bill under Article 110 of the Constitution of
India by the Hon’ble Speaker of the Lok Sabha, thereby, virtually excluding
the Rajya Sabha from the legislative process and depriving the Hon’ble
President of his power of return. This, according to them, is illegal and
grossly violates the constitutional provisions.

390) It was submitted that Bills are of three kinds:

    
    
           (i)     Ordinary Bills (Article 107);
    
           (ii)    Financial Bills viz. subset of Ordinary Bills (Article 117);
    
    

(iii) Money Bill viz. subset of Financial Bills (Article 110).

391) Article 110 reads as under:

> “Article 110 - Definition of "Money Bills".-

> (1) For the purposes of this Chapter, a Bill shall be deemed to be a Money
> Bill if it contains only provisions dealing with all or any of the following
> matters, namely:--

> (a) the imposition, abolition, remission, alteration or regulation of any
> tax;

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 458 of 567

(b) the regulation of the borrowing of money or the giving of any guarantee by
the Government of India, or the amendment of the law with respect to any
financial obligations undertaken or to be undertaken by the Government of
India;

(c) the custody of the Consolidated Fund or the Contingency Fund of India, the
payment of moneys into or the withdrawal of moneys from any such Fund;

(d) the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of India;

(e) the declaring of any expenditure to be expenditure charged on the
Consolidated Fund of India or the increasing of the amount of any such
expenditure;

(f) the receipt of money on account of the Consolidated Fund of India or the
public account of India or the custody or issue of such money or the audit of
the accounts of the Union or of a State; or

(g) any matter incidental to any of the matters specified in sub-clauses (a)
to (f).

(2) A Bill shall not be deemed to be a Money Bill by reason only that it
provides for the imposition of fines or other pecuniary penalties, or for the
demand or payment of fees for licenses or fees for services rendered, or by
reason that it provides for the imposition, abolition, remission, alteration
or regulation of any tax by any local authority or body for local purposes.

(3) If any question arises whether a Bill is a Money Bill or not, the decision
of the Speaker of the House of the People thereon shall be final.

(4) There shall be endorsed on every Money Bill when it is transmit led to the
Council of States under article 109, and when it is presented to the President
for assent under article 111, the certificate of the Speaker of the House of
the People signed by him that it is a Money Bill.”

392) It was submitted that a Money Bill may provide for matters Writ Petition
(Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 459 of 567 enumerated in
Clause (a) to (f) of Article 110. Clause (g) has been added because it may be
necessary to include provisions that are only “incidental” to any of matters
specified in (a) to (f). The learned counsel pointed out the distinguishing
features of a Money Bill are as below:

(i) It shall be introduced only on the recommendation of President (Article
117(1)).

(ii) It shall be introduced only in the House of the People (Article 117(1),
109(1)).

(iii) A Money Bill is transmitted by the Lok Sabha to the Rajya Sabha. Rajya
Sabha thereafter may only make recommendations and return the Bill and not
make amendments. The recommendations may or may not be accepted by the Lok
Sabha. If the Money Bill is not returned within 14 days, it is deemed to have
been passed by both the Houses. (Article 109(2) to Article 109(5)).

(iv) Upon submission of a Money Bill to the President for his assent, the
President cannot return the Money Bill with the message requesting that the
Houses will reconsider the Bill (proviso to Article 111).

Hence, it is manifest that a Money Bill that a Money Bill is a special kind of
Bill that has the effect of denuding the power of the Writ Petition (Civil)
No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 460 of 567 Rajya Sabha of its power
to amend the Bill and depriving the President of his power to return the bill
for reconsideration. On that premise, it was argued that the provisions of a
Money Bill must be construed very strictly and narrowly and only if a Bill
falls strictly under definition of a Money Bill (Article 110), it can be
passed as a Money Bill. If the provisions of the Bill fall outside the strict
definition of Money Bill, the said Bill cannot be passed as a Money Bill.

393) Great emphasis was laid on the word ‘only’ appearing in Article 110 which
signified that to qualify as a Money Bill, it has to strictly fall within one
or more of the clauses of Article 110. For the interpretation of the word
‘only’, reference was made to the judgment in the case of Hari Ram & Ors. v.
Babu Gokul Prasad140:

> “3. Section 166 of M.P. Land Revenue Code, 1954 reads as under:

> “166. Any person who holds land for agricultural purposes from a tenure
> holder and who is not an occupancy tenant under Section 169 or a protected
> lessee under the Berar Regulation of Agricultural Leases Act, 1951, shall be
> ordinary tenant of such land.

Explanation.— For the purposes of this section — 140(1991) Supp. 2 SCC 608
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 461 of 567

(i) any person who pays lease money in respect of any land in the form of crop
share shall be deemed to hold such land;

(ii) any person who cultivates land in partnership with the tenure holder
shall not be deemed to hold such land;

(iii) any person to whom only the right to cut grass or to graze cattle or to
grow singhara (Trapa bispinosa) or to propagate or collect lac is granted in
any land shall not be deemed to hold such land for agricultural purposes.” A
bare perusal of the section indicates that any tenant other than occupancy
tenant if he held the land for agricultural purposes from a tenure holder,
then he became ordinary tenant by operation of law. Doubt if any stood removed
by the explanation which clarifies the class of persons who could be deemed to
be covered under a tenant other than occupancy tenant. Since it has been found
that the land was let out to appellant not only for the right to cut grass, he
could not be held to be a person who was not holding the land for agricultural
purposes. The word ‘only’ in Explanation (iii) is significant. It postulates
that entire land should have been used for the purposes enumerated. If part of
the land was used for cultivation, then the land could not be deemed to have
been granted for cutting grass only. It has been found that out of 5 and odd
acres of land, the land under cultivation was 2 acres. Therefore, the negative
clause in Explanation (iii) did not apply and the appellant became ordinary
tenant under Section 166. In 1959, M.P. Land Revenue Code was enacted and
Section 185 provided for the persons who could be deemed to be occupancy
tenants. Its relevant part is extracted below:

“185. Occupancy tenants.— (1) Every person who at the coming into force of
this Code holds—

(i) in the Mahakoshal Region—

(a) ***

(b) ***

(c) any land as an ordinary tenant as defined in the Madhya Pradesh Land
Revenue Code, 1954 (2 of 1955);”

394) The learned counsel also referred to M/s. Saru Smelting (P) Ltd. Writ
Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 462 of 567 v.
Commissioner of Sales Tax, Lucknow141:

> “3. The contention of the respondent is that Phosphorous Bronze is an alloy
> containing not only the metals mentioned in the aforesaid entry but
> Phosphorous also and as such it is not covered under the aforesaid entry.
> The words “other alloy containing any of these metals only” mean that the
> alloy made of these metals i.e. copper, tin, nickel or zinc only and that
> alone is covered under the said entry. It was submitted that if any other
> metal or substance is included in such an alloy, the same would not be
> covered under the aforesaid entry.

> xx xx xx

> 5\. We were referred to various dictionary meanings of the words
> ‘Phosphorous Bronze’ which have been noticed by the learned Judge dealing
> with the case in the High Court. We are really concerned with the
> interpretation of the entry.

The emphasis in the entry is — either it should be pure copper, tin, nickel or
zinc and if it is an alloy containing two or more metals, it must be an alloy
containing these metals only. The expression “only” is very material for
understanding the meaning of the entry. Since the alloy in dispute contains
Phosphorous, may be in a very small quantity, it cannot fall within Entry 2(a)
of the aforesaid Notification. The appeal consequently fails and is dismissed
with costs.”

395) In order to demonstrate as to what would be the nature and scope of the
Money Bill, reference was made to the following literature:

    
    
                   “RELEVANT EXCERPTS FROM                      ERSKINE    MAY’S
                   “PARLIAMENTARY PRACTICE”
    
                   Definition of Money Bill –
    
    

Section 1(2) of the Act defines a ‘Money Bill’ as a public bill which in the
opinion of the Speaker of the House of Commons contains only provisions
dealing with all or any of the following subjects, namely, the imposition,
repeal, remission, alteration, or regulation of taxation; the imposition for
the payment of debt or other financial 141(1993) Supp. 3 SCC 97 Writ Petition
(Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 463 of 567 purposes of
charges on the Consolidated Fund or the national Loans Fund, or on money
provided by Parliament or the variation or repeal of any such charges; Supply;
the appropriation, receipt, custody, issue or audit of accounts of public
money; the raising or guarantee of any loan or the repayment thereof; or
subordinate matters incidental to those subjects or any of them. For the
purposes of this definition the expressions ‘taxation’, ‘public money’, and
‘loan’ respectively do not include any taxation, money, or loan raised by
local authorities or bodies for local purposes, matters which, on the other
hand, are included within the scope of Commons financial privilege.

PROCEDURE IN PASSING MONEY BILL A ‘Money Bill’ which has been passed by the
House of Commons and sent up to the House of Lords at least one month before
the end of the session, but is not passed by the House of Lords without
amendment within one month after it is so sent up, is, unless the House of
Commons direct to the contrary, to be presented for the Royal Assent and
becomes an Act of Parliament on the Royal Assent being signified to it. A
‘Money Bil’, when it is sent up to the House of Lords and when it is presented
to Her Majesty, must be endorsed with the Speaker’s certificate that it is
such a bill. Before giving this certificate the Speaker is directed to
consult, if practicable, those two members of the Panel of Chairs who are
appointed for the purpose at the beginning of each session by the Committee of
Selection.

When the Speaker has certified a bill to be a ‘Money Bill’ this is recorded in
the Journal; and Section 3 of the Parliament Act 1911 stipulates that such
certificate is conclusive for all purposes and may not be questioned in a
court of law.

No serious practical difficulty normally arises in deciding whether a
particular bill is or is not a ‘Money Bill’; and criticism has seldom been
voiced of the Speaker’s action in giving or withholding a certificate. A bill
which contains any of the enumerated matters and nothing besides is
indisputably a ‘Money bill’. If it contains any other matters, then, unless
these are ‘subordinate matters incidental to’ any of the enumerated matters so
contained in the bill, the bill is not a ‘Money bill’. Furthermore, even if
the main object of a bill is to create a new charge on the Writ Petition
(Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 464 of 567 Consolidated Fund
or on money provided by Parliament, the bill will not be certified if it is
apparent that the primary purpose of the new charge is not purely financial.”
THE PARLIAMENTARY ACT, 1911 Chapter 13 of the Parliament Act, 1911 wherein
Money Bill is defined as under:

“(1) … (2) A Money Bill means a Public Bill which in the opinion of the
Speaker of the House of Commons contains only provisions dealing with all or
any of the following subjects, namely, the imposition, repeal, remission,
alteration, or regulation of taxation; the imposition for the payment of debt
or other financial purposes of charges on the Consolidated Fund, or on money
provided by Parliament, or the variation or repeal of any such charges;
supply; the appropriation, receipt, custody, issue or audit of accounts of
public money; the raising or guarantee of any loan or the repayment thereof;
or subordinate matters incidental to those subjects or any of them. In this
subsection the expressions “taxation”, “public money”, and “loan” respectively
do not include any taxation, money, or loan raised by local authorities or
bodies for local purposes. (3) There shall be endorsed on every Money Bill
when it is sent up to the House of Lords and when it is presented to His
Majesty for assent the certificate of the Speaker of the House of Commons
signed by him that it is a Money Bill. Before giving his certificate, the
Speaker shall consult, if practicable, two members to be appointed from the
Chairmen’s Panel at the beginning of each Session by the Committee of
Selection.” RELEVANT EXCERPTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF IRELAND (1) A Money
Bill means a Bill which contains only provisions dealing with all or any of
the following matters, namely, the imposition, repeal, remission, alteration
or regulation of taxation; the imposition for the payment of debt or other
financial purposes of charges on public moneys or the variation or repeal of
any such charges; supply, the appropriation, receipt, custody, issue or audit
of accounts of public money; the raising or guarantee of any Writ Petition
(Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 465 of 567 loan or the
repayment thereof; matters subordinate and incidental to these matters or any
of them.

(2) In this definition the expressions “taxation”, “public money” and “loan”
respectively do not include any taxation, money or loan raised by local
authorities or bodies for local purposes.

RELEVANT EXCERPTS FROM KAUL & SHAKDER’S “PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE OF
PARLIAMENT”, LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT AT INDIA Speaker Mavalankar observed as
follows:

“Prima facie, it appears to me that the words of article 110 (imposition,
abolition, remission, alteration, regulation of any tax) are sufficiently wide
to make the Consolidated Bill a Money Bill. A question may arise as to what is
the exact significance or scope of the word ‘only’ and whether and how far
that word goes to modify or control the wide and general words ‘imposition,
abolition, remission, etc.’.

I think, prima facie, that the word ‘only’ is not restrictive of the scope of
the general terms. If a Bill substantially deals with the imposition,
abolition, etc., of a tax, then the mere fact of the inclusion in the Bill of
other provisions which may be necessary for the administration of that tax or,
I may say, necessary for the achievement of the objective of the particular
Bill, cannot take away the Bill from the category of Money Bills. One has to
look to the objective of the bill. Therefore, if the substantial provisions of
the Bill aim at imposition, abolition, etc., of any tax then the other
provisions would be incidental and their inclusion cannot be said to take it
away from the category of a Money Bill. Unless one construes the word ‘only’
in this way it might lead to make article 110 a nullity. No tax can be imposed
without making provisions for its assessment, collection, administration,
reference to courts or tribunals, etc, one can visualise only one section in a
Bill imposing the main tax and there may be fifty other sections which may
deal with the scope, method, manner, etc., of that imposition.

Further, we have also to consider the provisions of sub-clause (2) of article
110; and these provisions may be Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 &
connected matters Page 466 of 567 helpful to clarify the scope of the word
‘only’, not directly but indirectly.”

396) It was further submitted that though clause (3) of Article 110 stipulates
that decision of the Speaker on whether a Bill is a Money Bill or not is
final, that did not mean that it was not subject to the judicial scrutiny and,
therefore, in a given case, the Court was empowered to decide as to whether
decision of the Speaker was constitutionally correct. In respect of Bill in
question, it was argued that though Section 7 states that subsidies, benefits
and services shall be provided from Consolidated Fund of India which was an
attempt to give it a colour of Money Bill, some of the other provisions,
namely, clauses 23(2)(h), 54(2)(m) and 57 of the Bill (which corresponds to
Sections 23(2)(h), 54(2)(m) and 57 of the Aadhaar Act) do not fall under any
of the clauses of Article 110 of the Constitution. Therefore, some provisions
which were other than those covered by Money Bill and, therefore, introduction
of the Bill as Money Bill was clearly inappropriate. It was also argued that,
in this scenario, entire Act was bound to fail as there is no provision for
severing clauses in Indian Constitution, unlike Section 55 of the Australian
Constitution. Insofar as justiciability of the Speaker’s decision is
concerned, following judgments were referred to:

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 467 of 567

(i) Sub-Committee on Judicial Accountability v. Union of India & Ors.142

(ii) S.R. Bommai & Ors. v. Union of India & Ors.143

(iii) Raja Ram Pal v. Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha & Ors.144

(iv) Ramdas Athawale v. Union of India & Ors.145

(v) Kihoto Hollohan v. Zachillhu & Ors.146

397) It was emphasised that the creation and composition of the Rajya Sabha
(Upper House) is an indicator of, and is essential to, constitutional
federalism. It is a part of basic structure of the Constitution as held in
Kuldip Nayar & Ors. v. Union of India & Ors.147. Therefore, Rajya Sabha could
not have been by-passed while passing the legislation in question and doing
away with this process and also right of the President to return the Bill has
rendered the statute unconstitutional.

398) The learned Attorney General as well as Mr. Dwivedi and some other
counsel appearing for respondents refuted the aforesaid submissions in a
strongest manner possible. It was argued that the Bill was rightly
characterised as a Money Bill and introduced under Article 110 of the
Constitution. According to them, the 142(1991) 4 SCC 699 143(1994) 3 SCC 1
144(2007) 3 SCC 184 145(2010) 4 SCC 1 146(1992) Supp. 2 SCC 651 147(2006) 7
SCC 1 Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 468 of
567 heart of the Aadhaar Act is Section 7. It is not the creation of Aadhaar
number per se which is the core of the Act, rather, that is only a means to
identify the correct beneficiary and ensure “targeted delivery of subsidies,
benefits and services”, the expenditure for which is incurred from the
Consolidated Fund of India. A conjoint reading of the preamble to the Act
along with Section 7 clearly discloses the legislative intent and the object
of the Act, which is to ensure that subsidy, benefit or service for which
expenditure is incurred from or the receipt therefrom forms part of, the
Consolidated Fund of India should be targeted to reach the intended
beneficiary. It was argued, without prejudice to the above, that the decision
of the Speaker incorporated into a certificate sent to the President is final
and cannot be the subject matter of judicial review. To support the aforesaid
proposition, reference was made to the judgment in the case of Mohd. Saeed
Siddiqui v. State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr.148 wherein the Court held as under:

> “7. Leave granted in the special leave petition. This appeal is directed
> against the order dated 27-8-2012 passed by the Division Bench of the High
> Court of Judicature of Allahabad in Mukul Upadhyay v. N.K. Mehrotra [Civil
> Misc.

Writ Petition No. 24905 of 2012 (Writ-C 24905 of 2012), order dated 27-8-2012
(All)] whereby the High Court, while allowing the amendment application to the
writ petition and holding the writ petition to be maintainable, directed to
list the petition on 27-9-2012 for hearing on merits. By way of 148(2014) 11
SCC 415 Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 469 of
567 the said amendment application, the writ petitioner sought to add two
grounds in the writ petition viz. the Amendment Act is violative of the
provisions of the Constitution of India and the same was wrongly introduced as
a Money Bill in clear disregard to the provisions of Article 199 of the
Constitution of India. Accordingly, it was prayed to issue a writ, order or
direction in the nature of mandamus declaring the Amendment Act as ultra vires
the provisions of the Constitution of India.

xx xx xx

12\. It was further submitted by Mr Venugopal that the Amendment Act was not
even passed by the State Legislature in accordance with the provisions of the
Constitution of India and is, thus, a mere scrap of paper in the eye of the
law. The Bill in question was presented as a Money Bill when, on the face of
it, it could never be called as a Money Bill as defined in Articles 199(1) and
199(2) of the Constitution of India. Since the procedure for an ordinary Bill
was not followed and the assent of the Governor was obtained to an inchoate
and incomplete Bill which had not even gone through the mandatory requirements
under the Constitution of India, the entire action was unconstitutional and
violative of Article 200 of the Constitution of India.

xx xx xx

31\. The main apprehension of the petitioner is that the Bill that led to the
enactment of the Amendment Act was passed as a Money Bill in violation of
Articles 197 and 198 of the Constitution of India which should have been
passed by both the Houses viz. U.P. Legislative Assembly and U.P. Legislative
Council and was wrongly passed only by the U.P. Legislative Assembly. During
the course of hearing, Mr Desai, learned Senior Counsel appearing for the
State of U.P., placed the original records pertaining to the proceedings of
the Legislative Assembly, decision of the Speaker as well as the Governor,
which we are going to discuss in the latter part of our judgment.

xx xx xx

34\. The above provisions make it clear that the finality of the decision of
the Speaker and the proceedings of the State Legislature being important
privilege of the State Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected
matters Page 470 of 567 Legislature viz. freedom of speech, debate and
proceedings are not to be inquired by the courts. The “proceeding of the
legislature” includes everything said or done in either House in the
transaction of the parliamentary business, which in the present case is
enactment of the Amendment Act. Further, Article 212 precludes the courts from
interfering with the presentation of a Bill for assent to the Governor on the
ground of non-compliance with the procedure for passing Bills, or from
otherwise questioning the Bills passed by the House. To put it clear,
proceedings inside the legislature cannot be called into question on the
ground that they have not been carried on in accordance with the Rules of
Business. This is also evident from Article 194 which speaks about the powers,
privileges of the Houses of the Legislature and of the members and committees
thereof.

35\. We have already quoted Article 199. In terms of Article 199(3), the
decision of the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly that the Bill in question
was a Money Bill is final and the said decision cannot be disputed nor can the
procedure of the State Legislature be questioned by virtue of Article 212. We
are conscious of the fact that in the decision of this Court in Raja Ram Pal
v. Lok Sabha [(2007) 3 SCC 184] , it has been held that the proceedings which
may be tainted on account of substantive or gross irregularity or
unconstitutionality are not protected from judicial scrutiny.

36\. Even if it is established that there was some infirmity in the procedure
in the enactment of the Amendment Act, in terms of Article 255 of the
Constitution the matters of procedure do not render invalid an Act to which
assent has been given by the President or the Governor, as the case may be.

xx xx xx

43\. As discussed above, the decision of the Speaker of the Legislative
Assembly that the Bill in question was a Money Bill is final and the said
decision cannot be disputed nor can the procedure of the State Legislature be
questioned by virtue of Article 212. Further, as noted earlier, Article 252
also shows that under the Constitution the matters of procedure do not render
invalid an Act to which assent has been given by the President or the
Governor, as the case may be. Inasmuch as the Bill in question was a Money
Bill, Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 471 of
567 the contrary contention by the petitioner against the passing of the said
Bill by the Legislative Assembly alone is unacceptable.”

399) It was submitted that the challenge on identical grounds was, thus,
repelled in the aforesaid case wherein validity of legislative enactment of a
State in question, on the same ground, namely, it could not called Money Bill
as defined in Article 199 of the Constitution, which was pari materia with
Article 110 of the Constitution qua the Parliament. Judgment in the case of
Yogendra Kumar Jaiswal & Ors. v. State of Bihar & Ors.149 was also referred to
wherein the Court was concerned with Orissa Special Courts Act, 2006 which was
also passed as Money Bill and was challenged as violative of Article 199 of
the Constitution. It was argued that the Court held in this case that decision
of the Speaker that the Bill in question is a Money Bill is final and such a
decision cannot be disputed nor can the procedure of the state legislature can
be questioned by virtue of Article 212 of the Constitution. The learned
Attorney General specifically read out the following portion from the said
judgment:

> “42. In this regard, we may profitably refer to the authority in Mohd. Saeed
> Siddiqui v. State of U.P. [Mohd. Saeed Siddiqui v. State of U.P., (2014) 11
> SCC 415], wherein a three-Judge Bench while dealing with such a challenge,
> held that Article 212 precludes the courts from interfering with the
> presentation of a Bill for assent to the Governor on 149(2016) 3 SCC 183
> Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 472 of 567
> the ground of non-compliance with the procedure for passing Bills, or from
> otherwise questioning the Bills passed by the House, for proceedings inside
> the legislature cannot be called into question on the ground that they have
> not been carried on in accordance with the Rules of Business. Thereafter,
> the Court referring to Article 199(3) ruled that the decision of the Speaker
> of the Legislative Assembly that the Bill in question was a Money Bill is
> final and the said decision cannot be disputed nor can the procedure of the
> State Legislature be questioned by virtue of Article 212. The Court took
> note of the decision in Raja Ram Pal [Raja Ram Pal v. Lok Sabha, (2007) 3
> SCC 184] wherein it has been held that the proceedings which may be tainted
> on account of substantive or gross irregularity or unconstitutionality are
> not protected from judicial scrutiny. Eventually, the Court repelled the
> challenge.

> 43\. In our considered opinion, the authorities cited by the learned counsel
> for the appellants do not render much assistance, for the introduction of a
> Bill, as has been held in Mohd. Saeed Siddiqui [Mohd. Saeed Siddiqui v.
> State of U.P., (2014) 11 SCC 415] , comes within the concept of
> “irregularity” and it does come within the realm of substantiality. What has
> been held in Special Reference No. 1 of 1964 [Powers, Privileges and
> Immunities of State Legislatures, In re, Special Reference No. 1 of 1964,
> AIR 1965 SC 745] has to be appositely understood. The factual matrix therein
> was totally different than the case at hand as we find that the present
> controversy is wholly covered by the pronouncement in Mohd. Saeed Siddiqui
> [Mohd.

Saeed Siddiqui v. State of U.P., (2014) 11 SCC 415] and hence, we
unhesitatingly hold that there is no merit in the submission so assiduously
urged by the learned counsel for the appellants.”

400) Reliance was also placed on three judgments of Constitution Bench of this
Court150. The learned Attorney General also submitted that even if it is
presumed that there is illegality of procedure in the conduct of business in
the Parliament, such 150Mangalore Ganesh Beedi Works v. State of Mysore &
Anr., 1963 Supp (1) SCR 275; Ramdas Athawale v. Union of India & Ors., (2010)
4 SCC 1, and; M.S.M. Sharma v. Dr. Shree Krishna Sinha & Ors., AIR 1960 SC
1186 Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 473 of 567
parliamentary proceedings were immune from challenge.

Attention of the Court was also drawn to Article 122, which prohibits any
proceedings of Parliament being called in question on the ground of “any
alleged irregularity of procedure”. It was submitted that the decision and
certification of the Speaker being a matter of procedure is included in the
Chapter under the heads “Legislative Procedure” being Articles 107 to 111,
“Procedure in Financial Matters” being Articles 112 to 117 and “Procedure
Generally” being Article 118 to 122 placing beyond doubt that separation of
powers is embedded in these provisions clearly excluding judicial review in
matters of procedure. Submission was that if this is clearly a Money Bill,
being placed beyond challenge in a Court of Law, then to term it as a
Financial Bill as contended by the petitioners would be wholly unjustified.
Dilating the aforesaid proposition, it was pointed out that in the Draft
Constitution prepared by the drafting committee, Article 101 provided for
immunity of Parliamentary proceedings from judicial intervention on ‘alleged
irregularity of procedure’. This article finally got renumbered as Article 122
in the Constitution of India. During the Constituent Assembly debates, Shri
H.V. Kamath suggested an amendment to draft Article 101 to clarify that the
validity of any Parliamentary proceedings shall not be called in Writ Petition
(Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 474 of 567 question in any
court. Accordingly, he suggested that the words ‘called in question’ be
replaced with ‘called in question in any court’. Refuting this suggested
amendment, Dr. B.R. Ambedkar categorically stated:

> “Sir, with regard to the amendment of Mr. Kamath, I do not think it is
> necessary, because where can the proceedings of Parliament be questioned in
> a legal manner except in a court? Therefore the only place where the
> proceedings of Parliament can be questioned in a le-gal manner and legal
> sanction obtained is the Court. Therefore it is unnecessary to mention the
> words which Mr. Kamath wants in his amendment. For the reason I have
> explained, the only forum there the proceedings can be questioned in a legal
> manner and legal relief obtained either against the President or the Speaker
> or any officer or Member, being the Court, it is unnecessary to specify the
> forum.

Mr. Kamath will see that the marginal note makes it clear.”

401) Support of the judgment rendered by Patna High Court in Patna Zilla Truck
Owners Association & Ors. v. State of Bihar & Ors.151 was also taken, which
has been approved by the Constitution Bench judgment of this Court in State of
Punjab v. Sat Pal Dang & Ors.152. It was also argued that the legal position
was similar in other Parliamentary democracies like Australia and Canada.

402) In any case, argued the learned Attorney General and Mr. Dwivedi, the
Bill was rightly introduced as Money Bill as it merited such a description in
law as well. To buttress this submission, doctrine of pith and substance was
invoked as a guiding test. It 151AIR 1963 Pat 16 152(1969) 1 SCR 478 Writ
Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 475 of 567 was
argued that Section 7 which was the heart and soul of the Aadhaar Act
fulfilled this requirement as the subsidies, benefits and services, the
expenditure of which is incurred from the Consolidated Fund of India.
Therefore, conditions laid down in Article 110 were fully satisfied. Following
judgments 153 explaining the doctrine of pith and substance were pressed into
substance. It was submitted that undoubtedly in pith and substance, the object
of the Aadhaar Act is to identify the correct beneficiaries and ensure the
“targeted delivery of subsidies, benefits and services”, the expenditure for
which is incurred from the Consolidated Fund of India. The creation of the
Aadhaar number and authentication facility are in furtherance of the object of
the Aadhaar Act, which is permissible under Article 110(g). It was also argued
that Section 57, which has been attacked as being untraceable to any of the
sub-clauses of (a) to (f) of Article 110 cannot be looked at in isolation.
This Bill in its pith and substance should pass the test of being a Money Bill
and not isolated provisions. On the contrary, Section 57 of the Act is also
incidental to the object of the Act and creates a limitation upon use of
Aadhaar by private parties wherein even though nothing prevents them from
using Aadhaar for other purposes, the same 153A.S. Krishna v. State of Madras,
(1957) SCR 399; Union of India & Ors. v. Shah Goverdhan L. Kabra Teachers’
College, (2002) 8 SCC 228, and; P.N. Krishna Lal & Ors. v. Government of
Kerala & Anr., 1995 Supp (2) SCC 187 Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 &
connected matters Page 476 of 567 has been subjected to the procedure and
obligations of Section 8, which requires, inter alia, informed consent of the
Aadhaar number holder, purpose limitation, i.e. the identity information will
be used only for submission to CIDR for authentication and the private entity
must provide alternatives to submission of such identity information, which,
in other words, means that private parties cannot insist upon Aadhaar and make
Aadhaar mandatory, unless required by law. Therefore, Section 57 is a
limitation imposed under the Aadhaar Act on the use of Aadhaar number by
private parties which is purely incidental to the object of the Act and would
squarely fall within Article 110(g) of the Constitution.

403) At the outset, we would like to recognise the importance of Rajya Sabha
(Upper House) in a bicameral system of the Parliament. The significance and
relevance of the Upper House has been succinctly exemplified by this Court in
Kuldip Nayar’s case in the following words:

> “74. The growth of “bicameralism” in parliamentary forms of Government has
> been functionally associated with the need for effective federal structures.
> This nexus between the role of “Second Chambers” or Upper Houses of
> Parliament and better coordination between the Central Government and those
> of the constituent units, was perhaps first laid down in definite terms with
> the Constitution of the United States of America, which was ratified by the
> thirteen original States of the Union in the Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494
> of 2012 & connected matters Page 477 of 567 year 1787. The Upper House of
> the Congress of USA, known as the Senate, was theoretically modelled on the
> House of Lords in the British Parliament, but was totally different from the
> latter with respect to its composition and powers.

> 75\. Since then, many nations have adopted a bicameral form of Central
> Legislature, even though some of them are not federations. On account of
> colonial rule, these British institutions of parliamentary governance were
> also embodied in the British North America Act, 1867 by which the Dominion
> of Canada came into existence and the Constitution of India, 1950. In
> Canada, Parliament consists of the House of Commons and the Senate (the
> Upper House). Likewise, the Parliament of the Union of India consists of the
> Lok Sabha (House of the People) and the Rajya Sabha (Council of States,
> which is the Upper House). In terms of their functions as agencies of
> representative democracies, the Lower Houses in the legislatures of India,
> USA and Canada, namely, the Lok Sabha, the House of Representatives and the
> House of Commons broadly follow the same system of composition. As of now,
> Members of the Lower Houses are elected from pre-designated constituencies
> through universal adult suffrage. The demarcation of these constituencies is
> in accordance with distribution of population, so as to accord equity in the
> value of each vote throughout the territory of the country. However, with
> the existence of constituent States of varying areas and populations, the
> representation accorded to these States in the Lower House becomes highly
> unequal. Hence, the composition of the Upper House has become an indicator
> of federalism, so as to more adequately reflect the interests of the
> constituent States and ensure a mechanism of checks and balances against the
> exercise of power by Central authorities that might affect the interests of
> the constituent States.

> xx xx xx

> 79\. The genesis of the Indian Rajya Sabha on the other hand benefited from
> the constitutional history of several nations which allowed the Constituent
> Assembly to examine the federal functions of an Upper House.

However, “bicameralism” had been introduced to the provincial legislatures
under the British rule in 1921. The Government of India Act, 1935 also created
an Upper House in the federal legislature, whose members were to Writ Petition
(Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 478 of 567 be elected by the
members of provincial legislatures and in case of Princely States to be
nominated by the rulers of such territories. However, on account of the
realities faced by the young Indian Union, a Council of States (the Rajya
Sabha) in the Union Parliament was seen as an essential requirement for a
federal order. Besides the former British provinces, there were vast areas of
Princely States that had to be administered under the Union. Furthermore, the
diversity in economic and cultural factors between regions also posed a
challenge for the newly-independent country. Hence, the Upper House was
instituted by the Constitution- framers which would substantially consist of
members elected by the State Legislatures and have a fixed number of nominated
members representing non-political fields. However, the distribution of
representation between the States in the Rajya Sabha is neither equal nor
entirely based on population distribution. A basic formula is used to assign
relatively more weightage to smaller States but larger States are accorded
weightage regressively for additional population. Hence the Rajya Sabha
incorporates unequal representation for States but with proportionally more
representation given to smaller States. The theory behind such allocation of
seats is to safeguard the interests of the smaller States but at the same time
giving adequate representation to the larger States so that the will of the
representatives of a minority of the electorate does not prevail over that of
a majority.

80\. In India, Article 80 of the Constitution of India prescribes the
composition of the Rajya Sabha. The maximum strength of the House is 250
members, out of which up to 238 members are the elected representatives of the
States and the Union Territories [Article 80(1)(b)], and 12 members are
nominated by the President as representatives of non-political fields like
literature, science, art and social services [Articles 80(1)(a) and 80(3)].
The members from the States are elected by the elected members of the
respective State Legislative Assemblies as per the system of proportional
representation by means of the single transferable vote [Article 80(4)]. The
manner of election for representatives from the Union Territories has been
left to prescription by Parliament [Article 80(5)]. The allocation of seats
for the various States and Union Territories of the Indian Union is enumerated
in the Fourth Schedule to the Constitution, which is read with Articles 4(1)
and 80(2). This allocation Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected
matters Page 479 of 567 has obviously varied with the admission and
reorganisation of States.”

404) The Rajya Sabha, therefore, becomes an important institution signifying
constitutional fedaralism. It is precisely for this reason that to enact any
statute, the Bill has to be passed by both the Houses, namely, Lok Sabha as
well as Rajya Sabha. It is the constitutional mandate. The only exception to
the aforesaid Parliamentary norm is Article 110 of the Constitution of India.
Having regard to this overall scheme of bicameralism enshrined in our
Constitution, strict interpretation has to be accorded to Article 110. Keeping
in view these principles, we have considered the arguments advanced by both
the sides.

405) We would also like to observe at this stage that insofar as submission of
the respondents about the justiciability of the decision of the Speaker of the
Lok Sabha is concerned, we are unable to subscribe to such a contention.
Judicial review would be admissible under certain circumstances having regard
to the law laid down by this Court in various judgments which have been cited
by Mr. P. Chidambaran, learned senior counsel appearing for the petitioners,
and taken note of in paragraph 396.

406) From the submissions of the learned counsel for the parties as Writ
Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 480 of 567 taken
note of above, it is clear that the petitioners accept that Section 7 of the
Aadhaar Act has the elements of ‘Money Bill’. The attack is on the premise
that some other provisions, namely, clauses 23(2)(h), 54(2)(m) and 57 of the
Bill (which corresponds to Sections 23(2)(h), 54(2)(m) and 57 of the Aadhaar
Act) do not fall under any of the clauses of Article 110 of the Constitution
and, therefore, Bill was not limited to only those subjects mentioned in
Article 110. Insofar as Section 7 is concerned, it makes receipt of subsidy,
benefit or service subject to establishing identity by the process of
authentication under Aadhaar or furnish proof of Aadhaar etc. It is also very
clearly declared in this provision that the expenditure incurred in respect of
such a subsidy, benefit or service would be from the Consolidated Fund of
India. It is also accepted by the petitioners that Section 7 is the main
provision of the Act. In fact, Introduction to the Act as well as the
Statement of Objects and Reasons very categorically record that the main
purpose of Aadhaar Act is to ensure that such subsidies, benefits and services
reach those categories of persons, for whom they are actually meant. Sections
2(f), (w) and (x) of the Aadhaar Act define benefit, service and subsidy
respectively. These provisions read as under:

“2(f) “benefit” means any advantage, gift, reward, relief, or payment, in cash
or kind, provided to an individual or a Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012
& connected matters Page 481 of 567 group of individuals and includes such
other benefits as may be notified by the Central Government;

2(w) “service” means any provision, facility, utility or any other assistance
provided in any form to an individual or a group of individuals and includes
such other services as may be notified by the Central Government;

2(x) “subsidy” means any form of aid, support, grant, subvention, or
appropriation, in cash or kind, to an individual or a group of individuals and
includes such other subsidies as may be notified by the Central Government.”

407) As all these three kinds of welfare measures are sought to be extended to
the marginalised section of society, a collective reading thereof would show
that the purpose is to expand the coverage of all kinds of aid, support,
grant, advantage, relief provisions, facility, utility or assistance which may
be extended with the support of the Consolidated Fund of India with the
objective of targeted delivery. It is also clear that various schemes which
can be contemplated by the aforesaid provisions, relate to vulnerable and
weaker section of the society. Whether the social justice scheme would involve
a subsidy or a benefit or a service is merely a matter of the nature and
extent of assistance and would depend upon the economic capacity of the State.
Even where the state subsidizes in part, whether in cash or kind, the
objective of emancipation of the poor remains the goal.

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 482 of 567

408) The respondents are right in their submission that the expression
subsidy, benefit or service ought to be understood in the context of targeted
delivery to poorer and weaker sections of society. Its connotation ought not
to be determined in the abstract. For as an abstraction one can visualize a
subsidy being extended by Parliament to the King; by Government to the
Corporations or Banks; etc. The nature of subsidy or benefit would not be the
same when extended to the poor and downtrodden for producing those conditions
without which they cannot live a life with dignity. That is the main function
behind the Aadhaar Act and for this purpose, enrolment for Aadhaar number is
prescribed in Chapter II which covers Sections 3 to 6. Residents are, thus,
held entitled to obtain Aadhaar number. We may record here that such an
enrolment is of voluntary nature. However, it becomes compulsory for those who
seeks to receive any subsidy, benefit or service under the welfare scheme of
the Government expenditure whereof is to be met from the Consolidated Fund of
India. It follows that authentication under Section 7 would be required as a
condition for receipt of a subsidy, benefit or service only when such a
subsidy, benefit or service is taken care of by Consolidated Fund of India.
Therefore, Section 7 is the core Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 &
connected matters Page 483 of 567 provision of the Aadhaar Act and this
provision satisfies the conditions of Article 110 of the Constitution. Upto
this stage, there is no quarrel between the parties.

409) In this context, let us examine provisions of Sections 23(2)(h), 54(2)(m)
and 57 of the Aadhaar Act. Insofar as Section 23 is concerned, it deals with
powers and functions of the Authority. Sub-section (1) thereof says that the
Authority shall develop the policy, procedure and systems for issuing Aadhaar
numbers to individuals and perform authentication thereof under this Act. As
mentioned above, under Section 3 of the Aadhaar Act, Aadhaar number is to be
issued and authentication is performed under Section 8 of the Aadhaar Act.
Sub-section (2) stipulates certain specified powers and functions which the
Authority may perform and sub-section (h) thereof reads as under:

> “23(2)(h) specifying the manner of use of Aadhaar numbers for the purposes
> of providing or availing of various subsidies, benefits, services and other
> purposes for which Aadhaar numbers may be used.”

> 410) This provision, thus, enables the Authority to specify the manner of
> use of Aadhaar with specific purpose in mind, namely, for providing or
> availing of various subsidies, benefits and services.

These are relatable to Section 7. However, it uses the expression ‘other
purposes’ as well. The expression ‘other Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012
& connected matters Page 484 of 567 purposes’ can be read ejusdem generis
which would have its relation to subsidies, benefits and services as mentioned
in Section 7 and it can be confined only to that purpose i.e. scheme of
targeted delivery for giving any grant, relief etc. when it is chargeable to
Consolidated Fund of India. Therefore, this provision, according to us, can be
read as incidental to the main provision and would be covered by Article
110(g) of the Constitution. Section 54 confers power upon the Authority to
make regulations consistent with the Act and rules made thereunder, for
carrying out the provisions of the Act. Clause (m) of sub-section (2) of
Section 54 relates to Section 23(2)(h) as can be seen from its language.

“54(2)(m) the manner of use of Aadhaar numbers for the purposes of providing
or availing of various subsidies, benefits, services and other purposes for
which Aadhaar numbers may be used under clause (h) of sub-section (2) of
section 23.”

411) The interpretation which we have given to Section 23(2)(h) would apply
here as well and, therefore, we do not find any problem with this provision
also. Coming to Section 57 of the Aadhaar Act, it mentions that Aadhaar Act
would not prevent use of Aadhaar number for other purposes under the law. It
is only an enabling provision as it permits the use of Aadhaar number for
other purposes as well. This provision is to be viewed in the Writ Petition
(Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 485 of 567 backdrop that
Section 7 is the core provision. We have already held that it has substantial
nexus with the appropriation of funds from the Consolidated Fund of India and
is directly connected with Article 110 of the Constitution. To facilitate
this, UIDAI is established as Authority under the Act which performs various
functions including that of a regulator needing funds for staff salary and
it’s own expenses. Respondents have rights remarked that the Authority is the
performer in chief, the predominant dramatis personae. It appoints Registrars,
enrollers, REs and ASAs; it lays down device and software specifications, and
develops softwares too; it enrols; it de-duplicates; it establishes CIDR and
manages it; it authenticates; it inspects; it prosecutes; it imposes
disincentives; etc. And all this it does based on funds obtained by
appropriations from Consolidated Fund of India (Section 24).

412) When we examine the provision of Section 57 in the aforesaid backdrop, as
stated above, it only enables holder of Aadhaar number to use the said number
for other purposes as well. That would not take away or dilute the sheen of
clause 7 (now Section

7) for which purposes the Bill was introduced as Money Bill. In any case, a
part of Section 57 has already declared Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012
& connected matters Page 486 of 567 unconstitutional whereby even a body
corporate in private sector or person may seek authentication from the
Authority for establishing the identity of an individual.

For all the aforesaid reasons, we are of the opinion that Bill was rightly
introduced as Money Bill. Accordingly, it is not necessary for us to deal with
other contentions of the petitioners, namely, whether certification by the
Speaker about the Bill being Money Bill is subject to judicial review or not,
whether a provision which does not relate to Money Bill is severable or not.
We reiterate that main provision is a part of Money Bill and other are only
incidental and, therefore, covered by clause (g) of Article 110 of the
Constitution.

Section 139AA of the Income Tax Act, 1961:

413) The Division Bench of this Court in Binoy Viswam has already upheld the
validity of Section 139AA of the Income Tax Act, 1961 by repelling the
contention predicated on Articles 14 and 19 of the Constitution of India. No
doubt, in the said judgment, the Court held that insofar as scope of judicial
review of legislative act is concerned, it is available on two grounds,
namely:

(i) The Act is not within the competence of the legislature which passed the
law, and/or

(ii) It is in contravention of any fundamental rights stipulated in Writ
Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 487 of 567 Part III
of the Constitution or any other rights/provisions of the Constitution.

414) We have already acknowledged the existence of third ground as pointed out
in Shayara Bano case, namely, ‘manifest arbitrariness’. An Act which is
manifestly arbitrary would be unreasonable and contrary to rule of law and,
therefore, violative of Article 14 of the Constitution. Even when we consider
the provisions of Section 139AA of the Income Tax Act, 1961 from this point of
view, it cannot be said that the provision suffers from the vice of manifest
arbitrariness. On the contrary, in Binoy Viswam itself, the benevolent purpose
for inserting such a provision as a bona fide move has been highlighted.
Therefore, the provision needs this test as well. In this behalf, the Court
observed:

> “101. The varying needs of different classes or sections of people require
> differential and separate treatment. The legislature is required to deal
> with diverse problems arising out of an infinite variety of human relations.
> It must, therefore, necessarily have the power of making laws to attain
> particular objects and, for that purpose, of distinguishing, selecting and
> classifying persons and things upon which its laws are to operate. The
> principle of equality of law, thus, means not that the same law should apply
> to everyone but that a law should deal alike with all in one class; that
> there should be an equality of treatment under equal circumstances. It means
> that equals should not be treated unlike and unlikes should not be treated
> alike. Likes should be treated alike.” Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012
> & connected matters Page 488 of 567

> 415) Since the issue as to whether right to privacy is a facet of
> fundamental rights or not was pending before the Constitution Bench, the
> challenge to Section 139AA was not examined in the context of privacy
> rights, specifically Article 21 of the Constitution though this aspect was
> argued. The Division Bench observed in this behalf, as under:

> “136. Subject to the aforesaid, these writ petitions are disposed of in the
> following manner:

> 136.1. We hold that Parliament was fully competent to enact Section 139-AA
> of the Act and its authority to make this law was not diluted by the orders
> of this Court.

> 136.2. We do not find any conflict between the provisions of the Aadhaar Act
> and Section 139-AA of the Income Tax Act inasmuch as when interpreted
> harmoniously, they operate in distinct fields.

> 136.3. Section 139-AA of the Act is not discriminatory nor it offends
> equality clause enshrined in Article 14 of the Constitution.

> 136.4. Section 139-AA is also not violative of Article 19(1)

> (g) of the Constitution insofar as it mandates giving of Aadhaar enrolment
> number for applying for PAN cards, in the income tax returns or notified
> Aadhaar enrolment number to the designated authorities. Further, the proviso
> to sub-section (2) thereof has to be read down to mean that it would operate
> only prospectively.

> 136.5. The validity of the provision upheld in the aforesaid manner is
> subject to passing the muster of Article 21 of the Constitution, which is
> the issue before the Constitution Bench in Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of
> 2012 and other connected matters. Till then, there shall remain a partial
> stay on the operation of the proviso to sub-section (2) of Section 139-AA of
> the Act, as described above. No costs.”

> 416) The nine Judge Bench has already, since then, answered the Writ
> Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 489 of 567
> reference by holding that right to privacy is a fundamental right.

Having regard to that, validity of Section 139AA of the Act needs to be tested
on this ground.

417) As already explained above, the Constitution Bench has held that in K.S.
Puttaswamy though privacy is a fundamental right inter alia traceable to the
right to liberty enshrined in Article 21 of the Constitution, it is not an
absolute right but subject to limitations. The Court also laid down the triple
test which need to be satisfied for judging the permissible limits for
invasion of privacy while testing the validity of any legislation. These are:

    
    
           (a)     The existence of a law.
    
           (b)     A “legitimate State interest”; and
    
           (c)     Such law should pass the “test of proportionality”.
    
    
    

418) In the present case, there is no dispute that first requirement stands
satisfied as Section 139AA is a statutory provision and, therefore, there is a
backing of law. Mr. Tushar Mehta, learned ASG had argued that not only other
two requirements are also satisfied, rather these have been specifically dealt
with by the Division Bench in Binoy Viswam inasmuch as these aspects were
eluded to, consider, examined and the Court recorded its findings on these
aspects. We find force in this submission of Mr. Mehta. Writ Petition (Civil)
No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 490 of 567 Insofar as requirement of
‘legitimate State interest’ is concerned, he pointed out that though Nariman,
J. provided for a lenient test, namely, ‘larger public interest’ as against
‘legitimate State interest’, the provision satisfies both the tests. We agree
with his submission, as Section 139AA of the Income Tax Act, 1961 seeks to
safeguard the following interest:

> “To prevent income tax evasion by requiring, through an amendment to the
> Income Tax Act, that the Aadhaar number be linked with the PAN.”

> 419) The mandatory requirement of quoting/producing PAN number is given in
> Rule 114 and the Form 49A. While mandating that “every person”, (the term
> “person” as defined under Section 2(31) of the Act), shall apply for and get
> a PAN, the legislature also provided for the requirement so as to how such
> number will be given to every “person” in Rule 114 of the Income Tax Rules,
> the relevant part of which is Rule 114(1). While complying with the
> mandatory requirement (which have been in existence since 1989) and that for
> all “persons”, many facts were required to be disclosed and such disclosure
> was/is in public interest including demographic details and biometrics i.e.
> left thumb impression/signature.

420) The Parliament, considering the “legitimate State interest” as well Writ
Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 491 of 567 as the
“larger public interest” has now introduced Section 139AA which is only an
extension of Section 139A which requires linking of PAN number with Aadhaar
number which is issued under the Act for the purpose of eliminating duplicate
PANs from the system with the help of a robust technology solution. Therefore,
those who have PAN number and have already provided the information required
to get PAN number cannot claim to have any legitimate expectation of
withholding any data required for Aadhaar under the ground of “privacy”.

421) The respondents have demonstrated with empirical data, in the common
additional affidavit of respondent Nos. 1 and 3 the existence of the
“legitimate State interest” and “larger public interest”. Being a unique
identifier, the problem of bogus or duplicate PANs can be dealt with in a more
systematic and full- proof manner (though, in the context of Articles 14 and
19 of the Constitution, but at the same time, relevant from the perspective of
legitimate State interest also). Discussion on this aspect, in Binoy Viswam,
proceeds as under:

> “60.2. PAN is the key or identifier of all computerised records relating to
> the taxpayer. The requirement for obtaining of PAN is mandated through
> Section 139-A of the Act. The procedure for application for PAN is
> prescribed in Rule 114 of the Rules. The forms prescribed for PAN
> application are Forms 49-A and 49-AA for Indian and foreign
> citizens/entities. Quoting of PAN has been Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of
> 2012 & connected matters Page 492 of 567 mandated for certain transactions
> above specified threshold value in Rule 114-B of the Rules.

> 60.3. For achieving the objective of one PAN to one assessee, it is required
> to maintain uniqueness of PAN. The uniqueness of PAN is achieved by
> conducting a de- duplication check on all already existing allotted PAN
> against the data furnished by new applicant. Under the existing system of
> PAN only demographic data is captured. De-duplication process is carried out
> using a phonetic algorithm whereby a Phonetic PAN (PPAN) is created in
> respect of each applicant using the data of applicant's name, father's name,
> date of birth, gender and status. By comparison of newly generated PPAN with
> existing set of PPANs of all assessees duplicate check is carried out and it
> is ensured that same person does not acquire multiple PANs or one PAN is not
> allotted to multiple persons. Due to prevalence of common names and large
> number of PAN holders, the demographic way of de-duplication is not
> foolproof. Many instances are found where multiple PANs have been allotted
> to one person or one PAN has been allotted to multiple persons despite the
> application of abovementioned de-duplication process. While allotment of
> multiple PANs to one person has the risk of diversion of income of person
> into several PANs resulting in evasion of tax, the allotment of same PAN to
> multiple persons results in wrong aggregation and assessment of incomes of
> several persons as one taxable entity represented by single PAN.

> 60.4. Presently verification of original documents in only 0.2% cases (200
> out of 1,00,000 PAN applications) is done on a random basis which is quite
> less. In the case of Aadhaar, 100% verification is possible due to
> availability of online Aadhaar authentication service provided by the UIDAI.
> Aadhaar seeding in PAN database will make PAN allotment process more robust.

> 60.5. Seeding of Aadhaar number into PAN database will allow a robust way of
> de-duplication as Aadhaar number is de-duplicated using biometric attributes
> of fingerprints and iris images. The instance of a duplicate Aadhaar is
> almost non-existent. Further seeding of Aadhaar will allow the Income Tax
> Department to weed out any undetected duplicate PANs. It will also
> facilitate resolution of cases of one PAN allotted to multiple persons.

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 493 of 567

> xx xx xx

> 104\. Insofar as the impugned provision is concerned, Mr Datar had conceded
> that first test that of reasonable classification had been satisfied as he
> conceded that individual assessees form a separate class and the impugned
> provision which targeted only individual assessees would not be
> discriminatory on this ground. His whole emphasis was that Section 139-AA of
> the Act did not satisfy the second limb of the twin tests of classification
> as, according to him, this provision had no rational nexus with the object
> sought to be achieved. In this behalf, his submission was that if the
> purpose of the provision was to curb circulation of black money, such an
> object was not achievable by seeding PAN with Aadhaar inasmuch as Aadhaar is
> only for individuals. His submission was that it is only the individuals who
> are responsible for generating black money or money laundering. This was the
> basis for Mr Datar's submission. We find it somewhat difficult to accept
> such a submission.

> 105\. Unearthing black money or checking money laundering is to be achieved
> to whatever extent possible.

Various measures can be taken in this behalf. If one of the measures is
introduction of Aadhaar into the tax regime, it cannot be denounced only
because of the reason that the purpose would not be achieved fully. Such kind
of menace, which is deep-rooted, needs to be tackled by taking multiple
actions and those actions may be initiated at the same time. It is the
combined effect of these actions which may yield results and each individual
action considered in isolation may not be sufficient. Therefore, rationality
of a particular measure cannot be challenged on the ground that it has no
nexus with the objective to be achieved. Of course, there is a definite
objective. For this purpose alone, individual measure cannot be ridiculed. We
have already taken note of the recommendations of SIT on black money headed by
Justice M.B. Shah. We have also reproduced the measures suggested by the
Committee headed by Chairman, CBDT on “Measures to Tackle Black Money in India
and Abroad”. They have, in no uncertain terms, suggested that one singular
proof of identity of a person for entering into finance/business transactions,
etc. may go a long way in curbing this foul practice. That apart, even if
solitary purpose of de-duplication of PAN cards is taken into consideration,
that may be sufficient to meet the second test of Article 14. It has come on
record that 11.35 Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters
Page 494 of 567 lakh cases of duplicate PAN or fraudulent PAN cards have
already been detected and out of this 10.52 lakh cases pertain to individual
assessees. Seeding of Aadhaar with PAN has certain benefits which have already
been enumerated. Furthermore, even when we address the issue of shell
companies, fact remains that companies are after all floated by individuals
and these individuals have to produce documents to show their identity. It was
sought to be argued that persons found with duplicate/bogus PAN cards are
hardly 0.4% and, therefore, there was no need to have such a provision. We
cannot go by percentage figures. The absolute number of such cases is 10.52
lakhs, which figure, by no means, can be termed as miniscule, to harm the
economy and create adverse effect on the nation. The respondents have argued
that Aadhaar will ensure that there is no duplication of identity as
biometrics will not allow that and, therefore, it may check the growth of
shell companies as well.

xx xx xx

127\. It would be apposite to quote the following discussion by the
Comptroller and Auditor General in his report for the year 2011:

“Widening of Tax Base The assessee base grew over the last five years from
297.9 lakh taxpayers in 2005-06 to 340.9 lakh taxpayers in 2009-10 at the rate
of 14.4 per cent. The Department has different mechanisms available to enhance
the assessee base which include inspection and survey, information sharing
with other tax departments and third-party information available in annual
information returns. Automation also facilitates greater crosslinking. Most of
these mechanisms are available at the level of assessing officers. The
Department needs to holistically harness these mechanisms at macro level to
analyse the gaps in the assessee base. Permanent Account Numbers (PANs) issued
up to March 2009 and March 2010 were 807.9 lakhs and 958 lakhs respectively.
The returns filled in 2008-09 and 2009-10 were 326.5 lakhs and 340.9 lakhs
respectively. The gap between PANs and the number of returns filed was 617.1
lakhs in 2009-10. The Board needs to identify the reasons Writ Petition
(Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 495 of 567 for the gap and
use this information for appropriately enhancing the assessee base. The gap
may be due to issuance of duplicate PAN cards and death of some PAN card
holders. The Department needs to put in place appropriate controls to weed out
the duplicate PANs and also update the position in respect of deceased
assessee. It is significant to note that the number of PAN card holders has
increased by 117.7 per cent between 2005-06 to 2009-10 whereas the number of
returns filed in the same period has increased by 14.4 per cent only.

The total direct tax collection has increased by 128.8 per cent during the
period 2005-06 to 2009-10. The increase in the tax collection was around nine
times as compared to increase in the assessee base. It should be the constant
endeavour of the Department to ensure that the entire assessee base, once
correctly identified is duly meeting the entire tax liability. However, no
assurance could be obtained that the tax liability on the assessee is being
assessed and collected properly. This comment is corroborated in Para 2.4.1 of
Chapter 2 of this report where we have mentioned about our detection of
undercharge of tax amounting to Rs 12,842.7 crores in 19,230 cases audited
during 2008-09. However, given the fact that ours is a test audit, the
Department needs to take firm steps towards strengthening the controls
available on the existing statutes towards deriving an assurance on the tax
collections.” (emphasis supplied)

128\. Likewise, the Finance Minister in his Budget speech in February 2013
described the extent of tax evasion and offering lesser income tax than what
is actually due thereby labelling India as tax non-compliant, with the
following figures:

“India's tax to GDP ratio is very low, and the proportion of direct tax to
indirect tax is not optional from the viewpoint of social justice. I place
before you certain data to indicate that our direct tax collection is not
commensurate with the income and consumption pattern of Indian economy. As
against estimated 4.2 crore persons engaged in organised sector employment,
the number of individuals filing return for salary income are only 1.74
crores. As against 5.6 Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected
matters Page 496 of 567 crore informal sector individual enterprises and firms
doing small business in India, the number of returns filed by this category
are only 1.81 crores. Out of the 13.94 lakh companies registered in India up
to 31-3- 2014, 5.97 lakh companies have filed their returns for Assessment
Year 2016-17. Of the 5.97 lakh companies which have filed their returns for
Assessment Year 2016-17 so far, as many as 2.76 lakh companies have shown
losses or zero income. 2.85 lakh companies have shown profit before tax of
less than Rs 1 crore. 28,667 companies have shown profit between Rs 1 crore to
Rs 10 crores, and only 7781 companies have profit before tax of more than Rs
10 crores. Among 3.7 crore individuals who filed the tax returns in 2015-16,
99 lakhs show income below the exemption limit of Rs 2.5 lakh p.a. 1.95 crores
show income between Rs 2.5 to Rs 5 lakhs, 52 lakhs show income between Rs 5 to
Rs 10 lakhs and only 24 lakh people show income above Rs 10 lakhs. Of the 76
lakh individual assessees who declare income above Rs 5 lakhs, 56 lakhs are in
the salaried class. The number of people showing income more than 50 lakhs in
the entire country is only 1.72 lakhs. We can contrast this with the fact that
in the last five years, more than 1.25 crore cars have been sold, and number
of Indian citizens who flew abroad, either for business or tourism, is 2
crores in the year 2015. From all these figures we can conclude that we are
largely a tax non-compliant society. The predominance of the cash in the
economy makes it possible for the people to evade their taxes. When too many
people evade the taxes, the burden of their share falls on those who are
honest and compliant.”

129\. The respondents have also claimed that linking of Aadhaar with PAN is
consistent with India's international obligations and goals. In this behalf,
it is pointed out that India has signed the Inter-Governmental Agreement (IGA)
with USA on 9-7-2015, for Improving International Tax Compliance and
implementing the Foreign Account Tax Compliance Act (FATCA). India has also
signed a multilateral agreement on 3-6-2015, to automatically exchange
information based on Article 6 of the Convention on Mutual Administrative
Assistance in Tax Matters under the Common Reporting Scheme (CRS), formally
referred to as the Standard for Automatic Exchange of Financial Account
Information (AEoI). As part of India's commitment Writ Petition (Civil) No.
494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 497 of 567 under FATCA and CRS, financial
sector entities capture the details about the customers using the PAN. In case
the PAN or submitted details are found to be incorrect or fictitious, it will
create major embarrassment for the country. Under Non-filers Monitoring System
(NMS), the Income Tax Department identifies non-filers with potential tax
liabilities. Data analysis is carried out to identify non-filers about whom
specific information was available in AIR, CIB data and TDS/TCS returns.
Email/SMS and letters are sent to the identified non-filers communicating the
information summary and seeking to know the submission details of income tax
return. In a large number of cases (more than 10 lakh PANs every year) it is
seen that the PAN holder neither submits the response and in many cases the
letters are return unserved. Field verification by field formations have found
that in a large number of cases, the PAN holder is untraceable. In many cases,
the PAN holder mentions that the transaction does not relate to them. There is
a need to strengthen PAN by linking it with Aadhaar/biometric information to
prevent use of wrong PAN for high value transactions.”

422) Adverting to the aspect of proportionality, here again there was a
specific discussion in Binoy Viswam as this argument was raised, though in the
context of Article 19 of the Constitution. The Court after explaining the
doctrine of proportionality specifically held that proportionality test stood
applied with. Following discussion in the said judgment would amply
demonstrate this proposition:

> “65. While monitoring the PILs relating to night shelters for the homeless
> and the right to food through the public distribution system, this Court has
> lauded and complimented the efforts of the State Governments for inter alia
> carrying out biometric identification of the head of family of each
> household to eliminate fictitious, bogus and ineligible BPL/AAY household
> cards.

> xx xx xx Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 498
> of 567 125.2. Menace of corruption and black money has reached alarming
> proportion in this country. It is eating into the economic progress which
> the country is otherwise achieving. It is not necessary to go into the
> various reasons for this menace. However, it would be pertinent to comment
> that even as per the observations of the Special Investigation Team (SIT) on
> black money headed by Justice M.B. Shah, one of the reasons is that persons
> have the option to quote their PAN or UID or passport number or driving
> licence or any other proof of identity while entering into
> financial/business transactions. Because of this multiple methods of giving
> proofs of identity, there is no mechanism/system at present to collect the
> data available with each of the independent proofs of ID. For this reason,
> even SIT suggested that these databases be interconnected. To the same
> effect is the recommendation of the Committee headed by Chairman, CBDT on
> measures to tackle black money in India and abroad which also discusses the
> problem of money laundering being done to evade taxes under the garb of
> shell companies by the persons who hold multiple bogus PAN numbers under
> different names or variations of their names. That can be possible if one
> uniform proof of identity, namely, UID is adopted. It may go a long way to
> check and minimise the said malaise.

> 125.3. Thirdly, Aadhaar or UID, which has come to be known as the most
> advanced and sophisticated infrastructure, may facilitate law-enforcement
> agencies to take care of problem of terrorism to some extent and may also be
> helpful in checking the crime and also help investigating agencies in
> cracking the crimes. No doubt, going by the aforesaid, and may be some other
> similarly valid considerations, it is the intention of the Government to
> give fillip to Aadhaar movement and encourage the people of this country to
> enrol themselves under the Aadhaar Scheme.

> 126\. Whether such a scheme should remain voluntary or it can be made
> mandatory imposing compulsiveness on the people to be covered by Aadhaar is
> a different question which shall be addressed at the appropriate stage. At
> this juncture, it is only emphasised that mala fides cannot be attributed to
> this scheme. In any case, we are concerned with the vires of Section 139-AA
> of the Income Tax Act, 1961 which is a statutory provision. This Court is,
> thus, dealing with the aspect of judicial review of legislation.

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 499 of 567

Insofar as this provision is concerned, the explanation of the respondents in
the counter-affidavit, which has already been reproduced above, is that the
primary purpose of introducing this provision was to take care of the problem
of multiple PAN cards obtained in fictitious names. Such multiple cards in
fictitious names are obtained with the motive of indulging into money
laundering, tax evasion, creation and channelising of black money. It is
mentioned that in de-duplication exercises, 11.35 lakh cases of duplicate
PANs/fraudulent PANs have been detected. Out of these, around 10.52 lakhs
pertain to the individual assessees. Parliament in its wisdom thought that one
PAN to one person can be ensured by adopting Aadhaar for allotment of PAN to
individuals. As of today, that is the only method available i.e. by seeding of
existing PAN with Aadhaar. It is perceived as the best method, and the only
robust method of de-duplication of PAN database. It is claimed by the
respondents that the instance of duplicate Aadhaar is almost non-existent. It
is also claimed that seeding of PAN with Aadhaar may contribute to widening of
the tax case as well, by checking the tax evasions and bringing into tax hold
those persons who are liable to pay tax but deliberately avoid doing so.”

423) It has been stated by the respondents, on affidavit, that analysis of
Form 61/60 data using PAN Aadhaar linkage shows that a large number of PAN
holders do not quote their PAN in the prescribed transactions to prevent
linking of the transactions to the PAN. The analysis was performed by matching
the Aadhaar number and person name reported in Form 61 (which was possible
only due to linking of financial transactions/accounts with Aadhaar) with the
Aadhaar and name of the entity available in the ITD PAN database (possible due
to linking of PAN with Aadhaar). This analysis identified 1.65 crore non-PAN
transactions reported Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected
matters Page 500 of 567 through Form 61 (relating to FY 2016-17 and FY
2017-18) where PAN of the transacting party was present in the PAN database
and was not mentioned filing a wrong form deliberately. These transactions
totalled to around Rs. 33,000 crore (based on transaction amount reported).
This is the amount of undisclosed high value transaction which would have gone
undetected had it not been for Aadhaar linkage. Similar matching has also
helped populating PAN in 1.12 lakh non-PAN transactions reported under
Statement of Financial Transactions (SFT). Majority of the non- PAN
transactions reported are around Deposit in Cash, Investment in time deposit,
Sale of immovable property, Purchase of immovable property and Opening an
account (other than savings and time deposit). Thus, linking of PAN with
Aadhaar will significantly enhance legitimate collection of country’s revenue.

424) Taking into account the aforesaid consideration as well as other factors
mentioned above, we feel that there is a justifiable reason with the State for
collection and storage of data in the form of Aadhaar and linking it with PAN
insofar as Section 139AA of the Income Tax Act is concerned. We would like to
reproduce para 311 of K.S. Puttaswamy judgment, which reads as under:

> “311. Apart from national security, the State may have justifiable reasons
> for the collection and storage of data. In a social welfare State, the
> Government embarks upon Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected
> matters Page 501 of 567 programmes which provide benefits to impoverished
> and marginalised sections of society. There is a vital State interest in
> ensuring that scarce public resources are not dissipated by the diversion of
> resources to persons who do not qualify as recipients. Allocation of
> resources for human development is coupled with a legitimate concern that
> the utilisation of resources should not be siphoned away for extraneous
> purposes. Data mining with the object of ensuring that resources are
> properly deployed to legitimate beneficiaries is a valid ground for the
> State to insist on the collection of authentic data. But, the data which the
> State has collected has to be utilised for legitimate purposes of the State
> and ought not to be utilised unauthorisedly for extraneous purposes. This
> will ensure that the legitimate concerns of the State are duly safeguarded
> while, at the same time, protecting privacy concerns. Prevention and
> investigation of crime and protection of the revenue are among the
> legitimate aims of the State. Digital platforms are a vital tool of ensuring
> good governance in a social welfare State. Information
> technology—legitimately deployed is a powerful enabler in the spread of
> innovation and knowledge.”

> 425) Following passages from Subramanian Swamy v. Union of India, Ministry
> of Law & Ors.154 may also be relevant in this behalf and the same are
> reproduced below:

> “122. In State of Madras v. V.G. Row, the Court has ruled that the test of
> reasonableness, wherever prescribed, should be applied to each individual
> statute impugned and no abstract standard, or general pattern of
> reasonableness can be laid down as applicable to all cases. The nature of
> the right alleged to have been infringed, the underlying purpose of the
> restrictions imposed, the extent and urgency of the evil sought to be
> remedied thereby, the disproportion of the imposition, the prevailing
> conditions at the time, should all enter into the judicial verdict.

> xx xx xx

> 130\. The principles as regards reasonable restriction as has been stated by
> this Court from time to time are that the 154(2016) 7 SCC 221 Writ Petition
> (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 502 of 567 restriction
> should not be excessive and in public interest.

> The legislation should not invade the rights and should not smack of
> arbitrariness. The test of reasonableness cannot be determined by laying
> down any abstract standard or general pattern. It would depend upon the
> nature of the right which has been infringed or sought to be infringed. The
> ultimate “impact”, that is, effect on the right has to be determined. The
> “impact doctrine” or the principle of “inevitable effect” or “inevitable
> consequence” stands in contradistinction to abuse or misuse of a legislation
> or a statutory provision depending upon the circumstances of the case. The
> prevailing conditions of the time and the principles of proportionality of
> restraint are to be kept in mind by the court while adjudging the
> constitutionality of a provision regard being had to the nature of the
> right. The nature of social control which includes public interest has a
> role. The conception of social interest has to be borne in mind while
> considering reasonableness of the restriction imposed on a right. The social
> interest principle would include the felt needs of the society.

> xx xx xx

> 194\. Needless to emphasise that when a law limits a constitutional right
> which many laws do, such limitation is constitutional if it is proportional.
> The law imposing restriction is proportional if it is meant to achieve a
> proper purpose, and if the measures taken to achieve such a purpose are
> rationally connected to the purpose, and such measures are necessary. Such
> limitations should not be arbitrary or of an excessive nature beyond what is
> required in the interest of the public.

> Reasonableness is judged with reference to the objective which the
> legislation seeks to achieve, and must not be in excess of that objective
> (see P.P. Enterprisesv. Union of India). Further, the reasonableness is
> examined in an objective manner from the standpoint of the interest of the
> general public and not from the point of view of the person upon whom the
> restrictions are imposed or abstract considerations (see Mohd. Hanif
> Quareshi v. State of Bihar) On independent examination of the matter, the
> aforesaid exercise undertaken in the Binoy Viswam is hereby affirmed as we
> are in agreement therewith. We, thus, hold that the provisions Writ Petition
> (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 503 of 567 of Section 139AA
> of the Income Tax Act, 1961 meet the triple test of right to privacy,
> contained in K.S. Puttaswamy.

Prevention of Money Laundering Rules:

426) The petitioners have challenged amendment to Rule 9 of the Prevention of
Money Laundering (Maintenance of Records) Rules, 2005, (Rules, 2005) which was
amended by Prevention of Money Laundering (Maintenance of Records) Seventh
Amendment Rules, 2017. Rule 9 of the aforesaid Rules is amended by Second
Amendment Rules, 2017 whereby following additions are made. The amendment
reads as under:

> “(b) in rule 9, for sub-rule (4) to sub-rule (9), the following sub-rules
> shall be substituted, namely:-

> (4) Where the client is an individual, who is eligible to be enrolled for an
> Aadhaar number, he shall for the purpose of sub-rule (1) submit to the
> reporting entity,-

> (a) the Aadhaar number issued by the Unique Identification Authority of
> India; and

> (b) the Permanent Account Number or Form No. 60 as defined in Income Tax
> Rules, 1962, and such other documents including in respect of the nature of
> business and financial status of the client as may be required by the
> reporting entity:

> Provided that where an Aadhaar number has not been assigned to a client, the
> client shall furnish proof of application of enrolment for Aadhaar and in
> case the Permanent Account Number is not submitted, one certified copy of an
> ‘officially valid document’ shall be submitted.

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 504 of 567

Provided further that photograph need not be submitted by a client falling
under clause (b) of sub-rule (1). (4A) Where the client is an individual, who
is not eligible to be enrolled for an Aadhaar number, he shall for the purpose
of sub-rule (1), submit to the reporting entity, the Permanent Account Number
or Form No. 60 as defined in the Income Tax Rules, 1962:

Provided that if the client does not submit the Permanent Account Number, he
shall submit one certified copy of an ‘officially valid document’ containing
details of his identity and address, one recent photograph and such other
documents including in respect of the nature or business and financial status
of the client as may be required by the reporting entity.

(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-rules (4) and (4A), an
individual who desires to open a small account in a banking company may be
allowed to open such an account on production of a self-attested photograph
and affixation of signature or thumb print, as the case may be, on the form
for opening the account:

Provided that-

(i) the designated officer of the banking company, while opening the small
account, certifies under his signature that the person opening the account has
affixed his signature or thumb print, as the case may be, in his presence;

(ii) the small account shall be opened only at Core Banking Solution linked
banking company branches or in a branch where it is possible to manually
monitor and ensure that foreign remittances are not credited to a small
account and that the stipulated limits on monthly and annual aggregate of
transactions and balance in such accounts are not breached, before a
transaction is allowed to take place;

(iii) the small account shall remain operational initially for a period of
twelve months, and thereafter for a further period of twelve months if the
holder of such an account provides evidence before the banking company of
having applied for any of the officially valid documents within twelve months
of the opening of the said account, with the Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of
2012 & connected matters Page 505 of 567 entire relaxation provisions to be
reviewed in respect of the said account after twenty-four months;

(iv) the small account shall be monitored and when there is suspicion of money
laundering or financing of terrorism or other high risk scenarios, the
identity of client shall be established through the production of officially
valid documents, as referred to in sub-rule (4) and the Aadhaar number of the
client or where an Aadhaar number has not been assigned to the client, through
the production of proof of application towards enrolment for Aadhaar along
with an officially valid document;

Provided further that if the client is not eligible to be enrolled for an
Aadhaar number, the identity of client shall be established through the
production of an officially valid document;

(v) the foreign remittance shall not be allowed to be credited into the small
account unless the identity of the client is fully established through the
production of officially valid documents, as referred to in sub-rule (4) and
the Aadhaar number of the client or where an Aadhaar number has not been
assigned to the client, through the production of proof of application towards
enrolment for Aadhaar along with an officially valid document:

Provided that if the client is not eligible to be enrolled for the Aadhaar
number, the identity of client shall be established through the production of
an officially valid document.

(6) Where the client is a company, it shall for the purposes of sub-rule (1),
submit to the reporting entity the certified copies of the following
documents:-

(i) Certificate of incorporation;

(ii) Memorandum and Articles of Association;

(iii) A resolution from the Board of Directors and power of attorney granted
to its managers, officers or employees to transact on its behalf;

(iv) (a) Aadhaar numbers; and Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 &
connected matters Page 506 of 567

(b) Permanent Account Numbers or Form 60 as defined in the Income Tax Rules,
1962, issued to managers, officers or employees holding an attorney to
transact on the company’s behalf or where an Aadhaar number has not been
assigned, proof of application towards enrolment for Aadhaar and in case
Permanent Account Number is not submitted an officially valid document shall
be submitted:

Provided that for the purpose of this clause if the managers, officers or
employees holding an attorney to transact on the company’s behalf are not
eligible to be enrolled for Aadhaar number and do not submit the Permanent
Account Number, certified copy of an officially valid document shall be
submitted.

(7) Where the client is a partnership firm, it shall, for the purposes of sub-
rule (1), submit to the reporting entity the certified copies of the following
documents:-

(i) registration certificate;

(ii) partnership deed; and

(iii) (a) Aadhaar number; and

(b) Permanent Account Number or Form 60 as defined in the Income Tax Rules,
1962, issued to the person holding an attorney to transact on its behalf or
where an Aadhaar number has not been assigned, proof of application towards
enrolment for Aadhaar and in case Permanent Account Number is not submitted an
officially valid document shall be submitted:

Provided that for the purpose of this clause, if the person holding an
attorney to transact on the company’s behalf is not eligible to be enrolled
for Aadhaar number and does not submit the Permanent Account Number, certified
copy of an officially valid document shall be submitted. (8) Where the client
is a trust, it shall, for the purposes of sub-rule (1) submit to the reporting
entity the certified copies of the following documents:-

    
    
                   (i)    registration certificate;
    Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters               Page 507 of 567
                   (ii)   trust deed; and
    
                   (iii) (a) Aadhaar number; and
    
                   (b)    Permanent Account Number or Form 60 as defined
                   in the Income Tax Rules, 1962,
    
    

issued to the person holding an attorney to transact on its behalf or where
Aadhaar number has not been assigned, proof of application towards enrolment
for Aadhaar and in case Permanent Account Number is not submitted an
officially valid document shall be submitted:

Provided that for the purpose of this clause if the person holding an attorney
to transact on the company’s behalf is not eligible to be enrolled for Aadhaar
number and does not submit the Permanent Account Number, certified copy of an
officially valid document shall be submitted. (9) Where the client is an
unincorporated association or a body of individuals, it shall submit to the
reporting entity the certified copies of the following documents:-

(i) resolution of the managing body of such association or body of
individuals;

(ii) power of attorney granted to him to transact on its behalf;

(iii) (a) the Aadhaar number; and

(b) Permanent Account Number or Form 60 as defined in the Income Tax Rules,
1962, issued to the person holding an attorney to transact on its behalf or
where Aadhaar number has not been assigned, proof of application towards
enrolment for Aadhaar and in case the Permanent Account Number is not
submitted an officially valid document shall be submitted; and

(iv) such information as may be required by the reporting entity to
collectively establish the legal existence of such an association or body of
individuals:

Provided that for the purpose of this clause if the person holding an attorney
to transact on the company’s Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected
matters Page 508 of 567 behalf is not eligible to be enrolled for Aadhaar
number and does not submit the Permanent Account Number, certified copy of an
officially valid document shall be submitted.”

(c) after sub-rule (14), the following sub-rules shall be inserted, namely,-

(15) Any reporting entity, at the time of receipt of the Aadhaar number under
provisions of this rule, shall carry out authentication using either e-KYC
authentication facility or Yes/No authentication facility provided by Unique
Identification Authority of India.

(16) In case the client referred to in sub-rules (4) to (9) of rule 9 is not a
resident or is a resident in the States of Jammu and Kashmir, Assam or
Meghalaya and does not submit the Permanent Account Number, the client shall
submit to the reporting entity one certified copy of officially valid document
containing details of his identity and address, one recent photograph and such
other document including in respect of the nature of business and financial
status of the client as may be required by the reporting entity.

(17) (a) In case the client, eligible to be enrolled for Aadhaar and obtain a
Permanent Account Number, referred to in sub-rules (4) to (9) of rule 9 does
not submit the Aadhaar number or the Permanent Account Number at the time of
commencement of an account based relationship with a reporting entity, the
client shall submit the same within a period of six months from the date of
the commencement of the account based relationship:

Provided that the clients, eligible to be enrolled for Aadhaar and obtain the
Permanent Account Number, already having an account based relationship with
reporting entities prior to date of this notification, the client shall submit
the Aadhaar number and Permanent Account Number by 31st December, 2017.

(b) As per regulation 12 of the Aadhaar (Enrolment and Update) Regulations,
2016, the local authorities in the State Governments or Union-territory
Administrations have become or are in the process of becoming UIDAI Registrars
for Aadhaar enrolment and are organising special Aadhaar enrolment camps at
convenient locations for providing enrolment facilities in consultation with
UIDAI Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 509 of
567 and any individual desirous of commencing an account based relationship as
provided in this rule, who does not possess the Aadhaar number or has not yet
enrolled for Aadhaar, may also visit such special Aadhaar enrolment camps for
Aadhaar enrolment or any of the Aadhaar enrolment centres in the vicinity with
existing registrars of UIDAI.

(c) In case the client fails to submit the Aadhaar number and Permanent
Account Number within the aforesaid six months period, the said account shall
cease to be operational till the time the Aadhaar number and Permanent Account
Number is submitted by the client:

Provided that in case client already having an account based relationship with
reporting entities prior to date of this notification fails to submit the
Aadhaar number and Permanent Account Number by 31st December, 2017, the said
account shall cease to be operational till the time the Aadhaar number and
Permanent Account Number is submitted by the client.

(18) In case the identity information relating to the Aadhaar number or
Permanent Account Number submitted by the client referred to in sub-rules (4)
to (9) of rule 9 does not have current address of the client, the client shall
submit an officially valid documents to the reporting entity.” As can be seen
from the above, linking of Aadhaar with the bank account is now mandatory. It
applies not only to those bank accounts which would be opened after the
bringing into force the amendment but even the existing accounts as well.

427) Linking of a banking account to Aadhaar is challenged as violative of
Articles 14, 19(1)(g) and 21 of the Constitution and also of Prevention of
Money Laundering Act, 2002. Elaborate submissions were made by Mr. Arvind
Datar on the aforesaid Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected
matters Page 510 of 567 aspects. It was argued that those persons who do not
choose to enrol for Aadhaar number would not be in a position to open the bank
account or even operate the existing bank account and there is no valid
explanation as to why all bank accounts had to be authenticated. It was also
argued that provisions of the Rule referred to companies, firms, trust etc. as
well, though the Aadhaar Act is meant for establishing identity of individuals
only. It was further submitted that in case a person fails to link Aadhaar
with the bank account, such person would be rendered ineligible to operate the
bank account, which would amount to forfeiting her money lying in the account
which belongs to her. This amounts to depriving the person from her property
and is, therefore, violative of Article 300A of the Constitution as such a
deprivation can take place only by primary legislation and not by subordinate
legislation in the form of Rules. Much emphasis was also laid on the argument
that the amended Rule does not pass the proportionality test.

428) Mr. Tushar Mehta, learned Additional Solicitor General, refuted the
aforesaid submissions. He pointed out the objective with which the Prevention
of Money Laundering Act was enacted, namely, to curb money laundering and
black money, which is Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected
matters Page 511 of 567 becoming a menace. Therefore, the amendment to Rules
serves a legitimate State aim. He argued that the Rules are not arbitrary and
satisfies the proportionality test also, having regard to the laudable
objective which it seeks to serve.

429) After giving our thoughtful consideration to the various aspects, we feel
that it is not even necessary to deal with each and every contention raised by
the petitioners. Our considered opinion is that it does not meet the test of
proportionality and is also violative of right to privacy of a person which
extends to banking details.

430) This Court has held in Ram Jethmalani & Ors. v. Union of India & Ors.155
that revelation of bank details without prima facie ground of wrong doing
would be violative of right to privacy. The said decision has been approved in
K.S. Puttaswamy. Under the garb of prevention of money laundering or black
money, there cannot be such a sweeping provision which targets every resident
of the country as a suspicious person. Presumption of criminality is treated
as disproportionate and arbitrary.

431) Nobody would keep black money in the bank account. We accept the
possibility of opening an account in an assumed name 155(2011) 8 SCC 1 Writ
Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 512 of 567 and
keeping black money therein which can be laundered as well. However, the
persons doing such an Act, if at all, would be very few. More importantly,
those having bank accounts with modest balance and routine transactions can be
safely ruled out. Therefore, the provision in the present form does not meet
the test of proportionality. Therefore, for checking this possible malice,
there cannot be a mandatory provision for linking of every bank account.

432) In Lal Babu Hussein v. Electoral Registration Officer and Others156, this
Court had struck down the order of the Electoral Officer asking the residents
of a particular en masse to prove their identity as unconstitutional. The
Court held that the Electoral officer asking residents of a particular area en
masse to prove their identity was unconstitutional. In the case, the EO went
on the assumption that all inhabitants of a particular area were foreigners,
notwithstanding their name appearing in earlier electoral rolls. The court
held the following:

(a) Right to vote cannot be disallowed by insisting only on 4 proofs of
identity-voters can rely on any other proof of identity and obtain right to
vote.

(b) Notices were quashed because they failed to distinguish 156(1995) 3 SCC
100 Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 513 of 567
between existing voters who had voted several times and new voters.

(c) Large-scale presumption of illegality impermissible.

433) This linking is made compulsory not only for opening a new bank account
but even for existing bank accounts with a stipulation that if the same is not
done then the account would be deactivated, with the result that the holder of
the account would not be entitled to operate the bank account till the time
seeding of the bank account with Aadhaar is done. This amounts to depriving a
person of his property. We find that this move of mandatory linking of Aadhaar
with bank account does not satisfy the test of proportionality. To
recapitulate, the test of proportionality requires that a limitation of the
fundamental rights must satisfy the following to be proportionate: (i) it is
designated for a proper purpose; (ii) measures are undertaken to effectuate
the limitation are rationally connected to the fulfilment of the purpose;
(iii) there are no alternative less invasive measures; and (iv) there is a
proper relation between the importance of achieving the aim and the importance
of limiting the right.

434) The Rules are disproportionate for the following reasons:

(a) a mere ritualistic incantation of “money laundering”, “black Writ Petition
(Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 514 of 567 money” does not
satisfy the first test;

> (b) no explanations have been given as to how mandatory linking of every
> bank account will eradicate/reduce the problems of “money laundering” and
> “black money”;

> (c) there are alternative methods of KYC which the banks are already
> undertaking, the state has not discharged its burden as to why linking of
> Aadhaar is imperative. We may point out that RBI’s own Master Direction (KYC
> Direction, 2016) No. DBR.AML.BC.

> No. 81/14.01.001/2015-16 allows using alternatives to Aadhaar to open bank
> accounts.

435) There may be legitimate State aim for such a move as it aims at
prevention of money laundering and black money. However, there has not been a
serious thinking while making such a provision applicable for every bank
account. Maintaining back account in today’s world has almost become a
necessity. The Government itself has propagated the advantages thereof and is
encouraging people to open the bank account making it possible to have one
even with Zero Balance under the Pradhan Mantri Jan Dhan Yojana. The
Government has taken various measures to give a boost to digital economy.
Under these schemes, millions of persons, who are otherwise poor, are opening
their bank accounts. They are also becoming habitual to the good Writ Petition
(Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 515 of 567 practice of
entering into transactions through their banks and even by using digital modes
for operation of the bank accounts. Making the requirement of Aadhaar
compulsory for all such and other persons in the name of checking money
laundering or black money is grossly disproportionate. There should have been
a proper study about the methods adopted by persons who indulge in money
laundering, kinds of bank accounts which such persons maintain and target
those bank accounts for the purpose of Aadhaar. It has not been done.

436) We, thus, hold the amendment to Rule 9, by the Seventh Amendment Rules,
2017, in the present form, to be unconstitutional.

Linking of Mobile Number with Aadhaar

437) By a Circular dated March 23, 2017, the Department of Telecommunications
has directed that all licensees shall reverify the existing mobile subscribers
(pre-paid and post-paid) through Aadhaar based e-KYC process. In fine, it
amounts to mandatory linking of mobile connections with Aadhaar, which
requirement is not only in respect of those individuals who would be becoming
mobile subscribers, but applies to existing subscribers as well. Writ Petition
(Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 516 of 567

438) It was the submission of the petitioners that such a linking of the SIM
card with Aadhaar number violates their right to privacy. It is argued that
since it is a fundamental right, the restrictions/curb thereupon in the form
of said linking does not satisfy the tests laid down in K.S. Puttaswamy
inasmuch as it is neither backed by any law nor it serves any legitimate state
aim nor does it meet the requirement of proportionality test.

439) At the outset, it may be mentioned that the respondents have not been
able to show any statutory provision which permits the respondents to issue
such a circular. It is administrative in nature. The respondents have,
however, tried to justify the same on the ground that there have been numerous
instances where non-verification of SIM cards have posed serious security
threats. Having regard to the same, this Court had given direction in Lokniti
Foundation v. Union of India & Anr.157 for the linking of SIM card with
Aadhaar and it is pursuant to those directions that the Telecom Regulatory
Authority of India (TRAI) recommended this step. Therefore, as per the
respondents, Circular dated March 23, 2017 is the outcome of the aforesaid
directions and recommendations which should be treated as backing of law.
According to them, direction of this Court is a law under Article 157 (2017) 7
SCC 155 Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 517 of
567 141 of the Constitution. In addition, it is also argued that since Section
4 of the Indian Telegraph Act, 1885 empowers the Central Government to issue
licenses for establishing, maintaining and working telegraphs, it is within
the power of the Central Government to grant such licenses with condition and,
therefore, Circular dated March 23, 2017 may be read as condition for grant of
licenses. On this premise, attempt is to show that the Circular is issued in
exercise of the powers contained in Section 4 of the Indian Telegraph Act,
1885 which is the force of law.

440) In order to appreciate the respondents’ contentions, we reproduce the
relevant portion of Circular dated March 23, 2017, which reads as under:

> “Hon’ble Supreme Court, in its order dated 06.02.2017 passed in Writ
> Petition (C) No. 607/2016 filed by Lokniti Foundation v/s Union of India,
> while taking into cognizance of “Aadhaar based e-KYC process for issuing new
> telephone connection” issued by the Department, has inter- alia observed
> that “an effective process has been evolved to ensure identity verification,
> as well as, the addresses of all mobile phone subscribers for new
> subscribers. In the near future, and more particularly, within one year from
> today, a similar verification will be completed, in case of existing
> subscribers.” This amounts to a direction which is to be completed within a
> time frame of one year.

2\. A meeting was held on 13.02.2017 in the Department with the telecom
industry wherein UIDAI, TRAI and PMO representatives also participated to
discuss the way forward to implement the directions of Hon’ble Supreme Court.
Detailed discussions and deliberations were held in Writ Petition (Civil) No.
494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 518 of 567 the meeting. The suggestions
received from the industry have been examined in the Department.

3\. Accordingly, after taking into consideration the discussions held in the
meeting and suggestions received from telecom industry, the undersigned is
directed to convey the approval of competent authority that all Licensees
shall re-verify all existing mobile subscribers (prepaid and postpaid) through
Aadhaar based e-KYC process as mentioned in this office letter No.
800-29/2010- VAS dated 16.08.2016. The instructions mentioned in subsequent
paragraphs shall be strictly followed while carrying out the re-verification
exercise.”

441) In the first instance, it may be noticed that reference is made to the
judgment of this Court in Lokniti Foundation which has prompted the Ministry
of Communications to issue this circular. Paragraph 1 of the Circular itself
states that the observations of the Court in Lokniti Foundation amount to a
direction. Thus, the Circular is not issued in exercise of powers under
Section 4 of the Indian Telegraph Act, 1885 (though that itself would be
debatable as to whether Section 4 gives such a power at all). Insofar as
observations of this Court in that case are concerned, it is clear that in the
said brief order, this Court did not go into the issue as to whether linking
of SIM card with Aadhaar would be violate of privacy rights of the citizens.
In that petition filed as a Public Interest Litigation, a prayer was made to
the effect that identity of each subscriber and also the numbers should be
verified so that unidentified and unverified subscribers are not allowed to
misuse Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 519 of
567 mobile numbers. In response, the Union of India had filed the counter
affidavit bringing to the notice of the Court that the Department had launched
Aadhaar based e-KYC for issuing mobile connections. Based on this statement,
orders were passed by this Court. Lis, which is the subject matter of instant
petitions, was not raised in the said case. Obviously, the Court did not
deliberate on the aspects of necessity of such a provision in the light of
right to privacy. It was a case where both the sides were at ad idem. In the
absence of any such issue or discussion thereupon, such a case cannot be
treated as precedent and as a corollary it cannot be termed as ‘law’ within
the meaning of Article 13 or Article 141 of the Constitution. Moreover, we are
unable to read the order in Lokniti Foundation as a direction of the Court. It
simply disposed of the petition after recording the submission of the Union of
India to the effect that the grievance of the petitioner therein stood
redressed by evolving the procedure of linking. On that the Court simply
observed that undertaking given to this Court will be seriously taken and
given effect to. No doubt, the Central Government, as a licensor, can impose
conditions while granting licenses under Section 4 of the Indian Telegraph
Act, 1885\. However, such directions/conditions have to be legally valid. When
it affects the rights of the third parties (like the Writ Petition (Civil) No.
494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 520 of 567 petitioners herein who are not
party to the licenses granted by the Government to the Telecom Service
Providers) they have a right to challenge such directions. Here, the case made
out by the petitioners is that it infringes their right to privacy.

442) We are of the opinion that not only such a circular lacks backing of a
law, it fails to meet the requirement of proportionality as well. It does not
meet ‘necessity stage’ and ‘balancing stage’ tests to check the primary menace
which is in the mind of the respondent authorities. There can be other
appropriate laws and less intrusive alternatives. For the misuse of such SIM
cards by a handful of persons, the entire population cannot be subjected to
intrusion into their private lives. It also impinges upon the voluntary nature
of the Aadhaar scheme. We find it to be disproportionate and unreasonable
state compulsion. It is to be borne in mind that every individual/resident
subscribing to a SIM card does not enjoy the subsidy benefit or services
mentioned in Section 7 of the Act.

We, therefore, have no hesitation in declaring the Circular dated March 23,
2017 as unconstitutional.

Violation of the orders passed by this Court:

Whether certain actions of the respondents are in contravention of the interim
orders passed by the Court, if so, the effect Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of
2012 & connected matters Page 521 of 567 thereof?

443) It was vehemently argued that this Court had passed number of interim
orders (which have already been taken note of in the beginning of this
judgment) categorically stating that the Aadhaar enrolment is voluntary; that
no person would be forced to enrol under the scheme; that a person would be
told about the voluntary nature of the scheme; and that enrolment shall not be
given to any illegal migrant. As per the petitioners, notwithstanding these
orders, the Central Government as well as the State Governments have issued
various notifications requiring Aadhaar authentication for benefits, subsidies
and schemes mandatory. In this manner, according to the petitioners, the
respondents have violated the orders of this Court and it is the majesty of
the Court which is at stake.

444) It is not in dispute that the aforesaid orders were passed when the
Aadhaar Act had not come into force. After the enactment, Section 7 had
altered the position statutorily. The notifications and circulars etc. are
issued under this provision. Therefore, technically speaking, it cannot be
held that these circulars are issued in contravention of the orders passed by
this Court.

445) We feel that it would have been better had a clarification been Writ
Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 522 of 567 obtained
from the Court after the passing of the Aadhaar Act before issuing such
circulars and orders under Section 7. When the matter is sub judice in the
Court and certain orders operating, the respondents should have shown some
fairness by taking that route, which expectation would be high where the
respondent is the State. However, it would be difficult to hold the
respondents in contempt of the orders passed by this Court. We may note that
similar argument was advanced in Binoy Viswam, namely, insertion of Section
139AA in the Income Tax Act was in breach of interim orders passed by this
Court. This argument was repelled in the following manner:

> “99. Main emphasis, however, is on the plea that Parliament or any State
> Legislature cannot pass a law that overrules a judgment thereby nullifying
> the said decision, that too without removing the basis of the decision. This
> argument appears to be attractive inasmuch as few orders are passed by this
> Court in pending writ petitions which are to the effect that the enrolment
> of Aadhaar would be voluntary. However, it needs to be kept in mind that the
> orders have been passed in the petitions where Aadhaar Scheme floated as an
> executive/administrative measure has been challenged. In those cases, the
> said orders are not passed in a case where the Court was dealing with a
> statute passed by Parliament. Further, these are interim orders as the Court
> was of the opinion that till the matter is decided finally in the context of
> right to privacy issue, the implementation of the said Aadhaar Scheme would
> remain voluntary. In fact, the main issue as to whether Aadhaar card scheme
> whereby biometric data of an individual is collected violates right to
> privacy and, therefore, is offensive of Article 21 of the Constitution or
> not is yet to be decided. In the process, the Constitution Bench is also
> called upon to decide as to whether right to privacy is a part of Article 21
> of the Constitution at all. Therefore, no Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of
> 2012 & connected matters Page 523 of 567 final decision has been taken. In a
> situation like this, it cannot be said that Parliament is precluded from or
> it is rendered incompetent to pass such a law. That apart, the argument of
> the petitioners is that the basis on which the aforesaid orders are passed
> has to be removed, which is not done. According to the petitioners, it could
> be done only by making the Aadhaar Act compulsory. It is difficult to accept
> this contention for two reasons: first, when the orders passed by this Court
> which are relied upon by the petitioners were passed when the Aadhaar Act
> was not even enacted. Secondly, as already discussed in detail above, the
> Aadhaar Act and the law contained in Section 139-AA of the Income Tax Act
> deal with two different situations and operate in different fields. This
> argument of legislative incompetence also, therefore, fails.” Summary and
> Conclusions:

446) (a) The architecture and structure of the Aadhaar Act reveals that the
UIDAI is established as a statutory body which is given the task of developing
the policy, procedure and system for issuing Aadhaar numbers to individuals
and also to perform authentication thereof as per the provisions of the Act.
For the purpose of enrolment and assigning Aadhaar numbers, enrolling agencies
are recruited by the Authority. All the residents in India are eligible to
obtain an Aadhaar number. To enable a resident to get Aadhaar number, he is
required to submit demographic as well as biometric information i.e., apart
from giving information relating to name, date of birth and address, biometric
information in the form of photograph, fingerprint, iris scan is also to be
provided. Aadhaar number given to a particular person is treated Writ Petition
(Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 524 of 567 as unique number
as it cannot be reassigned to any other individual.

(b) Insofar as subsidies, benefits or services to be given by the Central
Government or the State Government, as the case may be, is concerned, these
Governments can mandate that receipt of these subsidies, benefits and services
would be given only on furnishing proof of possession of Aadhaar number (or
proof of making an application for enrolment, where Aadhaar number is not
assigned). An added requirement is that such individual would undergo
authentication at the time of receiving such benefits etc. A particular
institution/body from which the aforesaid subsidy, benefit or service is to be
claimed by such an individual, the intended recipient would submit his Aadhaar
number and is also required to give her biometric information to that agency.
On receiving this information and for the purpose of its authentication, the
said agency, known as Requesting Entity (RE), would send the request to the
Authority which shall perform the job of authentication of Aadhaar number. On
confirming the identity of a person, the individual is entitled to receive
subsidy, benefit or service. Aadhaar number is permitted to be used by the
holder for other purposes as well.

(c) In this whole process, any resident seeking to obtain an Writ Petition
(Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 525 of 567 Aadhaar number is,
in the first instance, required to submit her demographic information and
biometric information at the time of enrolment. She, thus, parts with her
photograph, fingerprint and iris scan at that stage by giving the same to the
enrolling agency, which may be a private body/person. Likewise, every time
when such Aadhaar holder intends to receive a subsidy, benefit or service and
goes to specified/designated agency or person for that purpose, she would be
giving her biometric information to that RE, which, in turn, shall get the
same authenticated from the Authority before providing a subsidy, benefit or
service.

(d) Attack of the petitioners to the Aadhaar programme and its
formation/structure under the Aadhaar Act is founded on the arguments that it
is a grave risk to the rights and liberties of the citizens of this country
which are secured by the Constitution of India. It militates against the
constitutional abiding values and its foundational morality and has the
potential to enable an intrusive state to become a surveillance state on the
basis of information that is collected in respect of each individual by
creation of a joint electronic mesh. In this manner, the Act strikes at the
very privacy of each individual thereby offending the right to privacy which
is elevated and given the status of fundamental right by tracing it to
Articles 14, 19 and 21 of the Constitution of India by a Writ Petition (Civil)
No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 526 of 567 nine Judge Bench judgment
of this Court in K.S. Puttaswamy.

(e) The respondents, on the other hand, have attempted to shake the very
foundation of the aforesaid structure of the petitioners’ case. They argue
that in the first instance, minimal biometric information of the applicant,
who intends to have Aadhaar number, is obtained which is also stored in CIDR
for the purpose of authentication. Secondly, no other information is stored.
It is emphasised that there is no data collection in respect of religion,
caste, tribe, language records of entitlement, income or medical history of
the applicant at the time of Aadhaar enrolment. Thirdly, the Authority also
claimed that the entire Aadhaar enrolment eco-system is foolproof inasmuch as
within few seconds of the biometrics having been collected by the enrolling
agency, the said information gets transmitted the Authorities/CIDR, that too
in an encrypted form, and goes out of the reach of the enrolling agency. Same
is the situation at the time of authentication as biometric information does
not remain with the requesting agency. Fourthly, while undertaking the
authentication process, the Authority simply matches the biometrics and no
other information is received or stored in respect of purpose, location or
nature or transaction etc. Therefore, the question of profiling does not arise
at all. Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 527 of
567

(f) In the aforesaid scenario, it is necessary, in the first instance, to find
out the extent of core information, biometric as well as demographic, that is
collected and stored by the Authority at the time of enrolment as well as at
the time of authentication. This exercise becomes necessary in order to
consider the argument of the petitioners about the profiling of the Aadhaar
holders. On going through this aspect, on the basis of the powerpoint
presentation given by Dr. Ajay Bhushan Pandey, CEO of UIDAI, and the arguments
of both the sides, including the questions which were put by the petitioners
to Dr. Pandey and the answers thereupon, the Court has come to the conclusion
that minimal possible data, demographic and biometric, is obtained from the
Aadhaar holders.

(g) The Court also noticed that the whole architecture of Aadhaar is devised
to give unique identity to the citizens of this country. No doubt, a person
can have various documents on the basis of which that individual can establish
her identify. It may be in the form of a passport, PAN card, ration card and
so on. For the purpose of enrolment itself number of documents are prescribed
which an individual can produce on the basis of which Aadhaar card can be
issued. Thus, such documents, in a way, are also proof of identity. However,
there is a fundamental difference Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 &
connected matters Page 528 of 567 between the Aadhaar card as a mean of
identity and other documents through which identity can be established.
Enrolment for Aadhaar card also requires giving of demographic information as
well as biometric information which is in the form of iris and fingerprints.
This process eliminates any chance of duplication. It is emphasised that an
individual can manipulate the system by having more than one or even number of
PAN cards, passports, ration cards etc. When it comes to obtaining Aadhaar
card, there is no possibility of obtaining duplicate card. Once the biometric
information is stored and on that basis Aadhaar card is issued, it remains in
the system with the Authority. Wherever there would be a second attempt for
enrolling for Aadhaar and for this purpose same person gives his biometric
information, it would be immediately get matched with the same biometric
information already in the system and the second request would stand rejected.
It is for this reason the Aadhaar card is known as Unique Identification
(UID). Such an identity is unparalleled.

(h) There is, then, another purpose for having such a system of issuing unique
identification cards in the form of Aadhaar card. A glimpse thereof is
captured under the heading ‘Introduction’ above, while mentioning how and
under what circumstances the whole project was conceptualised. To put it
tersely, in addition to Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected
matters Page 529 of 567 enabling any resident to obtain such unique
identification proof, it is also to empower marginalised section of the
society, particularly those who are illiterate and living in abject poverty or
without any shelter etc. It gives identity to such persons also. Moreover,
with the aid of Aadhaar card, they can claim various privileges and benefits
etc. which are actually meant for these people.

(i) Identity of a person has a significance for every individual in his/her
life. In a civilised society every individual, on taking birth, is given a
name. Her place of birth and parentage also becomes important as she is known
in the society and these demographic particulars also become important
attribute of her personality. Throughout their lives, individuals are supposed
to provide such information: be it admission in a school or college or at the
time of taking job or engaging in any profession or business activity, etc.
When all this information is available in one place, in the form of Aadhaar
card, it not only becomes unique, it would also qualify as a document of
empowerment. Added with this feature, when an individual knows that no other
person can clone her, it assumes greater significance.

(j) Thus, the scheme by itself can be treated as laudable when it comes to
enabling an individual to seek Aadhaar number, more Writ Petition (Civil) No.
494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 530 of 567 so, when it is voluntary in
nature. Howsoever benevolent the scheme may be, it has to pass the muster of
constitutionality. According to the petitioners, the very architecture of
Aadhaar is unconstitutional on various grounds.

(k) The Court has taken note of the heads of challenge of the Act, Scheme and
certain Rules etc. and clarified that the matter is examined with objective
examination of the issues on the touchstone of the constitutional provisions,
keeping in mind the ethos of constitutional democracy, rule of law, human
rights and other basic features of the Constitution.

Discussing the scope of judicial review, the Court has accepted that apart
from two grounds noticed in Binoy Viswam, on which legislative Act can be
invalidated [(a) the Legislature does not have competence to make the law; and
b) law made is in violation of fundamental rights or any other constitutional
provision], another ground, namely, manifest arbitrariness, can also be the
basis on which an Act can be invalidated. The issues are examined having
regard to the aforesaid scope of judicial review.

(l) From the arguments raised by the petitioners and the grounds of challenge,
it becomes clear that the main plank of challenge is that the Aadhaar project
and the Aadhaar Act Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters
Page 531 of 567 infringes right to privacy. Inbuilt in this right to privacy
is the right to live with dignity, which is a postulate of right to privacy.
In the process, discussion leads to the issue of proportionality, viz. whether
measures taken under the Aadhaar Act satisfy the doctrine of proportionality.

(m) In view of the above, the Court discussed the contours of right to
privacy, as laid down in K.S. Puttaswamy, principle of human dignity and
doctrine of proportionality. After taking note of the discussion contained in
different opinions of six Hon’ble Judges, it stands established, without any
pale of doubt, that privacy has now been treated as part of fundamental right.
The Court has held that, in no uncertain terms, that privacy has always been a
natural right which given an individual freedom to exercise control over his
or her personality. The judgment further affirms three aspects of the
fundamental right to privacy, namely:

> (i) intrusion with an individual’s physical body,

> (ii) informational privacy and

> (iii) privacy of choice.

(n) As succinctly put by Nariman, J., first aspect involves the person
himself/herself and guards a person’s rights relatable to his physical body
thereby controlling the uncalled invasion by the State. Insofar as second
aspect, namely, informational privacy is Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012
& connected matters Page 532 of 567 concerned, it does not deal with a
person’s body but deals with a person’s mind. In this manner, it protects a
person by giving her control over the dissemination of material that is
personal to her and disallowing unauthorised use of such information by the
State. Third aspect of privacy relates to individual’s autonomy by protecting
her fundamental personal choices. These aspects have functional connection and
relationship with dignity. In this sense, privacy is a postulate of human
dignity itself. Human dignity has a constitutional value and its significance
is acknowledged by the Preamble. Further, by catena of judgments, human
dignity is treated as fundamental right as a facet not only of Article 21, but
that of right to equality (Article 14) and also part of bouquet of freedoms
stipulated in Article 19. Therefore, privacy as a right is intrinsic of
freedom, liberty and dignity. Viewed in this manner, one can trace positive
and negative contents of privacy. The negative content restricts the State
from committing an intrusion upon the life and personal liberty of a citizen.
Its positive content imposes an obligation on the State to take all necessary
measures to protect the privacy of the individual.

(o) In developing the aforesaid concepts, the Court has been receptive to the
principles in international law and international instruments. It is a
recognition of the fact that certain human Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of
2012 & connected matters Page 533 of 567 rights cannot be confined within the
bounds of geographical location of a nation but have universal application. In
the process, the Court accepts the concept of universalisation of human
rights, including the right to privacy as a human right and the good practices
in developing and understanding such rights in other countries have been
welcomed. In this hue, it can also be remarked that comparative law has played
a very significant role in shaping the aforesaid judgment on privacy in Indian
context, notwithstanding the fact that such comparative law has only
persuasive value.

The whole process of reasoning contained in different opinions of the Hon’ble
Judges would, thus, reflect that the argument that it is difficult to
precisely define the common denominator of privacy, was rejected. While doing
so, the Court referred to various approaches to formulating privacy

(p) We have also remarked above, the taxonomy of privacy, namely, on the basis
of ‘harms’, ‘interest’ and ‘aggregation of rights’. We have also discussed the
scope of right to privacy with reference to the cases at hand and the
circumstances in which such a right can be limited. In the process, we have
also taken note of the passage from the judgment rendered by Nariman, J. in
K.S. Puttaswamy stating the manner in which law has to be Writ Petition
(Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 534 of 567 tested when it is
challenged on the ground that it violates the fundamental right to privacy.

(q) One important comment which needs to be made at this stage relates to the
standard of judicial review while examining the validity of a particular law
that allegedly infringes right to privacy. The question is as to whether the
Court is to apply ‘strict scrutiny’ standard or the ‘just, fair and
reasonableness’ standard. In the privacy judgment, different observations are
made by the different Hon’ble Judges and the aforesaid aspect is not
determined authoritatively, may be for the reason that the Bench was deciding
the reference on the issue as to whether right to privacy is a fundamental
right or not and, in the process, it was called upon to decide the specific
questions referred to it. This Court preferred to adopt a ‘just, fair and
reasonableness’ standard which is in tune with the view expressed by majority
of Judges in their opinion. Even otherwise, this is in consonance with the
judicial approach adopted by this Court while construing ‘reasonable
restrictions’ that the State can impose in public interest, as provided in
Article 19 of the Constitution. Insofar as principles of human dignity are
concerned, the Court, after taking note of various judgments where this
principle is adopted and elaborated, summed up the essential ingredients of
dignity Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 535 of
567 jurisprudence by noticing that the basic principle of dignity and freedom
of the individual is an attribute of natural law which becomes the right of
all individuals in a constitutional democracy. Dignity has a central normative
role as well as constitutional value. This normative role is performed in
three ways:

First, it becomes basis for constitutional rights; Second, it serves as an
interpretative principle for determining the scope of constitutional rights;
and, Third, it determines the proportionality of a statute limiting a
constitutional right. Thus, if an enactment puts limitation on a
constitutional right and such limitation is disproportionate, such a statute
can be held to be unconstitutional by applying the doctrine of
proportionality.

(r) As per Dworkin, there are two principles about the concept of human
dignity, First principle regards an ‘intrinsic value’ of every person, namely,
every person has a special objective value which value is not only important
to that person alone but success or failure of the lives of every person is
important to all of us. It can also be described as self respect which
represents the free will of the person, her capacity to think for herself and
to control her own life. The second principle is that of ‘personal
responsibility’, which means every person has the responsibility Writ Petition
(Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 536 of 567 for success in her
own life and, therefore, she must use her discretion regarding the way of life
that will be successful from her point of view.

(s) Sum total of this exposition can be defined by explaining that as per the
aforesaid view dignity is to be treated as ‘empowerment’ which makes a triple
demand in the name of ‘respect’ for human dignity, namely:

> (i) respect for one's capacity as an agent to make one's own free choices;

> (ii) respect for the choices so made; and

> (iii) respect for one's need to have a context and conditions in which one
> can operate as a source of free and informed choice.

(t) In the entire formulation of dignity right, ‘respect’ for an individual is
the fulcrum, which is based on the principle of freedom and capacity to make
choices and a good or just social order is one which respects dignity via
assuring ‘contexts’ and ‘conditions’ as the ‘source of free and informed
choice’. The aforesaid discourse on the concept of human dignity is from an
individual point of view. That is the emphasis of the petitioners as well.
That would be one side of the coin. A very important feature which the present
case has brought into focus is another Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 &
connected matters Page 537 of 567 dimension of human dignity, namely, in the
form of ‘common good’ or ‘public good’. Thus, our endeavour here is to give
richer and more nuanced understanding to the concept of human dignity.

(u) We, therefore, have to keep in mind humanistic concept of Human Dignity
which is to be accorded to a particular segment of the society and, in fact, a
large segment. Their human dignity is based on the socio-economic rights that
are read in to the Fundamental Rights as already discussed above.

When we read socio-economic rights into human dignity, the community approach
also assumes importance along with individualistic approach to human dignity.
It has now been well recognised that at its core, human dignity contains three
elements, namely, Intrinsic Value, Autonomy and Community Value. These are
known as core values of human dignity. These three elements can assist in
structuring legal reasoning and justifying judicial choices in ‘hard cases’.

(v) When it comes to dignity as a community value, it emphasises the role of
the community in establishing collective goals and restrictions on individual
freedoms and rights on behalf of a certain idea of good life. The relevant
question here is in what circumstances and to what degree should these actions
be Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 538 of 567
regarded as legitimate in a constitutional democracy? The liberal predicament
that the state must be neutral with regard to different conceptions of the
good in a plural society is not incompatible, of course, with limitation
resulting from the necessary coexistence of different views and potentially
conflicting rights. Such interferences, however, must be justified on grounds
of a legitimate idea of justice, an “overlapping consensus” 158 that can be
shared by most individuals and groups. Whenever such tension arises, the task
of balancing is to be achieved by the Courts.

We would like to highlight one more significant feature which the issues
involved in the present case bring about. It is the balancing of two facets of
dignity of the same individual. Whereas, on the one hand, right of personal
autonomy is a part of dignity (and right to privacy), another part of dignity
of the same individual is to lead a dignified life as well (which is again a
facet of Article 21 of the Constitution). Therefore, in a scenario where the
State is coming out with welfare schemes, which strive at giving dignified
life in harmony with human dignity and in the process some aspect of autonomy
is sacrificed, the balancing of the two becomes an important task which is to
be achieved by the 158“Overlapping consensus” is a term coined by John Rawls
that identifies basic ideas of justice that can be shared by supporters of
different religious, political, and moral comprehensive doctrines.

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 539 of 567

Courts. For, there cannot be undue intrusion into the autonomy on the pretext
of conferment of economic benefits. (w) In this way, the concept of human
dignity has been widened to deal with the issues at hand. As far as doctrine
of proportionality is concerned, after discussing the approaches that are
adopted by the German Supreme Court and the Canadian Supreme Court, which are
somewhat different from each other, this Court has applied the tests as laid
down in Modern Dental College & Research Centre, which are approved in K.S.
Puttaswamy as well. However, at the same time, a modification is done by
focusing on the parameters set down of Bilchitz which are aimed at achieving a
more ideal approach.

447) After stating the aforesaid manner in which different issues that arose
are specified and discussed, these questions and conclusions thereupon are
summarised below: (1) Whether the Aadhaar Project creates or has tendency to
create surveillance state and is, thus, unconstitutional on this ground?

> Incidental Issues:

> (a) What is the magnitude of protection that need to be accorded to
> collection, storage and usage of biometric data?

(b) Whether the Aadhaar Act and Rules provide such protection, including in
respect of data minimisation, purpose limitation, time period for data
retention and Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page
540 of 567 data protection and security?

> Answer:

> (a) The architecture of Aadhaar as well as the provisions of the Aadhaar Act
> do not tend to create a surveillance state. This is ensured by the manner in
> which the Aadhaar project operates.

> (b) We have recorded in detail the powerpoint presentation that was given by
> Dr. Ajay Bhushan Pandey, CEO of the Authority, which brings out the
> following salient features:

> (i) During the enrolment process, minimal biometric data in the form of iris
> and fingerprints is collected. The Authority does not collect purpose,
> location or details of transaction. Thus, it is purpose blind. The
> information collected, as aforesaid, remains in silos. Merging of silos is
> prohibited. The requesting agency is provided answer only in ‘Yes’ or ‘No’
> about the authentication of the person concerned. The authentication process
> is not exposed to the Internet world. Security measures, as per the
> provisions of Section 29(3) read with Section 38(g) as well as Regulation
> 17(1)(d) of the Authentication Regulations, are strictly followed and
> adhered to.

> (ii) There are sufficient authentication security measures taken as well, as
> demonstrated in Slides 14, 28 and 29 of the presentation.

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 541 of 567

(iii) The Authority has sufficient defence mechanism, as explained in Slide
30. It has even taken appropriate protection measures as demonstrated in Slide
31.

(iv) There is an oversight by Technology and Architecture Review Board (TARB)
and Security Review Committee.

(v) During authentication no information about the nature of transaction etc.
is obtained.

(vi) The Authority has mandated use of Registered Devices (RD) for all
authentication requests. With these, biometric data is signed within the
device/RD service using the provider key to ensure it is indeed captured live.
The device provider RD service encrypts the PID block before returning to the
host application. This RD service encapsulates the biometric capture, signing
and encryption of biometrics all within it. Therefore, introduction of RD in
Aadhaar authentication system rules out any possibility of use of stored
biometric and replay of biometrics captured from other source. Requesting
entities are not legally allowed to store biometrics captured for Aadhaar
authentication under Regulation 17(1)(a) of the Authentication Regulations.

(vii) The Authority gets the AUA code, ASA code, unique device code,
registered device code used for authentication. It does not get any
information related to the IP address or the GPS location Writ Petition
(Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 542 of 567 from where
authentication is performed as these parameters are not part of authentication
(v2.0) and e-KYC (v2.1) API. The Authority would only know from which device
the authentication has happened, through which AUA/ASA etc. It does not
receive any information about at what location the authentication device is
deployed, its IP address and its operator and the purpose of authentication.
Further, the authority or any entity under its control is statutorily barred
from collecting, keeping or maintaining any information about the purpose of
authentication under Section 32(3) of the Aadhaar Act.

(c) After going through the Aadhaar structure, as demonstrated by the
respondents in the powerpoint presentation from the provisions of the Aadhaar
Act and the machinery which the Authority has created for data protection, we
are of the view that it is very difficult to create profile of a person simply
on the basis of biometric and demographic information stored in CIDR. Insofar
as authentication is concerned, the respondents rightly pointed out that there
are sufficient safeguard mechanisms. To recapitulate, it was specifically
submitted that there was security technologies in place (slide 28 of Dr.
Pandey’s presentation), 24/7 security monitoring, data leak prevention,
vulnerability management programme and independent audits (slide 29) as well
as the Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 543 of
567 Authority’s defence mechanism (slide 30). It was further pointed out that
the Authority has taken appropriate pro-active protection measures, which
included disaster recovery plan, data backup and availability and media
response plan (slide 31). The respondents also pointed out that all security
principles are followed inasmuch as: (a) there is PKI-2048 encryption from the
time of capture, meaning thereby, as soon as data is given at the time of
enrolment, there is an end to end encryption thereof and it is transmitted to
the Authority in encrypted form. The said encryption is almost foolproof and
it is virtually impossible to decipher the same; (b) adoption of best-in-class
security standards and practices; and (c) strong audit and traceability as
well as fraud detection. Above all, there is an oversight of Technology and
Architecture Review Board (TARB) and Security Review Committee. This Board and
Committee consists of very high profiled officers. Therefore, the Act has
endeavoured to provide safeguards.

(d) Insofar as use and protection of data is concerned, having regard to the
principles enshrined in various cases, Indian and foreign, the matter is
examined from the stand point of data minimisation, purpose limitation, time
period for data retention, data protection and security (qua CIDR, requisite
entities, Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 544
of 567 enrolment agencies and Registrars, authentication service agency,
hacking, biometric solution providers, substantive procedural or judicial
safeguards). After discussing the aforesaid aspect with reference to certain
provisions of the Aadhaar Act, we are of the view that apprehensions of the
petitioners stand assuaged with the striking down or reading down or
clarification of some of the provisions, namely:

(i) Authentication records are not to be kept beyond a period of six months,
as stipulated in Regulation 27(1) of the Authentication Regulations. This
provision which permits records to be archived for a period of five years is
held to be bad in law.

(ii) Metabase relating to transaction, as provided in Regulation 26 of the
aforesaid Regulations in the present form, is held to be impermissible, which
needs suitable amendment.

(iii) Section 33(1) of the Aadhaar Act is read down by clarifying that an
individual, whose information is sought to be released, shall be afforded an
opportunity of hearing.

(iv) Insofar as Section 33(2) of the Act in the present form is concerned, the
same is struck down.

(v) That portion of Section 57 of the Aadhaar Act which enables body corporate
and individual to seek Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected
matters Page 545 of 567 authentication is held to be unconstitutional.

(vi) We have also impressed upon the respondents, to bring out a robust data
protection regime in the form of an enactment on the basis of Justice B.N.
Srikrishna (Retd.) Committee Report with necessary modifications thereto as
may be deemed appropriate.

(2) Whether the Aadhaar Act violates right to privacy and is unconstitutional
on this ground?

Answer:

(a) After detailed discussion, it is held that all matters pertaining to an
individual do not qualify as being an inherent part of right to privacy. Only
those matters over which there would be a reasonable expectation of privacy
are protected by Article 21. This can be discerned from the reading of Paras
297 to 307 of the judgment.

(b) The Court is also of the opinion that the triple test laid down in order
to adjudge the reasonableness of the invasion to privacy has been made. The
Aadhaar scheme is backed by the statute, i.e. the Aadhaar Act. It also serves
legitimate State aim, which can be discerned from the Introduction to the Act
as well as the Statement of Objects and Reasons which reflect that the aim in
passing the Act was to ensure that social benefit schemes reach Writ Petition
(Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 546 of 567 the deserving
community. The Court noted that the failure to establish identity of an
individual has proved to be a major hindrance for successful implementation of
those programmes as it was becoming difficult to ensure that subsidies,
benefits and services reach the unintended beneficiaries in the absence of a
credible system to authenticate identity of beneficiaries. The Statement of
Objects and Reasons also discloses that over a period of time, the use of
Aadhaar number has been increased manifold and, therefore, it is also
necessary to take measures relating to ensuring security of the information
provided by the individuals while enrolling for Aadhaar card.

(c) It may be highlighted that the petitioners are making their claim on the
basis of dignity as a facet of right to privacy. On the other hand, Section 7
of the Aadhaar Act is aimed at offering subsidies, benefits or services to the
marginalised section of the society for whom such welfare schemes have been
formulated from time to time. That also becomes an aspect of social justice,
which is the obligation of the State stipulated in Para IV of the
Constitution. The rationale behind Section 7 lies in ensuring targeted
delivery of services, benefits and subsidies which are funded from the
Consolidated Fund of India. In discharge of its solemn Constitutional
obligation to enliven the Fundamental Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 &
connected matters Page 547 of 567 Rights of life and personal liberty (Article
21) to ensure Justice, Social, Political and Economic and to eliminate
inequality (Article

14) with a view to ameliorate the lot of the poor and the Dalits, the Central
Government has launched several welfare schemes. Some such schemes are PDS,
scholarships, mid day meals, LPG subsidies, etc. These schemes involve 3%
percentage of the GDP and involve a huge amount of public money. Right to
receive these benefits, from the point of view of those who deserve the same,
has now attained the status of fundamental right based on the same concept of
human dignity, which the petitioners seek to bank upon. The Constitution does
not exist for a few or minority of the people of India, but “We the people”.
The goals set out in the Preamble of the Constitution do not contemplate
statism and do not seek to preserve justice, liberty, equality an fraternity
for those who have the means and opportunity to ensure the exercise of
inalienable rights for themselves. These goals are predominantly or at least
equally geared to “secure to all its citizens”, especially, to the
downtrodden, poor and exploited, justice, liberty, equality and “to promote”
fraternity assuring dignity. Interestingly, the State has come forward in
recognising the rights of deprived section of the society to receive such
benefits on the premise that it is their Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012
& connected matters Page 548 of 567 fundamental right to claim such benefits.
It is acknowledged by the respondents that there is a paradigm shift in
addressing the problem of security and eradicating extreme poverty and hunger.
The shift is from the welfare approach to a right based approach. As a
consequence, right of everyone to adequate food no more remains based on
Directive Principles of State Policy (Art 47), though the said principles
remain a source of inspiration. This entitlement has turned into a
Constitutional fundamental right. This Constitutional obligation is reinforced
by obligations under International Convention.

(d) Even the petitioners did not seriously question the purpose and bona fides
of the Legislature enacting the law.

(e) The Court also finds that the Aadhaar Act meets the test of
proportionality as the following components of proportionality stand
satisfied:

(i) A measure restricting a right must have a legitimate goal (legitimate goal
stage).

(ii) It must be a suitable means of furthering this goal (suitability or
rationale connection stage).

(iii) There must not be any less restrictive but equally effective alternative
(necessity stage).

(iv) The measure must not have a disproportionate impact on the right holder
(balancing stage).

(f) In the process, the Court has taken note of various Writ Petition (Civil)
No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 549 of 567 judgments pronounced by
this Court pertaining to right to food, issuance of BPL Cards, LPG connections
and LPG cylinders at minimal cost, old age and other kind of pensions to
deserving persons, scholarships and implementation of MGNREGA scheme.

(g) The purpose behind these orders was to ensure that the deserving
beneficiaries of the scheme are correctly identified and are able to receive
the benefits under the said scheme, which is their entitlement. The orders
also aimed at ensuring ‘good governance’ by bringing accountability and
transparency in the distribution system with the pious aim in mind, namely,
benefits actually reached those who are rural, poor and starving.

(h) All this satisfies the necessity stage test, particularly in the absence
of any less restrictive but equally effective alternative.

(i) Insofar as balancing is concerned, the matter is examined at two levels:

> (i) Whether, ‘legitimate state interest’ ensures ‘reasonable tailoring’?
> There is a minimal intrusion into the privacy and the law is narrowly framed
> to achieve the objective. Here the Act is to be tested on the ground that
> whether it is found on a balancing test that the social or public interest
> and the reasonableness of the restrictions outweigh the particular Writ
> Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 550 of 567 aspect
> of privacy, as claimed by the petitioners. This is the test we have applied
> in the instant case.

> (ii) There needs to be balancing of two competing fundamental rights, right
> to privacy on the one hand and right to food, shelter and employment on the
> other hand.

> Axiomatically both the rights are founded on human dignity. At the same
> time, in the given context, two facets are in conflict with each other. The
> question here would be, when a person seeks to get the benefits of welfare
> schemes to which she is entitled to as a part of right to live life with
> dignity, whether her sacrifice to the right to privacy, is so invasive that
> it creates imbalance?

(j) In the process, sanctity of privacy in its functional relationship with
dignity is kept in mind where it says that legitimate expectation of privacy
may vary from intimate zone to the private zone and from the private to public
arena. Reasonable expectation of privacy is also taken into consideration. The
Court finds that as the information collected at the time of enrolment as well
as authentication is minimal, balancing at the first level is met. Insofar as
second level, namely, balancing of two competing fundamental rights is
concerned, namely, dignity in the form of autonomy (informational Writ
Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 551 of 567 privacy)
and dignity in the form of assuring better living standards of the same
individual, the Court has arrived at the conclusion that balancing at the
second level is also met. The detailed discussion in this behalf amply
demonstrates that enrolment in Aadhaar of the unprivileged and marginalised
section of the society, in order to avail the fruits of welfare schemes of the
Government, actually amounts to empowering these persons. On the one hand, it
gives such individuals their unique identity and, on the other hand, it also
enables such individuals to avail the fruits of welfare schemes of the
Government which are floated as socio-economic welfare measures to uplift such
classes. In that sense, the scheme ensures dignity to such individuals. This
facet of dignity cannot be lost sight of and needs to be acknowledged. We are,
by no means, accepting that when dignity in the form of economic welfare is
given, the State is entitled to rob that person of his liberty. That can never
be allowed. We are concerned with the balancing of the two facets of dignity.
Here we find that the inroads into the privacy rights where these individuals
are made to part with their biometric information, is minimal. It is coupled
with the fact that there is no data collection on the movements of such
individuals, when they avail benefits under Section 7 of the Act thereby
ruling out the possibility of creating their profiles. In Writ Petition
(Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 552 of 567 fact, this
technology becomes a vital tool of ensuring good governance in a social
welfare state. We, therefore, are of the opinion that the Aadhaar Act meets
the test of balancing as well.

(k) Insofar as the argument based on probabilistic system of Aadhaar, leading
to ‘exclusion’ is concerned, the Authority has claimed that biometric accuracy
is 99.76% and the petitioners have also proceeded on that basis. In this
scenario, if the Aadhaar project is shelved, 99.76% beneficiaries are going to
suffer. Would it not lead to their exclusion? It will amount to throwing the
baby out of hot water along with the water. In the name of 0.232% failure
(which can in any case be remedied) should be revert to the pre-Aadhaar stage
with a system of leakages, pilferages and corruption in the implementation of
welfare schemes meant for marginalised section of the society, the full fruits
thereof were not reaching to such people?

(l) The entire aim behind launching this programme is the ‘inclusion’ of the
deserving persons who need to get such benefits. When it is serving much
larger purpose by reaching hundreds of millions of deserving persons, it
cannot be crucified on the unproven plea of exclusion of some. It is clarified
that the Court is not trivialising the problem of exclusion if it is there.
However, what we are emphasising is that remedy is to plug the Writ Petition
(Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 553 of 567 loopholes rather
than axe a project, aimed for the welfare of large section of the society.
Obviously, in order to address the failures of authentication, the remedy is
to adopt alternate methods for identifying such persons, after finding the
causes of failure in their cases. We have chosen this path which leads to
better equilibrium and have given necessary directions also in this behalf,
viz:

> (i) We have taken on record the statement of the learned Attorney General
> that no deserving person would be denied the benefit of a scheme on the
> failure of authentication.

> (ii) We are also conscious of the situation where the formation of
> fingerprints may undergo change for various reasons. It may happen in the
> case of a child after she grows up; it may happen in the case of an
> individual who gets old; it may also happen because of damage to the fingers
> as a result of accident or some disease etc. or because of suffering of some
> kind of disability for whatever reason. Even iris test can fail due to
> certain reasons including blindness of a person.

We again emphasise that no person rightfully entitled to the benefits shall be
denied the same on such grounds. It would be appropriate if a suitable
provision be made in the concerned regulations for establishing an identity by
alternate Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 554
of 567 means, in such situations.

(m) As far as subsidies, services and benefits are concerned, their scope is
not to be unduly expanded thereby widening the net of Aadhaar, where it is not
permitted otherwise. In this respect, it is held as under:

> (i) ‘Benefits’ and ‘services’ as mentioned in Section 7 should be those
> which have the colour of some kind of subsidies etc., namely, welfare
> schemes of the Government whereby Government is doling out such benefits
> which are targeted at a particular deprived class.

> (ii) It would cover only those ‘benefits’ etc. the expenditure thereof has
> to be drawn from the Consolidated Fund of India.

> (iii) On that basis, CBSE, NEET, JEE, UGC etc. cannot make the requirement
> of Aadhaar mandatory as they are outside the purview of Section 7 and are
> not backed by any law.

(3) Whether children can be brought within the sweep of Sections 7 and 8 of
the Aadhaar Act?

Answer:

(a) For the enrolment of children under the Aadhaar Act, it would be essential
to have the consent of their parents/guardian. Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494
of 2012 & connected matters Page 555 of 567

(b) On attaining the age of majority, such children who are enrolled under
Aadhaar with the consent of their parents, shall be given the option to exit
from the Aadhaar project if they so choose in case they do not intend to avail
the benefits of the scheme.

(c) Insofar as the school admission of children is concerned, requirement of
Aadhaar would not be compulsory as it is neither a service nor subsidy.
Further, having regard to the fact that a child between the age of 6 to 14
years has the fundamental right to education under Article 21A of the
Constitution, school admission cannot be treated as ‘benefit’ as well.

(d) Benefits to children between 6 to 14 years under Sarv Shiksha Abhiyan,
likewise, shall not require mandatory Aadhaar enrolment.

(e) For availing the benefits of other welfare schemes which are covered by
Section 7 of the Aadhaar Act, though enrolment number can be insisted, it
would be subject to the consent of the parents, as mentioned in (a) above.

(f) We also clarify that no child shall be denied benefit of any of these
schemes if, for some reasons, she is not able to produce the Aadhaar number
and the benefit shall be given by verifying the identity on the basis of any
other documents. This we say having regard to the statement which was made by
Mr. K.K. Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 556 of
567 Venugopal, learned Attorney General for India, at the Bar.

(4) Whether the following provisions of the Aadhaar Act and Regulations suffer
from the vice of unconstitutionality:

> (i) Sections 2(c) and 2(d) read with Section 32

> (ii) Section 2(h) read with Section 10 of CIDR

> (iii) Section 2(l) read with Regulation 23

> (iv) Section 2(v)

> (v) Section 3

> (vi) Section 5

> (vii) Section 6

> (viii) Section 8

> (ix) Section 9

> (x) Sections 11 to 23

> (xi) Sections 23 and 54

> (xii) Section 23(2)(g) read with Chapter VI & VII – Regulations 27 to 32

> (xiii) Section 29

> (xiv) Section 33

> (xv) Section 47 (xvi) Section 48 (xvii) Section 57 (xviii) Section 59
> Answer:

(a) Section 2(d) which pertains to authentication records, such records would
not include metadata as mentioned in Regulation 26(c) of the Aadhaar
(Authentication) Regulations, 2016. Therefore, this provision in the present
form is struck down. Liberty, however, is given to reframe the regulation,
keeping in view the parameters stated by the Court.

(b) Insofar as Section 2(b) is concerned, which defines ‘resident’, the
apprehension expressed by the petitioners was that Writ Petition (Civil) No.
494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 557 of 567 it should not lead to giving
Aadhaar card to illegal immigrants.

We direct the respondent to take suitable measures to ensure that illegal
immigrants are not able to take such benefits.

(c) Retention of data beyond the period of six months is impermissible.
Therefore, Regulation 27 of Aadhaar (Authentication) Regulations, 2016 which
provides archiving a data for a period of five years is struck down.

(d) Section 29 in fact imposes a restriction on sharing information and is,
therefore, valid as it protects the interests of Aadhaar number holders.
However, apprehension of the petitioners is that this provision entitles
Government to share the information ‘for the purposes of as may be specified
by regulations’. The Aadhaar (Sharing of Information) Regulations, 2016, as of
now, do not contain any such provision. If a provision is made in the
regulations which impinges upon the privacy rights of the Aadhaar card holders
that can always be challenged.

(e) Section 33(1) of the Act prohibits disclosure of information, including
identity information or authentication records, except when it is by an order
of a court not inferior to that of a District Judge. We have held that this
provision is to be read down with the clarification that an individual, whose
information is sought to be released, shall be afforded an opportunity of
hearing. If such Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters
Page 558 of 567 an order is passed, in that eventuality, he shall also have
right to challenge such an order passed by approaching the higher court.
During the hearing before the concerned court, the said individual can always
object to the disclosure of information on accepted grounds in law, including
Article 20(3) of the Constitution or the privacy rights etc.

(f) Insofar as Section 33(2) is concerned, it is held that disclosure of
information in the interest of national security cannot be faulted with.
However, for determination of such an eventuality, an officer higher than the
rank of a Joint Secretary should be given such a power. Further, in order to
avoid any possible misuse, a Judicial Officer (preferably a sitting High Court
Judge) should also be associated with. We may point out that such provisions
of application of judicial mind for arriving at the conclusion that disclosure
of information is in the interest of national security, are prevalent in some
jurisdictions. In view thereof, Section 33(2) of the Act in the present form
is struck down with liberty to enact a suitable provision on the lines
suggested above.

(g) Insofar as Section 47 of the Act which provides for the cognizance of
offence only on a complaint made by the Authority or any officer or person
authorised by it is concerned, it needs a Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of
2012 & connected matters Page 559 of 567 suitable amendment to include the
provision for filing of such a complaint by an individual/victim as well whose
right is violated.

(h) Insofar as Section 57 in the present form is concerned, it is susceptible
to misuse inasmuch as: (a) It can be used for establishing the identity of an
individual ‘for any purpose’. We read down this provision to mean that such a
purpose has to be backed by law. Further, whenever any such “law” is made, it
would be subject to judicial scrutiny. (b) Such purpose is not limited
pursuant to any law alone but can be done pursuant to ‘any contract to this
effect’ as well. This is clearly impermissible as a contractual provision is
not backed by a law and, therefore, first requirement of proportionality test
is not met. (c) Apart from authorising the State, even ‘any body corporate or
person’ is authorised to avail authentication services which can be on the
basis of purported agreement between an individual and such body corporate or
person. Even if we presume that legislature did not intend so, the impact of
the aforesaid features would be to enable commercial exploitation of an
individual biometric and demographic information by the private entities.
Thus, this part of the provision which enables body corporate and individuals
also to seek authentication, that too on the basis of a contract between the
individual and such body corporate or person, would impinge Writ Petition
(Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 560 of 567 upon the right to
privacy of such individuals. This part of the section, thus, is declared
unconstitutional.

(i) Other provisions of Aadhaar Act are held to be valid, including Section 59
of the Act which, according to us, saves the pre-enactment period of Aadhaar
project, i.e. from 2009-2016. (5) Whether the Aadhaar Act defies the concept
of Limited Government, Good Governance and Constitutional Trust? Answer:

Aadhaar Act meets the concept of Limited Government, Good Governance and
Constitutional Trust. (6) Whether the Aadhaar Act could be passed as ‘Money
Bill’ within the meaning of Article 110 of the Constitution? Answer:

(a) We do recognise the importance of Rajya Sabha (Upper House) in a bicameral
system of the Parliament. The significance and relevance of the Upper House
has been succinctly exemplified by this Court in Kuldip Nayar’s case. The
Rajya Sabha, therefore, becomes an important institution signifying
constitutional fedaralism. It is precisely for this reason that to enact any
statute, the Bill has to be passed by both the Houses, namely, Lok Sabha as
well as Rajya Sabha. It is the constitutional mandate. The only exception to
the aforesaid Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page
561 of 567 Parliamentary norm is Article 110 of the Constitution of India.

Having regard to this overall scheme of bicameralism enshrined in our
Constitution, strict interpretation has to be accorded to Article 110. Keeping
in view these principles, we have considered the arguments advanced by both
the sides.

(b) The petitioners accept that Section 7 of the Aadhaar Act has the elements
of ‘Money Bill’. The attack is on the premise that some other provisions,
namely, clauses 23(2)(h), 54(2)(m) and 57 of the Bill (which corresponds to
Sections 23(2)(h), 54(2)(m) and 57 of the Aadhaar Act) do not fall under any
of the clauses of Article 110 of the Constitution and, therefore, Bill was not
limited to only those subjects mentioned in Article 110. Insofar as Section 7
is concerned, it makes receipt of subsidy, benefit or service subject to
establishing identity by the process of authentication under Aadhaar or
furnish proof of Aadhaar etc. It is also very clearly declared in this
provision that the expenditure incurred in respect of such a subsidy, benefit
or service would be from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is also accepted
by the petitioners that Section 7 is the main provision of the Act. In fact,
introduction to the Act as well as Statement of Objects and Reasons very
categorically record that the main purpose of Aadhaar Act is to ensure that
such subsidies, benefits and Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected
matters Page 562 of 567 services reach those categories of persons, for whom
they are actually meant.

(c) As all these three kinds of welfare measures are sought to be extended to
the marginalised section of society, a collective reading thereof would show
that the purpose is to expand the coverage of all kinds of aid, support,
grant, advantage, relief provisions, facility, utility or assistance which may
be extended with the support of the Consolidated Fund of India with the
objective of targeted delivery. It is also clear that various schemes which
can be contemplated by the aforesaid provisions, relate to vulnerable and
weaker section of the society. Whether the social justice scheme would involve
a subsidy or a benefit or a service is merely a matter of the nature and
extent of assistance and would depend upon the economic capacity of the State.
Even where the state subsidizes in part, whether in cash or kind, the
objective of emancipation of the poor remains the goal.

(d) The respondents are right in their submission that the expression subsidy,
benefit or service ought to be understood in the context of targeted delivery
to poorer and weaker sections of society. Its connotation ought not to be
determined in the abstract. For as an abstraction one can visualize a subsidy
being Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 563 of
567 extended by Parliament to the King; by Government to the Corporations or
Banks; etc. The nature of subsidy or benefit would not be the same when
extended to the poor and downtrodden for producing those conditions without
which they cannot live a life with dignity. That is the main function behind
the Aadhaar Act and for this purpose, enrolment for Aadhaar number is
prescribed in Chapter II which covers Sections 3 to

6\. Residents are, thus, held entitled to obtain Aadhaar number. We may record
here that such an enrolment is of voluntary nature. However, it becomes
compulsory for those who seeks to receive any subsidy, benefit or service
under the welfare scheme of the Government expenditure whereof is to be met
from the Consolidated Fund of India. It follows that authentication under
Section 7 would be required as a condition for receipt of a subsidy, benefit
or service only when such a subsidy, benefit or service is taken care of by
Consolidated Fund of India. Therefore, Section 7 is the core provision of the
Aadhaar Act and this provision satisfies the conditions of Article 110 of the
Constitution. Upto this stage, there is no quarrel between the parties.

(e) On examining of the other provisions pointed out by the petitioners in an
attempt to take it out of the purview of Money Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494
of 2012 & connected matters Page 564 of 567 Bill, we are of the view that
those provisions are incidental in nature which have been made in the proper
working of the Act. In any case, a part of Section 57 has already been
declared unconstitutional. We, thus, hold that the Aadhaar Act is validly
passed as a ‘Money Bill’.

(7) Whether Section 139AA of the Income Tax Act, 1961 is violative of right to
privacy and is, therefore, unconstitutional? Answer:

Validity of this provision was upheld in the case of Binoy Viswam by repelling
the contentions based on Articles 14 and 19 of the Constitution. The question
of privacy which, at that time, was traced to Article 21, was left open. The
matter is reexamined on the touchstone of principles laid down in K.S.
Puttaswamy. The matter has also been examined keeping in view that manifest
arbitrariness is also a ground of challenge to the legislative enactment. Even
after judging the matter in the context of permissible limits for invasion of
privacy, namely: (i) the existence of a law; (ii) a ‘legitimate State
interest’; and (iii) such law should pass the ‘test of proportionality’, we
come to the conclusion that all these tests are satisfied. In fact, there is
specific discussion on these aspects in Binoy Viswam’s case as well. (8)
Whether Rule 9 of the Prevention of Money Laundering (Maintenance of Records)
Rules, 2005 and the notifications Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 &
connected matters Page 565 of 567 issued thereunder which mandates linking of
Aadhaar with bank accounts is unconstitutional?

Answer:

(a) We hold that the provision in the present form does not meet the test of
proportionality and, therefore, violates the right to privacy of a person
which extends to banking details.

(b) This linking is made compulsory not only for opening a new bank account
but even for existing bank accounts with a stipulation that if the same is not
done then the account would be deactivated, with the result that the holder of
the account would not be entitled to operate the bank account till the time
seeding of the bank account with Aadhaar is done. This amounts to depriving a
person of his property. We find that this move of mandatory linking of Aadhaar
with bank account does not satisfy the test of proportionality. To
recapitulate, the test of proportionality requires that a limitation of the
fundamental rights must satisfy the following to be proportionate: (i) it is
designated for a proper purpose; (ii) measures are undertaken to effectuate
the limitation are rationally connected to the fulfilment of the purpose;
(iii) there are no alternative less invasive measures; and

(iv) there is a proper relation between the importance of achieving the aim
and the importance of limiting the right.

(c) The Rules are held to be disproportionate for the reasons Writ Petition
(Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 566 of 567 stated in the main
body of this Judgment.

(9) Whether Circular dated March 23, 2017 issued by the Department of
Telecommunications mandating linking of mobile number with Aadhaar is illegal
and unconstitutional? Answer:

Circular dated March 23, 2017 mandating linking of mobile number with Aadhaar
is held to be illegal and unconstitutional as it is not backed by any law and
is hereby quashed. (10) Whether certain actions of the respondents are in
contravention of the interim orders passed by the Court, if so, the effect
thereof?

Answer:

This question is answered in the negative.

448) In view of the aforesaid discussion and observations, the writ petitions,
transferred cases, special leave petition, contempt petitions and all the
pending applications stand disposed of.

.............................................CJI.

(DIPAK MISRA) .............................................J.

(A.K. SIKRI) .............................................J.

(A.M. KHANWILKAR) NEW DELHI;

SEPTEMBER 26, 2018.

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 567 of 567
REPORTABLE IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION WRIT
PETITION (CIVIL) NO 494 OF 2012 JUSTICE K S PUTTASWAMY (RETD) & ANR
...PETITIONERS Versus UNION OF INDIA & ORS ...RESPONDENTS WITH T C (C) NO 151
OF 2013 T C (C) NO 152 OF 2013 W P (C) NO 833 OF 2013 W P (C) NO 829 OF 2013 T
P (C) NO 1797 OF 2013 W P (C) NO 932 OF 2013  1 T P (C) NO 1796 OF 2013 CONMT.
PET. (C) NO 144 OF 2014 T P (C) NO 313 OF 2014 T P (C) NO 312 OF 2014 SLP
(CRL) NO 2524 OF 2014 W P (C) NO 37 OF 2015 W P (C) NO 220 OF 2015 CONMT. PET.
(C) NO 674 OF 2015 in W P (C) NO 829 OF 2013 T P (C) NO 921 OF 2015 CONMT.
PET. (C) NO 470 OF 2015 W P (C) NO 231 OF 2016 CONMT. PET. (C) NO 444 OF 2016
CONMT. PET. (C) NO 608 OF 2016 W P (C) NO 797 OF 2016 CONMT. PET. (C) NO 844
OF 2017  2 W P (C) NO 342 OF 2017 W P (C) NO 372 OF 2017 W P (C) NO 841 OF
2017 W P (C) NO 1058 OF 2017 W P (C) NO 966 OF 2017 W P (C) NO 1014 OF 2017 W
P (C) NO 1002 OF 2017 W P (C) NO 1056 OF 2017 AND WITH CONMT. PET. (C) NO 34
OF 2018 in W P (C) NO 1014 OF 2017  3 JUDGMENT INDEX A Introduction:
technology, governance and freedom B The Puttaswamy1 principles B.I Origins:
privacy as a natural right B.2 Privacy as a constitutionally protected right :
liberty and dignity B.3 Contours of privacy B.4 Informational privacy B.5
Restricting the right to privacy B.6 Legitimate state interests C Submissions
C.I Petitioners’ submissions C.2 Respondents’ submissions D Architecture of
Aadhaar: analysis of the legal framework E Passage of Aadhaar Act as a Money
Bill E.I Judicial Review of the Speaker’s Decision E.2 Aadhaar Act as a Money
Bill F Biometrics, Privacy and Aadhaar F.I Increased use of biometric
technology F.2 Consent in the collection of biometric data F.3 Position before
the Aadhaar legislation 1 (2017) 10 SCC 1  4 F.4 Privacy Concerns in the
Aadhaar Act

1\. Consent during enrolment and authentication & the right to access
information under the Aadhaar Act

2\. Extent of information disclosed during authentication & sharing of core
biometric information

3\. Expansive scope of biometric information

4\. Other concerns regarding the Aadhaar Act: Misconceptions regarding the
efficacy of biometric information

5\. No access to biometric records in database

6\. Biometric locking

7\. Key takeaways G Legitimate state aim G.I Directive Principles G.2
Development and freedom G.3 Identity and Identification H Proportionality H.I
Harmonising conflicting rights H.2 Proportionality standard in Indian
jurisprudence H.3 Comparative jurisprudence H.4 Aadhaar: The proportionality
analysis H.5 Dignity and financial exclusion H.6 Constitutional validity of
Section 139AA of the Income Tax Act 1961 H.7 Linking of SIM cards and Aadhaar
numbers I Money laundering rules J Savings in Section 59 K Rule of law and
violation of interim orders L Conclusion  5 PART A Dr Dhananjaya Y
Chandrachud, J A Introduction: technology, governance and freedom 1 Technology
and biometrics are recent entrants to litigation. Individually, each presents
specific claims: of technology as the great enabler; and of biometrics as the
unique identifier. As recombinant elements, they create as it were, new
genetic material. Combined together, they present unforeseen challenges for
governance in a digital age. Part of the reason for these challenges is that
our law evolved in a radically different age and time. The law evolved
instruments of governance in incremental stages. They were suited to the
social, political and economic context of the time. The forms of expression
which the law codified were developed when paper was ubiquitous. The limits of
paper allowed for a certain freedom: the freedom of individuality and the
liberty of being obscure. Governance with paper could lapse into governance on
paper. Technology has become a universal language which straddles culture and
language. It confronts institutions of governance with new problems. Many of
them have no ready answers. 2 Technology questions the assumptions which
underlie our processes of reasoning. It reshapes the dialogue between citizens
and the state. Above all, it tests the limits of the doctrines which
democracies have evolved as a shield which preserves the sanctity of the
individual.  6 PART A 3 In understanding the interface between governance,
technology and freedom, this case will set the course for the future. Our
decision must address the dialogue between technology and power. The decision
will analyse the extent to which technology has reconfigured the role of the
state and has the potential to reset the lines which mark off no-fly zones:
areas where the sanctity of the individual is inviolable. Our path will define
our commitment to limited government. Technology confronts the future of
freedom itself.

4 Granville Austin, the eminent scholar of the Indian Constitution had
prescient comments on the philosophy of the Indian Constitution. He found it
in three strands:

> “The Constitution…may be summarized as having three strands: protecting and
> enhancing national unity and integrity; establishing the institutions and
> spirit of democracy; and fostering a social revolution to better the mass of
> Indians...the three strands are mutually dependent and inextricably
> intertwined. Social revolution could not be sought or gained at the expense
> of democracy. Nor could India be truly democratic unless the social
> revolution had to establish a just society. Without national unity,
> democracy would be endangered and there would be little progress toward
> social and economic reform. And without democracy and reform, the nation
> would not hold together. With these three strands, the framers had spun a
> seamless web. Undue strain on, or slackness in any one strand would distort
> the web and risk its destruction and, with it, the destruction of the
> nation.

Maintaining harmony between the strands predictably would present those who
later work the Constitution with great difficulties…”2 2 Granville Austin,
Working a Democratic Constitution: A History of the Indian Experience, Oxford
University Press (2003) at page 6  7 PART A These three strands are much like
the polycentric web of which Lon Fuller has spoken.3 A pull on one strand
shakes the balance between the others. The equilibrium between them preserves
the equilibrium of the Constitution. 5 This Court has been tasked with
adjudicating on the constitutional validity of the Aadhaar project. The
difficulties that Granville Austin had predicted would arise in harmonising
the strands of the “seamless web” are manifested in the present case. This
case speaks to the need to harmonise the commitment to social welfare while
safeguarding the fundamental values of a liberal constitutional democracy.

6 To usher in a social revolution, India espoused the framework of a welfare
state. The Directive Principles are its allies. The state is mandated to
promote the welfare of its citizens by securing and protecting as effectively
as possible a social order in which there is social, economic and political
justice. Government plays a vital role in the social and economic upliftment
of the nation’s citizenry by espousing equitable distribution of resources and
creating equal opportunities. These are ideals that are meant to guide and
govern State action. The State’s commitment to improve welfare is manifested
through the measures and programmes which it pursues. 3 Lon L. Fuller and
Kenneth I. Winston, The Forms and Limits of Adjudication, Harvard Law Review,
Vol. 92, (1978), at pages 353-409  8 PART A 7 The Constitution of India
incorporated a charter of human freedoms in Part III and a vision of
transformative governance in Part IV. Through its rights jurisprudence, this
Court has attempted to safeguard the rights in Part III and to impart
enforceability to at least some of the Part IV rights by reading them into the
former, as intrinsic to a constitutionally protected right to dignity. The
Directive Principles are a reminder of the positive duties which the state has
to its citizens. While social welfare is a foundational value, the
Constitution is the protector of fundamental human rights. In subserving both
those ideals, it has weaved a liberal political order where individual rights
and freedoms are at the heart of a democratic society. The Constitution seeks
to fulfil its liberal values by protecting equality, dignity, privacy,
autonomy, expression and other freedoms.

8 Two recent books have explored the complexities of human identity. In “The
Lies That Bind: Rethinking Identity”4, Kwame Anthony Appiah states that a
liberal constitutional democracy is not a fate but a project. He draws
inspiration from the Roman playwright Terence who observes: “I am human. I
think nothing human alien to me.” Francis Fukuyama, on the other hand has a
distinct nuance about identity. In “Identity: The Demand for Dignity and the
Politics of Enlightenment5, he writes about how nations can facilitate
“integrative national identities” based on liberal democratic values.
Reviewing the books, Anand Giridharadas noted that Fukuyama’s sense of
identity is 4 Kwame Anthony Appiah, The Lies That Bind: Rethinking Identity,
Liveright Publishing (2018). 5 Francis Fukuyama, Identity: The Demand for
Dignity and the Politics of Enlightenment, Farrar, Straus and Giroux (2018).

9 PART A “large enough to be inclusive but small enough to give people a real
sense of agency over their society.”6. Appiah and Fukuyama present two
variants – for Appiah it has a cosmopolitan and global nature while it is more
integrated with a nation state, for Fukuyama, though firmly rooted in a
liberal constitutional order.

9 India has participated in and benefited from the reconfiguring of technology
by the global community. We live in an age of information and are witness to a
technological revolution that pervades almost every aspect of our lives.
Redundancies and obsolescence are as ubiquitous as technology itself.
Technology is a great enabler. Technology can be harnessed by the State in
furthering access to justice and fostering good governance. 10 In an age
symbolised by an information revolution, society is witnessing a shift to a
knowledge economy7. In a knowledge economy, growth is dependent on the
‘quantity, quality, and accessibility’8 of information. The quest for digital
India must nonetheless be cognisant of the digital divide. Access confronts
serious impediments. Large swathes of the population have little or no access
to the internet or to the resources required for access to information. With
the growth of the knowledge economy, our constitutional jurisprudence has
expanded privacy rights. A digital nation must not submerge 6 Anand
Giridharadas, ‘What is Identity?’, The New York Times, 27 August, 2018. 7
Peter F Drucker, The Age of Discontinuity: Guidelines to Our Changing Society,
Harper & Row (1969). Drucker’s book popularized the term ‘Knowledge Economy’.
8 ‘What is Knowledge Economy?’, IGI Global: Disseminator of Knowledge,
available at: https://www.igi-global.com/dictionary/indigenous-knowledges-and-
knowledge-codification-in-the-knowledge- economy/16327  10 PART A the
identities of a digitised citizen. While data is the new oil, it still eludes
the life of the average citizen. If access to welfare entitlements is tagged
to unique data sets, skewed access to informational resources should not lead
to perpetuating the pre-existing inequalities of access to public resources.
An identification project that involves the collection of the biometric and
demographic information of 1.3 billion people9, creating the largest biometric
identity project in the world, must be scrutinized carefully to assess its
compliance with human rights.

11 Empowered by the technology that accompanied the advent of the information
age, the Aadhaar project was envisioned and born. The project is a centralised
nation-wide identification system based on biometric technology. It aims to be
a game changer in the delivery of welfare benefits through the use of
technology. The project seeks to facilitate de-duplication, prevent revenue
leakages and ensure a more cost and time efficient procedure for
identification. Conceptualised on the use of biometrics and authentication,
the Aadhaar identity card was originally introduced as a matter of voluntary
choice. It was made a requirement for state subsidies and benefits for which,
expenses are incurred from the Consolidated Fund of India. It was later
expanded to become necessary to avail of a host of other services. The project
is multifaceted and expansive. Perhaps no similar national identity program
exists in the world. The Aadhaar project has multifarious aspects, all 9
Krishnadas Rajagopal, ‘Aadhaar in numbers: key figures from UIDAI CEO’s
presentation to the Supreme Court’, The Hindu, (March 22, 2018). Aadhaar
enrollment as of March 2018 stood at over 1 billion.  11 PART A of which have
been the subject of a detailed challenge by the Petitioners. They have been
met with an equally strong defence from the government, which has argued that
the programme is indispensable to curb corruption, fraud and black money.

12 The Aadhaar project raises two crucial questions: First, are there
competing interests between human rights and ‘welfare furthering technology’
in democratic societies? Can technologies which are held out to bring
opportunities for growth, also violate fundamental human freedoms? Second, if
the answer to the first is in the affirmative, how should the balance be
struck between these competing interests?

13 Efficiency is a significant facet of institutional governance. But
efficiencies can compromise dignity. When efficiency becomes a universal
mantra to steam-roll fundamental freedoms, there is a danger of a society
crossing the line which divides democracy from authoritarian cultures. At the
heart of the grounds on which the Aadhaar project has been challenged, lies
the issue of power. Our Constitution is a transformative document in many
ways. One of them is in defining and limiting the State’s powers, while
expanding the ambit of individual rights and liberties. It protects citizens
from totalitarian excesses and establishes order between the organs of the
State, between the State and citizens and between citizens. Most importantly,
it reaffirms the position of the individual as the core defining element of
the  12 PART A polity. That is the justification to restrain power by
empowering all citizens to be authors of their destiny. According to the
Petitioners, the technological potential as well as the actual implementation
of the Aadhaar project alters the balance between the state and its citizens
in this relational sphere and has the potential to permanently redistribute
power within the constitutional framework.

14 As far as citizen-state relations are concerned, the Constitution was
framed to balance the rights of the individual against legitimate State
interests. Being transformative, it has to be interpreted to meet the needs of
a changing society. As the interpreter of the Constitution, it is the duty of
this Court to be vigilant against State action that threatens to upset the
fine balance between the power of the state and rights of citizens and to
safeguard the liberties that inhere in our citizens.

15 The present case involves issues that travel to the heart of our
constitutional structure as a democracy governed by the rule of law. Among
them is the scope of this Court’s power of judicial review. The Aadhaar
legislation was passed as a money bill in the Lok Sabha. Whether it was
permissible, in constitutional terms, to by-pass the Rajya Sabha, is the
question. The role of the Rajya Sabha in a bicameral legislative structure,
the limits of executive power when it affects fundamental rights and the duty
of the  13 PART A state to abide by interim orders of this Court are matters
which will fall for analysis in the case.

16 The case is hence as much about the rule of law and institutional
governance. Accountability is a key facet of the rule of law. Professor
Upendra Baxi has remarked:

> “The problem of human rights, in situations of mass poverty, is thus one of
> redistribution, access and needs. In other words, it is a problem of
> “development”, a process of planned social change through continuing
> exercise of public power. As there is no assurance that public power will
> always, or even in most cases, be exercised in favour of the deprived and
> dispossessed, an important conception of development itself is
> accountability, by the wielders of public power, to the people affected by
> it and people at large. Accountability is the medium through which we can
> strike and maintain a balance between the governors and the governed.”10
> These are some of the unique challenges of this case. They must be analysed
> in the context of our constitutional framework. The all-encompassing nature
> of the Aadhaar project, its magnitude and the resultant impact on citizens’
> fundamental rights, make it imperative to closely scrutinize the structure
> and effect of the project. For this will determine the future of freedom.

10 Upendra Baxi, The Right To Be Human: Some Heresies, India International
Centre Quarterly, Vol. 13, (1986).

    
    
    
                                                           14
                                                                                           PART B
    
    
    
    
    B          The Puttaswamy11 principles
    
    
    17         A unanimous verdict by a nine judge Bench declared privacy to be
    
    

constitutionally protected, as a facet of liberty, dignity and individual
autonomy. In a voluminous judgment, the Court traced the origins of privacy
and its content. The decision lays down the test of proportionality to
evaluate the constitutional validity of restrictions on the right to privacy.
18 The protection of privacy emerges both from its status as a natural right
inhering in every individual as well as its position as “a constitutionally
protected right”. As a constitutional protection, privacy traces itself to the
guarantee of life and personal liberty in Article 21 of the Constitution as
well as to other facets of freedom and dignity recognized and guaranteed by
the fundamental rights contained in Part III.

    
    
    B.I        Origins: privacy as a natural right
    
    
    19         Puttaswamy holds that the right to privacy inheres in every individual
    
    

as a natural right. It is inalienable and attaches to every individual as a
pre- condition for being able to exercise their freedom. The judgment of four
judges (with which Justice Sanjay Kishan Kaul concurred) held :

“42. Privacy is a concomitant of the right of the individual to exercise
control over his or her personality. It finds an origin 11 Justice K S
Puttaswamy (Retd) v Union of India (“Puttaswamy”), (2017) 10 SCC 1  15 PART B
in the notion that there are certain rights which are natural to or inherent
in a human being. Natural rights are inalienable because they are inseparable
from the human personality.”12 (Emphasis supplied) “319. Life and personal
liberty are not creations of the Constitution. These rights are recognised by
the Constitution as inhering in each individual as an intrinsic and
inseparable part of the human element which dwells within.”13 (Emphasis
supplied) In his concurring opinion, S A Bobde, J. opined:

> “392…Privacy, with which we are here concerned, eminently qualifies as an
> inalienable natural right, intimately connected to two values whose
> protection is a matter of universal moral agreement: the innate dignity and
> autonomy of man.”14 (Emphasis supplied) Similarly, in his concurring
> opinion, Nariman, J. opined:

> “532…It was, therefore, argued before us that given the international
> conventions referred to hereinabove and the fact that this right inheres in
> every individual by virtue of his being a human being, such right is not
> conferred by the Constitution but is only recognized and given the status of
> being fundamental. There is no doubt that the petitioners are correct in
> this submission.”15 (Emphasis supplied) In his concurring opinion, Abhay
> Manohar Sapre, J. opined:

> “557. In my considered opinion, “right to privacy of any individual” is
> essentially a natural right, which inheres in every human being by birth…It
> is indeed inseparable and inalienable from human being.”16 (Emphasis
> supplied) 12 Ibid, at page 365 13 Ibid, at page 508 14 Ibid, at pages
> 536-537 15 Ibid, at page 605 16 Ibid, at page 614  16 PART B The judgment
> authoritatively settles the position. While privacy is recognized and
> protected by the Constitution as an intrinsic and inseparable part of life,
> liberty and dignity, it inheres in every individual as a natural right.

B.2 Privacy as a constitutionally protected right : liberty and dignity 20 The
judgment placed the individual at the centre of the constitutional rights
regime. The individual lies at the core of constitutional focus. The ideals of
justice, liberty, equality and fraternity animate the vision of securing a
dignified existence to the individual. The Court held that privacy attaches to
the person and not the place where it is associated. Holding that privacy
protects the autonomy of the individual and the right to make choices, the
judgment of four judges held:

> “108….The individual is the focal point of the Constitution because it is in
> the realisation of individual rights that the collective well being of the
> community is determined.

Human dignity is an integral part of the Constitution.17 “266. Our
Constitution places the individual at the forefront of its focus, guaranteeing
civil and political rights in Part III and embodying an aspiration for
achieving socio-economic rights in Part IV.” (Emphasis supplied) It was held
that privacy rests in every individual “irrespective of social class or
economic status” and that every person is entitled to the intimacy and
autonomy that privacy protects:

17 Ibid, at page 403  17 PART B “271...It is privacy as an intrinsic and core
feature of life and personal liberty which enables an individual to stand up
against a programme of forced sterilization. Then again, it is privacy which
is a powerful guarantee if the State were to introduce compulsory drug trials
of non-consenting men or women. The sanctity of marriage, the liberty of
procreation, the choice of a family life and the dignity of being are matters
which concern every individual irrespective of social strata or economic well
being. The pursuit of happiness is founded upon autonomy and dignity. Both are
essential attributes of privacy which makes no distinction between the birth
marks of individuals.”18 (Emphasis supplied) 21 Recognizing that civil-
political rights are not subservient to socio- economic rights, the Court held
that “conditions necessary for realizing or fulfilling socio-economic rights
do not postulate the subversion of political freedom.” “266...The refrain that
the poor need no civil and political rights and are concerned only with
economic well-being has been utilised through history to wreak the most
egregious violations of human rights. Above all, it must be realised that it
is the right to question, the right to scrutinize and the right to dissent
which enables an informed citizenry to scrutinize the actions of government.
Those who are governed are entitled to question those who govern, about the
discharge of their constitutional duties including in the provision of socio-
economic welfare benefits. The power to scrutinize and to reason enables the
citizens of a democratic polity to make informed decisions on basic issues
which govern their rights.19

267... Conditions of freedom and a vibrant assertion of civil and political
rights promote a constant review of the justness of socio-economic programmes
and of their effectiveness in addressing deprivation and want. Scrutiny of
public affairs is founded upon the existence of freedom. Hence civil and
political rights and socio-economic rights are complementary and not mutually
exclusive.”20 18 Ibid, at page 484 19 Ibid, at pages 481-482 20 Ibid, at page
482  18 PART B Significantly, the Court rejected the submission that there is
a conflict between civil-political rights and socio-economic rights. Both in
the view of the Court are an integral part of the constitutional vision of
justice. 22 Privacy, it was held, reflects the right of the individual to
exercise control over his or her personality. This makes privacy the heart of
human dignity and liberty. Liberty and dignity are complementary
constitutional entities. Privacy was held to be integral to liberty. Privacy
facilitates the realization of constitutional freedoms. This Court held thus:

> “119. To live is to live with dignity. The draftsmen of the Constitution
> defined their vision of the society in which constitutional values would be
> attained by emphasising, among other freedoms, liberty and dignity. So
> fundamental is dignity that it permeates the core of the rights guaranteed
> to the individual by Part III. Dignity is the core which unites the
> fundamental rights because the fundamental rights seek to achieve for each
> individual the dignity of existence. Privacy with its attendant values
> assures dignity to the individual and it is only when life can be enjoyed
> with dignity can liberty be of true substance. Privacy ensures the
> fulfilment of dignity and is a core value which the protection of life and
> liberty is intended to achieve.”21

> 127...The right to privacy is an element of human dignity. The sanctity of
> privacy lies in its functional relationship with dignity. Privacy ensures
> that a human being can lead a life of dignity by securing the inner recesses
> of the human personality from unwanted intrusion. Privacy recognises the
> autonomy of the individual and the right of every person to make essential
> choices which affect the course of life. In doing so privacy recognises that
> living a life of dignity is essential for a human being to fulfil the
> liberties and freedoms which are the cornerstone of the Constitution.”22 21
> Ibid, at pages 406-407 22 Ibid, at page 413  19 PART B 23 The assurance of
> human dignity enhances the quality of life. The “functional relationship”
> between privacy and dignity secures the “inner recesses of the human
> personality from unwanted intrusion”. Privacy by recognizing the autonomy of
> an individual, protects the right to make choices essential to a dignified
> life. It thus enables the realization of constitutional liberties and
> freedoms. It was held in the judgment:

> “322. Privacy is the constitutional core of human dignity. Privacy has both
> a normative and descriptive function. At a normative level privacy sub-
> serves those eternal values upon which the guarantees of life, liberty and
> freedom are founded.

> At a descriptive level, privacy postulates a bundle of entitlements and
> interests which lie at the foundation of ordered liberty.23 298…Dignity
> cannot exist without privacy. Both reside within the inalienable values of
> life, liberty and freedom which the Constitution has recognised. Privacy is
> the ultimate expression of the sanctity of the individual. It is a
> constitutional value which straddles across the spectrum of fundamental
> rights and protects for the individual a zone of choice and self-
> determination.”24 24 Privacy is founded on the autonomy of the individual.
> The ability to make choices is at the core of the human personality. Its
> inviolable nature is manifested in the ability to make intimate decisions
> about oneself with a legitimate expectation of privacy. Privacy guarantees
> constitutional protection to all aspects of personhood. Privacy was held to
> be an “essential condition” for the exercise of most freedoms. As such,
> given that privacy and liberty are intertwined, privacy is necessary for the
> exercise of liberty. Bobde J, in his separate opinion held that:

23 Ibid, at page 508 24 Ibid, at page 499  20 PART B “409...Liberty and
privacy are integrally connected in a way that privacy is often the basic
condition necessary for exercise of the right of personal liberty. There are
innumerable activities which are virtually incapable of being performed at all
and in many cases with dignity unless an individual is left alone or is
otherwise empowered to ensure his or her privacy.25

411... Both dignity and privacy are intimately intertwined and are natural
conditions for the birth and death of individuals, and for many significant
events in life between these events. Necessarily, then, the right of privacy
is an integral part of both ‘life’ and ‘personal liberty’ under Article 21,
and is intended to enable the rights bearer to develop her potential to the
fullest extent made possible only in consonance with the constitutional values
expressed in the Preamble as well as across Part III.”26 25 Apart from being a
natural law right, the right to privacy was held to be a constitutionally
protected right flowing from Article 21. Privacy is an indispensable element
of the right to life and personal liberty under Article 21 and as a
constitutional value which is embodied in the fundamental freedoms embedded in
Part III of the Constitution. Tracing out the course of precedent in Indian
jurisprudence over the last four decades, the view of four judges holds:

> “103. The right to privacy has been traced in the decisions which have been
> rendered over more than four decades to the guarantee of life and personal
> liberty in Article 21 and the freedoms set out in Article 19.”27 “320.
> Privacy is a constitutionally protected right which emerges primarily from
> the guarantee of life and personal liberty in Article 21 of the
> Constitution…”28 25 Ibid, at page 543 26 Ibid, at page 544 27 Ibid, at page
> 401 28 Ibid, at page 508  21 PART B In a similar vein, Chelameswar J. while
> concurring with the view of four judges held:

> “375. The right to privacy is certainly one of the core freedoms which is to
> be defended. It is part of liberty within the meaning of that expression in
> Article 21.”29 26 Being indispensable to dignity and liberty, and essential
> to the exercise of freedoms aimed at the self-realization of every
> individual, privacy was held to be a common theme running across the
> freedoms and rights guaranteed not just by Article 21, but all of Part III
> of the Constitution. Bobde J. in his separate opinion held that:

> “406. It is not possible to truncate or isolate the basic freedom to do an
> activity in seclusion from the freedom to do the activity itself. The right
> to claim a basic condition like privacy in which guaranteed fundamental
> rights can be exercised must itself be regarded as a fundamental right.
> Privacy, thus, constitutes the basic, irreducible condition necessary for
> the exercise of ‘personal liberty’ and freedoms guaranteed by the
> Constitution. It is the inarticulate major premise in Part III of the
> Constitution.30

> 415\. Privacy is the necessary condition precedent to the enjoyment of any
> of the guarantees in Part III. As a result, when it is claimed by rights
> bearers before constitutional courts, a right to privacy may be situated not
> only in Article 21, but also simultaneously in any of the other guarantees
> in Part III. In the current state of things, Articles 19(1), 20(3), 25, 28
> and 29 are all rights helped up and made meaningful by the exercise of
> privacy.” (Emphasis supplied) 29 Ibid, at page 531 30 Ibid, at pages 541-542
> 22 PART B B.3 Contours of privacy 27 Privacy has been held to have distinct
> connotations including (i) spatial control; (ii) decisional autonomy; and
> (iii) informational control. The judgment of four judges held that:

> “248. Spatial control denotes the creation of private spaces. Decisional
> autonomy comprehends intimate personal choices such as those governing
> reproduction as well as choices expressed in public such as faith or modes
> of dress.

> Informational control empowers the individual to use privacy as a shield to
> retain personal control over information pertaining to the person.”
> Similarly, Nariman J. in his separate opinion held:

> “521. In the Indian context, a fundamental right to privacy would cover at
> least the following three aspects: • Privacy that involves the person i.e.
> when there is some invasion by the State of a person’s rights relatable to
> his physical body, such as the right to move freely; • Informational privacy
> which does not deal with a person’s body but deals with a person’s mind, and
> therefore recognizes that an individual may have control over the
> dissemination of material that is personal to him.

> Unauthorised use of such information may, therefore lead to infringement of
> this right; and • The privacy of choice, which protects an individual’s
> autonomy over fundamental personal choices.”31 28 However, it was held that
> this is not an exhaustive formulation of entitlements. In recording its
> conclusions, the opinion of four judges held:

> “324. This Court has not embarked upon an exhaustive enumeration or a
> catalogue of entitlements or interests comprised in the right to privacy.
> The Constitution must evolve with the felt necessities of time to meet the
> challenges thrown up in a democratic order governed by the rule of law. The
> meaning of the Constitution cannot be 31 Ibid, at page 598  23 PART B frozen
> on the perspectives present when it was adopted.

> Technological change has given rise to concerns which were not present seven
> decades ago and the rapid growth of technology may render obsolescent many
> notions of the present. Hence the interpretation of the Constitution must be
> resilient and flexible to allow future generations to adapt its content
> bearing in mind its basic or essential features.”32 (Emphasis supplied)
> Additionally, Bobde J., in his separate opinion held that the right to
> privacy may also inhere in other parts of the Constitution beyond those
> specified in the judgment:

> “415. Therefore, privacy is the necessary condition precedent to the
> enjoyment of any of the guarantees in Part III. As a result, when it is
> claimed by rights bearers before constitutional courts, a right to privacy
> may be situated not only in Article 21, but also simultaneously in any of
> the other guarantees in Part III. In the current state of things, Articles
> 19(1), 20(3), 25, 28 and 29 are all rights helped up and made meaningful by
> the exercise of privacy. This is not an exhaustive list. Future developments
> in technology and social ordering may well reveal that there are yet more
> constitutional sites in which a privacy right inheres that are not at
> present evident to us.”33 (Emphasis supplied) B.4 Informational privacy 29
> Puttaswamy held that informational privacy is an essential aspect of the
> fundamental right to privacy. It protects an individual’s free, personal
> conception of the ‘self.’ Justice Nariman held that informational privacy
> “deals with a person’s mind, and therefore recognizes that an individual may
> have control over the dissemination of material that is personal to him”.
> Any unauthorised use of such information may therefore lead to infringement
> of the 32 Ibid, at page 509 33 Ibid, at page 545  24 PART B right to
> privacy. In his concurring judgment, Justice Kaul held that informational
> privacy provides the right to an individual “to disseminate certain personal
> information for limited purposes alone”. Kaul J. in his separate opinion
> held:

> “620…The boundaries that people establish from others in society are not
> only physical but also informational. There are different kinds of
> boundaries in respect to different relations.

> Privacy assists in preventing awkward social situations and reducing social
> frictions. Most of the information about individuals can fall under the
> phrase “none of your business”. … An individual has the right to control
> one’s life while submitting personal data for various facilities and
> services. It is but essential that the individual knows as to what the data
> is being used for with the ability to correct and amend it. The hallmark of
> freedom in a democracy is having the autonomy and control over our lives
> which becomes impossible, if important decisions are made in secret without
> our awareness or participation.”34 (Emphasis supplied) 30 A reasonable
> expectation of privacy requires that data collection does not violate the
> autonomy of an individual. The judgment of four judges noted the centrality
> of consent in a data protection regime. This was also highlighted in the
> separate concurring opinion of Justice Kaul:

> “625. Every individual should have a right to be able to exercise control
> over his/her own life and image as portrayed to the world and to control
> commercial use of his/her identity.

> This also means that an individual may be permitted to prevent others from
> using his image, name and other aspects of his/her personal life and
> identity for commercial purposes without his/her consent.”35 34 Ibid, at
> page 627 35 Ibid, at page 629  25 PART B Consent, transparency and control
> over information are crucial to informational privacy. In this structure,
> Court has principally focused on the “individual” as central to our
> jurisprudence.
    
    
    B.5        Restricting the right to privacy
    
    
    31         There is an inherent importance of giving a constitutional status to
    
    

> privacy. Justice Nariman dealt with this:

> “490...The recognition of such right in the fundamental rights chapter of
> the Constitution is only a recognition that such right exists
> notwithstanding the shifting sands of majority governments. Statutes may
> protect fundamental rights; they may also infringe them. In case any
> existing statute or any statute to be made in the future is an infringement
> of the inalienable right to privacy, this Court would then be required to
> test such statute against such fundamental right and if it is found that
> there is an infringement of such right, without any countervailing societal
> or public interest, it would be the duty of this Court to declare such
> legislation to be void as offending the fundamental right to privacy.”36 A
> constitutional right may embody positive and negative ‘aspects’. They
> signify mandates. At an affirmative level, they emphasise the content and
> diversity of our liberties. As a ‘negative’, they impose restraints on the
> state and limit the power of the state to intrude upon the area of personal
> freedom.

> ‘Negative’ in this sense reflects a restraint: the fundamental rights are a
> restraining influence on the authority of power. In addition to keeping
> itself within the bounds of its authority, the state may have a positive
> obligation to perform. Rights such as informational privacy and data
> protection mandate 36 Ibid, at pages 580-581  26 PART B that the state must
> bring into being a viable legal regime which recognizes, respects, protects
> and enforces informational privacy. Informational privacy requires the state
> to protect it by adopting positive steps to safeguard its cluster of
> entitlements. The right to informational privacy is not only vertical
> (asserted and protected against state actors) but horizontal as well.

Informational privacy requires legal protection because the individual cannot
be left to an unregulated market place. Access to and exploitation of
individual personal data – whether by state or non-state entities – must be
governed by a legal regime built around the principles of consent,
transparency and individual control over data at all times.

32 Privacy, being an intrinsic component of the right to life and personal
liberty, it was held that the limitations which operate on those rights, under
Article 21, would operate on the right to privacy. Any restriction on the
right to privacy would therefore be subjected to strict constitutional
scrutiny. The constitutional requirements for testing the validity of any
encroachment on privacy were dealt with in the judgment as follows:

> “325… In the context of Article 21 an invasion of privacy must be justified
> on the basis of a law which stipulates a procedure which is fair, just and
> reasonable. The law must also be valid with reference to the encroachment on
> life and personal liberty under Article 21. An invasion of life or personal
> liberty must meet the three-fold requirement of (i) legality, which
> postulates the existence of law; (ii) need, defined in terms of a legitimate
> state aim; and (iii) proportionality which ensures a rational nexus between
> the objects and the means adopted to achieve them.”37 37 Ibid, at page 509
> 27 PART B These three-fold requirements emerge from the procedural and
> content-based mandate of Article 21. The first requirement is the enactment
> of a valid law, which justifies an encroachment on privacy. The second
> requirement of a legitimate State aim ensures that the law enacted to
> restrict privacy is constitutionally reasonable and does not suffer from
> manifest arbitrariness.

The third requirement of proportionality ensures that the nature and quality
of the encroachment on the right to privacy is not disproportionate to the
purpose of the law. Proportionality requires the State to justify that the
means which are adopted by the legislature would encroach upon the right to
privacy only to the minimum degree necessary to achieve its legitimate
interest. Justice Nariman held thus:

> “495…Statutory provisions that deal with aspects of privacy would continue
> to be tested on the ground that they would violate the fundamental right to
> privacy, and would not be struck down, if it is found on a balancing test
> that the social or public interest and the reasonableness of the
> restrictions would outweigh the particular aspect of privacy claimed. If
> this is so, then statutes which would enable the State to contractually
> obtain information about persons would pass muster in given circumstances,
> provided they safeguard the individual right to privacy as well… in
> pursuance of a statutory requirement, if certain details need to be given
> for the concerned statutory purpose, then such details would certainly
> affect the right to privacy, but would on a balance, pass muster as the
> State action concerned has sufficient inbuilt safeguards to protect this
> right – viz. the fact that such information cannot be disseminated to anyone
> else, save on compelling grounds of public interest.”38 33 While five judges
> of the Court adopted the “proportionality” standard to test a law infringing
> privacy, Justice Chelameswar discussed the need to 38 Ibid, at page 583  28
> PART B apply of a “compelling state interest” standard, describing it as the
> “highest standard of scrutiny that a court can adopt”. Describing Article 21
> as the “bedrock” of privacy, the learned Judge held:

> “379…If the spirit of liberty permeates every claim of privacy, it is
> difficult if not impossible to imagine that any standard of limitation,
> other than the one under Article 21 applies.39

> 380\. The just, fair and reasonable standard of review under Article 21
> needs no elaboration. It has also most commonly been used in cases dealing
> with a privacy claim hitherto.

> Gobind resorted to the compelling state interest standard in addition to the
> Article 21 reasonableness enquiry. From the United States where the
> terminology of ‘compelling state interest’ originated, a strict standard of
> scrutiny comprises two things- a ‘compelling state interest’ and a
> requirement of ‘narrow tailoring’ (narrow tailoring means that the law must
> be narrowly framed to achieve the objective). As a term, compelling state
> interest does not have definite contours in the US. Hence, it is critical
> that this standard be adopted with some clarity as to when and in what types
> of privacy claims it is to be used. Only in privacy claims which deserve the
> strictest scrutiny is the standard of compelling State interest to be used.
> As for others, the just, fair and reasonable standard under Article 21 will
> apply. When the compelling State interest standard is to be employed must
> depend upon the context of concrete cases.”40 (Emphasis supplied) Justice
> Chelameswar’s view accepts the ‘fair, just and reasonable’ standard in the
> generality of cases, carving an exception in cases of a certain category
> where a heightened scrutiny must apply. Those categories of exception are
> not spelt out. They would, as the judge opined, be evolved on a case by case
> basis.

39 Ibid, at page 532 40 Ibid, at pages 532-533  29 PART B 34 The Bench of nine
judges had held that the contours of privacy exist across the spectrum of
constitutionally protected freedoms. Privacy was held to be a necessary
condition precedent to the enjoyment of the guarantees in Part III. This has
enhanced the scope of the protection guaranteed to privacy. Consequently,
privacy infringements will generally have to satisfy the other tests
applicable apart from those under Article 21. In his concurring opinion,
Justice S A Bobde held:

> “427. Once it is established that privacy imbues every constitutional
> freedom with its efficacy and that it can be located in each of them, it
> must follow that interference with it by the state must be tested against
> whichever one or more Part III guarantees whose enjoyment is curtailed.

As a result, privacy violations will usually have to answer to tests in
addition to the one applicable to Article 21, Such a view would be wholly
consistent with R. C. Cooper v. Union of India.”41 (Emphasis supplied) Any
attempt by the State to restrict privacy must therefore meet the
constitutional requirements prescribed for each provision of Part III, which
the restriction infringes. In his concurring opinion, Justice Nariman held
thus:

> “488... Every State intrusion into privacy interests which deals with the
> physical body or the dissemination of information personal to an individual
> or personal choices relating to the individual would be subjected to the
> balancing test prescribed under the fundamental right that it infringes
> depending upon where the privacy interest claimed is founded.”42 (Emphasis
> supplied) Justice Nariman further held:

> “526…when it comes to restrictions on this right, the drill of various
> Articles to which the right relates must be scrupulously followed. For
> example, if the restraint on privacy is over fundamental personal choices
> that an 41 Ibid, at page 549 42 Ibid, at page 580  30 PART B individual is
> to make, State action can be restrained under Article 21 read with Article
> 14 if it is arbitrary and unreasonable; and under Article 21 read with
> Article 19(1)(a) only if it relates to the subjects mentioned in Article
> 19(2) and the tests laid down by this Court for such legislation or
> subordinate legislation to pass muster under the said Article.

> Each of the tests evolved by this Court, qua legislation or executive
> action, under Article 21 read with Article 14; or Article 21 read with
> Article 19(1) (a) in the aforesaid examples must be met in order that State
> action must pass muster.”43 (Emphasis supplied) The constitutional guarantee
> on protection of privacy was placed on a sure foundation. Since emanations
> of privacy are traceable to various rights guaranteed by Part III, a law or
> executive action which encroaches on privacy must meet the requirements of
> the constitutionally permissible restriction in relation to each of the
> fundamental rights where the claim is founded.
    
    
    B.6        Legitimate state interests
    
    
    35         Recognizing that the right to privacy is not absolute, the judgment
    
    

> recognizes that legitimate state interests may be a valid ground for the
> curtailment of the right subject to the tests laid down for the protection
> of rights. Justice Nariman held:

> “526...This right is subject to reasonable regulations made by the State to
> protect legitimate State interests or public interest. However, when it
> comes to restrictions on this right, the drill of various Articles to which
> the right relates must be scrupulously followed.”44 43 Ibid, at page 601 44
> Ibid, at page 601  31 PART B Recognizing that a legitimate state aim is a
> pre-requisite for any restriction on the right, the judgment of four judges
> held:

> “310…the requirement of a need, in terms of a legitimate state aim, ensures
> that the nature and content of the law which imposes the restriction falls
> within the zone of reasonableness mandated by Article 14, which is a
> guarantee against arbitrary state action. The pursuit of a legitimate state
> aim ensures that the law does not suffer from manifest arbitrariness.” 36
> The judgment sets out illustrations of legitimate State interests. The
> provisos to various fundamental rights were held to be an obvious
> restriction on the right to privacy. It was held that the State does have a
> legitimate interest in collection and storage of private information when it
> is related to security of the nation. Apart from the concerns of national
> security, an important State interest, it was held, lies in ensuring that
> scarce public resources reach the beneficiaries for whom they are intended.
> It was held thus:

> “311...Allocation of resources for human development is coupled with a
> legitimate concern that the utilisation of resources should not be siphoned
> away for extraneous purposes… Data mining with the object of ensuring that
> resources are properly deployed to legitimate beneficiaries is a valid
> ground for the state to insist on the collection of authentic data.”45
> Prevention and investigation of crime, protection of the revenue and public
> health were demarcated as being part of other legitimate aims of the State.

> The judgment places an obligation on the State to ensure that while its
> legitimate interests are duly preserved the data which the State collects is
> 45 Ibid, at page 505  32 PART B used only for the legitimate purposes of the
> State and is “not to be utilised unauthorizedly for extraneous purposes.” 37
> However, reiterating that every facet of privacy is to be protected, the
> judgment held that there should be a careful balance between individual
> interests and legitimate concerns of the state. Justice Nariman, in his
> separate opinion held:

> “488. Every State intrusion into privacy interests which deals with the
> physical body or the dissemination of information personal to an individual
> or personal choices relating to the individual would be subjected to the
> balancing test prescribed under the fundamental right that it infringes
> depending upon where the privacy interest claimed is founded.”46 38 The
> judgment in Puttaswamy recognizes the right to privacy as a constitutional
> guarantee protected as intrinsic to the freedoms guaranteed by Part III of
> the Constitution. Privacy is integral to the realization of human dignity
> and liberty. A society which protects privacy, values the worth of
> individual self-realization. For it is in the abyss of solitude that the
> innermost recesses of the mind find solace to explore within and beyond.

> 46 Ibid, at page 580  33 PART C C Submissions C.I Petitioners’ submissions
> The petitioners challenge the constitutional validity of:

a. The Aadhaar programme that operated between 28.01.2009 till the coming into
force of the Aadhaar Act, 2016 on 12.07.2016; b. The Aadhaar Act, 2016 (and
alternatively certain provisions of the Act); c. Regulations framed under the
Aadhaar Act, 2016; d. Elements of the Aadhaar programme that continue to
operate without the cover of the Act;

e. Subordinate legislation including the Money Laundering (Amendment) Rules,
2017;

f. All notifications issued under Section 7 of the Aadhaar Act in so far as
they make Aadhaar mandatory for availing of certain benefits, services and
subsidies; and g. Actions which made Aadhaar mandatory even where the activity
is not covered by Section 7 of the Act.

Mr Shyam Divan, learned Senior Counsel submitted that the Aadhaar project and
Act are ultra vires on the following grounds: i The project and the Act
violate the fundamental right to privacy;  34 PART C ii The architecture of
the Aadhaar project enables pervasive surveillance by the State;

iii The fundamental constitutional feature of a ‘limited government’ - which
is the sovereignty of the people and limited government authority- is changed
completely post Aadhaar and reverses the relationship between the citizen and
the State;

iv Due to the unreliability of biometric technology, there are authentication
failures which lead to the exclusion of individuals from welfare schemes; v A
citizen or resident in a democratic society has a choice to identify herself
through different modes in the course of her interactions generally in
society, as well as in her interactions with the State. Mandating
identification by only one mode is highly intrusive, excessive and
disproportionate and violates Articles 14, 19 and 21; and vi The procedure
adopted by the State before and after the enactment of the law is violative of
Articles 14 and 21 because: a. There is no informed consent at the time of
enrolment; b. UIDAI does not have control over the enrolling agencies and
requesting entities that collect sensitive personal information which
facilitates capture, storage and misuse of information; and  35 PART C c. The
data collected and uploaded into the CIDR is not verified by any government
official designated by UIDAI.

Mr Kapil Sibal, learned Senior Counsel submits that the provisions of the
Aadhaar Act are unconstitutional for the following reasons: i The aggregation
and concentration of sensitive personal information under the Aadhaar Act is
impermissible because it is capable of being used to affect every aspect of an
individual’s personal, professional, religious and social life. It is
therefore violative of the individual freedoms guaranteed under Articles
19(1)(a) to 19(1)(g), 21 and 25 of the Constitution; ii Such aggregation of
information is also an infringement of informational privacy, which has been
recognised in Puttaswamy; iii Making Aadhaar mandatory unreasonably deprives
citizens of basic rights and entitlements and infringes Article 21 of the
Constitution; iv Use of Aadhaar as an exclusive identity for availing of
subsidies, benefits and services is disproportionate and violates Article 14
for being arbitrary and discriminatory against persons otherwise entitled to
such benefits; v Collection and storage of data with the government under the
Aadhaar Act is violative of the right to protection from self-incrimination,
and the right to  36 PART C privacy and personal dignity and bodily Integrity
envisaged under Article 20(3) and Article 21 of the Constitution;

vi To prescribe that Aadhaar is the only identity that enables a person to
receive entitlements is contrary to the right of an individual under the
Constitution to identify the person through other prescribed documentation
such as electoral rolls or passports;

vii Section 7 of the Aadhaar Act is applicable only to such subsidies,
benefits and services, for which the entire expenditure is directly incurred
from the Consolidated Fund of India or from which the entire receipts directly
form part of the Consolidated Fund of India;

viii Use of Aadhaar as the sole identity will not prevent pilferage and
diversion of funds and subsidies, as faulty identification is only one of the
factors that contributes to it; and ix The Aadhaar project conditions the
grant of essential benefits upon the surrender of individual rights.

Mr Gopal Subramanium, learned Senior Counsel, made the following submissions:

37 PART C i The Aadhaar project violates dignity under Article 21 of the
Constitution as recognised in the judgments- in Puttaswamy, NALSA47 and
Subramanian Swamy48;

ii The Aadhaar project is unconstitutional as it seeks a waiver of fundamental
rights;

iii The Aadhaar project violates the guarantees of substantive and procedural
reasonableness under Articles 14,19 and 21; iv Aadhaar perpetrates exclusion
from social security schemes and is therefore discriminatory under Article 14;
v The Aadhaar Act lacks legitimacy in its object in so far as it validates a
breach of fundamental rights retrospectively; vi Rights and entitlements
conferred under the Constitution cannot be based on algorithmic probabilities
which UIDAI cannot control; vii No consequence is prescribed for non-
authentication under the Aadhaar Act;

viii The Aadhaar Act violates Part IX of the Constitution, which provides for
decentralisation (to Panchayats), while the Aadhaar scheme strikes at the
federal structure of the Constitution; and 47 (2014) 5 SCC 438 48 (2016) 7 SCC
221  38 PART C ix Breaches under the Aadhaar Act cannot be cured. Mr Arvind
Datar, learned Senior Counsel has submitted: i Rule 9 of the PMLA (Second
Amendment) Rules, 2017 which requires mandatory linking of Aadhaar with bank
accounts is unconstitutional and violates Articles 14, 19(1)(g), 21 and 300A
of the Constitution, Sections 3, 7 and 51 of the Aadhaar Act, and is also
ultra vires of the provisions of the PMLA Act, 2002 on the following grounds:
a. Under the impugned amended Rules, linkage of Aadhaar numbers to bank
accounts is mandatory and persons not enrolling for Aadhaar cannot operate a
bank account, which violates the spirit of Article 14 in entirety in so far it
arbitrarily metes out unequal treatment based on unreasonable classification;

b The impugned Rules are violative of Article 19(1)(g) as the Rules refer to
companies, firms, trusts, etc., whereas the Aadhaar Act is only to establish
identity of “individuals”;

c Non-operation of a bank account, even for a temporary period, leads to
deprivation of an individual's property and therefore constitutes a violation
under Article 300A of the Constitution, which provides that deprivation can be
done only by primary legislation; and  39 PART C d The Rule has no nexus to
the object of the PMLA Act, as the Act has no provision to make bank accounts
non-operational; ii Section 139AA of the Income Tax Act, 1961 is liable to be
struck down as violative of Articles 14, 21 and 19(g) of the Constitution; iii
The decision in Binoy Viswam v Union of India49 requires re-

consideration in view of the nine judge Bench decision in Puttaswamy; iv In
view of serious deficiencies in the Aadhaar Act, there is a need for
guidelines under Article 142 to protect inter alia, the right to privacy and
to implement the mandate of the nine judge Bench in Puttaswamy; v If the
Aadhaar project is not struck down, it should be confined only for
identification or authentication of persons who are entitled to subsidies,
benefits and services for which expenditure is incurred from the Consolidated
Fund of India;

vi Sections 2(g), 2(j) 7, 57 and 59 of the Aadhaar Act violate Articles 14, 21
and 300A of the Constitution; and vii PMLA Rule 9 is arbitrary as it is
contrary to the RBI Master Circular (issued in 2013), which provided a list of
documents that were to be treated as ‘identity proof’, in relation to proof of
name and proof of residence.

49(2017) 7 SCC 59  40 PART C Mr P Chidambaram, learned Senior Counsel argued
that the Aadhaar Act could not have been passed as a Money Bill. Thus, he
submitted: i The only difference between financial bills and money bills is
the term “only” in Article 110 of the Constitution which implies that the
scope of money bills is narrower than the scope of financial bills and
provisions relating to money bills must thus be construed strictly; ii The
Aadhaar Act, which was passed as a money bill, should be struck down since
many of its provisions such as Section 57 have no relation to the nature of a
Money Bill and bear no nexus to the Consolidated Fund of India;

iii Since Money Bills can only be introduced in the Lok Sabha, on account of
the curtailment of the powers of the Rajya Sabha and the President, the
relevant provisions must be accorded a strict interpretation; iv While Article
110(3) provides that the decision of the Speaker of the Lok Sabha as to
whether a Bill is a ‘Money Bill’ shall be final, the finality is only with
regard to the Parliament and does not exclude judicial review; and v Since the
legislative procedure is illegal and the power of the Rajya Sabha has been
circumvented to disallow legislative scrutiny of the  41 PART C Aadhaar bill,
provisions of the Act cannot be severed to save the Act and the Act is liable
to be struck down as a whole by the Court. Mr KV Vishwanathan, learned Senior
Counsel made the following submissions:

i All acts done prior to the passage of the Act are void ab initio and are not
saved or validated by Section 59. In any event, Section 59 is invalid; ii
Collection, storage and use of data under the Aadhaar project and Act are
invalid for the following reasons:

a. The Aadhaar Act and the surrounding infrastructure has made the possession
of Aadhaar de facto mandatory;

b. Compulsory collection of identity information violates various facets of
the right to privacy - bodily privacy, informational privacy and decisional
autonomy;

c. The Act is unconstitutional since it collects the identity information of
children between 5-18 years without parental consent; d. Centralised storage
of identity information and the unduly long period of retention of transaction
data and authentication records is disproportionate;

42 PART C e. The Act and Regulations preclude Aadhaar number holders from
accessing or correcting their identity information stored on the CIDR; and f.
The Act and Regulations lack safeguards to secure sensitive personal data.

iii Services like health related services, and those related to food, pensions
and daily wages claimed under Section 7 of the Act have been denied because of
biometric failure. Biometric infrastructure operates on a probabilistic
system, which cannot be ‘one hundred percent infallible’. Thus, the State
needs to take steps to prevent the denial of benefits by adopting alternate
methods for verification of identity. This is absent at present, resulting in
a violation of Articles 14 & 21; iv No provision is made for a hearing against
omission and deactivation of the Aadhaar number, which violates the principles
of natural justice; and v Sections 2(g), 2(j), 2(k) and 23(2) of the Aadhaar
Act suffer from excessive delegation and the allied regulations are vague,
manifestly arbitrary and unreasonable.

Mr Anand Grover, learned Senior Counsel has submitted thus:  43 PART C i The
Aadhaar project extends far beyond the scope of the Aadhaar Act with no
procedural safeguards. Hence it violates Article 21 in as much as it is
without the support and sanction of law. The data collected is unauthorised,
excessive and being illegally shared; ii The use of biometric technology to
establish identity is uncertain, unproven and unreliable leading to exclusion
and a violation of Articles 14 and 21;

iii The lack of security in the Aadhaar project violates the right to privacy
under Article 21;

iv Excessive powers have been delegated to the UIDAI through the Aadhaar Act;
and v Sections 33(2) and 57 of the Act are vague, overbroad and
constitutionally invalid.

Ms Meenakshi Arora, learned Senior Counsel contended that: i The general and
indiscriminate retention of personal data, including meta-

> data, and the ensuing possibility of surveillance by the State has a
> chilling effect on fundamental rights like the freedom of speech and
> expression, privacy, and dignity;

44

PART C ii Making Aadhaar the sole means of identification for various services
impinges upon dignity as it amounts to requiring a license for the exercise of
fundamental rights; and iii The Aadhaar project does not contain any specific
provisions for data protection, apart from a mere general obligation on UIDAI,
which is a violation of the obligation of the State to ensure that the right
to life, liberty, dignity and privacy of every individual is not breached
under Part III of the Constitution.

Mr Sajjan Poovayya, learned Senior Counsel has urged the following
submissions:

i The Aadhaar Act fails to satisfy the constitutional test of a just, fair and
reasonable law;

ii Maintenance of Aadhaar records by the State under Section 32 is an
unwarranted intrusion by the State;

iii Use of personal information under Section 33 is an unwarranted intrusion
by the State;

iv Section 57 of the Act is contrary to the principle of purpose limitation;
and  45 PART C v Sections 2(g) and 2(j), the proviso to Section 3(1), Section
23(2)(g) and Section 23(2)(n) read with Section 54(2)(l), and Section 29(4) of
the Act suffer from the vice of excessive delegation. Mr CU Singh, learned
Senior Counsel, argued that the rights of the child are violated through the
Aadhaar project. A child has no right to give consent or to enter into a
contract. A child in India, under law, has no power or right to bind herself
to anything, to consent or enter into contracts. In this background, there is
no compelling state interest to mandate Aadhaar for children. The fundamental
right of a child to education cannot be made subject to production of Aadhaar.
These requirements are not only contrary to domestic legislation protecting
the rights of children but also against India’s international obligations.
Learned counsel also spoke of the violation of the rights of homeless people
who are denied benefits due to the lack of a fixed abode. Mr Sanjay Hegde,
learned Senior Counsel has urged that since there is no ‘essential practice’
involved, exemptions must be allowed from the mandatory nature of the Aadhaar
Act on the grounds of freedom of conscience under Article 25 of the
Constitution.

Ms Jayna Kothari, learned Counsel arguing on behalf of an intervenor
organization for transgender persons and sexual minorities urged that the  46
PART C Aadhaar Act discriminates against sexual minorities. Aadhaar
Regulations require demographic information. The enrolment form has a third
gender, but there is no uniformity across the board, and the documents that
have to be produced to get an Aadhaar card do not always have that option.
Aadhaar is being made mandatory for almost everything but transgender persons
cannot get an Aadhaar because they do not have the gender identity documents
that Aadhaar requires. This non-recognition of gender identity leads to denial
of benefits which is violative of both Articles 14 and 21. It has also been
argued before us in an intervention application that denial of Aadhaar to Non-
Resident Indians leads to discrimination when NRIs seek to avail of basic
services in India.

C.2 Respondents’ submissions Mr KK Venugopal, Learned Attorney General for
India, has submitted thus: i. For the period prior to coming into force of the
Aadhaar Act, because of the interim orders passed by the SC, obtaining an
Aadhaar number or enrollment number was voluntary, and hence there was no
violation of any right;

ii. Section 59 of the Aadhaar Act protects all actions taken from the period
between 2010 till the passage of the Aadhaar Act in 2016;  47 PART C iii. The
judgments in MP Sharma and Kharak Singh being those of 8 and 6 judges
respectively, holding that the right to privacy is not a fundamental right,
judgments of smaller benches delivered during the period upto Puttaswamy would
be per incuriam. Hence, the State need not have proceeded on the basis that a
law was required for the purpose of getting an Aadhaar number or an enrolment
number. As a result, the administrative actions taken would be valid as well
as the receipt of benefits and subsidies by the beneficiaries; iv. Subsequent
to the Aadhaar Act, the petitioners would have to establish that one or more
of the tests laid down by the nine judge bench in Puttaswamy render the
invasion of privacy resulting from the Aadhaar Act unconstitutional. The tests
laid down in Puttaswamy have been satisfied and hence the Aadhaar Act is not
unconstitutional for the following reasons:

a. The first condition in regard to the existence of a law has been satisfied;

b. Legitimate state interests such as preventing the dissipation of social
welfare benefits, prevention of money laundering, black money and tax evasion,
and protection of national security are satisfied through the Act;

48 PART C c. The Aadhaar Act satisfies the test of proportionality by ensuring
that a “rational nexus” exists between the objects of the Act and the means
adopted to achieve its objects; and d. For the purpose of testing legitimate
State interest and proportionality, the Court must take note of the fact that
each one of the subsidies and benefits under Section 7 is traceable to rights
under Article 21 of the Constitution - such as the right to live with human
dignity, the right to food, right to shelter, right to employment, right to
medical care and education. If these rights are juxtaposed with the right to
privacy, the former will prevail over the latter.

v. The Aadhaar Act was validly passed as a Money Bill on the following
grounds:

a. The term ‘targeted delivery of subsidies’ contemplates an expenditure of
funds from the Consolidated Fund of India, which brings the Aadhaar Act within
the purview of a Money Bill under Art. 110 of the Constitution; b. Sections 7,
24, 25 and the Preamble of the Act also support its classification as a Money
Bill;

c. The Aadhaar Act has ancillary provisions, but they are related to the pith
and substance of the legislation which is the targeted delivery of subsidies
and benefits; and d. Section 57 of the Act is saved by Article 110 (1) (g) of
the Constitution as it is a standalone provision and even if a Bill is not
covered under  49 PART C clauses (a) to (f) of Article110(1), it can still be
covered under Article110 (1) (g).

Mr Tushar Mehta, learned Additional Solicitor General, submitted: i. Section
139AA of the Income Tax Act, was examined in Binoy Viswam in the context of
Article 19 and fulfills the three tests laid down under Puttaswamy as well as
the test of manifest arbitrariness laid down in Shayara Bano v Union of
India50;

ii. The demographic information that is required for Aadhaar enrollment is
already submitted while obtaining a PAN card and therefore individuals do not
have a legitimate interest in withholding information; iii. Linking Aadhaar to
PAN is in public interest on the following grounds:

> a. The State has a legitimate interest in curbing the menace of black money,
> money laundering and tax evasion, often facilitated by duplicate PAN cards,
> and the linking of Aadhaar to the PAN card will ensure that one person holds
> only one PAN Card, thereby curbing these economic offences;

> b. Aadhaar-PAN linking is in public interest and satisfies the test of
> proportionality and reasonableness;

50 (2017) 9 SCC 1  50 PART C c. The individual interest gives way to a larger
public interest and a statutory provision furthering state interest will take
precedence over fundamental rights;

d. The Court must not interfere with the Legislature’s wisdom unless the
statutory measure is shockingly disproportionate to the object sought to be
achieved;

e. India is a signatory to various international treaties under which it has
obligations to take action to curb the menace of black money and money
laundering in pursuance of which measures including the amendments to inter
alia the Income Tax Act and the PMLA Act and Rules thereunder, have been
brought about by the legislature; f. Statutory provisions under Aadhaar Act
and Income Tax Act are distinct and standalone. Moreover, the validity of one
provision cannot be examined in the light of the other;

g. Ascribing a (mandatory or voluntary) character to the provisions of a
statute is Parliament’s prerogative and cannot be questioned by courts; and h.
Rule 9 of the amended PMLA Rules that mandates furnishing of an Aadhaar number
to open a bank account is not ultra vires the Aadhaar Act. Similarly, the Rule
that an existing bank account will become non- operational if not linked with
Aadhaar within six months is not a  51 PART C penalty but a consequence to
render the accounts of money launderers non-operational.

Mr Rakesh Dwivedi, learned Senior Counsel, has submitted: i. The right to
privacy exists when there is a reasonable expectation of privacy. However,
this reasonable expectation of privacy differs from one dataset to another
since the Aadhaar Act draws a distinction between demographic information,
optional demographic information (eg. mobile number), core biometric
information (fingerprints and iris scans) and biometric information such as
photographs; ii. Alternatively, the applicability of Article 21 has to be
confined and limited to core biometric information;

iii. Fundamental rights are not absolute and can be restricted if permitted
specifically. Article 21 expressly envisages deprivation by laws which seek to
carry out legitimate objectives and are reasonable and proportionate;

iv. The Aadhaar Act does not cause exclusion because if authentication fails
after multiple attempts, then the subsidies, benefits and services, can be
availed of by proving the possession of an Aadhaar number, either by  52 PART
C producing the Aadhaar card or by producing the receipt of the application
for enrolment and producing the enrolment ID number; v. Section 7 of the
Aadhaar Act protects the right to human dignity recognized by Article 21 of
the Constitution by providing services, benefits and subsidies. The Aadhaar
Act is a welfare scheme in pursuance of the State’s obligation to respect the
fundamental rights to life and personal liberty; to ensure justice (social,
political and economic) and to eliminate inequality (Article 14) with a view
to ameliorate the lot of the poor and the Dalits;

vi. Socio-economic rights must be read into Part III of the Constitution since
civil and political rights cannot be enjoyed without strengthening socio -
economic rights;

vii. A welfare State has a duty to ensure that each citizen has access at
least to the basic necessities of life. The idea of a socialist state under a
mandate to secure justice- social, economic and political - will be completely
illusory if it fails to secure for its citizens the basic necessities in life.
There cannot be any dignity for those who suffer starvation, subjugation,
deprivation and marginalization and those who are compelled to do work which
is intrinsically below human dignity;  53 PART C viii. The Aadhaar number does
not convert individuals to numbers. The Aadhaar number is necessary for
authentication and it is solely used for that purpose. The petitioners have
conflated the concepts of identity and identification. Authentication through
a number is merely a technological requirement which does not alter the
identity of an individual; ix. Even if there is a conflict between the right
to privacy and the right to food and shelter, the Aadhaar Act strikes a fair
balance. The Aadhaar Act ensures human dignity and the right to life and
liberty, hence there would be no reasonable expectation of privacy and
autonomy; x. The requirement to obtain an Aadhaar number under the Aadhaar Act
does not reflect a lack of trust in citizens. Authentication by the State does
not presume that all its citizens are dishonest. The provisions of the Aadhaar
Act are merely regulatory in nature - similar to the process of frisking at
airports or other offices - since there is no effective method to ensure
targeted delivery;

xi. The “least intrusive test” is not applicable in the present case. The
requirement that the least intrusive means of achieving the State object must
be adopted, has been rejected by Indian courts in a catena of decisions as it
involves a value judgment and second guessing the wisdom of the legislature.
Such a test violates the separation of powers between the legislature and the
judiciary;  54 PART C xii. Even assuming that the ‘least intrusive method’
test applies, the exercise of determining the least intrusive method of
identification is a technical exercise and cannot be undertaken in a court of
law; xiii. The Petitioners who have furnished smartcards as an alternative to
the Aadhaar card, have not established that smartcards are less intrusive than
the Aadhaar card authentication process; xiv. The ‘strict scrutiny test’ does
not apply to the Aadhaar Act. That test is conceptualised in the United
States, to be only applied to ‘suspect classifications’;

xv. Section 7 of the Aadhaar Act does not involve any waiver of fundamental
rights;

xvi. There can be no assumption of mala fide against the government or the
legislature. A mere possibility of abuse is not a ground to invalidate the
Aadhaar Act;

xvii. Through Section 57, Parliament intended to make the use of the Aadhaar
number available for other purposes due to the liberalization and
privatization of the economy in areas earlier occupied by the government and
public sector. Many private corporate bodies are operating parallel to and in
competition with the public sector such as in banking, insurance,  55 PART C
defence, and health. These are core sectors absolutely essential for national
integrity, to the national economy and the life of people; xviii. Sections
2(g), and (j) read with Section 54(2)(a) and Section 54(1) do not suffer from
excessive delegation of power to UIDAI and there are sufficient guidelines
coupled with restrictions. The regulation making power of the Authority under
the Act is limited by the use of the expression ‘such other biological
attribute’ which will be interpreted ejusdem generis with the categories of
information mentioned before namely, fingerprints and iris scan. These
categories have certain characteristics: firstly, they do not contain genetic
information; secondly, they are non-intrusive; thirdly, apart from carrying
out authentication they do not reveal any other information of the individual;
fourthly, these are modes of identification used for identifying a person even
without digital technology; fifthly, they are capable of being used for
instantaneous digital authentication; and sixthly, they are biological
attributes enabling digital authentication. The addition of biological
attributes, under Section 54, must mandatorily be laid before the Parliament
under Section 55. This is an additional check on the regulation making power
of UIDAI; xix. Under Section 2(k), which defines demographic information,
certain sensitive categories of information such as ‘race, religion, caste,
tribe, ethnicity, language, records of entitlement, income or medical history’
of  56 PART C the person are excluded. The term ‘other relevant information’
has to be construed ejusdem generis and would have to be necessarily
demographic in nature as contrasted with biometric information; xx. Aadhaar is
necessary, as 3% of India’s GDP amounting to trillions of rupees is allocated
by Governments towards subsidies, scholarships, pensions, education, food and
other welfare programmes. But approximately half of if does not reach the
intended beneficiaries. Aadhaar is necessary for fixing this problem as no
other identification document is widely and commonly possessed by the
residents of the country and most of the other identity documents do not enjoy
the quality of portability;

xxi. The enrolment and authentication processes under the Aadhaar Act are
strongly regulated so that the data is secure; xxii. The security of the CIDR
is also ensured through adequate measures and safeguards;

xxiii. The Aadhaar Act ensures that UIDAI has control over the requesting
entity during the authentication process; xxiv. Enrolment Regulations ensure
that the requirement of informed consent of individuals is fulfilled while
securing the Aadhaar card in the following ways:

57 PART C a. Firstly, the resident is given an opportunity of verifying his or
her information for accuracy before uploading; b. Secondly, the details and
the supporting documents are provided by the resident, or an introducer (in
specific cases); c. Thirdly, the enrolling agency is obliged to inform the
individual about the manner in which the information shall be used, the nature
of recipients with whom the information is to be shared during authentication;
and the existence of a right to access information, the procedure for making
request for such access and details of the person/ department to whom a
request can be made; and d. Fourthly, the uploading of information is done in
the presence of the individual.

xxv. When an individual makes a choice to enter into a relational sphere then
his or her choice as to mode of identification would automatically get
restricted on account of the autonomy of the individuals or institution with
whom they wish to relate. This is more so where the individual seeks
employment, service, subsidy or benefits; xxvi. The Central government has the
power to direct the linking of Aadhaar card, with SIM card, as it is
proportional to the object sought to be achieved in the interest of national
security;  58 PART C xxvii. Regarding the process of authentication and
metadata retained under the Act, it is submitted:

a. The only purpose of the Aadhaar project is authentication and there is no
power under the Act to analyze data;

b. The Aadhaar Act does not involve big data or learning algorithms. It merely
utilizes a matching algorithm for the purpose of authentication; c. Metadata
contemplated is process or technical metadata and does not reveal anything
about the individual. Section 2(d) of the Act defines “authentication record”
to mean the record of the time of authentication, identity of the RE and the
response provided by the Authority”, and the relevant authentication
regulation, Regulation 26, does not go beyond the scope of Section 2(d) of the
Act; d. Moreover, Regulation 26 and Section 32(3) of the Act prohibit the
Authority from collecting or storing any information about the purpose of
authentication; and e. Only limited technical metadata is required to be
stored in an effort to exercise control over REs by way of audits.

xxviii. Regarding the security of the Aadhaar data, it is submitted:

> a. The provisions of the Information Technology Act, 2000 and the punitive
> measures provided there are made applicable to Aadhaar data under Section 30
> of the Aadhaar Act; and  59 PART C b. Anyone attempting to gain unauthorized
> access to the CIDR faces stringent punishment, including imprisonment upto
> 10 years.

xxix. On the control exercised by the Authority over the Requesting Entities
(RE), the following was urged before the Court: a. The standard of control
exercised by the Authority on the Requesting Entities is ‘fair and reasonable’
as laid down under Article 21 of the Constitution;

b. This control includes requirements that the RE’s procure the fingerprint
device from vendors controlled by the Authority, with the Authority also
providing the hardware and software of the device. The device is subject to
quality checks, and must be certified by the Authority before being used by
the RE. The Authority also takes measures to ensure that data is sent to it in
an encrypted form; c. The license is given to the RE from the Authority only
after an audit of the RE is conducted, and the audit report is approved; and
d. The data collected by these REs is segregated and there exists no way of
aggregating this data. During authentication requests, the full identity
information of the individual will never be transmitted back to the REs by the
Authority as there exists a statutory bar from sharing Biometric information
under Sections 29 (1) (a) and 29(4) of the Act.  60 PART C xxx. UIDAI has
entered into licensing agreements with foreign biometric solution providers
(BSP) for software. Even though the source code of the software is retained by
the BSP as it constitutes their intellectual property, the data in the server
rooms is secure as the software operates automatically and the biometric data
is stored offline. There is no opportunity available to the BSP to extract
data as they have no access to it;

xxxi. Prior to the enactment of the Aadhaar Act, the Aadhaar project was
governed by the provisions of the Information Technology Act, 2000. Section
72A of the Information Technology Act, 2000 provides for punishment for
disclosure of information in breach of law or contract; xxxii. The
architecture of the Aadhaar Act does not enable any real possibility,
proximate or remote, of mass surveillance in real time by the State; xxxiii.
The giving of identity information and undergoing authentication has no direct
and inevitable effect on Article 19(1)(a). Alternatively, even if Article
19(1)(a) is attracted, Article 19(2) would protect Section 7 of the Aadhaar
Act as it has a direct and proximate nexus to public order and security of the
State;

xxxiv. In response to the argument that the requirements of Aadhaar number and
authentication for benefits, services and subsidies would be ultra  61 PART C
vires Article 243-G and items 11, 12, 16, 17, 23, 25 and 28 of the XIth
Schedule, it is submitted that the Panchayats get only such powers as are
given to it by the legislature of the State. Article 243-G is merely enabling.
There is no compulsion upon the State to endow the Panchayats with powers
relating to the items specified in the XIth Schedule;

xxxv. On the validity and purpose of Section 57, it is urged:

> a. Section 57 is not an enabling provision. It merely provides, as it
> states, that the provisions of the Act would not prevent the use of Aadhaar
> for other purposes;

> b. However, Section 57 imposes a limitation on any such use for other
> purposes, that the use must be sanctioned by any law in force or any
> contract;

> c. Another limitation is presented by the proviso to Section 57, which says
> that the use of the Aadhaar number shall be subject to the procedure and
> obligations under Section 8 and Chapter VI, which would necessarily also
> subject it to the operation of Chapter VII (dealing with Offences &
> Penalties) of the Act;

> d. Under Section 57, the State, a body corporate or any other person cannot
> become Requesting Entities unless the limitations provided for under Section
> 57 are complied with;

62

PART C e. Section 57 imposes limitations, and the use is backed by
authentication, protection of information and punitive measures; f. The
expressions ‘pursuant to any law or any contract’, and ‘to this effect’-
necessarily entail that where the State makes a law or any body corporate
enters into a contract, the law or contract should be prior in point of time
to the making of any application for becoming a Requesting Entity or a Sub-
Authentication User Agency under Regulation 12 of the Authentication
Regulations; and g. A large number of small service providers simply cannot
become Requesting Entities under Section 57, as they will not meet the
rigorous standard demanded by the eligibility conditions which are prescribed
by the Regulations to become Authentication User Agencies (AUA)/ KYC User
Agencies (KUA). Therefore, this provision does not create a situation whereby
the common man is required to undergo authentication in all activities. xxxvi.
The Aadhaar Act is not exclusionary but inclusionary since it provides all
citizens the bare necessities for a dignified existence; xxxvii. Having the
option to opt-out is not a constitutional requirement. Mr Neeraj Kishan Kaul,
learned Senior Counsel, made the following submissions:

63 PART C i. Aadhaar is a speedy and reliable tool for identification and
authentication and there is no reason to hold it invalid;

ii. Private entities and AUAs/KUAs that have built their businesses around it
should be allowed to use Aadhaar authentication services; iii. Section 57 is
an enabling provision and private players should be given the choice to use
the Aadhaar authentication services as a tool for verification if there is a
consensus between private players’ and their customers;

iv. Aadhaar authentication has benefited women in villages and migrants and
increased the reach of microfinance institutions, thus reducing predatory
financing; and v. A statute cannot be struck down on the ground that there is
scope for misuse.

Mr Jayant Bhushan, learned Senior Counsel appearing for the Reserve Bank of
India urged the following submissions before the Court: i. RBI, in exercise of
its powers under the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 and Rule 9 of the PMLA
Rules, 2005 issued an amended Master Circular on April 20, 2018 which mandates
that Aadhaar has to be submitted to a Reporting Entity. This circular conforms
with the PMLA rules;  64 PART C ii. Rule 9(14) of the PMLA Rules provides that
the Regulator- the RBI in this case, lay down guidelines incorporating the
requirements of sub-rules 9(1)-(13), which would include enhanced or
simplified measures to verify identity; and iii. The requirement of submission
of Aadhaar to the RE is in exercise of this power under Rule 9(14).

Mr Gopal Sankarnarayanan, learned counsel, has submitted: i. The Aadhaar Act
as a whole does not violate the fundamental right to privacy;

ii. The factors that save the Aadhaar Act from failing the proportionality
test are (a) Voluntariness to subject one ’s identity information to obtain
the Aadhaar ; (b) Informed consent when such identity information is utilized;
and (c) A draw on the Consolidated Fund of India; iii. Right to identity is a
fundamental right as a part of the right to dignity, which is being realized
by the Aadhaar Act;

iv. The right to identity is also recognized under India’s international
obligations under instruments such as the UDHR and ICCPR; v. In view of the
large scale enrolments that have already taken place and the expenditure
incurred by the Government out of public funds, it would  65 PART C be in
overarching public interest to give Section 59 full effect. If this were not
done, the only avenue available to the Government would be to undertake the
mammoth enrolment task all over again under a new regime, affording only a
pyrrhic victory to the Petitioners, while there would be substantial revenue
losses to the Government and deprivation of beneficial schemes to those
eligible, in the meanwhile; vi. Certain provisions of the Aadhaar Act have to
be struck down or read down so that the Act as a whole can continue to serve
its essential purpose - namely Sections 47, Section 8(4) and Section 29(2) of
the Act; and vii. Section 139AA of the Income Tax Act, 1961 violates Article
14 and 21 of the Constitution.

Mr Zoheb Hossain, learned Counsel, made the following submissions: i. The
right to privacy cannot be asserted vicariously on behalf of others in a
representative capacity in a Public Interest Litigation, because unlike other
constitutional rights, right to privacy is a personal right. No Section 7
beneficiary has claimed a violation of their right to privacy despite the
pendency of the petitions for 6 years before this Court and therefore, the
Petitioners' challenge, in a representative capacity, to section 7 on the  66
PART C ground of a violation of the right to privacy of third parties is not
maintainable;

ii. There is no increased threat to privacy due to Aadhaar at the level of
requesting entities (RE) for the following reasons: a. REs are already in
possession of personal information of individuals and inclusion of Aadhaar
does not in any manner increase the threat to privacy;

b. Any information disclosed by REs will not be on account of Aadhaar and will
have to be dealt with under domain specific legislations, or a data protection
regime or agreements between the REs and their customers; and c. REs have data
of their own customers and not of other REs’ customers, so there is no
possibility of surveillance. iii. Safeguards against disclosure of information
in the Aadhaar Act are superior to the safeguards laid down in the PUCL
case51. Sections 8, 28 and 29 along with Chapter VII which deals with Offences
and Penalties, provide for protection of information and Section 33 lays down
a strict procedure for disclosure. Even though the Aadhaar Act is not required
to meet the same standard as laid down in PUCL, the safeguards in the Act are
not only adequate with regard to identity information and authentication
records, but far exceed the safeguards laid down PUCL; 51 (2011) 14 SCC 331
67 PART C iv. The petitioners cannot contend that Section 33(2) of the Aadhaar
Act goes against the principles of natural justice and is disproportionate (as
it does not define the term “national security”) for the following reasons: a.
What is in the interest of “national security” is not a question of law but
that of policy lying in the executive domain; and b. Principles of natural
justice cannot be observed strictly in a situation implicating national
security. In such cases, it is the duty of the court to read into and provide
for statutory exclusion. v. The laws, which are under challenge, are a part of
a concerted scheme to promote redistributive justice and ensure substantive
equality, in furtherance of Articles 14, 38, 39B and 39C. These laws ensure a
more transparent and a cleaner system, root out revenue leakages and evasion
of taxes, thereby giving genuine beneficiaries their rightful share in
subsidies;

vi. The object of the Aadhaar Act, contrary to what the petitioners have
argued, is totally unrelated to suppression of freedom of speech and any
incidental effect, if at all, would not implicate the right under Article
19(1)(a);

vii. The petitioners cannot contend that Section 47 of the Aadhaar Act is
arbitrary or unreasonable for the following reasons:  68 PART C a. The
offences and penalties under the Act are intended to maintain the purity of
data of the Aadhaar number holder and the integrity of the CIDR, which are
integral in achieving the object of the Act; b. Enrolment, storage of data in
CIDR, and authentications are so vast and inherently technical that any breach
of the provisions, can be effectively dealt with by the UIDAI;

c. The individual has not been left remediless, as he/she can make a complaint
to the UIDAI directly or through the grievance redressal centre [Regulation 32
of the Aadhaar (Enrolment and Update) Regulations, 2016]. After a complaint
has been made, the UIDAI would be obliged to examine the complaint and
accordingly lodge a complaint in a Court in terms of Section 47 of the Aadhaar
Act; d. Section 56 of the Aadhaar Act makes it clear that application of other
laws, like the IT Act, is not barred.

viii. Aadhaar must be made mandatory under Section 7 of the Aadhaar Act for
the following reasons:

a. Because of the involvement of biometrics, it is almost impossible for one
person to obtain two Aadhaar numbers. This will help in checking the entry of
fake and duplicate beneficiaries into any welfare scheme; b. Other methods
which were employed over the last 70 years to check duplication, siphoning of
money in welfare schemes, large-scale tax evasion, generation of black money,
and appearance and re-  69 PART C appearance of duplicates, have turned out to
be futile. If Aadhaar is made voluntary, the same problems are likely to creep
back into the system; and c. The State is bound to deploy the best technology
available to it to ensure proper allocation of resources as there is a
constitutional mandate upon the State under Article 14 to efficiently utilize
its resources.

ix. There is no conflict between the Aadhaar Act and the Income Tax Act as
they are both stand alone laws and their scope of operation is different; x.
Through the Aadhaar Act, the State is furthering the following obligations
under Part III and Part IV of the Constitution and international obligations:
a. The State has a positive obligation for securing socio-economic rights like
the basic right to food, shelter and livelihood of people arising out of
Article 21, even though it is worded negatively; b. The Supreme Court has
observed that civil & political rights and socio- economic rights in India are
placed on the same pedestal [PUCL]. Aadhaar is a means of achieving the latter
set of rights. The proportionality analysis would therefore require a
balancing of rights in this context;

70 PART C c. Articles 38, 39(b), (c), (e), (f), 41, 43, 47 and 51(c) impose a
constitutional mandate on the State to ensure effective and efficient
utilization of public resources;

d. The State is the trustee of public resources towards people, and inaction
of the State to plug the continuous leakage of public resources and revenues
would violate both, the principle of non- arbitrariness and reasonableness
envisaged by Article 14 as well as the constitutional doctrine of public
trust; and e. The creation of Aadhaar infrastructure and enactment of the
Aadhaar Act is a step towards the government pursuing India’s international
obligations under the ICESCR.

xi. While testing proportionality, reasonableness of a restriction has to be
determined in an objective manner from the standpoint of the interests of the
general public and not from the perspective of an individual right bearer
claiming invasion52; and xii. With regard to the alleged conflict between
Section 29(2) of the Aadhaar Act and Section 4(b)(xii) of the RTI Act, the
former cannot be struck down as unconstitutional for the following reasons: 52
Modern Dental College and Research Centre v State of Madhya Pradesh, (2016) 7
SCC 353.  71 PART D a. A provision can be struck down only if it is in
violation of the Constitution or if the legislature lacks competence, not on
the ground that it is in conflict with another law;

b. In any case, the obligations of public authorities under both these
provisions are different, as the public authority under the RTI Act can
publish the details of beneficiaries from the existing database and the
information received by the UIDAI is not required to be shared or displayed
publicly. However, if any information is displayed publicly, it can be
challenged by an aggrieved person on the ground of privacy which would be
completely unrelated to the present challenge; c. The two laws operate in
their distinct fields and there is no conflict between them; and d. A conflict
between two statutes is required to be reconciled through harmonious
construction. However, since there is no conflict between these two laws,
there is no need for harmonious construction. D Architecture of Aadhaar:
analysis of the legal framework 39 The architecture of the Aadhaar Act
envisages the creation of a unique identity for residents on the basis of
demographic and biometric information. The Act envisages a process of
identification by which the unique identity  72 PART D assigned to each
individual is verified with the demographic and biometric information
pertaining to that individual which is stored in a centralised repository of
data known as the Central Identities Data Repository (CIDR). The former part
of the legislative design is implemented by its regulatory provisions
governing enrolment53 of individuals who would be allotted a unique identity
number. The latter part of the legislative design consists of the process of
‘authentication’.

40 In order to facilitate an understanding of the key aspects of the law,
Section 2 provides a dictionary of meanings. ‘Aadhaar number’ is defined in
Section 2(a) as the identification number issued to the individual under sub-
section (3) of Section 3. The individual to whom an Aadhaar number is issued
is described in Section 2(b) as the ‘Aadhaar number holder’. The expression
‘authentication’ is defined in Section 2(c) thus:

> “(c) “Authentication” means the process by which the Aadhaar number
> alongwith demographic information or biometric information of an individual
> is submitted to the Central Identities Data Repository for its verification
> and such Repository verifies the correctness or lack thereof, on basis of
> information available with it.” Section 2(d) speaks of the ‘authentication
> record’ as the record of the time of authentication, the identity of the
> requesting entity and the response provided by UIDAI. The crucial
> definitions are those of ‘biometric information’, ‘core 53 Section 2(m)
> states: “enrolment” means the process, as may be specified by regulations,
> to collect demographic and biometric information from individuals by the
> enrolling agencies for the purpose of issuing Aadhaar numbers to such
> individuals under this Act.

73

PART D biometric information’, ‘demographic information’ and ‘identity
information’. These are as follows:

> “(g) “biometric information” means photograph, finger print, Iris scan, or
> other such biological attributes of an individual as may be specified by
> regulations;

> ...

> (j) “core biometric information” means finger print, Iris scan, or such
> other biological attribute of an individual as may be specified by
> regulations;

> (k) “demographic information” includes information relating to the name,
> date of birth, address and other relevant information of an individual, as
> may be specified by regulations for the purpose of issuing an Aadhaar
> number, but shall not include race, religion, caste, tribe, ethnicity,
> language, records of entitlement, income or medical history.

> ...

(n) “identity information” in respect of an individual, includes his Aadhaar
number, his biometric information and his demographic information.” The
largest subset of the above definitions consists of ‘identity information’
which is defined in an inclusive sense to comprehend the Aadhaar number,
biometric information and demographic information. Demographic information is
defined as information related to the name, date of birth and address and
other information pertaining to an individual as is specified by the
regulations. Significantly, Section 2(k) excludes, by a mandate, race,
religion, caste, tribe, ethnicity, language, records of entitlement, income or
medical history from the purview of demographic information. Biometric
information consists, under Section 2(g), of the photograph, fingerprint, Iris
scan, or other such biological attributes of an individual as may be specified
by regulations. Core biometric information in Section 2(j) excludes
photographs (which form part of biometric  74 PART D information). Apart from
photographs, other biometric information is comprehended within core biometric
information and may be expanded to include other biological attributes
specified in the regulations to be made under the Act.

41 The identity information of an individual is stored in a central
depository. Section 2(h) defines “Central Identities Data Repository” as a
centralised database in one or more locations containing all Aadhaar numbers
issued to Aadhaar number holders along with the corresponding demographic
information and biometric information of such individuals and other related
information. The CIDR is the backbone of the Aadhaar Act. All the information
collected or created under the Act is stored in it. For the establishment and
maintenance of the CIDR, it has been provided54 under the Act that UIDAI may
engage one or more entities, which can also perform any other functions as may
be specified by regulations. The Act does not prohibit the engagement of
private entities for the establishment and maintenance of the CIDR. 42 Section
3, pertains to the entitlement to obtain an ‘Aadhaar Number’, which forms a
part of Chapter II titled ‘enrolment’. Section 3 comprises of three parts: (i)
an entitlement of every resident to obtain an Aadhaar number;

(ii) a requirement of submitting demographic and biometric information to be
enrolled; and (iii) a process of undergoing enrolment. Section 3 provides
thus: 54 Section 10, Aadhaar Act  75 PART D “Section (3): Aadhaar Number.-

(1) Every resident shall be entitled to obtain an Aadhaar number by submitting
his demographic information and biometric information by undergoing the
process of enrolment:

Provided that the Central Government may, from time to time, notify such other
category of individuals who may be entitled to obtain an Aadhaar number. (2)
The enrolling agency shall, at the time of enrolment, inform the individual
undergoing enrolment of the following details in such manner as maybe
specified by regulations, namely:-

(a) The manner in which the information shall be used;

(b) The nature of recipients with whom the information is intended to be
shared during authentication; and

(c) The existence of a right to access information, the procedure for making
requests for such access and details of the person or department in-charge to
whom such requests can be made.

(3) On receipt of the demographic information and biometric information under
sub-section (1), the Authority shall, after verifying the information, in such
manner as may be specified by regulations, issue an Aadhaar number to such
individual.” Significantly, sub-section (1) of Section 3 recognises an
entitlement, of every resident55 to obtain an Aadhaar number. An entitlement
postulates a right. A right contemplates a liberty, for it is in the exercise
of the liberty that the individual asserts a right. What is a matter of an
entitlement is evidently a matter of option and not a compulsion. That
constitutes the fundamental postulate of Section 3. However, the entitlement
to obtain the Aadhaar 55 Section 2(v) states: “resident” means an individual
who has resided in India for a period or periods amounting in all to one
hundred and eighty-two days or more in the twelve months immediately preceding
the date of application for enrolment  76 PART D number is conditioned by the
requirement of submitting demographic and biometric information and
participating in the process of enrolment. 43 The collection of demographic
and biometric information is carried out by an enrolling agency. “Enrolling
agency” has been defined under Section 2(l) of the Act as an agency, appointed
by UIDAI or a Registrar56, for collecting demographic and biometric
information of individuals under the Act. The enrolling agency need not be an
entity of the state. The definition opens the space for engagement of private
entities in the collection of individual information for the process of
enrolment. The enrolling agencies have to set up enrolment centers and they
have to function in accordance with the procedure specified by UIDAI.57 Sub-
section (2) of Section 3 requires the enrolling agency to disclose to the
individual, who is undergoing enrolment, three important facets. The first is
the manner in which the information which is disclosed by the individual would
be used. The second relates to the nature of the recipients with whom the
information is likely to be shared during the course of authentication. The
third is founded upon the individual’s right of access to the information
disclosed. All these three facets are crucial to the legislative design
because they try to place individual autonomy at the forefront of the process.
An individual who discloses biometric and demographic information has a
statutory entitlement to fully understand how the information which is
disclosed is going to be used and with whom the 56 Section 2(s) states:
“Registrar” means any entity authorised or recognised by the Authority for the
purpose of enrolling individuals under this Act 57 Regulation 7, Aadhaar
(Enrolment and Update) Regulations, 2016  77 PART D information is likely to
be shared during authentication.58 Access of the information supplied to the
individual, it has been argued, is an integral feature of the design created
by the statute. These three facets are conditions precedent to the disclosure
of information by the individual. Before the individual does so, he or she
must have a full disclosure which would enable them to form an informed
decision on the exercise of the choice which underlies an entitlement to an
Aadhaar number. The entitlement which is recognised by sub-section (1) is
enforced by the mandatory requirements of sub-section (2). Before an Aadhaar
number is issued, sub-section (3) requires the authority to verify the
information disclosed, in the manner prescribed by regulations. The Act leaves
it to regulations to specify how verification will be carried out.

44 Sections 4, 5 and 6 indicate the characteristics which are attributed to
Aadhaar numbers, legislative recognition of the steps necessary to ensure
financial inclusion and the requirement of periodical updation of information.
Under Section 4, three important features attach to the possession of an
Aadhaar number. The first is that the number is unique to one individual and
to that individual alone. Once assigned, the Aadhaar number cannot be
reassigned to any other individual. The second feature is that an Aadhaar
number is random and bears no relation to the attributes or identity of its
holder. The third feature of Section 4 is that once assigned, an Aadhaar
number can be accepted as proof of identify of its holder “for any purpose”.
58 Section 3(2), Aadhaar Act.

78 PART D Under Section 5, UIDAI is under a mandate to adopt special measures
to issue Aadhaar numbers to women, children, senior citizens, the differently
abled, unskilled and unorganised workers, nomadic tribes, persons who do not
have permanent places of abode and to other categories which may be defined by
the regulations. Section 6 contains an enabling provision by which the
authority may require holders to update their demographic and biometric
information periodically, as specified under regulations. An Aadhaar number
also does not, by itself, constitute a conferment of a right of citizenship,
or domicile (Section 9).

45 Chapter III provides for Authentication. By virtue of Section 7, an
enabling provision has been made by which the Union or state governments may
require proof of an Aadhaar number for receiving subsidies, benefits and
services for which the expenditure is incurred from (or the receipts form part
of) the Consolidated Fund of India. Section 7 is in the following terms:

> “7. Proof of Aadhaar number necessary for receipt of certain subsidies,
> benefits and services, etc.- The Central Government or, as the case may be,
> the State Government may, for the purpose of establishing identity of an
> individual as a condition for receipt of a subsidy, benefit or service for
> which the expenditure is incurred from, or the receipt therefrom forms part
> of, the Consolidated Fund of India, require that such individual undergo
> authentication, or furnish proof of possession of Aadhaar number or in the
> case of an individual to whom no Aadhaar number has been assigned, such
> individual makes an application for enrolment:

Provided that if an Aadhaar number is not assigned to an individual, the
individual shall be offered alternate and viable means of identification for
delivery of the subsidy, benefit or service.”  79 PART D Section 3 (as
explained earlier) postulates an entitlement to an Aadhaar number. An
entitlement envisages a right which may (or may not) be exercised by the
resident. An entitlement is, after all, an option. Section 7, however,
contemplates a requirement. It covers subsidies, benefits or services that are
charged to the Consolidated Fund of India; the connect being either in regard
to the source of expenditure or the receipts. The statutory definitions of the
expressions ‘benefit’, ‘service’ and ‘subsidy’ are contained in clauses
(f),(w) and (x) of Section 2 which provide as follows:

> “(f) “benefit” means any advantage, gift, reward, relief, or payment, in
> cash or kind, provided to an individual or a group of individuals and
> includes such other benefits as may be notified by the Central Government;”
> (w) “service” means any provision, facility, utility or any other assistance
> provided in any form to an individual or a group of individuals and includes
> such other services as may be notified by the Central Government;

(x) “subsidy” means any form of aid, support, grant, subvention, or
appropriation, in cash or kind, to an individual or a group of individuals and
includes such other subsidies as may be notified by the Central Government.”
46 Section 7 encapsulates a purpose, a condition and a requirement. The
purpose incorporated in the provision is to establish the identity of an
individual. The condition which it embodies is for the receipt of a subsidy,
benefit or service for which the expenditure is incurred or the receipts form
part of the Consolidated Fund of India. Where the purpose and condition are
fulfilled, the central or state governments may require that the individual
should (i) undergo authentication; or (ii) furnish proof of possession of an
Aadhaar number; or (iii) provide proof of an application for enrolment where
80 PART D the Aadhaar number has not been assigned. Three alternatives are
stipulated in Section 7. Where the purpose and condition (noted above) are
fulfilled, the individual has to undergo authentication. Alternately, the
individual has to furnish proof that he or she possesses an Aadhaar number.
However, if an Aadhaar number has not been assigned to the individual, he or
she would have to make an application for enrolment. In a situation where no
Aadhaar number has been assigned as yet, the proviso stipulates that alternate
and viable means of identification would be provided to the individual for the
delivery of subsidies, benefits or services. Section 7 indicates that while
the central or state governments can mandate that an individual must undergo
authentication as a condition for the receipt of a subsidy, benefit or
service, a failure of authentication cannot be held out as a ground to deny
benefits, subsidies or services. That is for the reason that in the absence of
authentication, possession of an Aadhaar number would suffice. Moreover, even
if an individual does not possess an Aadhaar number, the mandate of Section 7
would be subserved by producing an application for enrolment. Section 3 which
speaks of an entitlement to obtain an Aadhaar number stands in contrast to
Section 7 under which an Aadhaar number may be required as a condition for the
receipt of a subsidy, benefit or service. As an entitlement, Section 3 makes
the possession of an Aadhaar number optional. Section 7 is an enabling power
by which the central or state governments may make the requirement of an
Aadhaar number compulsive or mandatory where a person  81 PART D desires a
subsidy, benefit or service for which expenditure is incurred from or the
receipt of which forms part of the Consolidated Fund of India. Section 7 acts
as an overriding provision over Section 3. 47 The manner in which an
authentication is carried out is elaborated upon by Section 8. Section 8 is in
the following terms:

> “Authentication of Aadhaar number.-

> (1) The Authority shall perform authentication of the Aadhaar number of an
> Aadhaar number holder submitted by any requesting entity, in relation to his
> biometric information or demographic information, subject to such conditions
> and on payment of such fees and in such manner as may be specified by
> regulations.
    
    
                 (2)     A requesting entity shall –
                       (a)        unless otherwise provided in this Act, obtain
    

> the consent of an individual before collecting his identity information for
> the purposes of authentication in such manner as may be specified by
> regulations; and

> (b) ensure that the identity information of an individual is only used for
> submission to the Central Identities Data Repository for authentication.

> (3) A requesting entity shall inform, in such manner as may be specified by
> regulations, the individual submitting his identify information for
> authentication, the following details with respect to authentication,
> namely:-

> (a) the nature of information that may be shared upon authentication;

> (b) the uses to which the information received during authentication may be
> put by the requesting entity; and

> (c) alternatives to submission of identity information to the requesting
> entity.

> (4) The Authority shall respond to an authentication query with a positive,
> negative or any other appropriate response sharing such identity information
> excluding any core biometric information.” As we have noticed earlier,
> authentication involves a process in which the Aadhaar number, together with
> the demographic or biometric information, is  82 PART D submitted to the
> CIDR for verification and is verified to be correct or otherwise by the
> repository on the basis of the information available with it. Under sub-

section (1) of Section 8 authentication has to be performed on a request
submitted by a requesting entity. The expression ‘requesting entity’ is
defined in Section 2(u) as follows:

> “(u) “requesting entity” means an agency or person that submits the Aadhaar
> number, and demographic information or biometric information, of an
> individual to the Central Identities Data Repository for authentication.”
> This definition also does not prohibit the engagement of private agencies
> for the process of authentication. Under sub-section (2) of Section 8, every
> requesting entity is bound to obtain the consent of the individual before
> collecting his or her identity information for the purpose of
> authentication.

Moreover, the requesting entity must ensure that the identity information is
submitted only for the purpose of authentication to the CIDR. Before the
requesting entity submits the identity information for authentication, it is
under a mandate of law to disclose (i) the nature of the information that may
be shared upon authentication; (ii) the use to which information received
during authentication may be put; and (iii) alternatives to the submission of
identity information.59 During the course of authentication, UIDAI is required
to respond to an authentication query with a positive, negative or appropriate
response sharing such identity information excluding core biometric
information.60 Core biometric information cannot be shared. The modes of 59
Section 8(3), Aadhaar Act 60 Section 8(4), Aadhaar Act  83 PART D
authentication are as mentioned in Regulation 4 of the Aadhaar
(Authentication) Regulations 2016. It can be based on (i) demographic
information; (ii) a one-time password with limited time validity; (iii)
biometrics or (iv) multi-factor authentication (a combination of two or more
of the above). The Requesting Agency chooses the mode according to its
requirement. 48 UIDAI is the umbrella entity under the Aadhaar Act. The
statutory backing to the authority of UIDAI to undertake the responsibility
for the processes of enrolment and authentication and maintenance of CIDR has
been provided under Chapter IV of the Act. Section 11 provides that the
Central Government shall, by notification, establish UIDAI, a body corporate
61, to be responsible for the processes of enrolment and authentication and
perform such other functions as are assigned to it under the Act. The
composition of UIDAI has been provided under Section 12: a Chairperson
(appointed on part-time or full-time basis); two part-time Members, and the
chief executive officer who shall be the Member- Secretary, to be appointed by
the Central Government. Section 23 enunciates the powers and functions of the
UIDAI. Sub-section (1) of Section 23 requires UIDAI to develop the policy,
procedure and systems for issuing Aadhaar numbers to individuals and to
perform authentication. Section 23(2) provides an inclusive list of the powers
and functions of UIDAI:

“(2) Without prejudice to sub-section (1), the powers and functions of the
Authority, inter alia, include— 61 Section 11(2), Aadhaar Act  84 PART D

(a) specifying, by regulations, demographic information and biometric
information required for enrolment and the processes for collection and
verification thereof;

(b) collecting demographic information and biometric information from any
individual seeking an Aadhaar number in such manner as may be specified by
regulations;

(c) appointing of one or more entities to operate the Central Identities Data
Repository;

(d) generating and assigning Aadhaar numbers to individuals;

(e) performing authentication of Aadhaar numbers;

(f) maintaining and updating the information of individuals in the Central
Identities Data Repository in such manner as may be specified by regulations;

(g) omitting and deactivating of an Aadhaar number and information relating
thereto in such manner as may be specified by regulations;

(h) specifying the manner of use of Aadhaar numbers for the purposes of
providing or availing of various subsidies, benefits, services and other
purposes for which Aadhaar numbers may be used;

(i) specifying, by regulations, the terms and conditions for appointment of
Registrars, enrolling agencies and service providers and revocation of
appointments thereof;

(j) establishing, operating and maintaining of the Central Identities Data
Repository;

(k) sharing, in such manner as may be specified by regulations, the
information of Aadhaar number holders, subject to the provisions of this Act;

(l) calling for information and records, conducting inspections, inquiries and
audit of the operations for the purposes of this Act of the Central Identities
Data Repository, Registrars, enrolling agencies and other agencies appointed
under this Act;

(m) specifying, by regulations, various processes relating to data management,
security protocols and other technology safeguards under this Act;

(n) specifying, by regulations, the conditions and procedures for issuance of
new Aadhaar number to existing Aadhaar number holder;

(o) levying and collecting the fees or authorising the Registrars, enrolling
agencies or other service providers to  85 PART D collect such fees for the
services provided by them under this Act in such manner as may be specified by
regulations;

(p) appointing such committees as may be necessary to assist the Authority in
discharge of its functions for the purposes of this Act;

(q) promoting research and development for advancement in biometrics and
related areas, including usage of Aadhaar numbers through appropriate
mechanisms;

(r) evolving of, and specifying, by regulations, policies and practices for
Registrars, enrolling agencies and other service providers;

(s) setting up facilitation centres and grievance redressal mechanism for
redressal of grievances of individuals, Registrars, enrolling agencies and
other service providers;

(t) such other powers and functions as may be prescribed.” Under Section 54,
UIDAI is empowered to make regulations and rules consistent with the Act, for
carrying out the provisions of the Act. Sub-section (2) of Section 54 provides
that UIDAI may make regulations covering any of the following matters:

> “(a) the biometric information under clause (g) and the demographic
> information under clause (k), and the process of collecting demographic
> information and biometric information from the individuals by enrolling
> agencies under clause (m) of section 2;

> (b) the manner of verifying the demographic information and biometric
> information for issue of Aadhaar number under sub- section (3) of section 3;

> (c) the conditions for accepting an Aadhaar number as proof of identity of
> the Aadhaar number holder under sub-section (3) of section 4;

> (d) the other categories of individuals under section 5 for whom the
> Authority shall take special measures for allotment of Aadhaar number;

> (e) the manner of updating biometric information and demographic information
> under section 6;

> (f) the procedure for authentication of the Aadhaar number under section 8;

86

PART D

(g) the other functions to be performed by the Central Identities Data
Repository under section 10;

(h) the time and places of meetings of the Authority and the procedure for
transaction of business to be followed by it, including the quorum, under sub-
section (1) of section 19;

(i) the salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of
service of, the chief executive officer, officers and other employees of the
Authority under sub-section (2) of section 21;

(j) the demographic information and biometric information under clause (a) and
the manner of their collection under clause (b) of sub-section (2) of section
23;

(k) the manner of maintaining and updating the information of individuals in
the Central Identities Data Repository under clause (f) of sub-section (2) of
section 23;

(l) the manner of omitting and deactivating an Aadhaar number and information
relating thereto under clause (g) of sub-section (2) of section 23;

(m) the manner of use of Aadhaar numbers for the purposes of providing or
availing of various subsidies, benefits, services and other purposes for which
Aadhaar numbers may be used under clause (h) of sub-section (2) of section 23;

(n) the terms and conditions for appointment of Registrars, enrolling agencies
and other service providers and the revocation of appointments thereof under
clause (i) of sub- section (2) of section 23;

(o) the manner of sharing information of Aadhaar number holder under clause
(k) of sub-section (2) of section 23;

(p) various processes relating to data management, security protocol and other
technology safeguards under clause (m) of sub-section (2) of section 23;

(q) the procedure for issuance of new Aadhaar number to existing Aadhaar
number holder under clause (n) of sub- section (2) of section 23;

(r) manner of authorising Registrars, enrolling agencies or other service
providers to collect such fees for services provided by them under clause (o)
of sub-section (2) of section 23;

(s) policies and practices to be followed by the Registrar, enrolling agencies
and other service providers under clause

(r) of sub-section (2) of section 23;

87 PART D

(t) the manner of accessing the identity information by the Aadhaar number
holder under the proviso to sub-section (5) of section 28;

(u) the manner of sharing the identity information, other than core biometric
information, collected or created under this Act under sub-section (2) of
section 29;

(v) the manner of alteration of demographic information under sub-section (1)
and biometric information under sub-section (2) of section 31;

(w) the manner of and the time for maintaining the request for authentication
and the response thereon under sub-section (1), and the manner of obtaining,
by the Aadhaar number holder, the authentication records under sub-section (2)
of section 32;

(x) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, specified, or in
respect of which provision is to be or may be made by regulations.” Section
11(1), read with Sections 23(2) and 54(2), indicates that UIDAI is the sole
authority vested with the power and responsibility of carrying out numerous
functions. These functions include:

(i) collection of demographic information and biometric information from
individuals;

(ii) generating and assigning Aadhaar numbers to individuals;

(iii) performing authentication of Aadhaar numbers;

(iv) maintaining and updating the information of individuals in the CIDR;

(v) omitting and deactivating of an Aadhaar number;

(vi) specifying the manner of use of Aadhaar numbers for the purposes of
providing or availing of various subsidies, benefits, services and other
purposes;

88 PART D

(vii) specifying the terms and conditions for appointment of Registrars,
enrolling agencies and service providers and revocation of appointments;

(viii) specifying various processes relating to data management, security
protocols and other technological safeguards under the Act;

(ix) setting up facilitation centres and mechanisms for the redressal of the
grievances of individuals, Registrars, enrolling agencies and other service
providers; and

(x) other functions prescribed by the Central government. The Act does not set
any limits within which the sole authority of UIDAI may operate. UIDAI has
been conferred with discretionary powers as provided in the above provisions.
The architecture of Aadhaar keeps UIDAI at the centre of all processes.

49 For the purpose of performing the functions of collecting, storing,
securing, processing of information, delivery of Aadhaar numbers to
individuals or performing authentication, clause (a) of Section 23(3)
contemplates that UIDAI may enter into Memoranda of Understanding or
agreements with the central or state governments, Union territories or other
agencies. In discharging its functions, UIDAI may appoint, by notification, a
number of Registrars, engage and authorise such agencies to collect, store,
secure and process information or perform authentication or such other
functions in relation to it, as may be necessary for the purposes of the Act
89 PART D (Section 23 (3) (b)). For the efficient discharge of its functions,
UIDAI may also engage consultants, advisors and other persons as may be
required (Section 23(4)). These, like many other provisions, open the scope
for the involvement of private entities in the Aadhaar project. This is also
evident from Section 57 of the Act, which allows the use of the Aadhaar
number, by the state, corporate entities or persons to establish the identity
of an individual:

> “57. Act not to prevent use of Aadhaar number for other purposes under law.-

> Nothing contained in this Act shall prevent the use of Aadhaar number for
> establishing the identity of an individual for any purpose, whether by the
> State or any body corporate or person, pursuant to any law, for the time
> being in force, or any contract to this effect:

Provided that the use of Aadhaar number under this section shall be subject to
the procedure and obligations under section 8 and Chapter VI.” 50 The
responsibility to ensure the security of identity information and
authentication records of individuals has been placed on UIDAI. 62 UIDAI is
also required to ensure confidentiality of identity information and
authentication records of individuals,63 except in circumstances, where
disclosure of information is permitted by the Act.64 Section 28(3) requires
UIDAI to take all necessary measures to ensure that the information in its
possession or control, including information stored in the CIDR, is secured
and protected against access, use or disclosure not permitted under the Act or
regulations, and against accidental or intentional destruction, loss or
damage. For the purpose 62 Section 28(1), Aadhaar Act 63 Section 28(2),
Aadhaar Act 64 Section 33, Aadhaar Act  90 PART D of maintaining the security
and confidentiality of the information of individuals, UIDAI is also required,
under Section 28(4), to:

> “(a) adopt and implement appropriate technical and organisational security
> measures;

(b) ensure that the agencies, consultants, advisors or other persons appointed
or engaged for performing any function of the Authority under this Act, have
in place appropriate technical and organisational security measures for the
information; and

(c) ensure that the agreements or arrangements entered into with such
agencies, consultants, advisors or other persons, impose obligations
equivalent to those imposed on the Authority under this Act, and require such
agencies, consultants, advisors and other persons to act only on instructions
from the Authority.” Except where it has otherwise been provided in the
Aadhaar Act, a burden is placed (under Section 28(5)) upon UIDAI, its
officers, other employees (whether during service or thereafter), and any
agency that maintains the CIDR not to reveal any information stored or the
authentication record to anyone. An Aadhaar number holder, however, may
request UIDAI to provide access to identity information excluding core
biometric information in the manner as may be specified by regulations
(proviso to Section 28(5)). Section 29 puts restrictions on sharing of
information, collected or created under the Act. Sub-section (1) of Section 29
provides that:

> “(1) No core biometric information, collected or created under this Act,
> shall be—

> (a) shared with anyone for any reason whatsoever; or

> (b) used for any purpose other than generation of Aadhaar numbers and
> authentication under this Act.”  91 PART D Sub-section (2) contemplates that
> the identity information, other than core biometric information, collected
> or created under the Act may be shared only in accordance with the
> provisions of the Act and in the manner as may be specified by regulations.

A burden is placed, under Section 29(3), upon a requesting entity to ensure
that any identity information available with it, is neither used for any
purpose, other than that specified to the individual at the time of submitting
identity information for authentication; nor disclosed further, except with
the prior consent of the individual to whom such information relates. Sub-
section (4) prohibits publishing, display or posting publicly of any Aadhaar
number or core biometric information collected or created under the Act in
respect of an Aadhaar number holder, except for such purposes as may be
specified by the regulations. Section 30 contemplates that the biometric
information collected and stored in an electronic form is to be deemed
“sensitive personal data or information”. The provision specifically relates
to biometric information. The provision dilutes the protection that should be
given to demographic information. Further, a statutory duty has been placed
upon UIDAI to maintain authentication records in the manner and for a time
period prescribed by regulations.65 The issue of maintenance of authentication
records by UIDAI has been contentious and is dealt in a subsequent section
titled “Proportionality”. A statutory right is provided to every Aadhaar
number 65 Section 32(1), Aadhaar Act  92 PART D holder to obtain his
authentication record in the manner specified by regulations.66 Section 32(3)
prohibits UIDAI (either by itself or through any entity under its control) to
collect, keep or maintain any information about the purpose of authentication.

51 The Aadhaar Act allows disclosure of individual information in limited
circumstances. The manner and purpose for which information of individuals,
including identity information or authentication records, can be disclosed has
been provided under Section 33 of the Act. Section 33 states:

> “(1) Nothing contained in sub-section (2) or sub-section (5) of section 28
> or sub-section (2) of section 29 shall apply in respect of any disclosure of
> information, including identity information or authentication records, made
> pursuant to an order of a court not inferior to that of a District Judge:

> Provided that no order by the court under this sub-section shall be made
> without giving an opportunity of hearing to the Authority.

> (2) Nothing contained in sub-section (2) or sub-section (5) of section 28
> and clause (b) of sub-section (1), sub-section (2) or sub-section (3) of
> section 29 shall apply in respect of any disclosure of information,
> including identity information or authentication records, made in the
> interest of national security in pursuance of a direction of an officer not
> below the rank of Joint Secretary to the Government of India specially
> authorised in this behalf by an order of the Central Government:

> Provided that every direction issued under this sub-section, shall be
> reviewed by an Oversight Committee consisting of the Cabinet Secretary and
> the Secretaries to the Government of India in the Department of Legal
> Affairs and the Department of Electronics and Information Technology, before
> it takes effect:

> Provided further that any direction issued under this sub-

section shall be valid for a period of three months from the 66 Section 32(2),
Aadhaar Act  93 PART D date of its issue, which may be extended for a further
period of three months after the review by the Oversight Committee.” The
Aadhaar Act provides two categories: a “court order” and “in the interest of
national security”, where the personal information of an individual can be
disclosed.

Under Section 31, in case any demographic information or biometric information
of an Aadhaar number holder is found to be incorrect, is lost or changes
subsequently, the Aadhaar number holder is required to request UIDAI to make
an alteration in his or her record in the CIDR in the manner specified by
regulations. On receipt of a request for alteration of demographic or
biometric information, UIDAI is vested with the power, subject to its
satisfaction, to make alterations as required in the record relating to the
Aadhaar number holder and to intimate the alteration to the holder. Sub-
section (4) of Section 31 prohibits alteration of any identity information in
the CIDR except in the manner provided in the Act or regulations made in this
behalf.

52 Chapter VII provides offences and penalties. Under Section 34, a penalty
has been provided for impersonation at the time of enrolment. Section 35
creates a penalty for impersonation of the Aadhaar number holder by changing
demographic or biometric information. Section 37 provides a penalty  94 PART D
for disclosing identity information (which was collected in the course of
enrolment or authentication).

Under Section 38, a penalty for unauthorised access to the CIDR has been
provided. Section 38 provides thus:

> “Whoever, not being authorised by the Authority, intentionally,—

> (a) accesses or secures access to the Central Identities Data Repository;

> (b) downloads, copies or extracts any data from the Central Identities Data
> Repository or stored in any removable storage medium;

> (c) introduces or causes to be introduced any virus or other computer
> contaminant in the Central Identities Data Repository;

> (d) damages or causes to be damaged the data in the Central Identities Data
> Repository;

> (e) disrupts or causes disruption of the access to the Central Identities
> Data Repository;

> (f) denies or causes a denial of access to any person who is authorised to
> access the Central Identities Data Repository;

> (g) reveals any information in contravention of sub-section (5) of section
> 28, or shares, uses or displays information in contravention of section 29
> or assists any person in any of the aforementioned acts;

(h) destroys, deletes or alters any information stored in any removable
storage media or in the Central Identities Data Repository or diminishes its
value or utility or affects it injuriously by any means; or

(i) steals, conceals, destroys or alters or causes any person to steal,
conceal, destroy or alter any computer source code used by the Authority with
an intention to cause damage, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term
which may extend to three years and shall also be liable to a fine which shall
not be less than ten lakh rupees.”  95 PART D Section 39 imposes a penalty for
tampering with data in the CIDR. Sections 40 and 41 impose penalties on
requesting and enrolment agencies in case they act in contravention of the
obligations imposed upon them under the Act. Section 42 provides for a general
penalty for an offence under the Act or the rules or regulations made
thereunder, for which no specific penalty is provided under the Act. Under
Section 43, when an offence has been committed by a company, every person who
at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsible to
the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the
company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be
proceeded against and punished accordingly. Section 44 indicates that the
provisions of the Act would apply to any offence or contravention committed
outside India by any person, irrespective of nationality. The power to
investigate offences under the Act has been placed, under Section 45, on a
police officer not below the rank of Inspector of Police. Section 47(1) of the
Act puts a bar on the courts from taking cognizance of any offence punishable
under the Act, except when a complaint is made by UIDAI or any officer or
person authorised by it. The provision indicates that the scope of cognizance
is limited. It does not allow an individual who finds that there is any
violation under the Act, to initiate criminal proceedings. The scope of
grievance redressal under the Act is restrictive and works only on the action
of UIDAI or a person authorised by it. UIDAI has set up a grievance redressal
mechanism as contemplated by Section 23(2)(s) of the Aadhaar Act. There is  96
PART D no grievance redressal mechanism if any breach or offence is committed
by UIDAI itself. The right of an individual to seek remedy under the Act if
his/her rights are violated will be discussed subsequently. Under sub-Section
(2), no court inferior to that of a Chief Metropolitan Magistrate or a Chief
Judicial Magistrate can try any offence punishable under the Act. Section 48
empowers the Central Government to supersede UIDAI, in certain situations.
Under Section 50, UIDAI, in exercise of its powers or performance of its
functions under the Act, shall be bound by the written directions on questions
of policy of the Central Government. Section 51 vests power in UIDAI to
delegate to any member, officer or any other person, its powers and functions
under the Act (except the power under section 54) as it may deem necessary.
Section 51 grants a wide discretion to the UIDAI to delegate any of its powers
and functions.

Section 55 requires every rule and regulation made under the Aadhaar Act to be
laid down before each House of Parliament. The Section states:

“55. Laying of rules and regulations before Parliament.-

Every rule and every regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in
session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one
session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of
the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
regulation, or both the Houses agree that the rule or regulation should not be
made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that  97
PART E any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the
validity of anything previously done under that rule or regulation.” UIDAI
needs to place the regulations framed by it before Parliament. 53 The
architecture of Aadhaar is integral to the exercise of analyzing the
reasonableness of the entire project. Whether the architecture addresses the
concerns raised by the petitioners is an essential component of this exercise.
The architecture of Aadhaar must pass the constitutional requirements of
reasonableness and proportionality. This aspect will be dealt under the
heading of “proportionality” in a subsequent part of this judgment.

    
    
    E     Passage of Aadhaar Act as a Money Bill
    
    
    54    The petitioners challenge the constitutionality of the Aadhaar Act,
    
    

contending that it could not have been passed as a Money Bill. According to
the submission, the Aadhaar Act did not qualify as a Money Bill under Article
110 of the Constitution, and it legislates on matters which fall outside that
provision. The Attorney General for India submitted that the Constitution
accords finality to the decision of the Speaker as to whether a Bill is a
Money Bill and hence the question whether the Aadhaar Act fulfils the
requirements of being categorized as Money Bill is not open to judicial
review. The Attorney General also urged that the Aadhaar Act does fall under
Article 110. Article 110 provides thus:

98 PART E “(1) For the purposes of this Chapter, a Bill shall be deemed to be
a Money Bill if it contains only provisions dealing with all or any of the
following matters, namely:—

(a) the imposition, abolition, remission, alteration or regulation of any tax;

(b) the regulation of the borrowing of money or the giving of any guarantee by
the Government of India, or the amendment of the law with respect to any
financial obligations undertaken or to be undertaken by the Government of
India;

(c) the custody of the Consolidated Fund or the Contingency Fund of India, the
payment of moneys into or the withdrawal of moneys from any such Fund;

(d) the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of India;

(e) the declaring of any expenditure to be expenditure charged on the
Consolidated Fund of India or the increasing of the amount of any such
expenditure;

(f) the receipt of money on account of the Consolidated Fund of India or the
public account of India or the custody or issue of such money or the audit of
the accounts of the Union or of a State; or

(g) any matter incidental to any of the matters specified in sub-clauses (a)
to (f).

(2) A Bill shall not be deemed to be a Money Bill by reason only that it
provides for the imposition of fines or other pecuniary penalties, or for the
demand or payment of fees for licences or fees for services rendered, or by
reason that it provides for the imposition, abolition, remission, alteration
or regulation of any tax by any local authority or body for local purposes.

(3) If any question arises whether a Bill is a Money Bill or not, the decision
of the Speaker of the House of the People thereon shall be final.

(4) There shall be endorsed on every Money Bill when it is transmitted to the
Council of States under article 109, and when it is presented to the President
for assent under article 111, the certificate of the Speaker of the House of
the People signed by him that it is a Money Bill.” 55 The key questions before
this Court are:

(i) Whether under Article 110(3), the decision of the Speaker of the Lok
Sabha, that a Bill is a Money Bill, is immune from judicial review;  99 PART E

(ii) If the answer to (i) is in the negative, whether the Aadhaar Act is a
Money Bill under Article 110(1) of the Constitution; and

(iii) If the Bill to enact the Aadhaar Act was not a Money Bill, whether a
declaration of unconstitutionality will result from its legislative passage as
a Money Bill in the Lok Sabha.

E.I Judicial Review of the Speaker’s Decision 56 Article 109 provides for a
special procedure in respect of Money Bills. It provides that a Money Bill
shall not be introduced in the Council of States, the Rajya Sabha. After a
Money Bill is introduced in the Lok Sabha and passed by it, the Bill has to be
transmitted to the Rajya Sabha for its recommendations. Article 110(4)
provides that when a ‘Money Bill’ is transmitted from the Lower House to the
Upper House, it must be endorsed with a certificate by the Speaker of the
Lower House that it is a Money Bill. From the date of the receipt of the Money
Bill, the Rajya Sabha is bound to return the Bill to the Lok Sabha, within a
period of fourteen days, with its recommendations. The Lok Sabha has the
discretion to “either accept or reject all or any of the recommendations” made
by the Rajya Sabha.67 If the Lok Sabha accepts any of the recommendations of
the Rajya Sabha, the Money Bill is deemed to have been passed by both Houses
of the Parliament “with the amendments recommended” by the Rajya Sabha and
accepted by the Lok Sabha.68 67 Article 109(2), The Constitution of India 68
Article 109(3), The Constitution of India  100 PART E However, when the Lok
Sabha “does not accept any of the recommendations” of the Rajya Sabha, the
Money Bill is said to have been passed by both Houses in the form in which it
was originally passed by the Lok Sabha.69 If a Money Bill after being passed
by the Lok Sabha and transmitted to the Rajya Sabha for its recommendations is
not returned to the Lok Sabha within a period of fourteen days, it is then
deemed to have been passed by both the Houses of the Parliament in the form in
which it was originally passed by the Lok Sabha.70 When a Money Bill has been
passed by the Houses of the Parliament, Article 111 requires it to be
presented to the President along with the Lok Sabha Speaker’s certificate for
assent71. Article 117(1) also provides that a Bill “making provision for any
of the matters specified in sub-clauses (a) to (f) of clause (1) of article
110” shall also not be introduced in the Rajya Sabha.

57 The Constitution contains corresponding provisions for Money Bills
introduced in and passed by a state legislative assembly. Article 198 provides
a special procedure for Money Bills in the state legislative assembly. Article
199(3) provides for the finality of the decision of the Speaker of the
Legislative Assembly. Under Article 200, when a Money Bill has been passed by
the State Legislature, it is to be presented to the Governor, along with the
Speaker’s certificate, for assent.72 69 Article 109(4), The Constitution of
India 70 Article 109(5), The Constitution of India 71 Article 110(4), The
Constitution of India 72 Article 199(4), The Constitution of India  101 PART E
Article 107 contains provisions for the introduction and passing of Bills in
general and provides thus:

> “(1) Subject to the provisions of articles 109 and 117 with respect to Money
> Bills and other financial Bills, a Bill may originate in either House of
> Parliament. (2) Subject to the provisions of articles 108 and 109, a Bill
> shall not be deemed to have been passed by the Houses of Parliament unless
> it has been agreed to by both Houses, either without amendment or with such
> amendments only as are agreed to by both Houses. (3) A Bill pending in
> Parliament shall not lapse by reason of the prorogation of the Houses.

> (4) A Bill pending in the Council of States which has not been passed by the
> House of the People shall not lapse on a dissolution of the House of the
> People.

(5) A Bill which is pending in the House of the People, or which having been
passed by the House of the People is pending in the Council of States, shall,
subject to the provisions of article 108, lapse on a dissolution of the House
of the People.” 58 Ordinary bills can be passed only when they are agreed to
by both Houses. Amendments suggested by one House have to be agreed upon by
both the Houses for the bill to be passed. Both Houses of Parliament have a
vital role assigned by the Constitution in the passage of ordinary bills.
Deviating from the important role which it assigns to the Rajya Sabha in the
passage of legislation, the Constitution carves out a limited role for the
Rajya Sabha in the passage of Money Bills.

59 The Constitution confers special powers on the Speaker of the Lok Sabha in
the passage of a Money Bill. Ordinary bills (other than Money Bills) can
originate in either House of Parliament. They can be scrutinised, debated in
and amended in both the Houses of Parliament during the course of  102 PART E
passage. A Bill is not regarded as being passed by Parliament until both the
Houses agree to its passage without amendments or with the amendments as
proposed. A constitutional discretion is conferred on the Speaker of the Lok
Sabha to decide whether a Bill is a Money Bill. When the Speaker of the Lok
Sabha declares a Bill to be a Money Bill, the Rajya Sabha is left only with
the option to make recommendations to the Bill within the deadline of fourteen
days. Being only recommendations, they do not bind the Lok Sabha. They may
either be accepted or rejected by the Lok Sabha. 60 The Rajya Sabha is a
constitutional body in a bicameral legislature. The makers of the Constitution
adopted bicameralism from Britain. The origin of the limited role that the
Upper House has in the passing of a Money Bill can be traced to the British
Parliament Act, 1911, which will be discussed in a subsequent part of this
analysis. The draftspersons of the Constitution were conscious of the impact
of a misuse of institutional power. They provided for a detailed blue print of
the architecture of constitutional governance. It is necessary to understand
our constitutional history in order to comprehend the scope of the finality
attributed to the Speaker’s decision on whether or not a Bill is a Money Bill.

61 The origins of the procedure of passing Money Bills in the United Kingdom
are older than the Parliament Act of 1911. The authoritative  103 PART E
treatise73, by Thomas Erskine May, on the law, privileges, proceedings and
usage of Parliament in Britain dwells on the history of the evolution of the
relationship between the House of Commons and the House of Lords with regard
to their powers of taxation and in relation to national revenue and public
expenditure.74 A grant imposed by the House of Commons would become law in
effect, only after the assent of the House of Lords and of the Queen.75 While
the House of Commons enjoyed the legal right to originate grants for nearly
300 years, the House of Lords was originally not precluded from amending a
Bill. But in 167176 and 167877 respectively, the Commons passed two
resolutions to curtail the powers of the House of Lords so that only the
Commons had the sole right to direct or limit the scope of a Bill regarding
taxation and government expenditure. The House of Lords was excluded from
altering any such Bill.

The exclusion of the Lords was so strictly followed that the Commons even
denied to the former, the power of authorising the taking of fees, imposing 73
Thomas Erskine May, A treatise on the law, privileges, proceedings and usage
of Parliament, Ninth Edition  (1883) 74 Ibid, at pages 637-638. It notes: “At
length, when the Commons had increased in political influence, and the
subsidies voted by them had become the principal source of national revenue,
they gradually assumed their present position in regard to taxation and
supply, and included the Lords as well as themselves in their grants. So far
back as 1407, it was stated by King Henry IV, in the ordinance called “The
Indemnity of the Lords and Commons”, that grants were “granted by the Commons,
and assented to by the Lords”.” 75 Ibid, at page 638 76 Ibid, at page 641. The
Resolution stated: “That in all aids given to the king by the Commons, the
rate or tax ought not to be altered”.

77 Ibid. The Resolution stated: “That all aids and supplies, and aids to his
Majesty in Parliament, are the sole gift of the Commons ; and all bills for
the granting of any such aids and supplies ought to begin with the Commons :
and that it is the undoubted and sole right of the Commons to direct, limit,
and appoint in such bills the ends, purposes, considerations, conditions,
limitations, and qualifications of such grants ; which ought not to be changed
or altered by the House of Lords.”  104 PART E pecuniary penalties or of
varying the mode of suing for them, or of applying them when recovered, though
such provisions were necessary to give effect to the general enactments of a
Bill.78 Since this strict enforcement was found to be “attended with
unnecessary inconvenience”, it led to the adopting of a Standing Order in 1849
which accommodated space to the House of Lords for suggesting amendments on
legislative issues.79 However, the constitutional skirmishes continued. They
eventually led to the passage of the Parliament Act of 1911, which essentially
deprived the House of Lords of the right to reject Money Bills.

62 The Parliament Act 1911 was explicitly aimed at “regulating the relations
between the two Houses of Parliament”80. The Preamble of the Act indicates
that it was enacted for “restricting the existing powers of the House of
Lords”81. Section 1(1) provides for the power of the House of Lords on Money
Bills:

> “If a Money Bill, having been passed by the House of Commons, and sent up to
> the House of Lords at least one month before the end of the session, is not
> passed by the House of Lords without amendment within one month after it is
> so sent up to that House, the Bill shall, unless the House of Commons direct
> to the contrary, be present to His Majesty and become an Act of Parliament
> on the Royal Assent being signified, notwithstanding that the House of Lords
> have not consented to the Bill.” “Money Bill” was defined statutorily for
> the first time. Section 1(2) provided:

78 Ibid, at pages 642-643 79 Ibid, pages 646-647 80 Preamble of the Parliament
Act 1911 81 Ibid  105 PART E “A Money Bill means a Public Bill which in the
opinion of the Speaker of the House of Commons contains only provisions
dealing with all or any of the following subjects, namely, the imposition,
repeal, remission, alteration, or regulation of taxation; the imposition for
the payment of debt or other financial purposes of charges on the Consolidated
Fund, [the National Loans Fund] or on money provided by Parliament, or the
variation or repeal of any such charges; supply; the appropriation, receipt,
custody, issue or audit of accounts of public money; the raising or guarantee
of any loan or the repayment thereof; or subordinate matters incidental to
those subjects or any of them. In this subsection the expressions “taxation”,
“public money”, and “loan” respectively do not include any taxation, money, or
loan raised by local authorities or bodies for local purposes.” The use of the
expression “means” in the definition of a Money Bill indicates it was
exhaustively defined. A Bill would be a Money Bill, if the Speaker of the
House of Commons opined that it contains “only” certain specific provisions.
Under Section 1(3), when a Money Bill is sent up to the House of Lords and to
Her Majesty for assent, it should be endorsed by a certificate of the Speaker
of the House of Commons that it is a Money Bill. This sub-section also
provides that before giving his certificate, the Speaker may consult “two
members to be appointed from the Chairman’s Panel at the beginning of each
Session by the Committee of Selection”. Therefore, the Speaker has to certify
any bill which in his or her opinion falls within the definition of a Money
Bill. Any bill containing provisions outside the definition would not be
certified as a Money Bill. The Speaker does not certify a Bill until it has
reached the form in which it will leave the House of Commons, that is, at the
end of its Commons  106 PART E stage. The Speaker can only decide whether or
not to certify a Bill once it has passed the House.82 Section 3 of the 1911
Act provides finality to the certificate issued by the Speaker and renders it
immune from judicial review. According to it:

> “Any certificate of the Speaker of the House of Commons given under this Act
> shall be conclusive for all purposes, and shall not be questioned in any
> court of law.” (Emphasis supplied) The Act provides finality to the decision
> of the Speaker of the House of Commons. By using the phrase “shall not be
> questioned in any court of law”, the Act grants immunity to the Speaker’s
> decision from judicial review.

The statutory concept of a ‘Money Bill’ and the Speaker’s certification of a
Bill as a ‘Money Bill’ introduced by the Parliament Act, 1911 ultimately found
its way into the Constitution of India, but with significant modifications. 63
In India, the categorization of Money Bills can be said to have begun from the
Commonwealth of India Bill 1925, which was drafted by a National Convention
comprised of 250 members, with Tej Bahadur Sapru as its Chairman. Article 36
of the Commonwealth Bill provided:

> “36. (a) Any Bill which appropriates revenue or moneys for the ordinary
> annual services of the Government shall deal only with such appropriation.

82 House of Lords, Select Committee on the Constitution, Money Bills and
Commons Financial Privilege (2011), available at
https://publications.parliament.uk/pa/ld201011/ldselect/ldconst/97/97.pdf  107
PART E

(b) Bills imposing taxation· shall deal only with the imposition of taxes, and
any provision therein dealing with any other matter shall be of no effect.

(c) Bills for the appropriation of revenues or moneys or imposing taxation
shall be introduced only by a member of the Cabinet, and can only originate in
the Legislative Assembly.” The Bill neither provided a definition of a Money
Bill nor did it discuss the role of the Speaker of the Assembly of elected
representatives. In its Madras session of December 1927, the Indian National
Congress, as a response to the setting up of the Simon Commission (which did
not have any Indian members) decided to set up an All Parties’ Conference to
draft a Constitution for India. With Motilal Nehru as the Chairman of the
Committee constituted by the All Parties’ Conference, a Report was prepared.
Article 17 of the Nehru Report provided a definition of a Money Bill:

> “17. A money bill means a bill which contains only provisions dealing with
> all or any of the following subjects, namely the imposition, repeal,
> remission, alteration or regulation of taxation; the imposition, for the
> payment of debt or other financial purposes, of charges on public revenues
> or monies, or the variation or repeal of any such charges; the supply,
> appropriation, receipt, custody, issue or audit of accounts of public money;
> the raising of any loan or the repayment thereof; or subordinate matters
> incidental to those subjects or any of them. In this definition the
> expression “taxation”, “public money” and “loan” respectively do not include
> any taxation, money or loan raised by local authorities or bodies for local
> purposes.” The definition of a Money Bill in the Nehru Report, was drawn
> from the Parliament Act, 1911 in Britain. Article 18 of the Report provided
> that the “question whether a bill is or is not a money bill will be decided
> by the  108 PART E president of the House of Representatives”. The House of
> Representatives (the Lower House) was provided the final authority to either
> accept or reject the recommendations made by the Senate (the Upper House).
> Article 19 of the Report provided thus:

> “A money bill passed by the House of Representatives shall be sent to the
> Senate for its recommendations and it shall be returned not later than… days
> therefrom to the House of Representatives, which may pass it, accepting or
> rejecting all or any of the recommendations of the Senate; and the bill so
> passed shall be deemed to have been passed by both chambers.” While the
> Constituent Assembly of India was in session, the Socialist Party of India
> came up with a “Draft Constitution of the Republic of India”, based on its
> ideologies. Article 147 of its Draft Constitution provided:

> “147. (1) A Bill making provision-

> (a) for imposing, abolishing, remitting, altering or regulating any tax ; or

> (b) for regulating the borrowing of money, or giving any guarantee by the
> Government, or for amending the law with respect to any financial
> obligations undertaken or to be undertaken by the Government; or

> (c) for declaring any expenditure to be expenditure charged on the public
> revenues, or for increasing the amount of any such expenditure shall be
> deemed as a money Bill and shall not be introduced or moved except on the
> recommendation of the Government. (2) A Bill or amendment shall not be
> deemed to make provision for any of the purposes aforesaid by reason only
> that it provides for the Imposition of fines or other pecuniary penalties,
> or for the demand and payment of fees for licenses or fees for services
> rendered, or by reason that it provides for the imposition, abolition,
> remission, alteration, or regulation of tax by any local authority or body
> for local purposes.

> (3) In case of dispute whether a Bill is a money Bill or not, the decision
> of the Speaker, or in his absence of the Deputy Speaker, shall be final.”
> 109 PART E The Draft Constitution of the Socialist Party conferred a
> discretion on the Speaker of the Lower House, and in his absence, on the
> Deputy Speaker, to decide whether a Bill is a Money Bill.

64 There was another model present before the makers of the Indian
Constitution. British India was governed by the provisions of the Government
of India Act, 1935, which provided for two Houses of Parliament − the Council
of States (Upper House) and Federal Assembly (Lower House). Section 37 of the
Government of India Act 1935 made special provisions for financial bills:

> “37.-(1) A Bill or amendment making provision- (a) for imposing or
> increasing any tax; or (b) for regulating the borrowing of money or the
> giving of any guarantee by the Federal Government, or for amending the law
> with respect to any financial obligations undertaken or to be undertaken by
> the Federal Government ; or (c) for declaring any expenditure to be
> expenditure charged on the revenues of the Federation, or for increasing the
> amount of any such expenditure, shall not be introduced or moved except on
> the recommendation of the Governor-General, and a Bill making such provision
> shall not be introduced in the Council of State.” Under the 1935 Act, there
> was no provision for a Speaker’s certificate regarding a Financial Bill.
> Section 38(1) authorized each House to make rules regulating its procedure
> and for the conduct of its business, subject to the provisions of the Act.

A Financial Bill could be introduced only “on the recommendation of the
Governor-General”. Section 41 provided a general immunity from judicial review
on the “ground of any alleged irregularity of procedure”:  110 PART E “41(1).
The validity of any proceedings in the Federal Legislature shall not be called
in question on the ground of any alleged irregularity of procedure.

(2) No officer or other member of the Legislature in whom powers are vested by
or under this Act for regulating procedure or the conduct of business, or for
maintaining order, in the Legislature shall be subject to the jurisdiction of
any court in respect of the exercise by him of those powers.” The Constituent
Assembly evidently had these legislative precedents relating to Money Bills
which it would have considered while formulating its drafts. 65 While the
proceedings of the Constituent Assembly were in motion, Sir B N Rau, as its
constitutional advisor, prepared a memorandum of the Draft Constitution for
the Union Constitution Committee. It envisaged a Parliament of the Union
consisting of the President and two Houses—the Senate and the House of
Representatives.83 One of the proposals discussed in the meetings of the Union
Constitution Committee was that “Money Bills would originate in the House of
the People and the power of the other House would be limited to making
suggestions for amendment, which the House of the People could accept or
reject”.84 B Shiva Rao has recorded what transpired during the course of the
proceedings of the Constituent Assembly:

> “The Draft also included provisions regarding legislative procedure,
> procedure in financial matters and general procedure for the conduct of
> business. No Bill could be submitted for the President’s assent unless it
> had been passed in identical form by both Houses. Except in the case of
> Money Bills, both Houses enjoyed equal powers; and difference between the
> two Houses were to be settled by a majority vote in a joint sitting of both
> Houses convened by the President… Money Bills were defined in the Draft as
> 83 B Shiva Rao, The Framing of India’s Constitution: A Study, Indian
> Institution of Public Administration (1968), at page 420 84 Ibid  111 PART E
> comprising Bills proposing the imposition or increase of any tax, regulating
> the borrowing of money by the Government of India or the giving of financial
> guarantees, or declaring any item of expenditure as ‘‘charged” on the
> revenues, i.e. placing it outside the vote of the House of the People. The
> general principle approved by the Constituent Assembly was that financial
> control over the executive would' be - exercised by the House of the People.
> Accordingly the Draft provided that Money Bills could originate only in that
> House. The powers of the Council of States in the case of Money Bills were
> restricted to making suggestions for amendment. If these suggestions were,
> not accepted by the House of the People, or if the Council of States did not
> return a Bill within thirty days with its suggestions for amendment, the
> Bill would be ‘deemed to have been' passed by both Houses in the form in
> which it was passed' by the House of the People” and submitted to the
> President for his assent’.”85 66 The draft prepared by the Constitutional
> Advisor provided a definition of a Money Bill, which was inspired by Section
> 37 of the Government of India Act 1935, Section 53 of the Commonwealth of
> Australia Constitution Act 190086 and Article 22 of the Constitution of
> Ireland 1937.87 Article 75 of this draft of the Constitution provided that
> “if any question arises whether a Bill is a ‘money bill’ or not, the
> decision of the Speaker of the House of the People thereon shall be
> final.”88 Neither Section 37 of the Government of India Act 1935 nor Section
> 53 of the Commonwealth of Australia Constitution Act 1900 85 Ibid, at pages
> 427-428 86 The said provision provides: “Powers of the Houses in respect of
> legislation.

Proposed laws appropriating revenue or moneys, or imposing taxation, shall not
originate in the Senate. But a proposed law shall not be taken to appropriate
revenue or moneys, or to impose taxation, by reason only of its containing
provisions for the imposition or appropriation of fines or other pecuniary
penalties, or for the demand or payment or appropriation of fees for licences,
or fees for services under the proposed law. The Senate may not amend proposed
laws imposing taxation, or proposed laws appropriating revenue or moneys for
the ordinary annual services of the Government. The Senate may not amend any
proposed law so as to increase any proposed charge or burden on the people.
The Senate may at any stage return to the House of Representatives any
proposed law which the Senate may not amend, requesting, by message, the
omission or amendment of any items or provisions therein. And the House of
Representatives may, if it thinks fit, make any of such omissions or
amendments, with or without modifications. Except as provided in this section,
the Senate shall have equal power with the House of Representatives in respect
of all proposed laws.” 87 B Shiva Rao, The Framing of India’s Constitution:
Selected Documents, Indian Institution of Public Administration (2012), at
page 32, as quoted in Pratik Datta, Shefali Malhotra & Shivangi Tyagi,
Judicial Review and Money Bills, NUJS Law Review (2017) 88 Ibid  112 PART E
has a similar provision which accords legal finality to the decision of the
Speaker. The draft provision was similar to Article 22 of the Constitution of
Ireland 1937, which provides:

> “1. The Chairman of Dáil Éireann89 shall certify any Bill which, in his
> opinion, is a Money Bill to be a Money Bill, and his certificate shall,
> subject to the subsequent provisions of this section, be final and
> conclusive.

> 2\. Seanad Éireann90, by a resolution, passed at a sitting at which not less
> than thirty members are present, may request the President to refer the
> question whether the Bill is or is not a Money Bill to a Committee of
> Privileges.

> 3\. If the President after consultation with the Council of State decides to
> accede to the request he shall appoint a Committee of Privileges consisting
> of an equal number of members of Dáil Éireann and of Seanad Éireann and a
> Chairman who shall be a Judge of the Supreme Court: these appointments shall
> be made after consultation with the Council of State. In the case of an
> equality of votes but not otherwise the Chairman shall be entitled to vote.

> 4\. The President shall refer the question to the Committee of Privileges so
> appointed and the Committee shall report its decision thereon to the
> President within twenty-one days after the day on which the Bill was sent to
> Seanad Éireann.

> 5\. The decision of the Committee shall be final and conclusive.

6\. If the President after consultation with the Council of State decides not
to accede to the request of Seanad Éireann, or if the Committee of Privileges
fails to report within the time hereinbefore specified the certificate of the
Chairman of Dáil Éireann shall stand confirmed.” (Emphasis supplied) 67 The
draft prepared by the Advisor to the Constituent Assembly did not adopt the
above provision in its entirety. It adopted the part on the finality of the
certification of the Speaker on whether a Bill is a Money Bill. The Irish
model of dispute resolution, which provided for a mechanism to review the
Speaker’s certification, was not adopted. 89 Lower House in Ireland 90 Upper
House in Ireland  113 PART E Subsequently, in its report submitted to the
President of the Constituent Assembly on 5 December 1947, the Expert Committee
on Financial Provisions suggested an amendment to the draft provision, to the
effect that:

> “When a Money Bill is sent from the Lower House to the Upper, a certificate
> of the Speaker of the Lower House saying that it is a Money Bill should be
> attached to, or endorsed on, the bill and a provision to that effect should
> be made in the Constitution on the lines of the corresponding provision in
> the Parliament Act, 1911. This will prevent controversies about the matter
> outside the Lower House.”91 (Emphasis supplied) Certification of any Bill by
> the Speaker of the Lower House as a Money Bill, was envisaged for procedural
> simplicity to avoid causing confusion in the Upper House of Parliament.

68 The final provision which has assumed the form of Article 110 of the
Constitution, does not contain the exact language used in the Act of 1911. The
1911 Act of the British Parliament consciously excluded judicial review of the
certificate of the Speaker of the House of Commons. The intention of the
British Parliament is clear from the specific language used in Section 3 of
the Act. Section 3 accords finality to the decision of the Speaker by
providing that any certificate of the Speaker of the House of Commons “shall
be conclusive for all purposes, and shall not be questioned in any court of
law”. The certification of the Speaker is both conclusive and immune from
judicial review. The framers of the Indian Constitution did not adopt this
language. 91 B Shiva Rao, The Framing of India’s Constitution: Selected
Documents, Indian Institution of Public Administration, at page 281  114 PART
E Rather, they chose to adopt the phrase “shall be final”. The phrase used in
the Act of 1911 expressly excluded courts from exercising their power of
judicial review over the decision of the Speaker of the House of Commons. This
language was used in the 1911 Act to put an end to the constitutional
skirmishes experienced by the House of Lords and the House of Commons in
Britain for more than five hundred years, leading to the enactment of the 1911
Act.92 The deviation from incorporating the language, used in the 1911 Act,
into the Indian Constitution is reflective of the intention of our
Constitution makers that they did not want to confer the same status on the
power assigned to the Speaker of the Lok Sabha, as is provided to the Speaker
of the House of Commons. Had their intention been otherwise, they would have
used the same language as that provided under the 1911 Act. Finality would
operate as between the Houses of Parliament. It did not exclude judicial
review by a constitutional Court.

69 The British legal system adopts the principle of parliamentary sovereignty.
That is not so in India. Ours is a system founded on the supremacy of the
Constitution. Judicial review is an essential component of constitutional
supremacy. A Constitution Bench of this Court in Kalpana Mehta v Union of
India93 has, while noticing this distinction, held:

> “…The fundamental difference between the two systems lies in the fact that
> parliamentary sovereignty in the Westminster form of government in the UK
> has given way, in the Indian Constitution, to constitutional supremacy.
> Constitutional 92 Pratik Datta, Shefali Malhotra & Shivangi Tyagi, Judicial
> Review and Money Bills, NUJS Law Review (2017) 93 (2018) 7 SCC 1  115 PART E
> supremacy mandates that every institution of governance is subject to the
> norms embodied in the constitutional text. The Constitution does not allow
> for the existence of absolute power in the institutions which it creates.
> Judicial review as a part of the basic features of the Constitution is
> intended to ensure that every institution acts within its bounds and
> limits.”94 70 The purpose of judicial review is to ensure that
> constitutional principles prevail in interpretation and governance.
> Institutions created by the Constitution are subject to its norms. No
> constitutional institution wields absolute power. No immunity has been
> attached to the certificate of the Speaker of the Lok Sabha from judicial
> review, for this reason. The Constitution makers have envisaged a role for
> the judiciary as the expounder of the Constitution. The provisions relating
> to the judiciary, particularly those regarding the power of judicial review,
> were framed, as Granville Austin observed, with “idealism”95. Courts of the
> country are expected to function as guardians of the Constitution and its
> values. Constitutional courts have been entrusted with the duty to
> scrutinize the exercise of power by public functionaries under the
> Constitution. No individual holding an institutional office created by the
> Constitution can act contrary to constitutional parameters. Judicial review
> protects the principles and the spirit of the Constitution. Judicial review
> is intended as a check against arbitrary conduct of individuals holding
> constitutional posts. It holds public functionaries accountable to
> constitutional duties. If our Constitution has to survive the vicissitudes
> of political aggrandisement and to face up to the prevailing 94 Ibid, at
> para 227 95 Granville Austin, The Indian Constitution: Cornerstone of a
> Nation, Oxford University Press (1966), at page 205  116 PART E cynicism
> about all constitutional institutions, notions of power and authority must
> give way to duties and compliance with the rule of law. Constitutional
> institutions cannot be seen as focal points for the accumulation of power
> and privilege. They are held in trust by all those who occupy them for the
> moment.

The impermanence of power is a sombre reflection for those who occupy
constitutional offices. The Constitution does not contemplate a debasement of
the institutions which it creates. The office of the Speaker of the House of
People, can be no exception. The decision of the Speaker of the Lok Sabha in
certifying a Bill as a Money Bill is liable to be tested upon the touchstone
of its compliance with constitutional principles. Nor can such a decision of
the Speaker take leave of constitutional morality. 71 Our Constitution does
not provide absolute power to any institution. It sets the limits for each
institution. Our constitutional scheme envisages a system of checks and
balances. The power of the Speaker of the Lok Sabha, to decide whether a Bill
is a Money Bill, cannot be untrammelled. The contention that the decision of
Speaker is immune from judicial review and cannot be questioned, is contrary
to the entire scheme of the Constitution, which is premised on transparency,
non-arbitrariness and fairness. The phrase “shall be final” used in Article
110(3) has been adopted, as mentioned earlier, from Article 22 of the Irish
Constitution. The provisions of Article 22 of the Irish Constitution provide a
mechanism for review of the certificate issued by the Speaker. Recourse is
provided under the Irish Constitution by which  117 PART E the members of the
Upper House of the Irish Parliament can request the President of Ireland to
refer the question of whether a Bill is a Money Bill, to a Committee of
Privileges. If the President refers the question to this Committee, the
decision of the Committee stands “final and conclusive”. The members of the
Constituent Assembly did not adopt this mechanism. Absence of this mechanism
does not mean that the decision of the Speaker of the Lok Sabha cannot be
subject to checks and balances, of which judicial review is an indispensable
facet. The Speaker has to act within the domain, which the Constitution
accords to the office of the Speaker. The power conferred on the Speaker of
the Lok Sabha cannot be exercised arbitrarily, for it could damage the scheme
of the Constitution. Judicial review is the ultimate remedy to ensure that the
Speaker does not act beyond constitutional entrustment. 72 The scope of the
phrase “shall be final” can also be understood by looking at the proceedings
of the Constituent Assembly. The constitutional foundation of Article 110(4)
is based upon a suggestion of the Expert Committee on Financial Provisions
that when a Money Bill is transmitted from the Lower House to the Upper House,
it should be endorsed by the Speaker’s certificate, so as to prevent any
controversy “about the matter outside the Lower House”. Therefore, the
finality provided to the decision of the Speaker as to whether a Bill is a
Money Bill or not, is aimed at avoiding any controversy on the issue in the
Rajya Sabha and before the President. Had it been intended to prevent the
court from adjudicating upon the validity of the  118 PART E decision of the
Speaker, the language of the Article would have made it explicit. Where a
constitutional provision evinces a specific intent to exclude judicial review,
clear words to that effect are used. Articles 243O(a) 96, 243ZG(a)97 and
329(a) specifically use the phrase − “shall not be called in question in any
court”. For instance, Article 329(a) provides thus:

> “Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution —

> (a) the validity of any law relating to the delimitation of constituencies
> or the allotment of seats to such constituencies, made or purporting to be
> made under article 327 or article 328, shall not be called in question in
> any court.” (Emphasis supplied) 73 In N P Ponnuswami v Returning Officer,
> Namakkal Constituency, Namakkal, Salem District98, a six judge Bench of this
> Court, while construing the provisions of Article 329, compared it to the
> preceding Articles, and held thus:

> “5…A notable difference in the language used in articles 327 and 328 on the
> one hand, and article 329 on the other, is that while the first two articles
> begin with the words “subject to the provisions of this Constitution”, the
> last article begins with the words “notwithstanding anything in this
> Constitution”. It was conceded at the Bar that the effect of this difference
> in language is that whereas any law made by Parliament under article 327, or
> by the State Legislature under article 328, cannot exclude the jurisdiction
> of the High Court under article 226 of the Constitution, that jurisdiction
> is excluded in regard to matters provided for in article 329.”99 96 Article
> 243O(a), which is a part of the chapter on Panchayats, provides:
> “Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution,— (a) the validity of any law
> relating to the delimitation of constituencies or the allotment of seats to
> such constituencies, made or purporting to be made under article 243K, shall
> not be called in question in any court.” 97 Article 243ZG(a), which is a
> part of the chapter on Municipalities, provides: “Notwithstanding anything
> in this Constitution,— (a) the validity of any law relating to the
> delimitation of constituencies or the allotment of seats to such
> constituencies, made or purporting to be made under article 243ZA shall not
> be called in question in any court.” 98 1952 SCR 218 99 Ibid, at para 5  119
> PART E 74 In order to understand the scope of the finality attached to the
> Speaker’s decision under Article 110(3), it would be useful to analyse how
> in the case of other constitutional provisions, the words “shall be final”
> have been interpreted by this Court. Articles 217(3)100, 311(3)101 and
> paragraph 6(1) of the Tenth Schedule102 contain the phrase “shall be final”.
> In Union of India v Jyoti Prakash Mitter103, this Court held that it can
> examine the legality of an order passed by the President on the
> determination of the age of a Judge of the High Court under Article 217 (3)
> of the Constitution. The six judge Bench held:

> “32…The President acting under Article 217(3) performs a judicial function
> of grave importance under the scheme of our Constitution. He cannot act on
> the advice of his Ministers.

> Notwithstanding the declared finality of the order of the President the
> Court has jurisdiction in appropriate cases to set aside the order, if it
> appears that it was passed on collateral considerations or the rules of
> natural justice were not observed, or that the President's judgment was
> coloured by the advice or representation made by the executive or it was
> founded on no evidence…Appreciation of evidence is entirely left to the
> President and it is not for the Courts to hold that on the evidence placed
> before the President on which the conclusion is founded, if they were called
> upon to decide the case they would have reached some other conclusion.”104
> The President was held to perform a judicial function in making a
> determination under Article 217(3).

100 Article 217 (3) states: “If any question arises as to the age of a Judge
of a High Court, the question shall be decided by the President after
consultation with the Chief Justice of India and the decision of the President
shall be final.” 101 Article 311(3) states: “If, in respect of any such person
as aforesaid, a question arises whether it is reasonably practicable to hold
such inquiry as is referred to in clause (2), the decision thereon of the
authority empowered to dismiss or remove such person or to reduce him in rank
shall be final.” 102 Paragraph 6(1) states “If any question arises as to
whether a member of a House has become subject to disqualification under this
Schedule, the question shall be referred for the decision of the Chairman, or,
as the case may be, the Speaker of such House and his decision shall be final:
Provided that where the question which has arisen is as to whether the
Chairman or the Speaker of a House has become subject to such
disqualification, the question shall be referred for the decision of such
member of the House as the House may elect in this behalf and his decision
shall be final.” 103 (1971) 1 SCC 396 104 Ibid, at page 397  120 PART E The
question of finality under Article 311(3) was dealt with by a Constitution
Bench of this Court in Union of India v Tulsiram Patel105. The Court held that
the finality given to the decision of the disciplinary authority by Article
311(3) that it is not reasonably practicable to hold an enquiry, is not
binding upon the Court so far as its power of judicial review is concerned.
The constitutional validity of the provisions contained in the Tenth Schedule
to the Constitution came up for consideration before a Constitution Bench of
this Court in Kihoto Hollohan v Zachillhu106. The Constitution Bench held that
the power vested in the Speaker or the Chairman under the Schedule, is a
judicial power, and was amenable to judicial review:

> “111…That Paragraph 6(1) of the Tenth Schedule, to the extent it seeks to
> impart finality to the decision of the Speakers/Chairmen is valid. But the
> concept of statutory finality embodied in Paragraph 6(1) does not detract
> from or abrogate judicial review under Articles 136, 226 and 227 of the
> Constitution in so far as infirmities based on violations of constitutional
> mandates, mala fides, non-

compliance with Rules of Natural Justice and perversity, are concerned.”107
(Emphasis supplied) The Bench had also clarified that:

> “101…The principle that is applied by the courts is that in spite of a
> finality clause it is open to the court to examine whether the action of the
> authority under challenge is ultra vires the powers conferred on the said
> authority. Such an action can be ultra vires for the reason that it is in
> contravention of a mandatory provision of the law conferring on the
> authority the power to take such an action. It will also be ultra vires the
> powers conferred on the authority if it is 105 (1985) 3 SCC 398 106 (1992)
> Supp (2) SCC 651 107 Ibid, at page 711  121 PART E vitiated by mala fides or
> is colourable exercise of power based on extraneous and irrelevant
> considerations...”108 Undoubtedly, the finality clauses contained in Article
> 217(3), 311(3) and in paragraph 6(1) of the Tenth Schedule were held not to
> exclude judicial review since the essential nature of the power is judicial.
> A constitutional function is entrusted to the Speaker to certify a Bill as a
> Money Bill under Article 110(3), to which the attributes of a judicial power
> do not apply. Indeed, the power which is entrusted to the Speaker under
> Article 110(3) is integral to the legislative process. But, the fact that
> the authority which a constitutional functionary exercises is not of a
> judicial character, is not sufficient to lead to the conclusion that a
> finality clause governing the exercise of that power makes it immune from
> judicial review. Where the entrustment of the power is subject to the due
> fulfilment of constitutional norms, the exercise of jurisdiction is amenable
> to judicial review, to the extent necessary to determine whether there has
> been a violation of a constitutional mandate. The nature and extent of
> judicial review would undoubtedly vary from a situation where finality has
> been attached to a judicial, administrative or quasi-judicial power.
> However, a clause on finality notwithstanding, it is open to the
> constitutional court to determine as to whether there has been a violation
> of a constitutional mandate as a result of which the decision suffers from a
> constitutional infirmity. The entrustment of a constitutional function to
> the Speaker under Article 110(3) to certify a Bill as a Money Bill is
> premised on the fulfilment of the norms stipulated in Article 110(1). A
> certification can be questioned on the ground 108 Ibid, at page 708  122
> PART E that the Bill did not fulfil the conditions stipulated in Article
> 110(1) to be designated as a Money Bill. If that is established, the
> certification would be contrary to constitutional mandate. Whether that is
> so can be judicially scrutinized.

75 The notion that an entrustment of power is absolute has a colonial origin.
Law under a colonial regime was not just an instrument to maintain order but
was a source of subordination. Recognition of the vesting of absolute
authority was but a reflection of the premise that those who ruled could not
be questioned. Those who were ruled had to accept the authority of the ruler.
Nothing can be as divorced from constitutional principle as these normative
foundations of colonial law and history. The notion that power is absolute is
inconsistent with a Constitution which subjects the entrustment of functions
to public functionaries to the restraints which accompany it. Our law must
recognise the need to liberate its founding principles from its colonial past.
The Court should not readily accept the notion that the authority vested in a
constitutional functionary is immune from judicial review. In the absence of a
specific exclusion of judicial review, none can be implied. Moreover, any
exclusion of judicial review must be tested on the anvil of its functionality.
A specific exclusion of judicial review, in order to be valid, must serve a
constitutional function. The test of functionality must relate to whether an
exclusion of review is necessary to fulfil the overarching need for the proper
discharge of a constitutional role. Exclusion of review, to be valid, must
fulfil  123 PART E the requirement of a constitutional necessity. Its purpose
cannot be to shield an excess of power from being questioned before the Court.
Nor is the fact that a power is vested in a high functionary a ground to
shield it from scrutiny. The ultimate test is whether the exclusion of
judicial review is express and specific and, whether such an exclusion is
designed to achieve a constitutional purpose that meets the test of
functionality, assessed in terms of a constitutional necessity. In the seventh
decade of the republic, our interpretation of the Constitution must subserve
the need to liberate it from its colonial detritus.

This approach was adopted by a seven judge Bench of this Court in Krishna
Kumar Singh v State of Bihar109. While interpreting the ordinance making power
of the Governor, the Court held that the interpretation of the Constitution
must be “carefully structured” to ensure that the power remains what the
framers of our Constitution intended it to be. The Bench held:

> “91…The issue which needs elaboration is whether an ordinance which by its
> very nature has a limited life can bring about consequences for the future
> (in terms of the creation of rights, privileges, liabilities and
> obligations) which will enure beyond the life of the ordinance. In deciding
> this issue, the court must adopt an interpretation which furthers the basic
> constitutional premise of legislative control over ordinances. The
> preservation of this constitutional value is necessary for parliamentary
> democracy to survive on the sure foundation of the Rule of law and
> collective responsibility of the executive to the legislature. The silences
> of the Constitution must be imbued with substantive content by infusing them
> with a meaning which enhances the Rule of law. To attribute to the executive
> as an incident of the power to frame ordinances, an unrestricted ability to
> create binding effects for posterity would 109 (2017) 3 SCC 1  124 PART E
> set a dangerous precedent in a parliamentary democracy.

The court's interpretation of the power to frame ordinances, which originates
in the executive arm of government, cannot be oblivious to the basic notion
that the primary form of law making power is through the legislature...”110
(Emphasis supplied) The ordinance making power was held to be an exceptional
power to meet a “constitutional necessity”.

76 The marginal note to Article 122 is: “Courts not to inquire into
proceedings of Parliament”. The Article reads thus:

> “122. (1) The validity of any proceedings in Parliament shall not be called
> in question on the ground of any alleged irregularity of procedure.

(2) No officer or member of Parliament in whom powers are vested by or under
this Constitution for regulating procedure or the conduct of business, or for
maintaining order, in Parliament shall be subject to the jurisdiction of any
court in respect of the exercise by him of those powers.” This Court must deal
with the question whether the Speaker’s decision under Article 110(3) is
protected by Article 122. Article 122 prohibits courts from examining the
validity of any proceedings in Parliament on the ground that there was “any
alleged irregularity of procedure”. The content of the expression “procedure”
referred to in the Article, is indicated in Article 118 of the Constitution.
The marginal note to Article 118 provides for “Rules of procedure”. Article
118 provides as follows:

> “118. (1) Each House of Parliament may make rules for regulating, subject to
> the provisions of this Constitution, its procedure and the conduct of its
> business.

(2) Until rules are made under clause (1), the rules of 110 Ibid, at pages
76-77  125 PART E procedure and standing orders in force immediately before
the commencement of this Constitution with respect to the Legislature of the
Dominion of India shall have effect in relation to Parliament subject to such
modifications and adaptations as may be made therein by the Chairman of the
Council of States or the Speaker of the House of the People, as the case may
be.

(3) The President, after consultation with the Chairman of the Council of
States and the Speaker of the House of the People, may make rules as to the
procedure with respect to joint sittings of, and communications between, the
two Houses.

(4) At a joint sitting of the two Houses the Speaker of the House of the
People, or in his absence such person as may be determined by rules of
procedure made under clause (3), shall preside.” (Emphasis supplied) 77
Articles 118 to 122 are covered under the rubric of the general heading-
“Procedure Generally”. Article 118 provides for rules to be made by each House
of Parliament for regulating the procedure and conduct of its business. The
Article subjects these contemplated rules to the provisions of the
Constitution. The provision does not indicate that these rules will stand
above the Constitution. They are, on the contrary, subject to the
Constitution. The rules framed under Article 118, are procedural in nature.
The procedure contemplated under Articles 118 to 122 is distinct from
substantive constitutional requirements. The obligation placed on the Speaker
of the Lok Sabha to certify whether a Bill is a Money Bill is not a mere
matter of “procedure” contemplated under Article 122. It is a constitutional
requirement, which has to be fulfilled according to the norms set out in
Article 110. Article 122 will not save the action of the Speaker, if it is
contrary to constitutional norms provided under Article 110. The Court, in the
exercise of its power of judicial review, can adjudicate upon the validity of
the action of the Speaker if  126 PART E it causes constitutional infirmities.
Article 122 does not envisage exemption from judicial review, if there has
been a constitutional infirmity. The Constitution does not endorse a complete
prohibition of judicial review under Article 122. It is only limited to an
“irregularity of procedure”. 78 This Court has on several occasions restricted
the scope of the bar provided under Article 122 (and under corresponding
Article 212 for the States) and has distinguished an “irregularity of
procedure” from “illegality”. In Special Reference No. 1 of 1964111, a seven
judge Bench of this Court brought home that distinction in the context of
Article 212(1) with the following observations:

> “61…Article 212(2) confers immunity on the officers and members of the
> Legislature in whom powers are vested by or under the Constitution for
> regulating procedure or the conduct of business, or for maintaining order,
> in the Legislature from being subject to the jurisdiction of any court in
> respect of the exercise by him of those powers. Art. 212(1) seems to make it
> possible for a citizen to call in question in the appropriate court of law
> the validity of any proceedings inside the legislative chamber if his case
> is that the said proceedings suffer not from mere irregularity of procedure,
> but from an illegality. If the impugned procedure is illegal and
> unconstitutional, it would be open to be scrutinised in a court of law,
> though such scrutiny is prohibited if the complaint against the procedure is
> no more than this that the procedure was irregular...” (Emphasis supplied)
> In Ramdas Athawale v Union of India112 (“Ramdas Athawale”), a Constitution
> Bench of this Court extended the above formulation to Article 122 of the
> Constitution:

111 AIR 1965 SC 745 112 (2010) 4 SCC 1  127 PART E “36.This Court Under
Article 143, Constitution of India, In re (Special Reference No. 1 of 1964)
[AIR 1965 SC 745 : (1965) 1 SCR 413] (also known as Keshav Singh case [AIR
1965 SC 745 : (1965) 1 SCR 413] ) while construing Article 212(1) observed
that it may be possible for a citizen to call in question in the appropriate
Court of law, the validity of any proceedings inside the Legislature if his
case is that the said proceedings suffer not from mere irregularity of
procedure, but from an illegality. If the impugned procedure is illegal and
unconstitutional, it would be open to be scrutinized in a Court of law, though
such scrutiny is prohibited if the complaint against the procedure is no more
than this that the procedure was irregular. The same principle would equally
be applicable in the matter of interpretation of Article 122 of the
Constitution.”113 A Constitution Bench of this Court reaffirmed the
distinction between a “procedural irregularity” and an “illegality” in Raja
Ram Pal v Hon'ble Speaker, Lok Sabha114 (“Raja Ram Pal”). The Bench held that
courts are not prohibited from exercising their power of judicial review to
examine any illegality or unconstitutionality in the procedure of Parliament:

> “386…Any attempt to read a limitation into Article 122 so as to restrict the
> court's jurisdiction to examination of the Parliament's procedure in case of
> unconstitutionality, as opposed to illegality would amount to doing violence
> to the constitutional text. Applying the principle of “expressio unius est
> exclusio alterius” (whatever has not been included has by implication been
> excluded), it is plain and clear that prohibition against examination on the
> touchstone of "irregularity of procedure" does not make taboo judicial
> review on findings of illegality or unconstitutionality…115 398… the Court
> will decline to interfere if the grievance brought before it is restricted
> to allegations of “irregularity of procedure”. But in case gross illegality
> or violation of constitutional provisions is shown, the judicial review will
> not be inhibited in any manner by Article 122, or for that matter by Article
> 105.”116 113 Ibid, at pages 13-14 114 (2007) 3 SCC 184 115 Ibid, at page 359
> 116 Ibid, at page 362  128 PART E The Court distinguished the constitutional
> background in India from that of England, holding that while England has
> adopted a regime of exclusive parliamentary dominance, India is governed by
> a system of checks and balances provided in the Constitution:

> “366.The touchstone upon which Parliamentary actions within the four-walls
> of the Legislature were examined was both the constitutional as well as
> substantive law. The proceedings which may be tainted on account of
> substantive illegality or unconstitutionality, as opposed to those suffering
> from mere irregularity thus cannot be held protected from judicial scrutiny
> by Article 122(1) in as much as the broad principle laid down in Bradlaugh
> [(1884) 12 QBD 271] acknowledging exclusive cognizance of the Legislature in
> England has no application to the system of governance provided by our
> Constitution wherein no organ is sovereign and each organ is amenable to
> constitutional checks and controls, in which scheme of things, this Court is
> entrusted with the duty to be watchdog of and guarantor of the
> Constitution.”117 (Emphasis supplied) The principle which emerges from these
> decisions is that the decision of the Speaker is amenable to judicial
> review, if it suffers from illegality or from a violation of constitutional
> provisions.

> 79 The Attorney General advanced the submission that this Court has on
> previous occasions refrained from scrutinizing the decision of the Speaker
> on whether a Bill is a Money Bill. Those decisions require discussion for
> adjudicating the present case. In Mangalore Ganesh Beedi Works v State of
> Mysore118 (“Mangalore Beedi”), a new system of coinage was introduced by
> amending the Indian Coinage Act. Under the new system, while one rupee 117
> Ibid, at page 350 118 1963 Supp (1) SCR 275  129 PART E was divided into a
> hundred naya paisas, the old legal tender of sixteen annas or sixty four
> pice remained legal tender equivalent to one hundred naya paisas. The
> appellant, which was a firm registered under the Mysore Sales Tax Act, had
> to pay an additional amount as sales tax due to change in the currency. It
> was argued that by the substitution of 2 naya paisas (the new currency) in
> place of 3 pies (the old currency) as tax, there was a change in the tax
> imposed by the Mysore Sales Tax Act, which could only have been done by
> passing a Money Bill under Articles 198, 199 and 207 of the Constitution and
> since no Money Bill was introduced or passed for the enhancement of the tax,
> the tax was illegal and invalid. The contention, therefore, was that the
> procedure envisaged for passing a Money Bill ought to have been, but was
> not, followed. The Constitution Bench dismissed the appeal, holding that the
> substitution of a new coinage i.e. naya paisas in place of annas, pice and
> pies did not amount to an enhancement of tax. It was held to be merely a
> substitution of one coinage by another of equivalent value. This Court held
> that the levy of tax in terms of naya paisas was not unconstitutional nor
> was it a taxing measure but it dealt merely with the conversion of the old
> coinage into new coinage. Having held this, the Bench also remarked:

> “5…Even assuming that it is a taxing measure its validity cannot be
> challenged on the ground that it offends Arts. 197 to 199 and the procedure
> laid down in Art. 202 of the Constitution. Article 212 prohibits the
> validity of any proceedings in a legislature of a State from being called in
> question on the ground of any alleged irregularity of procedure and Art. 255
> lays down that requirements as to recommendation and previous sanction are
> to be regarded as matters of procedure only...”  130 PART E The Court having
> found that a substitution of coinage did not result in an enhancement of
> tax, Article 199 was not attracted. The legislative measure was not a Money
> Bill. Once that was the case, the subsequent observations (extracted above)
> proceeded on an assumption: that even if it were a taxing measure, it would
> be saved by Article 255. The court having held that no enhancement of tax
> was involved in a mere substitution of coinage, the alternative hypothesis
> is not a part of the ratio and was unnecessary. The ratio was that
> substitution of a new coinage did not amount to a Money Bill. The decision
> of the Constitution Bench in Mangalore Beedi dealt with the contention that
> a Money Bill was unconstitutionally passed as an ordinary Bill.

> The Bench held that substitution of coinage did not make it a Money Bill.
> The decision contains a general observation regarding the immunity of
> proceedings in a state legislature. A scholarly article119 has correctly
> referred to the general remarks made in Mangalore Beedi as unnecessary and
> not the ratio since the issue was already decided on merits, by holding that
> the substitution of coinage was not an enhancement of tax.

80 A three judge Bench of this Court in Mohd Saeed Siddiqui v State of Uttar
Pradesh120 (“Mohd Saeed Siddiqui”) dealt with the constitutional validity of
the Uttar Pradesh Lokayukta and Up-Lokayuktas (Amendment) Act, 2012\. Section
5(1) of the unamended Act provided a term of six years for the Lokayukta.
Section 5(3) provided that on ceasing to hold office, the Lokayukta 119 Pratik
Datta, Shefali Malhotra & Shivangi Tyagi, Judicial Review and Money Bills, Vol
10, NUJS Law Review (2017).

120 (2014) 11 SCC 415  131 PART E or Up-Lokayukta shall be ineligible for
further appointment. The new State government, which came in office,
introduced a Bill which was passed as the Uttar Pradesh Lokayukta and Up-
Lokayuktas (Amendment) Act, 2012, by which the term of the U.P. Lokayukta and
Up-Lokayukta was extended from six years to eight years or till the successor
enters upon office. The Amendment Act also limited the ineligibility of the
Lokayuktas or Up- Lokayuktas for further appointment under the Government of
Uttar Pradesh. The Amendment Act was challenged on the ground that it was
passed as a Money Bill when, on the face of it, it could never have been
called a Money Bill under Article 199 of the Constitution. The Bench rejected
the petition holding that the question “whether a Bill is a Money Bill or not
can be raised only in the State Legislative Assembly by a member thereof when
the Bill is pending in the State Legislature and before it becomes an Act”. It
relied upon the observations made in Mangalore Beedi, to formulate following
principles:

> “(i) the validity of an Act cannot be challenged on the ground that it
> offends Articles 197 to 199 and the procedure laid down in Article 202; (ii)
> Article 212 prohibits the validity of any proceedings in a Legislature of a
> State from being called in question on the ground of any alleged
> irregularity of procedure; and (iii) Article 255 lays down that the
> requirements as to recommendation and previous sanction are to be regarded
> as a matter of procedure only. It is further held that the validity of the
> proceedings inside the Legislature of a State cannot be called in question
> on the allegation that the procedure laid down by the law has not been
> strictly followed and that no Court can go into those questions which are
> within the special jurisdiction of the Legislature itself, which has the
> power to conduct its own business.”  132 PART E The judgment also made a
> reference to the seven judge Bench decision in Pandit MSM Sharma v Dr Shree
> Krishna Sinha121 (“MSM Sharma”).

The “proceedings of the Legislature” were held to include “everything said or
done in either House” in the transaction of parliamentary business. Relying
upon Articles 212 and 255, the Bench accorded finality to the decision of the
Speaker:

> “43. As discussed above, the decision of the Speaker of the Legislative
> Assembly that the Bill in question was a Money Bill is final and the said
> decision cannot be disputed nor can the procedure of the State Legislature
> be questioned by virtue of Article 212. Further, as noted earlier, Article
> 255 also shows that under the Constitution the matters of procedure do not
> render invalid an Act to which assent has been given to by the President or
> the Governor, as the case may be.

Inasmuch as the Bill in question was a Money Bill, the contrary contention by
the Petitioner against the passing of the said Bill by the Legislative
Assembly alone is unacceptable.”122 Making a passing reference to the decision
of the Constitution Bench in Raja Ram Pal, the Bench opined that even if it is
established that there was some infirmity in the procedure in the enactment of
the Amendment Act, it will be protected by Article 255 of the Constitution. 81
Subsequently, a two judge Bench of this Court in Yogendra Kumar Jaiswal v
State of Bihar123 (“Yogendra Kumar”) dealt with the constitutional validity of
the Orissa Special Courts Act, 2006. The law was enacted by the 121 AIR 1960
SC 1186 122 Mohd Saeed Siddiqui, Ibid, at page 430 123 (2016) 3 SCC 183  133
PART E State legislature, keeping in view the accumulation of properties
disproportionate to their known sources of income by persons who have held or
hold high political and public offices. The legislature provided special
courts for speedy trial of certain classes of offences and for confiscation of
properties. The appellants, who were public servants and facing criminal
cases, challenged the Act on the ground that it was introduced in the State
Assembly as a Money Bill though it did not have any characteristics of a Money
Bill under Article 199 of the Constitution. The Court dismissed the petitions,
following the decision in Mohd Saeed Siddiqui. It held that:

> “43. In our considered opinion, the authorities cited by the learned Counsel
> for the Appellants do not render much assistance, for the introduction of a
> bill, as has been held in Mohd. Saeed Siddiqui (supra), comes within the
> concept of “irregularity” and it does come with the realm of substantiality.

What has been held in the Special Reference No. 1 of 1964 (supra) has to be
appositely understood. The factual matrix therein was totally different than
the case at hand as we find that the present controversy is wholly covered by
the pronouncement in Mohd. Saeed Siddiqui (supra) and hence, we unhesitatingly
hold that there is no merit in the submission so assiduously urged by the
learned Counsel for the Appellants.”124 Special Reference No. 1 of 1964 was
distinguished in Yogendra Kumar. Article 255 provides:

> “No Act of Parliament or of the Legislature of a State, and no provision in
> any such Act, shall be invalid by reason only that some recommendation or
> previous sanction required by this Constitution was not given, if assent to
> that Act was given—

> (a) where the recommendation required was that of the Governor, either by
> the Governor or by the President;

> (b) where the recommendation required was that of the Rajpramukh, either by
> the Rajpramukh or by the President;

124 Ibid, at page 229  134 PART E

(c) where the recommendation or previous sanction required was that of the
President, by the President.” 82 Article 255 speaks about a situation where a
“recommendation or previous sanction” is required to be given by the Governor,
Rajpramukh or, as the case may be, by the President. The absence of a
recommendation or previous sanction will not invalidate the law, where the Act
has received the assent of the Governor or the President. Subsequent assent,
in other words, cures the absence of recommendation or sanction. Article 255
is in no way related to the decision or certificate of the Speaker of the Lok
Sabha or of the State Legislative Assembly on whether a Bill is a Money Bill.
Moreover, Article 255 does not apply to Articles 110 for the simple reason
that the latter does not embody either a previous sanction or recommendation.
Article 255 does not envisage superseding the role of the Upper House of
Parliament or the State Legislature. Mohd Saeed Siddiqui proceeds on an
erroneous understanding of Article 255. Mohd Saeed Siddiqui was followed in
Yogendra Kumar. These two judgments cite the same three articles — Articles
199,125 212,126 and 255, to refrain from questioning the conduct of the
Speaker, without noticing that Article 255 does not apply there. Further, MSM
Sharma, which was referred in Mohd Saeed Siddiqui was discussed in the Special
Reference to hold that the validity of any proceedings in a legislative
chamber can be questioned if such proceedings 125 Corresponding provision for
the Union is Article 110 of the Constitution. 126 Corresponding provision for
the Union is Article 122 of the Constitution.  135 PART E suffer from
illegality. The consistent thread which emerges from the judgments in Special
Reference, Ramdas Athawale and Raja Ram Pal is that the validity of
proceedings in Parliament or a State Legislature can be subject to judicial
review on the ground that there is an illegality or a constitutional
violation. Moreover, the judgment in Yogendra Kumar followed Mohd Saeed
Siddiqui. Siddiqui was based on an erroneous understanding of Mangalore Beedi.
The decision of the Speaker under Articles 110(3) and 199(3) is not immune
from judicial review.

The three judge Bench decision in Mohd Saeed Siddiqui and the two judge Bench
decision in Yogendra Kumar are overruled. 83 Barring judicial review of the
Lok Sabha Speaker’s decision would render a certification of a Bill as a Money
Bill immune from scrutiny, even where the Bill does not, objectively speaking,
deal only with the provisions set out in Article 110(1). The decision of the
Speaker of the Lok Sabha whether a Bill is a Money Bill impacts directly upon
the constitutional role which will be discharged by the Rajya Sabha in
relation to it. The Lok Sabha alone does not represent Parliament. The Indian
Parliament is bicameral. The Constitution envisages a special role for the
Rajya Sabha. In order to truly understand the relevance of the Rajya Sabha in
the Indian context, an analysis of major bicameral systems is necessary, as an
exercise in comparative law.  136 PART E 84 Bicameral legislatures are not
unique to either the Presidential or Parliamentary forms of government.
Democracies with a Presidential form of government have adopted bicameral
legislatures, the United States being the leading example. Among Parliamentary
democracies, India and the UK have adopted bicameral legislatures. They are
predominant in federal countries. Where second chambers exist, they vary in
terms of powers and composition. Together, their powers and composition shape
the impact that they have on legislation.127 The phenomenon of the bicameral
system has two different historic origins. It was first established in
England, and later in the US.128 Both these models have been replicated across
the globe. 85 Britain developed some of the earliest institutional practices
that came to be emulated through the Western world. A separate powerful
legislature was initiated when King John in 1215 gave a written commitment to
seek the consent of Parliament to levy taxes to which he was entitled by
feudal prerogative. Over the next five centuries, the British Parliament was
transformed from an institution summoned at the desire of the ruler to one
which met on regular occasions to develop policy inclinations independent of
the wishes of the ruler.129 In the fourteenth century, Parliament was divided
into two chambers: one chamber (the House of Lords) in which debate took place
with the feudal lords and a second chamber (the House of Commons) 127 Fathali
M. Moghaddam, The SAGE Encyclopaedia of Political Behaviour (2017). 128 Betty
Drexhage, Bicameral Legislatures: An International Comparison, Ministry of the
Interior and Kingdom Relations- Netherlands (2015), at page 7 129 Abhinay
Muthoo & Kenneth A. Shepsle, The Constitutional Choice of Bicameralism, in
Institutions and Economic Performance (Elhanan Helpman ed.), Harvard
University Press (2008), at pages 251-252  137 PART E where the citizens were
represented.130 The upper chamber of the British Parliament, the Lords,
comprised of hereditary peers (whose number varied with the discretion of the
King to create them). The lower chamber, the Commons, represented individuals
satisfying a substantial property requirement. The two chambers in Britain
reflected a kind of class division. Before the beginning of the eighteenth
century, several factors such as civil war, regicide, experimentation with a
republic, and the restoration of the titular monarch caused power to be
permanently shifted from the King to Parliament.131 Around the same time, the
British colonies in North America were crafting institutions of their own.
Colonial legislatures were being conceptualized on similar lines, with some
exceptions, to British Parliament. The Constitution for the newly formed
United States adopted a bicameral system.132 The legislature in the United
States was innovative, for it created a bicameral arrangement that replaced a
class basis (as was in existence in Britain) for chamber representation with a
modified federal basis. The Constitutional Convention of 1787 had provided for
a lower chamber, a directly-elected House of Representatives, where each voter
had an equal vote in elections, and an upper chamber, a Senate, to which each
state could send two members, elected indirectly by the state parliaments. The
Convention was a 130 Betty Drexhage, Bicameral Legislatures: An International
Comparison, Ministry of the Interior and Kingdom Relations- Netherlands
(2015), at page 7 131 Abhinay Muthoo & Kenneth A. Shepsle, The Constitutional
Choice of Bicameralism, in Institutions and Economic Performance (Elhanan
Helpman ed.), Harvard University Press (2008), at page 252 132 Betty Drexhage,
Bicameral Legislatures: An International Comparison, Ministry of the Interior
and Kingdom Relations- Netherlands (2015), at page 8  138 PART E compromise
between those who wanted a parliament in which the states, irrespective of
their population size, would have an equal voice, and those who wanted a
Parliament for the newly formed federal nation where the participating states
were represented in proportion to the size of their population. A system with
two differently composed chambers was ultimately chosen to be the only way out
of the deadlock.133 The rationale for a bicameral legislature comprising of a
directly elected Lower House and an indirectly elected Upper House was best
articulated by James Madison, in the Federalist Papers:

> “First… a senate, as a second branch of the legislative assembly, distinct
> from, and dividing the power with, a first, must be in all cases a salutary
> check on the government. It doubles the security to the people, by requiring
> the concurrence of two distinct bodies in schemes of usurpation or perfidy,
> where the ambition or corruption of one would otherwise be sufficient…
> Second. The necessity of a senate is not less indicated by the propensity of
> all single and numerous assemblies to yield to the impulse of sudden and
> violent passions, and to be seduced by factious leaders into intemperate and
> pernicious resolutions… Third. Another defect to be supplied by a senate
> lies in a want of due acquaintance with the objects and principles of
> legislation. It is not possible that an assembly of men called for the most
> part from pursuits of a private nature, continued in appointment for a short
> time, and led by no permanent motive to devote the intervals of public
> occupation to a study of the laws, the affairs, and the comprehensive
> interests of their country, should, if left wholly to themselves, escape a
> variety of important errors in the exercise of their legislative trust… A
> good government implies two things: first, fidelity to the object of
> government, which is the happiness of the people; secondly, a knowledge of
> the means by which that object can be best attained… Fourth. The mutability
> in the public councils arising from a rapid succession of new members,
> however qualified they 133Betty Drexhage, Bicameral Legislatures: An
> International Comparison, Ministry of the Interior and Kingdom Relations-
> Netherlands (2015), at page 7  139 PART E may be, points out, in the
> strongest manner, the necessity of some stable institution in the
> government…”134 Madison conceptualized that the second chamber would fulfil
> significant roles:

(a) it would provide the certainty that the government will not neglect its
obligations to its constituents, as the chamber provides an extra check on it;

(b) it can curb the actions of the other chamber if it gives into the urge to
follow ‘sudden and pronounced sentimental reactions’; (c) it can meet the need
for expertise in the framing of laws and the interests of the country, and
thus help to avoid legislative mistakes; and (d) it can be a factor for
stability that ensures continuity in the administration of the country. 86
Bicameralism, in both systems, emerged as a development associated with the
changing conceptions of the state. The literature on bicameralism has
highlighted the importance of having a second chamber in the legislature of a
state. William Riker has emphasized that a bicameral structure acts as a
control over the tyranny of a majority.135 Levmore similarly echoes this
thought:

> “At the very least, if the two chambers consider an issue simultaneously,
> one chamber’s agenda setter will be at the mercy of the order of
> consideration in the second chamber.

Bicameralism can thus be understood as an antidote to the manipulative power
of the convenor, or agenda setter, when faced with cycling preferences.”136
134 James Madison, The Federalist No. 62 – The Senate, The Federalist Papers
(1788), available at http://www.constitution.org/fed/federa62.html 135 William
H. Riker, The Justification of Bicameralism, International Political Science
Review (1992), Vol. 13, Issue 1, at pages 101–16.

136 Saul Levmore, Bicameralism: When Are Two Decisions Better than One?,
International Review of Law and Economics (1992), Vol. 12, at pages 147-148.
140 PART E A study137 commissioned by the Dutch Ministry of the Interior and
Kingdom Relations analysed the design of the bicameral system in several
countries. The study consulted constitutional texts and literature on the
evolution of bicameralism and came to the finding that:

> “Historically, the creation of bicameral systems, both in the federal and
> the aristocratic variant, always was a concession to those (states or
> estates) who risked losing power in the new setting. In emerging
> democracies, and up until the present day, the choice of a bicameral system
> appears as a means of dispelling fear about the consequences of
> democratisation and reconciling established elites with the democratisation
> process. In developed democracies, the rationale of a bicameral system is
> now sought primarily in the possibility of combining different systems of
> representation (particularly in federal systems) and in the possibility of
> reconsideration by a different chamber in the legislative, making it
> possible to avoid making mistakes and enhancing both the quality and the
> stability of the legislation. In majority systems of the Westminster model -
> where the government is part of the lower house and it tends to have a
> stable majority -

a senate moreover is sometimes ascribed the role of giving more independent
input into the parliamentary work, less determined by party discipline, and of
paying more attention to the interests of minorities. A bicameral system is,
for that reason, sometimes recommended as a means to protect minorities
against a tyranny of the majority… Finally, a bicameral system may also
increase efficiency because it is possible to divide the legislative workload
between two chambers. That can be the case when the two chambers absorb a sort
of division of labour (e.g. an emphasis on technical legal quality in the
senate). In many bicameral systems, moreover, it can be decided to put bills
to either house, and the senate also has a right of initiative.”138 87 The
importance of the second chamber increases when there is no single party rule
in Parliament. Governments that lack Upper-House majority 137 Betty Drexhage,
Bicameral Legislatures: An International Comparison, Ministry of the Interior
and Kingdom Relations- Netherlands (2015).

138 Ibid, at pages 11-12  141 PART E support find it difficult to pass
Bills.139 Elliot Bulmer notes pertinently that in a democracy, a second
chamber addresses the inability of the elected chamber to adequately represent
a diverse society. In this view, a second chamber may enable a “more nuanced
and complete representation of society, with greater representation for
territorial, communal or other minorities”.140 While discussing the advantage
of second chambers in republican legislatures, Rogers observes that the
institution of a second chamber generates legislative advantage only “if the
chambers differ significantly from one another”.141 Quoting from the work of
various scholars, he observes:

> “Hammond and Miller find that “The stability-inducing properties of
> bicameralism are . . . dependent on the existence of distinctly different
> viewpoints in the two chambers”… Buchanan and Tullock conclude similarly
> that, “unless the bases for representation are significantly different in
> the two houses, there would seem to be little excuse for the two-house
> system”… Because two “congruent” chambers would ostensibly not significantly
> affect policy outcomes, Lijphart described bicameral systems with congruent
> chambers as “weak” forms of bicameralism…”142 88 Bicameralism, when
> entrenched as a principle in a constitutional democracy, acts as a check
> against the abuse of power by constitutional means or its use in an
> oppressive manner. As a subset of the constitutional principle of division
> of power, bicameralism is mainly a safeguard against the abuse of the
> constitutional and political process. A bicameral national 139 James N.
> Druckman & Michael F. Thies, The Importance of Concurrence: The Impact of
> Bicameralism on Government Formation and Duration, American Journal of
> Political Science (2002), Vol. 46, No. 4, at pages 760-771.

140 Elliot Bulmer, Bicameralism, International Institute for Democracy and
Electoral Assistance (2017), at page 4 141 James R. Rogers, The Advantage of
Second Chambers in Republican Legislatures: An Informational Theory, at page
6, available at
https://ecpr.eu/Filestore/PaperProposal/beb20221-c2c5-4475-9b9f-74bb3f1512a7.pdf
142 Ibid  142 PART E parliament can hold the government accountable and can
check or restrain the misuse of government power. Among its other roles is
that of representing local state units, acting as a body of expert review, and
providing representation for diverse socio-economic interests or ethno-
cultural minorities.

While deliberating over the necessity of having a second chamber, the
Constituent Assembly had the benefit of examining the constitutional history
of several other nations. The constitutional advisor, B N Rau, found the issue
of second chambers to be “one of the most vexing questions of political
science”.143 Under colonial rule, bicameralism had already been introduced.
The first bicameral legislature as the national assembly for India was
established by the Government of India Act 1919. The Government of India Act,
1935 had created an Upper House in the federal legislature which consisted of
members elected by the provincial legislatures as well as representatives sent
by numerous princely states that were not under the direct control of the
British government. The 1935 Act became the blueprint for the structure of
Parliament in the new Constitution. The Rajya Sabha, as the Upper House of the
Parliament, was adopted into the Constitution. The vision of the Constitution
makers behind the establishment of the Upper House of Parliament has found
expression in the classic work of Granville Austin:

143Granville Austin, The Indian Constitution: Cornerstone of a Nation, Oxford
University Press (1966), at page  195 143 PART E “The members of the
Constituent Assembly had one predominant aim when framing the Legislative
provisions of the Constitution: to create a basis for the social and political
unity of the country… The goals of the Constituent Assembly… were to bring
popular opinion into the halls of government, and, by the method of bringing
it there, to show Indians that although they were many peoples, they were but
one nation.”144 89 Article 80 of the Constitution deals with the composition
of the Rajya Sabha. The maximum strength of this chamber is 250 members, out
of which up to 238 members are elected representatives from the states and
union territories. 12 members are nominated by the President among persons
with a special knowledge or practical experience in literature, science, art
and social service. Members representing the states are elected by the state
legislatures through proportional representation by means of a single
transferable vote145. The method of electing representatives from Union
territories has been left to prescription by Parliament.146 In a departure
from the American model of equal representation for the states, the allocation
of seats in the Rajya Sabha to the States and Union territories is in
accordance with the division provided in the Fourth Schedule of the
Constitution (read with Articles 4(1) and 80(2)). The reason behind this
division of seats is “to safeguard the interests of the smaller states while
at the same time ensuring the adequate representation of the larger states, so
that the will of the representatives of a minority of the electorate does not
prevail over that of 144 Granville Austin, The Indian Constitution:
Cornerstone of a Nation, Oxford University Press (1966), at pages 180 & 203
145 Article 80(4), The Constitution of India 146 Article 80(5), The
Constitution of India  144 PART E those who represented the majority”147. In
this sense, the Rajya Sabha has a special structure.

90 The institutional structure of the Rajya Sabha has been developed to
reflect the pluralism of the nation and its diversity of language, culture,
perception and interest. The Rajya Sabha was envisaged by the makers of the
Constitution to ensure a wider scrutiny of legislative proposals. As a second
chamber of Parliament, it acts as a check on hasty and ill-conceived
legislation, providing an opportunity for scrutiny of legislative business.
The role of the Rajya Sabha is intrinsic to ensuring executive accountability
and to preserving a balance of power. The Upper Chamber complements the
working of the Lower Chamber in many ways. The Rajya Sabha acts as an
institution of balance in relation to the Lok Sabha and represents the federal
structure148 of India. Both the existence and the role of the Rajya Sabha
constitute a part of the basic structure of the Constitution. The architecture
of our Constitution envisions the Rajya Sabha as an institution of federal
bicameralism and not just as a part of a simple bicameral legislature. Its
nomenclature as the ‘Council of States’ rather than the ‘Senate’ appropriately
justifies its federal importance.149 Seervai has observed that the federal
principle is dominant in our Constitution. While adverting to several of its
147 Sidharth Chauhan, Bicameralism: comparative insights and lessons, Seminar
(February, 2013) available at http://india-
seminar.com/2013/642/642_sidharth_chauhan.html 148 In SR Bommai v Union of
India (AIR 1994 SC 1998), a seven-judge Bench of this Court held: “Democracy
and federalism are the essential features of our Constitution and are part of
its basic structure.” 149 Rajya Sabha Secretariat, Second Chamber In Indian
Parliament: Role and Status of Rajya Sabha, (2009), at page 2. See also M.N.
Kaul and S.L. Shakdher, Practice and Procedure of Parliament, Lok Sabha
Secretariat  (2001) 145 PART E federal features, Seervai emphasises the
position of the Rajya Sabha as an integral element:

> “First and foremost, Parliament (the Central Legislature) is dependent upon
> the States, because one of its Houses, the Council of States, is elected by
> the Legislative Assemblies of the States. Where the ruling party, or group
> of parties, in the House of the People has a majority but not an
> overwhelming majority, the Council of States can have a very important voice
> in the passage of legislation other than financial Bills. Secondly, a Bill
> to amend the Constitution requires to be passed by each House of Parliament
> separately by an absolute majority in that House and by not less than two-

thirds of those present and voting. Since the Council of States is indirectly
elected by the State Legislatures, the State Legislatures have an important
say in the amendment of the Constitution because of the requirement of special
majorities in each House. Thirdly, the very important matters mentioned in the
proviso to Article 368 (Amendment of the Constitution) cannot be amended
unless the amendments passed by Parliament are ratified by not less than half
the number of Legislatures of the States… Fourthly, the amendment of Article
352 by the 44th Amendment gives the Council of States a most important voice
in the declaration of Emergency, because a proclamation of emergency must be
approved by each House separately by majorities required for an amendment of
the Constitution… Fifthly, the executive power of the Union is vested in the
President of India who is not directly elected by the people but is elected by
an electoral college consisting of (a) the elected members of the Legislative
Assemblies of the States and (b) the elected members of both Houses of
Parliament… Directly the State Legislatures have substantial voting power in
electing the President; that power is increased indirectly through the Council
of States, which is elected by the Legislative Assemblies of States.”150 91
The Rajya Sabha represents the constituent states of India. It legitimately
holds itself as the guardian of the interest of the component states in a
federal polity. It endeavours to remain concerned and sensitive to the
aspirations of the states, thereby strengthening the country’s “federal
fabric” 150 H M Seervai, Constitutional Law of India, Universal Law Co. Pvt.
Ltd, Vol. 1, (1991), at pages 299-300.  146 PART E and “promotes national
integration”.151 Being the federal chamber of Parliament, the Rajya Sabha
enjoys some special powers, which are not even available to the Lok Sabha,
under the Constitution152:

> “(i) Article 249 of the Constitution provides that Rajya Sabha may pass a
> resolution, by a majority of not less than two- thirds of the Members
> present and voting to the effect that it is necessary or expedient in the
> national interest that Parliament should make a law with respect to any
> matter enumerated in the State List. Then, Parliament is empowered to make a
> law on the subject specified in the resolution for the whole or any part of
> the territory of India. Such a resolution remains in force for a maximum
> period of one year but this period can be extended by one year at a time by
> passing a further resolution;

(ii) Under Article 312 of the Constitution, if Rajya Sabha passes a resolution
by a majority of not less than two-thirds of the Members present and voting
declaring that it is necessary or expedient in the national interest to create
one or more All India Services common to the Union and the States, Parliament
has the power to create by law such services; and

(iii) Under the Constitution, President is empowered to issue Proclamations in
the event of national emergency (Article

352), in the event of failure of constitutional machinery in a State (Article
356), or in the case of financial emergency (Article 360). Normally, every
such Proclamation has to be approved by both Houses of Parliament within a
stipulated period. Under certain circumstances, however, Rajya Sabha enjoys
special powers in this regard. If a Proclamation is issued at a time when the
dissolution of the Lok Sabha takes place within the period allowed for its
approval, then the Proclamation can remain effective if a resolution approving
it, is passed by Rajya Sabha.” 92 The Rajya Sabha is a permanent body as it is
not subject to dissolution.153 Being an indirectly elected House, it has no
role in the making or unmaking of the Government and therefore it is
comparatively “free from 151 Rajya Sabha Secretariat, Second Chamber In Indian
Parliament: Role and Status of Rajya Sabha, (2009), at page 6.

152 Rajya Sabha Secretariat, Structure and Functions of Rajya Sabha
Secretariat, (2009), at pages 2-3 153 Under Article 83(1), the Rajya Sabha is
a permanent body with members being elected for 6 year terms and one-third of
the members retiring every 2 years.  147 PART E compulsions of competitive
party politics”.154 As a revising chamber, the Constitution makers envisioned
that it will protect the values of the Constitution, even if it is against the
popular will. The Rajya Sabha is a symbol against majoritarianism.

A Constitution Bench of this Court in Kuldip Nayar v Union of India155
highlighted the importance of the Rajya Sabha:

> “47. The Rajya Sabha is a forum to which experienced public figures get
> access without going through the din and bustle of a general election which
> is inevitable in the case of Lok Sabha. It acts as a revising chamber over
> the Lok Sabha. The existence of two debating chambers means that all
> proposals and programmes of the Government are discussed twice. As a
> revising chamber, the Rajya Sabha helps in improving Bills passed by the Lok
> Sabha...”156 93 Participatory governance is the essence of democracy. It
> ensures responsiveness and transparency. An analysis of the Bills revised by
> the Rajya Sabha reveals that in a number of cases, the changes recommended
> by the Rajya Sabha in the Bills passed by the Lok Sabha were eventually
> carried out.157 The Dowry Prohibition Bill is an example of a legislation in
> which the Rajya Sabha’s insistence on amendments led to the convening of a
> joint sitting158 of the two Houses and in that sitting, one of the
> amendments 154 Rajya Sabha Secretariat, Second Chamber In Indian Parliament:
> Role and Status of Rajya Sabha, (2009), at pages 7-8 155 (2006) 7 SCC 1 156
> Ibid, at page 47 157 Rajya Sabha Secretariat, Second Chamber In Indian
> Parliament: Role and Status of Rajya Sabha, (2009), at page 5 158 Dr
> Ambedkar explained that the joint sitting had been kept at the centre
> because of the federal character of the Central Legislature. See Granville
> Austin, The Indian Constitution: Cornerstone of a Nation, Oxford University
> Press (1966), at page 202  148 PART E suggested by the Rajya Sabha was
> adopted without a division. 159 The Rajya Sabha has a vital responsibility
> in nation building, as the dialogue between the two houses of Parliament
> helps to address disputes from divergent perspectives. The bicameral nature
> of Indian Parliament is integral to the working of the federal Constitution.
> It lays down the foundations of our democracy. That it forms a part of the
> basic structure of the Constitution, is hence based on constitutional
> principle. The decision of the Speaker on whether a Bill is a Money Bill is
> not a matter of procedure. It directly impacts on the role of the Rajya
> Sabha and, therefore, on the working of the federal polity.

94 There is a constitutional trust which attaches to the empowerment of the
Speaker of the Lok Sabha to decide whether a legislative measure is a Money
Bill. Entrustment of the authority to decide is founded on the expectation
that the Speaker of the Lok Sabha will not dilute the existence of a co-
ordinate institution in a bicameral legislature. A constitutional trust has
been vested in the office of the Speaker of the Lok Sabha. By declaring an
ordinary Bill to be a Money Bill, the Speaker limits the role of the Rajya
Sabha. This power cannot be unbridled or bereft of judicial scrutiny. If the
power of the Speaker is exercised contrary to constitutional norms, it will
not only limit the role of the Rajya Sabha, but denude the efficacy of a
legislative body created by the Constitution. Such an outcome would be
inconsistent 159 Rajya Sabha Secretariat, Second Chamber In Indian Parliament:
Role and Status of Rajya Sabha, (2009), at page 5  149 PART E with the scheme
of the Indian Constitution. Judicial review is necessary to ensure that the
federal features of the Constitution are not transgressed. E.2 Aadhaar Act as
a Money Bill This Court must now deal with whether the Aadhaar Act was validly
passed as a Money Bill.

95 Article 110(1) of the Constitution defines a Money Bill. For a Bill to be a
Money Bill, it must contain “only provisions” dealing with every or any one of
the matters set out in sub-clauses (a) to (g) of clause 1 of Article 110. The
expression “if it contains only provisions dealing with all or any of the
following matters, namely...” is crucial. Firstly, the expression “if”
indicates a condition and it is only upon the condition being fulfilled that
the deeming fiction of a Bill being a Money Bill for the purposes of the
Chapter will arise. Secondly, to be a Money Bill, the Bill should have only
those provisions which are referable to clauses (a) to (g). The condition is
much more stringent than stipulating that the Bill should incorporate any of
the matters spelt out in clauses (a) to (g). The words “only provisions” means
that besides the matters in sub clauses (a) to (g), the Bill shall not include
anything else. Otherwise, the expression “only” will have no meaning. The word
“only” cannot be treated to be otiose or redundant. Thirdly, the two
expressions “if it contains only provisions” and “namely” indicate that sub-
clauses (a) to (g) are exhaustive of what a Money Bill may contain. The
contents of a Money Bill have to be confined to all or any  150 PART E of the
matters specified in sub-clauses (a) to (g). Fourthly, sub-clause (g) covers
any matter incidental to sub-clauses (a) to (f). A matter is incidental when
it is ancillary to what is already specified. Sub-clause (g) is not a
residuary entry which covers all other matters other than those specified in
sub-clauses (a) to (f). If sub-clause (g) were read as a catch-all residuary
provision, it would defeat the purpose of defining a class of Bills as Money
Bills. What is incidental under sub-clause (g) is that which is ancillary to a
matter which is already specified in sub-clauses (a) to (f). The test is not
whether it is incidental to the content of a Bill but whether it is incidental
to any of the matters specifically enumerated in sub-clauses (a) to (f). The
Attorney General would request the court to read the word “only” before “if”
and not where it occurs. If the submission were to be accepted, it would lead
to the consequence that the Bill would be a Money Bill if it contained
provisions dealing with clause (a) to (g), even if it contained other
provisions not relatable to these clauses. We cannot rewrite the Constitution,
particularly where it is contrary to both text, context and intent.

Clause (2) of Article 110 provides that a Bill shall not be deemed to be a
Money Bill just for the reason that it provides for the imposition of fines or
other pecuniary penalties, or for the demand or payment of fees for licences
or fees for services rendered, or by reason that it provides for the
imposition, abolition, remission, alteration or regulation of any tax by any
local authority or body for local purposes. Like in the Parliament Act of
1911, the definition of a  151 PART E Money Bill provided under Article 110(1)
is exhaustive in nature. A Bill can be a Money Bill if it contains “only
provisions” dealing with all or any of the matters listed under sub-clauses
(a) to (g) of Article 110(1). 96 A Financial Bill is different from a Money
Bill. Article 117 provides for special provisions relating to Financial Bills.
Clause (1) of Article 117 states:

> “(1) A Bill or amendment making provision for any of the matters specified
> in sub-clauses (a) to (f) of clause (1) of article 110 shall not be
> introduced or moved except on the recommendation of the President and a Bill
> making such provision shall not be introduced in the Council of States.” A
> Financial Bill does not need to have “only provisions” dealing with Sub-

clauses (a) to (f) of Article 110. The provisions of Article 110(1) are
therefore narrow and exhaustive.

97 As a matter of interpretation, the use of the word “only” indicates that a
particular entry is exhaustive and is inapplicable to anything which falls
outside its scope. This Court has interpreted the expression “only” as a word
of exclusion and restriction.160 The interpretation of Article 110(1) as being
restrictive in nature is also supported by the proceedings in the Constituent
Assembly of India. Article 110 corresponds to Article 90 of the Draft
Constitution. On 20 May 1949, a member of the Constituent Assembly, Ghanshyam
Singh Gupta, proposed an amendment in clause (1) of Article 90 160Hari Ram v.
Baby Gokul Prasad, (1991) Supp (2) SCC 608; M/s Saru Smelting (P) Ltd. v.
Commissioner of Sales Tax, Lucknow, (1993) Supp (3) SCC 97.

152 PART E to delete the word “only”. He stated that a Bill can be a Money
bill even while containing other provisions. Gupta argued:

> “This article is a prototype of Section 37 of the Government of India Act
> which says that a Bill or amendment providing for imposing or increasing a
> tax or borrowing money, etc. shall not be introduced or moved except on the
> recommendation of the Governor-General. This means that the whole Bill need
> not be a money Bill: it may contain other provisions, but if there is any
> provision about taxation or borrowing, etc. It will come under this Section
> 37, and the recommendation of the Governor-General is necessary. Now article
> 90 says that a Bill shall be deemed to be a money Bill if it contains only
> provisions dealing with the imposition, regulation, etc., of any tax or the
> borrowing of money, etc. This can mean that if there is a Bill which has
> other provisions and also a provision about taxation or borrowing etc., it
> will not become a money Bill. If that is the intention I have nothing to
> say; but that if that is not the intention I must say the word "only" is
> dangerous, because if the Bill does all these things and at the same time
> does something else also it will not be a money Bill. I do not know what the
> intention of the Drafting Committee is but I think this aspect of the
> article should be borne in mind.”161 (Emphasis supplied) Another member
> Naziruddin Ahmad also emphasized on the deletion of the word “only”. The
> concern of these two members was that the word “only” restricts the scope of
> a Bill being passed as a Money Bill. Their apprehension was that if a Bill
> has other provisions which are unrelated to the clauses mentioned in draft
> Article 90, the Bill would not qualify to be a Money Bill in view of the
> word “only”. The amendment suggested by these members was listed to be put
> to vote on a later date. The amendment was rejected when it was put to vote
> on 8 June 1949. The framers of the Indian Constitution consciously rejected
> the said amendment.

161 Constituent Assembly Debates (20 May 1949)  153 PART E 98 When a Bill is
listed as a Money Bill, it takes away the power of the Rajya Sabha to reject
or amend the Bill. The Rajya Sabha can only make suggestions to a Money Bill,
which are not binding on the Lok Sabha. The Constitution makers would have
been aware about the repercussions of a Bill being introduced as a Money Bill.
As the role of the Rajya Sabha is limited in the context of Money Bills, the
scope of what constitutes a Money Bill was restricted by adopting the word
“only” in Draft Article 90. A Bill to be a Money Bill must not contain any
provision which falls outside clauses (a) to (g) of Article 110(1). The
Constitution has carefully used the expression “dealing with” in Article 110
(1) and not the wider legislative form “related to”. A Bill, which has both −
certain provisions which fall within sub-clauses (a) to (g) of Article 110(1)
and other provisions which fall outside will not qualify to be a Money Bill.
It is for this reason that there cannot also be any issue of the severability
of the provisions of a Bill, which has certain provisions relating to sub-
clauses (a) to (g) of Article 110(1), while also containing provisions which
fall beyond. Any other interpretation would result in rewriting the
Constitution. If a Bill contains provisions which fall outside sub-clauses (a)
to (g), it is not a Money Bill. The Rajya Sabha is entitled as part of its
constitutional function to legislative participation. The entirety of the Bill
cannot be regarded as a Money Bill, once it contains any matters which fall
beyond sub-clauses (a) to (g). Once that is the position, it could be
impossible to sever those parts which fall within sub-clauses (a) to (g) and
those that lie outside. The presence of matters which travel beyond sub-
clauses (a) to (g) has consequences in terms  154 PART E of the nature of the
Bill and the legislative participation of the Rajya Sabha. If the
constitutional function of the Rajya Sabha has been denuded on the hypothesis
that this Bill was a Money Bill, the consequence of a finding in judicial
review that the Bill is not a Money Bill must follow. Any other construction
will reduce bicameralism to an illusion. This interpretation is also supported
by the judgment of a Bench of seven judges of this Court in Krishna Kumar
Singh v State of Bihar162, where it held that the ordinance making power
conferred upon the President and the Governors is limited by the requirements
set out by Articles 123 and 213. This Court had held:

> “59…The constitutional conferment of a power to frame ordinances is in
> deviation of the normal mode of legislation which takes place through the
> elected bodies comprising of Parliament and the state legislatures. Such a
> deviation is permitted by the Constitution to enable the President and
> Governors to enact ordinances which have the force and effect of law simply
> because of the existence of circumstances which can brook no delay in the
> formulation of legislation. In a parliamentary democracy, the government is
> responsible collectively to the elected legislature. The subsistence of a
> government depends on the continued confidence of the legislature. The
> ordinance making power is subject to the control of the legislature over the
> executive. The accountability of the executive to the legislature is
> symbolised by the manner in which the Constitution has subjected the
> ordinance making power to legislative authority. This, the Constitution
> achieves by the requirements of Article 213...”163 (Emphasis supplied) 99
> The authority of the Lok Sabha to pass a Money Bill is based on the
> requirements set out under Article 110. The framers of the Indian
> Constitution 162 (2017) 3 SCC 1 163 Ibid, at page 61  155 PART E
> deliberately restricted the scope of Article 110(1) to ensure that the
> provision is not an avenue to supersede the authority of the Rajya Sabha.
> The intention of the Constitution makers is clear. The Lok Sabha cannot
> introduce and pass a legislative measure in the garb of a Money Bill, which
> could otherwise have been amended or rejected by the Rajya Sabha.
> Bicameralism is a founding value of our democracy. It is a part of the basic
> structure of the Constitution.

Introduction and passing of a Bill as a Money Bill, which does not qualify to
be a Money Bill under Article 110(1) of the Constitution, is plainly
unconstitutional. The Lok Sabha is not entrusted with the entire authority of
Parliament. The Lok Sabha, the Rajya Sabha and the President together
constitute the Parliament of India. The Lok Sabha is a body of elected
representatives and represents the aspirations of citizens. Yet, like every
constitutional institution, it is part of this basic structure of the
Constitution. A political party or a coalition which holds the majority in the
Lok Sabha cannot subvert the working of the Constitution, against which Dr B R
Ambedkar had warned164 in the Constituent Assembly. A ruling government has to
work within constitutional parameters and has to abide by constitutional
morality. 100 The Constitution of India is not a mere parchment of paper. It
was written with the vision of those who gave blood and sweat to freedom:
political personalities, social reformers and constitution framers. It
symbolises a faith in institutions, justice and good governance. That vision
cannot be belied. The 164 Constituent Assembly Debates (4 November, 1948). Dr
Ambedkar had remarked: “… it is perfectly possible to pervert the
Constitution, without changing its form by merely changing the form of the
administration and to make it inconsistent and opposed to the spirit of the
Constitution.”  156 PART E Speaker of the Lok Sabha has an onerous
constitutional duty to ensure that a Bill, which is not a Money Bill is not
passed as a Money Bill. The Speaker of the Lok Sabha, the Chairman of the
Rajya Sabha, the members of the Lok Sabha and the Rajya Sabha, and the
President need to work in constitutional solidarity to ensure that no
provision of the Constitution is diluted or subverted. 101 The Aadhaar Act was
passed as a Money Bill. The provisions of the Act need to be analysed to
determine whether the Act is a Money Bill. The Preamble of the Act states that
it is:

> “An Act to provide for, as a good governance, efficient, transparent, and
> targeted delivery of subsidies, benefits and services, the expenditure for
> which is incurred from the Consolidated Fund of India, to individuals
> residing in India through assigning of unique identity numbers to such
> individuals and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.” The
> Preamble focuses on the delivery of subsidies, benefits and services for
> which the expenditure is borne from the Consolidated Fund of India. But the
> essential issue is whether the Act confines itself to matters which fall
> within the ambit of Article 110.

102 Section 3 entitles every resident165 in India to obtain an Aadhaar number
by submitting his or her demographic information, by undergoing the process of
enrolment. Section 2(m) defines “enrolment” as the process to 165 Section 2(v)
provides: “resident” means an individual who has resided in India for a period
or periods amounting in all to one hundred and eighty-two days or more in the
twelve months immediately preceding the date of application for enrolment.

157 PART E collect demographic and biometric information from individuals by
the enrolling agencies for the purpose of issuing Aadhaar numbers to such
individuals. After receiving the demographic and biometric information of the
individual, the Unique Identification Authority of India (UIDAI) would verify
the information and shall issue an Aadhaar number to such an individual.166
Section 4(3) provides that the Aadhaar number may be accepted as proof of
identity for “any purpose”. Section 5 requires UIDAI to take special measures
to issue Aadhaar numbers to “women, children, senior citizens, persons with
disability, unskilled and unorganised workers, nomadic tribes or to such other
persons who do not have any permanent dwelling house and such other categories
of individuals”. Under Section 6, UIDAI may require Aadhaar number holders to
update their demographic information and biometric information, from time to
time so as to ensure continued accuracy of their information in the Central
Identities Data Repository (“CIDR”). The Aadhaar Act defines CIDR as a
centralised database containing all Aadhaar numbers issued to Aadhaar number
holders along with the corresponding demographic information and biometric
information of such individuals and other related information.167 103 Section
7 requires proof of an Aadhaar number as a necessary condition to avail
subsidies, benefits and services, for which the expenditure is borne from the
Consolidated Fund of India. The proviso to Section 7 states that if an Aadhaar
number is not assigned to an individual, the individual shall 166 Section
3(3), Aadhaar Act 167 Section 2(h), Aadhaar Act  158 PART E be offered
alternate and viable means of identification for delivery of the subsidy,
benefit or service. Section 8(1) requires UIDAI to perform authentication168
of the Aadhaar number of an Aadhaar number holder, in relation to his or her
biometric information or demographic information submitted by any requesting
entity169. Under Section 8(2), a requesting entity is required to obtain the
consent of an individual before collecting his or her identity information for
the purposes of authentication. The requesting entity must ensure that the
identity information of an individual collected by it is only used for
submission to the CIDR for authentication. Section 8(3) requires a requesting
entity to inform the individual submitting identity information for
authentication certain details with respect to authentication. 104 Chapter IV
of the Act deals with UIDAI. Section 11 establishes UIDAI as the body
responsible for the processes of enrolment and authentication and for
performing functions assigned to it under the Act. The Act provides for the
composition of UIDAI170, qualifications of its members171, terms of office172
of its chairperson and members, their removal173 and functions174. Section 23,
which deals with the powers and functions of UIDAI, authorizes it to develop
the policy, procedure and systems for issuing Aadhaar numbers to individuals
168 Section 2(c) provides: “authentication” means the process by which the
Aadhaar number alongwith demographic information or biometric information of
an individual is submitted to the Central Identities Data Repository for its
verification and such Repository verifies the correctness, or the lack
thereof, on the basis of information available with it.

169 Section 2 (u) provides: “requesting entity” means an agency or person that
submits the Aadhaar number, and demographic information or biometric
information, of an individual to the Central Identities Data Repository for
authentication 170 Section 12, Aadhaar Act 171 Section 13, Aadhaar Act 172
Section 14, Aadhaar Act 173 Section 15, Aadhaar Act 174 Section 17, Aadhaar
Act  159 PART E and to perform authentication. Section 23(h) states that UIDAI
has the power to specify the “manner of use of Aadhaar numbers” for the
purposes of providing or availing of various subsidies, benefits, services and
“other purposes” for which Aadhaar numbers may be used. Under Section 23(3),
UIDAI may enter into a Memorandum of Understanding or agreement with the
Central Government or State Governments or Union territories or other agencies
for the purpose of performing any of the functions in relation to collecting,
storing, securing or processing of information or delivery of Aadhaar numbers
to individuals or performing authentication. 105 Chapter V deals with grants,
accounts and audit and annual reports of UIDAI. Section 25 provides that the
fees or revenue collected by UIDAI shall be credited to the Consolidated Fund
of India. Chapter VI deals with protection of information collected from
individuals for authentication. Section 28(3) requires UIDAI to take all
necessary measures to ensure that the information in its possession or
control, including information stored in the CIDR, is secured and protected
against access, use or disclosure (not permitted under the Act or the
regulations), and against accidental or intentional destruction, loss or
damage. Section 29 imposes restrictions on sharing of core biometric
information, collected or created under the Act. Section 32(2) entitles every
Aadhaar number holder to obtain his or her authentication record in such
manner as may be specified by regulations. Section 33 provides for disclosure
of information pursuant to a court order or in the interest of national
security.  160 PART E 106 Chapter VII of the Act (Sections 34 to 47) provides
for offences and penalties. Section 34 provides for penalty for impersonation
at the time of enrolment. Section 35 provides a penalty for impersonation of
an Aadhaar number holder by changing demographic or biometric information.
Under Section 37, a penalty for disclosing identity information (which was
collected in the course of enrolment or authentication) is provided. Section
38 provides a penalty for unauthorised access to the CIDR. Section 39 imposes
a penalty for tampering with data in the CIDR. Under Sections 40 and 41, a
penalty has been provided for requesting entities and enrolment agencies, in
case they act in contravention of the obligations imposed upon them under the
Act. Section 44 indicates that the provisions of the Act would apply to any
offence or contravention committed outside India by any person, irrespective
of nationality.

107 Section 48 empowers the Central Government to supersede UIDAI in certain
situations. Section 50 states that UIDAI is bound by directions on questions
of policy given by the Central Government. Section 51 authorizes the UIDAI to
delegate to any member, officer of the Authority or any other person, such of
its powers and functions (except the power under section 54) as it may deem
necessary. Section 53 empowers the Central Government to make rules to carry
out the provisions of the Act. Under Section 54(2)(m), UIDAI can make
regulations providing the manner of use of Aadhaar numbers for the purposes of
providing or availing of various subsidies, benefits,  161 PART E services and
“other purposes” for which Aadhaar numbers may be used. Section 57 authorizes
the State or any body corporate or person to use an Aadhaar number for
establishing the identity of an individual “for any purpose”, subject to the
procedure and obligations under Section 8 and Chapter VI of the Act. Section
59 seeks to validate the actions taken by the Central Government pursuant to
the notifications dated 28 January 2009 and 12 September 2015, and prior to
the enactment of the Aadhaar Act. This broad description of the provisions of
the Aadhaar Act indicates that the Act creates a framework for obtaining a
unique identity number - the Aadhaar number - by submitting demographic and
biometric information and undergoing the process of enrolment and
authentication. The Act indicates that the Aadhaar number may be accepted as
proof of identity for any purpose. The Act, in other words, creates a platform
for one pan-India and nationally acceptable identity. It creates a central
database (CIDR) for storage of identity information collected from
individuals. Sections 3 to 6 specifically deal with the process of enrolment.
Section 3 entitles every resident to hold an Aadhaar number. Section 4(3)
states that the Aadhaar number so generated may be used as a proof of identity
“for any purpose”. The primary object of the legislation is to create one
national identity for every resident. It seeks to do so by legislating a
process for collecting demographic and biometric information. The Act has
created an authority to oversee the fulfilment of its provisions. In its
primary focus and initiatives, the law traverses  162 PART E beyond the
territory reserved by Article 110 for a Money Bill. Sections 7 to 10 deal with
authentication of information submitted at the time of enrolment. Section 8
creates obligations on requesting entities to ensure that consent is obtained
from individuals before collecting their identity information and that the
identity information of such individual is only used for submission to the
CIDR for authentication. Sections 11 to 23 create a statutory authority
(UIDAI) and assign responsibilities to it for the processes of enrolment and
authentication and to discharge other functions assigned to it under the Act,
including developing the policy, procedure and systems for issuing Aadhaar
numbers to individuals. Section 23(2)(h) provides that apart from availing of
various subsidies, benefits, and services, Aadhaar numbers may be used for
“other purposes”. Sections 28 to 33 deal with protection of information, and
provide for security and confidentiality of identity information and
restrictions on sharing of information. Section 28 imposes obligations on the
UIDAI to ensure the security and confidentiality of identity information and
authentication records of individuals, which are in its possession or control,
including information stored in CIDR. Disclosure of identity information and
authentication records can be made under Section 33, pursuant to a court order
(not below the rank of District Judge) or in the interest of national security
in pursuance of a direction of an officer (not below the rank of Joint
Secretary to the Government of India). Sections 34 to 47 deal with substantive
offences and penalties created under the Act. Sections 54(2)(m) states that
regulations can be made by UIDAI specifying the manner of use of Aadhaar  163
PART E numbers for the purposes of providing or availing of various subsidies,
benefits, services and “other purposes” for which Aadhaar numbers may be used.
Section 57 authorizes the use of Aadhaar number by anyone (whether by the
State or any body corporate or person under law or contract) for establishing
the identity of an individual “for any purpose”. 108 Section 7 makes the use
of the Aadhaar number mandatory for availing subsidies, benefits or services,
for which expenditure is incurred from the Consolidated Fund of India. The
scheme of the Act deals with several aspects relating to the unique identity
number. The unique identity is capable of being used for multiple purposes:
availing benefits, subsidies and services, for which expenses are incurred
from the Consolidated Fund of India, is just one purpose, among others. The
Preamble to the Aadhaar Act indicates that the main objective was to achieve
an efficient and “targeted delivery of subsidies, benefits and services, the
expenditure for which is incurred from the Consolidated Fund of India”. The
substantive provisions of the Act are, however, not confined to the object
specified in the Preamble. Indeed, they travel far beyond the boundaries of a
money bill under Article 110(1). The enrolment on the basis of demographic and
biometric information, generation of Aadhaar number, obtaining consent of
individuals before collecting their individual information, creation of a
statutory authority to implement and supervise the process, protection of
information collected during the process, disclosure of information in certain
circumstances, creation of offences and  164 PART E penalties for disclosure
or loss of information, and the use of the Aadhaar number for any purpose lie
outside the ambit of Article 110. These themes are also not incidental to any
of the matters covered by sub-clauses (a) to (f) of Article 110(1). The
provisions of Section 57 which allow the use of an Aadhaar number by bodies
corporate or private parties for any purpose do not fall within the ambit of
Article 110. The legal framework of the Aadhaar Act creates substantive
obligations and liabilities which have the capability of impacting on the
fundamental rights of residents. 109 A Bill, to be a Money Bill, must contain
only provisions which fall within the ambit of the matters mentioned in
Article 110. Section 7 of the Act allows the Aadhaar number to be made
mandatory for availing of services, benefits and subsidies for which
expenditure is incurred from the Consolidated Fund of India. Under clause (e)
of Article 110(1) the money bill must deal with the declaring of any
expenditure to be expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of India (or
increasing the amount of expenditure). Significantly, Section 7 does not
declare the expenditure incurred on services, benefits or subsidies to be a
charge on the Consolidated Fund of India. What Section 7 does is to enact a
provision allowing for Aadhaar to be made mandatory, in the case of services,
benefits or subsidies which are charged to the Consolidated Fund. Section 7
does not declare them to be a charge on the Consolidated Fund. It provides
that in the case of services, benefits or subsidies which are already charged
to the Consolidated Fund, Aadhaar can be made mandatory to avail  165 PART E
of them. Section 7, in other words, is a provision for imposing a requirement
of authentication and not declaring any expenditure to be a charge on the
Consolidated Fund of India. Hence, even Section 7 is not within the ambit of
Article 110(1)(e). However, even if Section 7 were to be held to be referable
to Article 110, that does not apply to the other provisions of the Act. The
other provisions of the Act do not in any event fall within the ambit of
Article 110(1). Introducing one provision – Section 7 – does not render the
entirety of the Act a Money Bill where its other provisions travel beyond the
parameters set out in Article 110. Section 57 of the Act in particular (which
creates a platform for the use of the Aadhaar number by the private entities)
can by no stretch of logic be covered under Article 110(1). The other
provisions of the Act do not deal with that which has been provided under Sub-
clauses (a) to (g) of Article 110. As regards the ‘incidental’ provision under
Article 110(1)(g), the provisions of the Aadhaar Act are not “incidental to
any of the matters specified in sub- clauses (a) to (f)”. Even if it is
assumed that there is one provision (Section 7) which is relatable to sub-
clause (e) of Article 110(1), the other provisions of the Act are unrelated to
Article 110(1).

110 This Court must also advert to the legislative history prior to the
enactment of the Aadhaar Act. An attempt to provide a legislative framework
governing the Aadhaar project was first made by introducing the National
Identification Authority of India Bill, 2010 (“NIA Bill”). The NIA Bill was
166 PART E introduced in the Rajya Sabha on 3 December 2010. The Preamble of
the Bill indicated its purpose:

> “A Bill to provide for the establishment of the National Identification
> Authority of India for the purpose of issuing identification numbers to
> individuals residing in India and to certain other classes of individuals
> and manner of authentication of such individuals to facilitate access to
> benefits and services to such individuals to which they are entitled and for
> matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.” The main objective of
> the Bill was to establish the National Identification Authority of India to
> issue unique identification numbers (called ‘Aadhaar’) to residents of India
> and to any other category of people for the purpose of facilitating access
> to benefits and services. Chapter II (Clauses 3 to 10) of the Bill dealt
> with Aadhaar numbers. Clause 3 of the Bill entitled every resident to obtain
> an Aadhaar number on providing demographic and biometric information to the
> Authority in such manner as may be specified. Clause 4(3) stated that an
> Aadhaar number shall be accepted, subject to authentication, as proof of
> identity of the Aadhaar number holder. Chapter III (Clauses 11 to

> 23) dealt with the National Identification Authority of India. Clause 11
> provided for establishment of the Authority by the Central Government.
> Clause 23 empowered the Authority to develop the policy, procedure and
> systems for issuing Aadhaar numbers to residents and to perform
> authentication. Clause 23(2)(h) stated that the Authority may specify the
> usage and applicability of the Aadhaar number for delivery of various
> benefits and services.

Establishing, operating and maintaining of the Central Identities Data
Repository (CIDR) by the Authority was provided under Clause 23(2)(j).  167
PART E Chapter IV (Clauses 24 to 27) provide for grants, accounts and audit
and annual reports related to the Authority. Clause 25 stated that the fees or
revenue collected by the Authority shall be credited to the Consolidated Fund
of India and the entire amount would be transferred to the Authority. Chapter
V (Clauses 28 and 29) dealt with creation of an Identity Review Committee and
its functions. The functions of the Review Committee included ascertaining the
extent and pattern of usage of Aadhaar numbers across the country and
preparing a report annually along with recommendations. Chapter VI (Clauses 30
to 33) dealt with the protection of individual identity information and
authentication records. Clause 30(1) required the Authority to ensure the
security and confidentiality of identity information and authentication
records of individuals. Clause 30(2) required the Authority to take measures
(including security safeguards) to ensure that the information in the
possession or control of the Authority (including information stored in the
Central Identities Data Repository) is secured and protected against any loss
or unauthorised access or use or unauthorised disclosure. Clause 33 stated
that individual information may be disclosed pursuant a court order or in the
interest of national security. Chapter VII (Clauses 34 to 46) created offences
and penalties under the law. Clause 47 empowered the Central Government to
supersede the Authority. Clause 50 authorized the Authority to delegate to any
Member, officer of the Authority or any other person such of its powers and
functions (except the power under Clause 53). Clause 57 sought to validate
168 PART E actions taken by the Central Government under the Planning
Commission’s notification of 2009.

111 Since the UID programme involved complex issues, the NIA Bill was
referred, on 10 December 2010, to the Standing Committee on Finance, chaired
by Mr Yashwant Sinha, for examination and report. The Standing Committee
comprised of 21 members from the Lok Sabha and 10 members from the Rajya
Sabha. The Standing Committee submitted its Report175 on 11 December 2011. The
Report raised several objections to the Bill, which included those summarised
below:

(i) Since law making was underway, the bill being pending, any executive
action is as violative of Parliament’s prerogatives as promulgation of an
ordinance while one of the Houses of Parliament is in session;

(ii) While the country is facing a serious problem of illegal immigrants and
infiltration from across the borders, the National Identification Authority of
India Bill, 2010 proposes to entitle every resident to obtain an Aadhaar
number, apart from entitling such other category of individuals as may be
notified from time to time. This will, it is apprehended, make even illegal
immigrants entitled for an Aadhaar number;

(iii) The issue of a unique identification number to individuals residing in
India and other classes of individuals under the Unique Identification (UID)
175Forty-Second Report, Standing Committee on Finance (2011-12), available at
http://www.prsindia.org/uploads/media/UID/uid%20report.pdf  169 PART E Scheme
is riddled with serious lacunae and concern areas. For example, the full or
near full coverage of marginalized sections for issuing Aadhaar numbers could
not be achieved mainly due to two reasons viz. (a) the UIDAI doesn’t have the
statistical data relating to them; and (b) estimated failure of biometrics is
expected to be as high as 15% because a large chunk of population is dependent
on manual labour;

(iv) Despite the presence of serious differences of opinion within the
Government on the UID scheme, the scheme continues to be implemented in an
overbearing manner without regard to legalities and other social consequences;

(v) The UID scheme lacks clarity on many issues including even the basic
purpose of issuing an “Aadhaar” number. Although the scheme claims that
obtaining an Aadhaar number is voluntary, an apprehension has developed in the
minds of people that in future, services / benefits including food
entitlements would be denied in case they do not an have an Aadhaar number;

(vi) It is also not clear as to whether possession of an Aadhaar number would
be made mandatory in future for availing of benefits and services. Even if the
Aadhaar number links entitlements to targeted beneficiaries, it may not ensure
that beneficiaries have been correctly identified. Thus, the present problem
of proper identification would persist;  170 PART E

(vii) Though there are significant differences between the identity system of
other countries and the UID scheme, yet there are lessons from the global
experience to be learnt before proceeding with the implementation of the UID
scheme, which the Ministry of Planning has ignored completely;

(viii) Considering the huge database and possibility of misuse of information,
the enactment of a national data protection law is a pre-requisite for any law
that deals with large scale collection of information from individuals and its
linkages across separate databases. In the absence of data protection
legislation, it would be difficult to deal with issues like access to and
misuse of personal information, surveillance, profiling, linking and matching
of data bases and securing confidentiality of information;

(ix) The Standing Committee strongly disapproved of the hasty manner in which
the UID scheme was approved. Unlike many other schemes / projects, no
comprehensive feasibility study, which ought to have been done before
approving such an expensive scheme, was done involving all aspects of the UID
scheme including a cost-benefit analysis, comparative costs of Aadhaar numbers
and various existing forms of identity, financial implications and prevention
of identity theft, for example, using hologram enabled ration cards to
eliminate fake and duplicate beneficiaries;

(x) The UID scheme may end up being dependent on private agencies, despite
contractual agreements made by the UIDAI with several private  171 PART E
vendors. As a result, the beneficiaries may be forced to pay over and above
the charges to be prescribed by the UIDAI for availing of benefits and
services, which are now available free of cost;

(xi) The scheme is full of uncertainty in technology as a complex scheme is
built up on untested and unreliable technology and on several assumptions. It
is also not known as to whether the proof of concept studies and assessment
studies undertaken by the UIDAI have explored the possibilities of maintaining
accuracy to a large level of enrolment of 1.2 billion people; and

(xii) The Committee felt that entrusting the responsibility of verification of
information of individuals to the registrars to ensure that only genuine
residents get enrolled into the system may have far reaching consequences for
national security. Given the limitation of any mechanism such as a security
audit by an appropriate agency that would be set up for verifying the
information, it is not evident as to whether a complete verification of
information of all Aadhaar number holders is practically feasible; and whether
it would deliver the intended results without compromising national security.

With these apprehensions about the UID scheme, the Standing Committee on
Finance categorically conveyed that the National Identification Authority of
India Bill, 2010 was not acceptable. The Committee urged the Government to
172 PART E reconsider and review the UID scheme and the proposals contained in
the Bill and bring forth a fresh legislation before Parliament. Ultimately,
the NIA Bill was withdrawn from the Rajya Sabha on 3 March, 2016. 112 A
comparison of the Aadhaar Act 2016 and NIA Bill 2010 reveals that both have a
common objective and framework − establishing a system of unique identity
numbers, which would be implemented and monitored by a statutory authority.
The NIA Bill was not a Money Bill. It was never passed by the Rajya Sabha. The
Bill was scrutinized by a Standing Committee on Finance, which had 10 members
from the Rajya Sabha and 21 from the Lok Sabha. The NIA Bill did not contain a
provision, similar to Section 7 of the Aadhaar Act. Yet, as discussed earlier,
the presence of Section 7 does not make the Aadhaar Act a Money Bill.
Introducing the Aadhaar Act as a Money Bill deprived the Rajya Sabha of its
power to reject or amend the Bill. Since the Aadhaar Act in its current form
was introduced as a Money Bill in the Lok Sabha, the Rajya Sabha had no option
other than of making recommendations to the Bill. The recommendations made by
the Rajya Sabha (which also included deletion of Section 57) were rejected by
the Lok Sabha. The legislative history is a clear pointer to the fact that the
subsequent passage of the Bill as a Money Bill by-passed the constitutional
authority of the Rajya Sabha. The Rajya Sabha was deprived of its legitimate
constitutional role by the passage of the Bill as a Money Bill in the Lok
Sabha.  173 PART E 113 The Court must also address the contention of the
Respondents that the Aadhaar Act is “in pith and substance” a Money Bill. The
learned Attorney General for India has submitted that though the Act has
ancillary provisions, its main objective is the delivery of subsidies,
benefits and services flowing out of the Consolidated Fund of India and that
the other provisions are related to the main purpose of the Act which was
giving subsidies and benefits. It has been submitted that the real test to be
applied in the present dispute is the doctrine of pith and substance.

114 This Court has applied the doctrine of pith and substance when the
legislative competence of a legislature to enact a law is challenged. The
doctrine is applied to evaluate whether an enactment which is challenged falls
within an entry in one of the three Lists in the Seventh Schedule over which
the legislature has competence under Article 246 of the Constitution. The
Seventh Schedule to the Constitution distributes legislative powers between
the Union and the States. When a law enacted by a legislature is challenged on
the ground of a lack of legislative competence, the doctrine of pith and
substance is invoked. Under the doctrine, the law will be valid if in
substance, it falls within the ambit of a legislative entry on which the
legislature is competent to enact a law, even if it incidentally trenches on a
legislative entry in a separate list. The constitutional rationale for the
application of this  174 PART E doctrine has been explained in a Constitution
Bench decision of this Court in A S Krishna v State of Madras176:

> “8…But then, it must be remembered that we are construing a federal
> Constitution. It is of the essence of such a Constitution that there should
> be a distribution of the legislative powers of the Federation between the
> Centre and the Provinces. The scheme of distribution has varied with
> different Constitutions, but even when the Constitution enumerates
> elaborately the topics on which the Centre and the States could legislate,
> some overlapping of the fields of legislation is inevitable. The British
> North America Act, 1867, which established a federal Constitution for
> Canada, enumerated in Sections 91 and 92 the topics on which the Dominion
> and the Provinces could respectively legislate.

Notwithstanding that the lists were framed so as to be fairly full and
comprehensive, it was not long before it was found that the topics enumerated
in the two sections overlapped, and the Privy Council had time and again to
pass on the constitutionality of laws made by the Dominion and Provincial
legislatures. It was in this situation that the Privy Council evolved the
doctrine, that for deciding whether an impugned legislation was intra vires,
regard must be had to its pith and substance. That is to say, if a statute is
found in substance to relate to a topic within the competence of the
legislature, it should be held to be intra vires, even though it might
incidentally trench on topics not within its legislative competence...”
(Emphasis supplied) The decision of a three judge Bench of this Court in State
of Maharashtra v Bharat Shanti Lal Shah177 has summarized the process of
reasoning which must be followed by the Court while applying the doctrine of
pith and substance. The Court held:

> “43…If there is a challenge to the legislative competence the courts will
> try to ascertain the pith and substance of such enactment on a scrutiny of
> the Act in question. In this process, it is necessary for the courts to go
> into and examine the true character of the enactment, its object, its scope
> and effect to find out whether the enactment in 176 1957 SCR 399 177(2008)
> 13 SCC 5  175 PART E question is genuinely referable to the field of
> legislation allotted to the respective Legislature under the constitutional
> scheme. Where a challenge is made to the constitutional validity of a
> particular State Act with reference to a subject mentioned in any entry in
> List I, the court has to look to the substance of the State Act and on such
> analysis and examination, if it is found that in the pith and substance, it
> falls under an entry in the State List but there is only an incidental
> encroachment on topics in the Union List, the State Act would not become
> invalid merely because there is incidental encroachment on any of the topics
> in the Union List.”178 (Emphasis supplied ) 115 The doctrine of pith and
> substance is mainly used to examine whether the legislature has the
> competence to enact a law with regard to any of the three Lists provided
> under the Constitution. It cannot be applied to sustain as a Money Bill, a
> Bill which travels beyond the constitutional boundaries set out by Article
> 110 Whether a Bill is validly passed as a Money Bill has nothing to do with
> the legislative competence of the legislature under Article 246 of the
> Constitution. Whether a Bill is a Money Bill has to be tested within the
> boundaries of Article 110. The submission of the Attorney General boils down
> to this: ‘ignore the expression “only provisions dealing with all or any of
> the following matters” and hold the Bill to be a Money Bill by treating
> Section 7 as its dominant provision’. This cannot be accepted. This would
> ignore the express and clear language of Article 110. As we have emphasised
> earlier, the submission of the Attorney General requires the court to
> transpose the word “only” from its present position to a place before “if”.
> That would be to rewrite the Constitution to mean that a Bill would be a
> Money Bill if it contained some provisions which fall under sub-clauses (a)
> to (g). The 178 Ibid, at page 21  176 PART E Constitution says to the
> contrary: a Bill is a Money Bill if it contains “only provisions” dealing
> with one or more of the matters set out in sub-clauses (a) to (g). Looked at
> in another way, all the provisions of the Aadhaar Act (apart from Section 7)
> cannot be read as incidental to Section 7. Such a view is belied by a plain
> reading of the Act, as indicated earlier. Moreover, we have also indicated
> reasons why even Section 7 cannot be held to be referable to Article 110.
> Section 7 does not deal with the declaring of any expenditure as expenditure
> charged to the Consolidated Fund. Section 7 allows for making Aadhaar
> mandatory for availing of subsidies, benefits or services the expenditure
> incurred on which is charged to the Consolidate Fund. Section 7 does not
> charge any expenditure to the Consolidated Fund. It deals with making
> Aadhaar mandatory.

In support of their contention, the Respondents have also relied upon a two
judge Bench decision in Union of India v Shah Goverdhan L Kabra Teachers’
College179 to submit that the doctrine of pith and substance can be used in
any context. The Court held:

> “7. It is further a well-settled principle that entries in the different
> lists should be read together without giving a narrow meaning to any of
> them. Power of the Parliament as well as the State legislature are expressed
> in precise and definite terms. While an entry is to be given its widest
> meaning but it cannot be so interpreted as to over-ride another entry or
> make another entry meaningless and in case of an apparent conflict between
> different entries, it is the duty of the court to reconcile them. When it
> appears to the Court that there is apparent overlapping between the two
> entries the doctrine of "pith and substance" has to be applied to find out
> the true nature of a legislation and the entry with which it would fall. In
> 179 (2002) 8 SCC 228  177 PART E case of conflict between entries in List I
> and List II, the same has to be decided by application of the principle of
> "pith and substance". The doctrine of "pith and substance" means that if an
> enactment substantially falls within the powers expressly conferred by the
> Constitution upon the legislature which enacted it, it cannot be held to be
> invalid, merely because it incidentally encroaches on matters assigned to
> another legislature. When a law is impugned as being ultra-vires of the
> legislative competence, what is required to be ascertained is the true
> character of the legislation. If on such an examination it is found that the
> legislation is in substance one on a matter assigned to the legislature then
> it must be held to be valid in its entirety even though it might
> incidentally trench on matters which are beyond its competence. In order to
> examine the true character of the enactment, the entire Act, its object and
> scope and effect, is required to be gone into. The question of invasion into
> the territory of another legislation is to be determined not by degree but
> by substance. The doctrine of "pith and substance' has to be applied not
> only in cases of conflict between the powers of two legislatures but in any
> case where the question arises whether a legislation is covered by
> particular legislative power in exercise of which it is purported to be
> made.”180 (Emphasis supplied) The decision is of no assistance to the
> submission in the present dispute. The observations made by the Court are in
> relation to the power to legislate under Article 246 of the Constitution. It
> is unconnected to the question of a Money Bill. Therefore, the argument that
> the Aadhaar Act is “in pith and substance” a Money Bill is rejected.

116 Introducing the Aadhaar Act as a Money Bill has bypassed the
constitutional authority of the Rajya Sabha. The passage of the Aadhaar Act as
a Money Bill is an abuse of the constitutional process. It deprived the Rajya
Sabha from altering the provisions of the Bill by carrying out amendments. On
the touchstone of the provisions of Article 110, the Bill could not have been
180 Ibid, at pages 233-234  178 PART E certified as a Money Bill. In his last
address to the Constituent Assembly on 25 November 1949, Dr B R Ambedkar had
stated:

> “The working of a Constitution does not depend wholly upon the nature of the
> Constitution. The Constitution can provide only the organs of State such as
> the Legislature, the Executive and the Judiciary. The factors on which the
> working of those organs of the State depends are the people and the
> political parties they will set up as their instruments to carry out their
> wishes and their politics.”181 117 The Rajya Sabha has an important role in
> the making of laws.

Superseding the authority of the Rajya Sabha is in conflict with the
constitutional scheme and the legitimacy of democratic institutions. It
constitutes a fraud on the Constitution. Passing of a Bill as a Money Bill,
when it does not qualify for it, damages the delicate balance of bicameralism
which is a part of the basic structure of the Constitution. The ruling party
in power may not command a majority in the Rajya Sabha. But the legislative
role of that legislative body cannot be obviated by legislating a Bill which
is not a Money Bill as a Money Bill. That would constitute a subterfuge,
something which a constitutional court cannot countenance. Differences in a
democratic polity have to be resolved by dialogue and accommodation.
Differences with another constitutional institution cannot be resolved by the
simple expedient of ignoring it. It may be politically expedient to do so. But
it is constitutionally impermissible. This debasement of a democratic
institution cannot be allowed to pass. Institutions are crucial to democracy.
Debasing them can only cause a peril to democratic structures.

181 Constituent Assembly (25 November 1949)  179 PART F The Act thus fails to
qualify as a Money Bill under Article 110 of the Constitution. Since the Act
was passed as a Money Bill, even though it does not qualify to be so, the
passage of the Act is an illegality. The Aadhaar Act is in violation of
Article 110 and therefore is liable to be declared unconstitutional.

F Biometrics, Privacy and Aadhaar “Any situation that allows an interaction
between man and machine is capable of incorporating biometrics”182 118 The
term ‘biometric’ is derived from the Greek nouns ‘βίος’ (life) and ‘μέτρον’
(measure) and means ‘measurement of living species’. 183 Biometric
technologies imply that “unique or distinctive human characteristics of a
person are collected, measured and stored for the automated verification of a
claim made by that person for the identification of that person.”184 These
systems thus identify or verify the identity or a claim of persons on the
basis of the automated measurement and analysis of their biological traits
(such as fingerprints, face and iris) or behavioral characteristics (such as
signature and voice).

182 Gary Roethenbaugh, (cited in A. Cavoukian, Privacy and Biometrics,
Information and Privacy Commissioner, Ontario, Canada, 1999, page 11,
available at http://www.ipc.on.ca/images/Resources/pri- biom.pdf 183 Els J.
Kindt, Privacy and Data Protection Issues of Biometric Applications: A
Comparative Legal Analysis, Springer (2013) 184 Ibid.

180 PART F 119 The idea that parts of our body can be used to identify our
unique selves is not new. Prints of hand, foot and finger have been used since
ancient times because of their unique characteristics. Before the advent of
biometric systems, however, human characteristics were compared in a manual
way. Today’s biometric systems hence differ from manual verification methods
in that technology allows for automated comparison of human characteristic(s)
in place of a regime of manual verification that existed earlier. It must be
understood that biometric systems themselves do not identify individuals. For
identification, additional information which is already stored in databases is
needed since biometric systems can only compare information which is already
submitted.185 Integral to such a system is the matching of a claim of identity
with biometric data collected and stored earlier. In general, biometric
applications are referred to as systems which allow one to authenticate
claims. The verb ‘to authenticate’ can be described as ‘making authentic,
legally valid’.186 Originally, fingerprints were the most commonly known and
used biometric traits, but with improvements in technology, multiple sources
of biometric information have emerged. These include data related to facial
features, iris, voice, hand geometry and DNA. Each trait is collected using
different technologies and can be used for different purposes 185 Ibid.

186 Ibid.

181 PART F separately or in combination, to strengthen and improve the
accuracy and reliability of the identification process.187 In general,
biometric information is developed by processing extractable key features of
an individual into an ‘electronic digital template’, which is then encrypted
and stored in a database. When an individual connects with the system to
verify his/her identity for any purpose, the information is used by matching
the ‘electronic digital template’ saved with the biometric information
presented, based on which comparison, the individual’s identity will be
confirmed or rejected. The intended purpose of biometric technology is to
confirm the identity of individuals through a “one to one” identification
check. This system compares a source of biometric data with existing data for
that specific person.

F.I Increased use of biometric technology 120 There had been an initial
increase in the usage of biometric technology in both developed and developing
countries by both the private and the public sector. However, despite the
increased adoption of biometric technologies by developed countries in the
1980s and 1990s, recent trends depict their reluctance to deploy biometric
technology - or at least mass storage of biometric data - because of privacy
concerns.188 Key instances included the 187Nancy Yue Liu, Bio-Privacy: Privacy
Regulations and the Challenge of Biometrics, Routledge (2013). 188Privacy
International, Biometrics: Friend or foe of privacy?, available at
https://privacyinternational.org/sites/default/files/2017-11/Biometrics_Friend_or_foe.pdf
182 PART F scrapping of the National Identity Register and ID cards in the UK,
and Germany’s decision to reject a centralised database when deploying
biometric passports.189 By contrast, in developing countries there is a rise
in the deployment of biometric technology since it is being portrayed to
citizens as a means to establishing their legal identity and providing them
access to services, as well as a tool for achieving economic development.
However, too often these goals are prioritised at the expense of their right
to privacy and other human rights.190 Simon Davies, an eminent privacy expert,
points out that it is not an accident or coincidence that biometric systems
are most aggressively tried out with welfare recipients since they are not in
a position to resist the State-mandated intrusion.191 There has been a
particular increase in the use of biometric technology in identification
programs in developing countries. This is because “biometrics include a wide
range of biological measures which are considered sufficiently unique at a
population level to allow individual identification with high rates of
accuracy”.192 Lack of formal identification and official identity
documentation in the developing world is a serious challenge which impedes the
ability of governments as well as development organisations to provide
essential goods and services to the populations they serve.193 Further,
identification is also 189 Ibid 190 Ibid 191 Simon Davies, as cited in John D.
Woodward, Biometric Scanning, Law & Policy: Identifying the Concerns -

Drafting the Biometric Blueprint, University of Pittsburgh Law Review, (1997)
192 Daniel M. L Storisteanu, Toby L. Norman, Alexandra Grigore and Alain B.
Labrique, Can biometrics beat the developing world’s challenges?, Biometric
Technology Today (2016) 193 Ibid  183 PART F essential to the gathering of
accurate data which is required for monitoring the progress of government
programmes.194 However, while biometric technology brings many advantages, the
flip side is that the same technology can also lead to human rights
violations:

> “When adopted in the absence of strong legal frameworks and strict
> safeguards, biometric technologies pose grave threats to privacy and
> personal security, as their application can be broadened to facilitate
> discrimination, profiling and mass surveillance. The varying accuracy and
> failure rates of the technology can lead to misidentification, fraud and
> civic exclusion.”195 121 The adoption of biometric technologies in
> developing countries in particular poses unique challenges since the
> implementation of new technologies in these countries is rarely preceded by
> the enactment of robust legal frameworks. Assessments of countries where a
> legal mechanism to regulate new technologies or protect data has followed as
> an afterthought have shown that there exists a huge risk of mass human
> rights violations where individuals are denied basic fundamental rights, and
> in extreme cases, even their identity.196 122 Technology today brings with
> it tremendous power and is much like two sides of a coin. When applied
> productively, it allows individuals around the world to access information,
> express themselves and participate in local and global discussions in real-
> time in ways previously thought unimaginable. The 194 Ibid 195 Privacy
> International, Biometrics, available at
> https://privacyinternational.org/topics/biometrics 196 Privacy
> International, Biometrics: Friend or foe of privacy?, available at
> https://privacyinternational.org/sites/default/files/2017-11/Biometrics_Friend_or_foe.pdf
> 184 PART F flip side is the concern over the abuse of new technology,
> including biometrics, by the State and private entities by actions such as
> surveillance and large-scale profiling. This is particularly acute, given
> the fact that technological advancements have far outpaced legislative
> change. As a consequence, the safeguards necessary to ensure protection of
> human rights and data protection are often missing. The lack of regulatory
> frameworks, or the inadequacy of existing frameworks, has societal and
> ethical consequences and poses a constant risk that the concepts of privacy,
> liberty and other fundamental freedoms will be misunderstood, eroded or
> devalued.197 123 Privacy has been recognized as a fundamental human right in
> various national constitutions and numerous global and regional human rights
> treaties.

In today’s digital age, the right to privacy is “the cornerstone that
safeguards who we are and supports our on-going struggle to maintain our
autonomy and self-determination in the face of increasing state power.”198 124
The proliferation of biometric technology has facilitated the invasion of
individual privacy at an unprecedented scale. The raw information at the heart
of biometrics is personal by its very nature.199 The Aadhaar Act recognises
this as sensitive personal information. Biometric technology is unique in the
sense that it uses part of the human body or behaviour as the basis of
authentication or identification and is therefore intimately connected to the
197 Ibid 198 Privacy International, Biometrics: Friend or foe of privacy?,
available at
https://privacyinternational.org/sites/default/files/2017-11/Biometrics_Friend_or_foe.pdf
199 Nancy Yue Liu, Bio-Privacy: Privacy Regulations and the Challenge of
Biometrics, Routledge (2013)  185 PART F individual concerned. While biometric
technology raises some of the same issues that arise when government agencies
or private firms collect any personal information about citizens, there are
specific features that distinguish biometric data from other personal data,
making concerns about biometric technology of particular importance with
regard to privacy protection.200 125 There are two main groups of privacy-
related interests that are directly pertinent to the contemporary discussion
on the ethical and legal implications of biometrics.201 The first group falls
under ‘informational privacy’ and is concerned with control of personal
information. The ability to control personal information about oneself is
closely related to the dignity of the individual, self- respect and sense of
personhood. The second interest group falls under the rubric of ‘physical
privacy’. This sense of privacy transcends the purely physical and is aimed
essentially at protecting the dignity of the human person. It is a safeguard
against intrusions into persons’ physical bodies and spaces. Another issue is
of property rights with respect to privacy, which concerns the appropriation
and ownership of interests in human personality. In many jurisdictions, the
basis of informational privacy is the notion that all information about an
individual is in some fundamental way their own property, and it is theirs to
communicate or retain as they deem fit. 200 Ibid 201 Ibid  186 PART F 126 The
collection of most forms of biometric data requires some infringement of the
data subject’s personal space. Iris and fingerprint scanners require close
proximity of biometric sensors to body parts such as eyes, hands and
fingertips.

Even in the context of law enforcement and forensic identification, the use of
fingerprinting is acknowledged to jeopardise physical privacy. Many countries
have laws and regulations which are intended to regulate such measures, in
order to protect the individual’s rights against infringement by state powers
and law enforcement. However, biometrics for the purpose of authentication and
identification is different as they do not have a specific goal of finding
traces related to a crime but are instead conducted for the purpose of
generating identity information specific to an individual. This difference in
purpose actually renders the collection of physical biometrics a more serious
breach of integrity and privacy. It indicates that there may be a presumption
that someone is guilty until proven innocent. This would be contrary to
generally accepted legal doctrine that a person is innocent until proven
guilty and will bring a lot of innocent people into surveillance schemes. 127
Concerns about physical privacy usually take a backseat as compared to
concerns about informational privacy. The reason for this is that physical
intrusion resulting from the use of biometric technology usually results from
the collection of physical information. However, for some people of specific
187 PART F cultural or religious backgrounds, even the mental harm resulting
from physical intrusion maybe quite serious.202 Another concern is that the
widespread usage of biometrics substantially undermines the right to remain
anonymous.203 People desire anonymity for a variety of reasons, including that
it is fundamental to their sense of freedom and autonomy. Anonymity may turn
out to be the only tool available for ordinary people to defend themselves
against being profiled. Thus, it is often argued that biometric technology
should not be the appropriate choice of technology as biometrics by its very
nature is inconsistent with anonymity. Given the manner in which personal
information can be linked and identified using biometric data, the ability to
remain anonymous is severely diminished. While some argue that “it is not
obvious that more anonymity will be lost when biometrics are used”, this
argument may have to be evaluated in light of the fact that there is no
existing identifier that can be readily equated with biometrics.204 No
existing identifier can expose as much information as biometric data nor is
there any other identifier that is supposed to be so universal, long-lasting
and intimately linked as biometrics. To say that the use of biometrics will
not cause further loss of anonymity may thus be overly optimistic. Semi-
anonymity maybe possible, provided that the biometric system is carefully
designed from the inception. 202 Nancy Yue Liu, Bio-Privacy: Privacy
Regulations and the Challenge of Biometrics, Routledge (2013). 203 Ibid 204
Ibid  188 PART F Another significant change brought about by biometric
technology is the precipitous decline of ‘privacy by obscurity’, which is
essentially “a form of privacy afforded to individuals inadvertently by the
inefficiencies of paper and  205 other legacy recordkeeping.” Now that paper
records worldwide are giving way to more efficient digital record-keeping and
identification, this form of privacy is being extinguished, and sometimes
without commensurate data privacy protections put in place to remedy the
effects of the changes.”206 128 Biometrically enhanced identity information,
combined with demographic data such as address, age and gender, among other
data, when used in increasingly large, automated systems creates profound
changes in societies, particularly in regard to data protection, privacy, and
security. Biometrics are at the very heart of identification systems. There
are numerous instances in history where the persecution of groups of civilians
on the basis of race, ethnicity and religion was facilitated through the use
of identification systems. There is hence an alarming need to ensure that the
on-going development of identification systems be carefully monitored, while
taking into account lessons learnt from history.

129 It is important to justify the usage of biometric technology given the
invasion of privacy. When the purpose of collecting the biometric data is just
for authentication and there is little or no benefit in having stronger user
205 Pam Dixon, A Failure to Do No Harm – India’s Aadhaar biometric ID program
and its inability to protect privacy in relation to measures in Europe and the
U.S., Health and Technology (2017), Vol. 7, at pages 539–  567 206 Ibid.

189 PART F identification, it is difficult to justify the collection of
biometric information. The potential fear is that there are situations where
there are few or no benefits to be gained from strong user verification /
identification and this is where biometric technology may be unnecessary.207
(Example: When ascertaining whether an individual is old enough to go to a bar
and drink alcohol, it is unnecessary to know who the person is, when all that
is needed to be demonstrated is that the individual is of legal age).
Fundamental rights are likely to be violated in case biometrics are used for
applications merely requiring a low level of security.

130 Biometric data, by its very nature, is intrinsically linked to
characteristics that make us ‘humans’ and its broad scope brings together a
variety of personal elements. It is argued that the collection, analysis and
storage of such innate data is dehumanising as it reduces the individual to
but a number. Ultimately, organisations and governmental agencies must
demonstrate that there is a compelling legitimate interest in using biometric
technology and that an obligatory fingerprint requirement is reasonably
related to the objective for which it is required. One way of avoiding
unnecessary collection of biometric data is to set strict legal standards to
ensure that the intrusion into privacy is commensurate with and proportional
to the need for the collection of bio- metric data.208 207 Nancy Yue Liu, Bio-
Privacy: Privacy Regulations and the Challenge of Biometrics, Routledge
(2013). 208 Ibid  190 PART F F.2 Consent in the collection of biometric data
131 Rules on the collection of physical data by government agencies usually
specify under what conditions a person can be required to provide fingerprints
and/or bodily tissues. If consent is required, rules are in place to regulate
the scope of consent. If forced searches are allowed, specifications are
usually provided as to how and by whom the search will be performed.
Therefore, the legal questions surrounding the issue should be:

(a) If required, what exactly should be the extent of coverage of the consent?

(b) When is the compulsory collection of biometric information required and
who is eligible to conduct it?

(c) What is the procedure to do so?

(d)What exactly should be filed and stored? 132 Biometric technology is far
from being a mature technology and a variety of errors inevitably occur.
Mature technology is a popular term for any technology for which any
improvements in deployment are evolutionary rather than revolutionary.209 Once
a biometric system is compromised, it is compromised forever. In the event of
biometric identity theft, there would appear to be no alternative but to
withdraw the user from the system. Passwords and numbers can be changed, but
how does one change the basic biological features that compromise biometrics
in the event that there is a theft?

209 Segen’s Medical Dictionary, 2012.

191 PART F All of these parameters need to be applied to test the validity of
the Aadhaar legislation in a two-part inquiry: First, reports and steps taken
by the Government of India that guided the introduction and role of biometrics
before the enactment of the Aadhaar Act will be analysed, which will be
followed by an analysis of relevant provisions concerning the intersection of
biometric technology and privacy, as they are enshrined in the Aadhaar Act,
2016 and supporting Regulations made under it.

F.3 Position before the Aadhaar legislation Summary of Pre-Enactment Events
133 On 3 March 2006, the Department of Information Technology, Ministry of
Communications & Information Technology, gave its approval for implementation
of the project ‘Unique ID for Below Poverty Line Families’ (BPL) by the
National Informatics Centre over a period of 12 months.210 This was followed
by a Processes Committee being set up a few months later on 3 July 2006, to
suggest the processes for updation, modification, addition and deletion of
data from the core database to be created under the Unique ID (“UID”) for BPL
Families Project.211 The Processes Committee prepared a 210 Ministry of
Communication & Information Technology, Department of Information Technology,
Administrative Approval for the project - “Unique ID for BPL families”, dated
March 03, 2006 (Annexure R-1, List of Pre- enactment dates and events for the
Aadhaar project submitted by the Learned AG). 211 Department of Information
Technology, Notification: Setting up of a Process Committee to suggest the
processes for updation, modification, addition & deletion of data and fields
from the core database to be created under the Unique ID for BPL families
project, dated July 03, 2006 (Annexure R-2, List of Pre- enactment dates and
events for the Aadhaar project submitted by the learned AG).  192 PART F paper
titled ‘Strategic Vision: Unique Identification of Residents’212. The paper
recommended the linkage of the UID database with other databases which would
ensure continuous updation and user-based validation and use of the Election
Commission’s database as the base database.213 The document inter-alia, also
stated that statutory backing would be required for adoption of UID in the
long term;214 focus and conviction would be required on security and privacy
to ensure adoption by different stakeholders; 215 while ‘transparency vs.
right to privacy’ was another challenge that would have to be addressed.216
Biometrics, however, found no mention in the paper at this stage.

Thereafter, on 4 December 2006, an Empowered Group of Ministers (“EGoM”), was
constituted with the approval of the Prime Minister to collate the National
Population Register (“NPR”) under the Citizenship Act 1955 and the Unique
Identification Number Project.217 In its meeting held on 27 April 2007, the
Processes Committee decided that the UID database would evolve in three
stages: initial, intermediate and final. Biometrics was mentioned for the
first time in the context of UID, when the committee agreed that if the
infrastructure was available and the photograph and/or biometrics of a 212
Strategic Vision: Unique Identification of Residents, dated 26 November 2006
(Annexure R-3, List of Pre-

> enactment dates and events for the Aadhaar project submitted by the learned
> AG).
    
    
    213    Ibid
    214    Ibid
    215    Ibid
    216    Ibid
    

> 217 Constitution of an Empowered Group of Ministers to collate two schemes -
> the National Population Register under the Citizenship Act, 1955 and the
> Unique Identification Number (UID) project of the Department of Information
> Technology (Annexure R-4, List of Pre-enactment dates and events for the
> Aadhaar project submitted by the learned AG).

193

PART F resident was obtainable along with other information, it would be
captured in the initial and intermediate stages as well.218 Subsequently, the
EGoM approved the establishment of a UID Authority under the Planning
Commission on 28 January 2008.219 while the strategy to collate NPR and UID
was also approved. The EGoM also agreed that the collection of data under the
NPR exercise could include collection of photographs and biometrics to the
extent feasible, while it was also resolved that the data collected under the
NPR would be handed over to the UID Authority for maintenance and updation.
The EGoM, in its fourth meeting dated 4 November 2008 decided that initially,
the UIDAI will be established as an executive body under the Planning
Commission for a period of 5 years. UIDAI, it was envisaged, will create its
database from the electoral roll of the ECI and verify it through Below
Poverty Line and Public Distribution System data, but it would also have the
authority to take its own decisions as to how a database should be built.220
Consequently, the Government of India issued a notification on 28 January 2009
constituting the UIDAI as an attached office and executive authority under the
aegis of the Planning Commission. 218 Planning Commission, No. 4(4)/56/2005-
C&I, Minutes of the Fifth Meeting of the Unique ID project under the
Chairmanship of Dr. Arvind Virmani (Annexure R-6, List of Pre-enactment dates
and events for the Aadhaar project submitted by the learned AG).

219 Minutes of the Second Meeting of the EGoM to collate two schemes - The
National Population Register under the Citizenship Act, 1955 and the Unique
Identification number (UID) project of the Department of Information
Technology (Annexure R-10, List of Pre-enactment dates and events for the
Aadhaar project submitted by the learned AG).

220 Minutes of the Fourth Meeting of the EGoM to collate two schemes - The
National Population Register under the Citizenship Act, 1955 and the Unique
Identification Number (UID) project of the Department of Information
Technology (Annexure R-12, List of Pre-enactment dates and events for the
Aadhaar project submitted by the learned AG).

194 PART F 134 Following the constitution of UIDAI, the Secretary, Planning
Commission addressed a letter to Chief Secretaries of all States/ UTs on 6 May
2009 enclosing a brief write up on UIDAI and UID numbers for resident Indians.
The letter included the concept, implementation strategy, model of the project
along with the role and responsibilities of the states/ UTs.221 It was also
decided that partner databases for two-way linkages between the UID database
and the partner databases for maintenance and continuous updation of the UID
databases would be ECI database, Ministry of Rural Development- rural
household survey database and the State ration card (PDS) databases. 135 The
first meeting of the PM’s Council of UIDAI, was held on 12 August 2009\.
Various proposals were approved by the Council,222 by which it was decided,
among other things, that the proposal to designate UIDAI as an apex body to
set standards in the area of biometrics and demographic data structures be
approved. On 29 September 2009, UIDAI set up the Biometrics Standards
Committee (“BSC”) to frame biometric standards for UIDAI. The Committee was
assigned with the following mandate:223 ● To develop biometric standards that
will ensure interoperability of devices, systems and processes used by various
agencies that use the UID system. 221 Secretary, Government of India, Planning
Commission, D.O. No. A-11016/02/09-UIDAI (Annexure R-22, List of Pre-enactment
dates and events for the Aadhaar project submitted by the learned AG). 222
Planning Commission, Minutes of the meeting of the PM’s Council of UIDAI
(Annexure R-35, List of Pre-

enactment dates and events for the Aadhaar project submitted by the Learned
AG). 223 Planning Commission, UIDAI, Office Memorandum, available at
https://www.uidai.gov.in/images/resource/Biometric_Standards_Committee_Notification.pdf.
195 PART F ● To review the existing standards of Biometrics and, if required,
modify/extend/enhance them so as to serve the specific requirements of UIDAI
relating to de-duplication and Authentication. This was followed by the
creation of the Demographic Data Standards and Verification Procedure
Committee (“DDSVPC”) on 9 October 2009, with the following mandate:224 ●
Review/ modify/ extend/ enhance the existing standards of Demographic data and
recommend the Demographic Data standards (The data fields and their
formats/structure, etc.) that will ensure interoperability and standardization
of basic demographic data and their structure used by various agencies that
use the UID system; and ● Recommend the Process of Verification of this
demographic data in order to ensure that the data captured, at the time of
enrolment of the residents into the UID system, is correct.

136 The DDSVPC in its report dated 9 December 2009, stated that UIDAI had
selected biometrics features as the primary method to check for duplicate
identity. In order to ensure that an individual was uniquely identified in an
easy and cost-effective manner, it was necessary to ensure that the captured
biometric information was capable of carrying out de-duplication at the time
when information was collected.225 The Know Your Resident (“KYR”) 224 DDSVPC
(UIDAI), DDSVPC Report, dated 09 December 2009, available at
https://uidai.gov.in/images/UID_DDSVP_Committee_Report_v1.0.pdf ,at pages 5-6.
225 Ibid, at page 4  196 PART F verification procedure was introduced to
ensure that “key demographic data is verified properly so that the data within
UID system can be used for authentication of identity by various systems”.
Three distinct methods of verification were to be acceptable under UID.
Verification could be based on ● Supporting documents;

● An introducer system under which a network of “approved” introducers can
introduce a resident and vouch for the validity of the resident’s information;
and (This idea was borrowed from the account opening procedure in the banks.)
● The process adopted for public scrutiny in the National Population Register.

137 In order to verify the correctness of certain mandatory fields, such as
name, date-of-birth, and address, a “Proof of Identity” (PoI) and “Proof of
Address” (PoA) would be required. This would comprise of documents containing
the resident’s name and photograph and the name and address, respectively. On
9 April 2010, the collection of iris biometrics for the NPR exercise was
approved.226 138 A strategy overview issued by UIDAI in April 2010 described
the features, benefits, revenue model and timelines of the project.227 The
survey 226 Annexure R-43, Volume II, List of Pre-enactment dates and events
for the Aadhaar project, Submissions by the AG 227 UIDAI, UIDAI Strategy
Overview, available at
http://www.prsindia.org/uploads/media/UID/UIDAI%20STRATEGY%20OVERVIEW.pdf.
197 PART F outlined that UIDAI would collect the following demographic and
biometric information from residents in order to issue a UID number: ● Name ●
Date of birth ● Gender ● Father's/ Husband's/ Guardian's name and UID number
(optional for adult residents) ● Mother's/ Wife's/ Guardian's name and UID
number (optional for adult residents) ● Introducer's name and UID number ( in
case of lack of documents) ● Address ● All ten fingerprints, photograph and
both iris scans On 12 May 2010, a note outlining the background of UIDAI, and
proposing an approach for collection of demographic and biometric attributes
of residents for the UID project was submitted to the Cabinet Committee on
UIDAI. 228 Permission of the Union Cabinet was sought to ensure that the
approach which was proposed should be adhered to by the Registrar General of
India for the NPR exercise and by all other Registrars in the UID system. The
rationale behind the inclusion of iris biometrics and the need for capturing
iris scans at the time of capturing biometric details was also explained. This
was followed by the introduction of the National Identification Authority of
India Bill, 2010 (NIAI Bill) in the Rajya Sabha on 3 December 2010. On 13
February 2011, the one millionth Aadhaar card was delivered. Thereafter, on
228Annexure R-46, Volume II, List of Pre-enactment dates and events for the
Aadhaar project, Submissions by the AG  198 PART F 11 April 2011, the Central
Government notified the Information Technology (Reasonable security practices
and procedures and sensitive personal data or information) Rules, 2011 [“IT
Rules”] under Section 43A of the IT Act, 2000. On 29 September 2011, the
Aadhaar project completed one year. An announcement was made of the generation
of ten crore enrolments and of more than 3.75 crore Aadhaar numbers.

Analysis of UIDAI Reports & Rights of Registrars A. Biometrics Standards
Committee (BSC) Report 139 BSC in its report dated 30 December 2009 stated
that it held extensive meetings and discussions with international experts and
technology suppliers. A technical sub-group was formed to collect Indian
fingerprints and analyze quality. Over 2,50,000 fingerprint images from 25,000
persons were sourced from the districts of Delhi, UP, Bihar and Orissa. Nearly
all the images were from rural regions, and were collected by different
agencies using different capture devices, and through different operational
processes. The BSC report is silent about the pretext on which fingerprints of
25,000 people were collected. This action of UIDAI raises privacy concerns
especially since the fingerprints were collected from rural regions where
people may not have been aware or made aware by UIDAI before collection of
fingerprints, of the possible privacy harms of giving up biometrics.  199 PART
F BSC after reviewing international standards and current national
recommendations, concluded that a fingerprints-based biometric system was to
be at the core of UIDAI’s de-duplication efforts and that the ISO 19794 series
of biometrics standards for fingerprints, face and iris set by the
International Standards Organization (ISO) were most suitable for the UID
project.229 BSC also observed that while a fingerprints-based biometric system
shall be at the core of UIDAI’s de-duplication efforts, its accuracy in the
Indian context could not predicted in the absence of empirical data:

> “The Committee notes that face is the most commonly captured biometric, and
> frequently used in manual checking. However, stand-alone, automatic face
> recognition does not provide a high level of accuracy, and can only be used
> to supplement a primary biometric modality. Fingerprinting, the oldest
> biometric technology, has the largest market share of all biometrics
> modalities globally. … Based on these factors, the Committee recognizes that
> a fingerprints-based biometrics system shall be at the core of the UIDAI’s
> de-

duplication efforts… The Committee, however, is also conscious of the fact
that de-duplication of the magnitude required by the UIDAI has never been
implemented in the world. In the global context, a de-duplication accuracy of
99% has been achieved so far, using good quality fingerprints against a
database of up to fifty million. Two factors, however, raise uncertainty about
the accuracy that can be achieved through fingerprints. First, retaining
efficacy while scaling the database size from fifty million to a billion has
not been adequately analyzed. Second, fingerprint quality, the most important
variable for determining de-duplication accuracy, has not been studied in
depth in the Indian context.”230 140 In its report for discussion titled
“Technical Standards for Digital Identity Systems for Digital Identity”, the
Identification for Development (ID4D) initiative, a cross-departmental effort
report of the World Bank, noted that 229 UIDAI Committee on Biometrics,
Biometrics Design Standards For UID Applications, at page 4 230 Ibid.

200 PART F UIDAI had not implemented “an important security standard, ISO
24745, which provides guidance for the protection of biometric information for
confidentiality and integrity during storage or managing identities … due to
the complexity of applicable compliance procedures” for the Aadhaar system.
231 Proponents of the program argue that in all fairness to UIDAI, it has to
be noticed that the ISO 24745 standard was published in August 2011 whereas
the report of BSC had already been submitted to UIDAI in January 2010.
However, Mr. Myung Geun Chun, the Project Editor of ISO 24745, is reported to
have stated that ISO 24745 standard is an ‘invaluable tool’ for addressing
‘unique privacy concerns’ like ‘unlawful processing and use of data’ raised by
biometric identification because of its binding nature ‘which links biometrics
with personally identifiable information’.232 ISO 24745 seeks to “safeguard
the security of a biometric system and the privacy of data subjects with solid
countermeasures”.233 ISO 24745 standard specifies:

> ● “Analysis of threats and countermeasures inherent in biometric and
> biometric system application models; ● Security requirements for binding
> between a biometric reference and an identity reference;

> ● Biometric system application models with different scenarios for the
> storage and comparison of biometric references;

● Guidance on the protection of an individual’s privacy during the processing
of biometric information.”234 231 Identification for Development (World Bank
Group), Technical Standards for Digital Identity Systems for Digital Identity
Draft for Discussion, available at
http://pubdocs.worldbank.org/en/579151515518705630/ID4D- Technical-Standards-
for-Digital-Identity.pdf, at page 22. 232 Katie Bird, Is your biometric data
safe online? ISO/IEC standard ensures security and privacy, (11 August 2011),
available at https://www.iso.org/news/2011/08/Ref1452.html. 233 Ibid.

234 Ibid.

201 PART F B. Strategy Overview of 2010 In this report, a balance was sought
to be struck between ‘privacy and purpose’ in respect of the information of
the residents which was collected. The report states that ‘agencies’ may store
the information of the residents at the time of enrolment, but they will not
have access to the information stored in the UID database.235 Further, for the
purposes of authentication, requests made by the agencies would be answered
through a ‘Yes’ or a ‘No’ response only.236 Under the sub-heading “Protecting
Privacy and Confidentiality”, the report stated that the additional
information which was being sought from people was only biometric information
like fingerprints and iris scans, as other information was already available
with public and private agencies in the country.237 Right to privacy and
confidentiality were sought to be protected by putting necessary provisions
“in place”.238 It was also observed in the context of privacy that loss of
biometric information of a resident who is a victim of identity theft,
especially when such information is linked to banking, social security and
passport records, risks financial and other assets and the reputation of the
resident.239 According to the review, the envisaged UIDAI Act (which was still
under contemplation at the time of publishing of this report and had not yet
been legislated) would have remedies for the following offences: 235 UIDAI,
UIDAI Strategy Overview, available at
http://www.prsindia.org/uploads/media/UID/UIDAI%20STRATEGY%20OVERVIEW. pdf, at
page 4 236 Ibid.

237 Ibid, at page 32 238 Ibid.

239 Ibid, at page 33  202 PART F ● “Unauthorized disclosure of information by
anyone in UIDAI, Registrar or the Enrolling agency;

● Disclosure of information violating the protocols set in place by UIDAI;

● Sharing any of the data on the database with anyone; ● Engaging in or
facilitating analysis of the data for anyone; ● Engaging in or facilitating
profiling of any nature for anyone or providing information for profiling of
any nature for anyone;

● All offences under the Information Technology Act shall be deemed to be
offences under UIDAI if directed against UIDAI or its database.”240 However,
according to the report, UIDAI was to concern itself only with identity fraud
and any grievances in respect of document fraud (counterfeit/ misleading
documents) were to be left to the Registrar enrolling the resident.241 141 The
following conclusions emerge from the UIDAI’s strategy overview: Firstly, the
UIDAI was aware of the importance of biometric information before the Aadhaar
programme had been rolled out. Secondly, UIDAI had itself contemplated a
scenario of identity theft which could occur at the time of enrollment for
Aadhaar cards. However, it had no solution to the possible harms which could
result after the identity theft of a person, more so when the potential ‘UIDAI
Act’ was still in the pipeline and was not eventually enacted until 2016.

240 Ibid.

241 Ibid, at page 34  203 PART F C. Registrars 142 The term ‘Registrar’ was
first defined by UIDAI in its DDSVPC Report as “any government or private
agency that will partner with UIDAI in order to enroll and authenticate
residents”.242 In the Strategy Overview, the term was defined as “agencies
such as central and state departments and private sector agencies who will be
‘Registrars’ for the UIDAI”.243 The Strategy Overview also stated that:

> “Registrars will process UID applications, and connect to the CIDR to de-
> duplicate resident information and receive UID numbers. These Registrars can
> either be enrollers, or will appoint agencies as enrollers, who will
> interface with people seeking UID numbers. The Authority will also partner
> with service providers for authentication. If the Registrar issues a card to
> the resident, the UIDAI will recommend that the card contain the UID number,
> name and photograph. They will be free to add any more information related
> to their services (such as Customer ID by bank). They will also be free to
> print/ store the biometric collected from the applicant on the issued card.
> If more registrars store such biometric information in a single card format,
> the cards will become interoperable for offline verification. But the UIDAI
> will not insist on, audit or enforce this.”244 (Emphasis supplied) 143 In
> the ‘Aadhaar Handbook for Registrars 2010’ (“2010 Handbook”), following
> policy guidelines were laid down in respect of Registrars:

> 1\. “Registrars may retain the biometric data collected from residents
> enrolled by them. However, the Registrar will have to exercise a fiduciary
> duty of care with respect to the data collected from residents and will be
> responsible for loss, unauthorized access to and misuse of data in their
> custody.

> 2\. In order to ensure data integrity and security, the biometrics captured
> shall be encrypted upon collection by using the 242 DDSVPC (UIDAI), DDSVPC
> Report, (9 December 2009), available at
> https://uidai.gov.in/images/UID_DDSVP_Committee_Report_v1.0. pdf , at page 5
> 243 UIDAI, UIDAI Strategy Overview, available at
> http://www.prsindia.org/uploads/media/UID/UIDAI%20STRATEGY%20OVERVIEW.pdf,
> at page 2 244 Ibid, at page 15  204 PART F encryption key defined by the
> Registrar. It is the responsibility of the Registrar to ensure the safety,
> security and confidentiality of this data which is in their custody. The
> Registrar must protect the data from unauthorized access and misuse. The
> UIDAI will define guidelines for the storage of biometric data in order to
> give the Registrar some guidance on ensuring security of the data. The
> Registrar shall have to define their own security policy and protocols to
> ensure safety of the Biometric data. The Registrars shall bear liability for
> any loss, unauthorized access and misuse of this data. In the interest of
> transparency, it is recommended that the Registrar inform the resident that
> they will be keeping the biometric data and also define how the data will be
> used and how it will be kept secure.”245 (Emphasis supplied) In the ‘Aadhaar
> Handbook for Registrars 2013’ (“2013 Handbook”), it was stated that “UIDAI
> has defined security guidelines for the storage of biometric data”.246 While
> it is indicated in the handbook that guidelines for storage were defined by
> UIDAI, it is evident that this took place only after 2010 before which the
> registrars were functioning without guidelines mandating how the biometric
> data was to be kept secure.

The following guideline finds mention both in the Handbook of 2010 and 2013:

> “In the interest of transparency, it is recommended that the Registrar
> inform the resident that they will be keeping the biometric data and also
> define how the data will be used and how it will be kept secure”.247
> However, it is apparent from this guideline that it was merely a
> recommendation to the Registrars, and no obligation was cast upon the 245
> UIDAI, Aadhaar Handbook for Registrars, available at
> http://doitc.rajasthan.gov.in/administrator/Lists/Downloads/Attachments/26/aadhaar_handbook_version.
> pdf, at page 11 246 Annexure R-74, Volume III, List of Pre-enactment dates
> and events for the Aadhaar project, Submissions by the AG.

247 UIDAI (Planning Commission), Aadhaar Handbook for Registrars (2010),
available at http://indiamicrofinance.com/wp-content/uploads/2010/08/Aadhaar-
Handbook. pdf, at page 11; UIDAI (Planning Commission), Aadhaar Handbook for
Registrars (2013), at page 16 (Annexure R-74, List of Pre- enactment dates and
events for the Aadhaar project submitted by the Learned AG).  205 PART F
Registrars, to inform residents that their biometric data will be stored by
them and how the data was to be used and kept secure. In contrast, Regulation
5 of the Aadhaar (Sharing of Information) Regulations 2016, states:

> “Responsibility of any agency or entity other than requesting entity with
> respect to Aadhaar number. — (1) Any individual, agency or entity which
> collects Aadhaar number or any document containing the Aadhaar number,
> shall: (a) collect, store and use the Aadhaar number for a lawful purpose;
> (b) inform the Aadhaar number holder the following details:— i. the purpose
> for which the information is collected; ii. whether submission of Aadhaar
> number or proof of Aadhaar for such purpose is mandatory or voluntary, and
> if mandatory, the legal provision mandating it; iii. alternatives to
> submission of Aadhaar number or the document containing Aadhaar number, if
> any; (c) obtain consent of the Aadhaar number holder to the collection,
> storage and use of his Aadhaar number for the specified purposes.

> (2) Such individual, agency or entity shall not use the Aadhaar number for
> any purpose other than those specified to the Aadhaar number holder at the
> time of obtaining his consent.

(3) Such individual, agency or entity shall not share the Aadhaar number with
any person without the consent of the Aadhaar number holder.” (Emphasis
supplied) 144 What the Registrar is obliged to do under law after the
enactment of the Aadhaar Act, was a recommendation to the Registrar prior to
the enactment of the Aadhaar Act. Thus, it is uncertain whether residents were
informed about where and how their data would be kept secure since the
guidelines to the Registrars were only recommendatory in nature. Similarly, in
a UIDAI document titled ‘Roles and Responsibilities of Enrollment Staff,
2017’, one of the ‘Fifteen Commandments that an Operator must remember during
Resident Enrollment’ is “Make sure that the resident is well informed that
his/her  206 PART F biometric will only be used for Aadhaar Enrolment/Update
and no other purpose”.248 However, in the UIDAI document titled ‘Enrollment
Process Essentials, 2012’, there is no mention of any such obligation being
placed upon the enrolment staff.249 In the absence of informed consent for the
collection of data, a shadow of potential illegality is cast.

    
    
    F.4     Privacy Concerns in the Aadhaar Act
    
    
    1     Consent during enrolment and authentication & the right to access
          information under the Aadhaar Act
    
    
    145     Section 3(2) of the Aadhaar Act requires enrolment agencies to inform
    
    

the individual being enrolled about: a) the manner in which information shall
be used; b) the nature of recipients with whom the information is to be shared
during authentication; and c) the existence of a right to access information.
However, the Enrolment Form in Schedule I of the Enrolment Regulations does
not offer any clarification or mechanism on how the mandate of Section 3(2) is
to be fulfilled.

The right of an individual to access information related to his or her
authentication record is recognized in Section 3(2)(c) and Section 32(2) of
the 248 UIDAI, Roles and Responsibilities of Enrolment Staff, available at
https://idai.gov.in/images/annexure_b_roles_and_responsibility_of_enrolment_staff.
Pdf , at page 8 249UIDAI, Enrolment Process Essentials (13 December 2012),
available at
http://www.nictcsc.com/images/Aadhaar%20Project%20Training%20Module/English%20Training%20Module/
module2_aadhaar_enrolment_process17122012. pdf  207 PART F Aadhaar Act.
However, the supplementary regulations that complement the Act are bereft of
detail on the procedure to access such information. Similarly, Regulation 9(c)
of the Enrolment Regulations states that the procedure for accessing data
would be provided to residents through the enrolment form, which is found in
Schedule I to the Enrolment Regulations. However, all that Schedule I states
is: “I have a right to access my identity information (except core biometrics)
following the procedure laid down by UIDAI”, without any such procedure
actually being laid down. 146 Section 2(I) of the Act, which defines an
enrolling agency read with Regulation 23 of the Aadhaar (Enrolment and Update)
Regulations allows for the collection of sensitive personal data (demographic
and biometric information) of individuals by private agencies, which also have
to discharge the burden of explaining the voluntary nature of Aadhaar
registration and obtaining an individual’s informed consent. The
Authentication Regulations, framed under sub-section (1), and sub- clauses (f)
and (w) of sub-section (2) of Section 54 of the Aadhaar Act deal with the
authentication framework for Aadhaar numbers, the governance of authentication
agencies and the procedure for collection, storage of authentication data and
records. Regulation 5 (1) states what details shall be made available to the
Aadhaar number holder at the time of authentication  208 PART F which are a)
the nature of information that will be shared by the Authority upon
authentication, (b) the uses to which the information received during
authentication may be put; and (c) alternatives to submission of identity
information. Regulation 6 (2) mandates that a requesting entity shall obtain
the consent of an Aadhaar number holder for authentication in physical or,
preferably, in electronic form and maintain logs or records of the consent
obtained in the manner and form as may be specified by the Authority for this
purpose.

Although Regulation 5 mentions that at the time of authentication, requesting
entities shall inform the Aadhaar number holder of alternatives to submission
of identity information for the purpose of authentication, and Regulation 6
mandates that the requesting entity shall obtain the consent of the Aadhaar
number holder for the authentication, in neither of the above circumstances do
the regulations specify the clearly defined options that should be made
available to the Aadhaar number holder in case they do not wish to submit
identity information, nor do the regulations specify the procedure to be
followed in case the Aadhaar number holder does not provide consent. This is a
significant omission. Measures for providing alternatives must be defined in
all identity systems, particularly those that are implemented on a large
scale.  209 PART F 2 Extent of information disclosed during authentication &
sharing of core biometric information 147 Section 8(4) of the Act permits the
Authority to respond to an authentication query with a “positive, negative or
any other appropriate response sharing such identity information excluding any
core biometric information”. The petitioners have argued that the wide ambit
of this provision gives the Authority discretion to respond to the requesting
entity with information including an individual’s photograph, name, date of
birth, address, mobile number, email address and any other demographic
information that was disclosed at the time of enrolment.

Moreover, it must be realized that even if core biometric information cannot
be shared, demographic information is nonetheless, sensitive. Regulation 2(j)
of the Authentication Regulations250 provides that a digitally signed response
with e-KYC data251 [which is defined in Regulation 2(k)] can be returned to
the requesting entity, while Regulation 3(ii)252 provides for this form of
authentication (e-KYC) by UIDAI.

250 Regulation 2(j) of Aadhaar (Authentication) Regulations: “e-KYC
authentication facility” means a type of authentication facility in which the
biometric information and/or OTP and Aadhaar number securely submitted with
the consent of the Aadhaar number holder through a requesting entity, is
matched against the data available in the CIDR, and the Authority returns a
digitally signed response containing e-KYC data along with other technical
details related to the authentication transaction. 251 Regulation 2(k) of
Aadhaar Authentication Regulations: “e-KYC data” means demographic information
and photograph of an Aadhaar number holder.

252 Regulation 3(ii) of Aadhaar (Authentication) Regulations, 2016: “3. Types
of Authentication-There shall be two types of authentication facilities
provided by the Authority, namely— (i) Yes/No authentication facility, which
may be carried out using any of the modes, (ii) e-KYC authentication facility,
which may be carried out only using OTP and/ or biometric authentication modes
as specified in regulation 4(2)”.  210 PART F 148 Section 29(1) of the Aadhaar
Act expressly states that ‘core biometric information can never be shared with
anyone for any reason whatsoever or be used for any purpose other than
generation of Aadhaar numbers and authentication under this Act’. However,
this provision which seemingly protects an individual’s core biometric
information from being shared is contradicted by Section 29(4)253 of the Act,
the proviso to which grants UIDAI the power to publish, display or post core
biometric information of an individual for purposes specified by the
regulations. The language of this section is overbroad and which could lead to
transgressions and abuse of power. Moreover, sub-sections 29(1) and (2), in
effect, create distinction between two classes of information (core biometric
information and identity information), which are integral to individual
identity. Identity information requires equal protection as provided to core
biometric information. 3 Expansive scope of biometric information 149
Definitions of biometric information [Section 2(g)], core biometric
information [Section 2(j)] and demographic information [Section 2(k)] under
the Aadhaar Act are inclusive and expansive. Section 2(g) defines 'biometric
information' as “photograph, fingerprint, iris scan, or such other biological
attributes of an individual as may be specified by regulations”. Section 2(j)
defines ‘core biometric information’ as “fingerprint, Iris scan, or such other
253 Section 29(4) states: “No Aadhaar number or core biometric information
collected or created under this Act in respect of an Aadhaar number holder
shall be published, displayed or posted publicly, except for the purposes as
may be specified by regulations.”  211 PART F biological attribute of an
individual as may be specified by regulations”. Section 2(t) explains that the
regulations are to be made by UIDAI, which is the supreme authority under the
Act. Sections 2(g), (j), (k) and (t) give discretionary power to UIDAI to
define the scope of biometric and demographic information. Although the Act
specifically provides what information can be collected, it does not
specifically prohibit the collection of further biometric information. The
scope of what can, in addition, be collected, has been left to regulations.
These provisions empower UIDAI to expand on the nature of information already
collected at the time of enrolment, to the extent of also collecting ‘such
other biological attributes’ that it may deem fit by specifying it in
regulations at a future date. The definitions of these sections provide the
government with unbridled powers to add to the list of biometric details that
UIDAI can require a citizen to part with during enrolment which might even
amount to an invasive collection of biological attributes including blood and
urine samples of individuals. 4 Other concerns regarding the Aadhaar Act:
Misconceptions regarding the efficacy of biometric information 150 The
uniqueness of a fingerprint in forensic science remains an assumption without
watertight proof. The uniqueness of biometric data is not absolute, it is
relative. Not everyone will have a particular biometric trait, or an
individual’s biometric trait may be significantly different from the ‘normal’
212 PART F expected trait. Some people may be missing fingerprints due to skin
or other disease, which may cause further problems when enrolling a large
population in a fingerprint-based register. Discrimination concerns may also
be raised in such a case. Therefore, a large scale biometric scheme will
usually need to utilise more than one biometric. For example- both fingerprint
and face to ensure all people can be enrolled.254 The stability of even so
called stable types of biometric data is not absolute. Each time an individual
places a fingerprint on a fingerprint reader, the pattern may appear to be the
same from a short distance, but there are actually small differences in the
pattern due to dryness, moisture and elasticity of the skin. Moreover, cuts
and scratches can alter the pattern. Similarly, even the iris, a popular
biometric measurement suffers from difficulties in obtaining a valid image.
The iris can also be hindered by specula reflections in uncontrolled lighting
situations. These problems also apply to other relatively stable biometric
identifiers.255 151 Sections 6256 and 31(2)257 of the Aadhaar Act place an
additional onus on individual Aadhaar holders to update their information.
These provisions 254Ramesh Subramanian, Computer Security, Privacy & Politics:
Current Issues, Challenges & Solutions, IRM Press, at pages 99-100 255Ibid, at
page 100 256Section 6 states: “The Authority may require Aadhaar number
holders to update their demographic information and biometric information,
from time to time, in such manner as may be specified by regulations, so as to
ensure continued accuracy of their information in the Central Identities Data
Repository.” 257Section 31(2) states: “In case any biometric information of
Aadhaar number holder is lost or changes subsequently for any reason, the
Aadhaar number holder shall request the Authority to make necessary alteration
in his record in the Central Identities Data Repository in such manner as may
be specified by regulations.”  213 PART F create a legal mandate on
individuals to ensure that their information is accurate within the CIDR. It
is an acknowledgement that an individual’s biometric information may change
from time to time. Natural factors like ageing, manual labour, injury and
illness can cause an individual’s biometric information to be altered over the
course of a lifetime. Critics of the Aadhaar program however point to the fact
that provisions for updation fly in the face of UIDAI’s repeated
advertisements that Aadhaar enrolment is a “one-time” affair, as it is not and
will never be. Moreover, there is no way in which a person can estimate that
he or she is due for an update, as this is not something that can be discerned
by actions as innocuous as looking in the mirror or at one’s fingers, and
therefore there remains no objective means of complying with the above
sections. In fact, an authentication failure and a subsequent denial of
welfare benefits, a subsidy or a service that an individual is entitled to
might be the only way one comes to the conclusion that his or her biometrics
need to be updated in the CIDR.258 Moreover, since the promise of Aadhaar as a
unique identity hinges on the uniqueness of biometrics, it would be logical to
assume that any update to biometric data should go through the same rigour as
a new enrolment. Regulation 19(a), entitled ‘Modes of Updating Residents
Information’ under Chapter IV of the Aadhaar (Enrolment and Update)
Regulations, 2016 provides:

258 L. Vishwanath, Four Reasons You Should Worry About Aadhaar's Use of
Biometrics, The Wire (28 March, 2017), available at
https://thewire.in/rights/real-problem-aadhaar-lies-biometrics  214 PART F
“19. Mode of Updating Residents Information:

a) At any enrolment centre with the assistance of the operator and/or
supervisor. The resident will be biometrically authenticated and shall be
required to provide his Aadhaar number along with the identity information
sought to be updated.” This raises the question as to how an individual will
update his/her biometric information. If the biometric information stored in
CIDR has changed, the present biometrics will lead to mismatch during
authentication. This Regulation does not provide any real clarity on how
updation should be taking place in practice for the following reasons:

1\. As required by the regulation, can an individual be asked to undergo
biometric authentication, when the purpose is to update the biometrics?

2\. Does the provision amount to an implied expectation that an individual is
supposed to revisit the enrolment centre before all ten fingers and two irises
(core biometric information) are rendered inaccurate for the purposes of
authentication?259 This is also evidence of the fact that an Aadhaar enrolment
is not a one-time affair.

5 No access to biometric records in database 152 The proviso to Section
28(5)260 of the Aadhaar Act disallows an individual access to the biometric
information that forms the core of his or her 259 Ibid.

260 Section 28(5) states: “Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law
for the time being in force, and save as otherwise provided in this Act, the
Authority or any of its officers or other employees or any agency  215 PART F
unique ID (Aadhaar). The lack of access is problematic for the following
reasons: First, verification of whether the biometrics have been recorded
correctly or not in the first place is not possible. This becomes critical
when that same information forms the basis of identity and is the basis of
authentication and subsequent access to welfare benefits and other services.
Second, there is a great potential for fraudulently replacing a person’s
biometric identity in the database, as the individual has no means to verify
the biometric information that has been recorded at the time of enrolment.
Even an entity like the enrolment operator (with a software hack) could upload
someone else’s biometrics against another person.261 Denial of access to the
individual violates a fundamental principle of data protection: ownership of
the data must at all times vest with the individual. Overlooking this
fundamental principle is manifestly arbitrary and violative of Article 14.

    
    
    6        Biometric locking
    
    
    153      Authentication Regulations 11 (1) and (4) provide for the facility of
    
    

Biometric Locking. Regulation 11(1) provides:

> “The Authority may enable an Aadhaar number holder to permanently lock his
> biometrics and temporarily unlock it when needed for biometric
> authentication.” that maintains the Central Identities Data Repository shall
> not, whether during his service or thereafter, reveal any information stored
> in the Central Identities Data Repository or authentication record to
> anyone:

Provided that an Aadhaar number holder may request the Authority to provide
access to his identity information excluding his core biometric information in
such manner as may be specified by regulations.” 261 L. Vishwanath, Four
Reasons You Should Worry About Aadhaar's Use of Biometrics, The Wire (28
March, 2017), available at https://thewire.in/rights/real-problem-aadhaar-
lies-biometrics  216 PART F Regulation 11(4) provides:

> “The Authority may make provisions for Aadhaar number holders to remove such
> permanent locks at any point in a secure manner.” The provision allowing
> biometric locking is salutary to the extent that it allows Aadhaar number
> holders to permanently lock their biometrics and temporarily unlock them
> only when needed for biometric authentication. But the regulation is
> problematic to the extent that it also empowers the UIDAI to make provisions
> to remove such locking without any specified grounds for doing so.262 7 Key
> takeaways 154 The use of biometric technology is only likely to grow
> dramatically both in the private and public sector. On our part, we can only
> ensure that the strides made in technology are accompanied by stringent
> legal and technical safeguards so that biometrics do not become a threat to
> privacy.263 155 There is no unique concept of privacy and there maybe trade-
> offs between privacy and other objectives.264 The challenge regarding
> privacy is best put in the following words:

262 The Centre for Internet & Society, Analysis of Key Provisions of the
Aadhaar Act Regulations, (31 March, 2017), available at https://cis-
india.org/internet-governance/blog/analysis-of-key-provisions-of-aadhaar-act-
regulations.

263 A. Cavoukian, Privacy and Biometrics, Information and Privacy Commissioner
Canada (1999), available at http://www.ipc.on.ca/images/Resources/pri-biom.pdf
264 Robert Gellman. Privacy and Biometric ID Systems: An Approach Using Fair
Information Practices for Developing Countries, CGD Policy Paper 028
Washington DC: Centre for Global Development (1 August 2013), available at
https://www.cgdev.org/sites/default/files/privacy-and-biometric-ID-systems_0.
pdf  217 PART F “The definition of privacy in any jurisdiction must take into
account cultural, historical, legal, religious and other local factors. One
size may not fit all countries, regions, or cultures when it comes to privacy
or to some elements of privacy. In addition, views of privacy change as time
passes and technology advances. However, different perspectives are not a
barrier to evaluating privacy but a challenge.”265 The relationship between
biometrics and privacy is completely shaped by the design of the systems and
the framework within which private and personal data is handled.
Unfortunately, particularly in developing countries the adoption of biometrics
has not been accompanied by an adequate discussion of privacy concerns.266
Biometrics can also be a “staunch friend of privacy” when the technology is
used for controlling access and to restrict unauthorized personnel from
gaining access to sensitive personal information. 267 While evaluating privacy
consequences of biometric technology, it is also important to bear in mind
that there cannot be an assumption that current privacy protections which may
be appropriate for the present state of technology will also be sufficient in
the future.268 Technology will continue to develop as will the need to develop
corresponding privacy protections. Concerns around privacy and data protection
will have to be addressed. “Fair Information Practices (FIPs), Privacy by
Design (PbD), and Privacy Impact Assessments (PIAs)”269 might be useful in
addressing these concerns. FIPs offer the substantive content for a privacy
policy. PbD offers a proactive approach to 265 Ibid 266 Ibid 267John D
Woodward, Biometrics: Identifying Law & Policy Concerns, in Biometrics (AK
Jain A.K, R Bolle, and S Pankanti eds.), Springer (1996) 268Robert Gellman,
Privacy and Biometric ID Systems: An Approach Using Fair Information Practices
for Developing Countries, CGD Policy Paper 028 Washington DC: Centre for
Global Development (1 August, 2013), available at
https://www.cgdev.org/sites/default/files/privacy-and-biometric-ID-
systems_0.pdf 269Ibid  218 PART F the protection of privacy that relies on
advance planning rather responding to problems after they arise. PIAs offer a
formal way to consider and assess the privacy consequences of technology or
other choices, including consideration of alternatives early in the planning
stages. These three methodologies are not mutually exclusive and can be
combined to achieve the just and optimal result for society.270 156 Of
particular significance is the “Do Not Harm” principle which means that
biometrics and digital identity should not be used by the issuing authority,
typically a government, or adjacent parties to serve purposes that could harm
the individuals holding the identification.271 Identity systems, whether in
paper or digital, must work for the public good and must do no harm. However,
identity systems due to their inherent power, can cause harm when placed into
hostile hands and used improperly. Great care must be taken to prevent this
misuse. “Do No Harm” requires rigorous evaluation, foresight, and continual
oversight.272 157 There are many adversarial actors – from private espionage
groups to foreign governments, who may try to exploit data vulnerabilities.
There is also the threat of abuse of power by future governments. However,
creating and instilling strong privacy protection laws and safeguards may
decrease these 270 Ibid 271Pam Dixon, A Failure to Do No Harm – India’s
Aadhaar biometric ID program and its inability to protect privacy in relation
to measures in Europe and the U.S., Health and Technology, Vol. 7 (2017), at
pages 539–567 272 Ibid  219 PART G risks- such as the framework provided by
the EUGDPR273. In order to uphold democratic values, the government needs to
curtail its own powers concerning the tracking of all citizens and prevent the
needless collection of data. Such protections may assuage the fears and uphold
the long-term legitimacy of Aadhaar. If the legislative process takes into
account public feedback and addresses the privacy concerns regarding Aadhaar,
it would provide a solid basis for more digital initiatives, which are
imminent in today’s digital age. However, in its current form, the Aadhaar
framework does not address the privacy concerns issues discussed in this
section of the judgment.

    
    
    G           Legitimate state aim
    
    
    G.I         Directive Principles
    
    
    158         The Union government has contended that the legitimate state interest
    
    

in pursuing the Aadhaar project flows from the solicitous concern shown in the
text and spirit of the Constitution for realising socio-economic rights. The
right to food must, according to the view proposed before the Court, trump
over the right to privacy. The Aadhaar project, it has been urged, seeks to
fulfil socio- economic entitlements.

159 The Constituent Assembly did not work in a vacuum. The idealism with which
the members of the Assembly drafted the Constitution was the result of 273
General Data Protection Regulation, available at https://gdpr-info.eu/  220
PART G the “social content of the Independence movement”274, which came from
the awareness of the members about the existing conditions of the Indian
masses. Granville Austin has therefore referred to the Constitution as a
“social document” and a “modernizing force”, whose provisions reflect
“humanitarian sentiments”.275 The Constitution was the medium through which
the nascent Indian democracy was to foster many goals. Austin observes:

> “Transcendent among [the goals] was that of social revolution. Through this
> revolution would be fulfilled the basic needs of the common man, and, it was
> hoped, this revolution would bring about fundamental changes in the
> structure of Indian society.”276 (Emphasis supplied) Austin has further
> observed:

> “The first task of [the] Assembly… [was] to free India through a new
> constitution, to feed the starving people, and to clothe the naked masses,
> and to give every Indian the fullest opportunity to develop himself
> according to his capacity.”277 In his work titled “The Constitution of
> India: A Contextual Analysis”, Arun K Thiruvengadam identified one such goal
> of the Constitution as follows:

> “The Indian Constitution sought to lay the blueprint for economic
> development of the vast subcontinental nation, which was an imperative for a
> populace that was largely illiterate, poor and disproportionately situated
> in rural societies that had limited access to many essential social goods
> and infrastructural facilities.278” .

> “By establishing these positive obligations of the state, the members of the
> Constituent Assembly made it the responsibility of future Indian governments
> to find a middle way between individual liberty and the public good, 274
> Granville Austin, The Indian Constitution: Cornerstone of a Nation, Oxford
> University Press (1999) at page xxii 275 Ibid, at pages 62, xiii and xxii
> 276 Ibid, at page xxi 277 Ibid, at page 32 278 Arun K Thiruvengadam, The
> Constitution of India: A Contextual Analysis, (Bloomsbury 2017), at page 1
> 221 PART G between preserving the property and the privilege of the few and
> bestowing benefits on the many in order to liberate ‘the powers of all men
> equally for contributions to the common good’.”279 (Emphasis supplied) 160
> The draftpersons of the Constitution believed that the driving force to
> bring social change rested with the State. This is evident from an instance
> during the proceedings of the Constituent Assembly. Dr. B R Ambedkar had
> submitted to the Assembly a social scheme to be incorporated into the
> Constitution, which included provisions to cover every adult Indian by life
> insurance. However, his social scheme was rejected on the ground that such
> provisions should be left to legislation and need not be embodied into the
> Constitution.280 161 The social and economic goals which were contemplated
> at the time of Independence remain at the forefront of the State’s agenda
> even today.

Certain parts of the Constitution play a leading role in declaring the
blueprint of its social intent. Directive Principles were specifically
incorporated into the Constitution for this purpose. Though not enforceable in
courts, the principles are “fundamental in the governance of the country” and
it is the duty of the State to apply these principles while making laws.281
The essence of the Directive Principles lies in Article 38 of the
Constitution, which places an obligation on the State to secure a social order
for the promotion of the 279 Granville Austin, The Indian Constitution:
Cornerstone of a Nation, Oxford University Press (1999) at page 66 280 Ibid,
at page 99 281 Article 37, The Constitution of India  222 PART G welfare of
the people. Titled as Part IV of the Constitution, the Directive Principles
are symbolic of the welfare vision of the Constitution makers. Article 38 of
the Constitution provides that :

> “(1) The State shall strive to promote the welfare of the people by securing
> and protecting as effectively as it may a social order in which justice,
> social economic and political, shall inform all the institutions of the
> national life.

(2) The State shall, in particular, strive to minimize the inequalities in
income, and endeavor to eliminate inequalities in status, facilities and
opportunities, not only amongst individuals but also amongst groups of people
residing in different areas or engaged in different vocations.” Clauses (b),
(c), (e) and (f) of Article 39 provide thus :

> “39. The State shall, in particular, direct its policy towards securing -

> ...

> (b) that the ownership and control of the material resources of the
> community are so distributed as best to subserve the common good;

> (c) that the operation of the economic system does not result in the
> concentration of wealth and means of production to the common detriment;

> ..

> (e) that the health and strength of workers, men and women, and the tender
> age of children are not abused and that citizens are not forced by economic
> necessity to enter avocations unsuited to their age or strength;

(f) that children are given opportunities and facilities to develop in a
healthy manner and in conditions of freedom and dignity and that childhood and
youth are protected against exploitation and against moral and material
abandonment.” Article 41 speaks of the right to work, to education, and to
public assistance :

> “41. The State shall, within the limits of its economic capacity and
> development, make effective provision for securing the right to work, to
> education and to public assistance in cases  223 PART G of unemployment, old
> age, sickness and disablement, and in other cases of undeserved want.”
> Article 43 contemplates a living wage and conditions of work which provide a
> decent standard of life:

> “43. The State shall endeavour to secure, by suitable legislation or
> economic organisation or in any other way, to all workers, agricultural,
> industrial or otherwise, work, a living wage, conditions of work ensuring a
> decent standard of life and full enjoyment of leisure and social and
> cultural opportunities and, in particular, the State shall endeavour to
> promote cottage industries on an individual or co-operative basis in rural
> areas.” Article 47 casts a positive obligation upon the State to raise the
> level of nutrition and the standard of living and to improve public health,
> as among its primary duties. Reflecting a constitutional vision of socio-
> economic justice, the values adopted in the Directive Principles are to be
> progressively realised in the course of social and economic development.

> 162 In a recently published book titled “Supreme Court of India: The
> Beginnings”, George H Gadbois, Jr. observes that the Indian Constitution,
> “easily the lengthiest fundamental law in the world, probably ranks also as
> one of the most eclectic ever produced”.282 Reflecting upon the
> constitutional models from which the draftspersons of India’s Constitution
> drew sustenance, Gadbois states:

> “The Constitution makes provision for a parliamentary system adapted from
> the British model, a federation patterned after the Government of India Act
> of 1935 and the Canadian 282George H Gadbois, JR, Supreme Court of India:
> The Beginnings (Vikram Raghavan and Vasujith Ram eds.), Oxford University
> Press (2017), at page 193  224 PART G Constitution, a set of emergency
> powers similar to those set forth in the Weimar Constitution, a lengthy list
> of fundamental rights adapted from the American experience with a Bill of
> Rights, a Supreme Court endowed with express powers of judicial review for
> which the American Supreme Court served as the model, and list of “Directive
> Principles of State Policy” patterned after the Constitution of Eire.”283
> Reflecting on the Directive Principles, Gadbois observes:

> “Suffice to say that the directive principles have provided the
> constitutional basis and justification for the Government’s efforts to
> establish a welfare state, or, to use the designation preferred by Indian
> leaders, a “socialist pattern of society”.284 The sanction behind the
> Directives, according to him “is political and not juridical”. On the other
> hand, the fundamental rights are justiciable because Article 13 provides
> that a law which takes them away or abridges them will be void. The conflict
> as Gadbois sees it is this:

> “the directive principles are a set of instructions to the Government of the
> day to legislate into being a welfare state, which means, of course, an
> emphasis on the social and economic uplift of the community at large and a
> corresponding subtraction from individual rights. It is the duty of the
> Government to apply these principles in making laws. In short, the
> Constitution confers upon the Supreme Court the task of making the
> fundamental rights meaningful against possible infringements by the
> legislatures and executives, and makes it obligatory for the Government to
> bring about changes in the social and economic life of the nation, changes
> which were bound to affect adversely some private rights.

> It is conceivable at least, that both the Supreme Court and the Government
> could have pursued their respective tasks without conflict, but this did not
> happen. The legislatures, purporting to be doing no more than carrying out
> the duties prescribed in the directive principles, enacted legislation which
> the Supreme Court found to be in conflict with some of the fundamental
> rights.”285 283 Ibid, at pages 193-194 284 Ibid, at page 195 285 Ibid, at
> pages 195-196  225 PART G This formulation by Gadbois formed part of a
> dissertation in April 1965. The evolution of jurisprudence in India since
> then has altered the Constitutional dialogue. Over time, the values
> enshrined in the Directive Principles have been read into the guarantees of
> freedom in Part III. In incremental stages, the realisation of economic
> freedom has been brought within the realm of justiciability, at least as a
> measure of the reasonableness of legislative programmes designed to achieve
> social welfare.

163 As our constitutional jurisprudence has evolved, the Directive Principles
have been recognised as being more than a mere statement of desirable goals.
By a process of constitutional interpretation, the values contained in them
have been adopted as standards of reasonableness to expand the meaning and
ambit of the fundamental rights guaranteed by Part III of the Constitution.286
In doing so, judicial interpretation has attempted to imbue a substantive
constitutional content to the international obligations assumed by India in
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the International Covenant on
Economic and Social and Cultural Rights. Eradicating extreme poverty and
hunger is a significant facet of the Millennium Development Goals of the
United Nations. Social welfare legislation is but a step to achieve those
goals. The enactment of the National Food Security Act 2013 constituted a
milestone in legislative attempts to provide food security at the household
level. The Act discerns a targeted Public Distribution System for providing
food-grains to those below the poverty line. The rules contemplated in Section
286 Minerva Mills Ltd. v Union of India, (1980) 3 SCC 625  226 PART G
12(2)(b), incorporate the application of Information and Communication
Technology tools to ensure transparency of governance and prevent a diversion
of benefits. Another important piece of legislation has been the Mahatma
Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA) Act 2005 which was
enacted for the enhancement of livelihood and security of rural households.
The Act guarantees a hundred days of wage employment in every financial year
to at least one able-bodied member of every household in rural areas in public
works programmes designed to create public assets. Both the National Food
Security Act 2013 and the MGNREGA Act 2005 follow a rights-based approach in
dealing with endemic problems of poverty and deprivation in rural areas.
Leveraging Aadhaar for biometric identification of beneficiaries, it has been
argued by the respondents, is an intrinsic part of the legislative effort to
ensure that benefits in terms of food security and employment guarantee are
channelised to those for whom they are meant.

    
    
    G.2     Development and freedom
    
    
    164     Many scholars have delved into the substantive themes of the Indian
    
    

Constitution. Upendra Baxi has argued that the Indian Constitution has four
sovereign virtues: “rights, justice, development, and governance”287. Baxi
notes that they are “intertwined and interlocked with the rest and, in
contradictory combination/recombinations with both the constitutional and
287Upendra Baxi, “A known but an indifferent judge”: Situating Ronald Dworkin
in contemporary Indian jurisprudence, International Journal of Constitutional
Law, (2003) at page 582  227 PART G social past and their future images”.288
Development is a leading aspect of our constitutional vision. Development in
the constitutional context is not only economic development assessed in terms
of conventional indicators such as the growth of the gross domestic product or
industrial output. The central exercise of development in a constitutional
sense is addressing the “deprivation, destitution and oppression”289 that
plague an individual’s life. 165 In a traditional sense, freedom and liberty
mean an absence of interference by the state into human affairs. Liberty
assumes the character of a shield. The autonomy of the individual is protected
from encroachment by the state. This formulation of political rights reflects
the notion that the state shall not be permitted to encroach upon a protected
sphere reserved for individual decisions and choices. What the state is
prevented from doing is couched in a negative sense. Civil and political
rights operate as restraints on state action. They postulate a restriction on
the state. Isaiah Berlin formulates the negative conception of liberty thus:

> “I am … free to the degree to which no man or body of man interferes with my
> activity. Political liberty is simply the area within which a man can act
> unobstructed by others.”290 166 Individual freedom, in this conception,
> imposes a duty of restraint on the state. Modern ideas of neo liberalism
> have funnelled this notion. Neo-

liberalism postulates that the increasing presence of the state is a threat to
288 Ibid 289 Amartya Sen, Development as Freedom, Oxford University Press
(2000), at page xii 290 Isaiah Berlin, Two Concepts of Liberty, available at
http://faculty.www.umb.edu/steven.levine/courses/Fall%202015/What%20is%20Freedom%20Writings/Berlin.p
df  228 PART G individual autonomy. A free market economy with minimum state
control, in this view, is regarded as integral to protecting individual rights
and freedoms. FA Hayek construes the content of liberty as meaning the absence
of obstacles. Resultantly, this notion of liberty regards the role of the
state in a narrow jurisprudential frame. Attempts by the state to pursue
social justice or to use its authority for redistribution of wealth would in
this conception not be a legitimate use of state power.291 167 The notion that
liberty only consists of freedom from restraint does not complete the universe
of its discourse. Broader notions of liberty are cognizant of the fact that
individuals must be enabled to pursue their capacities to the fullest degree.
Social and economic discrimination poses real barriers to access education,
resources and the means to a dignified life. This approach to understanding
the content of freedom construes the ability to lead a dignified existence as
essential to the conception of liberty and freedom. The integral relationship
between removal of socio-economic inequality and freedom has been eloquently
set out by Amartya Sen in “Development as Freedom”292:

> “Development requires the removal of major sources of unfreedom: poverty as
> well as tyranny, poor economic opportunities as well as systematic social
> deprivation, neglect of public facilities as well as intolerance or
> overactivity of repressive states. Despite unprecedented increases in
> overall opulence, the contemporary world denies elementary freedoms to vast
> numbers – perhaps even the majority-of people. Sometimes the lack of
> substantive freedoms relates directly to economic poverty, which robs people
> of the 291 F A Hayek, The Constitution of Liberty, Routledge & Kegan Paul,
> (1960) at pages 11, 207-208 292 Amartya Sen, Development as Freedom, Oxford
> University Press (2000) at page 3-4  229 PART G freedom to satisfy hunger,
> or to achieve sufficient nutrition, or to obtain remedies for treatable
> illnesses, or the opportunity to be adequately clothed or sheltered, or to
> enjoy clean water or sanitary facilities. In other cases, the unfreedom
> links closely to the lack of public facilities and social care, such as the
> absence of epidemiological programs, or of organized arrangements for health
> care or educational facilities, or of effective institutions for the
> maintenance of local peace and order. In still other cases, the violation of
> freedom results directly from a denial of political and civil liberties by
> authoritarian regimes and from imposed restrictions on the freedom to
> participate in the social, political and economic life of the community.” In
> Sen’s analysis, human development is influenced by economic opportunities,
> political liberties, social powers, and the enabling conditions of good
> health, basic education, and the encouragement and cultivation of
> initiatives. Taking it further, Sen has recognized an important co-relation
> in terms of the non-availability of basic economic conditions:

> “Economic unfreedom, in the form of extreme poverty, can make a person a
> helpless prey in the violation of other kinds of freedom… Economic unfreedom
> can breed social unfreedom, just as social or political unfreedom can also
> foster economic unfreedom.”293 168 The notion of freedom as an agency has
> been developed by Sen as part of the ‘capability theory’. The necessary
> consequence of focusing upon major sources of unfreedom, in a social and
> economic perspective, is that the removal of these restraints is essential
> to the realization of freedom. If true freedom is to be achieved through the
> removal of conditions which cause social and economic deprivation, the role
> of the state is not confined to an absence of restraint. On the contrary,
> the state has a positive obligation to 293 Ibid, at page 8  230 PART G
> enhance individual capabilities. Martha Nussbaum294 argues that realising
> freedom requires the state to discharge positive duties. Nussbaum expresses
> a threshold level of capability below which true human functioning is not
> available. Freedom is seen in terms of human development and is the process
> by which individuals can rise above capability thresholds. In the
> realisation of basic rights, the state is subject to positive duties to
> further the fulfilment of freedom.

> 169 The broader conception of freedom and liberty which emerges from the
> writings of Sen and Nussbaum has direct consequences upon how we view civil
> and political rights and socio-economic rights. The distinction between the
> two sets of rights becomes illusory once civil and political rights are
> regarded as comprehending within their sweep a corresponding duty to take
> such measures as would achieve true freedom. Henry Shue295 suggests that
> rights give rise to corresponding duties. These duties include:

(i) a duty to respect;

(ii) a duty to protect; and

(iii) a duty to fulfil.

Duties of respect embody a restraint on affecting the rights of others. Duties
to protect mandate that the state must restrain others in the same manner as
it restrains itself. The state’s duty of non-interference extends to private
individuals. The duty to fulfil connotes aiding the deprived in the
realisation of 294Martha Nussbaum, Women and Human Development, Cambridge
University Press, (2000) 295Henry Shue, Basic Rights: Subsistence, Affluence
and US Foreign Policy, Princeton University Press, Second Edition (1996)  231
PART G rights. This imposes a corresponding duty to create the conditions
which will facilitate the realisation of the right. The right which is
protected for the individual will also signify an expectation that the state
must create institutions enabling the exercise of facilitative measures or
programmes of action, of an affirmative nature. The state has affirmative
obligations to fulfil in the realisation of rights. These positive duties of
the state are readily apparent in the context of welfare entitlements when the
state must adopt affirmative steps to alleviate poverty and the major sources
of economic and social non- freedom. But the thesis of Nussbaum and Shue have
an important role for the state to discharge in ensuring the fulfilment of
political rights as well. In a highly networked and technology reliant world,
individual liberty requires the state to take positive steps to protect
individual rights. Data protection and individual privacy mandate that the
state put in place a positive regime which recognises, respects and protects
the individual from predatory market places. The state has a positive duty to
create an autonomous regulatory framework in which the individual has access
to remedies both against state and non- state actors, both of whom pose grave
dangers of assault on the individual as an autonomous entity. Failure to
discharge that duty is a failure of the state to respect, protect and fulfil
rights.

Dr Ambedkar’s prophetic final address to the Constituent Assembly elaborates
that vision:

> “On the social plane, we have in India a society based on the principle of
> graded inequality with elevation for some and degradation for others. On the
> economic plane, we have a society in which there are some who have immense
> wealth as against many who live in abject poverty. On the 26th of  232 PART
> G January 1950, we are going to enter into a life of contradictions. In
> politics we will have equality and in social and economic life we will have
> inequality...How long shall we continue to live this life of contradictions?
> How long shall we continue to deny equality in our social and economic life?
> If we continue to deny it for long, we will do so only by putting our
> political democracy in peril. We must remove this contradiction at the
> earliest possible moment or else those who suffer from inequality will blow
> up the structure of political democracy which [this] Assembly has [so]
> laboriously built up.”296 The pursuit of social welfare and security is a
> central aspect of development.

The State, in Ambedkar’s vision, would be the main instrumentality in the
debate on development, which has to revolve around the social, economic and
political spheres and would be guided by the values of the Constitution. 170
Social opportunities are the facilities and “arrangements that society makes”
for education, healthcare and nutrition, which “influence the individual’s
substantive freedom to live better”.297 Social security measures include
programmes which intend to promote the welfare of the population through
assistance measures guaranteeing access to sufficient resources. The social
security framework is not only important for individual development, but also
for effective participation in economic and political activities. Social
security programmes flow from ‘economic and social rights’− also called as
“welfare rights” 298 or second generation rights. These rights, recognized for
the first time under the Universal Declaration on Human Rights, 1948 include a
large list of freedoms and claims under its “protective 296 Constituent
Assembly Debates (25 November 1949) 297 Amartya Sen, Development as Freedom,
Oxford University Press (2000), at page 39 298 Amartya Sen, The Idea of
Justice, Penguin (2009) at pages 379-380  233 PART G umbrella”. They include
not only basic political rights, but the right to work, the right to
education, protection against unemployment and poverty, the right to join
trade unions and even the right to just and favourable remuneration. 299
Social security programmes as an instrument for the removal of global poverty
and other economic and social deprivations are at the centre stage in the
global discourse. Article 22 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
expressly recognises that every member of society is entitled to the right to
social security and to the realisation of economic, social and cultural
rights. Those rights are stated to be indispensable for dignity and to the
free development of personality. The realisation of these rights has to be
facilitated both through national efforts and international co-operation and
in accordance with the organisation and the resources of each state. Article
22 stipulates that:

> “Article 22 Everyone, as a member of society, has the right to social
> security and is entitled to realization, through national effort and
> international co-operation and in accordance with the organization and
> resources of each State, of the economic, social and cultural rights
> indispensable for his dignity and the free development of his personality.”
> In a similar vein, Article 23 comprehends a conglomeration of rights
> including

> (i) the right to work; (ii) free choice of employment; (iii) just and
> favourable conditions of work; (iv) protection against unemployment; (v)
> equal pay for equal work without any discrimination; (vi) just and
> favourable remuneration for work; and (vii) formation and membership of
> trade unions. Article 23 299 Ibid, at page 380  234 PART G construes these
> rights as a means of ensuring both for the individual and the family, an
> “existence worthy of human dignity” supplemented if necessary “by other
> means of social protection”.

India having adopted the UDHR, its principles can legitimately animate our
constitutional conversations. Both Articles 22 and 23 are significant in
recognising economic rights and entitlements in matters of work and social
security. Both the articles recognise the intrinsic relationship between human
dignity and the realisation of economic rights. Measures of social protection
are integral to the realisation of economic freedom and to fulfil the
aspiration for human dignity.

171 India adopted and ratified the Covenant on Civil and Political Rights as
well as the Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights. India acceded to
the Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights on 10 April 1979.
According to the Preamble, the states who are parties to the Covenant have
recognized that:

> “the ideal of free human beings enjoying freedom from fear and want can only
> be achieved if conditions are created whereby everyone may enjoy his
> economic, social and cultural rights, as well as his civil and political
> rights.” Freedom is thus defined in terms of the absence of fear and want.
> Moreover, freedom consists in the enjoyment of a conglomeration of rights:
> economic,  235 PART G social and cultural as well as civil and political
> rights. There is in other words no dichotomy between the two sets of rights.

Article 11 of the Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights imposes
positive obligations on the covenanting states:

> “Article 11.

> 1\. The States Parties to the present Covenant recognize the right of
> everyone to an adequate standard of living for himself and his family,
> including adequate food, clothing and housing, and to the continuous
> improvement of living conditions. The States Parties will take appropriate
> steps to ensure the realization of this right, recognizing to this effect
> the essential importance of international cooperation based on free consent.

> 2\. The States Parties to the present Covenant, recognizing the fundamental
> right of everyone to be free from hunger, shall take, individually and
> through international co- operation, the measures, including specific
> programmes, which are needed:

> (a) To improve methods of production, conservation and distribution of food
> by making full use of technical and scientific knowledge, by disseminating
> knowledge of the principles of nutrition and by developing or reforming
> agrarian systems in such a way as to achieve the most efficient development
> and utilization of natural resources;

(a) Taking into account the problems of both food-importing the food-exporting
countries, to ensure an equitable distribution of world food supplies in
relation to need.” 172 The Masstricht Guidelines on Violations of Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights (January 1997) stipulate that:

> “It is now undisputed that all human rights are indivisible, interdependent,
> interrelated and of equal importance for human dignity. Therefore, states
> are as responsible for violations of economic, social and cultural rights as
> they are for violations of civil and political rights.”  236 PART G The
> Guidelines also stipulate that like civil and political rights, economic,
> social and cultural rights impose three different types of obligations on
> states :

the obligation to respect, protect and fulfil. The guidelines recognize that
violations of economic, social and cultural rights can occur through acts of
commission and omission on the part of states. The omission or failure of
states to take measures emanating from their legal obligations may result in
such violations. Among them is the failure to enforce legislation or to put
into effect policies designed to implement the provisions of the Covenant. In
similar terms, the Limburg Principles on the Implementation of the
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights cast
affirmative duties on states to take immediate steps towards realizing the
rights contained in the Covenant. Clauses 16, 21 and 27 of the guidelines are
thus:

> “16. All States parties have an obligation to begin immediately to take
> steps towards full realization of the rights contained in the Covenant.

> 21\. The obligation “to achieve progressively the full realization of the
> rights” requires States parties to move as expeditiously as possible towards
> the realization of the rights. Under no circumstances shall this be
> interpreted as implying for States the right to defer indefinitely efforts
> to ensure full realization. On the contrary all States parties have the
> obligation to begin immediately to take steps to fulfil their obligations
> under the Covenant.

27\. In determining whether adequate measures have been taken for the
realization of the rights recognized in the Covenant attention shall be paid
to equitable and effective use of and access to the available resources.” The
office of the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights notified General Comment
No. 3, which was adopted at the fifth session of the Committee on  237 PART G
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights on 14 December 1990. The Comment states:

> “…while the full realization of the relevant rights may be achieved
> progressively, steps towards that goal must be taken within a reasonably
> short time after the Covenant’s entry into force for the States concerned.
> Such steps should be deliberate, concrete and targeted as clearly as
> possible towards meeting the obligations recognized in the Covenant.”
> Similarly, General Comment No. 12 on the right to adequate food was adopted
> at the twentieth session of the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural
> Rights on 12 May 1999. It states :

> “The Committee observes that while the problems of hunger and malnutrition
> are often particularly acute in developing countries, malnutrition, under-
> nutrition and other problems which relate to the right to adequate food and
> the right to freedom from hunger also exist in some of the most economically
> developed countries, Fundamentally, the roots of the problem of hunger and
> malnutrition are not lack of food but lack of access to available food,
> inter alia because of poverty, by large segments of the world's population.”
> The emphasis on the lack of access to available food is significant to the
> present discourse. It indicates that access to food requires institutional
> mechanisms to ensure that the available resources reach the beneficiaries
> for whom they are intended.

> 173 Section 2(1)(f) of the Protection of Human Rights Act 1993 specifically
> adverts to the Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights:

> “2.(1)(f) “International Covenants” means the International Covenant on
> Civil and Political Rights and the International Covenant on Economic,
> Social and Cultural Rights adopted by the General Assembly of the United
> Nations on 16th December, 1996 and such other Covenant or Convention  238
> PART G adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations as the Central
> Government may, by notification, specify;” Under Section 12(f), the National
> Human Rights Commission has been entrusted with the function of studying
> treaties and other international instruments of human rights and to make
> recommendations for their effective implementation. Parliament has
> statutorily incorporated India’s obligations at international law under the
> above covenants as a part of the national effort to realise fundamental
> human freedoms. Achieving economic freedom is integral to that mission. In
> his classic work “The Idea of Justice”, Amartya Sen has observed in this
> regard:

> “The inclusion of second-generation rights makes it possible to integrate
> ethical issues underlying general ideas of global development with the
> demands of deliberative democracy, both of which connect with human rights
> and quite often with an understanding of the importance of advancing human
> capabilities.”300 174 Social security thus acts as an underpinning link with
> development.

There is also a two-way relationship between development and social security
(expansion of human capability). Dreze and Sen have dealt with this
relationship in their following observation:

> “Growth generates resources with which public and private efforts can be
> systematically mobilized to expand education, health care, nutrition, social
> facilities, and other essentials of fuller and freer human life for all. And
> the expansion of human capability, in turn, allows a faster expansion of
> resources and production, on which economic growth ultimately depends… Well-
> functioning public services, especially (but not only) in fields such as
> education and health, are also critical in fostering participatory growth as
> well as in ensuring that 300 Amartya Sen, The Idea of Justice, Penguin
> (2009) at page 381  239 PART G growth leads to rapid improvements in
> people’s living conditions.”301 The authors have further observed that apart
> from education and healthcare, India faces larger issues of accountability
> in the “public sector as a whole”. 302 The lack of progress in public
> services acts as a huge barrier to improve the quality of life of people.303
> It has been observed:

> “The relative weakness of Indian social policies on school education, basic
> healthcare, child nutrition, essential land reform and gender equity
> reflects deficiencies of politically engaged public reasoning and social
> pressure, not just inadequacies in the official thinking of the
> government.”304 The future of Indian democracy therefore depends on how it
> engages itself with the issues of accountability in transfer of basic human
> facilities to the common man.

> 175 The State has a legitimate aim to ensure that its citizens receive basic
> human facilities. In order to witness development, the huge amount of
> expenditure that the State incurs in providing subsidies and benefits to the
> common citizens, must be accompanied by accountability and transparency.

Legislative and institutional changes are often capable of creating an
atmosphere of transparency and accountability. The most visible example of a
legislative enactment which brought institutional changes is the Right to
Information Act, 2005. Commentators have often highlighted the importance 301
Jean Dreze and Amartya Sen, An Uncertain Glory, Penguin (2013), at pages x and
xi 302 Ibid, at page xi 303 Jean Dreze and Amartya Sen, An Uncertain Glory,
Penguin (2013), at page 33 304 Amartya Sen, The Idea of Justice, Penguin
(2009) at page 349  240 PART G of this legislation by deliberating upon how it
has been successful at “curbing corruption and restoring accountability in
public life”305. According to the State, though the Aadhaar programme is not
in itself a social security programme, the institutional framework established
by the Act, seeks to act, in a way, as an extension of social security
programmes. The State has a legitimate concern to check that the welfare
benefits which it marks for those, who are entitled, reach them without
diversion. The Aadhaar programme, it is argued, acts as an instrument for the
realization of the benefits arising out of the social security programmes. The
Aadhaar programme, it was further contended, fulfils the State’s concern that
its resources are utilised fully for human development.

It has been contended by the Respondents that since the establishment of the
UIDAI in 2009, its basic mandate is to provide a unique identity number to
residents. The number would subserve two purposes. First, it would serve as a
proof of identity. Second, it would be used for the purpose of identifying
beneficiaries for the transfer of social welfare benefits, provided by the
state. The rationale for establishing a method of identification is to ensure
that the benefits provided by social welfare programmes formulated by the
State reach the beneficiaries for whom they are intended. As a policy
intervention, a unique measure of identification is intended, it has been
argued, to secure financial inclusion. A significant hurdle in the success of
social welfare programmes is that benefits do not reach the targeted
population. The reason 305 Jean Dreze and Amartya Sen, An Uncertain Glory,
Penguin (2013), at page 100  241 PART G for this may have something to do
intrinsically with the condition of the individuals as much as with their
larger socio-economic circumstances. Migrant labour and labour in the
unorganised sector lacks fixity of abode. The nature of their work renders
their lives peripatetic. Nomadic tribes, particularly in inaccessible areas,
may not have fixed homes. In many cases, traditional occupations require
individuals to move from place to place, dependent on seasonal changes. Then
again, groups of citizens including women, children and the differently abled
may face significant difficulties in accessing benefits under publicly
designed social welfare programmes as a result of factors such as gender, age
and disability.

176 Unequal access to welfare benefits provided by the State becomes a
significant source of deprivation resulting in a denial of the means to
sustain life and livelihood. Before the adoption of Aadhaar based-identity,
there were multiple platforms for identification of residents. They created a
situation where those with no identity had no access to the means of
sustaining a dignified life. Equally significant, as a policy intervention,
was the issue of capture. While on the one hand, large swathes of the
population had no access to welfare assistance, benefits could be captured by
persons not entitled to them either by the assertion of fake or multiple
identities. Setting up a fake identity enables an individual to pass off as
another and to secure a benefit to which that individual is not entitled. Fake
identities compound the problem of capture by allowing individuals to receive
multiple benefits through  242 PART G shell identities. Policy makers were
confronted with the serious problems posed by fake and multiple identities
since they imposed a burden on the exchequer while at the same time diluting
the efficacy of state designed social welfare measures. The burden on the
exchequer is illustrated by situations where persons who are not entitled to
benefits secure them in the guise of being persons entitled to them. When
imposters secure benefits which are not meant for them, they deprive in the
process, persons who are genuinely entitled to benefits. The class of
beneficiaries of social welfare programmes is, so to speak, adulterated by the
capture of benefits by those not entitled to them. This raises serious
concerns of the deprivation of human rights. The capture of benefits has the
consequence of depriving those to whom these benefits should legitimately
flow, of the measures designed by the state to protect its populace from human
want and need. The resources deployed by the state are from its public
revenues. When designing a unique measure of identification, the state must be
guided by the necessity of ensuring financial inclusion and of protecting
against financial exclusion. Every citizen who is eligible for social welfare
benefits should obtain them. No person who is entitled should be excluded.
Individuals who do not qualify for social welfare benefits should not capture
them by passing off as individuals entitled. Enforcing and implementing a
robust platform for identification of beneficiaries must ensure that social
welfare benefits reach the hands of those who fulfil the conditions of
eligibility and are not captured by rent-seeking behaviour of those to whom
social welfare benefits are not designed. This constitutes a  243 PART G
legitimate object of state policy. Reaching out to the targeted population is
a valid constitutional purpose. Social welfare measures are an intrinsic part
of state policy designed to facilitate dignified conditions of existence to
the marginalised, especially those who live below the poverty line.
Identification of beneficiaries is crucial to the fulfilment of social welfare
programmes. 177 These concerns form the basis of the Aadhaar (Targeted
Delivery of Financial and other Subsidies, Benefits and Services) Act, 2016.
As its Statement of Objects and Reasons explains:

> “The correct identification of targeted beneficiaries for delivery of
> various subsides, benefits, services, grants, wages and other social
> benefits schemes which are funded from the Consolidated Fund of India has
> become a challenge for the Government. The failure to establish identity of
> an individual has proved to be a major hindrance for successful
> implementation of these programmes. This has been a grave concern for
> certain categories of persons, such as women, children, senior citizens,
> persons with disabilities, migrant unskilled and unorganised workers, and
> nomadic tribes. In the absence of a credible system to authenticate identity
> of beneficiaries, it is difficult to ensure that the subsidies, benefits and
> services reach to intended beneficiaries.” The Statement of Objects and
> Reasons indicates that the enactment is designed to ensure “the effective,
> secure and accurate delivery of benefits, subsidies and services from the
> Consolidated Fund of India to targeted beneficiaries”. The architecture of
> the law contemplates regulating the following aspects:

> “(a) issue of Aadhaar numbers to individuals on providing ..

> demographic and biometric information to the Unique Identification Authority
> of India;

> (b) requiring, Aadhaar numbers for identifying an individual for delivery of
> benefits, subsidies, and  244 PART G services (where) the expenditure is
> incurred from or the receipt therefrom forms part of the Consolidated Fund
> of India;

> (c) authentication of the Aadhaar number of an Aadhaar number holder in
> relation to his demographic and biometric information;

> (d) establishment of the Unique Identification Authority of India… to
> perform functions in pursuance of the objectives above;

> (e) maintenance and updating the information of individuals in the Central
> Identities Data Repository in such manner as may be specified by
> regulations;

(f) measures pertaining to security, privacy and confidentiality of
information in possession or control of the Authority including information
stored in the Central Identities Data Repository; and

(g) offences and penalties for contravention of relevant statutory
provisions.” The Preamble to the enactment indicates that Parliament designed
the legislation as an instrument of good governance, to secure an “efficient,
transparent and targeted delivery of subsidies, benefits and services” for
which the expenditure is incurred from the Consolidated Fund to resident
individuals.

178 The Aadhaar platform is not a social welfare benefit in itself.
Essentially, what it seeks to achieve is to provide a unique identity to every
resident. This identity, in the form of an Aadhaar number, is obtained upon
the submission of demographic and biometric information in the course of
enrolment. The legislative design envisages that the identity of the
individual is verified through the process of authentication by which the
biometric data stored in the central repository is matched with the biometric
information submitted for authentication. Aadhaar is a platform for
verification of identity  245 PART G based principally on biometric
information. In facilitating the process of establishing the identity of the
individual who seeks social welfare benefits envisaged in Section 7, Aadhaar
has an instrumental role. It is instrumental in the sense that as a measure of
state policy, it seeks to bring about financial inclusion by providing a means
of identification to every segment of the population including those who may
not have been within the coverage of traditional markers of identity. As an
instrument for verifying identity, Aadhaar seeks to ensure that social welfare
benefits are obtained by persons eligible to do so and are not captured by the
ineligible. Relying on an asserted reliability of biometric markers, the
Aadhaar platform attempts to eliminate, or at least to curb rent-seeking
behaviour.

The rationale underlying Section 7 is the targeted delivery of services,
benefits and subsidies which are funded from the Consolidated Fund of India.
In the seven decades since Independence, the Union Government has put into
place social welfare measures including the public distribution system, free
education, scholarships, mid-day meals and LPG subsidies to ameliorate the
conditions of existence of the poor and marginalised. There is a state
interest in ensuring that the welfare benefits which the state provides reach
those for whom they are intended.

246 PART G G.3 Identity and Identification 179 Identity is inseparable from
the human personality. An identity is a statement of who an individual is. Our
identities define who we are. They express what we would wish the world to
know us as. The human personality is, at a certain level, all about identity,
for it is through the assertion of identity that each individual seeks to
preserve the core of his or her humanity. An identity is the persona which an
individual puts forth in a multitude of relationships. The significance of our
identity lies in our ability to express the core of our beings. When the
Constitution protects our right to be and to be what we are, it creates a
space where the individual is immune from interference. By recognizing our
liberty as autonomous persons, the Constitution recognizes our ability to
preserve and shape our identities in interactions with others.

Identity may be, but is not always based upon immutable characteristics that
are defined at birth. What is immutable may not be or, at any rate, is not
generally understood as being capable of change. But even here, the
immutability of our features is relative to our own existence and is capable
of being shaped by the social milieu in which human beings lead their lives.
Features about our biological being which are defined at birth are, after all,
not as constraining upon our identities as is often assumed to be the case.
That is because these immutable features are also constantly engaged with our
247 PART G social and cultural environment. They shape and are influenced by
that environment.

180 There is a distinction between identity and identification. Identification
is a matter of proof- of establishing that a person is actually, the
individual who claims a right or entitlement. In their daily interactions,
individuals have to distinguish themselves from others, whether it be in the
course of employment, travel, civil union, location, community perspectives,
revenue obligations or access to benefits. Identification is a proof of
identity or evidence of identity. Identification is mandatory in numerous
activities of day to day life: a passport is necessary for international
travel, a voter ID is required for exercising electoral rights, a driving
license is necessary to ply a vehicle and an arms license is needed to possess
a fire arm. The holder of a policy of medical insurance will have a card
depicting his or her identity which is a proof of holding a valid policy for
availing medical benefits. 181 Under international law, recognition of
identity is an obligation of a nation state. Article 6 of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights provides that “everyone has the right to
recognition everywhere as a person before the law”. Article 16 of the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights is in similar terms.
Article 8 of the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child mandates that State
parties undertake to respect the right of the child to  248 PART G preserve
his or her identity, including nationality, name and family relations as
recognized by law without unlawful interference. The importance of identity is
recognized by Article 3 of the American Convention on Human Rights. The Inter-
American Juridical Committee (IAJC) of the Organisation of American States
(OAS) has in fact provided that:

> “12. The right to identity is consubstantial to the attributes and human
> dignity. Consequently it is an enforceable basic human right erga omnes as
> an expression of a collective interest of the overall international
> community that does not admit derogation or suspension in cases provided in
> the American Convention on Human Rights.

…

15\. The Committee considers that the right to identity is, among its most
relevant implications and scope, to constitute an autonomous right that is
based on the regulations of international law and those that derive from the
actual cultural elements considered in the domestic legal systems of the
States, in order therefore to satisfy the specificity of the individual, with
his or her rights that are unique, singular and identifiable.”306 182 In
National Legal Services Authority v Union of India307, this Court held that
gender identity is fundamental to and an essential component for the enjoyment
of civil rights by the transgender community. Self-determination of identity
has been held to be an essential facet of Article 21. In the view of this
Court:

> “74. The recognition of one's gender identity lies at the heart of the
> fundamental right to dignity. Gender, as already indicated, constitutes the
> core of one's sense of being as well 306 Opinion on the Right to Identity,
> 2007, available at
> http://www.oas.org/en/sla/iajc/docs/ijc_current_agenda_Right_to_Identity.pdf
> 307 (2014) 5 SCC 438  249 PART G as an integral part of a person's identity.
> Legal recognition of gender identity is, therefore, part of right to dignity
> and freedom guaranteed under our Constitution.

75\. Article 21, as already indicated, guarantees the protection of "personal
autonomy" of an individual. In Anuj Garg v. Hotel Association of India33 (SCC
p. 15, paras 34-35), this Court held that personal autonomy includes both the
negative right of not to be subject to interference by others and the positive
right of individuals to make decisions about their life, to express themselves
and to choose which activities to take part in. Self-determination of gender
is an integral part of personal autonomy and self-expression and falls within
the realm of personal liberty guaranteed under Article 21 of the Constitution
of India.” Identity assumes a complex character in a networked society. Shah
adopts the following definition of a networked society308:

> “a network society is a society where the key social structures and
> activities are organized around electronically processed information
> networks. So it’s not just about networks or social networks, because social
> networks have been very old forms of social organization. It’s about social
> networks which process and manage information and are using micro-
> electronic based technologies”309.

183 In a networked society, an individual is a data subject and a quantified
self. The individual is a data subject since his or her data is stored in a
database. Shah notes that there is an ambivalence about whether the data
subject is the individual whose identity becomes the basis of validating the
data or whether the data subject is the identity of the individual as it gets
constructed through data sets. The individual becomes a quantified self where
data which is distributed across various systems is “curated” to form a
comprehensive profile of an individual.

308Nishant Shah, Identity and Identification – the Individual in the Time of
Networked Governance, Socio Legal Review, available at
http://www.sociolegalreview.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/12/Identity-and-
Identification- the-Individual-in-the-Time-of-Networked-Governance.pdf
309Manuel Castells, Conversation with Manuel Castells, Globetrotter, available
at http://globetrotter.berkeley.edu/people/Castells/castells-con4.html  250
PART G 184 The Aadhaar project was intended to allow a unique identity to
enable individuals to “navigate through disconnected and often hostile
governmental database systems”. Shah notes that ever since 2009, the terms
‘identity’ and ‘identification’ were used as part of the Aadhaar project
inter-changeably, introducing “a curious conflation and interoperability”310
between these notions. ‘Identification’ is the ability of a network device to
identify an individual by scanning unique data sets, from personal information
to biometric details such as finger print and iris scan, which would be stored
in a massive centralized database. UIDAI posited that identification took
place through its yes/no mechanism by which the centralised database would
provide a response to whether the biometric details submitted for
authentication match those in the repository. Technologically, at this level,
Aadhaar was to be a means of identification. Yet at another level, the Aadhaar
project also offered itself as providing a documentary identity to persons who
may not have possessed one at all. Shah, in the course of his article, has
this to state about the conflation between identity and identification in the
Aadhaar project:

> “This ambiguity and conflation cannot merely be attributed to a semantic
> slip of the keyboard, but to a much larger phenomenon which points to the
> construction of a new notion of the individual, through big data streams and
> measures of self-quantification. It offers us a techno-social framework
> where the machine function of identification is wedded to the human
> expression of identity, and thus offers an inroad into looking at what
> happens when our identities are mediated, mitigated, facilitated, and
> contained by the ways in which the networked technologies of authentication
> and verification operate. It is a crucial shift where the identity of a
> person is ontologically defined through the logics and logistics of
> 310Nishant Shah, Identity and Identification – the Individual in the Time of
> Networked Governance, Socio Legal Review, available at
> http://www.sociolegalreview.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/12/Identity-and-
> Identification-

the-Individual-in-the-Time-of-Networked-Governance.pdf  251 PART G networked
computation that form the Aadhaar project. This is why the Aadhaar enrolment
system, for instance, does not check the veracity of the information that the
individual gives it. For the enrolment, the individual needs no proof to
substantiate or validate the information provided. The name, the address, the
description, etc. are empty signifiers and it is possible for anybody to
assume any identity as long as they give the inviolable data of biometric
recognition. Thus, the identity of the person being enrolled and registered is
almost insignificant and has value only in how it would now always identify
the individual through the credentials or information provided. The Aadhaar
network governance system is concerned only with the identifiers rather than
the narrative, iterative, forms of identity and expression, and this is where
we begin examining the ways in which identity is shaped, understood, and used
to construct the notion of an individual in computation systems.”311 185
Identity includes the right to determine the forms through which identity is
expressed and the right not to be identified. That concept is now “flipped” so
that identification through identifiers becomes the only form of identity in
the time of database governance. This involves a radical transformation in the
position of the individual.

The submission which has been urged on behalf of the petitioners is that an
individual entitled to the protection of the freedoms and liberties guaranteed
by Part III of the Constitution must have the ability to assert a choice of
the means of identification for proving identity. Requiring an individual to
prove identity on the basis of one mode alone will, it is submitted, violate
the right of self-determination and free choice.

311 Ibid  252 PART G 186 The Aadhaar (Enrolment and Update) Regulations, 2016
stipulate in Regulation 4, the demographic information which is required for
enrolment. Regulation 4 is in the following terms:

> “4. Demographic information required for enrolment.-

> (1) The following demographic information shall be collected from all
> individuals undergoing enrolment (other than children below five years of
> age):
    
    
                 (i)     Name;
                 (ii)    Date of Birth;
                 (iii)   Gender;
                 (iv)    Residential Address.
    
    

> (2) The following demographic information may also additionally be collected
> during enrolment, at the option of the individual undergoing enrolment:

> (i) Mobile number;

> (ii) Email address.

> (3) In case of Introducer-based enrolment, the following additional
> information shall be collected:

> (i) Introducer name;

> (ii) Introducer’s Aadhaar number.

> (4) In case of Head of Family based enrolment, the following additional
> information shall be collected:

> (i) Name of Head of Family;

> (ii) Relationship;

> (iii) Head of Family’s Aadhaar number;

> (iv) One modality of biometric information of the Head of Family.

> (5) The standards of the above demographic information shall be as may be
> specified by the Authority for this purpose.

253

PART G (6) The demographic information shall not include race, religion,
caste, tribe, ethnicity, language, record of entitlement, income or medical
history of the resident.” Regulation 9 postulates that at the time of
enrolment, the enrolling agency shall inform the individual who is undergoing
enrolment of (i) the manner in which the information shall be used; (ii) the
nature of recipients with whom the information is intended to be shared during
authentication; and (iii) the existence of a right to access information.
Under Regulation 10, a resident seeking enrolment has to submit an application
for enrolment together with copies of supporting documents for proof of
identity, address and date of birth. Schedule II indicates a list of
supporting documents which are accepted for verification of identity, address
and date of birth. If a resident does not possess the supporting documents,
enrolment is contemplated through an introducer or a Head of Family. Schedule
II contains as many as eighteen documents which are accepted towards proof of
identity and thirty three documents as proof of address. The Aadhaar Act, it
has been contended, allows the resident to identify herself through any of the
stipulated documents for the purpose of availing an Aadhaar number. The
Aadhaar number can be availed of to secure a subsidy, benefit or service under
Section 7, the expenditure of which is drawn from the Consolidated Fund of
India. Article 266 of the Constitution provides as follows:

“266. Consolidated Funds and public accounts of India and of the States  254
PART G (1) Subject to the provisions of Article 267 and to the provisions of
this Chapter with respect to the assignment of the whole or part of the net
proceeds of certain taxes and duties to States, all revenues received by the
Government of India, all loans raised by that Government by the issue of
treasury bills, loans or ways and means advances and all moneys received by
that Government in repayment of loans shall form one consolidated fund to be
entitled the “Consolidated Fund of India”, and all revenues received by the
Government of a State, all loans raised by that Government by the issue of
treasury bills, loans or ways and means advances and all moneys received by
that Government in repayment of loans shall form one consolidated fund to be
entitled “the Consolidated Fund of the State”.

(2) All other public moneys received by or on behalf of the Government of
India or the Government of a State shall be credited to the public account of
India or the public account of the State, as the case may be (3) No moneys out
of the Consolidated Fund of India or the Consolidated Fund of a State shall be
appropriated except in accordance with law and for the purposes and in the
manner provided in this Constitution.” 187 The Union Government is the
custodian of the Consolidated Fund under Article 266. All revenues received by
the government form part of the Consolidated Fund. No part of its proceeds can
be “appropriated except in accordance with law and for the purpose and in the
manner” which is provided by the Constitution. As the custodian of the fund,
the Union Government, it has been submitted by the respondents, had the
Aadhaar Act enacted through Parliament. The Act places a restriction on the
right of the individual to utilize any other identification save and except
for the Aadhaar number, for the purpose of availing of a subsidy, benefit or
service that involves an expenditure from the Consolidated Fund. The purpose
of making an Aadhaar number mandatory for the delivery of benefits, services
and subsidies funded from the Consolidated Fund is to confirm the identity of
the individual to whom  255 PART G the benefit is being transferred. This was
in order to ensure that the benefits under social welfare programmes funded by
the Consolidated Fund reach the hands of targeted beneficiaries. The Union
Government which expends huge sums of money in its welfare schemes was
apprised of the fact that money which was meant for the beneficiaries was
being siphoned off through ghosts and duplicates. As a result, genuine
beneficiaries would be deprived of their basic rights. Cornering of benefits
by the creation of bogus identities seriously impacted upon social welfare
measures adopted by the Union Government as an instrument of fostering social
and economic development. It was to deal with this evil that the Aadhaar
project assumed a statutory character in 2016. Through the provisions of the
law, Parliament intended that Aadhaar should become an effective instrument of
de-duplication. This is premised on the view of the legislating body that the
use of biometrics would render it difficult, if not impossible, to obtain fake
identities. Aadhaar, in other words, was adopted as a matter of legislative
policy to curb the evil of shell companies and ghost identities. Where the
State expends large sums on social welfare projects, it has a legitimate
interest in ensuring that the resources which it deploys reach the hands of
those for whom they are meant. Thus, there are two important facets of the
Aadhaar regime which must be noticed. The first is that under Section 3, it is
a voluntary option of the individual to choose Aadhaar as a form of
identification. However, if the individual seeks a subsidy, benefit or service
for which the expenditure is  256 PART G incurred from the Consolidated Fund
of India, Aadhaar becomes a mandatory requirement. The second important
feature is the requirement of informed consent when the individual parts with
identity information. The mandate of Section 7 must be understood from the
perspective of the obligation imposed on the State to ensure effective and
efficient utilization of public resources. Article 266 reinforces that mandate
in its stipulation that all monies out of the Consolidated Fund of India can
only be appropriated in accordance with law, for the purpose of and in the
manner provided by the Constitution. The State is a trustee of public
resources. The adoption of Aadhaar is in fulfilment of the doctrine of public
trust. The state is under a bounden obligation to ensure that its revenues
which are placed in the Consolidated Fund are appropriated in accordance with
law and are not diverted for extraneous purposes. These principles have been
elucidated in the decisions of this Court in Natural Resources Allocation, In
Re, Special Reference No.1 of 2012312, Centre for Public Interest Litigation v
Union of India313, Reliance Telecom Limited v Union of India314.

The mandate of Section 7 is founded on a legitimate state interest. The state
has a vital interest in ensuring that public revenues are duly accounted, that
the Consolidated Fund is utilized for purposes authorized by law; that funds
for development reach genuine beneficiaries and that scarce public resources
312 (2012) 10 SCC 1 313 (2012) 3 SCC 1 314 (2017) 4 SCC 269  257 PART H meant
for those at the foot of the socio-economic ladder are not mis-utilized by
rent-seeking behavior.

H Proportionality 188 The petitioners have challenged the constitutional
validity of the Aadhaar project and the Aadhaar Act on various grounds
including the violation of the fundamental rights of citizens including the
right to privacy and dignity. The respondents, in defense, have argued that
Aadhaar is an enabler of identity and empowers citizens to realise various
facets of the right to life, such as the right to food and livelihood.

189 The learned Attorney General has argued that the use and authentication of
the Aadhaar number is a necessary and proportionate measure to ensure targeted
delivery of financial benefits and services and to prevent ‘leakages’. He
submits that the Aadhaar scheme satisfies the test of proportionality: it has
a rational nexus with the goal that it seeks to achieve, and since welfare
benefits enhance the right to live with dignity, the latter will prevail over
the right to privacy. Mr Rakesh Dwivedi, learned Senior Counsel has argued
that the “least intrusive test” is not accepted in Indian jurisprudence. He
submits that even if the test were to be accepted, the exercise of determining
whether a measure is the least intrusive is a technical issue for which the
Court lacks the requisite expertise. He states that this  258 PART H exercise
“cannot be undertaken in the courts with the assistance of lawyers who equally
have no expertise in the field” and that “such an exercise involves research,
study by the experts and courts cannot substitute the same”. Mr Gopal
Sankaranarayanan, learned Counsel, submits that the means adopted “at the
moment” are no more than is necessary for ensuring that the “avowed objects”
are served, and that they balance individual interests (fundamental rights)
with societal interests (directive principles). He further submits that the
fact there are various limitations in place ensure that “some balance” is
achieved between the breach of privacy and the object sought to be achieved.
This Court must now perform the delicate task of ‘balancing’ these competing
interests by subjecting the Aadhaar Act to the proportionality test.

    
    
    H.I      Harmonising conflicting rights
    
    
    190      In the 2003 edition of his celebrated work, Granville Austin recounts the
    
    

words of Prime Minister Morarji Desai that freedom and bread are not
incompatible, but further adds, ‘Neither could they easily be sought
together’.315 As mentioned earlier, Granville Austin had insightfully spoken
about how the strands of the Constitution of unity-integrity, democracy and
social revolution could come in conflict with one another creating challenges
for those who work with the Constitution.316 Some of the questions inherent in
315 Granville Austin, Working a Democratic Constitution: A History of the
Indian Experience, Oxford University Press (2003), at page 652 316 Ibid, at
page 651  259 PART H the Constitution according to him are “Democracy for
whom? Justice for whom? What is Justice? What are the appropriate means of
employing the Constitution’s means’ among citizens, between them and their
government?”317 It was due to the foresight of the framers of the Constitution
that they insisted that neither the strand of social revolution nor the strand
of democracy was to be pursued at the expense of the other.318 The ostensible
conflict between bread and freedom has also been explored in the works of
Professor Upendra Baxi. In a seminal essay on human rights in 1984 which he
calls the “the great gift of classical and contemporary human thought to
culture and civilization”319, he discusses the widening sphere of human rights
thought and action to new arenas and constituencies as “New rights arise from
the womb of the old.”320 He draws on the distinction between basic human needs
and human rights and argues that the constant struggle between these two
forces is the essence of the difference between the right to be human approach
and the human rights approach.321 It is rightly pointed out that a discussion
on human rights will always constitute an inherent aspect of the larger debate
of development. He opines that whatever meaning maybe ascribed to the term
“development”, it must ensure that people will not be deprived of the right to
remain human:

317 Ibid 318 Ibid 319Upendra Baxi, From Human Rights to the Right to be Human:
Some Heresies, India International Centre Quarterly, Vol. 13, No. 3/4, Pg.185,
(December 1986) 320 Ibid, at page 185 321 Ibid  260 PART H “Whatever it may be
made to mean, “development” must at least mean this: people will be given the
right to be and remain human. Total and continuing destitution and
impoverishment exposes people to a loss of their humanity. In no society that
takes human rights seriously should there be allowed a state of affairs where
human beings become sub- human—that is, when they perforce have to surrender
even those sonorously recited "inalienable" rights of man… The expression
"human rights" presupposes a level at which biological entities are bestowed
with the dignity of being called human. The bearers of human rights must have
an implicit right to be and remain human, allowing them some autonomy of
choice in planning survival.”322 Thus, the broader matrix of human rights
includes within it the inalienable and fundamental right to always ‘be and
remain human’. Professor Upendra Baxi notes that this broader debate between
human rights and the ‘right to be human’ is reflective of the bread vs freedom
conflict. It is noted that historically, freedom might have been chosen over
bread due to the vast enumeration of liberal rights it includes, despite the
acute awareness that without bread, freedom of speech and assembly, of
association, of conscience and religion, of political participation, symbolic
adult suffrage may all be meaningless.323 At the same time, Baxi points out
the danger in choosing bread at the cost of freedom, given that historically
in the absence of freedom, human beings have been subject to the most
egregious indignities:

> “The provision of "bread" may justify indefinite postponement of the
> provision of any kind of "freedom". In the absence of such freedom, even the
> promised "bread" may not be realized by the masses; indeed, they even lose,
> in the process, their power to protest at the indignity of regime sponsored
> starvation.

This, indeed, is a possibility which has materialized more often than not.”324
322 Ibid, at page 187 323 Ibid, at page 186 324 Ibid, at page 190  261 PART H
Baxi concludes that the choice between bread and freedom is a false
antithesis. The challenge is not a choice in the abstract between bread and
freedom but rather the balancing of the two:325 “But the issues are not really
"bread" and/or "freedom" in the abstract, but rather who has how much of each,
for how long, at what cost to others, and why. Some people have both "bread"
and "freedom"; others have "freedom" but little "bread" or none at all; yet
others have half a loaf (which is better than none, surely!) with or without
freedom; and still others have a precarious mix where "bread" is assured if
certain (not all) freedoms are bartered.”326 It is the foremost duty of the
State to work towards achieving and maintaining a fine balance, taking into
account these myriad considerations. The State must always be guided by the
knowledge and sense of duty that in a true democracy, the citizens cannot be
made to choose between rights and needs, as they are equally entitled to both.
As the sentinel of justice and protector of fundamental rights, it is the
responsibility of this Court to act as a check and ensure that government
action or inaction does not endanger or threaten to disturb the balance that
the Constitution seeks to achieve. It is imperative to remember that both
‘bread’ and ‘freedom’ play a vital role in the guaranteeing to our citizens
the gamut of human rights and freedoms that make human existence meaningful.

191 While exercising judicial review, courts are often confronted with
situations involving conflicts between rights, tensions between individuals
arising from the assertion of rights and discord arising out of the assertion
of 325 Ibid, at page 186 326 Ibid, at page 186  262 PART H the same right by
two or more individuals. Conflicts between rights arise when the assertion of
a fundamental human right by an individual impacts upon the exercise of
distinct freedoms by others. The freedom of one individual to speak and to
express may affect the dignity of another. A person may be aggrieved when the
free exercise of the right to speak by someone impinges upon his or her
reputation, which is integral to the right to life under Article 21. A
conflict will, in such a situation, arise between a right which is asserted
under Article 19(1)(a) by one citizen and the sense of injury of another who
claims protection of the right to dignity under Article 21. Conflicts also
arise when the exercise of rights is perceived to impact upon the collective
identity of another group of persons. Conflicts may arise when an activity or
conduct of an individual, in pursuit of a freedom recognised by the
Constitution, impinges upon the protection afforded to another individual
under the rubric of the same human right. Such a situation involves a conflict
arising from a freedom which is relatable to the same constitutional
guarantee. Privacy is an assertion of the right to life under Article 21. The
right to a dignified existence is also protected by the same Article. A
conflict within Article 21 may involve a situation when two freedoms are
asserted as political rights. A conflict may also envisage a situation where
an assertion of a political right under the umbrella of the right to life
stands in conflict with the assertion of an economic right which is also
comprehended by the protection of life under the Constitution.

263 PART H Such conflicts require the court to embark on a process of judicial
interpretation. The task is to achieve a sense of balance. An ideal situation
would be one which would preserve the core of the right for both sets of
citizens whose entitlements to freedom appear to be in conflict.
Realistically, drawing balances is not a simple task. Balances involve
sacrifices and the foregoing of entitlements. In making those decisions, a
certain degree of value judgment is inevitable. The balance which the court
draws may be open to criticism in regard to its value judgment on the relative
importance ascribed to the conflicting rights in judicial decision making. In
making those fine balances, the court can pursue an objective formulation by
relying upon those values which the Constitution puts forth as part of its
endeavour for a just society. Our Constitution has in Part III recognised the
importance of political freedom. In Part IV, the Constitution has recognised
our social histories of discrimination and prejudice which have led to
poverty, deprivation and the absence of a dignified existence to major
segments of society. Holding Part III in balance with Part IV is integral to
the vision of social and economic justice which the Constitution has sought to
achieve consistent with political democracy. Difficult as this area is, a
balancing of rights is inevitable, when rights asserted by individuals are in
conflict. 192 Several decisions of this Court over the last two decades have
sought to bring order to the clash between fundamental rights. In People’s
Union for  264 PART H Civil Liberties (PUCL) v Union of India327, this Court
was called upon to balance the right to information of voters (requiring the
disclosure of the assets of candidates and their spouses at an election) with
the right to privacy implicit in Article 21. In drawing the balance, a bench
of three Judges of this Court gave primacy to the entitlement of citizens to
be informed about the affairs of those who would represent them in electoral
democracy. As the Court held:

> “121…By calling upon the contesting candidate to disclose the assets and
> liabilities of his/her spouse, the fundamental right to information of a
> voter/citizen is thereby promoted.

When there is a competition between the right to privacy of an individual and
the right to information of the citizens, the former right has to be
subordinated to the latter right as it serves the larger public interest. The
right to know about the candidate who intends to become a public figure and a
representative of the people would not be effective and real if only truncated
information of the assets and liabilities is given.”328 The Court held that
the provision contained in the Representation of People Act 1951 for a
disclosure of assets and liabilities only to the Speaker or to the Chairman of
the House did not adequately protect the citizen’s right to information,
resulting in a violation of the guarantee of free speech and expression.

193 In Thalappalam Service Cooperative Bank Limited v State of Kerala329, this
Court dealt with a conflict between the right to information 327 (2003) 4 SCC
399 328 Ibid, at page 472 329 (2013) 16 SCC 82  265 PART H [(protected by
Article 19(1)(a)] and the right to privacy (protected by Article

21). The Court observed:

> “61. The right to information and right to privacy are, therefore, not
> absolute rights, both the rights, one of which falls under Article 19(1)(a)
> and the other under Article 21 of the Constitution of India, can obviously
> be regulated, restricted and curtailed in the larger public interest.
> Absolute or uncontrolled individual rights do not and cannot exist in any
> modern State. Citizens' right to get information is statutorily recognised
> by the RTI Act, but at the same time limitations are also provided in the
> Act itself, which is discernible from the Preamble and other provisions of
> the Act.”330 The Court held that the balance between the right to
> information and the right to privacy is drawn under the Right to Information
> Act 2005: if the information which is sought is personal and has no
> relationship with a public activity or interest, a public authority is not
> legally bound to provide such information. If the information which is
> sought is to be made available in the larger public interest, reasons have
> to be recorded because the person from whom the information is sought has a
> right to privacy guaranteed by Article 21.

Thalappalam considered a conflict arising between two fundamental rights, the
right to information protected by Article 19(1)(a) and the right to privacy
which is protected by Article 21.

194 More recently, in G Sundarrajan v Union of India331, a two judge Bench
considered a challenge to the establishment of a nuclear power plant on the
ground that it would violate the right to life guaranteed by Article 21.
Noting that there was a need to draw a balance between the assertion of 330
Ibid, at page 112 331 (2013) 6 SCC 620  266 PART H several rights including
the protection of the environment, the Court observed that the larger public
interest must prevail:

> “198. We have to resolve the issue whether the establishment of NPP would
> have the effect of violating the right to life guaranteed under Article 21
> to the persons who are residing in and around Kudankulam or by establishing
> the NPP, it will uphold the right to life in a larger sense. While balancing
> the benefit of establishing KKNPP Units 1 to 6, with right to life and
> property and the protection of environment including marine life, we have to
> strike a balance, since the production of nuclear energy is of extreme
> importance for the economic growth of our country, alleviate poverty,
> generate employment, etc. While setting up a project of this nature, we have
> to have an overall view of larger public interest rather than smaller
> violation of right to life guaranteed under Article 21 of the
> Constitution.”332 In Subramanian Swamy v Union of India333, the learned
> Chief Justice, speaking for a Bench of two judges emphasised the need for a
> sense of balance when the assertion of fundamental rights by two citizens is
> in conflict:

> “137…One fundamental right of a person may have to coexist in harmony with
> the exercise of another fundamental right by others and also with reasonable
> and valid exercise of power by the State in the light of the directive
> principles in the interests of social welfare as a whole. The Court's duty
> is to strike a balance between competing claims of different interests.”334
> Noting that the “balancing of fundamental rights is a constitutional
> necessity”, the Court has attempted to harmonise reputation as an intrinsic
> element of the right to life under Article 21 with criminal defamation as a
> restriction under Article 19(2).

> 332 Ibid, at page 714 333 (2016) 7 SCC 221 334 Ibid, at page 319  267 PART H
> 195 In Asha Ranjan v Chandrakeshwar Prasad335, this Court dealt with a case
> involving a conflict between the fundamental rights of two individuals
> within Article 21. There was on the one hand an assertion of the right to
> life on the part of an individual accused of an offence, who claimed a right
> to a fair trial, and the protection of the interests of the victim which was
> also relatable to the same fundamental right under Article 21. In resolving
> the conflict, the Court gave expression to the need to preserve “paramount
> collective interests”:

> “61…circumstances may emerge that may necessitate for balancing between
> intra-fundamental rights. It has been distinctly understood that the test
> that has to be applied while balancing the two fundamental rights or inter
> fundamental rights, … may be different than the principle to be applied in
> intra-conflict between the same fundamental right. To elaborate, as in this
> case, the accused has a fundamental right to have a fair trial under Article
> 21 of the Constitution. Similarly, the victims who are directly affected and
> also form a part of the constituent of the collective, have a fundamental
> right for a fair trial. Thus, there can be two individuals both having
> legitimacy to claim or assert the right. The factum of legitimacy is a
> primary consideration. It has to be remembered that no fundamental right is
> absolute and it can have limitations in certain circumstances. Thus,
> permissible limitations are imposed by the State. The said limitations are
> to be within the bounds of law. However, when there is intra-

> conflict of the right conferred under the same article, like fair trial in
> this case, the test that is required to be applied, we are disposed to
> think, it would be “paramount collective interest” or “sustenance of public
> confidence in the justice dispensation system”.336 196 These decisions
> indicate that the process of resolving conflicts arising out of the
> assertion of different fundamental rights and conflicts within the same
> fundamental right, necessarily involves judicial balancing. In finding a 335
> (2017) 4 SCC 397 336 Ibid, at page 433  268 PART H just balance this Court
> has applied norms such as the ‘paramount public interest’. In seeking to
> draw the balance between political freedoms and economic freedoms, the Court
> must preserve the euphony between fundamental rights and directive
> principles. It is on their co-existence that the edifice of the Constitution
> is founded. Neither can exist without the other.

Democracy rejects the totalitarian option of recognising economic entitlements
without political liberty. Economic rights have become justiciable because of
the constitutional guarantees founded on freedom and the rule of law. The
Constitution is founded on democratic governance and is based on the
protection of individual freedom. Freedom comprehends both fundamental
political freedoms as well as basic human rights. A just balance between the
two is integral to the fulfilment of India’s constitutional commitment to
realise human liberty in a social context which is cognizant of the histories
of discrimination and prejudice suffered by large segments of our society.
Where the question is related to the limiting the right to privacy, Puttaswamy
requires the test of proportionality. It has, therefore, to be tested whether
the Aadhaar scheme fulfils the test of proportionality. 197 The test of
proportionality, which began as an unwritten set of general principles of law,
today constitutes the dominant “best practice” judicial standard for resolving
disputes that involve either a conflict between two rights claims or between a
right and a legitimate government interest. 337 It has 337JudMathews and Alec
Stone Sweet, All things in Proportion? American Rights Review and the Problem
of Balancing, Emory Law Journal, Vol. 60 (2011)  269 PART H become a
“centrepiece of jurisprudence” across the European continent as well as in
common law jurisdictions including the United Kingdom, South Africa and
Israel.338 Proportionality is the “defining doctrinal core of a transnational
rights-based constitutionalism”339. It has been raised to the rank of a
fundamental constitutional principle,340 and represents a global shift from a
culture of authority to a culture of justification.341 Servin argues that
jurisprudence on privacy has evolved from the “right to be let alone”, to now
being centered around the principle of proportionality.342 198 Subjecting the
Aadhaar scheme to the test of proportionality does not mean that the Court is
second-guessing the wisdom of the legislature. State action must be subjected
to judicial scrutiny to ensure that it passes constitutional muster. The test
of proportionality stipulates that the nature and extent of the State’s
interference with the exercise of a right (in this case, the rights to
privacy, dignity, choice, and access to basic entitlements) must be
proportionate to the goal it seeks to achieve (in this case, purported
plugging of welfare leakage and better targeting).

338Alec Stone Sweet & Jud Mathews, Proportionality Balancing and Global
Constitutionalism, Columbia Journal of Transnational Law, Vol. 47 (2008)
339Jud Mathews and Alec Stone Sweet, All things in Proportion? American Rights
Review and the Problem of Balancing, Emory Law Journal, Vol. 60 (2011) 340
Ibid 341Moshe Cohen-Eliya and Iddo Porat, Proportionality and the Culture of
Justification, American Journal of Comparative Law Vol. 59 (2011) (cited in);
Etienne Mureinik, A Bridge to Where? Introducing the Interim Bill of Rights,
South African Journal on Human Rights, Vol. 10 (1994) 342Andrew B. Serwin,
Privacy 3.0 – The Principle of Proportionality, University of Michigan Journal
of Law Reform, Vol. 42 (2009)  270 PART H Within the framework of
constitutional interpretation, proportionality serves as a test to determine
the extent to which fundamental rights can be limited in the face of
legislative intervention which purports to further social and public interest
aims. Aharon Barak, the former Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of Israel
has described the importance of the proportionality test as thus:343
“Examination of the test of proportionality (in the narrow sense) returns us
to first principles that are the foundation of our constitutional democracy
and the human rights … Our democracy is characterized by the fact that it
imposes limits on the ability to violate human rights; that it is based on the
recognition that surrounding the individual there is a wall protecting his
right, which cannot be breached even by majority.” In applying the
proportionality test, the Court cannot mechanically defer to the State’s
assertions. Especially given the intrusive nature of the Aadhaar scheme, such
deference to the legislature is inappropriate. The State must discharge its
burden by demonstrating that rights-infringing measures were necessary and
proportionate to the goal sought to be achieved. H.2 Proportionality standard
in Indian jurisprudence 199 In India, the principle of proportionality has a
long jurisprudential history which has been adverted to in a judgment344 of
this Court:

> “On account of a Chapter on Fundamental Rights in Part III of our
> Constitution right from 1950, Indian Courts did not suffer from the
> disability similar to the one experienced by English Courts for declaring as
> unconstitutional legislation on the principle of proportionality or reading
> them in a manner 343 Adalah v. The Minister of Interior, HCJ 7052/03,
> English translation available at
> http://elyon.court.gov.il/files_eng/03/520/070a47/03070520.a47.pdf 344 Om
> Kumar v Union of India, (2001) 2 SCC 386  271 PART H consistent with the
> charter of rights. Ever since 1950, the principle of ‘proportionality’ has
> indeed been applied vigorously to legislative (and administrative action) in
> India. While dealing with the validity of legislation infringing fundamental
> freedoms enumerated in Article 19(1) of the Constitution of India…this court
> had occasion to consider whether the restrictions imposed by legislation
> were disproportionate to the situation and were not the least restrictive of
> the choices.” (Emphasis supplied) The early decisions of this Court may not
> have used the expression “proportionality”. But the manner in which the
> court explained what would be a permissible restraint on rights indicates
> the seeds or the core of the proportionality standard. Proportionality has
> been the core of reasonableness since the 1950s. Chintaman Rao v State of
> Madhya Pradesh345 concerned a State legislation which empowered the
> government to prohibit people in certain areas from manufacturing bidis. The
> object of the law was to ensure the supply of adequate labour for
> agricultural purposes in areas where bidi manufacturing was an alternative
> source of employment for persons likely to be engaged in agricultural
> labour. The Court held that the State need not have prohibited all labourers
> from engaging in bidi manufacturing throughout the year in order to satisfy
> the objective. Justice Mahajan, on behalf of a Constitution Bench held:

> “6.The phrase "reasonable restriction" connotes that the limitation imposed
> on a person in enjoyment of the right should not be arbitrary or of an
> excessive nature, beyond what is required in the interests of the public.
> The word "reasonable" implies intelligent care and deliberation, that is,
> the choice of a course which reason dictates. Legislation which arbitrarily
> or excessively invades the right cannot be said to contain the quality of
> reasonableness and unless it strikes a proper balance between the freedom
> 345 1950 SCR 759  272 PART H guaranteed in article 19(1)(g) and the social
> control permitted by clause (6) of article 19, it must be held to be wanting
> in that quality.” (Emphasis supplied) 200 State of Madras v V G Row346
> considered whether the action of the Tamil Nadu government in declaring an
> association unlawful violated Article 19(1)(c) of the Constitution. Chief
> Justice Patanjali Sastri, speaking for the Constitution Bench, propounded
> what has come to be regarded as a classic statement of the principle of
> proportionality in our law:

> “15…the test of reasonableness, wherever prescribed, should be applied to
> each individual statute impugned, and no abstract standard, or general
> pattern of reasonableness can be laid down as applicable to all cases. The
> nature of the right alleged to have been infringed, the underlying purpose
> of the restrictions imposed, the extent and urgency of the evil sought to be
> remedied thereby, the disproportion of the imposition, the prevailing
> conditions at the time, should all enter into the judicial verdict...”
> (Emphasis supplied) The decision of the Constitution Bench in State of Bihar
> v Kamla Kant Misra347 concerned a challenge to the second part of sub-
> section (6) of Section 144 of the Code of Criminal Procedure on the ground
> that it violated sub-clauses (b), (c) and (d) of Clause (1) of Article 19 of
> the Constitution.

Justice K S Hegde, speaking for the majority, observed:

> “15.One of the important tests to find out whether a restriction is
> reasonable is to see …whether the restriction is in excess of the
> requirement or whether it is imposed in an arbitrary manner”.348 (Emphasis
> supplied) 346 1952 SCR 597 347 (1969) 3 SCC 337 348 Ibid, at page 345  273
> PART H 201 In Mohammed Faruk v State of Madhya Pradesh349 a Constitution
> Bench of this Court held that in determining the proportionality of a
> measure restricting an individual’s right under Article 19(1)(g) of the
> Constitution, the factors to be taken into consideration would include
> whether a less drastic restriction would have served the purpose. As the
> Court held:

> “10…The Court must in considering the validity of the impugned law imposing
> a prohibition on the carrying on of a business or profession, attempt an
> evaluation of its direct and immediate impact upon the fundamental rights of
> the citizens affected thereby and the larger public interest sought to be
> ensured in the light of the object sought to be achieved, the necessity to
> restrict the citizen's freedom, [...],the possibility of achieving the
> object by imposing a less drastic restraint , [...] or that a less drastic
> restriction may ensure the object intended to be achieved.”350 (Emphasis
> supplied) In Bishambhar Dayal Chandra Mohan v State of Uttar Pradesh351,
> “reasonable restriction” was held to mean that the limitation imposed on the
> enjoyment of a right should not be arbitrary or of an excessive nature,
> beyond what is required in the interests of the public.

> 202 The decision in Om Kumar v Union of India352 concerned the quantum of
> punishment imposed in departmental disciplinary proceedings. Justice M.

Jagannadha Rao, speaking for a two judge Bench, defined proportionality in the
following terms:

“28. By 'proportionality', we mean the question whether, while regulating
exercise of fundamental rights, the appropriate or 349 (1969) 1 SCC 853 350
Ibid, at page 857 351 (1982) 1 SCC 39 352 (2001) 2 SCC 386  274 PART H least
restrictive choice of measures has been made by the legislature or the
administrator so as to achieve the object of the legislation or the purpose of
the administrative order, as the case may be. Under the principle, the Court
will see that the legislature and the administrative authority 'maintain a
proper balance between the adverse effects which the legislation or the
administrative order may have on the rights, liberties or interests of persons
keeping in mind the purpose which they were intended to serve'. The
legislature and the administrative authority are however given an area of
discretion or a range of choices but as to whether the choice made infringes
the rights excessively or not is for the Court. That is what is meant by
proportionality.”353 (Emphasis supplied) In Teri Oat Estates v U.T.,
Chandigarh354, this Court adopted a similar interpretation of proportionality.

203 In Modern Dental College and Research Centre v State of Madhya Pradesh,355
a Constitution Bench of this Court while dealing with a challenge to the vires
of the Madhya Pradesh Niji Vyavasayik Shikshan Sanstha (Pravesh Ka Viniyaman
Avam Shulk Ka Nirdharan) Adhiniyam, 2007, held that proportionality is the
correct test to apply in the context of Article 19(6). Justice A K Sikri,
speaking for the Court, held thus :

> “60…Thus, while examining as to whether the impugned provisions of the
> statute and Rules amount to reasonable restrictions and are brought out in
> the interest of the general public, the exercise that is required to be
> undertaken is the balancing of fundamental right to carry on occupation on
> the one hand and the restrictions imposed on the other hand. This is what is
> known as 'Doctrine of Proportionality'.

Jurisprudentially, 'proportionality' can be defined as the set of Rules
determining the necessary and sufficient conditions for limitation of a
constitutionally protected 353 Ibid, at page 399 354 (2004) 2 SCC 130 355
(2016) 7 SCC 353  275 PART H right by a law to be constitutionally
permissible...”356 (Emphasis supplied) While expounding on the theory of
proportionality, Justice AK Sikri referred to Aharon Barak’s seminal book357
on proportionality:

> “60…A limitation of a constitutional right will be constitutionally
> permissible if: (i) it is designated for a proper purpose; (ii) the measures
> undertaken to effectuate such a limitation are rationally connected to the
> fulfilment of that purpose; (iii) the measures undertaken are necessary in
> that there are no alternative measures that may similarly achieve that same
> purpose with a lesser degree of limitation; and finally (iv) there needs to
> be a proper relation ('proportionality stricto sensu' or 'balancing')
> between the importance of achieving the proper purpose and the social
> importance of preventing the limitation on the constitutional right.”358
> Justice Sikri held that laws limiting constitutional rights must satisfy the
> test of proportionality:

> “63…The law imposing restrictions will be treated as proportional if it is
> meant to achieve a proper purpose, and if the measures taken to achieve such
> a purpose are rationally connected to the purpose, and such measures are
> necessary….359

> 64\. The exercise which, therefore, to be taken is to find out as to whether
> the limitation of constitutional rights is for a purpose that is reasonable
> and necessary in a democratic society and such an exercise involves the
> weighing up of competitive values, and ultimately an assessment based on
> proportionality i.e. balancing of different interests.”360 (Emphasis
> supplied) 356 Ibid, at page 412 357 Aharon Barak, Proportionality:
> Constitutional Rights and their Limitations, Cambridge University Press
> (2012) 358 Ibid, at page 412 359 Ibid, at page 414 360 Ibid, at page 415
> 276 PART H 204 In KS Puttaswamy v Union of India361, one of us (Chandrachud
> J.), speaking for four judges, laid down the tests that would need to be
> satisfied under our Constitution for violations of privacy to be justified.
> This included the test of proportionality:

> “325…A law which encroaches upon privacy will have to withstand the
> touchstone of permissible restrictions on fundamental rights. In the context
> of Article 21 an invasion of privacy must be justified on the basis of a law
> which stipulates a procedure which is fair, just and reasonable. The law
> must also be valid with reference to the encroachment on life and personal
> liberty under Article 21. An invasion of life or personal liberty must meet
> the three-fold requirement of (i) legality, which postulates the existence
> of law; (ii) need, defined in terms of a legitimate state aim; and (iii)
> proportionality which ensures a rational nexus between the objects and the
> means adopted to achieve them.”362 The third principle (iii above) adopts
> the test of proportionality to ensure a rational nexus between the objects
> and the means adopted to achieve them.

The essential role of the test of proportionality is to enable the court to
determine whether a legislative measure is disproportionate in its
interference with the fundamental right. In determining this, the court will
have regard to whether a less intrusive measure could have been adopted
consistent with the object of the law and whether the impact of the
encroachment on a fundamental right is disproportionate to the benefit which
is likely to ensue. The proportionality standard must be met by the procedural
and substantive aspects of the law.

361 (2017) 10 SCC 1 362 Ibid, at page 509  277 PART H Justice Sanjay Kishan
Kaul, in his concurring opinion, suggested a four- pronged test as follows363:

> “(i)The action must be sanctioned by law;

> (ii) The proposed action must be necessary in a democratic society for a
> legitimate aim;

> (iii) The extent of such interference must be proportionate to the need for
> such interference;

(iv) There must be procedural guarantees against abuse of such interference.”
The ‘test of proportionality’ is a judicially-entrenched principle which has
invigorated fundamental rights jurisprudence in the country. The application
of the proportionality standard in rights-based adjudication is well-
recognised across diverse jurisdictions.

    
    
    H.3         Comparative jurisprudence
    
    
    205         Since some of the concerns raised by the Aadhaar scheme have arisen
    
    

for the first time in India, it would be appropriate to discuss judgments of
foreign jurisdictions which have inquired into the proportionality of measures
many of them similar to those prescribed under the Aadhaar Act. 206 The Privy
Council formulated the parameters of proportionality in Elloy de Freitas v
Permanent Secretary of Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries, Lands and
Housing,364 elaborating a three-fold test:

“whether: (i) the legislative objective is sufficiently important to justify
limiting a fundamental right; (ii) the measures designed 363 Ibid, at para 638
364 [1999] 1 AC 69  278 PART H to meet the legislative objective are
rationally connected to it; and (iii) the means used to impair the right or
freedom are no more than is necessary to accomplish the objective.”
Subsequently in Huang (FC) v Secretary of State for the Home Department,365
the House of Lords added a fourth parameter which is “the need to balance the
interests of society with those of individuals and groups.” 207 In the Federal
Census Act Case (Volkszählungsurteil),366 the Federal Constitutional Court of
the Federal Republic of Germany dealt with a challenge to the German Federal
Census Act, 1983, which provided for collection of citizens’ basic personal
information, including, inter alia, source of income, occupation,
supplementary employment, educational background and hours of work. Certain
provisions provided for transmission of statistical data to local governments
for the purposes of regional planning, surveying, environmental protection,
and redrawing of election districts. The Court struck down provisions
permitting transfer of statistical data to local authorities on the ground
that they enabled authorities to compare census data with local housing
registries. The Court observed that the combination of statistical data and a
personalized registry could lead to the identification of particular persons,
which would lead to a chilling effect upon individuals’ right to informational
self-determination.

365 [2007] UKHL 11 366 (1983) 65 BVerfGE 1  279 PART H The Court developed a
‘fundamental right of informational self-determination’ drawing from Articles
1(1) and 2(1) of the German Constitution, which protect the fundamental right
to human dignity and the right to freely develop one’s personality. Explaining
the importance of this right in the context of risks occasioned by modern data
processing, the Court noted that:

> “The freedom of individuals to make plans or decisions in reliance on their
> personal powers of self-determination may be significantly inhibited if they
> cannot with sufficient certainty determine what information on them is known
> in certain areas of their social sphere and in some measure appraise the
> extent of knowledge in the possession of possible interlocutors. A social
> order in which individuals can no longer ascertain who knows what about them
> and when and a legal order that makes this possible would not be compatible
> with the right to informational self-determination…This would not only
> restrict the possibilities for personal development of those individuals but
> also be detrimental to the public good since self-determination is an
> elementary prerequisite for the functioning of a free democratic society
> predicated on the freedom of action and participation of its members…The
> fundamental right guarantees in principle the power of individuals to make
> their own decisions as regards the disclosure and use of their personal
> data.”367 The Court, while recognizing the right to informational self-
> determination, observed that distinct silos of data “can be pieced together
> with other data collections particularly when individual integrated
> information systems are built up – to add up to a partial or virtually
> complete personality profile,” and that too with, “the person concerned
> having no means of controlling its truth and application.”368 Of crucial
> importance is the Court’s observation that the right to informational self-
> determination is particularly endangered because 367Jürgen Bröhmer et al.,
> “BVerfGE 65, 1 - Census Act” in 60 Years German Basic Law: The German
> Constitution and its Court - Landmark Decisions of the Federal
> Constitutional Court of Germany in the Area of Fundamental Rights (Suhainah
> Wahiduddin ed.), (2012) at Pages 147-148, available at
> http://www.kas.de/wf/doc/kas_32858-1522-1-30.pdf?121123115540 368 Census Act
> Case, (1983)  280 PART H in reaching decisions, one no longer has to rely on
> manually collected registries and files. Today, the technical means of
> storing individual statements about personal or factual situations of a
> certain or verifiable person with the aid of automatic data processing are
> practically unlimited and can be retrieved in a matter of seconds
> irrespective of distances.369 The Court noted, however, that the right to
> informational self-determination is not absolute and that public sector
> entities could collect personal data under certain conditions. The Court
> held that there must be a statutory basis for this informational activity,
> and that it must satisfy the principle of proportionality.

On the need for a statutory basis, the Court held that:

“The use of the data is limited to the purpose specified by law.

If for no other reason than because of the dangers associated with automated
data processing, protection is required against unauthorized use - including
protection against such use by other governmental entities - through a
prohibition on the transfer and use of such data”370 “Clearly defined
conditions must be created for processing to ensure that individuals do not
become mere data subjects in the context of the automated collection and
processing of the information pertaining to their person. Both the absence of
a connection with a specific purpose that can be recognized and verified at
all times and the multifunctional use of data, reinforce the tendencies that
are to be checked and restricted by data-protection legislation, which
represents the concrete manifestation of the constitutionally guaranteed right
to informational self-determination.”371 On the principle of proportionality,
the Court held that:

> “The legislature must in its statutory regulations respect the principle of
> proportionality. This principle, which enjoys constitutional status, follows
> from the nature of the 369Census Act Case, (1983) 370 Ibid, at page 150.

371 Ibid, at page 151  281 PART H fundamental rights themselves, which, as an
expression of the general right of the public to freedom from interference by
the state, may be restricted by the public powers in any given case only
insofar as indispensable for the protection of public interests … In view of
the threats described above that arise from the use of automated data
processing, the legislature must more than was the case previously, adopt
organizational and procedural precautions that work counter to the threat of
violation of the right of personality …”372 “The survey program of the 1983
Census Act also satisfies, to the extent relevant to the matter under review,
the principle of proportionality. A measure to achieve the intended purpose
must therefore be suitable and necessary; the intensity of the attendant
action may not be disproportionate to the importance of the matter and the
compromises imposed upon the public.”373 The Court concluded that according to
the principles of purpose specification and proportionality, not only must the
purpose for which data is being collected be specified at the time of
collection, but the data acquired must also not exceed that which is
absolutely necessary for accomplishing the specified purpose. In light of
this, the Court directed the German Parliament to amend the law in certain
particulars before the census could be carried out, and to close all loopholes
in the law that may lead to abuses in the collection, storage, use and
transfer of personal data. 208 The ECtHR dealt with whether retention of DNA
samples of individuals who were arrested but who were later acquitted or had
charges against them dropped was a violation of the right to privacy. In S and
Marper v United 372 Ibid, at page 149 373 Ibid, at page 154  282 PART H
Kingdom,374 the ECtHR noted the “blanket and indiscriminate nature of the
power of retention”:

> “The material may be retained irrespective of the nature or gravity of the
> offence with which the individual was originally suspected or of the age of
> the suspected offender; fingerprints and samples may be taken—and
> retained—from a person of any age, arrested in connection with a recordable
> offence, which includes minor or non-imprisonable offences.

The retention is not time-limited; the material is retained indefinitely
whatever the nature or seriousness of the offence of which the person was
suspected. Moreover, there exist only limited possibilities for an acquitted
individual to have the data removed from the nationwide database or the
materials destroyed; in particular, there is no provision for independent
review of the justification for the retention according to defined criteria,
including such factors as the seriousness of the offence, previous arrests,
the strength of the suspicion against the person and any other special
circumstances.”375 The Court concluded that the retention constituted a
disproportionate interference with the Applicants’ right to privacy:

> “125…That the blanket and indiscriminate nature of the powers of retention
> of the fingerprints, cellular samples and DNA profiles of persons suspected
> but not convicted of offences, as applied in the case of the present
> applicants, fails to strike a fair balance between the competing public and
> private interests and that the respondent State has overstepped any
> acceptable margin of appreciation in this regard. Accordingly, the retention
> at issue constitutes a disproportionate interference with the applicants’
> right to respect for private life and cannot be regarded as necessary in a
> democratic society…” (Emphasis supplied) The Court rejected the government’s
> arguments that fingerprints constituted neutral, objective, irrefutable and
> unintelligible material, holding that they contained unique information
> about an individual, allowing their precise 374 (2008) 48 EHRR 1169 375
> Ibid, at Paragraph 119  283 PART H identification in certain circumstances.
> The Court concluded that the collection of fingerprints was therefore
> capable of affecting private life, and retention of such information without
> consent “cannot be regarded as neutral or insignificant.” 209 In 2012, the
> French Constitutional Council (“Council”) – the body that reviews the
> constitutionality of French laws – declared four provisions of the Identity
> Protection Act, which proposed the introduction of a new national biometric
> ID for citizens, to be unconstitutional.376 Articles 3 and 5 were among the
> provisions that were struck down. Article 3 authorized that the national ID
> card may contain data which would enable the holder to identify himself or
> herself on electronic communication networks or use his or her electronic
> signature. The Article stated that:

> “If requested by its holder, the national identity card may also contain
> data, stored separately, enabling it to identify itself on electronic
> communication networks and to affix its electronic signature. Upon each use,
> the interested party shall decide which identification data are to be
> transmitted electronically.” The Council observed that Article 3 did not
> stipulate the nature of the data that was being collected, nor did it
> provide any guarantee of maintaining confidentiality. Thus, the Council
> declared Article 3 to be unconstitutional:

> “that the provisions of Article 3 do not specify either the nature of the
> “data” through which these functions may be implemented or the guarantees
> ensuring the integrity and confidentiality of this data; that they do not
> define in any 376Decision No. 2012-652 DC of 22 March 2012 by Le Conseil
> Constitutionnel, available at http://www.conseil-

constitutionnel.fr/conseil-constitutionnel/english/case-law/sample-of-
decisions-in-relevant-areas- dc/decision/decision-no-2012-652-dc-
of-22-march-2012.105428.html  284 PART H greater detail the conditions under
which the persons implementing these functions are to be authenticated,
especially when they are minors or are subject to legal protection; that
accordingly, Parliament acted in excess of its powers; that accordingly
Article 3 must be ruled unconstitutional;” Article 5 allowed for the
establishment of a database of personal information which would include, in
addition to the marital status and residence of the holder, their height, eye
colour, fingerprints and photograph for the issuance of French passports and
national ID cards and for conducting investigations involving certain offences
if authorised by a public prosecutor or a judge. The Council relied on Article
34 of the French Constitution to hold that it was incumbent upon the
Parliament to strike a balance between safeguarding public order and bringing
offenders to justice on one hand, and the right to privacy on the other. The
Council placed reliance on the Declaration of the Rights of Man and the
Citizen of 1789. Article 2 of the Declaration states “The aim of every
political association is the preservation of the natural and imprescriptible
rights of Man. These rights are liberty, property, safety and resistance to
oppression”. The Council held that the liberty proclaimed by Article 2
includes the right to respect for private life, and accordingly, that “the
collection, registration, conservation, consultation and communication of
personal data must be justified on grounds of general interest and implemented
in an adequate manner, proportionate to this objective.” The Council held that
Article 5 violated the French Constitution as the nature of the data collected
was such that it would facilitate the identification of French  285 PART H
citizens on the basis of their fingerprints, thus breaching the right to
respect for private life:

> “Considering however that, given its object, this database containing
> personal data is intended to collect data relating to almost all of the
> population of French nationality; that since the biometric data registered
> in this file, including in particular fingerprints, are themselves liable to
> be compared with physical traces left involuntarily by an individual or
> collected unbeknown to him, they are particularly sensitive; that the
> technical characteristics of this database as defined by the contested
> provisions enable it to be consulted for purposes other than the
> verification of an individual's identity; that the provisions of the act
> referred authorise this database to be consulted or viewed not only in
> relation to the issue or renewal of identity and travel documents or to
> verify the holder of such a document, but also for other purposes of an
> administrative nature or by the investigating police;… …having regard to the
> nature of the data registered, the scope of this processing, its technical
> characteristics and the conditions under which it may be consulted, the
> provisions of Article 5 violate the right to respect for privacy in a manner
> which cannot be regarded as proportionate to the goal pursued; that
> accordingly, Articles 5 and 10 of the act must be ruled unconstitutional…”
> (Emphasis supplied) Subsequently, Law 2012-410 of March 27, 2012, on
> Identity Protection was published in the official gazette of France, without
> Articles 3 and 5, which had been rendered unconstitutional by the
> Council.377 210 Aycaguer v France378 concerned the applicant’s refusal to
> undergo biological testing, the result of which was to be included in the
> national computerised DNA database. As a result of his refusal, he was
> convicted. The ECtHR held that the regulations on the storage of DNA
> profiles did not provide 377LOI n° 2012-410 du 27 mars 2012 relative à la
> protection de l'identité, available at
> https://www.legifrance.gouv.fr/affichTexte.do?cidTexte=JORFTEXT000025582411&dateTexte=&categorieLien
> =id.

378 Application no. 8806/12  286 PART H individuals with sufficient
protection, due to its duration and the fact that the data could not be
deleted. The Court concluded that the regulations failed to strike a balance
between competing public and private interests and held, unanimously, that
there had been a violation of Article 8 (right to respect for private life) of
the European Convention on Human Rights. 211 The Conseil d'Etat379 in
Association pour la promotion de l'image 380 was asked whether a decree
regulating the use and storage of data from biometric passports was lawful.
One of the stipulations of the decree was that eight fingerprints were stored
by the authorities, while only two were required for the passport. The Conseil
d'Etat stated that the collection and retention of six more fingerprints to be
centrally stored was irrelevant and excessive in relation to the purpose of
the computerized database. 212 In Digital Rights Ireland Ltd v Minister,381
the Court of Justice of the European Union held that the EU legislature had
exceeded the limits of the principle of proportionality in relation to certain
provisions of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union –
Articles 7, 8 and 52(1) – by adopting the Data Retention Directive. According
to the Directive, member states were obliged to store citizens’
telecommunications data for a minimum of 6 months and a maximum of 24 months.
The Directive empowered police 379The Conseil d’Etat (Council of State) is a
body of the French government that acts as legal advisor of the executive
branch and as the supreme court for administrative justice 380 Conseil d’ Etat
in France, 26 October 2011 381 C‑293/12 and C‑594/12  287 PART H and security
agencies to request access to details such as IP address and time of use of
all e-mails, phone calls and text messages sent or received. The Court applied
the test of proportionality to the measures. It was noted that metadata allows
officials to make precise conclusions about a person’s private life, and
dragnet data collection creates a chilling effect based on the sense that
one’s life is subject to surveillance at all times. On the nature of metadata,
the Court observed that:

> “Taken as a whole, [metadata] may allow very precise conclusions to be drawn
> concerning the private lives of the persons whose data has been retained,
> such as the habits of everyday life, permanent or temporary places of
> residence, daily or other movements, the activities carried out, the social
> relationships of those persons and the social environments frequented by
> them.”382 The Court found that surveillance serves an important public
> interest – public security – and that the right to security is itself a
> fundamental right under Article 6 of the Charter.383 However, the Court
> adopted a two-pronged proportionality test to conclude that the Directive’s
> retention and access requirements were not proportional to that interest.

“…According to the settled case-law of the Court, the principle of
proportionality requires that acts of the EU institutions be appropriate for
attaining the legitimate objectives pursued by the legislation at issue and do
not exceed the limits of what is appropriate and necessary in order to achieve
those objectives.”384 382 Ibid, at para 27 383 Ibid, at para 42 384 Ibid, at
para 46  288 PART H The retention measure was held to be unnecessary to
fulfill the objective of fighting against serious crime:

> “As regards the necessity for the retention of data required by Directive
> 2006/24, it must be held that the fight against serious crime, in particular
> against organised crime and terrorism, is indeed of the utmost importance in
> order to ensure public security and its effectiveness may depend to a great
> extent on the use of modern investigation techniques.

However, such an objective of general interest, however fundamental it may be,
does not, in itself, justify a retention measure such as that established by
Directive 2006/24 being considered to be necessary for the purpose of that
fight. (Emphasis supplied)”385 The Court criticized the Directive for failing
to lay down any clear or precise rules governing the extent of the
interference with the fundamental rights enshrined in Articles 7 and 8 of the
Charter. It observed that the Directive was overbroad because it applied to
all data, regardless of the existence of suspicion, and contained no criteria
for limiting government access or safeguards for preventing abuse:

> “…Directive 2006/24 covers, in a generalised manner, all persons and all
> means of electronic communication as well as all traffic data without any
> differentiation, limitation or exception being made in the light of the
> objective of fighting against serious crime… …Whilst seeking to contribute
> to the fight against serious crime, Directive 2006/24 does not require any
> relationship between the data whose retention is provided for and a threat
> to public security and, in particular, it is not restricted to a retention
> in relation (i) to data pertaining to a particular time period and/or a
> particular geographical zone and/or to a circle of particular persons likely
> to be involved, in one way or another, in a serious crime, or (ii) to
> persons who could, for other reasons, contribute, by the retention of their
> data, to the prevention, detection or prosecution of serious offences.”386
> “Not only is there a general absence of limits in Directive 2006/24 but
> Directive 2006/24 also fails to lay down any 385 Ibid, at para 51 386 Ibid,
> at paras 57-59  289 PART H objective criterion by which to determine the
> limits of the access of the competent national authorities to the data and
> their subsequent use for the purposes of prevention, detection or criminal
> prosecutions concerning offences that, in view of the extent and seriousness
> of the interference with the fundamental rights enshrined in Articles 7 and
> 8 of the Charter, may be considered to be sufficiently serious to justify
> such an interference. On the contrary, Directive 2006/24 simply refers, in
> Article 1(1), in a general manner to serious crime, as defined by each
> Member State in its national law.”387 The Court concluded that the Directive
> failed to set out “clear and precise rules”388 for access or for how states
> should judge the period of time for which data should be held, and “entails
> a wide-ranging and particularly serious interference with those fundamental
> rights in the legal order of the EU, without such an interference being
> precisely circumscribed by provisions to ensure that it is actually limited
> to what is strictly necessary.”389 The Court struck down the Directive on
> the basis of the scope of the data to be retained, 390 the lack of limits
> imposed on state access,391 and the failure to distinguish between the
> treatment of data based on its usefulness and relevance.392 Of crucial
> importance is the Court’s emphasis that the judicial review of the EU
> legislature’s discretion “should be strict” because of “the important role
> played by the protection of personal data in the light of the fundamental
> right to respect for private life and the extent and seriousness of the
> interference with 387 Ibid, at para 60 388 Ibid, at para 54 389 Ibid, at
> para 65 390 Ibid, at paras 56 –58 391 Ibid, at paras 60-62 392 Ibid, at
> paras 59, 63– 64  290 PART H that right caused by Directive 2006/24”.393 In
> addition, the Court emphasized that even highly important objectives such as
> the fight against serious crime and terrorism cannot justify measures which
> lead to forms of interference that go beyond what is ‘strictly
> necessary’.394 213 In Michael Schwarz v Stadt Bochum,395 the Court of
> Justice of the European Union was called upon to examine the validity of a
> provision in a Council Regulation that obliged persons applying for a
> passport to provide fingerprints which would be stored in that passport. In
> considering whether this regulation was valid and necessary, the Court
> observed:

> “…Article 1(2) of Regulation No 2252/2004 does not provide for the storage
> of fingerprints except within the passport itself, which belongs to the
> holder alone.396 The regulation not providing for any other form or method
> of storing those fingerprints, it cannot in and of itself…be interpreted as
> providing a legal basis for the centralised storage of data collected
> thereunder or for the use of such data for purposes other than that of
> preventing illegal entry into the European Union.397 In those circumstances,
> the arguments put forward by the referring court concerning the risks linked
> to possible centralisation cannot, in any event, affect the validity of that
> regulation and would have, should the case arise, to be examined in the
> course of an action brought before the competent courts against legislation
> providing for a centralised fingerprint base. In the light of the foregoing,
> it must be held that Article 1(2) of Regulation No 2252/2004 does not imply
> any processing of fingerprints that would go beyond what is necessary in
> order to achieve the aim of protecting against the fraudulent use of
> passports. It follows that the interference arising from Article 1(2) of
> Regulation No 2252/2004 is justified by its aim of protecting against the
> fraudulent use of passports.”398 393 Ibid, at para 48 394 Ibid, at para 51
> 395 [2013] EUECJ C-291/12 396 Ibid, at para 60 397 Ibid, at para 61 398
> Ibid, at para 62  291 PART H The Court held that although the taking and
> storing of fingerprints in passports constituted an infringement of the
> right to respect for private life and the right to protection of personal
> data, Article 1(2) of Regulation No 2252/2004 did not imply any processing
> of fingerprints that would go beyond what is necessary in order to achieve
> the aim of protecting against the fraudulent use of passports and was
> therefore valid.

> 214 In Madhewoo v The State of Mauritius,399 the Judicial Committee of the
> Privy Council heard an appeal from a judgment of the Supreme Court of
> Mauritius regarding the constitutionality of the provisions of The National
> Identity Card (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, 2013. The Act required
> biometric information including fingerprints, to be stored in a central
> register in which particulars of the identity of every citizen of Mauritius
> were to be recorded.

The Supreme Court upheld provisions of the Act that provided for the
compulsory taking of fingerprints. However, the Court struck down those
provisions that provided for the biometric data to be stored in a central
register. The Appellant appealed to the Committee, contending that the
provisions providing for the compulsory taking of fingerprints should also be
struck down as unconstitutional.

The appellant challenged the following provisions of the Act: (i) the storage
of data in a register in electronic data under Section 3; (ii) the obligation
to 399 [2016] UKPC 30  292 PART H provide biometric information under Section
4; (iii) the collection of information, in electronic form, for a national ID
card under Section 5; (iv) the compulsory production of an identity card to a
policeman under Section 7(1A) in response to a request under Section 7(1)(b);
and (v) the gravity of the potential penalties for non-compliance under
Section 9(3), before the Mauritian Supreme Court. The challenge was on the
ground that the implementation of the biometric identity card and the
permanent storage of biometric data contravened provisions of the Mauritian
Constitution and the Civil Code.

Regarding the challenge to Section 4 (2)(c) of the Act, which provided that,
“every person who applies for an identity card shall allow his fingerprints,
and other biometric information about himself, to be taken and recorded … for
the purpose of the identity card,” the Supreme Court noted that the right to
privacy under Section 9(1) of the Constitution was not an absolute right and
interference with that right could be permitted under Section 9(2), if a law
that interfered with that right was in the interest, inter alia, of public
order. The Committee noted the Supreme Court’s approach to determining whether
Section 4(2)(c) fell foul of the Constitution, which was based on the test
laid down in S and Marper v The United Kingdom400:

> “In addressing the question whether section 4(2)(c) of the 1985 Act (as
> amended) was reasonably justifiable in a democratic society the Supreme
> Court drew on jurisprudence of the European Court of Human Rights in S v The
> United Kingdom…In substance the Court asked whether the 400 [2008] ECHR 1581
> 293 PART H measure pursued a legitimate aim, whether the reasons given by
> the national authorities for the interference in pursuit of that aim were
> relevant and sufficient, and whether the measure was proportionate to the
> aim pursued. This evaluation is essentially the same as that adopted by the
> courts in the United Kingdom in relation to article 8(2) of the ECHR, in
> which the courts ask themselves (a) whether the measure is in accordance
> with the law, (ii) whether it pursues a legitimate aim, and (iii) whether
> the measure will give rise to interferences with fundamental rights which
> are disproportionate, having regard to the legitimate aim pursued.

In relation to (iii), the courts ask themselves: (a) whether the objective is
sufficiently important to justify a limitation of the protected right, (b)
whether the measure is rationally connected to the objective, (c) whether a
less intrusive measure could have been used without compromising the
achievement of the objective (in other words, whether the limitation on the
fundamental right was one which it was reasonable for the legislature to
impose), and (d) whether the impact of the infringement of the protected
rights is disproportionate to the likely benefit of the measure” The Committee
reproduced the Mauritian Supreme Court’s holding that the provisions of the
Act which enforced the compulsory taking and recording of fingerprints
interfered with the Appellant’s rights guaranteed under section 9(1) of the
Constitution,401 but that the law was justifiable on grounds of public
interest and public order:

> “We find that it can hardly be disputed that the taking of fingerprints
> within the applicable legal framework pursues the legitimate purpose of
> establishing a sound and secure identity protection system for the nation
> and thus answers a pressing social need affording indispensable protection
> against identity fraud. Such a purpose, as has been amply demonstrated, is
> vital for proper law enforcement in Mauritius. Furthermore, taking into
> consideration the appropriate safeguards in the taking of fingerprints for
> their insertion in the cards, and the relatively limited degree of
> interference involved, we are led to conclude that such interference is
> proportionate to the legitimate aim pursued.”402 401 Maharajah Madhewoo v.
> The State of Mauritius & Anr., 2015 SCJ 177, at page 23 402 [2016] UKPC 30,
> at page 10  294 PART H Thus, the Mauritian Supreme Court upheld provisions
> of the Act which provided for the compulsory taking of fingerprints. The
> Appellant also challenged Section 3 of the Act, which provided for biometric
> data to be stored in a register. The Supreme Court, after taking into
> consideration witness testimonies on the purpose of data collection, noted
> that though there may have been a legitimate aim for storing and collecting
> this data, “sufficiently strong reasons…to establish that such storage and
> retention of data for an indefinite period is proportionate to the
> legitimate aim pursued” were not established.403 Thus, the Court held that:

> “… it is inconceivable that there can be such uncontrolled access to
> personal data in the absence of the vital safeguards afforded by judicial
> control. The potential for misuse or abuse of the exercise of the powers
> granted under the law would be significantly disproportionate to the
> legitimate aim which the defendants have claimed in order to justify the
> retention and storage of personal data under the Data Protection Act.”404
> Thus, while the Supreme Court noted that the law providing for the storage
> and retention of personal biometric data constituted a permissible
> derogation under Section 9(2) of the Constitution,405 it held that since the
> Respondent had not established that provisions dealing with storage and
> retention were reasonably justifiable in a democratic society, they were
> unconstitutional.

> 403 Ibid, at page 31 404 Ibid, at page 33 405 Article 9. Protection of
> privacy of home and other property: (2) Nothing contained in or done under
> the authority of any law shall be held to be consistent with or in
> contravention of this section to the extent that the law in question makes
> provision - (a) in the interests of defence, public safety, public order,
> public morality, public health, town and country planning, the development
> or utilisation of mineral resources or the development or utilisation of any
> other property in such a manner as to promote the public benefit; (b) for
> the purpose of protecting the rights or freedoms of other persons; (c) to
> enable an officer or agent of the government or a local authority, or a body
> corporate established by law for public purpose, to enter on the premises of
> any person in order to value those premises for the purpose of any tax, rate
> or due, or in order to carry out work connected with any property that is
> lawfully on those premises and that belongs to the government, the local
> authority or that body corporate, as the case may be; or (d) to authorise,
> for the purpose of enforcing the judgement or order of a court in any civil
> proceedings, the search of any person or property by order of a court or the
> entry upon any premises by such order, Except so far as that provision or,
> as the case may be, the thing done under its authority is shown not to be
> reasonably justifiable in a democratic society  295 PART H The Judicial
> Committee did not interfere with the Supreme Court’s decision.

However, it noted an inconsistency in the Supreme Court’s order wherein it
held that the law providing for the storage and retention of fingerprints and
other biometric data constitutes a permissible derogation under section 9(2)
of the Constitution, whilst simultaneously holding the same provisions to be
unconstitutional. The Committee reconciled the holding to be:

> “A law providing for the storage and retention of fingerprints and other
> personal biometric data regarding the identity of a person in principle
> constitutes a permissible derogation, in the interests of public order,
> under section 9(2) of the Constitution.” (Emphasis supplied) 215 The learned
> Attorney General has relied on cases from other jurisdictions to buttress
> his contention that the collection and use of biometric information for
> various services have been found to be legal. ‘Biometric data406’ is defined
> in the General Data Protection Regulation thus:

> “personal data resulting from specific technical processing relating to the
> physical, physiological or behavioural characteristics of a natural person,
> which allow or confirm the unique identification of that natural person,
> such as facial images or dactyloscopic data.” The learned Attorney General
> cited the following judgments of the US Supreme Court: Vernonia School
> District 47J v Acton (“Acton”),407 Skinner v Railway Labor Executives’
> Association (“Skinner”),408 Whalen v Roe (“Whalen”),409 United States v
> Dionisio (“Dionisio”)410 and Bowen v Roy 406 Article 4(14) 407 515 U.S. 646
> (1995) 408 489 U.S. 602 (1989) 409 429 U.S. 589 (1977) 410 410 U.S. 1 (1973)
> 296 PART H (“Bowen”).411 Only Acton, Skinner and Dionisio were decided in
> the context of biometrics, which as we have found before, forms the bedrock
> of the Aadhaar program. In Acton, the court held that the action of the
> authorities conducting random drug testing of high school athletes was legal
> since the conditions of collection were nearly identical to those typically
> encountered in public restrooms. As a result, it was found that, privacy
> interests of the students were negligibly affected. In Skinner, the court
> found the actions of the Federal Railroad Administration (“FRA”) requiring
> mandatory blood and urine testing of employees involved in train accidents
> to be constitutional. The court observed that railroad accidents, if not
> prevented, could cause massive loss of life and property. Further, it was
> held that FRA’s regulations fulfilled a “special need” because of the
> interest of the government in ensuring safety of railroads and were
> therefore, not “an undue infringement on the justifiable expectations of
> privacy of covered employees”. In Whalen, the Court found that retention of
> patients’ information such as their name, address and age, under the New
> York State Controlled Substances Act, 1972, was not in violation of the
> constitutional right to privacy as the Court was satisfied that the statute
> provided for proper safeguards and redressal against theft and loss of
> information. In Dionisio, the Court found no constitutional infirmity with
> the issuance of a subpoena to procure voice recording exhibits by tapping
> telephones in order to investigate crimes. The Court held that “neither the
> summons to appear before the grand jury, nor its directive to make a voice
> recording, infringed upon any interest protected by the Fourth Amendment”.

> 411 476 U.S. 693 (1986)  297 PART H The Court observed that a compelled
> display of identifiable physical characteristics does not infringe upon an
> “interest protected by the privilege against compulsory self-incrimination”.
> In Bowen, the Court upheld the provisions of a welfare scheme which required
> citizens to furnish their social security number, rejecting the argument
> that the use of a social security number violated the Appellant’s Native
> American beliefs. The Court held that the Free Exercise Clause of the First
> Amendment could not be construed to place a requirement on the government to
> conduct its internal affairs in consonance with the religious beliefs of
> particular citizens.

In In re Crawford,412 the Ninth Circuit upheld provisions of the Bankruptcy
Code which mandated public disclosure of a Bankruptcy Petition Preparers’
Social Security Number on documents submitted to the Court, noting that the
provision had been enacted to serve governmental interests of preventing fraud
and providing public access to judicial proceedings. 216 Some decisions of
lower courts in the US which have considered the validity of laws or actions
of the State deploying biometrics and which have been cited by the respondents
are: Haskell v Harris (“Haskell”),413 Utility Workers Union of America v
Nuclear Regulatory Commission (“UWUA”),414 Nicholas A Iacobucci v City of
Newport (“Iacobucci”),415 412 194 F.3d 954 (9th Cir. 1999) 413 669 F.3d 1049
(9th Cir. 2012) 414 664 F. Supp. 136 (S.D.N.Y. 1987) 415 785 F.2d 1354 (6th
Cir. 1986)  298 PART H Thom v New York Stock Exchange (“Thom”),416 Perkey v
Department of Motor Vehicles (“Perkey”),417 Buchanan v Wing (Buchanan),418
People v Stuller (“Stuller”),419 United States v Kelly (“Kelly”)420 and Brown
v Brannon (“Brannon”).421 At first blush, it does seem that these cases
support the Respondents’ stand, however, we cannot lose sight of the context
in which the courts came to the conclusion emphasised by the respondents in
support of their submissions. In Haskell, the Ninth Circuit found a
Californian law which authorized law enforcement officers to collect DNA in
the form of a sample from the buccal swab of the mouth of felony arrestees,
who had not been convicted, to be constitutional. The Court noted that the
arrestees had reduced privacy interests; the physical intrusion of collecting
a buccal swab was de minimis in nature; there were stringent limits on the
manner in which the information was to be used; and the interest of the State
in deterring future criminal acts to exculpate innocent arrestees aided in
prison administration and law enforcement. For the above reasons, the Court
found that the infringement of privacy of the felony arrestees was justified.
In UWUA, the Ninth Circuit ruled that a law requiring individuals working in
nuclear power facilities to submit their fingerprints for identification and
criminal history record checks was not unconstitutional. In Iacobucci, an
ordinance which required employees of liquor selling establishments which
permitted nude dancing, to be fingerprinted and photographed by the police
department, was held 416 306 F. Supp. 1002 (S.D.N.Y. 1969) 417 (1986) 42 Cal.
3d 185 418 N.Y.S.2d 865 419 10 Cal. App.3d 582 (1970) 420 55 F.2d 67 (2d Cir.
1932) 421 399 F. Supp. 133 (M.D.N.C. 1975)  299 PART H constitutional. The
Court observed that fingerprinting and photographing of employees of retail
liquor establishments bore a rational relationship to the legitimate aim of
elimination of crime. In Thom, a New York statute, which as a condition of
employment, required all the employees of member firms of national stock
exchanges to be fingerprinted, was upheld. The Court ruled that fingerprinting
was a necessary means of verifying the existence or non- existence of a prior
criminal record, in order to avert any threat posed by an employee who was in
a position to commit theft of securities. In Perkey, the Californian Supreme
Court upheld the actions of the state mandating an individual to provide a
fingerprint in order to obtain a driver’s license. The Court held that
fingerprint technology was the only reliable means of ensuring the integrity
of the records of the department of motor vehicles as other methods such as
handwriting specimens and photographs were not reliable. Thus, the submission
of fingerprints as part of the license application process, bore a rational
relationship to the State’s goal of promoting safe and lawful use of highways.
In Buchanan, the Court upheld the eligibility requirement for a welfare aid
scheme which mandated participation in an identity verification procedure
known as Automated Finger Imaging System (AFIS), rejecting the challenge based
on religious beliefs of the Petitioner. The Court held that the Petitioner had
failed to prove that the AFIS involved any invasive procedures, noting that
she had acknowledged that she had never seen finger imaging performed and had
no idea whether a laser was involved. In Stuller, the constitutionality of a
law which required “temporary and itinerant classes of  300 PART H employees”
to undergo fingerprinting in order to protect “visitors and residents” of a
resort city from crime and loss, both against people and against property, was
upheld. In Kelly, the Circuit Court of Appeals rejected a claim for return of
fingerprints of the defendant which had been obtained after he had been
arrested by prohibition agents, holding that there was no reason to interfere
with a method of identifying persons “charged with a crime”. In Brannon, the
court held that a law requiring “massagists” to submit their fingerprints,
photographs and reports of their medical examinations in order to obtain
licenses was valid, noting that the fingerprints and photographs would aid in
their identification as well as in the enforcement of criminal statutes
relating to public morality and decency.

217 The cases cited by the learned Attorney General would not be applicable in
the context of the Aadhaar program. The cases cited dealt with narrowly
tailored legislations set out to achieve very specific objectives. For
instance, courts upheld statutes aimed at protecting a nuclear facility or to
prevent theft of securities, where incidents of sabotage or breach of security
would have led to national disasters. These national disasters in turn would
have resulted in the immediate loss of human life or in a situation of
financial emergency. Such laws, were therefore, enacted in order to assuage
security concerns which, if not implemented, could lead to incidents of
massive losses of life and property.

301 PART H Some of the statutes upheld, permitted collection of DNA samples,
fingerprints and photographs for identification. The objective behind these
laws was prevention of crime, albeit on a comparatively smaller scale.
Moreover, the courts in these cases were also satisfied that the procedures
involved in collecting biometrics were not invasive enough to strike them down
as unconstitutional or that there were adequate safeguards to prevent misuse.
The aforementioned cases will not apply in the backdrop of the Aadhaar program
because they were rendered broadly in the context of prevention of crime. It
needs no reiteration that an entire population cannot be presumed to be
siphoning huge sums of money in welfare schemes or viewed through the lens of
criminality, and therefore, considered as having a diminished expectation of
privacy. The judgments cited by the respondents which were decided in the
context of crime, require the State to at least form a reasonable belief about
the criminal antecedents of individuals or their potential to commit crimes.
On the contrary, by collecting identity information, the Aadhaar program
treats every citizen as a potential criminal without even requiring the State
to draw a reasonable belief that a citizen might be perpetrating a crime or an
identity fraud. When the State is not required to have a reasonable belief and
judicial determination to this effect, a program like Aadhaar, which infringes
on the justifiable expectations of privacy of citizens flowing from the
Constitution, is completely disproportionate to the objective sought to be
achieved by the State.

302 PART H 218 The fundamental precepts of proportionality, as they emerge
from decided cases can be formulated thus:

1\. A law interfering with fundamental rights must be in pursuance of a
legitimate state aim;

2\. The justification for rights-infringing measures that interfere with or
limit the exercise of fundamental rights and liberties must be based on the
existence of a rational connection between those measures, the situation in
fact and the object sought to be achieved;

3\. The measures must be necessary to achieve the object and must not infringe
rights to an extent greater than is necessary to fulfil the aim;

4\. Restrictions must not only serve a legitimate purposes; they must also be
necessary to protect them; and

5\. The State must provide sufficient safeguards relating to the storing and
protection of centrally stored data. In order to prevent arbitrary or abusive
interference with privacy, the State must guarantee that the collection and
use of personal information is based on the consent of the individual; that it
is authorised by law and that sufficient safeguards exist to ensure that the
data is only used for the purpose specified at the time of collection.
Ownership of the data must at all times vest in the individual whose data is
collected. The individual must have a right of access to the data collected
and the discretion to opt out.

303 PART H 219 Privacy and proportionality are two interlocking themes that
recur consistently in the above judgements. Privacy, also construed as
“informational self-determination”, is a fundamental value. There is a
consistent emphasis on the impact on personal dignity if private information
is widely available and individuals are not able to decide upon its disclosure
and use. This right of controlling the extent of the availability and use of
one’s personal data is seen as a building block of data protection -
especially in an environment where the state of technology facilitates ease of
collection, analysis and dissemination of information. 220 The blanket and
indiscriminate collection of information is seen as a violation of privacy,
which is a constituent of the right to liberty. An extensive power to retain
collected data is also seen as a disproportionate interference with the right
to privacy and not necessary in a democratic society. The judgments hold that
unlimited data retention and unrestricted state access both constitute a
disproportionate interference with privacy and data protection. They also
emphasize the need to clearly stipulate the nature of the data being collected
and ensure its confidentiality. Provisions where these principles are not
respected cannot be regarded as valid. While courts do recognize the need for
public order and security, they emphasize the need to strike a balance between
safeguarding public order and the right to privacy.  304 PART H 221 The
principle of proportionality also recurs through these judgments, which note
that the collection and use of information must be limited to the purpose
specified by law and to the extent indispensable for the protection of public
interest. The striking of a balance between public and private interests is
crucial to proportionality. The judgments hold that there must be a protection
against unauthorized use and clearly defined conditions for processing of data
collected. Those conditions must not be excessive and must be justified on
grounds of public interest and implemented in a manner proportionate to the
objective. Too broad a scope of data collected and retained, the lack of
limits imposed on access to data by authorities and a failure to distinguish
between the treatment of data based on its usefulness and relevance are seen
by Courts as constituting grounds for striking down the measure. While the
State's imperatives are seen as relevant, emphasis is laid on retention and
access requirements being proportionate to those imperatives and the need to
prevent against abuse. Courts have upheld regulations that are necessary to
achieve the legitimate aims and not excessive in their nature or impact.

The issue is whether the Aadhaar project and the Act, Rules and Regulations
meet the test of proportionality.

305 PART H H.4 Aadhaar: the proportionality analysis 222 Under Aadhaar, the
State has put forth an objective of transferring subsidies and entitlements to
its citizens. The aim was to curb leakages and to increase transparent and
efficient “targeted delivery of subsidies, benefits and services”. However,
the Act in the present form has surpassed a tailored objective and has sought
to administer every facet of the citizen-state engagement through mandatory
biometric-enabled Aadhaar linking. The violations of fundamental rights that
result from the operation of the Aadhaar scheme will have to be evaluated on
the touchstone of legitimate state interest and proportionality.

Since biometric systems have been employed, it is fundamental to understand
that the right to privacy and its protection must be at the centre of the
debate, from the very onset of the decision to use biometric data. It is vital
that adequate safeguards are set down for every step of the process from
collection to retention of biometric data. At the time of collection,
individuals must be informed about the collection procedure, the intended
purpose of the collection, the reason why the particular data set is requested
and who will have access to their data. Additionally, the retention period
must be justified and individuals must be given the right to access, correct
and delete their data at any point in time, a procedure familiar to an opt-out
option. The intended purpose should always act as a shining light and adequate
caution must be  306 PART H taken to ensure that there is no function creep
with the lapse of time, in order to prevent the use of the data for new,
originally unintended purposes. Measures to protect privacy would include
enacting more entrenched and specific legislation so that the right to privacy
is not only recognized but protected in all its aspects. Meeting this
obligation would necessarily mean enactment of data protection legislation as
well. The choice of particular techniques and the role of components in the
architecture of the technology also have a strong impact on the privacy
protections provided by the biometric system.

During the course of the hearing, the CEO of UIDAI, Mr Ajay Bhushan Pandey was
permitted on the request of the learned Attorney General to make a power-point
presentation before the Court, explaining the architecture and working of the
Aadhaar project. On the basis of the presentation, Mr Shyam Divan, counsel for
the petitioners had served a list of questions to the respondents. Responses
to these questions have been filed by UIDAI. Analysing the power-point
presentation by the CEO, questions addressed by Mr Divan and the responses
filed by the respondents will facilitate an understanding of the architecture
of the Aadhaar project. Our analysis indicates that the correctness of the
documents submitted by an individual at the stage of enrolment or while
updating information is not verified by any official of UIDAI or of the
Government. UIDAI does not take  307 PART H institutional responsibility for
the correctness of the information entering its database. It delegates this
task to the enrolment agency or the Registrar. The following response has been
submitted by the respondents to the queries addressed specifically on this
aspect:

> “As per UIDAI process, the verification of the documents is entrusted to the
> Registrar. For Verification based on Documents, the verifier present at the
> Enrolment Centre will verify the documents. Registrars/Enrolment agency must
> appoint personnel for the verification of documents.” 223 UIDAI does not
> identify the persons who enrol within the Aadhaar system. Once the biometric
> information is stored in the CIDR during enrolment, it is only matched with
> the information received at the time of authentication. Biometric
> authentication of an Aadhaar number holder is performed as a “one to one”
> biometric match against the biometric information of the Aadhaar number
> holder in CIDR. Based on the match, UIDAI provides a ‘yes’ or ‘no’response.
> Whether the information which is entering into CIDR is correct or not is a
> task entrusted to the enrolling agency or the Registrars.

UIDAI does not assume responsibility for it. The task of verifying whether a
person is an illegal resident has also been left to the enrolling agencies. At
the stage of enrolment, a verification of whether a person has been residing
in India for 182 days or more in the past twelve months is done on the basis
of a ‘self-declaration’ of the individual. The declaration which has been
provided in the Aadhaar enrolment forms is thus:  308 PART H “Disclosure under
section 3(2) of The Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of Financial and Other
Subsidies, Benefits and Servìces Act, 2016 I confirm that I have been residing
in India for at least 182 days in the preceding 12 months & information
(including biometrics) provided by me to the UIDAI Ìs my own and is true,
correct and accurate. I am aware that my information including biometrics will
be tested for generation of Aadhaar and authentication. I understand that my
identity information (except core biometric) may be provided to an agency only
with my consent during authentication or as per the provisions of the Aadhaar
Act. I have a right to access my identity information (except core biometrics)
following the procedure laid down by UIDAI.”422 224 The petitioners have
argued that persons who were enrolled under the Aadhaar programme before the
Act came into force on 12 September 2016 (more than a hundred crore) were not
even required to make this declaration. The authenticity of the documents
submitted (along with the declaration) is not checked by UIDAI.

The exception handling process permitting the use of alternative modes of
identification if the Aadhaar authentication fails, is also left to the
discretion of the Requesting Entity. On this aspect, the response which has
been provided to the Court is thus:

> “As per Regulation 14(i) of Aadhaar (Authentication) Regulations 2016,
> requesting entities shall implement exception-handling mechanisms and back-
> up identity authentication mechanisms to ensure seamless provision of
> authentication services to Aadhaar number holders.

Therefore, this exception handling mechanism is to be implemented and
monitored by the requesting entities and in case of the government, their
respective ministries.”  309 PART H Forty-nine thousand enrolment operators
have been blacklisted by UIDAI. In reply to the question of the petitioners
asking the reasons for blacklisting of the enrolment operators, UIDAI has
stated that a data quality check is done during the enrolment process and if
any Aadhaar enrolment is found to be not to be compliant with the UIDAI
process, the enrolment gets rejected and an Aadhaar number is not generated.
An operator who crosses a threshold defined in the policy, is blacklisted/
removed from the UIDAI ecosystem. UIDAI has provided information that forty-
nine thousand operators were blacklisted/removed from the UIDAI ecosystem for
the following reasons: (a) illegally charging residents for Aadhaar enrolment;
(b) poor demographic data quality; (c) invalid biometric exceptions; and (d)
other process malpractices. Once an operator is blacklisted or suspended,
further enrolments cannot be carried out by it until the order of
blacklisting/suspension is valid. 225 The Aadhaar architecture incorporates
the role of Authentication User Agencies (AUAs) and Authentication Service
Agencies (ASAs). ASAs, under the Aadhaar (Authentication) Regulations, have
been defined as entities providing necessary infrastructure for ensuring
secure network connectivity and related services for enabling a requesting
entity to perform authentication using the authentication facility provided by
UIDAI.423 AUAs have been defined under the Aadhaar (Authentication)
Regulations as requesting entities that use the Yes/No authentication facility
provided by UIDAI. 424 “Yes/No 423 Regulation 2(f), Aadhaar (Authentication)
Regulations 424 Regulation 2(g), Aadhaar (Authentication) Regulations  310
PART H authentication facility” is a type of authentication facility in which
the identity information and Aadhaar number securely submitted with the
consent of the Aadhaar number holder through a requesting entity, are matched
against the data available in the CIDR, and the Authority responds with a
digitally signed response containing a “Yes” or “No”, along with other
technical details related to the authentication transaction, excluding
identity information.425 The other type of authentication facility is the
e-KYC authentication facility, in which the biometric information and/or OTP
and Aadhaar number securely submitted with the consent of the Aadhaar number
holder through a requesting entity, are matched against the data available in
the CIDR, and the Authority returns a digitally signed response containing
e-KYC data along with other technical details related to the authentication
transaction. A requesting entity which, in addition to being an AUA, uses
e-KYC authentication facility provided by UIDAI is called a “e-KYC User
Agency” or “KUA”.426 Under Regulation 15(2), a requesting agency may permit
any other agency or entity to perform Yes/ No authentication by generating and
sharing a separate license key for every such entity through the portal
provided by UIDAI to the said requesting entity. It has also been clarified
that sharing of a license key is only permissible for performing Yes/ No
authentication, and is prohibited in case of e-KYC authentication.427 425
Regulation 2(p), Aadhaar (Authentication) Regulations 426 Regulation 2(l),
Aadhaar (Authentication) Regulations 427 Regulation 15, Aadhaar
(Authentication) Regulations  311 PART H The petitioners have contended that
the points of service (PoS) biometric readers are capable of storing biometric
information. The response which UIDAI has provided is extracted below:

> “UIDAI has mandated use of Registered Devices (RD) for all authentication
> requests. With Registered Devices biometric data is signed within the
> device/ RD service using the provider key to ensure it is indeed captured
> live. The device provider RD Service encrypts the PID block before returning
> to the host application. This RD Service encapsulates the biometric capture,
> signing and encryption of biometrics all within it. Therefore, introduction
> of RD in Aadhaar authentication system rules out any possibility of use of
> stored biometric and replay of biometrics captured from other source.
> Requesting entities are not legally allowed to store biometrics captured for
> Aadhaar authentication under Regulation 17(1)(a) of Aadhaar (Authentication)
> Regulations 2016.” 226 A PID block is defined in Regulation 2(n) of Aadhaar
> (Authentication) Regulations, 2016 as the Personal Identity Data element,
> which includes necessary demographic and/or biometric and/or OTP collected
> from the Aadhaar number holder during authentication. Regulation 17(1)(c)
> allows the requesting entity to store the PID block when “it is for buffered
> authentication where it may be held temporarily on the authentication device
> for a short period of time, and that the same is deleted after
> transmission”. Thus, under the Aadhaar project, requesting entities can hold
> the identity information of individuals, even if for a temporary period.

It was further contended by the petitioners that authentication entities in
the Aadhaar architecture are capable of recording the date and time of the
authentication, the client IP, the device ID and purpose of authentication. In
312 PART H response, UIDAI stated that it does not ask requesting entities to
maintain any logs related to the IP address of the device, GPS coordinates of
the device and purpose of authentication. It was, however, admitted that in
order to ensure that their systems are secure and frauds are managed, AUAs
like banks and telecom providers may store additional information according to
their requirement to secure their system.

227 The process of sending authentication requests has been dealt with in
Regulation 9 of the Aadhaar (Authentication) Regulations. It provides that
after collecting the Aadhaar number or any other identifier provided by the
requesting entity which is mapped to the Aadhaar number and necessary
demographic and / or biometric information and/ or OTP from the Aadhaar number
holder, the client application immediately packages and encrypts the input
parameters into the PID block before transmission and sends it to the server
of the requesting entity using secure protocols. After validation, the server
of a requesting entity passes the authentication request to the CIDR, through
the server of the Authentication Service Agency. The Regulation further
provides that the authentication request must be digitally signed by the
requesting entity and/or by the Authentication Service Agency, pursuant to the
mutual agreement between them. Based on the mode of authentication requested,
the CIDR validates the input parameters against the data stored and returns a
digitally signed Yes or No authentication response, or a digitally signed
e-KYC authentication response with encrypted e-KYC data, as the  313 PART H
case may be, along with other technical details related to the authentication
transaction. In all modes of authentication, the Aadhaar number is mandatory
and is submitted along with the input parameters such that authentication is
always reduced to a 1:1 match. Clause (5) of Regulation 9 provides that a
requesting entity shall ensure that encryption of PID Block takes place at the
time of capture on the authentication device according to the processes and
specifications laid down by UIDAI. Regulation 18(1) provides that a requesting
entity would maintain logs of the authentication transactions processed by it,
containing the following transaction details:

(a) the Aadhaar number against which authentication is sought;

(b) specified parameters of authentication request submitted;

(c) specified parameters received as authentication response;

(d) the record of disclosure of information to the Aadhaar number holder at
the time of authentication; and

(e) record of consent of the Aadhaar number holder for authentication. The
provision excludes retention of PID information in any case. Regulations 18(2)
and 18(3) allow the retention of the logs of authentication transactions by
the requesting entity for a period of two years. Upon the expiry of two years
the logs have to be archived for a period of five years or the number of years
required by the laws or regulations governing the entity, whichever is later.
Upon the expiry of this period, the logs shall be deleted except those records
which are required to be retained by a court or for any pending disputes.
Regulation 20(1) provides that an Authentication Service Agency would  314
PART H maintain logs of the authentication transactions processed by it,
containing the following transaction details:

(a) identity of the requesting entity;

(b) parameters of authentication request submitted; and

(c) parameters received as authentication response. The Regulation excludes
retention of Aadhaar number, PID information, device identity related data and
e-KYC response data. Under Regulations 20(2) and 20(3), authentication logs
shall be maintained by the ASA for a period of two years, during which period
the Authority and/or the requesting entity may require access to such records
for grievance redressal, dispute redressal and audit in accordance with the
procedure specified in the regulations. The authentication logs shall not be
used for any purpose other than that stated. Upon the expiry of the period of
two years, the authentication logs shall be archived for a period of five
years. Upon the expiry of five years or the number of years required by the
laws or regulations governing the entity whichever is later, the
authentication logs shall be deleted except those logs which are required to
be retained by a court or for pending disputes. Section 2(d)428 of the Aadhaar
Act allows storage of the record of the time of authentication. These
provisions permit the storage of logs of authentication transactions for a
specific time period.

The power-point presentation made by the CEO of UIDAI states that: 428Section
2(d) states: “authentication record” means the record of the time of
authentication and identity of the requesting entity and the response provided
by the Authority  315 PART H “With registered devices every biometric device
will have a unique identifier allowing traceability, analytics and fraud
management and biometric data will be signed within the device.” The response
further indicates that UIDAI gets the AUA code, ASA code, unique device code,
registered device code used for authentication, and that UIDAI would know from
which device the authentication has happened and through which AUA/ASA. The
response provided by the respondents states:

> “UIDAI does not get any information related to the IP address or the GPS
> location from where authentication is performed as these parameters are not
> the part of authentication (v2.0) and e-KYC (v2.1) API. UIDAI would only
> know from which device the authentication has happened, through which
> AUA/ASA etc. This is what the slides meant by traceability.

UIDAI does not receive any information about at what location the
authentication device is deployed, its IP address and its operator and the
purpose of authentication. Further, the UIDAI or any entity under its control
is statutorily barred from collecting, keeping or maintaining any information
about the purpose of authentication under Section 32(3) of the Aadhaar Act.”
However, Regulation 26, which deals with the storage and maintenance of
Authentication Transaction Data clearly provides that UIDAI shall store and
maintain authentication transaction data, which shall contain the following
information:

(a) authentication request data received including PID block;

(b) authentication response data sent;

(c) meta data429 related to the transaction; and

(d) any authentication server side configurations430 as necessary. 429AUA
code, ASA code, unique device code, registered device code used for
authentication, and that UIDAI would know from which device the authentication
has happened 430An important configuration could be IP address  316 PART H The
only data, which has been excluded from retention under this provision, like
Section 32(3) of the Aadhaar Act, is the purpose of authentication. Regulation
27 provides that the authentication transaction data shall be retained by
UIDAI for a period of six months, and will thereafter be archived for five
years, upon which, the authentication transaction data shall be deleted except
when it is required to be maintained by a court or in connection with any
pending dispute. These provisions indicate that under the Aadhaar
architecture, UIDAI stores authentication transaction data. This is in
violation of the widely recognized data minimisation principles which seek
that data collectors and processors delete personal data records when the
purpose for which it has been collected is fulfilled. The lack of
specification of security standards and the overall lack of transparency and
inadequate grievance redressal mechanism under the Aadhaar program greatly
exacerbate the overall risk associated with data retention. In the Aadhaar
regime, an Authentication User Agency (AUA) connects to the CIDR and uses
Aadhaar authentication to validate a user and enable its services. The
responsibility for the logistics of service delivery rests with the AUAs. In
this federated model, Authentication Service Agencies (ASAs) transmit
authentication requests to CIDR on behalf of one or more AUAs. However, any
device that communicates via the Internet is assigned an IP address. Using the
meta- data related to the transaction, the location of the authentication can
easily be traced using the IP address.

317 PART H 228 The petitioners have also brought the attention of this Court
to bear on an expert report, with respect to security and Aadhaar, which was
filed along with an Additional Affidavit dated 09 March 2018. The report dated
4 March 2018 is titled as “Analysis of Major Concern about Aadhaar Privacy and
Security” and has been authored by Professor Manindra Agrawal. Professor
Agrawal is the N Ramarao Professor at IIT Kanpur and is a member of the
Technology and Architecture Review Board (TARB) and of the Security Review
Committee of UIDAI. Professor Agarwal’s Report deals with the notion of
differential privacy. Differential privacy makes it possible for tech entities
to collect and share aggregate information about user habits, while
maintaining the privacy of individual users. The Report states that
differential privacy of a protocol is the change in the privacy of people when
the protocol is introduced without altering any other protocol present. If the
differential privacy of a protocol is “non-negative”, the protocol does not
compromise privacy in any way. There are four existing Aadhaar databases:

(i) The ‘person database’ stores personal attributes of a person (name,
address, age, etc.) along with his/her Aadhaar number;

(ii) The reference database stores the Aadhaar number of a person along with a
unique reference number (which has no relationship with the Aadhaar number of
an individual);

(iii) The biometric database stores biometric information of a person along
with the unique reference number; and  318 PART H

(iv) The verification log records all ID verifications done in the past five
years. For each verification, it stores the biometric data, Aadhaar number,
and ID of the device on which verification was done. The report analyses the
situation if any of the databases gets leaked. The report remarks:

> “Finally, let us turn attention to Verification Log. Its leakage may affect
> both the security and the privacy of an individual as one can extract
> identities of several people (and hence can keep changing forged identities)
> and also locate the places of transactions done by an individual in the past
> five years. Note that differential privacy of this becomes negative since
> without access to this database it is not possible to track locations of an
> individual in past five years (as opposed to tracking current location which
> is possible). Therefore, Verification Log must be kept secure.” The Report
> underlines the importance of ensuring the security of verification logs in
> the Aadhaar database. The leakage of verification logs is capable of
> damaging the security and privacy of individuals since the report notes that
> from the verification log, it is possible to locate the places of
> transactions by an individual in the past five years. A breach in
> verification log would allow a third party to access the location of the
> transactions of an individual over the past five years. The report indicates
> that it is possible through the Aadhaar database to track the location of an
> individual. The Aadhaar database is different from other databases such as
> PAN Card or driving license. The Aadhaar database is universal and contains
> the biometrics of an individual.

The threshold to scrutinize the effects of this database is therefore much
higher as compared to that of other databases.  319 PART H 229 In Puttaswamy,
Justice Kaul (in his concurring judgment) emphasized upon the concerns
regarding surveillance of individuals. The learned Judge held:

> “The growth and development of technology has created new instruments for
> the possible invasion of privacy by the State, including through
> surveillance, profiling and data collection and processing. Surveillance is
> not new, but technology has permitted surveillance in ways that are
> unimaginable… One such technique being adopted by States is ‘profiling’. The
> European Union Regulation of 2016 on data privacy defines ‘Profiling’ as any
> form of automated processing of personal data consisting of the use of
> personal data to evaluate certain personal aspects relating to a natural
> person, in particular to analyse or predict aspects concerning that natural
> person's performance at work, economic situation, health, personal
> preferences, interests, reliability, behaviour, location or movements. Such
> profiling can result in discrimination based on religion, ethnicity and
> caste.”431 Justice Kaul also dealt with the need to regulate the conduct of
> private entities vis-a-vis profiling of individuals:

> “The capacity of non-State actors to invade the home and privacy has also
> been enhanced. Technological development has facilitated journalism that is
> more intrusive than ever before…432 …[I]n this digital age, individuals are
> constantly generating valuable data which can be used by non-State actors to
> track their moves, choices and preferences. Data is generated not just by
> active sharing of information, but also passively… These digital footprints
> and extensive data can be analyzed computationally to reveal patterns,
> trends, and associations, especially relating to human behavior and
> interactions and hence, is valuable information. This is the age of ‘big
> data’.

> The advancement in technology has created not just new forms of data, but
> also new methods of analysing the data and has led to the discovery of new
> uses for data. The algorithms are more effective and the computational power
> has magnified exponentially.”433 431 Puttaswamy at para 585 432 Puttaswamy
> at para 587 433 Puttaswamy at para 588  320 PART H 230 Section 2(c) of the
> Aadhaar Act is capable of revealing the identity of an individual to UIDAI.
> Section 2(d) permits storage of record of the time of authentication.
> Through meta data and in the light of the observations made in the Professor
> Manindra Agarwal Report, it can easily be concluded that it is possible
> through the UIDAI database to track the location of an individual.

Further, the verification logs reveal the details of transactions over the
past five years. The verification logs are capable of profiling an individual.
Details of the transaction include what the transaction was (whether
authentication request was accepted/rejected), where it was sent from, and how
it was sent. The only thing not stored in the transaction is its purpose. 231
The threat to privacy arises not from the positive identification that
biometrics provide, but the ability of third parties to access this in an
identifiable form and link it to other information, resulting in secondary use
of that information without the consent of the data subject. This erodes the
personal control of an individual over the uses of his or her information. The
unauthorised secondary use of biometric data is perhaps the greatest risk that
biometric technology poses to informational privacy.434 The Manindra Agarwal
Report acknowledges that the biometric database in the CIDR is accessible by
third-party vendors providing biometric search and de-duplication algorithms.
The other three databases are stored, in encrypted form, by UIDAI.

434Nancy Yue Liu, Bio-Privacy: Privacy Regulations and the Challenge of
Biometrics, Routledge (2013) at page  76 321 PART H In this regard, it would
be necessary to deal with the Contract (dated 24 August 2010) signed between
UIDAI and L1 Identity Solutions (the foreign entity which provided the source
code for biometric storage). It has been submitted by the petitioners that the
contract gives L1 Identity Solutions free access to all personal information
about all residents in India. The contract specifies that UIDAI (‘the
purchaser’) has the right in perpetuity to use all original newly created
processes “identified” by M/S L-1 Identity Solutions “solely during execution”
of the contract to the purchaser’s unique specifications and which do not
contain any pre-existing intellectual property right belonging to L-1 Identity
Solutions.435 UIDAI was provided the license of the software (proprietary
algorithms) developed by L-1 Identity Solutions. However, it has been
clarified in the Contract that:

> “The Contract and the licenses granted herein are not a sale of a copy of
> the software and do not render Purchaser the owner of M/S L-1 Identity
> Solutions Operating Company’s proprietary ABIS and SDK software.”436 The
> Contract authorises L-1 Identity Solutions to retain proprietary ownership
> of all intellectual property rights in and to goods, services and other
> deliverables to the purchaser under the Contract that are modifications or
> derivative works to their pre-existing technologies, software, goods,
> services and other works. If a modification or derivative work made by L-1
> Identity Solutions or its consortium members contains unique confidential
> information of the purchaser, then, the contract provides that the former
> shall not further 435 Clause 13.1 of the Contract 436 Ibid  322 PART H
> license or distribute such modification or derivative to any other customer
> or third party other than the purchaser without the purchaser’s prior
> written permission.437 Clause 13.3 provides:

> “M/S L-1 Identity Solutions Operating Company/ The team of M/S L-1 Identity
> Solutions Operating Company shall ensure that while it uses any software,
> hardware, processes, document or material in the course of performing the
> Services, it does not infringe the Intellectual Property Rights of any
> person and M/S L-1 Identity Solutions Operating Company shall keep the
> Purchaser indemnified against all costs, expenses and liabilities howsoever,
> arising out any illegal or unauthorized use (piracy) or in connections with
> any claim or proceedings relating to any breach or violation of any
> permission/license terms or infringement of any Intellectual Property Rights
> by M/S L-1 Identity Solutions Operating Company or the team of M/S L-1
> Identity Solutions Operating Company during the course of performance of the
> Services.

> In case of infringement by M/S L-1 Identity Solutions Operating Company/ The
> team of M/S L-1 Identity Solutions Operating Company, M/S L-1 Identity
> Solutions Operating Company shall have sole control of the defense and all
> related settlement negotiations.” Clause 13.4 deals with information
> privacy. It provides:

> “M/S L-1 Identity Solutions Operating Company/ The team of M/S L-1 Identity
> Solutions Operating Company shall not carry any written/printed document,
> layout diagrams, floppy diskettes, hard disk, storage tapes, other storage
> devices or any other goods/material proprietary to Purchaser into/out of
> Datacenter Sites and UIDAI Locations without written permission from the
> Purchaser.” Clause 15, titled as “data and hardware”, provides:

> “15.1 By virtue of this Contract, M/s L-1 Identity Solutions Operating
> Company/The team of M/s L-1 Identity Solutions Operating Company may have
> access to personal information of the Purchaser [UIDAI] and/or a third party
> or any resident of India, any other person covered within the ambit of any
> legislation as may be applicable. The purchaser shall have the sole
> ownership of and the right to use all such data in 437 Ibid  323 PART H
> perpetuity including any data or other information pertaining to the
> residents of India that may be in the possession of M/s L-1 Identity
> Solutions Operating Company or the Tram of M/s L-1 Identity Solutions
> Operating Company in the course of performing.

> 15.2 The purchaser shall have the sole ownership of and the right to use,
> proprietary Biometric templates of residents of India as created and
> maintained by M/S L-1 Identity Solutions Operating Company in the course of
> performing the Services under this Contract. In the event of termination or
> expiry of contract, M/S L-1 Identity Solutions Operating Company shall
> transfer all the proprietary templates to UIDAI in an electronic storage
> media in a form that is freely retrievable for reference and usage in
> future.

15.3 The Data shall be retained by M/S L-1 Identity Solutions Operating
Company not more than a period of 7 years as per Retention Policy of
Government of India or any other policy that UIDAI may adopt in future.” Under
the Contract, L-1 Identity Solutions retains the ownership of the biometric
software. UIDAI has been given only the license to use the software. Neither
the Central Government nor the UIDAI have the source code for the de-
duplication technology which is at the heart of the programme. The source code
belongs to a foreign corporation. UIDAI is merely a licensee. It has also been
provided that L-1 Identity Solutions can be given access to the database of
UIDAI and the personal information of any individual. 232 This Court in
Puttaswamy had emphasized on the centrality of consent in protection of data
privacy:

> “307…Apart from safeguarding privacy, data protection regimes seek to
> protect the autonomy of the individual. This is evident from the emphasis in
> the European data protection regime on the centrality of consent. Related to
> the issue of consent is the requirement of transparency which requires a
> disclosure by the data recipient of information pertaining to data transfer
> and use.”  324 PART H Prior to the enactment of the Aadhaar Act, an
> individual had no right of informed consent. Without the consent of
> individual citizens, UIDAI contracted with L-1 Identity Solutions to provide
> any information to it for the performance of the Contract. It has been
> provided in the Contract that L-1 Identity Solutions would indemnify UIDAI
> against any loss caused to it. However, the leakage of sensitive personal
> information of 1.2 billion citizens, cannot be remedied by a mere
> contractual indemnity. The loss of data is irretrievable. In a digital
> society, an individual has the right to protect herself by maintaining
> control over personal information. The protection of data of 1.2 billion
> citizens is a question of national security and cannot be indemnified by a
> Contract.

233 Mr Shyam Divan, learned senior counsel for the petitioners, has also drawn
the attention of this Court to the Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) signed
between UIDAI and various entities for carrying out the process of enrolment.
Before the enactment of the Aadhaar Act, UIDAI existed as an executive
authority, under the erstwhile Planning Commission and then under the Union
Ministry of Communications and Information Technology. Mr. Divan has argued
that the activities of the private parties engaged in the process of enrolment
had no statutory or legal backing. It was his contention that MOUs signed
between UIDAI and Registrars are not contracts within the purview of Article
299 of the Constitution, and therefore, do not cover the acts done by  325
PART H the private entities engaged by the Registrars for enrolment. In Monnet
Ispat and Energy Ltd v Union of India438, this Court had held:

> “290. What the appellants are seeking is in a way some kind of a specific
> performance when there is no concluded contract between the parties. An MOU
> is not a contract, and not in any case within the meaning of Article 299 of
> the Constitution of India.”439 The MoUs entered into by UIDAI do not fall
> within the meaning of Article 299 of the Constitution. There is no privity
> of contract between UIDAI and the Enrolling agencies.

234 This Court held in Puttaswamy that any law which infringes the right to
privacy of an individual needs to have stringent inbuilt safeguards against
the abuse of the process. The Aadhaar Act envisages UIDAI as the sole
authority for the purpose of the Act. It entrusts UIDAI with a wide canvass of
functions, both administrative and adjudicatory. It performs the functions of
appointing enrolling agencies, registrars and requesting entities. Currently,
there are 212 Registrars and 755 enrolling agencies in different states of the
country. 440 Monitoring the actions of so many entities is not a task easily
done. Responsibility has also been placed on UIDAI to manage and secure the
central database of identity information of individuals. UIDAI is also
required to ensure that data stored in CIDR is kept secure and confidential.
It has been placed with the responsibility for the protection of the identity
information of 1.2 billion citizens. UIDAI is entrusted with discretionary
powers under the 438 (2012) 11 SCC 1 439 Ibid, at page 153 440 As submitted by
Mr Rakesh Dwivedi, learned senior counsel for the State of Gujarat  326 PART H
architecture of Aadhaar, including the discretion to share the personal
information of any individual with the biometric service providers (BSPs) for
the performance of contracts with them.

235 The proviso to Section 28(5) provides only for a request to UIDAI for
access to information and does not make access to information a right of the
individual. This would mean that it would be entirely upon the discretion of
the UIDAI to refuse to grant access to the information once a request has been
made. It is also not clear how a person is supposed to know that the biometric
information contained in the database has changed if he/she does not have
access to it. UIDAI is also empowered to investigate any breach under the Act,
as a result of which any offence under the Act will be cognizable only if a
complaint is filed by UIDAI. UIDAI is not an independent monitoring agency.
Under the Aadhaar architecture, UIDAI is the only authority which carries out
all the functions, be it administrative, adjudicatory, investigative, or
monitoring of the project. While the Act confers such major functions on
UIDAI, it does not place any institutional accountability upon UIDAI to
protect the database of citizens’ personal information. The Act is silent on
the liability of UIDAI and its personnel in case of non-compliance of the
provisions of the Act or the regulations made under it. Under Section 23(2)(s)
of the Act, UIDAI is required to establish a grievance redressal mechanism.
Making the authority administering a project, also responsible for providing
for the framework to  327 PART H address grievances arising from the project,
severely compromises the independence of the grievance redressal body.441
Section 47 of the Act violates the right to seek remedy. Under Section 47(1),
a court can take cognizance of an offence punishable under the Act only on a
complaint made by UIDAI or any officer or person authorised by it. There is no
grievance redressal mechanism if any breach or offence is committed by UIDAI
itself. The law must specify who is to be held accountable. The Act lacks a
mechanism through which any individual can seek speedy redressal for his/her
data leakage and identity theft. Compensation must be provided for any loss of
data of an individual. A stringent and independent redressal mechanism and
options for compensation must be incorporated in the law. Section 47 is
arbitrary as it fails to provide a mechanism to individuals to seek
efficacious remedies for violation of their right to privacy. Whether it is
against UIDAI or a private entity, it is critical that the individual retains
the right to seek compensation and justice. This would require a carefully
designed structure.442 236 An independent and autonomous authority is needed
to monitor the compliance of the provisions of any statute, which infringes
the privacy of an individual. A fair data protection regime requires
establishment of an independent authority to deal with the contraventions of
the data protection framework as well as to proactively supervise its
compliance. The 441 The Centre for Internet & Society, Salient Points in the
Aadhaar Bill and Concerns, available at https://cis- india.org/internet-
governance/salient-points-in-the-aadhaar-bill-and-concerns. 442Shankkar Aiyar,
Aadhaar: A Biometric History of India’s 12-Digit Revolution, Westland (2017),
at pages 226-  227 328 PART H independent monitoring authority must be
required to prescribe the standards against which compliance with the data
protection norms is to be measured. It has to independently adjudicate upon
disputes in relation to the contravention of the law. Data protection requires
a strong regulatory framework to protect the basic rights of individuals. The
architecture of Aadhaar ought to have, but has failed to embody within the law
the establishment of an independent monitoring authority (with a hierarchy of
regulators), along with the broad principles for data protection.443 The
principles should include that the means of collection of data are fair and
lawful, the purpose and relevance is clearly defined, user limitations
accompanied by intelligible consent requirements are specified and subject to
safeguards against risks such as loss, unauthorised access, modification and
disclosure.444 The independent authority needs to be answerable to Parliament.
In the absence of a regulatory framework which provides robust safeguards for
data protection, the Aadhaar Act does not pass muster against a challenge on
the ground of Article 14. The law fails to meet the norms expected of a data
protection regime which safeguards the data of 1.2 billion Indians. The
absence of a regulatory framework leaves the law vulnerable to challenge on
the ground that it has failed to meet the requirements of fair institutional
governance under the rule of law. 237 The scheme of the Aadhaar Act is
postulated on the norms enunciated in Chapter VI for the protection of
information and their enforcement under a 443Subhashis Banerjee, Architecture
for privacy, The Indian Express (5 May 2018), available at
https://indianexpress.com/article/opinion/columns/architecture-for-privacy-
data-protection-facebook-india- united-states-5163819/ 444 Shankkar Aiyar,
Aadhaar: A Biometric History of India’s 12-Digit Revolution, Westland (2017),
at page 226  329 PART H regime of criminal offences and penalties under
Chapter VII. Providing a regime under law for penalizing criminal wrongdoing
is necessary. But, criminal offences are not a panacea for a robust regulatory
framework under the auspices of an autonomous regulatory body. Violations in
regard to the integrity of data may be incremental. Millions of data
transactions take place in the daily lives of a community of individuals.
Violations in regard to the integrity of data are numerous. Some of them may
appear to be trivial, if looked at in isolation. However, cumulatively, these
violations seriously encroach on the dignity and autonomy of the individual. A
regime of criminal law may not in itself be adequate to deal with all these
violations in terms of their volume and complexity. It is hence necessary that
the criminal law must be supplemented by an independent regulatory framework.
In its absence, there is a grave danger that the regime of data protection, as
well as the administration of criminal justice will be rendered dysfunctional.
Unfortunately, a regulatory framework of the nature referred to above is
completely absent. UIDAI which is established and controlled by the Union
Government possesses neither the autonomy nor the regulatory authority to
enforce the mandate of the law in regard to the protection of data. The
absence of a regulatory framework renders the legislation largely ineffective
in dealing with data violations. Data protection cannot be left to an
unregulated market place. Nor can the law rest in the fond hope that organized
structures within or outside government will be self-compliant. The Aadhaar
Act has manifestly failed in its legislative design to establish and enforce
an autonomous  330 PART H regulatory mechanism. Absent such a mechanism, the
state has failed to fulfil the obligation cast upon it to protect the
individual right to informational self- determination.

238 Section 33(2), which permits disclosure of identity information and
authentication records in the interest of national security, specifies a
procedure for oversight by a committee. However, no substantive provisions
have been laid down as guiding principles for the oversight mechanism such as
the principle of data minimisation.

239 Privacy concerns relating to the Aadhaar project have been the subject of
wide ranging deliberation. Biometric data offers strong evidence of one’s
identity since it represents relatively unique biological characteristics
which distinguish one person from another. As biometric data can be usually
linked to only one individual it acts as a powerful, unique identifier that
brings together disparate pieces of personal information about an individual.
As a relatively unique identifier, biometric data not only allows individuals
to be tracked, but it also creates the potential for the collection of an
individual’s information and its incorporation into a comprehensive profile.
Central databases, data matching/linking and profiling are technical factors
that facilitate ‘function creep’ (the slippery slope according to which
information can be used for functions other than that for which it was
collected). Privacy advocates believe that any identification scheme can be
carried out with a  331 PART H hidden agenda and that the slippery slope
effect can be relevant to several factors such as motivations of governments
and business, and on the existence of safeguards. The special nature of
biometric data makes function creep more likely and even attractive. The legal
measures possible to control function creep are still limited. However, there
are several ways in which function creep can be curtailed. They include (i)
limiting the amount of data that is collected for any stated purpose; (ii)
enabling regulation to limit technological access to the system; (iii)
concerted debates with all stakeholders and public participation; (iv)
dispersion of multiple enablers for a system; and (v) enabling choices for
user participation. 240 This Court held in Puttaswamy that a reasonable
expectation of privacy requires that data collection must not violate the
autonomy of an individual. The Court has held consent, transparency, and
control over information as the cornerstones over which the fundamentals of
informational privacy stand. The Court had made it clear that an individual
has the right to prevent others from using his or her image, name and other
aspects of personal life and identity for commercial purposes without consent.
An Aadhaar number is a unique attribute of an individual. It embodies unique
information associated with an individual. The manner in which it is to be
used has to be dependent on the consent of the individual.  332 PART H 241
Section 57 of the Aadhaar Act allows the use of an Aadhaar number for
establishing the identity of an individual “for any purpose” by the state,
private entities and persons. Allowing private entities to use Aadhaar numbers
will lead to commercial exploitation of an individual’s personal data without
his/her consent and could lead to individual profiling. The contention is that
Section 57 fails to meet the requirements set out in the Puttaswamy judgment.
In this regard, reference must be drawn to a 2010 policy paper. A group of
officers was created by the Government of India to develop a framework for a
privacy legislation that would balance the need for privacy protection with
security and sectoral interests, and respond to the need for domain
legislation on the subject. An approach paper for the legal framework for a
proposed legislation on privacy was prepared by the group and was uploaded on
the website of the Government of India. The paper noted the repercussions of
having a project based on a database of unique individual IDs:

> “Data privacy and the need to protect personal information is almost never a
> concern when data is stored in a decentralized manner. However, all this is
> likely to change with the implementation of the UID Project. One of the
> inevitable consequences of the UID Project will be that the UID Number will
> unify multiple databases. As more and more agencies of the government sign
> on to the UID Project, the UID Number will become the common thread that
> links all those databases together. Over time, private enterprise could also
> adopt the UID Number as an identifier for the purposes of the delivery of
> their services or even for enrolment as a customer...Once this happens, the
> separation of data that currently exists between multiple databases will
> vanish… Such a vast interlinked public information database is unprecedented
> in India. It is imperative that appropriate steps be taken to protect
> personal data before the vast government  333 PART H storehouses of private
> data are linked up and the threat of data security breach becomes real.”445
> The Paper highlighted the potential of exploitation that the UID project
> possessed. The potential was that the UID data could be used directly or
> indirectly by market forces for commercial exploitation as well as for
> intrusions by the State into citizens’ privacy. The Paper contained an
> incisive observation in regard to the exploitation of citizens’ data by
> private entities:

> “Similarly, the private sector entities such as banks, telecom companies,
> hospitals etc are collecting vast amount of private or personal information
> about individuals. There is tremendous scope for both commercial
> exploitation of this information without the consent/ knowledge of the
> individual consent and also for embarrassing an individual whose personal
> particulars can be made public by any of these private entities. The IT Act
> does provide some safeguards against disclosure of data / information stored
> electronically, but there is no legislation for protecting the privacy of
> individuals for all information that may be available with private entities
> In view of the above, privacy of individual is to be protected both with
> reference to the actions of Government as well as private sector
> entities.”446 The Paper highlighted the need for a stringent privacy
> protection mechanism, which could prevent individual data from commercial
> exploitation as well as individual profiling.

> 242 Reference must also be drawn to Chapter V of the National Identification
> Authority of India Bill, 2010, which provided for the constitution of
> 445Government of India, Approach Paper for a Legislation on Privacy (2010),
> available at http://www.prsindia.org/uploads/media/UID/aproach_paper.pdf 446
> Ibid  334 PART H an Identity Review Committee. The proposed Committee was to
> be entrusted to carry out the function of ascertaining the extent and
> pattern of usage of Aadhaar numbers across the country. The Committee was
> required to prepare a report annually in relation to the extent and pattern
> of usage of the Aadhaar numbers along with its recommendations thereon and
> submit it to the Central Government. The idea behind the establishment of
> such a Committee was to limit the extent to which Aadhaar numbers could be
> used. These provisions have not been included in the Aadhaar Act, 2016.
> Instead, the Act allows the use of Aadhaar number for any purpose by the
> State as well as private entities. This is a clear case of overbreadth and
> an instance of manifest arbitrariness.

243 Section 57 indicates that the legislature has travelled far beyond its
stated object of ensuring targeted delivery of social welfare benefits.
Allowing the Aadhaar platform for use by private entities overreaches the
purpose of enacting the law. It leaves bare the commercial exploitation of
citizens data even in purported exercise of contractual clauses. This will
result in a violation of privacy and profiling of citizens.

335 PART H An article titled “Privacy and Security of Aadhaar: A Computer
Science Perspective”447 underlines the risk of profiling and identification
that is possible by the use of Aadhaar numbers. It states:

> “The Aadhaar number is at the heart of the Aadhaar scheme and is one of the
> biggest causes of concern. Recall that the Aadhaar number is a single unique
> identifier that must function across multiple domains. Given that the
> Aadhaar number must necessarily be disclosed for obtaining services, it
> becomes publicly available, not only electronically but also often in human
> readable forms as well, thereby increasing the risk that service providers
> and other interested parties may be able to profile users across multiple
> service domains. Once the Aadhaar number of an individual is (inevitably)
> known, that individual may be identified without consent across domains,
> leading to multiple breaches in privacy.” 244 The risks which the use of
> Aadhaar “for any purpose” carries is that when it is linked with different
> databases (managed by the State or by private entities), the Aadhaar number
> becomes the central unifying feature that connects the cell phone with geo-
> location data, one’s presence and movement with a bank account and income
> tax returns, food and lifestyle consumption with medical records. This
> starts a “causal link” between information which was usually unconnected and
> was considered trivial. 448 Thus, linking Aadhaar with different databases
> carries the potential of being profiled into a system, which could be used
> for commercial purposes. It also carries the capability of influencing the
> behavioural patterns of individuals, by affecting their privacy and liberty.
> Profiling individuals could be used to create co-relations between human
> lives, which are generally unconnected. If the 447 Shweta Agrawal, Subhashis
> Banerjee, and Subodh Sharma, Privacy and Security of Aadhaar: A Computer
> Science Perspective, Economic & Political Weekly (16 September 2017), Vol.
> 52, available at https://www.epw.in/journal/2017/37/special-
> articles/privacy-and-security-aadhaar.html 448 Nishant Shah, Digital Native:
> Cause an effect, The Indian Express (17 June 2018), available at
> https://indianexpress.com/article/technology/social/digital-native-cause-an-
> effect-5219977/  336 PART H traces of Aadhaar number are left in every facet
> of human life, it will lead to a loss of privacy. The repercussions of
> profiling individuals were anticipated in 1966 by Alexander Solzhenitsyn in
> ‘Cancer Ward’449. His views are prescient to our age:

> “As every man goes through life he fills in a number of forms for the
> record, each containing a number of questions. A man’s answer to one
> question on one form becomes a little thread, permanently connecting him to
> the local centre of personnel records administration. There are thus
> hundreds of little threads radiating from every man, millions of threads in
> all. If these threads were suddenly to become visible, the whole sky would
> look like a spider’s web, and if they materialised as elastic bands, buses,
> trams and even people would all lose the ability to move, and the wind would
> be unable to carry torn newspapers or autumn leaves along the streets of the
> city. They are not visible, they are not material, but every man is
> constantly aware of their existence… Each man, permanently aware of his own
> invisible threads, naturally develops a respect for the people who
> manipulate the threads…” The invisible threads of a society networked on
> biometric data have grave portents for the future. Unless the law mandates
> an effective data protection framework, the quest for liberty and dignity
> would be as ephemeral as the wind.

> 245 A novelist’s vision is threatening to become a reality in our times.

Profiling can impact individuals and their behaviour. Since data collection
records the preferences of an individual based on the entities which requested
for proof of identity, any such pattern in itself is crucial data that could
be used to predict the emergence of future choices and preferences of
individuals. 449 Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn, Cancer Ward, The Bodley Head (1968)
337 PART H These preferences could also be used to influence the decision
making of the electorate in choosing candidates for electoral offices. Such a
practice would be unhealthy for the working of a democracy, where a citizen is
deprived of free choice. In the modern digital era, privacy protection does
not demand that data should not be collected, stored, or used, but that there
should be provable guarantees that the data cannot be used for any purpose
other than those that have been approved. In any of the programmes employed,
it is imperative that the state takes strong data privacy measures to prevent
theft and abuse. Moreover, it must be realized that an identification system
like Aadhaar, which is implemented nationwide, will always be more prone to
external threats. The State is always open to threat from its adversaries, and
a national level identification system can become an easy target for anyone
looking to cause serious damage as individuals’ biometric credentials are at
risk in the process. Therefore, it is vital that state action ascertain
security vulnerabilities while developing an identification system. These
issues have not been dealt with by the Aadhaar Act. There is currently limited
legislative or other regulatory guidance to specify whether private or public
organisations are prevented from sharing or selling biometric information to
others. Section 57 cannot be applied to permit commercial exploitation of the
data of individuals or to affect their behavioural patterns. Section 57 does
not pass constitutional muster. It is manifestly arbitrary, suffers from
overbreadth and violates Article 14.

338 PART H 246 At its core, the Aadhaar Act attempts to create a method for
identification of individuals so as to provide services, subsidies and other
benefits to them. The Preamble of the Act explains that the architecture of
the Act seeks to provide “efficient, transparent and targeted delivery of
subsidies, benefits and services” for which the expenditure is incurred from
the Consolidated Fund to resident individuals. Section 7 of the Act makes the
proof of possession of Aadhaar number or Aadhaar authentication as a mandatory
condition for receipt of a subsidy, benefit or service, which incurs
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. The scope of Section 7 is
very wide. It leaves the door open for the government to route more benefits,
subsidies and services through the Consolidated Fund of India and expand the
scope of Aadhaar. Any activity of the government paid for from the
Consolidated Fund of India ranging from supply of subsidised grains and LPG,
to use of roads and civic amenities, healthcare, and even rebates to tax
payers could come under such an umbrella. The scope of Section 7 could cover
every basic aspect of the lives of citizens. The marginalized sections of
society, who largely depend upon government’s social security schemes and
other welfare programmes for survival could be denied basic living conditions
because of a mismatch in biometric algorithms. The notifications issued by
government under Section 7 of the Act, which require mandatory proof of
possession of an Aadhaar number or requiring authentication, cover 252
schemes, including schemes for children (such as benefits under the Sarva
Shiksha Abhiyan or getting meals under the Mid-day meal scheme, painting  339
PART H and essay competitions for children, scholarships on merit), schemes
relating to rehabilitation of bonded labour and human trafficking, scholarship
schemes for SC/ST students, universal access to tuberculosis care, pensions,
schemes relating to labour and employment, skill development, personnel and
training, agriculture and farmers’ welfare, primary and higher education,
social justice, benefits for persons with disabilities, women and child
development, rural development, food distribution, healthcare, panchayati raj,
chemicals & fertilizers, water resources, petroleum and natural gas, science
and technology, sanitation, textiles, urban development, minority affairs,
road transport, culture, tourism, urban housing, tribal affairs and stipends
for internship for students. The list is ever expanding and is endless. These
notifications cover a large number of facilities provided by the government to
its citizens. Every conceivable facility can be brought under the rubric of
Section 7. From delivery to deliverance, almost every aspect of the cycle of
life would be governed by the logic of Aadhaar. 247 When Aadhaar is seeded
into every database, it becomes a bridge across discreet data silos, which
allows anyone with access to this information to re-construct a profile of an
individual’s life. It must be noted while Section 2(k) of the Aadhaar Act
excludes storage of individual information related to race, religion, caste,
tribe, ethnicity, language, income or medical history into CIDR, the mandatory
linking of Aadhaar with various schemes allows the same result in effect. For
instance, when an individual from a particular caste  340 PART H engaged in
manual scavenging is rescued and in order to take benefit of rehabilitation
schemes, she/he has to link the Aadhaar number with the scheme, the effect is
that a profile as that of a person engaged in manual scavenging is created in
the scheme database. The stigma of being a manual scavenger gets permanently
fixed to her/his identity. What the Aadhaar Act seeks to exclude specifically
is done in effect by the mandatory linking of Aadhaar numbers with different
databases, under cover of the delivery of benefits and services.

Moreover, the absence of proof of an Aadhaar number would render a resident
non-existent in the eyes of the State, and would deny basic facilities to such
residents. Section 7 thus makes a direct impact on the lives of citizens. If
the requirement of Aadhaar is made mandatory for every benefit or service
which the government provides, it is impossible to live in contemporary India
without Aadhaar. It suffers from the vice of being overbroad. The scope of
subsidies provided by the government (which incur expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund) is not the same as that of other benefits and services
which the government provides to its citizens. Therefore, benefits and
services cannot be measured with the same yardstick as subsidies. The
inclusion of services and benefits in Section 7 is a pre- cursor to the kind
of function creep which is inconsistent with privacy and informational self-
determination. The broad definitions of the expressions ‘services and
‘benefits’ would enable government to regulate almost every  341 PART H facet
of its engagement with citizens under the Aadhaar platform. Section 7 suffers
from clear overbreadth in its uncanalised application to services and
benefits.

248 The open-ended nature of the provisions of Section 7 is apparent from the
definition of ‘benefit’ in Section 2(f) and of ‘service’ in Section 2(w).
‘Benefit’ is defined to mean any advantage, gift, reward, relief or payment in
cash or kind provided to an individual or a group of individuals. ‘Service’ is
defined to mean any provision, facility, utility, or any other assistance
provided in any form to an individual or a group of individuals. These are
broad and unstructured terms under which the government can cover the entire
gamut of its activities involving an interface with the citizen. The provision
has made no requirement to determine whether in the first place biometric
identification is necessary in each case and whether a less intrusive modality
should suffice. Both the definitions include such other services as may be
notified by the Central government. The residuary clause is vague and
ambiguous and leaves it to the Central government at its uncharted discretion
to expand on what benefits and services would be covered by the legislation.
The manner in which these definitions have been expansively applied to cover a
wide range of activities is attributable to the vagueness implicit in Section
7. Can the provisions of Section 7 be applied with any justification to
pensions payable on account of the past service rendered by a person to the
state?  342 PART H Pension, it is well settled, is not a largesse or bounty
conferred by the state. Pension, as a condition of service, attaches as a
recompense for the long years of service rendered by an individual to the
state and its instrumentalities. Pensioners grow older with passing age. Many
of them suffer from the tribulations of old age including the loss of
biometrics. It is unfair and arbitrary on the part of the state to deny
pension to a person entitled to it by linking pensionary payments to the
possession of an Aadhaar number or to its authentication. A right cannot be
denied on the anvil of requiring one and only one means of identification. The
pension disbursing authority is entitled to lay down regulations (which are
generally speaking, already in place) to ensure the disbursal of pension to
the person who is rightfully entitled. This aim of the government can be
fulfilled by other less intrusive measures. The requirement of insisting on an
Aadhaar number for the payment of pensionary benefits involves a breach of the
principle of proportionality. Such a requirement would clearly be contrary to
the mandate of Article 14. Similarly, the state as a part of its welfare
obligations provides numerous benefits to school going children, including
mid-day meals or scholarships, to children belonging to the marginalised
segments of the society. Should the disbursal of these benefits be made to
depend upon a young child obtaining an Aadhaar number or undergoing the
process of authentication? The object of the state is to ensure that the
benefits which it offers are being availed of by genuine students who are
entitled to them. This legitimate aim can be fulfilled  343 PART H by adopting
less intrusive measures as opposed to the mandatory enforcement of the Aadhaar
scheme as the sole repository of identification. The state has failed to
demonstrate that a less intrusive measure other than biometric authentication
will not subserve its purposes. That the state has been able to insist on
adherence to the Aadhaar scheme without exception is a result of the
overbreadth of Section 7. Consequently, the inclusion of benefits and services
in Section 7 suffers from a patent ambiguity, vagueness and overbreadth which
renders the inclusion of services and benefits arbitrary and violative of
Article 14.

249 Various entities are involved in the Aadhaar project. Their inter-
dependencies require a greater onus to be put on them so as to match privacy
and security requirements. The architecture of Aadhaar treats individuals as
data. However, the core must be about personhood. The architecture of Aadhaar
is destroyed by a lack of transparency, accountability and limitations.
Safeguards for protection of individual rights ought to have been explicitly
guaranteed by design and default.450 The presence of accountability and
transparency within the Aadhaar architecture ought to be a necessary
requirement so as to overcome the fear of the loss of privacy and liberty.
Without these safeguards, the legislation and its architecture cannot pass
muster under proportionality.

450 Shankkar Aiyar, Aadhaar: A Biometric History of India’s 12-Digit
Revolution, Westland (2017), at page 226  344 PART H It is also important to
highlight that identity is a vital facet of personality and hence of the right
to life under Article 21 of the Constitution. Identity is essential and
inalienable to human relationships and in the dealings of an individual with
the State. The notion that individuals possess only one, or at the least, a
dominant identity is not sound constitutional principle. The Constitution has
been adopted for a nation of plural cultures. It is accepting of diversity in
every walk of life. Diversity of identity is an expression of the plurality
which constitutes the essence of our social culture. Amartya Sen in ‘The
Argumentative Indian’451 demonstrates the untenability of the notion that
identity is exclusive. He rejects the notion of an exclusive identity as
“preposterous”, observing that in different settings, individuals rely upon
and assert varying identities:

> “Each of us invokes identities of various kinds in disparate contexts. The
> same person can be of Indian origin, a Parsee, a French citizen, a US
> resident, a woman, a poet, a vegetarian, an anthropologist, a university
> professor, a Christian, a bird watcher, and an avid believer in extra-

terrestrial life and of the propensity of alien creatures to ride around the
cosmos in multicoloured UFOs. Each of these collectivities, to all of which
this person belongs, gives him or her a particular identity. They can all have
relevance, depending on the context.”452 Sen’s logic, drawn from how
individuals express their personalities in the real world, has a strong
constitutional foundation. In the protection which it grants to a diverse set
of liberties and freedoms, the Constitution allows for the assertion of
different identities. The exercise of each freedom may generate a distinct
identity. Combinations of freedoms are compatible with composite 451 Amartya
Sen, The Argumentative Indian, Penguin (2005), at page 350 452 Ibid, at page
350  345 PART H identities. Sen also rejects the notion that individuals
“discover their identities with little room for choice”. The support for such
a notion, as he observes, comes from communitarian philosophy, according to
which identity precedes choice:

> “As Professor Michael Sandel has explained this claim (among other
> communitarian claims) : ‘community describes not just what they have as
> fellow citizens but also what they are, not a relationship they choose (as
> in a voluntary association) but an attachment they discover, not merely an
> attribute but a constituent of their identity In this view, identity comes
> before reasoning and choice.”453 Sen rejects the above idea on the ground
> that it does not reflect a universally valid principle. Undoubtedly, some
> identities are ‘given’. But even here, as Sen explains, the issue is not
> whether an identity can be selected by an individual in all cases but
> whether the individual has a choice over the relative weight to be ascribed
> to different identities:

> “The point at issue is not whether any identity whatever can be chosen (that
> would be an absurd claim), but whether we have choices over alternative
> identities or combinations of identities, and perhaps more importantly,
> whether we have some freedom in deciding what priority to give to the
> various identities that we may simultaneously have. People’s choices may be
> constrained by the recognition that they are, say, Jewish or Muslim, but
> there is still a decision to be made by them regarding what importance they
> give to that particular identity over others that they may also have
> (related, for example, to their political beliefs, sense of nationality,
> humanitarian commitments or professional attachments).”454 Sen reasons that
> identity is a plural concept and the relevance of different identities
> depends on the contexts in which they are asserted:

> 453 Ibid, at page 350 454 Ibid, at page 351  346 PART H “Identity is thus a
> quintessentially plural concept, with varying relevance of different
> identities in distinct contexts. And, most importantly, we have choice over
> what significance to attach to our different identities. There is no escape
> from reasoning just because the notion of identity has been invoked. Choices
> over identities do involve constraints and connections, but the choices that
> exist and have to be made are real, not illusory. In particular, the choice
> of priorities between different identities, including what relative weights
> to attach to their respective demands, cannot be only a matter of discovery.

They are inescapably decisional, and demand reason-not just recognition.”455
250 The Constitution recognizes, through the rights which it protects, a
multitude of identities and the myriad forms of its expression. Our political
identities as citizens define our relationship with the nation state. The
rights which the Constitution recognizes as fundamental liberties constitute a
reflection of the identity of the self. As we speak, so we profess who we are.
An artist who paints, the writer who shares a thought, the musician who
composes, the preacher who influences our spirituality and the demagogue who
launches into human sensibilities are all participants in the assertion of
identity. In this participative process, the identities of both the performer
and the audience are continuously engaged. Identity at a constitutional level
is reflected in the entitlement of every individual, protected by its values,
to lead a way of life which defines the uniqueness of our beings. The
Constitution recognizes a multitude of identities, based on the liberties
which it recognizes as an inseparable part of our beings. To be human is to
have a multitude of identities and be guaranteed the right to express it in
various forms. The state 455 Ibid, at page 352  347 PART H which must abide by
a written Constitution cannot require any person to forsake one or more
identities. Constitutional freedoms compel the state to respect them.

251 Technologies that affect how our identities function must be subject to
constitutional norms. The existence of individual identity is the core of a
constitutional democracy. Addressing the Constituent Assembly on 4th November
1948, Dr B.R. Ambedkar had emphasised on the importance of individual identity
in our constitutional framework:

“I am glad that the Draft Constitution has… adopted the individual as its
unit.”456 Having an individual identity is an important part of the human
condition. The negation of identity is the loss of personhood, which in turn
affects the freedom of choice and free will. Personhood constructs democracy.
It represents the quality of democracy. Our decided cases have recognized the
intimate relationship between human liberty and identity. The traveller in
Maneka Gandhi v Union of India457, the employee complaining of sexual
harassment in Vishaka v State of Rajasthan458, the guardian of the minor in
Githa Hariharan (Ms) v Reserve Bank of India459, the bar employee in Anuj Garg
v Hotel Association of India460, the transgender in National Legal 456
Constituent Assembly Debates (4 November, 1948) 457 (1978) 1 SCC 248 458
(1997) 6 SCC 241 459 (1999) 2 SCC 228 460 (2008) 3 SCC 1  348 PART H Services
Authority v Union of India461, the tribal worker in Madhu Kishwar v State of
Bihar462 and the oppressed victim of state violence in Nandini Sundar v State
of Chattisgarh463 are all engaged in the assertion of identity. Puttaswamy
recognizes the role of the individual as “the core of constitutional focus”
and “the focal point of the Constitution”. Justice Kaul’s concurring opinion
recognised that the individual has the right to control her identity.464 It
was submitted by the petitioners that a unique identity number infringes the
identity of the individual since it reduces every resident to a number.
Ascribing to the holder of an Aadhaar card, a unique identity number must not
infringe constitutional identities. The Aadhaar Act indicates, in its
Statement of Objects and Reasons, that correct identification of targeted
beneficiaries is necessary and that a failure to establish the identity of an
individual is a major hindrance in the disbursal of welfare benefits. Section
3(1) recognizes the entitlement of every resident to obtain an Aadhaar number.
Section 4(3) provides that an Aadhaar number may be accepted as proof of
identity. Section 7(1) indicates that its purpose is for establishing the
identity of an individual for the receipt of services, benefits or subsidies
drawn from the Consolidated Fund. These provisions cannot be allowed to
displace constitutional identities. Nor can the provisions of Section 7 reduce
an individual to a nameless or faceless person. 461 (2014) 5 SCC 438 462
(1996) 5 SCC 125 463 (2011) 7 SCC 547 464 Ibid  349 PART H 252 Aadhaar is
about identification and is an instrument which facilitates a proof of
identity. It must not obliterate constitutional identity. The definition of
demographic information in Section 2(k) excludes race, religion, caste, tribe,
ethnicity, language, records of entitlement, income or medical history.
However, as has been specifically discussed before, the linking of the Aadhaar
number to different databases is capable of profiling an individual, which
could include information regarding her/his race, religion, caste, tribe,
ethnicity, language, records of entitlement, income or medical history. Thus,
the impact of technology is such that the scheme of Aadhaar can reduce
different constitutional identities into a single identity of a 12-digit
number and infringe the right of an individual to identify herself/himself
with choice. 253 Social security schemes and programmes are a medium of
existence of a large segment of society. Social security schemes in India,
such as the PDS, were introduced to protect the dignity of the marginalized.
Exclusion from these schemes defeats the rationale for the schemes which is to
overcome chronic hunger and malnutrition. Exclusion is violative of human
dignity. As discussed previously in detail, the statistics recorded in
government records and the affidavits filed by the petitioners point out
glaring examples of exclusion due to technical errors in Aadhaar. The
authentication failures in the Aadhaar scheme have caused severe disruptions
particularly in rural India. Exclusion as a consequence of biometric devices
has a disproportionate impact on the lives of the marginalized and poor. This
Court  350 PART H cannot turn a blind eye to the rights of the marginalized.
It may be the fashion of the day to advance the cause of a digital nation.
Technology is undoubtedly an enabler. It has become a universal unifier of our
age. Yet, the interface between technology and basic human rights cannot be
oblivious to social reality. Compulsive linking of biometrics to
constitutional entitlements should not result in denial to the impoverished.
There exists a digital divide. To railroad those on one side of that divide
unconcerned about social and technical constraints which operate in society is
to defeat the purpose of social welfare. The Court has to be specifically
conscious of the dignity of the underprivileged. The Court must fulfill its
role of protecting constitutional values even if it affects a small percentage
of the population. The exclusion errors in this case have led to grave
injustice to the marginalized. The Court, therefore, has to play an active
role in protecting their dignity. 254 The institution of rights places a heavy
onus on the State to justify its restrictions. No right can be taken away on
the whims and fancies of the State. The State has failed to justify its
actions and to demonstrate why facilitating the targeted delivery of
subsidies, which promote several rights such as the right to food for
citizens, automatically entails a sacrifice of the right to privacy when both
these rights are protected by the Constitution. One right cannot be taken away
at the behest of the other especially when the State has been unable to
satisfy this Court that the two rights are mutually exclusive. The State has
been unable to respond to the contention of the  351 PART H petitioners that
it has failed to consider that there were much less rights- invasive measures
that could have furthered its goals. The burden of proof on the State was to
demonstrate that the right to food and other entitlements provided through the
Aadhaar scheme could not have been secured without the violating the
fundamental rights of privacy and dignity. Dworkin in his classical book
“Taking Rights Seriously”, while answering the question whether some rights
are so important that the State is justified in doing all it can to maintain
even if it abridges other rights, states that:

> “But no society that purports to recognize a variety of rights, on the
> ground that a man’s dignity or equality may be invaded in a variety of ways,
> can accept such a principle… If rights make sense, then the degrees of their
> importance cannot be so different that some count not at all when others are
> mentioned.”465 (Emphasis supplied) 255 There is no antinomy between the
> right to privacy and the legitimate goals of the State. An invasion of
> privacy has to be proportional to and carefully tailored for achieving a
> legitimate aim. While the right to food is an important right and its
> promotion is a constitutional obligation of the State, yet the right to
> privacy cannot simply and automatically yield to it. No legitimate goal of
> the State can be allowed at the cost of infringement of a fundamental right
> without passing the test of constitutionality. While analysing the
> architecture of Aadhaar, this Court has demonstrated how the purported
> safeguards in the Aadhaar architecture are inadequate to protect the
> integrity of personal data, the right of informational self-determination
> and above all rights attributable to the privacy-dignity-autonomy trilogy.
> It is also concluded 465 Ronald Dworkin, Taking Rights Seriously (1977), at
> pages 203-204  352 PART H that the Aadhaar scheme is capable of destroying
> different constitutional identities. The financial exclusion caused due to
> errors in Aadhaar based authentication violate the individual’s right to
> dignity. The Aadhaar scheme causes an unwarranted intrusion into fundamental
> freedoms guaranteed under the Indian Constitution since the respondents have
> failed to demonstrate that these measures satisfy the test of necessity and
> proportionality.

H.5 Dignity and financial exclusion 256 Our jurisprudence reflects a keen
awareness of the need to achieve dignity. The nine judge Bench decision in
Puttaswamy also emphasized the seminal value of dignity in our constitutional
scheme. Human dignity is a strengthening bond in the relationship between
Parts III and IV of the Constitution. Reading the Directive Principles
contained in Part IV in the context of the right to life (in Part III of the
Constitution) has significant implications both for the substantive content of
the right and on the ability of the state in pursuit of its positive
obligation to secure conditions of a dignified existence. Dignity is an
integral element of natural law and an inalienable constitutional construct.
To lead a dignified life is a constitutional assurance to an individual. Dr
Ambedkar conceptualized four basic premises on which a political democracy can
rest:

“Political Democracy rests on four premises which may be set out in the
following terms:

    
    
    
                                               353
                                                                                                      PART H
    
    
                    (i)      The individual is an end in himself.
                    (ii)     That the individual has certain inalienable rights which
    

must be guaranteed to him by the Constitution.

(iii) That the individual shall not be required to relinquish any of his
constitutional rights as a condition precedent to the receipt of a privilege.

(iv) That the State shall not delegate powers to private persons to govern
others.”466 (Emphasis supplied) Interpreting the words of Dr Ambedkar in a
constitutional context, any action on the part of the State which forces an
individual to part with her or his dignity or any other right under Part III
will not be permissible. 257 The experience of living with chronic hunger;
recurring uncertainty about the availability of food; debt bondage; low and
highly underpaid work; self-denial; and sacrifice of other survival needs,
being discriminated against467 are instances of the loss of dignity for the
marginalized. The State has social security programmes and legislation to
improve the living conditions of the marginalized and to protect their dignity
and means of livelihood. However, as documented in the works of Sainath,
Dreze, Sen and other authors, India has “utterly poor standards of the social
services provided to common folk, whether it is the Mid-day Meal Scheme, the
Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan, Integrated Child Development Services, Public
Distribution system, healthcare at the primary health centres, district
hospitals and even public 466Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar: Writings and Speeches
(Vol. 1), Dr. Ambedkar Foundation (2014) 467Harsh Mander, Living with Hunger:
Deprivation among the Aged, Single Women and People with Disability, Economic
& Political Weekly (April 26, 2008), Vol. 43, available at
https://www.epw.in/journal/2008/17/special-articles/living-hunger-deprivation-
among-aged-single-women-and- people  354 PART H hospitals in the state
capitals”468. This manner of addressing the deprivations faced by the
marginalized crushes their dignity. Any action or inaction on the part of the
State which is insensitive to and unconcerned about protecting the dignity of
the marginalized is constitutionally impermissible. Denial of benefits arising
out of any social security scheme which promotes socio-economic rights of the
marginalized, would not be legitimate under the Constitution, for the reason
that such denial violates human dignity. No individual can be made to part
with his or her dignity. Responsibility for protection of dignity lies not
only with governments but also with individuals, groups and entities.

It is in the above background that this Court must deal with the next
contention of the petitioners. The submission of the petitioners is that
identity recognition technology may be based on a system which is
deterministic or probabilistic. Biometric authentication systems work on a
probabilistic model. For the purposes of authentication, a comparison is
through a template which reduces the finger print to a scale and then, a
minutea. The claim of the petitioners is that as a result, identities are
reduced from certainty to a chance. 468Dignity, Not Mere Roti, Economic &
Political Weekly (10 August, 2013), Vol. 48, available at
https://www.epw.in/journal/2013/32/editorials/dignity-not-mere-roti.html  355
PART H 258 Section 7 of the Aadhaar Act makes it mandatory for an individual
to undergo authentication or furnish proof of possession of an Aadhaar number
in order to avail a subsidy, benefit or service, which incurs expenditure from
the Consolidated Fund of India. In the Aadhaar based Biometric Authentication,
the Aadhaar number and biometric information submitted by an Aadhaar number
holder are matched with the biometric information stored in the CIDR. This may
be fingerprints-based or iris-based authentication or other biometric
modalities based on biometric information stored in the CIDR.469 It has been
submitted that failure of the authentication process results in denial of a
subsidy, benefit or service contemplated under Section 7 of the Act. It has
been contended that non-enrolment in the Aadhaar scheme and non-linking of the
Aadhaar number with the benefit, subsidy or service causes exclusion of
eligible beneficiaries. It is the submission of the petitioners that
authentication of biometrics is faulty, as biometrics are probabilistic in
nature. It is the case of the petitioners that Aadhaar based biometric
authentication often results in errors and thus leads to exclusion of
individuals from subsidies, benefits and services provided under Section 7.
Across the country, it has been urged, several persons are losing out on
welfare entitlements because of a biometric mis-match. Mr Divan has argued in
his written submissions, that “the project is not an ‘identity’ project but
‘identification’ 469 UIDAI, Aadhaar Authentication, available at
https://uidai.gov.in/authentication.html  356 PART H exercise and unless the
biometrics work, a person in flesh and blood, does not exist for the state”.

In order to deal with this contention, it is necessary to understand whether
biometrics authentication can result in errors in matching. People are
identified by three basic means: “by something they know, something they have,
or something they are”.470 Biometrics fall within the last category, and, as
such, should presumably be less susceptible to being copied or forged.
However, various factors can reduce the probability of accurate human
identification, and this increases the probability of a mismatch. Human
fallibility can produce errors.471 259 In the United States of America, the
National Academy of Science published a report in 2010 on biometrics titled
“Biometric Recognition: Challenges & Opportunities”472. The report was based
on a study carried out by several reputed scientists and researchers under the
aegis of the National Research Council, the National Academy of Engineering
and the Institute of Medicine. This report highlights the nature of biometrics
as follows:

> “Biometric recognition systems are inherently probabilistic and their
> performance needs to be assessed within the context of this fundamental and
> critical characteristic. Biometric recognition involves matching, within
> 470United States General Accounting Office, Technology Assessment: Using
> Biometrics for Border Security (2002), available at
> http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d03174.pdf.

471Jeremy Wickins, The ethics of biometrics: the risk of social exclusion from
the widespread use of electronic identification, Science & Engineering Ethics
(2007), at pages 45-54 472Biometric Recognition: Challenges & Opportunities
(Joseph N. Pato and Lynette I. Millett eds.), National Academy of Science-
United States of America (2010), available at
https://www.nap.edu/read/12720/chapter/1  357 PART H a tolerance of
approximation, of observed biometric traits against previously collected data
for a subject. Approximate matching is required due to the variations in
biological attributes and behaviors both within and between persons.”473
(Emphasis supplied) The report also took note of how changes in an
individual’s biometrics may occur due to a number of factors:

> “Biometric characteristics and the information captured by biometric systems
> can be affected by changes in age, environment, disease, stress,
> occupational factors, training and prompting, intentional alterations,
> socio- cultural aspects of the situation in which the presentations occurs,
> changes in human interface with the system, and so on. As a result, each
> interaction of the individual with the system (at enrolment, identification
> and so on) will be associated with different biometric information.

Individuals attempting to thwart recognition for one reason or another also
contribute to the inherent uncertainty in biometric systems.”474 (Emphasis
supplied) The report had also stated that biometrics can result in exclusion
of people if it is used for claiming entitlement to a benefit:

> “When used in contexts where individuals are claiming enrollment or
> entitlement to a benefit, biometric systems could disenfranchise people who
> are unable to participate for physical, social, or cultural reasons. For
> these reasons, the use of biometrics—especially in applications driven by
> public policy, where the affected population may have little alternative to
> participation—merits careful oversight and public discussion to anticipate
> and minimize detrimental societal and individual effects and to avoid
> violating privacy and due process rights.

Social, cultural, and legal issues can affect a system’s acceptance by users,
its performance, or the decisions on whether to use it in the first place—so
it is best to consider these explicitly in system design. Clearly, the
behavior of those being enrolled and recognized can influence the accuracy and
effectiveness of virtually any biometric system, 473 Ibid, at page 3 474 Ibid
358 PART H and user behavior can be affected by the social, cultural, or legal
context. Likewise, the acceptability of a biometric system depends on the
social and cultural values of the participant populations.”475 (Emphasis
supplied) The report underlines that the relationship between an individual’s
biometric traits and data records has the potential to cause
disenfranchisement, when a section of the population is excluded from the
benefits of positive claim systems. The report thus states that:

> “Policies and interfaces to handle error conditions such as failure to
> enroll or be recognized should be designed to gracefully avoid violating the
> dignity, privacy, or due process rights of the participants.” (Emphasis
> supplied) 260 Els Kindt in a comprehensive research titled “Privacy and Data
> Protection Issues of Biometric Applications: A Comparative Legal
> Analysis”476, deals with the nature of biometrics. The book notes that error
> rates in biometric systems lead to a situation where entitled data subjects
> will be falsely rejected from the process of database matching. This will
> adversely affect the rights of individuals. It has been observed that:

> “The error rates imply also that the system will allow impostors. This is
> equally important because the security of biometric systems should be
> questioned in case of high false accept rates. This element should be given
> sufficient weight in the decision to implement a biometric system for
> security purposes… Other tests clearly indicated increased error rates for
> young persons, in case of aging, in particular for face and for disabled
> persons. Individuals with health problems may also be falsely rejected or no
> longer be recognized, although they 475Ibid, at pages 10-11 476 Els J.
> Kindt, Privacy and Data Protection Issues of Biometric Applications: A
> Comparative Legal Analysis, Springer (2013)  359 PART H were previously
> enrolled. In some cases, (non-)enrolment will be a significant problem. It
> is clear that these data subjects need additional protection.”477 The book
> underlines the risk inherent in the limited accuracy of biometrics.478 261 A
> recently published book titled “Automating Inequality: How High-

> Tech Tools Profile, Police, and Punish the Poor”479, authored by Virginia
> Eubanks, deals with the impact of data mining, policy algorithms, and
> predictive risk models on economic inequality and democracy in America.

Eubanks outlines the impacts of automated decision-making on public services
in the USA through three case studies relating to welfare provision,
homelessness and child protection services. Eubanks looks at these three areas
in three different parts of the United States: Indiana, Los Angeles and
Pittsburgh, to examine what technological automation has done in determining
benefits and the problems it causes. The author records that in Indiana, one
million applications for health care, food stamps, and cash benefits in three
years were denied, because a new authentication system interpreted any
application mistake as “failure to cooperate”. In Los Angeles, an algorithm
calculates the comparative vulnerability of thousands of homeless people so as
to prioritize them for an inadequate pool of housing resources. In Pittsburgh,
child services use an algorithm to predict future behaviour. Statistics are
used to predict which children might be future victims of abuse 477 Ibid, at
page 363 478 Ibid 479 Virginia Eubanks, Automating Inequality: How High-Tech
Tools Profile, Police, and Punish the Poor, St. Martin's Press (2018)  360
PART H or neglect. Eubanks shows how algorithms have taken over for human
interaction and understanding. She has argued that automated decision- making
is much wider in reach and is likely to have repercussions unknown to non-
digital mechanisms, such as nineteenth-century poorhouses in America.
Poorhouses were tax-supported residential institutions to which people were
required to go if they could not support themselves. 480 People who could not
support themselves (and their families) were put up for bid at public auction.
The person who got the contract (which was for a specific time-frame) got the
use of the labour of the poor individual(s) for free in return for feeding,
clothing, housing and providing health care for the individual and his/her
family. The practice was a form of indentured servitude and hardly had any
recourse for protection against abuse. Eubanks considers the technology based
decision-making for poverty management as the extension of the poorhouses of
the 19th century:

> “America’s poor and working-class people have long been subject to invasive
> surveillance, midnight raids, and punitive public policy that increase the
> stigma and hardship of poverty. During the nineteenth century, they were
> quarantined in county poorhouses. During the twentieth century, they were
> investigated by caseworkers, treated like criminals on trial. Today, we have
> forged what I call a digital poorhouse from databases, algorithms, and risk
> models. It promises to eclipse the reach and repercussions of everything
> that came before.

Like earlier technological innovations in poverty management, digital tracking
and automated decision-making hide poverty from the professional middle-class
public and give the nation the ethical distance it needs to make inhuman
choices: who gets food and who starves, who has housing and who remains
homeless, and which families are broken by the state. The digital poorhouse is
a part of a long American 480 Tommy L. Gardner, Spending Your Way to the
Poorhouse, Authorhouse (2004), at page 221  361 PART H tradition. We manage
the individual poor in order to escape our shared responsibility for
eradicating poverty.”481 The author further remarks:

> “While poorhouses have been physically demolished, their legacy remains
> alive and well in the automated decision-

making systems that encage and entrap today's poor. For all their high-tech
polish, our modern systems of poverty management - automated decision-making,
data mining, and predictive analysis - retain a remarkable kinship with the
poorhouses of the past. Our new digital tools spring from punitive, moralistic
views of poverty and create a system of high-tech containment and
investigation. The digital poorhouse deters the poor from accessing public
resources; polices their labor, spending, sexuality, and parenting; tries to
predict their future behavior; and punishes and criminalizes those who do not
comply with its dictates. In the process, it creates ever-finer moral
distinctions between the 'deserving' and 'undeserving' poor, categorizations
that rationalize our national failure to care for one another.”482 (Emphasis
supplied) Eubanks builds the argument that automated decision-making
technology does not act as a facilitator for welfare schemes for the poor and
only acts as a gatekeeper:

> “New high-tech tools allow for more precise measuring and tracking, better
> sharing of information, and increased visibility of targeted populations. In
> a system dedicated to supporting poor and working-class people's self-
> determination, such diligence would guarantee that they attain all the
> benefits they are entitled to by law. In that context, integrated data and
> modernized administration would not necessarily result in bad outcomes for
> poor communities. But automated decision-

making in our current welfare system acts a lot like older, atavistic forms of
punishment and containment. It filters and diverts. It is a gatekeeper, not a
facilitator.”483 481 Virginia Eubanks, Automating Inequality: How High-Tech
Tools Profile, Police, and Punish the Poor, St. Martin's Press (2018), at
pages 12-13 482 Ibid, at page 16 483 Ibid, at pages 81-82  362 PART H The crux
of the book is reflected in the following extract:

> “We all live in the digital poorhouse. We have always lived in the world we
> built for the poor. We create a society that has no use for the disabled or
> the elderly, and then are cast aside when we are hurt or grow old. We
> measure human worth based only on the ability to earn a wage, and suffer in
> a world that undervalues care and community. We base our economy on
> exploiting the labor of racial and ethnic minorities, and watch lasting
> inequities snuff out human potential. We see the world as inevitably riven
> by bloody competition and are left unable to recognize the many ways we
> cooperate and lift each other up.

But only the poor lived in the common dorms of the county poorhouse. Only the
poor were put under the diagnostic microscope of scientific clarity. Today, we
all live among the digital traps we have laid for the destitute.”484 (Emphasis
supplied) Automating Inequality demonstrates the problems with authentication
and algorithmic technology and indicates that the system, which was intended
to provide assistance for the short term and help people out of poverty, has
become a system to perpetuate poverty and injustice. 262 Errors in biometrics
matching imply that an individual will not be considered a part of the
biometrics database. If a benefit or service is subject to the matching of
biometrics, then any mismatch would result in a denial of that benefit or
service. Exclusion based on technological errors, with no fault of the
individual, is a violation of dignity. The fate of individuals cannot be left
to the vulnerabilities of technological algorithms or devices. ‘To live is to
live 484 Ibid, at page 188  363 PART H with dignity’.485 Arbitrary exclusion
from entitled benefits or subsidies is a violation of dignity. If any such
project has to survive, then it has to be ensured that individual dignity is
protected. These concerns have to be addressed. As mentioned earlier, concerns
regarding the application of biometrics in the Aadhaar project were discussed
in 2009 by the Biometrics Standards Committee of UIDAI486, which was of the
view that the large magnitude of the Aadhaar project raised uncertainty about
the accuracy of biometrics. 487 The Strategy Overview488 published by UIDAI,
in 2010, had discussed the risks associated with biometrics perceived by UIDAI
itself. Under the heading of ‘Project Risk’, the overview stated the UID
project does face certain risks in its implementation, which have to be
addressed through its architecture and in the design of its incentives. It
stated:

> “1) Adoption Risks: There will have to be sufficient, early demand from
> residents for the UID number. Without critical mass among key demographic
> groups (the rural and the poor) the number will not be successful in the
> long term. To ensure this, the UIDAI will have to model de-duplication and
> authentication to be both effective and viable for participating agencies
> and service providers…

> 3) Enrolment Risks: The project will have to be carefully designed to
> address risks of low enrolment – such as creating sufficient touch points in
> rural areas, enabling and motivating Registrars, ensuring that documentary
> requirements don't derail enrolment in disadvantaged communities – as well
> as managing difficulties in address verification, name standards, lack of
> information on date of birth, and hard to record fingerprints.

485 Puttaswamy, at para 119 486 UIDAI Committee on Biometrics, Biometrics
Design Standards For UID Applications, at page 4 487 Ibid 488 UIDAI, UIDAI
Strategy Overview, (2010), available at
http://www.prsindia.org/uploads/media/UID/UIDAI%20STRATEGY%20OVERVIEW.pdf  364
PART H

4) Risks of Scale: The project will have to handle records that approach one
billion in number. This creates significant risks in biometric de-duplication
as well as in administration, storage, and continued expansion of
infrastructure.

5) Technology risks: Technology is a key part of the UID program, and this is
the first time in the world that storage, authentication and de-duplication of
biometrics are being attempted on this scale. The authority will have to
address the risks carefully – by choosing the right technology in the
architecture, biometrics, and data management tools; managing obsolescence and
data quality; designing the transaction services model and innovating towards
the best possible result.

6) Privacy and security risks: The UIDAI will have to ensure that resident
data is not shared or compromised.”489 (Emphasis supplied) Technological error
would result in authentication failures. The concerns raised by UIDAI ought to
have been resolved before the implementation of the Aadhaar project. Poor
connectivity in rural India was a major concern. The majority of the Indian
population lives in rural areas. Even a small percentage of error results in a
population of crores being affected. Denial of subsidies and benefits to them
due to the infirmities of biometric technology is a threat to good governance
and social parity.

263 The issue of exclusion needs to be considered at three different levels:

(i) before the implementation of the Aadhaar Act, when biometrics were being
used since 2009; (ii) under the provisions of the Act; and (iii) at the
practical level during the implementation of the Aadhaar programme. 489 Ibid,
at page 38  365 PART H Before the enactment of the Aadhaar Act in 2016, the
Standing Committee on Finance, which examined the NIA Bill, was concerned
about the impact of Aadhaar on marginalized sections of society. Since the
availing of subsidies and benefits was to depend upon Aadhaar based
authentication, any error in the authentication would result in a denial of
the benefits of social security schemes for the marginalized. In 2011, the
report of the Standing Committee noted, thus:

> “The full or near full coverage of marginalized sections for issuing Aadhaar
> numbers could not be achieved mainly owing to two reasons viz. (i) the UIDAI
> doesn’t have the statistical data relating to them; and (ii) estimated
> failure of biometrics is expected to be as high as 15% due to a large chunk
> of population being dependent on manual labour.”490 (Emphasis supplied) The
> Economic Survey 2016-17 has adverted to authentication failures while
> discussing the concept of Universal Basic Income (UBI). The Survey, which is
> an official document of the Union government, states that UBI is premised on
> the idea that a just society needs to guarantee to each individual a minimum
> income which they can count on, and which provides the necessary material
> foundation for a life with access to basic goods and a life of dignity.491
> UBI was to be implemented by providing cash transfers (for availing benefits
> of social security schemes) to the bank accounts of beneficiaries. The
> implementation of UBI was to be undertaken through what is described as the
> JAM trinity:

490 Forty-Second Report of the Standing Committee on Finance (2011), available
at http://www.prsindia.org/uploads/media/UID/uid%20report.pdf, at page 30 491
Government of India, Economic Survey 2016-17, available at
https://www.thehinducentre.com/multimedia/archive/03193/Economic_Survey_20_3193543a.pdf,
at page 173  366 PART H Jan-Dhan Bank Accounts, Aadhaar data and Mobile
phones. However, the Survey noted that while Aadhaar is designed to solve the
identification problem, it cannot solve the “targeting problem” on its own.
The Survey emphasized the need to build state capacity and that “the state
will still have to enhance its capacities to provide a whole range of public
goods”.492 The Survey has recorded the statistics of authentication failures
of Aadhaar in several regions of the country:

> “While Aadhaar coverage speed has been exemplary, with over a billion
> Aadhaar cards being distributed, some states report authentication failures:
> estimates include 49 percent failure rates for Jharkhand, 6 percent for
> Gujarat, 5 percent for Krishna District in Andhra Pradesh and 37 percent for
> Rajasthan. Failure to identify genuine beneficiaries results in exclusion
> errors.”493 No failure rate in the provision of social welfare benefits can
> be regarded as acceptable. Basic entitlements in matters such as foodgrain,
> can brook no error. To deny food is to lead a family to destitution,
> malnutrition and even death.

264 A recent Office Memorandum dated 19 December 2017 issued by the Cabinet
Secretariat of the Union government494 acknowledges that the Aadhaar enrolment
process has not been completed and that infrastructure constraints are capable
of posing difficulties in online authentication. The Memorandum provides that
those beneficiaries who do not possess Aadhaar, 492 Ibid, at page 174 493
Ibid, at page 194 494 Office Memorandum dated 19 December 2017, available at
https://dbtbharat.gov.in/data/om/Office%20Memorandum_Aadhaar.pdf  367 PART H
shall be provided a subsidy, benefit or service based on alternate
identification documents as contemplated by Section 7 of the Aadhaar Act. It
also requires efforts to be made to ensure that all beneficiaries are
facilitated to get enrolment under the Aadhaar programme. The Memorandum
creates a mechanism for availing subsidies, benefits or services in cases
where Aadhaar authentication fails:

(i) Departments and Bank Branches may make provisions for IRIS scanners along
with fingerprint scanners wherever feasible;

(ii) In cases of failure due to lack of connectivity, offline authentication
systems such as QR code based coupons, Mobile based OTP or TOTP may be
explored; and

(iii) In all cases where online authentication is not feasible, the
benefit/service may be provided on the basis of possession of Aadhaar, after
duly recording the transaction in a register, to be reviewed and audited
periodically.

The figures from the Economic Survey of India indicate that there are millions
of eligible beneficiaries across India who have suffered financial exclusion.
The Cabinet Secretariat has pro-actively acknowledged the need to address
matters of exclusion by implementing alternate modalities, apart from those
set out in Section 7. Options (i) and (ii) above were to be implemented in
future. This exercise should have been undertaken by the government in
advance. Problems have to be anticipated when a project is on the drawing  368
PART H board, not after severe deprivations have been caused by the denial of
social welfare benefits.

265 Exclusion of citizens from availing benefits of social security schemes
because of failures or errors in Aadhaar based biometric authentication has
also been documented in research studies and academic writings published by
members of civil society, including Reetika Khera and Jean Dreze. Similar
testimonies have been recorded in affidavits submitted before this Court by
civil society activists. Hearing the voices of civil society must be an
integral part of the structural design of a project, such as Aadhaar. In the
absence of a credible mechanism to receive and respond to feed-back, the state
has to depend on its own personnel who may not always provide reliable and
candid assessments of performance and failure.

266 ABBA (Aadhaar based biometric authentication) refers to the practice of
installing a Point of Sale (PoS) machine equipped with a fingerprint reader
and authenticating a person each time she accesses her entitlements.495 Dreze
has stated that for successful authentication in PDS outlets, several
technologies need to work simultaneously.496 These are497: 495Reetika Khera,
Impact of Aadhaar on Welfare Programmes, Economic & Political Weekly, Vol. 52
(16 December 2017), available at https://www.epw.in/journal/2017/50/special-
articles/impact-aadhaar-welfare- programmes.html 496Jean Dreze, Dark clouds
over the PDS, The Hindu (10 September 2016), available at
https://www.thehindu.com/opinion/lead/Dark-clouds-over-the-
PDS/article14631030.ece 497 Anmol Somanchi, Srujana Bej, and Mrityunjay
Pandey, Well Done ABBA? Aadhaar and the Public Distribution System in
Hyderabad, Economic & Political Weekly (18 February 2017), Vol. 52, available
at https://www.epw.in/journal/2017/7/web-exclusives/well-done-abba.html  369
PART H

(a) Seeding of Aadhaar numbers: An eligible individual can become a
beneficiary and access the PDS system only if her Aadhaar number is correctly
seeded onto the PDS database and added to the household ration card;

(b) Point of Sale (PoS) machines: The process at the PDS outlet is dependent
on the PoS machine. If it malfunctions, no transaction can be made. The first
step in the process requires the dealer to enter the ration card number of the
beneficiary’s household onto the PoS machine;

(c) Internet connection: Successful working of the PoS machine depends on
internet connectivity as verification of the ration card number and the
beneficiary’s biometric fingerprint is carried out over the internet;

(d) Remote Aadhaar servers: Remote Aadhaar servers verify the ration card
number and initiate fingerprint authentication; and

(e) Fingerprint recognition software: The beneficiary proves her identity by
submitting to fingerprint recognition in the PoS machine. Upon verification,
the PoS machine indicates that the beneficiary is genuine and that foodgrains
can be distributed to her household. The above procedure requires that at the
time of purchase of PDS grains each month, any one person listed on the ration
card needs to authenticate themselves. Similarly, for pensions, elderly
persons must go to the point of delivery to authenticate themselves. Reetika
Khera has observed that since ABBA on PoS machines is currently a monthly
activity, so each of its  370 PART H associated technologies (correct Aadhaar-
seeding, mobile connectivity, electricity, functional PoS machines and UIDAI
servers and fingerprint recognition) needs to work for a person to get their
entitlement.498 Dreze has referred to the above procedure as “a wholly
inappropriate technology for rural India”499. Network failures and other
glitches routinely disable this sort of technology. Dreze has further observed
that in villages with poor connectivity, it is a “recipe for chaos”500.

267 A government-commissioned sample study501 in Andhra Pradesh to ascertain
the efficiency of Aadhaar-based social programmes in the case of subsidised
grains indicated that technical deficiencies are depriving the poor of their
access to food. The study was commissioned by the state government after it
was found that 22% of the PDS beneficiaries did not take the ration in the
month of May 2015. The sample study, which covered five PDS outlets in three
districts, found that half of the beneficiaries of PDS in the surveyed areas
could not access their ration quota due to glitches, lack of training and
mismatches linked to Aadhaar. In the survey, a majority of beneficiaries
reported fingerprint mismatches and the inability of fair-price shop owners to
498 Reetika Khera, Impact of Aadhaar on Welfare Programmes, Economic &
Political Weekly, Vol. 52 (16 December 2017), available at
https://www.epw.in/journal/2017/50/special-articles/impact-aadhaar-welfare-
programmes.html 499Jean Dreze, Dark clouds over the PDS, The Hindu (10
September 2016), available at https://www.thehindu.com/opinion/lead/Dark-
clouds-over-the-PDS/article14631030.ece 500Ibid 501Society for Social Audit,
Accountability and Transparency, FP Shops Left Over Beneficiaries Report,
available at
http://www.socialaudit.ap.gov.in/SocialAudit/LoadDocument?docName=Fair%20Price%20Work%20%20Shops
%20(Ration%20Card%20Holders)%20-%20Beneficiaries%20Report.pdf&type=application.
See also Aadhaar- based projects failing the poor, says Andhra govt study,
Hindustan Times (7 October 2015), available at
https://www.hindustantimes.com/india/aadhaar-based-projects-failing-the-poor-
says-andhra-govt-study/story- 7MFBCeJcfl85Lc5zztON6L.html  371 PART H operate
point-of-sale (POS) devices correctly as major hurdles. Aadhaar numbers did
not match with ration card numbers in many cases. Another survey502 of 80
households conducted in Hyderabad finds that despite the introduction of
technology-intensive authentication and payment systems, a significant number
of those vulnerable and dependent on Public Distribution System (PDS) for food
grains are failing to realise their right to food. The survey revealed that
among 80 surveyed households, 89% reported receiving full entitlements at
correct prices even before the introduction of Aadhaar- based biometric
authentication (ABBA). In contrast, 10% of households were excluded due to
authentication failures due to reported errors with one or more of its five
technological components. 268 An article titled “Aadhaar and Food Security in
Jharkhand: Pain without Gain?”503, based on a household survey in rural
Jharkhand, examines various issues related to compulsory ABBA for availing PDS
benefits. The article notes the impact of PDS on the lives of the rural poor,
who visit the ration shop every month. In “their fragile and uncertain lives”,
the PDS provides a “modicum of food and economic security”. The article notes
that in ABBA, the failure of authentication results in denial of food from
ration shops. The household is unable to get food rations for no fault of its
own. The 502Anmol Somanchi, Srujana Bej, and Mrityunjay Pandey, Well Done
ABBA? Aadhaar and the Public Distribution System in Hyderabad, Economic &
Political Weekly, Vol. 52 (18 February 2017), available at
https://www.epw.in/journal/2017/7/web-exclusives/well-done-abba.html 503Jean
Drèze, Nazar Khalid, Reetika Khera, and Anmol Somanchi, Aadhaar and Food
Security in Jharkhand: Pain without Gain?, Economic & Political Weekly, Vol.
52 (16 December 2017).  372 PART H article comes to the conclusion that the
imposition of ABBA on the PDS in Jharkhand is a case of “pain without gain”,
as it has led to serious problems of exclusion (particularly for vulnerable
groups such as widows, the elderly and manual workers). The article further
notes that ABBA has neither failed to reduce quantity fraud (which is the main
form of PDS corruption in Jharkhand), nor has it helped to address other
critical shortcomings of the PDS in Jharkhand, such as the problem of missing
names in ration cards, the identification of Antyodaya (poorest of the poor)
households, or the arbitrary power of private dealers. The article identifies
poor internet connectivity as one of the reasons for authentication failures
and eventual exclusion:

> “Sporadic internet connectivity is another major hurdle. Sometimes, light
> rain is enough to disrupt connectivity or the electricity supply. Every step
> in the ABBA process—ration card verification, biometric authentication,
> electronic upload of transactions, updating NFSA [National Food Security
> Act] lists and entitlements on the PoS504 [Point of Sale] machine— depends
> on internet connectivity. Further, even with stable connectivity, biometric
> authentication is not always easy.

Biometric failures are especially common for two groups: the elderly, and
manual labourers. Both are particularly vulnerable to food insecurity.”505 The
article regards the denial of basic services to the poor due to failure of
ABBA as a form of grave injustice:

504 Ibid, at page 51. The article states: “[PoS] is a handheld device
installed at every PDS outlet (“ration shop”) and connected to the Internet.
The list of ration cards attached to that outlet, and their respective
entitlements, are stored in the PoS machine and updated every month. When a
cardholder turns ups, the PoS machine first “authenticates” her by matching
her fingerprints with the biometric data stored against her Aadhaar number in
the Central Identities Data Repository (CIDR). The machine then generates a
receipt with the person’s entitlements, which are also audible from a recorded
message... The transaction details are also supposed to be entered by the
dealer in the person’s ration card.” 505 Ibid, at page 55  373 PART H
“Imposing a technology that does not work on people who depend on it for their
survival is a grave injustice.”506 (Emphasis supplied) As we have noted in an
earlier part of this judgment, even the Economic Survey of India 2016-17 found
a 49% failure rate for beneficiaries in Jharkhand and 37% in Rajasthan. Those
at the receiving end are the poorest of the poor.

Reetika Khera looks at the impact of Aadhaar-integration with security schemes
(primarily in MGNREGA, PDS and social security pensions). 507 The author also
discusses briefly the impact of Aadhaar on liquefied petroleum gas (LPG)
subsidy and the application of Aadhaar in the mid-day meal (MDM) scheme. In
coming to its conclusions, the article has relied upon quantitative data from
primary field studies, secondary data from government portals, figures
obtained through queries made under the Right to Information (RTI) Act, and
responses to questions in Parliament. In Khera’s words, Aadhaar is becoming a
“tool of exclusion”:

> “Savings or exclusion? The government claimed that Aadhaar integration saved
> 399 crore up to 31 December 2016 (GoI 2017c). At a given level of benefits,
> a reduction in government expenditure in any particular transfer scheme can
> be on two counts: removal of ghosts and duplicates (“efficiency”); and a
> fall in the number of genuine beneficiaries (“shrinkage”), for instance, if
> they do not link their Aadhaar numbers when required. Across welfare
> schemes, the government has been treating any reduction in expenditure as
> “savings,” even when it comes from shrinkage. This is true 506Ibid, at page
> 58 507 Reetika Khera, Impact of Aadhaar on Welfare Programmes, Economic &
> Political Weekly, Vol. 52 (16 December 2017), available at
> https://www.epw.in/journal/2017/50/special-articles/impact-aadhaar-welfare-

programmes.html  374 PART H for SSP [social security pension] as well. For
instance, in Rajasthan, pensioners were “mistakenly” recorded as dead and this
was presented as Aadhaar-enabled savings (Yadav 2016f). In Jharkhand too,
pensioners’ names have been deleted because they did not complete Aadhaar-
seeding formalities or pensions stopped due to seeding errors (Sen 2017a).
Studying 100 pensioners, selected from 10 randomly- selected villages from
five blocks of Ranchi district in February 2017, Biswas (2017) finds that 84%
of her respondents receive pensions but irregularity in payments was a big
issue. The remaining 16% were not receiving it due to Aadhaar-related
issues.”508 Puja Awasthi documents the plight of individuals suffering from
leprosy, who have been denied pensions due to not being able to get enrolled
into the Aadhaar system. Leprosy can damage fingerprints and thus make an
individual incapable of providing biometrics. Awasthi’s article509 notes that
Aadhaar is capable of causing a denial of benefits or services to 86,000
citizens, who suffer from leprosy.

These writings show how in most cases, an authentication failure means that
the individual/household was denied the benefit of a social security programme
for no fault of their own. Some have gone hungry. Some reportedly lost their
lives.510 508 Ibid, at page 66 509Puja Awasthi, Good enough to vote, not
enough for Aadhaar, People’s Archive of Rural India, available at
https://ruralindiaonline.org/articles/good-enough-to-vote-not-enough-for-
aadhaar 510 Yet another Aadhaar-linked death? Denied rations for 4 months,
Jharkhand woman dies of hunger, Scroll (3 Feb. 2018), available at:
https://scroll.in/article/867352/yet-another-aadhaar-linked-death-jharkhand-
woman- dies-of-hunger-after-denial-of-rations; Denied food because she did not
have Aadhaar-linked ration card, Jharkhand girl dies of starvation, Scroll (16
Oct 2017), available at: https://scroll.in/article/854225/denied-food-
because-she-did-not-have-aadhaar-linked-ration-card-jharkhand-girl-dies-of-
starvation  375 PART H 269 A person’s biometrics change over time. For
persons, who are engaged in manual labour, and persons who are disabled or
aged, fingerprints actually cannot be captured by biometric devices. The
material which has been relied upon in this segment originates from
government’s official documents as well as from distinguished academics and
researchers from civil society. There exist serious issues of financial
exclusion. Pensions for the aged particularly in cases where a pension is
earned for past service – are not charity or doles. They constitute legal
entitlements. For an old age pensioner, vicissitudes of time and age
obliterate fingerprints. Hard manual labour severely impacts upon
fingerprints. The elderly, the disabled and the young are the most vulnerable
and a denial of social welfare entitlements verily results in a deprivation of
the right to life. Should the scholarship of a girl child or a mid- day meal
for the young be made to depend on the uncertainties of biometric matches? Our
quest for technology should not be oblivious to the country’s real problems:
social exclusion, impoverishment and marginalisation. The Aadhaar project
suffers from crucial design flaws which impact upon its structural probity.
Structural design in delivering welfare entitlements must be compliant with
structural due process, to be in accord with Articles 14 and 21. The Aadhaar
project has failed to account for and remedy the flaws in its framework and
design which lead to serious issues of exclusion. Dignity and rights of
individuals cannot be based on algorithms or probabilities. Constitutional
guarantees cannot be subject to the vicissitudes of technology.  376 PART H
270 Structural due process imposes requirements on public institutions and
projects at the macro level. Structural due process requires that the delivery
of social welfare benefits must be effective and timely. Those who are
eligible for the benefits must not face exclusion. Procedures for the
disbursal of benefits must not be oppressive. They must be capable of
compliance both by those who disburse and by those who receive the benefits.
Deployment of technology must factor in the available of technological
resources in every part of the coverage area and the prevailing levels of
literacy and awareness. Above all, the design of the project will be compliant
with structural due process only if it is responsive to deficiencies,
accountable to the beneficiaries and places the burden of ensuring that the
benefits reach the marginalised on the state and its agencies.

H.6 Constitutional validity of Section 139AA of the Income Tax Act  1961 271
Section 139AA of the Income Tax Act 1961 which was inserted by the Finance Act
2017, mandates the quoting of an Aadhaar number in the application for a
Permanent Account Number (PAN) and in the return of income tax. Failure to
intimate an Aadhaar number results in the PAN being deemed invalid
retrospectively.

Section 139AA reads thus:

> “Quoting of Aadhaar number.- (1) Every person who is eligible to obtain
> Aadhaar number shall, on or after the 1st day of July, 2017, quote Aadhaar
> number-

> (i) in the application form for allotment of permanent account number;

377

> PART H

> (ii) in the return of income:

> Provided that where the person does not possess the Aadhaar Number, the
> Enrolment ID of Aadhaar application form issued to him at the time of
> enrolment shall be quoted in the application for permanent account number
> or, as the case may be, in the return of income furnished by him.

> (2) Every person who has been allotted permanent account number as on the
> 1st day of July, 2017, and who is eligible to obtain Aadhaar number, shall
> intimate his Aadhaar number to such authority in such form and manner as may
> be prescribed, on or before a date to be notified by the Central Government
> in the Official Gazette:

> Provided that in case of failure to intimate the Aadhaar number, the
> permanent account number allotted to the person shall be deemed to be
> invalid and the other provisions of this Act shall apply, as if the person
> had not applied for allotment of permanent account number.

> (3) The provisions of this Section shall not apply to such person or class
> or classes of persons or any State or part of any State, as may be notified
> by the Central Government in this behalf, in the Official Gazette.

> Explanation. - For the purposes of this section, the expressions –

> (i) “Aadhaar number”, “Enrolment” and “resident” shall have the same
> meanings respectively assigned to them in Clauses (a), (m) and (v) of
> Section 2 of the Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of Financial and other
> Subsidies, Benefits and Services) Act, 2016 (18 of 2016);

(ii) “Enrolment ID” means a 28 digit Enrolment Identification Number issued to
a resident at the time of enrolment.” 272 In Binoy Viswam v Union of India
(“Binoy Viswam”),511 a two judge Bench (consisting of Dr Justice AK Sikri and
Justice Ashok Bhushan) upheld the constitutional validity of Section 139AA.
Since the issue of whether privacy is a constitutionally guaranteed right was
pending before a Bench of nine judges (the decision in Puttaswamy was still to
be delivered), the two judge 511 (2017) 7 SCC 59  378 PART H Bench did not
dwell on the challenge to the legislation on the ground of privacy and under
Article 21. The Bench examined other submissions based on Articles 14 and 19
and on the competence of Parliament to enact the law. 273 The decision in
Binoy Viswam holds that in assessing the constitutional validity of a law, two
grounds of judicial review are available:

(i) The legislative competence of the law-making body which has enacted the
law, over the subject of legislation; and

(ii) Compliance with Part III of the Constitution, which enunciates the
fundamental rights, and with the other provisions of the Constitution. Holding
that a third ground of challenge – that the law in question is arbitrary – is
not available, the decision in Binoy Viswam placed reliance on the enunciation
of law by a three judge Bench in State of A P v McDowell & Co (Mcdowell).512
McDowell ruled that while a challenge to a statute on the ground that it
violates the principle of equality under Article 14 is available, a statute
cannot be invalidated on the ground that it is arbitrary:

> “43…In other words, say, if an enactment is challenged as violative of
> Article 14, it can be struck down only if it is found that it is violative
> of the equality clause/equal protection clause enshrined therein… No
> enactment can be struck down by just saying that it is arbitrary or
> unreasonable. Some or other constitutional infirmity has to be found before
> invalidating an Act.”513 512 (1996) 3 SCC 709 513 Ibid, at page 124  379
> PART H In Binoy Viswam, the two judge Bench observed that the “contours” of
> judicial review had been spelt out in State of Madhya Pradesh v Rakesh
> Kohli,514 and more recently in Rajbala v State of Haryana.515 Reiterating
> the same position, Binoy Viswam holds:

> “81.Another aspect in this context, which needs to be emphasised, is that a
> legislation cannot be declared unconstitutional on the ground that it is
> “arbitrary” inasmuch as examining as to whether a particular Act is
> arbitrary or not implies a value judgment and the courts do not examine the
> wisdom of legislative choices and, therefore, cannot undertake this
> exercise.”516 274 In the decision of the Constitution Bench in Shayara Bano
> v Union of India (“Shayara Bano”),517 Justice Rohinton Nariman speaking for
> himself and Justice Uday U Lalit noticed that the dictum in McDowell, to the
> effect that “no enactment can be struck down by just saying it is arbitrary
> or unreasonable” had failed to notice the judgment of the Constitution Bench
> in Ajay Hasia v Khalid Mujib Sehravardi (“Ajay Hasia”),518 and a three judge
> Bench decision in Dr K R Lakshmanan v State of T N (“Lakshmanan”).519 In
> Ajay Hasia, the Constitution Bench traced the evolution of the doctrine of
> equality beyond its origins in the doctrine of classification. Ajay Hasia
> ruled that since the decision in E P Royappa v State of Tamil Nadu,520 it
> had been held that equality had a substantive content which, simply put, was
> the antithesis of arbitrariness. Consequently:

> 514 (2012) 6 SCC 312 515 (2016) 2 SCC 445 516 Ibid, at page 125 517 (2017) 9
> SCC 1 518 (1981) 1 SCC 722 519 (1996) 2 SCC 226 520 (1974) 4 SCC 3  380 PART
> H “16...Wherever therefore there is arbitrariness in State action whether it
> be of the legislature or of the executive or of an “authority” under Article
> 12, Article 14 immediately springs into action and strikes down such State
> action. In fact, the concept of reasonableness and non-

arbitrariness pervades the entire constitutional scheme and is a golden thread
which runs through the whole of the fabric of the Constitution.”521 (Emphasis
supplied) The principle of arbitrariness was applied for invalidating a State
law by the three judge Bench decision in Lakshmanan. It was, in this context
that Justice Nariman speaking for two Judges in the Constitution Bench in
Shayara Bano held that manifest arbitrariness is a component of Article 14.
Hence, a law which is manifestly arbitrary would violate the fundamental right
to equality:

> “87. The thread of reasonableness runs through the entire fundamental rights
> chapter. What is manifestly arbitrary is obviously unreasonable and being
> contrary to the rule of law, would violate Article 14. Further, there is an
> apparent contradiction in the three-Judge Bench decision in McDowell when it
> is said that a constitutional challenge can succeed on the ground that a law
> is “disproportionate, excessive or unreasonable”, yet such challenge would
> fail on the very ground of the law being “unreasonable, unnecessary or
> unwarranted”. The arbitrariness doctrine when applied to legislation
> obviously would not involve the latter challenge but would only involve a
> law being disproportionate, excessive or otherwise being manifestly
> unreasonable. All the aforesaid grounds, therefore, do not seek to
> differentiate between State action in its various forms, all of which are
> interdicted if they fall foul of the fundamental rights guaranteed to
> persons and citizens in Part III of the Constitution.”522 Justice Nariman
> has observed that even after McDowell, challenges to the validity of
> legislation have been entertained on the ground of arbitrariness 521 Ajay
> Hasia at page 741 522 Ibid, at pages 91-92  381 PART H (Malpe Vishwanath
> Acharya v State of Maharashtra,523 Mardia Chemicals Ltd. v Union of
> India,524 State of Tamil Nadu v K Shyam Sunder,525 Andhra Pradesh Dairy
> Development Corporation Federation v B Narasimha Reddy526 and K T Plantation
> Private Limited v State of Karnataka527).

275 In Shayara Bano, Justice Nariman has adverted to the decisions which have
followed McDowell including the two judge Bench decision in Binoy Viswam.
These decisions, in the view of Justice Nariman, are therefore no longer good
law:

> “99. However, in State of Bihar v. Bihar Distillery Ltd., SCC at para 22, in
> State of M.P. v. Rakesh Kohli, SCC at paras 17 to 19, in Rajbala v. State of
> Haryana, SCC at paras 53 to 65 and in Binoy Viswam v. Union of India, SCC at
> paras 80 to 82, McDowell was read as being an absolute bar to the use of
> “arbitrariness” as a tool to strike down legislation under Article

> 14\. As has been noted by us earlier in this judgment, McDowell itself is
> per incuriam, not having noticed several judgments of Benches of equal or
> higher strength, its reasoning even otherwise being flawed. The judgments,
> following McDowell are, therefore, no longer good law.”528 In the above
> extract, Justice Nariman has specifically held that the McDowell test which
> barred a challenge to a law on the ground of arbitrariness ignored a binding
> Constitution Bench view in Ajay Hasia and that of a three judge Bench in
> Lakshmanan. Moreover, the above extract from Shayara Bano 523 (1998) 2 SCC 1
> 524 (2004) 4 SCC 311 525 (2011) 8 SCC 737 526 (2011) 9 SCC 286 527 (2011) 9
> SCC 1 528 Ibid, at page 97  382 PART H disapproves of the restriction on
> judicial review in Binoy Viswam, which follows McDowell. Justice Kurian
> Joseph, in the course of his decision has specifically agreed with the view
> expressed by Justice Nariman:

> “5…However, on the pure question of law that a legislation, be it plenary or
> subordinate, can be challenged on the ground of arbitrariness, I agree with
> the illuminating exposition of law by Nariman J. I am also of the strong
> view that the constitutional democracy of India cannot conceive of a
> legislation which is arbitrary.” 276 In Puttaswamy, the judgment delivered
> on behalf of four Judges expressly recognized the impact of Article 14 in
> determining whether a law which is challenged on the ground that it violates
> Article 21 meets both the procedural as well as the substantive content of
> reasonableness. The Court held:

> “291… the evolution of Article 21, since the decision in Cooper indicates
> two major areas of change. First, the fundamental rights are no longer
> regarded as isolated silos or watertight compartments. In consequence,
> Article 14 has been held to animate the content of Article 21. Second, the
> expression “procedure established by law” in Article 21 does not connote a
> formalistic requirement of a mere presence of procedure in enacted law. That
> expression has been held to signify the content of the procedure and its
> quality which must be fair, just and reasonable. The mere fact that the law
> provides for the deprivation of life or personal liberty is not sufficient
> to conclude its validity and the procedure to be constitutionally valid must
> be fair, just and reasonable. The quality of reasonableness does not attach
> only to the content of the procedure which the law prescribes with reference
> to Article 21 but to the content of the law itself. In other words, the
> requirement of Article 21 is not fulfilled only by the enactment of fair and
> reasonable procedure under the law and a law which does so may yet be
> susceptible to challenge on the ground that its content does not accord with
> the requirements of a valid law. The law is open to substantive challenge on
> the ground that it violates the fundamental right.”529 529 Ibid, at page 495
> 383 PART H The same principle has been emphasized in the following
> observations:

> “294…Article 14, as a guarantee against arbitrariness, infuses the entirety
> of Article 21. The interrelationship between the guarantee against
> arbitrariness and the protection of life and personal liberty operates in a
> multi-faceted plane. First, it ensures that the procedure for deprivation
> must be fair, just and reasonable. Second, Article 14 impacts both the
> procedure and the expression “law”. A law within the meaning of Article 21
> must be consistent with the norms of fairness which originate in Article 14.
> As a matter of principle, once Article 14 has a connect with Article 21,
> norms of fairness and reasonableness would apply not only to the procedure
> but to the law as well.”530 277 In Binoy Viswam, the two judge Bench held
> that while enrolment under the Aadhaar Act is voluntary, it was legitimately
> open to the Parliament, while enacting Section 139AA of the Income Tax Act
> to make the seeding of the Aadhaar number with the PAN card mandatory. The
> court held that the purpose of making it mandatory under the Income Tax Act
> was to curb black money, money laundering and tax evasion. It was open to
> Parliament to do so and its legislative competence could not be questioned
> on that ground. The court held that the legislative purpose of unearthing
> black money and curbing money laundering furnished a valid nexus with the
> objective sought to be achieved by the law:

> “105. Unearthing black money or checking money laundering is to be achieved
> to whatever extent possible. Various measures can be taken in this behalf.
> If one of the measures is introduction of Aadhaar into the tax regime, it
> cannot be denounced only because of the reason that the purpose would not be
> achieved fully. Such kind of menace, which is deep-rooted, needs to be
> tackled by taking multiple actions and those actions may be initiated at the
> same time. It is the combined effect of these actions which may yield
> results and 530 Ibid, at page 496  384 PART H each individual action
> considered in isolation may not be sufficient. Therefore, rationality of a
> particular measure cannot be challenged on the ground that it has no nexus
> with the objective to be achieved. Of course, there is a definite objective.
> For this purpose alone, individual measure cannot be ridiculed. We have
> already taken note of the recommendations of SIT on black money headed by
> Justice M.B. Shah. We have also reproduced the measures suggested by the
> Committee headed by Chairman, CBDT on “Measures to Tackle Black Money in
> India and Abroad”. They have, in no uncertain terms, suggested that one
> singular proof of identity of a person for entering into finance/business
> transactions, etc. may go a long way in curbing this foul practice. That
> apart, even if solitary purpose of de-duplication of PAN cards is taken into
> consideration, that may be sufficient to meet the second test of Article 14.
> It has come on record that 11.35 lakh cases of duplicate PAN or fraudulent
> PAN cards have already been detected and out of this 10.52 lakh cases
> pertain to individual assessees. Seeding of Aadhaar with PAN has certain
> benefits which have already been enumerated. Furthermore, even when we
> address the issue of shell companies, fact remains that companies are after
> all floated by individuals and these individuals have to produce documents
> to show their identity. It was sought to be argued that persons found with
> duplicate/bogus PAN cards are hardly 0.4% and, therefore, there was no need
> to have such a provision. We cannot go by percentage figures. The absolute
> number of such cases is 10.52 lakhs, which figure, by no means, can be
> termed as miniscule, to harm the economy and create adverse effect on the
> nation. The respondents have argued that Aadhaar will ensure that there is
> no duplication of identity as biometrics will not allow that and, therefore,
> it may check the growth of shell companies as well.

106\. Having regard to the aforesaid factors, it cannot be said that there is
no nexus with the objective sought to be achieved.”531 The court observed that
it was a harsh reality of our times that the benefit of welfare measures
adopted by the State does not reach the segments of society for whom they are
intended:

> “125.1.3… However, for various reasons including corruption, actual benefit
> does not reach those who are supposed to receive such benefits. One of the
> main reasons is failure to 531 Ibid, at pages 134-135  385 PART H identify
> these persons for lack of means by which identity could be established of
> such genuine needy class.

Resultantly, lots of ghosts and duplicate beneficiaries are able to take undue
and impermissible benefits. A former Prime Minister of this country has gone
on record to say that out of one rupee spent by the Government for welfare of
the downtrodden, only 15 paisa thereof actually reaches those persons for whom
it is meant. It cannot be doubted that with UID/Aadhaar much of the malaise in
this field can be taken care of.”532 In this context, the court also noted
that as a result of de-duplication exercises, 11.35 lakh cases of duplicate
PANs / fraudulent PANs had been detected out of which 10.52 lakh cases
pertained to individual assesses. The court upheld the decision of Parliament
as the legislating body of seeding PANs with Aadhaar as “the best method, and
the only robust method of de- duplication of PAN database”.

278 The edifice of Section 139AA is based on the structure created by the
Aadhaar Act. Section 139AA of the Income Tax Act 1962 is postulated on the
requirement of Aadhaar having been enacted under a valid piece of legislation.
The validity of the legislation seeding Aadhaar to PAN is dependent upon and
cannot be segregated from the validity of the parent Aadhaar legislation. In
fact, that is one of the reasons why in Binoy Viswam, the Article 21 challenge
was not adjudicated upon since that was pending consideration before a larger
Bench. The validity of seeding Aadhaar to PAN under Section 139AA must
therefore depend upon the constitutional validity of the Aadhaar Act as it is
determined by this Court. Further Rule 114B of the 532 Ibid, at page 146  386
PART H Income Tax Rules 1962 provides for a list of transactions for which a
person must quote a PAN card number. Rule 114B requires that a person must
possess a PAN card for those transactions. These are summarized below:

> • “Sale or purchase of a motor vehicle or vehicle, as defined in clause (28)
> of section 2 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 (59 of 1988) which requires
> registration by a registering authority under Chapter IV of that Act, other
> than two wheeled vehicles.

> • Opening an account [other than a time-deposit and a Basic Savings Bank
> Deposit Account] with a banking company or a co-operative bank to which the
> Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (10 of 1949), applies (including any bank or
> banking institution referred to in section 51 of that Act).

> • Making an application to any banking company or a co-

> operative bank to which the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (10 of 1949),
> applies (including any bank or banking institution referred to in section 51
> of that Act) or to any other company or institution, for issue of a credit
> or debit card.

> • Opening of a demat account with a depository, participant, custodian of
> securities or any other person registered under sub-section (1A) of section
> 12 of the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992 (15 of 1992).

> • Payment to a hotel or restaurant against a bill or bills at any one time.

> • Payment in connection with travel to any foreign country or payment for
> purchase of any foreign currency at any one time.

> • Payment to a Mutual Fund for purchase of its units. • Payment to a company
> or an institution for acquiring debentures or bonds issued by it.

> • Payment to the Reserve Bank of India, constituted under section 3 of the
> Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934) for acquiring bonds issued by
> it.

> • Deposit with,— • banking company or a co-operative bank to which the
> Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (10 of 1949), applies (including any bank or
> banking institution referred to in section 51 of that Act);

> • Post Office.

• Purchase of bank drafts or pay orders or banker's cheques from a banking
company or a co-operative bank to which the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (10
of 1949),  387 PART H applies (including any bank or banking institution
referred to in section 51 of that Act).

• A time deposit with, — • a banking company or a co-operative bank to which
the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (10 of 1949), applies (including any bank or
banking institution referred to in section 51 of that Act);

• a Post Office;

• a Nidhi referred to in section 406 of the Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013);
or • a non-banking financial company which holds a certificate of registration
under section 45-IA of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934), to
hold or accept deposit from public.

• Payment for one or more pre-paid payment instruments, as defined in the
policy guidelines for issuance and operation of pre-paid payment instruments
issued by Reserve Bank of India under section 18 of the Payment and Settlement
Systems Act, 2007 (51 of 2007), to a banking company or a co-operative bank to
which the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (10 of 1949), applies (including any
bank or banking institution referred to in section 51 of that Act) or to any
other company or institution.

• Payment as life insurance premium to an insurer as defined in clause (9) of
section 2 of the Insurance Act, 1938 (4 of 1938).

• A contract for sale or purchase of securities (other than shares) as defined
in clause (h) of section 2 of the Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956
(42 of 1956). • Sale or purchase, by any person, of shares of a company not
listed in a recognised stock exchange.

• Sale or purchase of any immovable property. • Sale or purchase, by any
person, of goods or services of any nature other than those specified above.”
The decision in Puttaswamy has recognised that protection of the interests of
the revenue constitutes a legitimate state aim in the three-pronged test of
proportionality. The circumstances which have been adverted to in the decision
in Binoy Viswam are a sufficient indicator of the legitimate concerns of the
revenue to curb tax evasion, by embarking upon a programme for de- duplication
of the Pan data base. A legitimate state aim does exist. However,  388 PART H
that in itself is not sufficient to uphold the validity of the law, which must
meet the other parameters of proportionality spelt out in Puttaswamy. The
explanation to Section 139AA adopts the definition of the expressions ‘Aadhaar
number’, ‘enrolment’ and ‘resident’ from the parent Aadhaar legislation. The
seeding of Aadhaar with Pan cards must depend for its validity on the
constitutional validity of the Aadhaar legislation. Hence, besides affirming
that the object of the measure in Section 139AA constitutes a legitimate state
aim, the decision of this Court in regard to the validity of Aadhaar will
impact upon the seeding of PAN with Aadhaar, which Section 139AA seeks to
achieve.

H.7 Linking of SIM cards and Aadhaar numbers 279 In Avishek Goenka v Union of
India533, a three judge Bench of this Court dealt with a public interest
litigation seeking to highlight the non- observance of norms, regulations and
guidelines relating to subscriber verification by Telecom Service Providers
(TSPs). The Department of Telecommunications (DoT), in the course of the
proceedings, filed its instructions stating its position in regard to the
verification of prepaid and postpaid mobile subscribers. While concluding the
proceedings, this Court directed the constitution of an expert committee
comprising of representatives of TRAI and DoT. The court mandated that the
following issues should be examined by the Committee:

533 (2012) 5 SCC 275  389 PART H “(a) Whether re-verification should be
undertaken by the service provider/licensee, DoT itself or any other central
body?

(b) Is there any need for enhancing the penalty for violating the
instructions/guidelines including sale of pre- activated SIM cards?

(c) Whether delivery of SIM cards may be made by post? Which is the best mode
of delivery of SIM cards to provide due verification of identity and address
of a subscriber?

(d) Which of the application forms i.e. the existing one or the one now
suggested by TRAI should be adopted as universal application form for purchase
of a SIM card?

(e) In absence of Unique ID card, whether updating of subscriber details
should be the burden of the licensee personally or could it be permitted to be
carried out through an authorised representative of the licensee?

(f) In the interest of national security and the public interest, whether the
database of all registered subscribers should be maintained by DoT or by the
licensee and how soon the same may be made accessible to the security agencies
in accordance with law?”534 In pursuance of the above directive, DoT issued
instructions on the verification of new mobile subscribers on 9 August 2012.
On 6 January 2016, TRAI addressed a communication to DoT recommending that the
new procedure for subscriber verification was “cumbersome and resource
intensive” and hence should be replaced by an Aadhaar linked e-KYC mechanism.
Following this, DoT issued a directive on 16 August 2016 to launch an Aadhaar
e-KYC service across all licenced service areas for issuance of mobile
connections. However, it was stated that the e-KYC process was an alternative,
in addition to the existing process of issuing mobile connections to
subscribers and would not be applicable for bulk, outstation and foreign
customers. 534 Ibid, at page 283  390 PART H 280 A public interest litigation
was filed before this Court under Article 32 in Lokniti Foundation v Union of
India535. The relief which claimed was that there should be a definite mobile
phone subscriber verification to ensure a hundred per cent verification of
subscribers. Responding to the petition, the Union Government informed this
Court that DoT had launched an Aadhaar based e-KYC for issuing mobile
connections on 16 August 2016, by which customers as well as point of sale
agents of TSPs will be authenticated by UIDAI. A statement was made by the
learned Attorney General that an effective programme for verification of
prepaid connections would be devised within one year. In view of the statement
of the AG, the petition was disposed of by a two judge Bench in terms of the
following directions:

> “5. In view of the factual position brought to our notice during the course
> of hearing, we are satisfied, that the prayers made in the writ petition
> have been substantially dealt with, and an effective process has been
> evolved to ensure identity verification, as well as, the addresses of all
> mobile phone subscribers for new subscribers. In the near future, and more
> particularly, within one year from today, a similar verification will be
> completed, in the case of existing subscribers. While complimenting the
> petitioner for filing the instant petition, we dispose of the same with the
> hope and expectation, that the undertaking given to this Court, will be
> taken seriously, and will be given effect to, as soon as possible.”536
> Following the decision, DoT issued a directive on 23 March 2017 to all
> licensees stating that a way forward had been found to implement the
> directions of the Supreme Court. Based on the hypothesis that this Court had
> directed an E-KYC verification, DoT proceeded to implement it on 23 March
> 2017\.

535 (2017) 7 SCC 155 536 Ibid, at page 156  391 PART H 281 Mr Rakesh Dwivedi,
learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of UIDAI and the State of Gujarat
supported the measure. He submitted that the licences of all TSPs are issued
under Section 4 of the Indian Telegraph Act 1885\. Since the Central
Government has the exclusive privilege of establishing, maintaining and
working telegraphs, TSPs, it was urged, have to operate the telegraph under a
license and the Central Government is entitled to impose conditions on the
licensee. The instruction issued by DoT on 23 March 2017 has, it is urged, the
sanction of Section 4 of the Indian Telegraph Act 1885.

282 We must at the outset note the ambit of the proceedings before this Court
in Lokniti Foundation. In response to the public interest litigation, it was
the Union Government which relied on its decision of 16 August 2016 to
implement e-KYC verification for mobile subscribers. The petition was disposed
of since the prayers were substantially dealt with and the court perceived
that an effective process had been adopted to ensure identity verification
together with verification of addresses. Existing subscribers were directed to
be verified in a similar manner within one year. The issue as to whether the
seeding of Aadhaar with mobile SIM cards was constitutionally valid did not
fall for consideration.

283 The decision to link Aadhaar numbers with SIM cards and to require e- KYC
authentication of mobile subscribers has been looked upon by the Union  392
PART H government purely as a matter of efficiency of identification. TRAI’s
letter dated 6 January 2016 states that the new procedure for subscriber
verification which it had adopted was “cumbersome and resource intensive”. The
issue as to whether Aadhaar linked e-KYC authentication would seriously
compromise the privacy of mobile subscribers did not enter into the decision
making calculus. In applying the test of proportionality, the matter has to be
addressed not just by determining as to whether a measure is efficient but
whether it meets the test of not being disproportionate or excessive to the
legitimate aim which the state seeks to pursue. TRAI and DoT do have a
legitimate concern over the existence of SIM cards obtained against identities
which are not genuine. But the real issue is whether the linking of Aadhaar
cards is the least intrusive method of obviating the problems associated with
subscriber verification. The state cannot be oblivious to the need to protect
privacy and of the dangers inherent in the utilization of the Aadhaar platform
by telecom service providers. In the absence of adequate safeguards, the
biometric data of mobile subscribers can be seriously compromised and
exploited for commercial gain. While asserting the need for proper
verification, the state cannot disregard the countervailing requirements of
preserving the integrity of biometric data and the privacy of mobile phone
subscribers. Nor can we accept the argument that cell phone data is so
universal that one can become blasé about the dangers inherent in the
revealing of biometric information.  393 PART H 284 The submission that a
direction of this nature could have been given to TSPs under Section 4 of the
Indian Telegraph Act 1885 does not answer the basic issue of its
constitutional validity, which turns upon the proportionality of the measure.
Having due regard to the test of proportionality which has been propounded in
Puttaswamy and as elaborated in this judgment, we do not find that the
decision to link Aadhaar numbers with mobile SIM cards is valid or
constitutional. The mere existence of a legitimate state aim will not justify
the means which are adopted. Ends do not justify means, at least as a matter
of constitutional principle. For the means to be valid, they must be carefully
tailored to achieve a legitimate state aim and should not be either
disproportionate or excessive in their encroachment on individual liberties.
285 Mobile technology has become a ubiquitous feature of our age. Mobile
phones are not just instruments to facilitate a telephone conversation. They
are a storehouse of data reflecting upon personal preferences, lifestyles and
individual choices. They bear upon family life, the workplace and personal
intimacies. The conflation of biometric data with SIM cards is replete with
grave dangers to personal autonomy. A constitution based on liberal values
cannot countenance an encroachment of this nature. The decision to link
Aadhaar numbers to SIM cards and to enforce a regime of e-KYC authentication
clearly does not pass constitutional muster and must stand invalidated. All
TSPs shall be directed by the Union government and by TRAI to forthwith delete
the biometric data and Aadhaar details of all subscribers  394 PART I within
two weeks. The above data and Aadhaar details shall not be used or purveyed by
any TSP or any other person or agency on their behalf for any purpose
whatsoever.

I Money laundering rules 286 Parliament enacted a law on money-laundering as
part of a concerted effort by the international community to deal with
activities which constitute a threat to financial systems and to the integrity
and sovereignty of nations. The Statement of Objects and Reasons accompanying
the introduction of the Bill contains an elucidation of the reasons for the
enactment:

> “Introduction Money-laundering poses a serious threat not only to the
> financial systems of countries, but also to their integrity and sovereignty.
> To obviate such threats international community has taken some initiatives.
> It has been felt that to prevent money-laundering and connected activities a
> comprehensive legislation is urgently needed. To achieve this objective the
> Prevention of Money-laundering Bill, 1998 was introduced in the Parliament.
> The Bill was referred to the Standing Committee on Finance, which presented
> its report on 4th March 1999 to the Lok Sabha. The Central Government
> broadly accepted the recommendation of the Standing Committee and
> incorporated them in the said Bill along with some other desired changes.

> Statement of Objects and Reasons It is being realized, world over, that
> money-laundering poses a serious threat not only to the financial systems of
> countries, but also to their integrity and sovereignty. Some of the
> initiatives taken by the international community to obviate such threat are
> outlined below:-

> (a) the United Nations Convention Against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs
> and Psychotropic Substances, to which India is a party, calls for prevention
> of laundering of proceeds of drug crimes and other connected activities and
> confiscation of proceeds derived from such offence.

(b) the Basle Statement of Principles, enunciated in 1989, outlined basic
policies and procedures that banks should  395 PART I follow in order to
assist the law enforcement agencies in tackling the problem of money
laundering.

(c) the Financial Action Task Force established at the summit of seven major
industrial nations, held in Paris from 14th to 16th July 1989, to examine the
problem of money- laundering has made forty recommendations, which provide the
foundation material for comprehensive legislation to combat the problem of
money-laundering. The recommendations were classified under various heads.
Some of the important heads are-

(i) declaration of laundering of monies carried through serious crimes a
criminal offence;

(ii) to work out modalities of disclosure by financial institutions regarding
reportable transactions;

(iii) confiscation of the proceeds of crime;

(iv) declaring money-laundering to be an extraditable offence; and

(v) promoting international co-operation in investigation of money-laundering.

(d) the Political Declaration and Global Programme of Action adopted by United
Nations General Assembly by its Resolution No. S-17/2 of 23rd February 1990,
inter alia, calls upon the member States to develop mechanism to prevent
financial institutions from being used for laundering of drug related money
and enactment of legislation to prevent such laundering.

(e) the United Nations in the Special Session on countering World Drug Problem
Together concluded on the 8th to the 10th June 1998 has made another
declaration regarding the need to combat money-laundering. India is a
signatory to this declaration.” 287 The expressions “beneficial owner,
reporting entity and intermediary” are defined respectively in clauses (fa),
(wa) and (n) of the Act thus:

> “(fa) “beneficial owner” means an individual who ultimately owns or controls
> a client of a reporting entity or the person on whose behalf a transaction
> is being conducted and includes a person who exercises ultimate effective
> control over a juridical person.

> (wa) “reporting entity” means a banking company, financial institution,
> intermediary or a person carrying on a designated business or profession.

> (n) “intermediary” means,-

> (i) a stock-broker, sub-broker share transfer agent, banker to an issue,
> trustee to a trust deed, registrar to an issue,  396 PART I merchant banker,
> underwriter, portfolio manager, investment adviser or any other intermediary
> associated with securities market and registered under section 12 of the
> Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992 (15 of 1992); or

> (ii) an association recognised or registered under the Forward Contracts
> (Regulation) Act, 1952 (74 of 1952) or any member of such association; or

> (iii) intermediary registered by the Pension Fund Regulatory and Development
> Authority; or

> (iv) a recognised stock exchange referred to in clause (f) of section 2 of
> the Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956 (42 of 1956).” The
> Prevention of Money-Laundering (Maintenance of Records) Rules 2005 were
> amended by the Prevention of Money-Laundering (Maintenance of Records)
> Second Amendment Rules 2017. By the amendment, several definitions were
> introduced with reference to the provisions of the Aadhaar Act. These are:

> “‘(aaa) “Aadhaar number” means an identification number as defined under
> sub-section (a) of section 2 of the Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of Financial
> and Other Subsidies, Benefits and Services) Act, 2016;

> (aab) “authentication” means the process as defined under sub-section (c) of
> section 2 of the Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of Financial and Other
> Subsidies, Benefits and Services) Act, 2016;

> (aac) “Resident” means an individual as defined under sub- section (v) of
> section 2 of the Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of Financial and Other
> Subsidies, Benefits and Services) Act, 2016;

> (aad) “identity information” means the information as defined in sub-section
> (n) of section 2 of the Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of Financial and Other
> Subsidies, Benefits and Services) Act, 2016;

> (aae) “e – KYC authentication facility” means an authentication facility as
> defined in Aadhaar (Authentication) Regulations, 2016;

> (aaf) “Yes/No authentication facility” means an authentication facility as
> defined in Aadhaar (Authentication) Regulations, 2016…”  397 PART I
> Similarly, the expression “officially valid document” was amended to read as
> follows:

> “(d) “officially valid document” means the passport, the driving licence,
> the Permanent Account Number (PAN) Card, the Voter’s Identity Card issued by
> [Election Commission of India, job card issued by NREGA duly signed by an
> officer of the State Government, the letter issued by the Unique
> Identification Authority of India containing details of name, address and
> Aadhaar number or any other document as notified by the Central Government
> in consultation with the [Regulator]:

> [Provided that where simplified measures are applied for verifying the
> identity of the clients the following documents shall be deemed to be
> officially valid documents:-

> (a) identity card with applicant’s Photograph issued by the Central/State
> Government Departments, Statutory/ Regulatory Authorities, Public Sector
> Undertakings, Scheduled Commercial Banks and Public Financial Institutions;

> (b) letter issued by a gazette officer, with a duly attested photograph of
> the person].” 288 Rule 9 of the 2005 Rules requires every reporting entity
> to carry out client due diligence at the time of the commencement of an
> account-based relationship. Due diligence requires a verification of the
> identity of the client and a determination of whether the client is acting
> on behalf of a beneficial owner, who then has to be identified. Rule 9(3)
> defines the expression “beneficial owner” for the purpose of sub-rule 1.
> Rule 9(4) requires an individual client to submit an Aadhaar number. Rule
> 9(3) and Rule 9(4) are extracted below:

> “9. Client Due Diligence.—(1) Every reporting entity shall— xxxxx xxxxx (3)
> The beneficial owner for the purpose of sub-rule (1) shall be determined as
> under—

> (a) where the client is a company, the beneficial owner is the natural
> person(s), who, whether acting alone or  398 PART I together, or through one
> or more juridical person, has a controlling ownership interest or who
> exercises control through other means.

> Explanation.—For the purpose of this sub-clause-

> 1\. "Controlling ownership interest" means ownership of or entitlement to
> more than twenty-five per cent. of shares or capital or profits of the
> company;

> 2\. "Control" shall include the right to appoint majority of the directors
> or to control the management or policy decisions including by virtue of
> their shareholding or management rights or shareholders agreements or voting
> agreements;

> (b) where the client is a partnership firm, the beneficial owner is the
> natural person(s) who, whether acting alone or \ together, or through one or
> more juridical person, has I ownership of/ entitlement to more than fifteen
> per cent. of capital or profits of the partnership;

(c) where the client is an unincorporated association or body of individuals,
the beneficial owner is the natural person(s), who, whether acting alone or
together, or through one or more juridical person, has ownership of or
entitlement to more than fifteen per cent. of the property or capital or
profits of such association or body of individuals;

(d) where no natural person is identified under (a) or (b) or (c) above, the
beneficial owner is the relevant natural person who holds the position of
senior managing official;

(e) where the client is a trust, the identification of beneficial owner(s)
shall include identification of the author of the trust, the trustee, the
beneficiaries with fifteen per cent. or more interest in the trust and any
other natural person exercising ultimate effective control over the trust
through a chain of control or ownership; and

(f) where the client or the owner of the controlling interest is a company
listed on a stock exchange, or is a subsidiary of such a company, it is not
necessary to identify and verify the identity of any shareholder or beneficial
owner of such companies.

(4) Where the client is an individual, who is eligible to be enrolled for an
Aadhaar number, he shall for the purpose of sub-rule (1) submit to the
reporting entity, -

(a) the Aadhaar number issued by the Unique Identification Authority of India;
and

(b) the Permanent Account Number or Form No. 60 as defined in Income-tax
Rules, 1962, and such other documents including in respect of the nature of
business and financial status of the client as may be required by the
reporting entity:

Provided that where an Aadhaar number has not been assigned to a client, the
client shall furnish proof of application of enrolment for Aadhaar and in case
the  399 PART I Permanent Account Number is not submitted, one certified copy
of an 'officially valid document' shall be submitted. Provided further that
photograph need not be submitted by a client falling under clause (b) of sub-
rule (1).” (Emphasis supplied) Sub-rule 15 of Rule 9 requires the reporting
entity to carry out authentication at the time of receipt of the Aadhaar
number:

> “(15) Any reporting entity, at the time of receipt of the Aadhaar number
> under provisions of this rule, shall carry out authentication using either
> e-KYC authentication facility or Yes/No authentication facility provided by
> Unique Identification Authority of India.” Sub-rule 17 allows a period of
> six months for a client who is eligible to be enrolled for Aadhaar and to
> obtain a PAN to submit it upon the commencement of the account-based
> relationship. Failure to do so, would result in the account ceasing to be
> operational until the Aadhaar number and PAN are submitted. Clauses a and c
> of sub-rule 17 provide as follows :

> “(17) (a) In case the client, eligible to be enrolled for Aadhaar and obtain
> a Permanent Account Number, referred to in sub- rules (4) to (9) of rule 9
> does not submit the Aadhaar number or the Permanent Account Number at the
> time of commencement of an account based relationship with a reporting
> entity, the client shall submit the same within a period of six months from
> the date of the commencement of the account based relationship:

> Provided that the clients, eligible to be enrolled for Aadhaar and obtain
> the Permanent Account Number, already having an account based relationship
> with reporting entities prior to date of this notification, the client shall
> submit the Aadhaar number and Permanent Account Number by 31st December,
> 2017\.

> (c) In case the client fails to submit the Aadhaar number and Permanent
> Account Number within the aforesaid six months period, the said account
> shall cease to be operational till the time the Aadhaar number and Permanent
> Account Number is submitted by the client:

400

> PART I Provided that in case client already having an account based
> relationship with reporting entities prior to date of this notification
> fails to submit the Aadhaar number and Permanent Account Number by 31st
> December, 2017, the said account shall cease to be operational till the time
> the Aadhaar number and Permanent Account Number is submitted by the client.”
> 289 The statutory mandate for the framing these rules is contained in
> Sections 12, 15 and 73 of the PMLA. Insofar as is material, Section 12
> provides as follows:

> “12. Reporting entity to maintain records:- (1) Every reporting entity
> shall-

> (a) maintain a record of all transactions, including information relating to
> transactions covered under clause (b), in such manner as to enable it to
> reconstruct individual transactions;

> (b) furnish to the Director within such time as may be prescribed,
> information relating to such transactions, whether attempted or executed,
> the nature and value of which may be prescribed;

> (c) verify the identity of its clients in such manner and subject to such
> conditions, as may be prescribed;

> (d) identify the beneficial owner, if any, of such of its clients, as may be
> prescribed;

> (e) maintain record of documents evidencing identity of its clients and
> beneficial owners as well as account files and business correspondence
> relating to its clients.

> (2) Every information maintained, furnished or verified, save as otherwise
> provided under any law for the time being in force, shall be kept
> confidential.

> (3) The records referred to in clause (a) of sub-section (1) shall be
> maintained for a period of five years from the date of transaction between a
> client and the reporting entity. (4) The records referred to in clause (e)
> of sub-section (1) shall be maintained for a period of five years after the
> business relationship between a client and the reporting entity has ended or
> the account has been close, whichever is later.

> (5) The Central Government may, by notification, exempt any reporting entity
> or class of reporting entities from any obligation under this Chapter.”
> (Emphasis supplied)  401 PART I Section 12 imposes a statutory obligation on
> reporting entities to maintain records and to verify the identity of their
> clients and beneficial owners in the manner prescribed. The procedure for
> and manner in which information is furnished by reporting entities is
> specified under sub-section 1 of Section 12 by the Central Government in
> consultation with the Reserve Bank of India.

Section 15 provides as follows:

> “15. Procedure and manner of furnishing information by reporting entities:-

The Central Government may, in consultation with the Reserve Bank of India,
prescribe the procedure and the manner of maintaining and furnishing
information by a reporting entity under sub-section (1) of Section 12 for the
purpose of implementing the provisions of this Act.” (Emphasis supplied) The
rule making power is referable to the provisions of Section 73, which insofar
as is material, provides as follows:

> “73. Power to make rules-

> (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for carrying out
> the provisos of this Act. (2) In particular, and without prejudice to the
> generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of
> the following matters, namely-

> (j) the manner and the conditions in which identity of clients shall be
> verified by the reporting entities under clause (c) of sub-section (1) of
> Section 12; (jj) the manner of identifying beneficial owner, if any, from
> the clients by the reporting entities under clause (d) of sub-section (1) of
> Section 12;

> (k) the procedure and the manner of maintaining and furnishing information
> under sub-section (1) of Section 12 as required under Section 15;

(x) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.” Section
12(1)(c) requires the reporting entity to verify the identity of its clients
“in such manner and subject to such conditions” as may be prescribed. The  402
PART I provisions of the rules, including sub-rule 17(c) of Rule 9 have been
challenged on the ground that they suffer from the vice of excessive
delegation.

290 In Bombay Dyeing and Mfg v Bombay Environmental Action Group537, this
Court has re-affirmed the well-settled legal test which determines the
validity of delegated legislation. The court held:

> “104…By reason of any legislation, whether enacted by the legislature or by
> way of subordinate legislation, the State gives effect to its legislative
> policy. Such legislation, however, must not be ultra vires the Constitution.
> A subordinate legislation apart from being intra vires the Constitution,
> should not also be ultra vires the parent Act under which it has been made.
> A subordinate legislation, it is trite, must be reasonable and in consonance
> with the legislative policy as also give effect to the purport and object of
> the Act and in good faith.” The essential legislative function consists in
> the determination of legislative policy and of formally enacting it into a
> binding rule of conduct. Once this is carried out by the legislature,
> ancillary or subordinate functions can be delegated. Having laid down
> legislative policy, the legislation may confer discretion on the executive
> to work out the details in the exercise of the rule making power, though, in
> a manner consistent with the plenary enactment (J K Industries Ltd v Union
> of India538).

291 The Reserve Bank of India had issued a Master Circular dated 25 February
2016 in exercise of its statutory powers under Section 35A of the 537 (2006) 3
SCC 434 538 (2007) 13 SCC 673  403 PART I Banking Regulation Act 1949 (read
with Section 56) and Rule 9(14) of the Prevention of Money-Laundering
(Maintenance of Records) Rules 2005. Following the amendment of the PMLA
Rules, the Master Circular of the Reserve Bank has been updated on 20 April
2018. The basic issue which needs to be addressed is whether the amendments
which were brought about to the PMLA Rules in 2017 meet the test of
proportionality.

292 In 2005, the Central Government in consultation with the Reserve Bank of
India notified the Prevention of Money-Laundering (Maintenance of Records)
Rules 2005 under Section 73 of the parent Act. The expression ‘officially
valid document’ was defined in Rule 2(d) in the following terms :

> “(d) “officially valid document” means the passport, the driving licence,
> the Permanent Account Number (PAN) Card, the Voter’s Identity Card issued
> by539 [Election Commission of India, job card issued by NREGA duly signed by
> an officer of the State Government, the letter issued by the Unique
> Identification Authority of India540 [or the National Population Register]
> containing details of name, address and Aadhaar number or any other document
> as notified by the Central Government in consultation with the [Regulator];”
> Rule 9(4) required the submission to the reporting entity, where the client
> is an individual, a certified copy of an officially valid document
> containing details of identity and address. Rule 9(4) read as follows :

> “(4) Where the client is an individual, he shall for the purpose of sub-rule
> (1), submit to the reporting entity, one certified 539 Substituted by G.S.R.
> 980(E), dated 16-12-2010 (w.e.f. 16-12-2010) 540 Inserted by G.S.R. 544(E)
> 404 PART I copy of an “officially valid document” containing details of his
> identity and address, one recent photograph and such other documents
> including in respect of the nature of business and financial status of the
> client as may be required by the reporting entity:” Under Rule 9(14), the
> regulator was empowered to issue guidelines, in terms of the provisions of
> the rule, and to prescribe enhanced or simplified measures to verify the
> identity of a client, taking into consideration the type of client, business
> relationship, and the nature and value of transactions based on the overall
> money-laundering and terrorist financing risks involved. Under the above
> rules there were six ‘officially valid documents’ : the passport, driving
> licence, Permanent Account Number (PAN) Card, NREGA job card, Voter’s
> Identity Card and a letter of UIDAI containing details of name, address and
> details of Aadhaar number. or any other document notified by the Central
> Government in consultation with the Regulator.

293 In the Master Circular issued by the Reserve Bank of India on 25 February
2016, a provision was made for the submission by customers, at their option,
of one of the six officially valid documents (OVDs) for proof of identity and
address. Rule 3(vi) defined the expression ‘officially valid document’ in
similar terms:

> “(vi) “officially valid document” means the passport, the driving licence,
> the Permanent Account Number (PAN) Card, the Voter’s Identity Card issued by
> the Election Commission of India, job card issued by NREGA duly signed by an
> officer of the State Government, letter issued by the Unique Identification
> Authority of India containing details of name, address and Aadhaar number.

405

PART I Explanation: Customers, at their option, shall submit one of the six
OVDs for proof of identity and proof of address.” Customer due diligence and
on-going due diligence were defined thus:

> “Customer Due Diligence (CDD)” means indemnifying and verifying the customer
> and the beneficial owner using ‘Officially Valid Documents’ as a ‘proof of
> identity’ and a ‘proof of address’.

“On-going Due Diligence” means regular monitoring of transactions in accounts
to ensure that they are consistent with the customers’ profile and source of
funds.” 294 Chapter III of the Master Circular provided for regulated entities
(including banks) to specify a customer acceptance policy. Clause 15 of the
Master Circular inter alia specified that customers shall not be required to
furnish additional OVDs if the OVD already submitted, contained both proof of
identity and address. Chapter VI which provided for a due diligence procedure
allowed customers to submit one of the six OVDs for proof of identity and
address. Under Part V of Chapter VI, banks were required to conduct on- going
due diligence particularly in regard to large and complex transactions above a
threshold. Clause 39 of the Circular provided for a partial freezing and
closure of accounts:

> “39. Partial freezing and closure of accounts

> (a) Where REs are unable to comply with the CDD requirements mentioned at
> Part I to V above, they shall not open accounts, commence business relations
> or perform transactions. In case of existing business relationship which is
> not KYC compliant, banks shall ordinarily take step to terminate the
> existing business relationship after giving due notice.

> (b) As an exception to the Rule, banks shall have an option to choose not to
> terminate business relationship straight away and instead opt for a phased
> closure of operations in this account as explained below:

406

PART I i. The option of ‘partial freezing’ shall be exercise after giving due
notice of three months to the customers to comply with KYC requirements. ii. A
reminder giving a further period of three months shall also be given.

iii. Thereafter, ‘partial freezing’ shall be imposed by allowing credits and
disallowing all debits with the freedom to close the accounts in case of the
account being KYC non-compliant after six months of issue first notice.

iv. All debits and credits from/to the accounts shall be disallowed, in case
of the account being KYC non- compliant after six months of imposing ‘partial
freezing’, v. The account holders shall have the option, to revive their
accounts by submitting the KYC documents.

(c) When an account is closed whether without ‘partial freezing’ or after
‘partial freezing’, the reason for that shall be communicated to account
holder.” Chapter VIII provided for reporting requirements to the Financial
Intelligence Unit. Chapter IX dealt with compliance with
requirements/obligations under international agreements. Clause 58 of Chapter
X stipulated reporting requirements under the Foreign Account Tax Compliance
Act (FATCA) and Common Reporting Standards (CRS).

295 As a result of the amendment to the Rules brought about in 2017, Rule 9(4)
mandates that in the case of a client who is an individual, who is eligible to
be enrolled for an Aadhaar number, submission of the Aadhaar number is
mandatory. Instead of furnishing an option to submit one of six OVDs,
submission of Aadhaar number alone is mandated. Where an Aadhaar number has
not been assigned, proof of an application for enrolment is required to be
submitted. Under Rule 9(15), the reporting entity at the time of  407 PART I
receipt of an Aadhaar number is under an obligation to carry out
authentication using either the e-KYC authentication facility or the yes/no
authentication provided by UIDAI. If a client who is eligible to be enrolled
for Aadhaar and to obtain a PAN card does not submit its details while
commencing an account based relationship, there is a period of six months
reserved for submission. Those who already have accounts are required to
submit their Aadhaar numbers by a stipulated date. Failure to do so, renders
the account subject to the consequence that it shall cease to be operational
until compliance is effected.

Following the amendments to the rules, the Reserve Bank has updated its Master
Circular on 20 April 2018 to bring it into conformity with the amended rules.

296 In deciding whether the amendment brought about in 2017 to the rules is
valid, it is necessary to bear in mind what has already been set out earlier
on the aspect of proportionality. Does the requirement of the submission or
linking of an Aadhaar number to every account- based relationship satisfy the
test of proportionality?

The state has a legitimate aim in preventing money-laundering. In fact, it is
with a view to curb and deal with money-laundering that the original version
of the Master Circular as well as its updated version impose conditions for
initial  408 PART I and on-going due diligence. The Reserve Bank has
introduced several reporting requirements including those required to comply
with FATCA norms. The existence of a legitimate state aim satisfies only one
element of proportionality. In its submissions, the Union government has dealt
only with legitimate aim, leaving the other elements of proportionality
unanswered. Requiring every client in an account based relationship to link
the Aadhaar number with a bank account and to impose an authentication
requirement, is excessive to the aim and object of the state. There can be no
presumption that all existing account holders as well as every individual who
seeks to open an account in future is a likely money-launderer. The type of
client, the nature of the business relationship, the nature and value of the
transactions and the terrorism and laundering risks involved may furnish a
basis for distinguishing between cases and clients. The rules also fail to
make a distinction between opening an account and operating an account. If an
account has been opened in the past, it would be on the basis of an
established identity. The consequences of the non-submission of an Aadhaar
number are draconian. Non-submission within the stipulated period will result
in a consequence of the account ceasing to be operational. A perfectly genuine
customer who is involved in no wrongdoing would be deprived of the use of the
moneys and investments reflected in the account, in violation of Article 300A
of the Constitution purely on an assumption that he or she has indulged in
money- laundering. The classification is over-inclusive: a uniform requirement
of such a nature cannot be imposed on every account based relationship
irrespective  409 PART I of the risks involved to the financial system. The
account of a pensioner or of a salaried wage earner cannot be termed with the
same brush as a high net- worth individual with cross-border inflows and
outflows. Treating every account holder with a highly intrusive norm suffers
from manifest arbitrariness. Moreover, there is no specific provision in the
Act warranting a consequence of an account holder being deprived of the moneys
standing in the account, even if for a temporary period. Section 12(1)(c)
empowers a reporting entity to verify the entity or its client in such a
manner and “subject to such conditions” as may be prescribed. This does not
envisage a consequence of an account ceasing to be operational. Blocking an
account is a deprivation of property under Article 300A. The Union Government
has been unable to discharge the burden of establishing that this was the
least intrusive means of achieving its aim to prevent money-laundering or that
its object would have been defeated if it were not to impose the requirement
of a compulsory linking of Aadhaar numbers with all account based
relationships with the reporting entity. Money-laundering is indeed a serious
matter and the Union Government is entitled to take necessary steps including
by classifying transactions and sources which give rise to reasonable grounds
for suspecting a violation of law. But, to impose a uniform requirement of
linking Aadhaar numbers with all account based relationships is clearly
disproportionate and excessive. It fails to meet the test of proportionality
and suffers from manifest arbitrariness. While we have come to the above
conclusion, we clarify that this would not preclude the Union Government in
the exercise of its rule making  410 PART J power and the Reserve Bank of
India as the regulator to re-design the requirements in a manner that would
ensure due fulfillment of the object of preventing money-laundering, subject
to compliance with the principles of proportionality as outlined in this
judgment.

J Savings in Section 59 297 Section 59 of the Aadhaar Act provides:

> “Anything done or any action taken by the Central Government under the
> Resolution of the Government of India, Planning Commission bearing
> notification number A-

43011/02/2009-Admin. I, dated the 28th January, 2009, or by the Department of
Electronics and Information Technology under the Cabinet Secretariat
Notification bearing notification number S.O. 2492(E), dated the 12th
September, 2015, as the case may be, shall be deemed to have been validly done
or taken under this Act.” 298 The petitioners have submitted that all acts
done pursuant to the Notifications dated 28 January 2009 and 12 September
2015, under which the Aadhaar programme was created and implemented, violate
fundamental rights and were not supported by the authority of law. It has been
submitted that the collection, storage and use of personal data by the State
and private entities, which was done in a legislative vacuum as the State
failed to enact the Aadhaar Act for six years, is now being sought to be
validated by Section

59\. It has been contended that since the acts done prior to the enactment of
the Aadhaar Act are in breach of fundamental rights, Section 59 is invalid.
Moreover, Section 59 does not operate to validate the collection of biometric
data prior to the enforcement of the Aadhaar Act.  411 PART J It has been
submitted that a validating law must remove the cause of invalidity of
previous acts: it would not be effective if it simply deems a legal
consequence without amending the law from which the consequence could follow.
In the present case, it has been contended, Section 59 does not create a legal
fiction where the Aadhaar Act is deemed to have been in existence since 2009
and that it only declares a legal consequence of the acts done by the Union
since 2009.

It has also been submitted that Section 59 is invalid and unconstitutional
inasmuch as for Aadhaar enrolments done before 2016, there was neither
informed consent nor were any procedural guarantees and safeguards provided
under a legal framework. Section 59, it is contended, cannot cure the absence
of consent and other procedural safeguards, provided under the Aadhaar Act, to
the enrolments done prior to the enactment of the Act. 299 The respondents
have submitted that Section 59 protects the actions taken by the Central
government. It does not contemplate the maintenance of any data base,
containing identity information, by the State governments. The State
governments, it is urged, have destroyed the biometric data collected during
Aadhaar enrolments before the Act came into force, from their server. It has
been contended that Section 59 is retrospective in nature as it states that it
shall operate from an earlier date.

412 PART J The Respondents have relied upon the judgments of this Court in
West Ramnad Electric Distribution Co. Ltd. v State of Madras541 (“West
Ramnad”), State of Mysore v D. Achiah Chetty, Etc542 (“Chetty”), and Hari
Singh v Military Estate Officer543 (“Hari Singh”) to contend that the
legislature can, by retrospective operation, cure the invalidity of actions
taken under a law which is void for violating fundamental rights. It has also
been contended that before the advent of the Aadhaar Act, no individual has
been enrolled under compulsion, and since all enrolments were voluntary, they
cannot be considered to be in breach of Article 21 or any other fundamental
right. It is further submitted that non-adjudication of the issue of whether
collection of identity information violates the right to privacy, does not
prevent the Parliament from enacting a validating clause. Reliance has also
been placed on State of Karnataka v State of Tamil Nadu544 to submit that
Section 59 creates a deemed fiction as a result of which one has to imagine
that all actions taken under the notifications were taken under the Act. 300
Section 7 provides that the Central Government or the State Governments may
require proof of an Aadhaar number as a necessary condition for availing a
subsidy, benefit or service for which the expenditure is incurred from the
Consolidated Fund of India. Section 3 provides that the Aadhaar number shall
consist of demographic and biometric information of an 541 (1963) 2 SCR 747
542 (1969) 1 SCC 248 543 (1972) 2 SCC 239 544 (2017) 3 SCC 362  413 PART J
individual. “Biometric information”, under Section 2(g), means a photograph,
finger print, Iris scan, or such other biological attributes of an individual
as may be specified by regulations. Section 4(3) provides that an Aadhaar
number may be used as a proof of identity “for any purpose”. Section 57
authorizes a body corporate or person to use the Aadhaar number for
establishing the identity of an individual “for any purpose”. The proviso to
Section 57 provides that the use of an Aadhaar number under the Section shall
be subject to the procedure and obligations under Section 8 and Chapter VI of
the Act. Section 8 sets out the procedure for authentication. It states that
for authentication, a requesting entity shall obtain the consent of an
individual before collecting identity information and shall ensure that the
identity information is only used for submission to the Central Identities
Data Repository for authentication. It does not envisage collection of
identity information for any other purpose. Chapter VI of the Act, which deals
with protection of information, provides for security and confidentiality of
identity information collected under the Act, imposes restrictions on sharing
that information and classifies biometrics as sensitive personal information.
301 The scheme of the Aadhaar Act creates a system of identification through
authentication of biometric information and authorises the Central and State
governments to assign the task of collecting individual biometric information
for the purpose of generation of Aadhaar numbers to private entities. The Act
authorises the use of Aadhaar numbers by the Central  414 PART J government,
state governments and the private entities for establishing the identity of a
resident for any purpose. The Act also contains certain safeguards regarding
storage and use of biometric information. The actions taken before the
enactment of the Aadhaar Act have to be tested upon the touchstone of the
legal framework provided under the Act. 302 Section 59 is a validating
provision. It seeks to validate all the actions of the Central Government
prior to the Aadhaar Act, which were done under the notifications of 28
January 2009 and 12 September 2015. Section 59 does not validate actions of
the state governments or of private entities. Acts undertaken by the State
governments and by private entities are not saved by Section 59.

303 The Planning Commission’s notification dated 28 January 2009 created
UIDAI, while giving it the responsibility of laying down a plan and policies
to implement a unique identity (UID) scheme. UIDAI was only authorized to own
and operate the UID database, with a further responsibility for the updation
and maintenance of the database on an ongoing basis. Significantly, the 2009
notification did not contain any reference to the use of biometrics for the
purpose of the generation of Aadhaar numbers. The notification gave no
authority to collect biometrics. Biometrics, finger prints or iris scans were
not within its purview. There was no mention of the safeguards and measures
relating to the persons or entities who would collect biometric data, how the
415 PART J data would be collected and how it would be used. The website of
the Press Information Bureau of the Government of India states that, by the
time Aadhaar Act was notified by the Central government, UIDAI had generated
about 100 crore Aadhaar numbers.545 The collection of biometrics from
individuals prior to the enactment of the Aadhaar Act does not fall within the
scope of the 2009 notification. Having failed to specify finger prints and
iris scans in the notification, the validating provision does not extend to
the collection of biometric data before the Act. The 2009 notification did not
provide authority to any government department or to any entity to collect
biometrics. Since the collection of biometrics was not authorised by the 2009
notification, Section 59 of the Aadhaar Act does not validate these actions.
304 The collection of the biometrics of individuals impacts their privacy and
dignity. Informed consent is crucial to the validity of a state mandated
measure to collect biometric data. Encroachment on a fundamental right
requires the enacting of a valid law by the legislature.546 The law will be
valid only if it meets the requirements of permissible restrictions relating
to each of the fundamental rights on which there is an encroachment. Privacy
animates Part III of the Constitution.547 The invasion of any right flowing
from privacy places a heavy onus upon the State to justify its actions. Nine
judges of this 545Press Information Bureau, UIDAI generates a billion (100
crore) Aadhaars A Historic Moment for India, available at
http://pib.nic.in/newsite/PrintRelease.aspx?relid=138555 546A Constitution
Bench of this Court in State of Madhya Pradesh v. Thakur Bharat Singh (AIR
1967 SC 1170) held: “All executive action which operates to the prejudice of
any person must have the authority of law to support it… Every Act done by the
Government or by its officers must, if it is to operate to the prejudice of
any person, be supported by some legislative authority.” 547Puttaswamy, at
para 272  416 PART J Court in Puttaswamy categorically held that there must be
a valid law in existence to encroach upon the right to privacy. An executive
notification does not satisfy the requirement of a valid law contemplated in
Puttaswamy. A valid law, in this case, would mean a law enacted by Parliament,
which is just, fair and reasonable. Any encroachment upon the fundamental
right to privacy cannot be sustained by an executive notification. There is
also no merit in the submission of the Respondents that prior to the enactment
of the Aadhaar Act, no individual has been enrolled under compulsion, and
since all enrolments were voluntary, these cannot be considered to be in
breach of Article 21 or any other fundamental right. The format of the first
two enrolment forms used by UIDAI, under which around 90 crore enrolments were
done, had no mention of informed consent or the use of biometrics. Hence, this
submission is rejected. Apart from the existence of a valid law which
authorises an invasion of privacy, Puttaswamy requires that the law must have
adequate safeguards for the collection and storage of personal data. Data
protection, which is intrinsic to privacy, seeks to protect the autonomy of
the individual. The judgment noted the centrality of consent in a data
protection regime. The Aadhaar Act provides certain safeguards in Section 3(2)
and Section 8(3) for the purposes of ensuring informed consent, and in terms
of Section 29 read with Chapter VII in the form of penalties. The safeguards
provided under the  417 PART J Act were not in existence before the enactment
of the Act. The collection of biometrics after the 2009 notification and prior
to the Aadhaar Act suffers from the absence of adequate safeguards. While a
legislature has the power to legislate retrospectively, it cannot
retrospectively create a deeming fiction about the existence of safeguards in
the past to justify an encroachment on a fundamental right. At the time when
the enrolments took place prior to the enactment of the Aadhaar Act in
September 2016, there was an absence of adequate safeguards. Section 59 cannot
by a deeming fiction, as it were, extend the safeguards provided under the Act
to the enrolments done earlier. This will be impermissible simply because the
informed consent of those individuals, whose Aadhaar numbers were generated in
that period cannot be retrospectively legislated by an assumption of law.
Moreover, it is a principle of criminal law that it cannot be applied
retrospectively to acts which were not offences at the time when they took
place. Article 20(1) of the Constitution provides that “No person shall be
convicted of any offence except for violation of the law in force at the time
of the commission of the act charged as an offence”. The application of the
criminal provisions of the Act, provided under Chapter VII of the Act which
deals with “Offences and Penalties”, cannot be extended to the period prior to
the enactment of the Aadhaar Act. 305 The Respondents submit that the
collection of biometrics prior to the Aadhaar Act was adequately safeguarded
by the provisions of the Information  418 PART J Technology Act 2000;
specifically those provisions, which were inserted or amended by the
Information Technology (Amendment) Act, 2008. Section 43A of the Act provides
for compensation for failure to protect data:

> “Where a body corporate, possessing, dealing or handling any sensitive
> personal data or information in a computer resource which it owns, controls
> or operates, is negligent in implementing and maintaining reasonable
> security practices and procedures and thereby causes wrongful loss or
> wrongful gain to any person, such body corporate shall be liable to pay
> damages by way of compensation to the person so affected.

> Explanation: For the purposes of this section,-

> (i) “body corporate” means any company and includes a firm, sole
> proprietorship or other association of individuals engaged in commercial or
> professional activities;

> (ii) “reasonable security practices and procedures” means security practices
> and procedures designed to protect such information from unauthorised
> access, damage, use, modification, disclosure or impairment, as may be
> specified in an agreement between the parties or as may be specified in any
> law for the time being in force and in the absence of such agreement or any
> law, such reasonable security practices and procedures, as may be prescribed
> by the Central Government in consultation with such professional bodies or
> associations as it may deem fit.

(iii) “sensitive personal data or information” means such personal information
as may be prescribed by the Central Government in consultation with such
professional bodies or associations as it may deem fit.” (Emphasis supplied)
306 Rule 3 of the Information Technology (Reasonable Security Practices and
Procedures and Sensitive Personal Data or Information) Rules, 2011 made by the
Central government under Section 43A, defines “sensitive personal data or
information”:

> “Sensitive personal data or information of a person means such personal
> information which consists of information relating to;—

> (i) password;

419

PART J

(ii) financial information such as Bank account or credit card or debit card
or other payment instrument details ;

(iii) physical, physiological and mental health condition;

    
    
                      (iv)    sexual orientation;
                      (v)     medical records and history;
                      (vi)    Biometric information;
    

(vii) any detail relating to the above clauses as provided to body corporate
for providing service; and

(viii) any of the information received under above clauses by body corporate
for processing, stored or processed under lawful contract or otherwise.

Provided that, any information that is freely available or accessible in
public domain or furnished under the Right to Information Act, 2005 or any
other law for the time being in force shall not be regarded as sensitive
personal data or information for the purposes of these rules.” Section 66C
provides a punishment for identity theft:

“66C. Punishment for identity theft.-

Whoever, fraudulently548 or dishonestly549 make use of the electronic
signature, password or any other unique identification feature of any other
person, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to three years and shall also be liable to fine which may
extend to rupees one lakh.” (Emphasis supplied) Section 66E provides for
punishment for the violation of the privacy of an individual:

> “Whoever, intentionally or knowingly captures, publishes or transmits the
> image of a private area of any person without his or her consent, under
> circumstances violating the privacy of that person, shall be punished with
> imprisonment which may extend to three years or with fine not exceeding two
> lakh rupees, or with both.” The explanation to the Section provides that
> “transmit” means to electronically send a visual image with the intent that
> it be viewed by a person or persons.

548Section 25, Indian Penal Code states: ““Fraudulently”.—A person is said to
do a thing fraudulently if he does that thing with intent to defraud but not
otherwise” 549Section 24, Indian Penal Code states: ““Dishonestly”- Whoever
does anything with the intention of causing wrongful gain to one person or
wrongful loss to another person, is said to do that thing “dishonestly”  420
PART J “Capture”, with respect to an image, has been defined to mean
videotaping, photographing, filming or recording by any means. “Private area”
means the “naked or undergarment clad genitals, pubic area, buttocks or female
breast.” “Publishes” has been defined as reproduction in the printed or
electronic form and making it available for public.

Section 72A provides for punishment for disclosure of information in breach of
a lawful contract:

> “Save as otherwise provided in this Act or any other law for the time being
> in force, any person including an intermediary who, while providing services
> under the terms of lawful contract, has secured access to any material
> containing personal information about another person, with the intent to
> cause or knowing that he is likely to cause wrongful loss or wrongful gain
> discloses, without the consent of the person concerned, or in breach of a
> lawful contract, such material to any other person shall be punished with
> imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years, or with a fine
> which may extend to five lakh rupees, or with both.” (Emphasis supplied)
> Section 43A applies only to bodies corporate and has no application to
> government or to its departments. Explanation (i) defines body corporate to
> mean any company and to include a firm, sole proprietorship or other
> association of individuals engaged in professional or commercial activities.

Personal information leaked or lost by government agencies will not be covered
under Section 43A. The scope of Section 66E is limited. It only deals with the
privacy of the “private area” of any person. It does not deal with
informational privacy. The scope of Section 72A is also limited. It only
penalises acts of disclosing personal information about a person obtained  421
PART J while providing services under a lawful contract. Section 66C deals
with identity theft and punishes the dishonest or fraudulent use of the unique
identification feature of a person. The Information Technology Act also does
not penalise unauthorised access to the Central Identities Data Repository.
Many of the safeguards which were introduced by the Aadhaar Act were not
comprehended in the provisions of the Information Technology Act. Indeed, it
was the absence of those safeguards in the Information Technology Act which
required their introduction in the Aadhaar Act. Hence, the Attorney General is
not correct in submitting that India operated under a regime of comprehensive
safeguards governing biometric data during the period when the Aadhaar project
was governed by an executive notification, in the absence of a legislative
framework. The absence of a legislative framework rendered the collection of
biometric data vulnerable to serious violations of privacy. There are two
distinct facets here. First, the absence of a legislative framework for the
Aadhaar project between 2009 and 2016 left the biometric data of millions of
Indian citizens bereft of the kind of protection which a law, as envisaged in
Puttaswamy, must provide to comprehensively protect and enforce the right to
privacy. Second, the notification of 2009 does not authorise the collection of
biometric data. Consequently, the validation of actions taken under the 2009
notification by Section 59 does not save the collection of biometric data
prior to the enforcement of the Act. Privacy is of paramount importance. No
invasion of privacy can be allowed without proper, adequate and stringent  422
PART J safeguards providing not only penalties for misuse or loss of one’s
personal information, but also for protection of that person. 307 The
Respondents have relied upon several judgments where this Court has upheld
validating statutes, which, they contend, are similar to Section 59. The first
decision which needs to be discussed is the judgment of the Constitution Bench
in West Ramnad, which dealt with a validating statute of the Madras
Legislature. Act 43 of 1949 of the Madras Legislature which sought to acquire
electricity undertakings in the state was struck down for want of legislative
competence. In the meantime, the Constitution came into force, and under the
Seventh Schedule, the State acquired legislative competence. A fresh law was
enacted in 1954. Section 24 sought to validate actions done and taken under
the 1949 Act. Section 24 provided thus:

> “Orders made, decisions or directions given, notifications issued,
> proceedings taken and acts or things done, in relation to any undertaking
> taken over, if they would have been validly made, given, issued, taken or
> done, had the Madras Electricity Supply Undertakings (Acquisition) Act 1949
> (Madras Act 43 of 1949), and the rules made thereunder been in force on the
> date on which the said orders, decisions or directions, notifications,
> proceeding, acts or things were made, given, issued, taken or done are
> hereby declared to have been validly made, given, issued, taken or done, as
> the case may be, except to the extent to which the said orders, decisions,
> directions, notifications, proceedings, acts or things are repugnant to the
> provisions of this Act.” (Emphasis supplied) Section 24 was held to be a
> provision, which saved and validated actions validly taken under the
> provisions of the earlier Act, which was invalid from the  423 PART J
> inception. Justice Gajendragadkar, speaking for the Court, interpreted
> Section 24 thus:

> “12. The first part of the section deals, inter alia, with notifications
> which have been validly issued under the relevant provisions of the earlier
> Act and it means that if the earlier Act had been valid at the relevant
> time, it ought to appear that the notifications in question could have been
> and had in fact been made properly under the said Act. In other words,
> before any notification can claim the benefit of Section 24, it must be
> shown that it was issued properly under the relevant provisions of the
> earlier Act, assuming that the said provisions were themselves valid and in
> force at that time. The second part of the section provides that the
> notifications covered by the first part are declared by this Act to have
> been validly issued; the expression “hereby declared” clearly means
> “declared by this Act” and that shows that the notifications covered by the
> first part would be treated as issued under the relevant provisions of the
> Act and would be treated as validly issued under the said provisions. The
> third part of the section provides that the statutory declaration about the
> validity of the issue of the notification would be subject to this exception
> that the said notification should not be inconsistent with or repugnant to
> the provisions of the Act.

> In other words, the effect of this section is that if a notification had
> been issued properly under the provisions of the earlier Act and its
> validity could not have been impeached if the said provisions were
> themselves valid, it would be deemed to have been validly issued under the
> provisions of the Act, provided, of course, it is not inconsistent with the
> other provisions of the Act. The section is not very happily worded, but on
> its fair and reasonable construction, there can be no doubt about its
> meaning or effect.” (Emphasis supplied) 308 The second decision is a four
> judge Bench judgment in Chetty, which dealt with the competence of a
> legislature to remedy a discriminatory procedure retrospectively. There were
> two Acts in Mysore for acquisition of private land for public purposes − the
> Mysore Land Acquisition Act, 1894 and the City of Bangalore Improvement Act,
> 1945. The respondent challenged a notification which was issued under the
> 1894 Act for the acquisition of his land  424 PART J in Bangalore, on the
> ground that recourse to the provisions of the Land Acquisition Act was
> discriminatory because in other cases the provisions of the Improvement Act
> were applied. The High Court accepted the contention, against which there
> was an appeal to this Court. During the pendency of the appeal, the
> Bangalore Acquisition of Lands (Validation) Act, 1962 was passed. The 1962
> Act contained two provisions. Section 2 provided:

> “2. Validation of certain acquisition of lands and proceedings and orders
> connected therewith.-

> (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the City of Bangalore Improvement
> Act, 1945 (Mysore Act 5 of 1945), or in any other law, or in any judgment,
> decree or order of any court:

> (a) every acquisition of land for the purpose of improvement, expansion or
> development of the City of Bangalore or any area to which the City of
> Bangalore Improvement Act, 1945, extends, made by the State Government
> acting or purporting to act under the Mysore Land Acquisition Act, 1894
> (Mysore Act 7 of 1894), at any time before the commencement of this Act, and
> every proceeding held, notification issued and order made in connection with
> the acquisition of land for the said purpose shall be deemed for all
> purposes to have been validly made, held to issue, as the case may be, and
> any acquisition proceeding commenced under the Mysore Land Acquisition Act,
> 1894, for the said purpose before the commencement of this Act but not
> concluded before such commencement, may be continued under the Land
> Acquisition Act, 1894 (Central Act 1 of 1894), as extended to the State of
> Mysore by the Land Acquisition (Mysore Extension and Amendment) Act, 1961,
> and accordingly no acquisition so made, no proceeding held, no notification
> issued and no order made by the State Government or by any authority under
> the Mysore Land Acquisition Act, 1894, or the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, in
> connection with any such acquisition shall be called in question on the
> ground that the State Government was not competent to make acquisition of
> land for the said purpose under the said Act or on any other ground
> whatsoever;

> (b) any land to the acquisition of which the provisions of clause (a) are
> applicable shall, after it has vested in the State Government, be deemed to
> have been  425 PART J transferred, or stand transferred, as the case may be,
> to the Board of Trustees for the improvement of the City of Bangalore.”
> (Emphasis supplied) The Act of 1962 validated all acquisitions made,
> proceedings held, notifications issued or orders made under the Mysore Land
> Acquisition Act before the validating law came into force. The Validation
> Act was challenged on the ground that it was discriminatory to provide two
> Acts which prescribed two different procedures under the acquisition laws in
> the same field. This Court found that the legislature retrospectively made a
> single law for the acquisition of properties and upheld the validating Act.
> It was held:

> “15. If two procedures exist and one is followed and the other discarded,
> there may in a given case be found discrimination.

> But the Legislature has still the competence to put out of action
> retrospectively one of the procedures leaving one procedure only available,
> namely, the one followed and thus to make disappear the discrimination. In
> this way a Validating Act can get over discrimination. Where, however, the
> legislative competence is not available, the discrimination must remain for
> ever, since that discrimination can only be removed by a legislature having
> power to create a single procedure out of two and not by a legislature which
> has not that power.” 309 In West Ramnad, the validation depended upon the
> condition that a notification or act ought to have been validly issued or
> done under the earlier statute, presuming that the earlier Act was itself
> valid at that time. In the present case, there was no earlier law governing
> the actions of the government for the collection of biometric data. The
> Aadhaar Act was notified in 2016. The Planning Commission’s notification of
> 2009 and the Ministry of Information and Technology’s notification of 2015
> were not issued under any  426 PART J statute. Therefore, the validating law
> in West Ramnad was clearly of a distinct genre. West Ramnad will be of no
> assistance to the Union of India.

310 The decision in Chetty in fact brings out the essential attributes of a
validating law. The existence of two legislations governing the field of land
acquisition had been found to be discriminatory and hence violative of Article
14 by the High Court (on the basis of the position in law as it then stood).
During the pendency of the appeal before this Court, the legislature enacted a
validating law which removed the cause for invalidity. The reason the state
law had been invalidated by the High Court was the existence of two laws
governing the same field. This defect was removed. To use the words of this
Court, the legislature “put out of action retrospectively one of the
procedures” as a result of which only one procedure was left in the field. The
decision in Chetty thus brings out the true nature of a validating law. A
validating law essentially removes the deficiency which is found to exist in
the earlier enactment. By curing the defect, it validates actions taken under
a previous enactment.

311 The third judgment of seven judges is in Hari Singh. The constitutionality
of the Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1958 was
challenged on the ground that Section 5(1) contravened Article

14\. Section 5(1) conferred power on the Estate Officer to make an order of
eviction against persons who were in unauthorised occupation of public  427
PART J premises. During the pendency of the appeal before this Court, the
Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1971 was enacted,
which validated all actions taken under the Act of 1958. The constitutional
validity of the 1971 Act was also challenged. Section 20 of the later Act
provided:

> “Notwithstanding any judgment, decree or order of any court, anything done
> or any action taken (including rules or orders made, notices issued,
> evictions ordered or effected, damages assessed, rents or damages or costs
> recovered and proceedings initiated) or purported to have been done or taken
> under the Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1958
> shall be deemed to be as valid and effective as if such thing or action was
> done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act which, under
> Sub-section (3) of Section 1 shall be deemed to have come into force on the
> 16th day of September, 1958 ...” (Emphasis supplied) The Court held that the
> legislature has the power to validate actions under an earlier law by
> removing its infirmities. In that case, validation was achieved by enacting
> the 1971 Act with retrospective effect from 1958 and legislating that
> actions taken under the earlier law will be deemed to be as valid and
> effective as if they were taken under the 1971 Act. The Court held:

> “24. The 1958 Act has not been declared by this Court to be
> unconstitutional… The arguments on behalf of the appellants therefore
> proceeded on the footing that the 1958 Act will be presumed to be
> unconstitutional. It was therefore said that the 1971 Act could not validate
> actions done under the 1958 Act.

> The answer is for the reasons indicated above that the Legislature was
> competent to enact this legislation in 1958 and the Legislature by the 1971
> Act has given the legislation full retrospective operation. The Legislature
> has power to validate actions under an earlier Act by removing the
> infirmities of the earlier Act. The 1971 Act has achieved that object of
> validation.”  428 PART J The Court approved the Constitution Bench decision
> in West Ramnad:

> “16. The ruling of this Court in West Ramnad Electric Distribution Co. Ltd.
> case establishes competence of the legislature to make laws retrospective in
> operation for the purpose of validation of action done under an earlier Act
> which has been declared by a decision of the court to be invalid. It is to
> be appreciated that the validation is by virtue of the provisions of the
> subsequent piece of legislation.” In Hari Singh, the validating Act
> retrospectively authorised the actions undertaken under the previous Act,
> which had been invalidated by a court decision. The validating law of 1971
> was enacted with retrospective effect from 1958.

> 312 Reliance was placed by the Respondents on the judgments of this Court in
> Jaora Sugar Mills (P) Ltd. v State of Madhya Pradesh550 (Jaora Sugar Mills),
> SKG Sugar Ltd. v State of Bihar551 (“SKG Sugar”) and Krishna Chandra
> Gangopadhyaya v Union of India552 (“Krishna Chandra”), to contend that in
> the case of fiscal legislation, where an enactment was struck down for
> violating Article 265 or the fundamental rights, of a citizen, validating
> Acts were enacted after removing the flaw and that in cases where the state
> Legislature was held to be incompetent to enact a taxing measure, a
> validating law was enacted by Parliament by making a substantive provision.

550 (1966) 1 SCR 523 551 (1974) 4 SCC 827 552 (1975) 2 SCC 302  429 PART J 313
In Jaora Sugar Mills, a state law imposing cess was struck down for want of
legislative competence. Parliament enacted the Sugarcane Cess (Validation)
Act, 1961 to validate the imposition of cess under the invalidated state law.
Section 3(1) of the 1961 Act provided:

> “12…Notwithstanding any judgment, decree or order of any Court, all cesses
> imposed, assessed or collected or purporting to have been imposed, assessed
> or collected under any State Act before the commencement of this act shall
> be deemed to have been validly imposed, assessed or collected in accordance
> with law, as if the provisions of the State Acts and of all notifications,
> orders and rules issued or made thereunder, in so far as such provisions
> relate to the imposition, assessment and collection of such cess had been
> included in and formed part of this section and this section had been in
> force at all material times when such cess was imposed, assessed or
> collected; ….” (Emphasis supplied) The Section was upheld. Speaking for the
> Constitution Bench, Chief Justice Gajendragadkar held:

> “14... What Parliament has done by enacting the said section is not to
> validate the invalid State Statutes, but to make a law concerning the cess
> covered by the said Statutes and to provide that the said law shall come
> into operation retrospectively. There is a radical difference between the
> two positions. Where the legislature wants to validate an earlier Act which
> has been declared to be invalid for one reason or another, it proceeds to
> remove the infirmity from the said Act and validates its provisions which
> are free from any infirmity.” (Emphasis supplied) The state law was held to
> be invalid for want of legislative competence.

> Parliament, which was competent to enact a law on the subject, did so with
> retrospective effect and validated actions which were taken under the
> invalid state law.

430

PART J 314 In SKG Sugar, a state law - Bihar Sugar Factories Control Act, 1937
- was declared unconstitutional. In 1969, during President's Rule in Bihar,
Parliament enacted the Bihar Sugarcane (Regulation of Supply and Purchase)
Act, 1969. Section 66(1) of the Act provided:

> “12…Notwithstanding any judgment, decree or order of any court, all cesses
> and taxes imposed, assessed or collected or purporting to have been imposed,
> assessed or collected under any State law, before the commencement of this
> Act, shall be deemed to have been validly imposed, assessed or collected in
> accordance with law as if this Act had been in force at all material times
> when such cess or tax was imposed, assessed or collected and
> accordingly....” 553 (Emphasis supplied) The Constitution Bench held:

> “32… By virtue of the legal fiction introduced by the validating provision
> in Section 66(1), the impugned notification will be deemed to have been
> issued not necessarily under the Ordinance No. 3 of 1968 but under the
> President's Act, itself, deriving its legal force and validity directly from
> the latter.”554 315 In Krishna Chandra, provisions of the Bihar Land Reforms
> Act, 1950 were struck down for want of legislative competence. Parliament
> enacted the Mines and Minerals (Regulation and Development) Act, 1957 to
> validate those provisions with retrospective effect. Section 2 provided
> that:

> “1…(2). Validation of certain Bihar State laws and action taken and things
> done connected therewith.- (1) The laws specified in the schedule shall be
> and shall be deemed always to have been, as valid as if the provisions
> contained therein had been enacted by Parliament.

> (2) Notwithstanding any judgment, decree or order of any court, all actions
> taken, things done, rules made, notifications issued or purported to have
> been taken, done, 553 Ibid, at page 831 554 Ibid, at page 835  431 PART J
> made or issued and rents or royalties realised under any such laws shall be
> deemed to have been validly taken, done, made, issued or realised, as the
> case may be, as if this section had been in force at all material times when
> such action was taken, things were done, rules were, made, notifications
> were issued, or rents or royalties were realised, and no suit or other
> proceedings shall be maintained or continued in any court for the refund of
> rents or royalties realised under any such laws.

(3) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that nothing in Sub-
section (2) shall be construed as preventing any person from claiming refund
of any rents or royalties paid by him in excess of the amount due from him
under any such laws.”555 (Emphasis supplied) The central issue in the case was
whether a statute and a rule earlier declared to be unconstitutional or
invalid, can be retroactively enacted through fresh validating legislation by
the competent Legislature. The Court held that it could be.

316 Section 59 of the Aadhaar Act is different from the validating provisions
in Jaora Sugar Mills, SKG Sugar and Krishna Chandra. In those cases, state
laws were invalid for want of legislative competence. Parliament, which
undoubtedly possessed legislative competence, could enact a fresh law with
retrospective effect and protect actions taken under the state law. The
infirmity being that the earlier laws were void for absence of competence in
the legislature, the fresh laws cured the defect of the absence of legislative
competence.

555 Ibid, at page 306  432 PART J 317 Parliament and the State Legislatures
have plenary power to legislate on subjects which fall within their
legislative competence. The power is plenary because the legislature can
legislate with prospective as well as with retrospective effect. Where a law
suffers from a defect or has been invalidated, it is open to the legislature
to remove the defect. While doing that, the legislature can validate
administrative acts or decisions made under the invalid law in the past. The
true test of a validation is that it must remove the defects in the earlier
law. It is not enough for the validating law to state that the grounds of
invalidity of the earlier law are deemed to have been removed. The validating
law must remove the deficiencies. There were several deficiencies in the
collection of biometric data during the period between 2009 and 2016, before
the Aadhaar Act came into force. The first was the absence of enabling
legislation. As a result, the collection of sensitive personal information
took place without the authority of law. Second, the notification of 2009 did
not authorize the collection of biometric data. Third, the collection of
biometric data was without an enabling framework of the nature which the
Aadhaar Act put into place with effect from 2016. The Aadhaar Act introduced a
regime for obtaining informed consent, securing the confidentiality of
information collected from citizens, penalties and offences for breach and
regulated the uses to which the data which was collected could be put. In the
absence of safeguards, the collection of biometric data prior of the enactment
of Aadhaar Act 2016 is ultra vires.

433 PART J 318 Section 59 does not remove the cause for invalidity. First,
Section 59 protects actions taken under the notification of 2009. The
notification does not authorize the collection of biometric data. Hence,
Section 59 would not provide legal authority for the collection of biometrics
between 2009 and 2016. Second, it was through the Aadhaar Act, that safeguards
were sought to be introduced for ensuring informed consent, confidentiality of
information collected, restrictions on the use of the data and through a
regime of penalties and offences for violation. Section 59 does not cure the
absence of these safeguards between 2009 and 2016. Section 59 fails to meet
the test of a validating law for the simple reason that the absence of
safeguards and of a regulatory framework is not cured merely by validating
what was done under the notifications of 2009 and 2016. There can be no
dispute about the principle that the legislature is entitled to cure the
violation of a fundamental right. But in order to do so, it is necessary to
cure the basis or the foundation on which there was a violation of the
fundamental right. The deficiency must be demonstrated to be cured by the
validating law. Section 59 evidently fails to do so. It fails to remedy the
deficiencies in regard to the conditions under which the collection of
biometric data took place before the enforcement of the Aadhaar Act in 2016.

The Respondents submitted that Section 59 creates a deemed fiction and cited a
few judgments in support of this contention. In Bishambhar Nath  434 PART J
Kohli v State of Uttar Pradesh556, an Ordinance repealed another Ordinance.
Section 58(3) of the repealing Ordinance stated:

> “6…The repeal by this Act of the Administration of Evacuee Property
> Ordinance, 1949 or the Hyderabad Administration of Evacuee Property
> Regulation or of any corresponding law shall not affect the previous
> operation of that Ordinance, Regulation or corresponding law, and subject
> thereto, anything done or any action taken in the exercise of any power
> conferred by or under that Ordinance, Regulation or corresponding law, shall
> be deemed to have been done or taken in the exercise of the powers conferred
> by or under this Act as if this Act were in force on the day on which such
> thing was done or action was taken.” (Emphasis supplied) 319 A Constitution
> Bench of this Court held that by virtue of Section 58, all things done and
> actions taken under the repealed ordinance are deemed to be done or taken in
> exercise of the powers conferred by the repealing Act, as if that Act were
> in force on the day on which that thing was done or action was taken. The
> things done or actions taken under the repealed ordinance are to be deemed
> by fiction to have been done or taken under the repealing Act. The actions
> were validated because the Act, in this case, was deemed to be “in force on
> the day on which such thing was done or action was taken”. Section 59 of the
> Aadhaar Act does not create this fiction. The Aadhaar Act does not come in
> force on the date on which the actions, which this Section seeks to
> validate, were taken.

320 A three judge Bench headed by one of us, Hon’ble Mr Justice Dipak Misra
(as the learned Chief Justice then was) in State of Karnataka v State 556
(1966) 2 SCR 158  435 PART J of Tamil Nadu557, was dealing with a batch of
civil appeals filed against a final order of the Cauvery Water Disputes
Tribunal constituted under the Inter- State River Water Disputes Act, 1956.
Section 6(2) of the 1956 Act provides:

> “72…6(2).The decision of the Tribunal, after its publication in the Official
> Gazette by the Central Government under Sub-

section (1), shall have the same force as an order or decree of the Supreme
Court.”558 Relying on Section 6(2), it was contended that the jurisdiction of
this Court is ousted as it cannot sit in appeal on its own decree. The Court
did not accept the submission and held:

> “74. The language employed in Section 6(2) suggests that the decision of the
> tribunal shall have the same force as the order or decree of this Court.
> There is a distinction between having the same force as an order or decree
> of this Court and passing of a decree by this Court after due adjudication.
> The Parliament has intentionally used the words from which it can be
> construed that a legal fiction is meant to serve the purpose for which the
> fiction has been created and not intended to travel beyond it. The purpose
> is to have the binding effect of the tribunal's award and the effectiveness
> of enforceability. Thus, it has to be narrowly construed regard being had to
> the purpose it is meant to serve…559 81…it is clear as crystal that the
> Parliament did not intend to create any kind of embargo on the jurisdiction
> of this Court.

The said provision was inserted to give the binding effect to the award passed
by the tribunal. The fiction has been created for that limited purpose.”560
(Emphasis supplied) The judgment makes it clear that a deeming fiction cannot
travel beyond what was originally intended. As stated earlier, the action of
collecting and authentication of biometrics or the requirement of informed
consent finds no 557 (2017) 3 SCC 362 558 Ibid, at page 405 559 Ibid, at page
406 560 Ibid, at page 408  436 PART J mention in the 2009 notification.
Therefore, Section 59 cannot be held to create a deeming fiction that all the
actions taken under the notifications issued were done under the Act and not
under the aforesaid notifications. 321 This Court must also deal with the
Respondents’ submission that Parliament is not debarred from enacting a
validation law even though the Court did not have the opportunity to rule on
the validity of the notifications which are purported by Section 59 to have
been validated. The Respondents have placed reliance on a two judge Bench
decision in Amarendra Kumar Mohapatra v State of Orissa.561 This case involved
a challenge to the constitutional validity of the Orissa Service of Engineers
(Validation of Appointment) Act, 2002 enacted to regularise ad hoc
appointments of employees. The issue before the Court was whether the Orissa
Act was in effect a validation statute to validate any illegality or defect in
a pre-existing Act or rule in existence. The Court held that since the Orissa
Act merely regularised the appointment of graduate Stipendiary Engineers
working as ad hoc Assistant Engineers as Assistant Engineers, it could not be
described as a validating law. It was held the legislation did not validate
any such non- existent act, but simply appointed the ad hoc Assistant
Engineers as substantive employees of the State by resort to a fiction. This
Court held:

> “31…a prior judicial pronouncement declaring an act, proceedings or rule to
> be invalid is not a condition precedent for the enactment of a Validation
> Act. Such a piece of legislation may be enacted to remove even a perceived
> invalidity, which the Court has had no opportunity to adjudge.

561 (2014) 4 SCC 583  437 PART J Absence of a judicial pronouncement is not,
therefore, of much significance for determining whether or not the legislation
is a validating law.”562 The Court further held that:

> “25. … when the validity of any such Validation Act is called in question,
> the Court would have to carefully examine the law and determine whether (i)
> the vice of invalidity that rendered the act, rule, proceedings or action
> invalid has been cured by the validating legislation (ii) whether the
> legislature was competent to validate the act, action, proceedings or rule
> declared invalid in the previous judgments and (iii) whether such validation
> is consistent with the rights guaranteed by Part III of the Constitution.

It is only when the answer to all these three questions is in the affirmative
that the Validation Act can be held to be effective and the consequences
flowing from the adverse pronouncement of the Court held to have been
neutralised.” (Emphasis supplied) 322 The two judge Bench relied upon the
Constitution Bench decision of this Court in Shri Prithvi Cotton Mills Ltd v
Broach Borough Municipality563 to formulate the following pre-requisites of a
piece of legislation that purports to validate any act, rule, action or
proceedings:

> “(a) The legislature enacting the Validation Act should be competent to
> enact the law and;

(b) the cause for ineffectiveness or invalidity of the Act or the proceedings
needs to be removed.” These judgments suggest that while there can be no
disagreement with the proposition that a legislature has the power, within its
competence, to make a law to validate a defective law, the validity of such a
law would depend upon whether it removes the cause of ineffectiveness or
invalidity of the previous 562 Ibid, at page 604 563 (1969) 2 SCC 283  438
PART K Act or proceedings. Parliament has the power to enact a law of
validation to cure an illegality or defect in the pre-existing law, with or
without a judicial determination. But that law should cure the cause of
infirmity or invalidity. Section 59 fails to cure the cause of invalidity
prior to the enactment of the Aadhaar Act.

K Rule of law and violation of interim orders 323 The rule of law is the
cornerstone of modern democratic societies and protects the foundational
values of a democracy. When the rule of law is interpreted as a principle of
constitutionalism, it assumes a division of governmental powers or functions
that inhibits the exercise of arbitrary State power. It also assumes the
generality of law: the individual's protection from arbitrary power consists
in the fact that her personal dealings with the State are regulated by general
rules, binding on private citizens and public officials alike.564 It envisages
a fundamental separation of powers among different organs of the State.
Separation of power supports the accountability aspect of the rule of law.
Separation of the judicial and executive powers is an essential feature of the
rule of law. By entrusting the power of judicial review to courts, the
doctrine prevents government officials from having the last word on whether
564T. R. S. Allan, Constitutional Justice: A Liberal Theory of the Rule of Law
(2001), available at
http://www.oxfordscholarship.com/view/10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199267880.001.0001/acprof-9780199267880-
chapter-2  439 PART K they have acted illegally. The separation of judicial
power provides an effective check on the executive branch.565 324 The concepts
of the rule of law and separation of powers have been integral to Indian
constitutional discourse. While both these concepts have not been specified in
as many words in the Constitution, they have received immense attention from
this Court in its judgments. Though the Indian Constitution does not follow
the doctrine of separation of powers in a rigid sense, the following statement
of the law by Chief Justice Mukherjea in Ram Sahib Ram Jawaya Kapur v State of
Punjab566 is widely regarded as defining the core of its content:

> “12…The Indian Constitution has not indeed recognised the doctrine of
> separation of powers in its absolute rigidity but the functions of the
> different parts or branches of the Government have been sufficiently
> differentiated and consequently it can very well be said that our
> Constitution does not contemplate assumption, by one organ or part of the
> State, of functions that essentially belong to another...” Separation of
> powers envisages a system of checks and balances, which ensures governance
> by law and not by the caprice of those to whom governance is entrusted for
> the time being. By curbing excesses of power, it has a direct link with the
> preservation of institutional rectitude and individual liberty. In S G
> Jaisinghani v Union of India567, this Court held that:

> “14. In this context it is important to emphasize that the absence of
> arbitrary power is the first essential of the rule of 565Denise Meyerson,
> The Rule of Law and the Separation of Powers (2004), available at
> http://www5.austlii.edu.au/au/journals/MqLJ/2004/1.html 566 (1955) 2 SCR 225
> 567 (1967) 2 SCR 703  440 PART K law upon which our whole constitutional
> system is based. In a system governed by rule of law, discretion, when
> conferred upon executive authorities, must be confined within clearly
> defined limits. The rule of law from this point of view means that decisions
> should be made by the application of known principles and rules and, in
> general, such decisions should be predictable and the citizen should know
> where he is. If a decision is taken without any principle or without any
> rule it is unpredictable and such a decision is the antithesis of a decision
> taken in accordance with the Rule of law…” The separation of powers between
> the legislature, the executive and the judiciary has been declared to be
> part of the basic structure of the Constitution. In Kesavananda Bharati v
> State of Kerala568, Chief Justice Sikri held that:

> “292…The basic structure may be said to consist of the following features:

> (1) Supremacy of the Constitution;

> (2) Republican and Democratic form of Government; (3) Secular character of
> the Constitution; (4) Separation of powers between the legislature, the
> executive and the judiciary;

> (5) Federal character of the Constitution.”569 (Emphasis supplied) Justice
> HR Khanna held that the rule of law meant “supremacy of the Constitution and
> the laws as opposed to arbitrariness”570. The same view is expressed in
> subsequent decisions of this Court.571 In Smt Indira Nehru Gandhi v Shri Raj
> Narain572, Chief Justice AN Ray held the rule of law to be the basis of
> democracy.

568 (1973) 4 SCC 225 569 Ibid, at page 366 570 Ibid, at para 1529 571Smt.
Indira Nehru Gandhi v. Shri Raj Narain, 1975 (Supp.) SCC 1; State of Bihar v.
Bal Mukund Sah, (2000) 4 SCC 640]; I .R. Coelho (Dead) by L.Rs. v. State of
Tamil Nadu, (2007) 2 SCC 1. 572 1975 Supp SCC 1  441 PART K The functional
relationship between separation of powers and the rule of law was discussed by
a Constitution Bench of this Court in State of Tamil Nadu v State of
Kerala573, as follows:

> “98. Indian Constitution, unlike the Constitution of United States of
> America and Australia, does not have express provision of separation of
> powers. However, the structure provided in our Constitution leaves no manner
> of doubt that the doctrine of separation of powers runs through the Indian
> Constitution. It is for this reason that this Court has recognized
> separation of power as a basic feature of the Constitution and an essential
> constituent of the rule of law.

The doctrine of separation of powers is, though, not expressly engrafted in
the Constitution, its sweep, operation and visibility are apparent from the
Constitution. Indian Constitution has made demarcation without drawing formal
lines between the three organs--legislature, executive and judiciary.” This
Court has consistently held judicial review to be an essential component of
the separation of powers as well as of the rule of law. Judicial review
involves determination not only of the constitutionality of law but also of
the validity of administrative action. It protects the essence of the rule of
law by ensuring that every discretionary power vested in the executive is
exercised in a just, reasonable and fair manner.

325 In a reference574 under Article 143 of the Constitution, a seven judge
Bench held that irrespective of “whether or not there is distinct and rigid
separation of powers under the Indian Constitution”, the judicature has been
entrusted the task of construing the provisions of the Constitution and of
safeguarding the fundamental rights of citizens. It was held: 573 (2014)12 SCC
696 574 (1965) 1 SCR 413  442 PART K “41…When a statute is challenged on the
ground that it has been passed by Legislature without authority, or has
otherwise unconstitutionally trespassed on fundamental rights, it is for the
courts to determine the dispute and decide whether the law passed by the
legislature is valid or not… If the validity of any law is challenged before
the courts, it is never suggested that the material question as to whether
legislative authority has been exceeded or fundamental rights have been
contravened, can be decided by the legislatures themselves. Adjudication of
such a dispute is entrusted solely and exclusively to the Judicature of this
country…” In his celebrated dissent in Additional District Magistrate,
Jabalpur v Shivakant Shukla575, Justice HR Khanna, while referring to the rule
of law as the “antithesis of arbitrariness”, held:

> “527…Rule of law is now the accepted norm of all civilised societies...
> [E]verywhere it is identified with the liberty of the individual. It seeks
> to maintain a balance between the opposing notions of individual liberty and
> public order. In every State the problem arises of reconciling human rights
> with the requirements of public interest. Such harmonising can only be
> attained by the existence of independent courts which can hold the balance
> between citizen and State and compel Governments to conform to the law.”576
> 326 Judicial review has been held to be one of the basic features of the
> Constitution. A seven judge Bench of this Court, in L Chandra Kumar v Union
> of India577, declared:

> “78… the power of judicial review over legislative action vested in the High
> Courts under Article 226 and in the Supreme Court under Article 32 of the
> Constitution is an integral and essential feature of the Constitution,
> constituting part of its basic structure.”578 575 (1976) 2 SCC 521 576 Ibid,
> at page 748 577 (1997) 3 SCC 261 578 Ibid, at page 301  443 PART K The
> complementary relationship between judicial review, the rule of law and the
> separation of powers is integral to working of the Constitution. This Court
> in I R Coelho v State of Tamil Nadu579 held thus:

> “129… Equality, rule of law, judicial review and separation of powers form
> parts of the basic structure of the Constitution. Each of these concepts are
> intimately connected. There can be no rule of law, if there is no equality
> before the law. These would be meaningless if the violation was not subject
> to the judicial review. All these would be redundant if the legislative,
> executive and judicial powers are vested in one organ.

> Therefore, the duty to decide whether the limits have been transgressed has
> been placed on the judiciary.”580 Judicial review, by protecting individual
> rights, promotes the foundational values of the Constitution and the rule of
> law. This Court took note of this aspect in Puttaswamy:

> “295. Above all, it must be recognized that judicial review is a powerful
> guarantee against legislative encroachments on life and personal liberty. To
> cede this right would dilute the importance of the protection granted to
> life and personal liberty by the Constitution. Hence, while judicial review
> in constitutional challenges to the validity of legislation is exercised
> with a conscious regard for the presumption of constitutionality and for the
> separation of powers between the legislative, executive and judicial
> institutions, the constitutional power which is vested in the Court must be
> retained as a vibrant means of protecting the lives and freedoms of
> individuals.”581 327 Constitutional adjudication facilitates answers to the
> silences of the Constitution. The task of interpretation is to foster the
> spirit of the Constitution as much as its text. This role has exclusively
> been conferred on the Supreme Court and the High Courts to ensure that its
> values are not diminished by the 579 (2007) 2 SCC 1 580 Ibid, at page 58 581
> Ibid, at page 497  444 PART K legislature or the executive. Our Court has
> been conscious of this role. In Krishna Kumar Singh v State of Bihar582,
> while dealing with the question whether an ordinance (promulgated by the
> Governor) which has a limited life can bring about consequences for the
> future (in terms of the creation of rights, privileges, liabilities and
> obligations) which will enure beyond its life, a seven judge Bench held
> that:

> “91…The silences of the Constitution must be imbued with substantive content
> by infusing them with a meaning which enhances the Rule of law. To attribute
> to the executive as an incident of the power to frame ordinances, an
> unrestricted ability to create binding effects for posterity would set a
> dangerous precedent in a parliamentary democracy. The court's interpretation
> of the power to frame ordinances, which originates in the executive arm of
> government, cannot be oblivious to the basic notion that the primary form of
> law making is through the legislature...”583 (Emphasis supplied) The Court
> held that the ordinance making power must be carefully structured to ensure
> that it remains what the framers of our Constitution intended it to be:

an exceptional power to meet a constitutional necessity. 328 In a
constitutional democracy, the power of government, is defined, limited, and
distributed by the fundamental norms of the Constitution. A constitutional
democracy holds its political regime accountable, responsible, or answerable
for its decisions and actions while in public office. 584 A 582 (2017) 3 SCC 1
583 Ibid, at page 76 584 Almon Leroy Way, Jr., Constitutional Democracy &
Other Political Regimes, available at
http://www.proconservative.net/CUNAPolSci201PartTWOA.shtml  445 PART K
constitutional democracy determines the degree and manner of distribution of
political authority among the major organs or parts of the government. The
limits of each institution are set by the Constitution. No institution which
has been created by the Constitution can have absolute power. Separation of
powers, envisaged by the Constitution between different institutions acts as a
check and balance among the institutions and promotes the rule of law by
ensuring that no institution can act in an arbitrary manner. Judicial review
as a part of the basic structure of the Indian Constitution and as an
essential component of the rule of law and separation of powers, is intended
to ensure that every institution acts within its limits. Judicial review
promotes transparency, consistency and accountability in the administration of
law, and notions of equity, justice and fairness585. Constitutionalism thus
puts a legal limitation on the government. It envisages the existence of
limited government. Discretion conferred upon an institution of governance, be
it the legislature or the executive, is confined within clearly defined limits
of the Constitution. Not only are the organs of the State required to operate
within their defined legitimate spheres; they are bound to exercise their
powers within these spheres without violating the Constitution.586 Judicial
review is a sanction and agency to enforce the limitations imposed by the
Constitution upon the authority of the organs of the State. 585In Sheela Barse
v. State of Maharashtra ((1983) 2 SCC 96), the Supreme Court insisted on
fairness to women in police lock-up and also drafted a code of guidelines for
the protection of prisoners in police custody, especially female prisoners. In
Veena Sethi v. State of Bihar (AIR 1982 S.C. 1470), the Supreme Court extended
the reach of rule of law to the poor who constitute the bulk of India by
ruling that rule of law does not merely for those who have the means to fight
for their rights and expanded the locus standi principle to help the poor
586Durga Das Basu, Limited Government and Judicial Review, LexisNexis, (2016)
at pages 123-124  446 PART K This formulation of the limited power of
political authority has been recognized in several judgments of this Court. In
State of M P v Thakur Bharat Singh587, a Constitution Bench held:

> “5…Our federal structure is founded on certain fundamental principles: (1)
> the sovereignty of the people with limited Government authority i.e. the
> Government must be conducted in accordance with the will of the majority of
> the people. The people govern themselves through their representatives,
> whereas the official agencies of the executive Government possess only such
> powers as have been conferred upon them by the people; (2) There is a
> distribution of powers between the three organs of the State — legislative,
> executive and judicial — each organ having some check direct or indirect on
> the other; and (3) the rule of law which includes judicial review of
> arbitrary executive action…” (Emphasis supplied) 329 In a decision rendered
> by a Constitution Bench, in S P Sampath Kumar v Union of India588, Chief
> Justice P.N. Bhagwati, in his concurring opinion, held:

> “3…It is a fundamental principle of our constitutional scheme that every
> organ of the State, every authority under the Constitution, derives its
> power from the Constitution and has to act within the limits of such power.
> It is a limited government which we have under the Constitution and both the
> executive and the legislature have to act within the limits of the power
> conferred upon them under the Constitution… The judiciary is constituted the
> ultimate interpreter of the Constitution and to it is assigned the delicate
> task of determining what is the extent and scope of the power conferred on
> each branch of government, what are the limits on the exercise of such power
> under the Constitution and whether any action of any branch 587(1967) 2 SCR
> 454 588 (1987) 1 SCC 124  447 PART K transgresses such limits. It is also a
> basic principle of the rule of law which permeates every provision of the
> Constitution and which forms its very core and essence that the exercise of
> power by the executive or any other authority must not only be conditioned
> by the Constitution but also be in accordance with law and it is the
> judiciary which has to ensure that the law is observed and there is
> compliance with the requirements of law on the part of the executive and
> other authorities…”589 (Emphasis supplied) 330 In I R Coelho v State of
> Tamil Nadu590, a nine judge Bench held that control over government power
> ensures that the foundational values of a democracy are not damaged:

> “43…The principle of constitutionalism advocates a check and balance model
> of the separation of powers; it requires a diffusion of powers,
> necessitating different independent centres of decision-making… The role of
> the judiciary is to protect fundamental rights. A modern democracy is based
> on the twin principles of majority rule and the need to protect fundamental
> rights. According to Lord Steyn, it is job of the judiciary to balance the
> principles ensuring that the Government on the basis of number does not
> override fundamental rights.” The rule of law is an implied limitation on
> the authority of any institution in a constitutional democracy.591 331
> Interim orders of courts are an integral element of judicial review.

Interim directions issued on the basis of the prima facie findings in a case
are 589 Ibid, at pages 128-129 590 (2007) 2 SCC 1 591 K.T. Plantation (P) Ltd.
v. State of Karnataka, (2011) 9 SCC 1  448 PART K temporary arrangements till
the matter is finally decided. Interim orders ensure that the cause which is
being agitated does not become infructuous before the final hearing.592 The
power of judicial review is not only about the writs issued by superior courts
or the striking down of governmental action. Entrustment of judicial review is
accompanied by a duty to ensure that judicial orders are complied with. Unless
orders are enforced, citizens will lose faith in the efficacy of judicial
review and in the legal system. It is in the background of the above
constitutional position that this Court must deal with the contention that the
interim orders passed by this Court, during the adjudication of the present
dispute were not observed. This Court has consistently insisted, through its
interim orders, on a restraint on the mandatory use of Aadhaar. It has been
submitted that the interim orders have been violated and several contempt
petitions are pending593 before this Court. 332 Prior to the enactment of the
Aadhaar Act, the scheme was challenged before this Court. By its interim order
dated 23 September 2013 594, a two judge Bench directed:

> “All the matters require to be heard finally. List all matters for final
> hearing after the Constitution Bench is over.

In the meanwhile, no person should suffer for not getting the Aadhaar card in
spite of the fact that some authority had issued a circular making it
mandatory and when any person applies to get the Aadhaar Card voluntarily, it
may be checked whether that person is entitled for it 592State of Assam v.
Barak Upatyaka DU Karmachari Sanstha, (2009) 5 SCC 694 593Contempt Petition
(Civil) No. 144/2014 in WP (C) No. 494/2012; Contempt Petition (Civil) No.
674/2014 in WP (C) No. 829/2013; Contempt Petition (Civil) No 444/2016 in WP
(C) No. 494/2012 594The interim order was in WP (Civil No. 494 of 2012)  449
PART K under the law and it should not be given to any illegal immigrant.”
(sic) This was followed by an order dated 26 November 2013 where the earlier
order was continued:

> “After hearing the matter at length, we are of the view that all the States
> and Union Territories have to be impleaded as respondents to give effective
> directions. In view thereof notice be issued to all the States and Union
> Territories through standing counsel… Interim order to continue, in the
> meantime.” While considering another petition, Unique Identification
> Authority of India v Central Bureau of Investigation595, this Court directed
> in an interim order dated 24 March 2014:

> “In the meanwhile, the present petitioner is restrained from transferring
> any biometric information of any person who has been allotted the Aadhaar
> number to any other agency without his consent in writing… More so, no
> person shall be deprived of any service for want of Aadhaar number in case
> he/she is otherwise eligible/entitled. All the authorities are directed to
> modify their forms/circulars/likes so as to not compulsorily require the
> Aadhaar number in order to meet the requirement of the interim order passed
> by this Court forthwith… Tag and list the matter with main matter i.e. WP(C)
> No.494/2012.” On 16 March 2015, while considering WP (Civil) 494 of 2012,
> this Court noted a violation of its earlier order dated 23 September 2013
> and directed thus:

> “The matters require considerable time for hearing… In the meanwhile, it is
> brought to our notice that in certain quarters, Aadhaar identification is
> being insisted upon by the various authorities. We do not propose to go into
> the specific instances. Since Union of India is represented by learned
> Solicitor General and all the States are represented through their
> respective counsel, we expect 595 SLP (Crl.) No. 2524/2015 450 PART K that
> both the Union of India and States and all their functionaries should adhere
> to the Order passed by this Court on 23rd September, 2013.” By an order
> dated 11 August 2015, a three judge Bench referred the issue as to whether
> privacy is a fundamental right to a bench of a larger strength of judges.
> The following interim directions were issued:

> “Having considered the matter, we are of the view that the balance of
> interest would be best served, till the matter is finally decided by a
> larger Bench if the Union of India or the UIDAI proceed in the following
> manner:-

> 1\. The Union of India shall give wide publicity in the electronic and print
> media including radio and television networks that it is not mandatory for a
> citizen to obtain an Aadhaar card;

> 2\. The production of an Aadhaar card will not be condition for obtaining
> any benefits otherwise due to a citizen;

> 3\. The Unique Identification Number or the Aadhaar card will not be used by
> the respondents for any purpose other than the PDS Scheme and in particular
> for the purpose of distribution of foodgrains, etc. and cooking fuel, such
> as kerosene. The Aadhaar card may also be used for the purpose of the LPG
> Distribution Scheme;

> 4\. The information about an individual obtained by the Unique
> Identification Authority of India while issuing an Aadhaar card shall not be
> used for any other purpose, save as above, except as may be directed by a
> Court for the purpose of criminal investigation.” On 15 October 2015, a
> Constitution Bench of this Court partially modified the order dated 11
> August 2015, thus:

> “3…we are of the view that in paragraph 3 of the Order dated 11.08.2015, if
> we add, apart from the other two Schemes, namely, P.D.S. Scheme and the
> L.P.G. Distribution Scheme, the Schemes like The Mahatma Gandhi National
> Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS), National Social Assistance
> Programme (Old Age Pensions, Widow Pensions, Disability Pensions), Prime
> Minister’s Jan Dhan Yojana (PMJDY) and Employees’ Provident Fund
> Organisation (EPFO) for the present, it would not dilute earlier order
> passed by this Court. Therefore, we now include the aforesaid Schemes apart
> from the other two Schemes that this Court has permitted in its earlier
> order dated 11.08.2015.

451

> PART K

> 4\. We impress upon the Union of India that it shall strictly follow all the
> earlier orders passed by this Court commencing from 23.09.2013.

5\. We will also make it clear that the Aadhaar card Scheme is purely
voluntary and it cannot be made mandatory till the matter is finally decided
by this Court one way or the other.” After the Aadhaar Act was enacted there
was a challenge in All Bengal Minority Students Council v Union of India596,
to a letter written to the Chief Secretaries/Administrators of all State
Governments/Union territory Administrations by the Under Secretary to the
Government of India, by which the requirement of the submission of Aadhaar for
claiming benefits under a scheme was made mandatory. By an order dated 14
September 2016, a two judge Bench directed as follows:

> “…we stay the operation and implementation of letters dated 14.07.2006 (i.e.
> Annexure P-5, P-6 and P-7) for Pre-Matric Scholarship Scheme, Post-Matric
> Scholarship Scheme and Merit-cum-Means Scholarship Scheme to the extent they
> have made submission of Aadhaar mandatory and direct the Ministry of
> Electronics and Information Technology, Government of India i.e. Respondent
> No.2 to remove Aadhaar number as a mandatory condition for student
> Registration form at the National Scholarship Portal of Ministry of
> Electronics and Information Technology, Government of India at the website
> http://scholarships.gov.in/newStudentRegFrm and stay the implementation of
> clause (c) of the 'Important Instructions' of the advertisement dated
> 20.08.2016 for the Pre-Matric Scholarship Scheme, Post-Matric Scholarship
> Scheme and Merit-cum-Means Scholarship Scheme, during the pendency of this
> writ petition.” It has been submitted that the notifications and circulars,
> which make the application of Aadhaar mandatory, are contrary to the interim
> orders passed by this Court. It has been contended that the Respondents have
> flouted the 596 WP (Civil) No. 686/2016 452 PART K most elementary norms of
> good governance and have disrespected judicial orders. This contention
> requires serious consideration.

333 The legislature cannot simply declare that the judgment of a court is
invalid or that it stands nullified. In Kalpana Mehta, a Constitution Bench of
this Court held:

> “255…If the legislature were permitted to do so, it would travel beyond the
> boundaries of constitutional entrustment. While the separation of powers
> prevents the legislature from issuing a mere declaration that a judgment is
> erroneous or invalid, the law-making body is entitled to enact a law which
> remedies the defects which have been pointed out by the court. Enactment of
> a law which takes away the basis of the judgment (as opposed to merely
> invalidating it) is permissible and does not constitute a violation of the
> separation doctrine.

That indeed is the basis on which validating legislation is permitted.”597
Where a final judgment or order of this Court is sought to be undone by an Act
of Parliament, it is imperative that the basis of the Court’s judgment or
order is removed. It has been held by this Court in Bhubaneshwar Singh v Union
of India598:

> “11. From time to time controversy has arisen as to whether the effect of
> judicial pronouncements of the High Court or the Supreme Court can be wiped
> out by amending the legislation with retrospective effect. Many such
> Amending Acts are called Validating Acts, validating the action taken under
> the particular enactments by removing the defect in the statute
> retrospectively because of which the statute or the part of it had been
> declared ultra vires. Such exercise has been held by this Court as not to
> amount to encroachment on the judicial power of the courts. The exercise of
> rendering ineffective the judgments or orders of competent courts by
> changing the very basis by legislation is a well-known device of validating
> legislation. This Court has repeatedly pointed out 597 Ibid, at page 126 598
> (1994) 6 SCC 77  453 PART K that such validating legislation which removes
> the cause of the invalidity cannot be considered to be an encroachment on
> judicial power. At the same time, any action in exercise of the power under
> any enactment which has been declared to be invalid by a court cannot be
> made valid by a Validating Act by merely saying so unless the defect which
> has been pointed out by the court is removed with retrospective effect. The
> validating legislation must remove the cause of invalidity. Till such defect
> or the lack of authority pointed out by the court under a statute is removed
> by the subsequent enactment with retrospective effect, the binding nature of
> the judgment of the court cannot be ignored.”599 (Emphasis supplied) When
> the Aadhaar Act was notified on 25 March 2016, the interim directions issued
> by this court were in operation. Was it then open to government to launch
> upon a virtual spree of administrative notifications making Aadhaar a
> mandatory requirement of virtually every aspect of human existence from
> birth until death?

The position which the Union government has adopted before this court is
simply this: interim directions were issued by this court when the Aadhaar
project was governed by executive instructions. Once a law was enacted by
Parliament, a statutory authorisation was brought into existence to enable
government to issue administrative instructions. Hence, compliance with the
interim orders stands obviated upon the enactment of the law. 334 This defence
of government can be scrutinized at two levels – the first as a matter of
statutory interpretation and the second, on a broader foundation which engages
the judicial power of this court. As a matter of 599 Ibid at pages 83-84  454
PART K statutory interpretation, the Aadhaar Act did not, as it could not
have, merely nullified the interim orders of this court. Section 59 has no
provision which gives it overriding effect notwithstanding any judgment,
decree or order of a court. The interim orders do not stand superseded. Apart
from approaching the issue purely as a matter of statutory interpretation,
there are broader concerns which arise from the manner in which the
authorities proceeded, oblivious to the interim directions. Interim directions
were issued by this court in a situation where a constitutional challenge was
addressed in a batch of petitions on the ground that the Aadhaar project was
offensive to fundamental rights, including the right to privacy. So
significant was the nature of the challenge that it was referred initially to
a Constitution Bench and thereafter, to a bench of nine-judges of this Court
for resolving the question as to whether privacy is a protected fundamental
right. The collection and storage of biometric data and its use for the
purpose of authentication is the subject of a constitutional challenge. Noting
the nature of the challenge and after considering the serious issues which
have arisen in the case, successive benches of this Court issued a series of
interim directions. The purport of those directions is that Aadhaar could not
be made mandatory except for specified schemes which were listed by the court.
Moreover, in the context of the serious grievance of financial exclusion, the
court directed that no individual should be excluded from the receipt of
welfare entitlements, such as food-grains, for want of an Aadhaar number. The
constitutional challenge was not obviated merely on the enactment of the
Aadhaar Act. The law gave a  455 PART K statutory character to a project which
since 2009 was possessed of an administrative or executive nature. The
constitutional challenge to some of the basic features underlying the
collection of biometric data still remained to be addressed by the court. The
proceedings before this Court are testimony to the fact that the issue of
constitutionality was indeed live. That being the position, the issuance of a
spate of administrative notifications is in defiance of the interim orders
passed by this Court. Judicial orders, be they interim or final, cannot simply
be wished away. If governments or citizens were allowed to ignore judicially
enforceable directions, that would negate the basis of the rule of law. Both
propriety and constitutional duty required Union government to move this Court
after the enactment of the Aadhaar Act for variation of the interim orders.
Such an application would have required this Court to weigh on the one hand
the subsequent development of the law being passed (something which would be
relied upon by government) with the constitutional concerns over the entire
biometric project. It is not as if that the mere enactment of the law put an
end to the constitutional challenge. The existence of law (post 2016) is only
one aspect to be considered in deciding the interim arrangement which would
hold the field when the constitutional challenge was pending adjudication
before this Court. Institutions of governance are bound by a sense of
constitutional morality which requires them to abide by judicial orders. What
seems to emerge from the course of action which has been followed in the
present case by government is a perception that judicial directions can be
ignored on a supposed construction of the statute. Besides  456 PART K the
fact that this construction is erroneous in law, it is above all, the
fundamental duty of this Court to ensure that its orders are not treated with
disdain. If we were not to enforce a punctilious compliance with our own
directions by government, that would ring a death – knell of the institutional
position of the Supreme Court. If governments were free to ignore judicial
directions at will, could a different yardstick be applied to citizens? The
obligation to comply with judicial orders is universal to our polity and
admits of no exception. Confronted with a brazen disregard of our interim
orders, I believe that we have no course open except to stand firm. 335 The
power of judicial review conferred on an independent judiciary requires that
other organs of the State respect the authority of Courts. This Court in P
Sambamurthy v State of Andhra Pradesh600, while highlighting the importance of
judicial review in the rule of law regime, held thus:

> “4… it is a basic principle of the rule of law that the exercise of power by
> the executive or any other authority must not only be conditioned by the
> Constitution but must also be in accordance with law and the power of
> judicial review is conferred by the Constitution with view to ensuring that
> the law is observed and there is compliance with the requirement of law on
> the part of the executive and other authorities. It is through the power of
> judicial review conferred on an independent institutional authority such as
> the High Court that the rule of law is maintained and every organ of the
> State is kept within the limits- of the law. Now if the exercise of the
> power of judicial review can be set at naught by the State Government by
> overriding the decision given against it, it would sound, the death-knell of
> the rule of law. The rule of law would cease to have any meaning, because
> then it would be open to the State Government to defy the law and yet get
> away with it.”601 (Emphasis supplied) 600 (1987) 1 SCC 362 601 Ibid, at page
> 369  457 PART K 336 A Bench of two judges in Re: Arundhati Roy602 held that
> for the courts to protect the rule of law, it is necessary that the dignity
> and authority of the courts have to be respected and protected. It was held:

> “‘Rule of Law’ is the basic rule of governance of any civilised democratic
> policy. Our Constitutional scheme is based upon the concept of Rule of Law
> which we have adopted and given to ourselves. Everyone, whether individually
> or collectively is unquestionably under the supremacy of law. Whoever the
> person may be, however high he or she is, no-one is above the law
> notwithstanding how powerful and how rich he or she may be. For achieving
> the establishment of the rule of law, the Constitution has assigned the
> special task to the judiciary in the country. It is only through the courts
> that the rule of law unfolds its contents and establishes its concept. For
> the judiciary to perform its duties and functions effectively and true to
> the spirit with which it is sacredly entrusted, the dignity and authority of
> the courts have to be respected and protected at all costs.”603 (Emphasis
> supplied) The accountability of power, as a component of the rule of law,
> requires that the power vested in any organ of the State, and its agents,
> can only be used for promotion of constitutional values and vision.604
> Governmental authority may only be exercised in accordance with written laws
> which are adopted though an established procedure. No action of the
> legislature or the executive can undermine the authority of the courts,
> except according to established principles. Disrespect of court orders
> results in impairment of the dignity of the courts.

> 602 (2002) 3 SCC 343 603 Ibid, at page 346 604 Nandini Sundar v State of
> Chhattisgarh, (2011) 7 SCC 547  458 PART K 337 Constitutional morality
> requires a government not to act in a manner which would become violative of
> the rule of law.605 Constitutional morality requires that the orders of this
> Court be complied with, faithfully. This Court is the ultimate custodian of
> the Constitution. The limits set by the Constitution are enforced by this
> Court. Constitutional morality requires that the faith of the citizens in
> the constitutional courts of the country be maintained. The importance of
> the existence of courts in the eyes of citizens has been highlighted in
> Harper Lee’s classic “To Kill a Mockingbird”:

> “But there is one way in this country in which all men are created
> equal—there is one human institution that makes a pauper the equal of a
> Rockefeller, the stupid man the equal of an Einstein, and the ignorant man
> the equal of any college president. That institution, gentlemen, is a court.
> It can be the Supreme Court of the United States or the humblest J.P.

> court in the land, or this honorable court which you serve. Our courts have
> their faults, as does any human institution, but in this country our courts
> are the great levelers, and in our courts all men are created equal.”
> (Emphasis supplied) Many citizens, although aggrieved, are not in a
> condition to reach the highest Court. The poorest and socially neglected
> lack resources and awareness to reach this Court. Their grievances remain
> unaddressed. Such individuals suffer injury each day without remedy.
> Disobedience of the interim orders of this Court and its institutional
> authority, in the present case, has made a societal impact. It has also
> resulted in denial of subsidies and other benefits essential to the
> existence of a common citizen. Constitutional morality therefore needs to be
> enforced as a valid response to these arbitrary acts.

Non-compliance of the interim orders of this Court is contrary to
constitutional 605 Manoj Narula v Union of India, (2014) 9 SCC 1  459 PART K
morality. Constitutional morality, as an essential component of the rule of
law, must neutralise the excesses of power by the executive. The brazen manner
in which notifications have been issued making Aadhaar mandatory, despite the
interim order of this Court is a matter of serious concern. Deference to the
institutional authority of the Supreme Court is integral to the values which
the Constitution adopts. The postulate of a limited government is enforced by
the role of the Supreme Court in protecting the liberties of citizens and
holding government accountable for its transgressions. The authority of this
Court is crucial to maintaining the fine balances of power on which democracy
thrives and survives. The orders of the Court are not recommendatory – they
are binding directions of a constitutional adjudicator. Dilution of the
institutional prestige of this Court can only be at the cost of endangering
the freedom of over a billion citizens which judicial review seeks to
safeguard. 338 Courts – as it is often said- have neither the power of the
purse nor the sword. Our authority lies in constitutional legitimacy as much
as in public confidence. Combined together they impart moral and institutional
authority to the Court. That sense of legitimacy and duty have required me to
assert once again the norms of a written Constitution and the rule of law.
This judgment has taken a much wider postulation. Having held the Aadhaar Act
prior to its passage not to be a Money Bill, I have delved into the merits of
the constitutional challenge for two reasons:  460 PART L i. Merits have been
argued in considerable detail both by petitioners and the Union of India; and
ii. As a logical consequence of the view that the Aadhaar legislation is not a
Money Bill, it would be open to the government to reintroduce fresh
legislation. The principles governing a law regulating the right to data
protection and informational privacy have hence been delineated.

    
    
    L      Conclusion
    
    
    339    The present dispute has required this Court to analyze the provisions of
    
    

the Aadhaar Act and Regulations, along with the framework as it existed prior
to the enactment of the Act, through the prism of the Constitution and the
precedents of this Court. My conclusions are outlined below: (1) In order to
deal with the challenge that the Aadhaar Act should not have been passed as a
Money Bill, this Court was required to adjudicate whether the decision of the
Speaker of the Lok Sabha to certify a Bill as a Money Bill, can be subject to
judicial review. The judgment has analyzed the scope of the finality
attributed to the Speaker’s decision, by looking at the history of Article
110(3) of the Constitution, by comparing it with the comparative
constitutional practices which accord finality to the Speaker’s decision, by
analyzing other constitutional provisions which use the phrase  461 PART L
“shall be final”, and by examining the protection granted to parliamentary
proceedings under Article 122. This judgment holds that:

(a) The phrase “shall be final” used under Article 110(3) aims at avoiding any
controversy on the issue as to whether a Bill is a Money Bill, with respect to
the Rajya Sabha and before the President. The language used in Article 110(3)
does not exclude judicial review of the Speaker’s decision. This also applies
to Article 199(3).

(b) The immunity from judicial review provided to parliamentary proceedings
under Article 122 is limited to instances involving “irregularity of
procedure”. The decisions of this Court in Special Reference, Ramdas Athawale
and Raja Ram Pal hold that the validity of proceedings in Parliament or a
State Legislature can be subject to judicial review when there is a
substantive illegality or a constitutional violation. These judgments make it
clear that the decision of the Speaker is subject to judicial review, if it
suffers from illegality or from a violation of constitutional provisions.

(c) Article 255 has no relation with the decision of the Speaker on whether a
Bill is a Money Bill. The three Judge Bench decision in Mohd Saeed Siddiqui
erroneously interpreted the judgment in Mangalore Beedi to apply Articles 212
(or Article 122) and 255 to refrain from questioning the conduct of the
Speaker (under Article 199 or 110). The two judge  462 PART L Bench decision
in Yogendra Kumar followed Mohd Saeed Siddiqui. The correct position of law is
that the decision of the Speaker under Articles 110(3) and 199(3) is not
immune from judicial review. The decisions in Mohd Saeed Siddiqui and Yogendra
Kumar are accordingly overruled.

(d) The existence of and the role of the Rajya Sabha, as an institution of
federal bicameralism in the Indian Parliament, constitutes a part of the basic
structure of the Constitution. The decision of the Speaker of the Lok Sabha to
certify a Bill as a Money Bill has a direct impact on the role of the Rajya
Sabha, since the latter has a limited role in the passing of a Money Bill. A
decision of the Speaker of the Lok Sabha to declare an ordinary Bill to be a
Money Bill limits the role of the Rajya Sabha. The power of the Speaker cannot
be exercised arbitrarily in violation of constitutional norms and values, as
it damages the essence of federal bicameralism, which is a part of the basic
structure of the Constitution. Judicial review of the Speaker’s decision, on
whether a Bill is a Money Bill, is therefore necessary to protect the basic
structure of the Constitution.

(2) To be certified a Money Bill, a Bill must contain “only provisions”
dealing with every or any one of the matters set out in sub-clauses (a) to (g)
of Article 110(1). A Bill, which has both provisions which fall within sub-
clauses (a) to (g) of Article 110(1) and provisions which fall outside their
463 PART L scope, will not qualify to be a Money Bill. Thus, when a Bill which
has been passed as a Money Bill has certain provisions which fall beyond the
scope of sub-clauses (a) to (g) of Article 110(1), these provisions cannot be
severed. If the bill was not a Money Bill, the role of the Rajya Sabha in its
legislative passage could not have been denuded. The debasement of a
constitutional institution cannot be countenanced by the Court. Democracy
survives when constitutional institutions are vibrant. (3) The Aadhaar Act
creates a statutory framework for obtaining a unique identity number, which is
capable of being used for “any” purpose, among which availing benefits,
subsidies and services, for which expenses are incurred from the Consolidated
Fund of India, is just one purpose provided under Section 7. Clause (e) of
Article 110(1) requires that a Money Bill must deal with the declaring of any
expenditure to be expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of India (or
increasing the amount of the expenditure). Section 7 fails to fulfil this
requirement. Section 7 does not declare the expenditure incurred to be a
charge on the Consolidated Fund. It only provides that in the case of such
services, benefits or subsidies, Aadhaar can be made mandatory to avail of
them. Moreover, provisions other than Section 7 of the Act deal with several
aspects relating to the Aadhaar numbers: enrolment on the basis of demographic
and biometric information, generation of Aadhaar numbers, obtaining the
consent of individuals before collecting their individual information,  464
PART L creation of a statutory authority to implement and supervise the
process, protection of information collected during the process, disclosure of
information in certain circumstances, creation of offences and penalties for
disclosure or loss of information, and the use of the Aadhaar number for “any
purpose”. All these provisions of the Aadhaar Act do not lie within the scope
of sub-clauses (a) to (g) of Article 110(1). Hence, in the alternate, even if
it is held that Section 7 bears a nexus to the expenditure incurred from the
Consolidated Fund of India, the other provisions of the Act fail to fall
within the domain of Article 110(1). Thus, the Aadhaar Act is declared
unconstitutional for failing to meet the necessary requirements to have been
certified as a Money Bill under Article 110(1). (4) The argument that the
Aadhaar Act is in pith and substance a Money Bill, with its main objective
being the delivery of subsidies, benefits and services flowing out of the
Consolidated Fund of India and that the other provisions are ancillary to the
main purpose of the Act also holds no ground, since the doctrine of pith and
substance is used to examine whether the legislature has the competence to
enact a law with regard to any of the three Lists in the Seventh Schedule of
the Constitution. The doctrine cannot be invoked to declare whether a Bill
satisfies the requirements set out in Article 110 of the Constitution to be
certified a Money Bill. The argument of the Union of India misses the point
that a Bill  465 PART L can be certified as a Money Bill “only” if it deals
with all or any of the matters contained in clauses (a) to (g) of Article
110(1). (5) Having held that the Aadhaar Act is unconstitutional for having
been passed as a Money Bill this judgment has also analysed the merits of the
other constitutional challenges to the legislation as well as to the framework
of the project before the law was enacted. (6) The architecture of the Aadhaar
Act seeks to create a unique identity for residents on the basis of their
demographic and biometric information. The Act sets up a process of
identification by which the unique identity assigned to each individual is
verified with the demographic and biometric information pertaining to that
individual which is stored in a centralised repository of data. Identification
of beneficiaries is integral and essential to the fulfilment of social welfare
schemes and programmes, which are a part of the State’s attempts to ensure
that its citizens have access to basic human facilities. This judgment accepts
the contention of the Union of India that there is a legitimate state aim in
maintaining a system of identification to ensure that the welfare benefits
provided by the State reach the beneficiaries who are entitled, without
diversion. (7) The Aadhaar programme involves application of biometric
technology, which uses an individual’s biometric data as the basis of
authentication or identification and is therefore intimately connected to the
individual. While  466 PART L citizens have privacy interests in personal or
private information collected about them, the unique nature of biometric data
distinguishes it from other personal data, compounding concerns regarding
privacy protections safeguarding biometric information. Once a biometric
system is compromised, it is compromised forever. Therefore, it is imperative
that concerns about protecting privacy must be addressed while developing a
biometric system. Adequate norms must be laid down for each step from the
collection to retention of biometric data. At the time of collection,
individuals must be informed about the collection procedure, the intended
purpose of the collection, the reason why the particular data set is requested
and who will have access to their data. Additionally, the retention period
must be justified and individuals must be given the right to access, correct
and delete their data at any point in time, a procedure familiar to an opt-out
option.

(8) Prior to the enactment of the Aadhaar Act, no mandatory obligation was
imposed upon the Registrars or the enrolling agencies, to obtain informed
consent from residents before recording their biometric data, to inform them
how the biometric data would be stored and used and about the existence of
adequate safeguards to secure the data. Moreover, prior to the enactment of
the Act, while UIDAI had itself contemplated that an identity theft could
occur at the time of enrollment for Aadhaar cards, it  467 PART L had no
solution to the possible harms which could result after the identity theft of
a person.

(9) The Regulations framed subsequently under the Aadhaar Act also do not
provide a robust mechanism on how informed consent is to be obtained from
residents before collecting their biometric data. The Aadhaar Act and
Regulations are bereft of the procedure through which an individual can access
information related to his or her authentication record. The Aadhaar Act
clearly has no defined options that should be made available to the Aadhaar
number holders in case they do not wish to submit identity information during
authentication, nor do the regulations specify the procedure to be followed in
case the Aadhaar number holder does not provide consent for authentication.

(10) Sections 29(1) and (2) of the Act create a distinction between two
classes of information (core biometric information and identity information),
which are integral to individual identity and require equal protection.
Section 29(4) suffers from overbreadth as it gives wide discretionary power to
UIDAI to publish, display or post core biometric information of an individual
for purposes specified by the regulations. (11) Sections 2(g), (j), (k) and
(t) suffer from overbreadth, as these can lead to an invasive collection of
biological attributes. These provisions give  468 PART L discretionary power
to UIDAI to define the scope of biometric and demographic information and
empower it to expand on the nature of information already collected at the
time of enrollment, to the extent of also collecting any “such other
biological attributes” that it may deem fit. (12) There is no clarity on how
an individual is supposed to update his/her biometric information, in case the
biometric information mismatches with the data stored in CIDR. The proviso to
Section 28(5) of the Aadhaar Act, which disallows an individual access to the
biometric information that forms the core of his or her unique ID, is
violative of a fundamental principle that ownership of an individual’s data
must at all times vest with the individual. UIDAI is also provided wide powers
in relation to removing the biometric locking of residents. With this analysis
of the measures taken by the Government of India prior to the enactment of the
Aadhaar Act as well as a detailed analysis of the provisions under the Aadhaar
Act, 2016 and supporting Regulations made under it, this judgment concludes
that the Aadhaar programme violates essential norms pertaining to
informational privacy, self-determination and data protection. (13) The State
is under a constitutional obligation to safeguard the dignity of its citizens.
Biometric technology which is the core of the Aadhaar programme is
probabilistic in nature, leading to authentication failures. These
authentication failures have led to the denial of rights and legal  469 PART L
entitlements. The Aadhaar project has failed to account for and remedy the
flaws in its framework and design which has led to serious instances of
exclusion of eligible beneficiaries as demonstrated by the official figures
from Government records including the Economic Survey of India 2016-17 and
research studies. Dignity and the rights of individuals cannot be made to
depend on algorithms or probabilities. Constitutional guarantees cannot be
subject to the vicissitudes of technology. Denial of benefits arising out of
any social security scheme which promotes socio- economic rights of citizens
is violative of human dignity and impermissible under our constitutional
scheme.

(14) The violations of fundamental rights resulting from the Aadhaar scheme
were tested on the touchstone of proportionality. The measures adopted by the
respondents fail to satisfy the test of necessity and proportionality for the
following reasons:

(a) Under the Aadhaar project, requesting entities can hold the identity
information of individuals, for a temporary period. It was admitted by UIDAI
that AUAs may store additional information according to their requirement to
secure their system. ASAs have also been permitted to store logs of
authentication transactions for a specific time period. It has been admitted
by UIDAI that it gets the AUA code, ASA code, unique device code and the
registered device code used for authentication, and that UIDAI would know from
which device the authentication took  470 PART L place and through which
AUA/ASA. Under the Regulations, UIDAI further stores the authentication
transaction data. This is in violation of widely recognized data minimisation
principles which mandate that data collectors and processors delete personal
data records when the purpose for which it has been collected is fulfilled.
Moreover, using the meta-data related to the transaction, the location of the
authentication can easily be traced using the IP address, which impacts upon
the privacy of the individual.

(b) From the verification log, it is possible to locate the places of
transactions by an individual in the past five years. It is also possible
through the Aadhaar database to track the current location of an individual,
even without the verification log. The architecture of Aadhaar poses a risk of
potential surveillance activities through the Aadhaar database. Any leakage in
the verification log poses an additional risk of an individual’s biometric
data being vulnerable to unauthorised exploitation by third parties.

(c) The biometric database in the CIDR is accessible to third-party vendors
providing biometric search and de-duplication algorithms, since neither the
Central Government nor UIDAI have the source code for the de- duplication
technology which is at the heart of the programme. The source code belongs to
a foreign corporation. UIDAI is merely a licensee. Prior to the enactment of
the Aadhaar Act, without the consent  471 PART L of individual citizens, UIDAI
contracted with L-1 Identity Solutions (the foreign entity which provided the
source code for biometric storage) to provide to it any personal information
related to any resident of India. This is contrary to the basic requirement
that an individual has the right to protect herself by maintaining control
over personal information. The protection of the data of 1.2 billion citizens
is a question of national security and cannot be subjected to the mere terms
and conditions of a normal contract.

(d) Before the enactment of the Aadhaar Act, MOUs signed between UIDAI and
Registrars were not contracts within the purview of Article 299 of the
Constitution, and therefore, do not cover the acts done by the private
entities engaged by the Registrars for enrolment. Since there is no privity of
contract between UIDAI and the Enrolling agencies, the activities of the
private parties engaged in the process of enrolment before the enactment of
the Aadhaar Act have no statutory or legal backing.

(e) Under the Aadhaar architecture, UIDAI is the sole authority which carries
out all administrative, adjudicatory, investigative, and monitoring functions
of the project. While the Act confers these functions on UIDAI, it does not
place any institutional accountability upon UIDAI to protect the database of
citizens’ personal information. UIDAI also takes no institutional
responsibility for verifying whether the data entered and  472 PART L stored
in the CIDR is correct and authentic. The task has been delegated to the
enrolment agency or the Registrar. Verification of data being entered in the
CIDR is a highly sensitive task for which the UIDAI ought to have taken
responsibility. The Aadhaar Act is also silent on the liability of UIDAI and
its personnel in case of their non-compliance of the provisions of the Act or
the regulations.

(f) Section 47 of the Act violates citizens’ right to seek remedies. Under
Section 47(1), a court can take cognizance of an offence punishable under the
Act only on a complaint made by UIDAI or any officer or person authorised by
it. Section 47 is arbitrary as it fails to provide a mechanism to individuals
to seek efficacious remedies for violation of their right to privacy. Further,
Section 23(2)(s) of the Act requires UIDAI to establish a grievance redressal
mechanism. Making the authority which is administering a project, also
responsible for providing a grievance redressal mechanism for grievances
arising from the project severely compromises the independence of the
grievance redressal body.

(g) While the Act creates a regime of criminal offences and penalties, the
absence of an independent regulatory framework renders the Act largely
ineffective in dealing with data violations. The architecture of Aadhaar ought
to have, but has failed to embody within the law the establishment of an
independent monitoring authority (with a hierarchy  473 PART L of regulators),
along with the broad principles for data protection. This compromise in the
independence of the grievance redressal body impacts upon the possibility and
quality of justice being delivered to citizens. In the absence of an
independent regulatory and monitoring framework which provides robust
safeguards for data protection, the Aadhaar Act cannot pass muster against a
challenge on the ground of reasonableness under Article 14.

(h) No substantive provisions, such as those providing data minimization, have
been laid down as guiding principles for the oversight mechanism provided
under Section 33(2), which permits disclosure of identity information and
authentication records in the interest of national security.

(i) Allowing private entities to use Aadhaar numbers, under Section 57, will
lead to commercial exploitation of the personal data of individuals without
consent and could also lead to individual profiling. Profiling could be used
to predict the emergence of future choices and preferences of individuals.
These preferences could also be used to influence the decision making of the
electorate in choosing candidates for electoral offices. This is contrary to
privacy protection norms. Data cannot be used for any purpose other than those
that have been approved. While developing an identification system of the
magnitude of Aadhaar, security concerns relating to the data of 1.2 billion
citizens  474 PART L ought to be addressed. These issues have not been dealt
with by the Aadhaar Act. By failing to protect the constitutional rights of
citizens, Section 57 violates Articles 14 and 21.

(j) Section 57 is susceptible to be applied to permit commercial exploitation
of the data of individuals or to affect their behavioural patterns. Section 57
cannot pass constitutional muster. Since it is manifestly arbitrary, it
suffers from overbreadth and violates Article 14.

(k) Section 7 suffers from overbreadth since the broad definitions of the
expressions ‘services and ‘benefits’ enable the government to regulate almost
every facet of its engagement with citizens under the Aadhaar platform. If the
requirement of Aadhaar is made mandatory for every benefit or service which
the government provides, it is impossible to live in contemporary India
without Aadhaar. The inclusion of services and benefits in Section 7 is a pre-
cursor to the kind of function creep which is inconsistent with the right to
informational self-determination. Section 7 is therefore arbitrary and
violative of Article 14 in relation to the inclusion of services and benefits
as defined.

(l) The legitimate aim of the State can be fulfilled by adopting less
intrusive measures as opposed to the mandatory enforcement of the Aadhaar
scheme as the sole repository of identification. The State has failed to
demonstrate that a less intrusive measure other than biometric  475 PART L
authentication would not subserve its purposes. That the state has been able
to insist on an adherence to the Aadhaar scheme without exception is a result
of the overbreadth of Section 7.

(m) When Aadhaar is seeded into every database, it becomes a bridge across
discreet data silos, which allows anyone with access to this information to
re-construct a profile of an individual’s life. This is contrary to the right
to privacy and poses severe threats due to potential surveillance.

(n) One right cannot be taken away at the behest of the other. The State has
failed to satisfy this Court that the targeted delivery of subsidies which
animate the right to life entails a necessary sacrifice of the right to
individual autonomy, data protection and dignity when both these rights are
protected by the Constitution.

(15) Section 59 of the Aadhaar Act seeks to retrospectively validate the
actions of the Central Government done prior to the Aadhaar Act pursuant to
Notifications dated 28 January 2009. and 12 September 2015\. Section 59 does
not validate actions of the state governments or of private entities.
Moreover, the notification of 2009 did not authorise the collection of
biometric data. Consequently, the validation of actions taken under the 2009
notification by Section 59 does not save the collection of biometric data
prior to the enforcement of the Act. While Parliament  476 PART L possesses
the competence to enact a validating law, it must cure the cause of infirmity
or invalidity. Section 59 fails to cure the cause of invalidity prior to the
enactment of the Aadhaar Act. The absence of a legislative framework for the
Aadhaar project between 2009 and 2016 left the biometric data of millions of
Indian citizens bereft of the kind of protection which must be provided to
comprehensively protect and enforce the right to privacy. Section 59 therefore
fails to meet the test of a validating law since the complete absence of a
regulatory framework and safeguards cannot be cured merely by validating what
was done under the notifications of 2009 and 2016.

(16) The decision in Puttaswamy recognised that revenue constitutes a
legitimate state aim in the three-pronged test of proportionality. However,
the existence of a legitimate aim is insufficient to uphold the validity of
the law, which must also meet the other parameters of proportionality spelt
out in Puttaswamy.

(17) The seeding of Aadhaar with PAN cards depends on the constitutional
validity of the Aadhaar legislation itself. Section 139AA of the Income Tax
Act 1962 is based on the premise that the Aadhaar Act itself is a valid
legislation. Since the Aadhaar Act itself is now held to be unconstitutional
for having been enacted as a Money Bill and on the touchstone of
proportionality, the seeding of Aadhaar to PAN under Article 139AA does not
stand independently.

477 PART L (18) The 2017 amendments to the PMLA Rules fail to satisfy the test
of proportionality. The imposition of a uniform requirement of linking Aadhaar
numbers with all account based relationships proceeds on the presumption that
all existing account holders as well as every individual who seeks to open an
account in future is a potential money-launderer. No distinction has been made
in the degree of imposition based on the client, the nature of the business
relationship, the nature and value of the transactions or the actual
possibility of terrorism and money- laundering. The rules also fail to make a
distinction between opening an account and operating an account. Moreover, the
consequences of the failure to submit an Aadhaar number are draconian. In
their present form, the rules are clearly disproportionate and excessive. We
clarify that this holding would not preclude the Union Government in the
exercise of its rule making power and the Reserve Bank of India as the
regulator to re-design the requirements in a manner that would ensure due
fulfillment of the object of preventing money-laundering, subject to
compliance with the principles of proportionality as outlined in this
judgment. (19) Mobile phones have become a ubiquitous feature of the lives of
people and the linking of Aadhaar numbers with SIM cards and the requirement
of e-KYC authentication of mobile subscribers must necessarily be viewed in
this light. Applying the proportionality test, the legitimate aim of
subscriber verification, has to be balanced against the countervailing
requirements of  478 PART L preserving the integrity of biometric data and the
privacy of mobile phone subscribers. Mobile phones are a storehouse of
personal data and reflect upon individual preferences, lifestyle and choices.
The conflation of biometric information with SIM cards poses grave threats to
individual privacy, liberty and autonomy. Having due regard to the test of
proportionality which has been propounded in Puttaswamy and as elaborated in
this judgment, the decision to link Aadhaar numbers with mobile SIM cards is
neither valid nor constitutional. The mere existence of a legitimate state aim
will not justify the disproportionate means which have been adopted in the
present case. The biometric information and Aadhaar details collected by
Telecom Service Providers shall be deleted forthwith and no use of the said
information or details shall be made by TSPs or any agency or person or their
behalf. (20) Defiance of judicial orders (both interim and final) be it by the
government or by citizens negates the basis of the rule of law. Both propriety
and constitutional duty required the Union government to move this Court after
the enactment of the Aadhaar Act for variation of this Court’s interim orders.
Institutions of governance are bound by a sense of constitutional morality
which requires them to abide by judicial orders. (21) Identity is necessarily
a plural concept. The Constitution also recognizes a multitude of identities
through the plethora of rights that it safeguards.  479 PART L The technology
deployed in the Aadhaar scheme reduces different constitutional identities
into a single identity of a 12-digit number and infringes the right of an
individual to identify herself/himself through a chosen means. Aadhaar is
about identification and is an instrument which facilitates a proof of
identity. It must not be allowed to obliterate constitutional identity.

(22) The entire Aadhaar programme, since 2009, suffers from constitutional
infirmities and violations of fundamental rights. The enactment of the Aadhaar
Act does not save the Aadhaar project. The Aadhaar Act, the Rules and
Regulations framed under it, and the framework prior to the enactment of the
Act are unconstitutional. (23) To enable the government to initiate steps for
ensuring conformity with this judgment, it is directed under Article 142 that
the existing data which has been collected shall not be destroyed for a period
of one year. During this period, the data shall not be used for any purpose
whatsoever. At the end of one year, if no fresh legislation has been enacted
by the Union government in conformity with the principles which have been
enunciated in this judgment, the data shall be destroyed. Creating strong
privacy protection laws and instilling safeguards may address or at the very
least assuage some of the concerns associated with the Aadhaar scheme which
severely impairs informational self-determination,  480 PART L individual
privacy, dignity and autonomy. In order to uphold the democratic values of the
Constitution, the government needs to address the concerns highlighted in this
judgment which would provide a strong foundation for digital initiatives,
which are imminent in today’s digital age. However, in its current form, the
Aadhaar framework does not sufficiently assuage the concerns that have arisen
from the operation of the project which have been discussed in this judgment.

……....................................................J [Dr Dhananjaya Y
Chandrachud] New Delhi;

September 26, 2018.

481 1

REPORTABLE IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION WRIT
PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 494 OF 2012 JUSTICE K.S.PUTTASWAMY (RETD.) AND ANR.
...PETITIONERS VERSUS UNION OF INDIA AND ORS. ... RESPONDENTS WITH T.C.(C)
No.151/2013, T.C.(C) No.152/2013, W.P.(C) No.833/2013 (PIL­W), W.P.(C)
No.829/2013 (PIL­W), T.P. (C) No.1797/2013, W.P.(C) No.932/2013 (PIL­W),
T.P.(C) No.1796/2013, CONMT. PET.(C) No.144/2014 In W.P.(C) No.494/2012
(PIL­W), T.P.(C) No.313/2014, T.P.(C) No.312/2014, SLP(Crl.) No.2524/2014,
W.P.(C) No.37/2015 (PIL­W), W.P.(C) No.220/2015 (PIL­W), CONMT. PET.(C)
No.674/2015 In W.P.(C) No.829/2013 (PIL­W), T.P.(C) No.921/2015, CONMT.
PET.(C) No.470/2015 In W.P.(C) No.494/2012 (PIL­W), W.P.(C) No.231/2016
(PIL­W), CONMT. PET.(C) No.444/2016 In W.P.(C) No.494/2012 (PIL­W), CONMT.
PET.(C) No.608/2016 In W.P.(C) No.494/2012 (PIL­W), W.P.(C) No.797/2016
(PIL­W), CONMT. PET.(C) No.844/2017 In W.P.(C) No.494/2012 (PIL­W), W.P.(C)
No.342/2017 (PIL­ W), W.P.(C) No.372/2017, W.P.(C) No.841/2017, W.P.(C)
No.1058/2017 (PIL­W), W.P.(C) No.966/2017 (PIL­W), W.P.(C) No. 1014/2017
(PIL­W), W.P. (C) No.1002/2017 (PIL­W), W.P.(C) No.1056/2017 and CONMT.
PET.(C) No.34/2018 in W.P.(C) No.1014/2017 (PIL­W) J U D G M E N T ASHOK
BHUSHAN, J.

The challenge in this batch of cases can be  2 divided in two parts, firstly,
the challenge to Executive's Scheme dated 28.01.2009 notified by the
Government of India, by which the Unique Identification Authority of India
(hereinafter referred to as “UIDAI”) was constituted to implement the UIDAI
Scheme, and secondly challenge to The Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of Financial
and Other Subsidies, Benefits and Services) Act, 2016 (hereinafter referred to
as “Act, 2016”).

2\. The group of cases can be divided into four broad heads. First head
consists of the sixteen Writ Petitions filed under Article 32 of the
Constitution of India in this Court challenging the notification dated
28.01.2009 and/or the Act, 2016.

Second group consists of seven Transfer Cases/Transfer petitions to be heard
alongwith Writ Petitions filed under Article 32.

Group three consists of only one Special Leave Petition (Criminal) No. 2524 of
2014 filed by UIDAI and Anr. Fourth group consists of seven Contempt  3
Petitions, which have been filed alleging violation of the interim orders
passed by this Court in Writ Petitions and SLP (Criminal) as noted above.

3\. Before we come to the different prayers made in the Writ Petitions wherein
Executive Scheme dated 28.01.2009 as well as Act, 2016 has been challenged, it
is useful to notice certain background facts, which lead to issuance of
notification dated 28.01.2009 as well as the Act, 2016.

4\. India is a country, which caters a sea of population. When the British
left our country in 1947, total population of the country was only 330
million, which has rapidly increased into enormous figure of 1.3 billion as on
date. The Citizenship Act, 1955 was enacted by the Parliament for the
acquisition and determination of Indian Citizenship. Our constitutional
framers have provided for adult franchise to every adult citizens. Election
Commission of India had taken steps to provide for an identity  4 card to each
person to enable him to exercise his franchise. The Citizenship Act, 1955 was
amended by the Act 6 of 2004 whereas Section 14A was inserted providing that
Central Government may compulsorily register every citizen of India and issue
national identity card to him. The Planning Commission of the Government of
India conceived a Unique Identification Project for providing a Unique
Identity Number for each resident across the country, which was initially
envisaged primarily as the basis for the efficient delivery of welfare
services.

5\. At first, in the year 2006, administrative approval was granted for the
project “Unique Identity for BPL Families”. A Process Committee was
constituted, which prepared a strategic vision on the Unique Identification
Project. The Process Committee furnished a detailed proposal to the Planning
Commission in the above regard. The Prime Minister approved the constitution
of an empowered Group of Ministers to collate the two spheres, the national  5
population register under the Citizenship Act, 1955 and the Unique
Identification Number Project of the Department of Information Technology. The
empowered Group of Ministers recognised the need for creating an identity
related resident database and to establish an institutional mechanism, which
shall own the database and shall be responsible for its maintenance and
updations on ongoing basis. The empowered Group of Ministers held various
meetings to which inputs were provided from different sources including
Committee of Secretaries. The recommendation of empowered Group of Ministers
to constitute Unique Identification Authority of India (hereinafter referred
to as “UIDAI”) was accepted with several guidelines laying down the roles and
responsibilities of the UIDAI. The UIDAI was constituted under the aegis of
Planning Commission of India. The Notification dated 28.01.2009 was issued
constituting the UIDAI, providing for its composition, roles and
responsibilities.

6

6\. In the year 2010, a bill namely the National Identification Authority of
India Bill, 2010 providing for the establishment of the National
Identification Authority of India for the purpose of issuing identification
numbers to individuals residing in India and to certain other classes of
individuals, manner of authentication of such individuals to facilitate access
to benefits and services to which they are entitled and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto was introduced. The Bill was pending in the
Parliament when the first Writ Petition i.e. Writ Petition (C) No. 494 of 2012
– Justice K.S. Puttaswamy (Retd.) & Anr. Vs. Union of India & Ors. Was filed.
The Writ Petition under Article 32 was filed on the ground that fundamental
rights of the innumerable citizens of India namely Right to Privacy falling
under Article 21 of the Constitution of India are adversely affected by the
Executive action of the Central Government proceeding to implement an
Executive order dated 28.01.2009 and thereby issuing Aadhaar numbers to both
citizens as also illegal  7 immigrants presently illegally residing in the
country. While the Bill namely “National Identification Authority of India
Bill, 2010”, which had already been introduced in the Rajya Sabha on
03.12.2010 and referred to the Standing Committee, had been rejected. The Writ
Petition prayed for following reliefs:­ (A) ISSUE a writ in the nature of
mandamus  restraining the respondents Nos. 1 to 3 from issuing Aadhaar Numbers
by way of implementing its Executive order dated 28.01.2009 (Annexure “P­1”)
which tentamount to implementing the provisions of the National Identification
Authority of India Bill, 2010 pending before the Parliament until and unless
the said Bill is considered and passed by the Parliament and becomes an Act of
Parliament.

(B) Pass such other order/s as this Hon'ble Court may deem fit and proper in
the circumstances of the case.

7\. Writ Petition (C) No. 829 of 2013 ­ Mr. S.G. Vombatkere & Anr. Vs. Union
of India & Ors., was filed by Mr. S.G. Vombatkere and Bezwada Wilson
questioning the UID Project and Aadhaar Scheme. The UID Project and Aadhaar
Scheme were contended to be illegal and  8 violative of fundamental rights. It
was also contended that the Scheme has no legislative sanction. Various other
grounds for attacking the Scheme were enumerated in the Writ Petition. Writ
Petition (C) No. 833 of 2013 – Ms. Aruna Roy & Anr. Vs. Union of India & Ors.,
was also filed challenging the UID Scheme. Other Writ Petitions being Writ
Petition (C) No. 932 of 2013 and Writ Petition (C) No. 37 of 2015 came to be
filed challenging the UID Scheme.

8\. S.G. Vombatkere and Bezwada Wilson filed another Writ Petition (C) No. 220
of 2015 challenging the exercise of preparation of the National Population
Register. Section 14A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 was also challenged as void
and ultra vires. Petitioners have referred to earlier Writ Petition (C) No.
829 of 2013 and adopted the grounds already raised in the earlier Writ
Petition. Writ petitioner had also challenged the collection of confidential
biometric informations, which is neither sanctioned nor authorised under any
Act or Rules.

9

9\. The Parliament enacted the Act, 2016, which contains following preamble:­
“An Act to provide for, as a good governance, efficient, transparent, and
targeted delivery of subsidies, benefits and services, the expenditure for
which is incurred from the Consolidated Fund of India, to individuals residing
in India through assigning of unique identity numbers to such individuals and
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.”

10\. The Writ Petition (C) No. 231 of 2016­ Shri Jairam Ramesh Vs. Union of
India & Ors., was filed by Shri Jairam Ramesh seeking a direction declaring
the Act, 2016 as unconstitutional, null and void and ultra vires. Writ
Petition (C) No. 797 of 2016 ­ S.G. Vombatkere & Ors. Vs. Union of India &
Ors., was also filed by S.G. Vombatkere and Bezwada Wilson challenging the
Act, 2016. The petitioners have also referred to earlier Writ Petition (C) No.
829 of 2013 and Writ Petition (C) No. 220 of 2015. The writ petitioners
alleged various grounds for challenging the Act, 2016. Apart from seeking a
direction to declare the Act, 2016 ultra vires, unconstitutional and null and
void, prayers for declaring various  10 Sections of Act, 2016 as ultra vires,
unconstitutional and null and void were also made. The writ petitioners
claimed lots of reliefs from a to w, it is useful to quote the reliefs a to d,
which are to the following effect:­ "a) Issue a Writ, order or direction in
the nature of Certiorari or any other appropriate writ/order/direction
declaring that the Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of Financial and Other
Subsidies, Benefits and Services) Act, 2016 is ultra vires, unconstitutional,
null and void and in particular violate Articles 14, 19 and 21 of the
Constitution of India;

    
    
        b)     Issue a Writ, order or direction in the
               nature   of   Certiorari   or   any   other
               appropriate                 writ/order/direction
    

declaring that sections 2(h), 2(l), 2(m), 2(v), 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, Chapter
IV, Section 23 read with Section 54, Section 29, Section 30, Section 33,
Section 47, Section 57 and Section 59 of the Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of
Financial and Other Subsidies, Benefits and Services) Act, 2016 are ultra
vires, unconstitutional, null and void and in particular violate Articles 14,
19, 20(3) and 21 of the Constitution of India;

c) Issue a Writ, order or direction in the nature of Certiorari or any other
appropriate writ/order/direction declaring that the right to privacy is a
fundamental right guaranteed under Part III of the Constitution of India;

11

d) Issue a Writ, order or direction in the nature of Certiorari or any other
appropriate writ/order/direction declaring that no person may be deprived of
receiving any financial subsidy or other subsidy or benefit or services from
the State on the ground that he or she does not have an Aadhaar number;”

11\. Writ Petition (C) No. 342 of 2017 ­ Shantha Sinha & Anr. Vs. Union of
India & Anr. Was filed challenging the Act, 2016. Apart from seeking a
direction to declare various Sections of Act, 2016 as null and void, writ
petitioners also prayed for a direction declaring Sections 2(h), 2(l), 2(m),
2(v), 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, Chapter IV, Section 23 read with Section 54,
Section 29, Section 30, Section 33, Section 47, Section 57 and Section 59 of
the Act, 2016 as ultra vires, unconstitutional and null and void. Writ
Petition (Civil) NO. 372 of 2017 ­ Shankar Prasad Dangi Vs. Bharat Cooking
Coal Limited & Another, was filed by Shankar Prasad Dangi, who claims to be
employed under the Bharat Cooking Coal Limited. Petitioner filed the writ
petition seeking a mandamus directing the respondents not to compel the
petitioner  12 to submit the Aadhaar Card copy. The petitioner placed reliance
on Order of this Court dated 14.09.2016 in Writ Petition (C) No. 686 of 2016.
Writ Petition (C) No. 841 of 2017 has also been filed by State of West Bengal
challenging various notifications issued under Section 7 of the Act, 2016. The
petitioner also sought a direction declaring that no person may be deprived of
receiving any benefit or services from the State on the ground that he or she
does not have an Aadhaar number or Aadhaar enrolment. Writ Petition (C) No.
1058 of 2017 – Mathew Thomas Vs. Union of India & Ors. has been filed
challenging the Act, 2016. The writ petitioner also prayed for declaring
Prevention of Money Laundering Rules (Second Amendment) 2017 as violative of
Articles 14, 19 and 21 of the Constitution. Section 139AA of the Income Tax
Act, 1961 was also prayed to be declared as violative of Articles 14, 19 and
21 of the Constitution.

12\. Writ Petition (C) No. 966 of 2017 – Raghav Tankha Vs. Union of India
through its Secretary & Ors. has been filed seeking following prayers:­  13
"a) Issue a Writ of Mandamus or any other appropriate writ, order or direction
under Article 32 of the Constitution of India, directing the Respondents to
declare that Aadhaar is not mandatory for the purpose of authentication while
obtaining a mobile connection; or the re­ verification of Subscribers, being
completely illegal, arbitrary and mala fide; and/or

b) Issue a Writ of Mandamus or any other appropriate writ, order or direction
under Article 32 of the Constitution of India, directing the Respondents
Number 2 to 6, to take immediate steps in the present situation, for
restraining and banning the transfer of data from UIDAI to Private Telecom
Service Providers and Aadhaar being made the only option of authentication;
and/or”

13\. Writ Petition (C) No. 1014 of 2017 – M.G.

Devasahayam and Ors. Vs. Union of India & Anr. has been filed, where following
prayers have been made:­ “a) This Hon'ble Court may be pleased to issue an
appropriate writ, order or direction declaring Rule 9 of the Prevention of
Money Laundering Rules, 2017 as amended by the Prevention of Money Laundering
(Second Amendment) Rules, 2017 as ultra vires, unconstitutional, null and void
and in particular violate Articles 14, 19 and 21 of the Constitution of India;

b) This Hon'ble Court may be pleased to issue an appropriate writ, order or
14 direction declaring that bank accounts will not be denied or ceased on the
basis that he or she does not have an Aadhaar number;

c) This Hon'ble Court may be pleased to issue an appropriate writ, order or
direction in the nature of mandamus against the Respondents directing them to
forthwith forbear from implementing or acting pursuant to or in implementation
of Rule 9 of the Prevention of Money Laundering Rules, 2017 as amended by the
Prevention of Money Laundering (Second Amendment) Rules, 2017;

d) This Hon'ble Court may be pleased to issue an appropriate writ, order or
direction in the nature of mandamus against the Respondents directing them to
forthwith clarify by issuing appropriate announcements, circulars and/or
directions that no citizen of India is required to obtain an Aadhaar
number/Aadhaar card and that the program under the Aadhaar Act is entirely
voluntary even for opening or maintaining the bank accounts and carrying
financial transactions;

e) This Hon'ble Court may be pleased to award costs relating to the present
petition to the petitioners; and

f) This Hon'ble Court may be pleased to issue any other writ/order/direction
in the nature of mandamus as this Hon'ble Court may deem fit an proper in the
circumstances of the case.”

14\. Writ Petition (C) No. 1002 of 2017 – Dr. Kalyani  15 Menon Sen Vs. Union
of India and Others, also sought declaration that Rule 2(b) of the Prevention
of Money Laundering (Maintenance of Records) Second Amendment Rules, 2017 is
ultra vires. Circular dated 23.03.2017 issued by the Department of
Telecommunication was also sought to be declared as ultra vires,
unconstitutional, null and void. A further direction was sought declaring that
pursuant to the Circular dated 23.03.2017, the mobile phone numbers of
subscribers will not be made in­operational, and future applicants will not be
coerced to submit their Aadhaar numbers. Certain other reliefs have also been
claimed in the writ petition. Writ Petition (C) No. 1056 of 2017 – Nachiket
Udupa & Anr. Vs. Union of India & Ors. has been filed challenging the Act,
2016 and with other prayers, which is as follows:­ A. Issue a Writ of
Declaration and Mandamus or any other appropriate Writ, Direction, Order or
such other appropriate remedy to declare the Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of
Financial and Other Subsidies, Benefits and Services) Act, 2016 [ACT No. 18 of
2016] as illegal and violative of Articles 14, 19(1)(a) and 21 of the
Constitution of India;

16

B. In the alternative to Prayer (A), issue a Writ of Declaration and Mandamus
or any other appropriate Writ, Direction, Order or such other appropriate
remedy against Respondent No. 3 to provide 'opt­out' or process to delete
identity information from Central Identities Data Repository at the option of
Aadhaar Number Holders;

C Issue a Writ of Declaration and Mandamus or any other appropriate Writ,
Direction, Order or such other appropriate remedy to declare the Aadhaar
(Enrolment and Update) Regulations, 2016 being illegal, and ultra vires the
Aadhaar Act and violative of Articles 14 and 21 of the Constitution of India;

D. Issue a Writ of Declaration and Mandamus or any other appropriate Writ,
Direction, Order or such other appropriate remedy to declare the Aadhaar
(Authentication) Regulations, 2016 as being illegal and ultra vires the
Aadhaar Act and violative of Articles 14 and 21 of the Constitution of India;

E. Issue a Writ of Declaration and Mandamus or any other appropriate Writ,
Direction, Order or such other appropriate remedy to declare the Aadhaar (Data
Security) Regulations, 2016 as being illegal, and ultra vires the Aadhaar Act
and violative of Articles 14 and 21 of the Constitution of India;

F. Issue a Writ of Declaration and  17 Mandamus or any other appropriate Writ,
Direction, Order or such other appropriate remedy to declare the Aadhaar
(Sharing of Information) Regulations, 2016 as being illegal, and ultra vires
the Aadhaar Act and violative of Articles 14 and 21 of the Constitution of
India;

G. Issue a Writ of Declaration and Mandamus or any other appropriate Writ,
Direction, Order or such other appropriate remedy to declare the Direction
issued by Respondent No. 2 on 23.03.2017 vide File No. 800­262/2016­ AS.II, as
being illegal, ultra vires the Aadhaar Act and violative the Articles 14,
19(1)(a) and 21, of the Constitution;

H. In the alternative to Prayer (G) above, issue a Writ of Declaration and
Mandamus or any other appropriate Writ, Direction, Order or such other
appropriate remedy to Respondent No. 2 to prohibit all Telecom Service
Providers from storing, retaining, making copies or in any manner dealing with
Aadhaar Number, biometric information or any demographic information received
from Respondent No. 3 in the process of authentication and/or identity
verification of mobile numbers;

I. Pass such further and other orders as this Hon'ble Court may deem fit and
proper in the instant facts and circumstances.”

15\. There are seven Transfer Cases/Transfer Petitions  18 to be heard
alongwith the Writ Petitions filed under Article 32, where the issues
pertaining to UID Scheme and other related issues were also raised before
different High Courts. Four Transfer Applications have been filed by Indian
Oil Corporation Limited praying for transfer of different writ petitions
pending in different High Courts to be heard alongwith Writ Petition (C) No.
494 of 2012 – Justice K.S. Puttaswamy (Retd.) & Anr. Vs. Union of India &
Ors., which was considering the same issues. This Court had passed order in
few transfer petitions allowing the same and issued certain directions, rest
of transfer petitions are also allowed.

16\. One Transfer Petition has also been filed by Union of India for
transferring Writ Petition (C) No. 2764 of 2013 – Sri V. Viswanandham Vs.
Union of India & Ors., pending in the High Court of Hyderabad. It is not
necessary to notice various issues in the pending different writ petitions,
which were sought to be transferred by above transfer petitions/transfer  19
cases. Issues pending in different High Courts were more or less same, which
have been raised in leading Writ Petition (C) No. 494 of 2012 ­ Justice K.S.
Puttaswamy (Retd.) & Anr. Vs. Union of India & Ors. and other writ petitions,
which were entertained and pending in this Court. Special Leave Petition
(Crl.) No. 2524 of 2014 has been filed by UIDAI and Anr. challenging the
interim order dated 18.03.2014 passed by High Court of Bombay at Goa in
Criminal Writ Petition No. 10 of 2014 – Unique Identification Authority of
India Through its Director General & Anr. Vs. Central Bureau of Investigation.
On an application filed by the Central Bureau of Investigation, a Magistrate
passed an order on 22.10.2013 directing the UIDAI to provide certain data with
regard to a case of a rape of seven years old child. The Bombay High Court at
Goa passed an order dated 18.03.2014 issuing certain interim directions, which
were challenged by UIDAI in the aforesaid special leave petition. This Court
passed an interim order on 24.03.2014 staying the order passed by Bombay High
Court at Goa. This  20 Court also by the interim order restrained the UIDAI to
transfer any biometric information of any person who has been allotted the
Aadhaar number to any other agency without his consent in writing. This
special leave petition was directed to be listed alongwith Writ Petition (C)
No. 494 of 2012.

17\. This Court in Writ Petition (C) No. 494 of 2012 has issued various
Interim Orders dated 23.09.2013, 24.03.2014, 16.03.2015, 11.08.2015 and
15.10.2015.

18\. Seven Contempt Petitions have been filed. Out of seven, five contempt
petitions have been filed alleging violation of the aforesaid interim orders
and praying for issuing proceedings against the respondents contemnor for
willful disobeying the interim orders. One Contempt Petition (C) No. 674 of
2015 in W.P.(C) No.829 of 2013 has been filed for issuing proceedings against
the respondents contemnor for wilfully disobeying the orders dated 23.09.2013,
24.03.2014 and 16.03.2015 passed by this Court. The  21 other Contempt
Petition (C) No. 34 of 2018 in W.P.(C) No. 1014 of 2017 has been filed against
the respondent contemnors for wilfully disobeying the order dated 03.11.2017
passed by this Court in the aforesaid writ petition. All the contempt
applications are pending without any order of issuing notice in the contempt
petitions.

19\. Writ Petition (C) No.494 of 2012 : Justice K.S. Puttaswamy(Retd.) and
another vs. Union of India and others, has been treated as leading petition
wherein various orders and proceedings have been taken, few of such orders and
proceedings also need to be noted. An interim order dated 23.09.2013 was
passed in Writ Petition (C) No.494 of 2012 which is to the following effect:

> “Issue notice in W.P.(C) No. 829/2013.

> Application for deletion of the name of petitioner no. 1 in T.P.(C) Nos. 47
> of 2013 is allowed.

> T.P.(C)nos. 47­48 of 2013 and T.P.(C) No. 476 of 2013 are allowed in terms
> of the signed order.

22

> All the matters require to be heard finally. List all matters for final
> hearing after the Constitution Bench is over.

> In the meanwhile, no person should suffer for not getting the Aadhaar card
> inspite of the fact that some authority had issued a circular making it
> mandatory and when any person applies to get the Aadhaar Card voluntarily,
> it may be checked whether that person is entitled for it under the law and
> it should not be given to any illegal immigrant.”

20\. By order dated 26.11.2013 all the States and Union Territories were
impleaded as respondents to give effective directions. Interim order passed
earlier was also continued. On 24.03.2014 following order was passed in
SLP(Crl.) No.2524 of 2014:

> “Issue notice.

> In addition to normal mode of service, dasti service, is permitted.

> Operation of the impugned order shall remain stayed.

> In the meanwhile, the present petitioner is restrained from transferring any
> biometric information of any person who has been allotted the Aadhaar number
> to any other agency without his consent in writing.

> More so, no person shall be deprived of any service for want of Aadhaar
> number in case he/she is otherwise eligible/entitled. All the authorities
> are directed to modify their forms/circulars/likes so as to not compulsorily
> require the Aadhaar number in  23 order to meet the requirement of the
> interim order passed by this Court forthwith.

> Tag and list the matter with main matter i.e. WP(C) No.494/2012.”

21\. This court on 16.03.2015 in Writ Petition (C) No.494 of 2012 directed
both the Union of India and the States and all their functionaries should
adhere to the order dated 23.09.2013.

22\. A three­Judge Bench on 11.08.2015 passed an order referring the matter to
a Bench of appropriate strength. After reference was made on a prayer made by
the petitioners, following interim directions were also passed by the Bench :

> “Having considered the matter, we are of the view that the balance of
> interest would be best served, till the matter is finally decided by a
> larger Bench if the Union of India or the UIDA proceed in the following
> manner:­

> 1\. The Union of India shall give wide publicity in the electronic and print
> media including radio and television networks that it is not mandatory for a
> citizen to obtain an Aadhaar card;

> 2\. The production of an Aadhaar card will not be condition for obtaining
> any benefits otherwise due to a citizen;

24

> 3\. The Unique Identification Number or the Aadhaar card will not be used by
> the respondents for any purpose other than the PDS Scheme and in particular
> for the purpose of distribution of food grains, etc. and cooking fuel, such
> as kerosene. The Aadhaar card may also be used for the purpose of the LPG
> Distribution Scheme;

> 4\. The information about an individual obtained by the Unique 15
> Identification Authority of India while issuing an Aadhaar card shall not be
> used for any other purpose, save as above, except as may be directed by a
> Court for the purpose of criminal investigation. Ordered accordingly.”

23\. A Constitution Bench of five Judges on 15.10.2015 passed an order after
hearing application filed by the Union of India for seeking certain
clarification/modification in the earlier order dated 11.08.2015, part of
order, which is relevant for the present case is as follows:

> “3. After hearing the learned Attorney General for India and other learned
> senior counsels, we are of the view that in paragraph 3 of the Order dated
> 11.08.2015, if we add, apart from the other two Schemes, namely, P.D.S.
> Scheme and the L.P.G.

> Distribution Scheme, the Schemes like The Mahatma Gandhi National Rural
> Employment Guarantee Scheme 12 (MGNREGS), National Social Assistance
> Programme (Old Age Pensions, Widow Pensions, Disability Pensions) Prime
> Minister’s Jan Dhan Yojana (PMJDY) and Employees’ Provident Fund  25
> Organisation (EPFO) for the present, it would not dilute earlier order
> passed by this Court. Therefore, we now include the aforesaid Schemes apart
> from the other two Schemes that this Court has permitted in its earlier
> order dated 11.08.2015.

> 5\. We will also make it clear that the Aadhaar card Scheme is purely
> voluntary and it cannot be made mandatory till the matter is finally decided
> by this Court one way or the other.”

24\. A three­Judge Bench of this Court in its reference order dated 11.08.2015
noticed that these cases raise far­reaching questions of importance, which
involves interpretation of the Constitution. Two earlier decisions of this
Court, i.e., M.P. Sharma & Others Vs. Satish Chandra & Others, 1954 AIR SC
300, rendered by eight Judges and another judgment rendered by six­ Judges
Bench in Kharak Singh Vs. State of U.P. & Others, AIR 1963 SC 1295 were
noticed and it was observed that in the event the observations made in the
above two judgments are to be read literally and accepted as the law of this
country, the fundamental rights guaranteed under the Constitution of India and
more particularly right to liberty under Article 21 would be denuded of vigour
and vitality. The three­  26 Judge Bench observed that to give quietus to the
kind of controversy raised in this batch of cases once for all, it is better
that the ratio decidendi of M.P. Sharma (supra) and Kharak Singh (supra) is
scrutinized and the jurisprudential correctness of the subsequent decisions of
this Court where the right to privacy is either asserted or referred be
examined and authoritatively decided by a Bench of appropriate strength.

25\. By order dated 18.07.2017, a Constitution Bench considered it appropriate
that the issue be resolved by a Bench of Nine Judge. Following order was
passed on 18.07.2017 by a Constitution Bench:

> “During the course of the hearing today, it seems that it has become
> essential for us to determine whether there is any fundamental right of
> privacy under the Indian Constitution. The determination of this question
> would essentially entail whether the decision recorded by this Court in M.P.

> Sharma and Ors. vs. Satish Chandra, District Magistrate, Delhi and Ors. ­
> 1950 SCR 1077 by an eight­Judge Constitution Bench, and also, in Kharak
> Singh vs. The State of U.P. and Ors. ­ 1962 (1) SCR 332 by a six­Judge
> Constitution Bench, that there is no such fundamental right, is the correct
> expression of the constitutional position.

27

> Before dealing with the matter any further, we are of the view that the
> issue noticed hereinabove deserves to be placed before the nine­Judge
> Constitution Bench. List these matters before the Nine­Judge Constitution
> Bench on 19.07.2017.

> Liberty is granted to the learned counsel appearing for the rival parties to
> submit their written briefs in the meantime.”

26\. A nine­Judge Constitution Bench proceeded to hear and decide all aspects
of right of privacy as contained in the Constitution of India.

27\. Dr. D.Y. Chandrachud delivered opinion on his behalf as well as on behalf
of Khehar, CJ., Agrawal, J. and Nazeer, J. Jasti Chelameswar, J., Bobde, J.,
Sapre, J. and Kaul, J. also delivered concurring, but separate opinions. The
opinion of all the nine Judges delivered in above cases held that right of
privacy is a right which is constitutionally protected and it is a part of
protection guaranteed under Article 21 of the Constitution of India.
Explaining the essential nature of privacy, Dr. D.Y. Chandrachud, J. in
paragraphs 297 and 298 laid down following:

“297. What, then, does privacy postulate?

Privacy postulates the reservation of a  28 private space for the individual,
described as the right to be let alone. The concept is founded on the autonomy
of the individual.

The ability of an individual to make choices lies at the core of the human
personality.

The notion of privacy enables the individual to assert and control the human
element which is inseparable from the personality of the individual. The
inviolable nature of the human personality is manifested in the ability to
make decisions on matters intimate to human life. The autonomy of the
individual is associated over matters which can be kept private. These are
concerns over which there is a legitimate expectation of privacy. The body and
the mind are inseparable elements of the human personality. The integrity of
the body and the sanctity of the mind can exist on the foundation that each
individual possesses an inalienable ability and right to preserve a private
space in which the human personality can develop. Without the ability to make
choices, the inviolability of the personality would be in doubt. Recognising a
zone of privacy is but an acknowledgment that each individual must be entitled
to chart and pursue the course of development of personality. Hence privacy is
a postulate of human dignity itself. Thoughts and behavioural patterns which
are intimate to an individual are entitled to a zone of privacy where one is
free of social expectations. In that zone of privacy, an individual is not
judged by others. Privacy enables each individual to take crucial decisions
which find expression in the human personality. It enables individuals to
preserve their beliefs, thoughts, expressions, ideas, ideologies, preferences
and choices against societal demands of homogeneity. Privacy is an intrinsic
recognition of heterogeneity, of the right of the individual to be different
29 and to stand against the tide of conformity in creating a zone of solitude.
Privacy protects the individual from the searching glare of publicity in
matters which are personal to his or her life. Privacy attaches to the person
and not to the place where it is associated. Privacy constitutes the
foundation of all liberty because it is in privacy that the individual can
decide how liberty is best exercised. Individual dignity and privacy are
inextricably linked in a pattern woven out of a thread of diversity into the
fabric of a plural culture.

298\. Privacy of the individual is an essential aspect of dignity. Dignity has
both an intrinsic and instrumental value. As an intrinsic value, human dignity
is an entitlement or a constitutionally protected interest in itself. In its
instrumental facet, dignity and freedom are inseparably intertwined, each
being a facilitative tool to achieve the other. The ability of the individual
to protect a zone of privacy enables the realisation of the full value of life
and liberty. Liberty has a broader meaning of which privacy is a subset. All
liberties may not be exercised in privacy.

Yet others can be fulfilled only within a private space. Privacy enables the
individual to retain the autonomy of the body and mind.

The autonomy of the individual is the ability to make decisions on vital
matters of concern to life. Privacy has not been couched as an independent
fundamental right. But that does not detract from the constitutional
protection afforded to it, once the true nature of privacy and its
relationship with those fundamental rights which are expressly protected is
understood. Privacy lies across the spectrum of protected freedoms. The
guarantee of equality is a guarantee against arbitrary State action. It
prevents the State  30 from discriminating between individuals. The
destruction by the State of a sanctified personal space whether of the body or
of the mind is violative of the guarantee against arbitrary State action.
Privacy of the body entitles an individual to the integrity of the physical
aspects of personhood. The intersection between one’s mental integrity and
privacy entitles the individual to freedom of thought, the freedom to believe
in what is right, and the freedom of self­ determination. When these
guarantees intersect with gender, they create a private space which protects
all those elements which are crucial to gender identity. The family, marriage,
procreation and sexual orientation are all integral to the dignity of the
individual. Above all, the privacy of the individual recognises an inviolable
right to determine how freedom shall be exercised. An individual may perceive
that the best form of expression is to remain silent. Silence postulates a
realm of privacy. An artist finds reflection of the soul in a creative
endeavour. A writer expresses the outcome of a process of thought. A musician
contemplates upon notes which musically lead to silence. The silence, which
lies within, reflects on the ability to choose how to convey thoughts and
ideas or interact with others. These are crucial aspects of personhood. The
freedoms under Article 19 can be fulfilled where the individual is entitled to
decide upon his or her preferences. Read in conjunction with Article 21,
liberty enables the individual to have a choice of preferences on various
facets of life including what and how one will eat, the way one will dress,
the faith one will espouse and a myriad other matters on which autonomy and
self­determination require a choice to be made within the privacy of the mind.
The constitutional right  31 to the freedom of religion under Article 25 has
implicit within it the ability to choose a faith and the freedom to express or
not express those choices to the world. These are some illustrations of the
manner in which privacy facilitates freedom and is intrinsic to the exercise
of liberty. The Constitution does not contain a separate article telling us
that privacy has been declared to be a fundamental right. Nor have we tagged
the provisions of Part III with an alpha­suffixed right to privacy: this is
not an act of judicial redrafting. Dignity cannot exist without privacy. Both
reside within the inalienable values of life, liberty and freedom which the
Constitution has recognised. Privacy is the ultimate expression of the
sanctity of the individual. It is a constitutional value which straddles
across the spectrum of fundamental rights and protects for the individual a
zone of choice and self­determination.”

28\. Privacy has been held to be an intrinsic element of the right to life and
personal liberty Under Article 21 and has a constitutional value which is
embodied in the fundamental freedoms embedded in Part III of the Constitution.
It was further held that like the right to life and liberty, privacy is not
absolute. The limitations which operate on the right to life and personal
liberty would operate on the right to privacy. Any curtailment or deprivation
of that right would have to take place under a regime of  32 law. The
procedure established by law must be fair, just and reasonable.

29\. The nine­Judge Constitution Bench also noticed the context of right of
privacy under the international covenants. The protection of right of privacy
as developed in U.K. decision, decisions of US Supreme Court, constitutional
right to privacy in South Africa, constitutional right to privacy in Canada,
privacy under European convention on human rights and under Charter of
fundamental rights of European Union were considered with reference to
decision rendered by foreign courts.

30\. Justice D.Y. Chandradhud in his judgment traced the right of privacy from
the judgments of this Court which were rendered for the last five decades.
Referring to International Law on the subject, following observations were
made by Justice D.Y. Chandradhud, J.:

> “103...In the view of this Court, international law has to be construed as a
> 33 part of domestic law in the absence of legislation to the contrary and,
> perhaps more significantly, the meaning of constitutional guarantees must be
> illuminated by the content of international conventions to which India is a
> party. Consequently, as new cases brought new issues and problems before the
> Court, the content of the right to privacy has found elaboration in these
> diverse contexts.”

31\. All contours of the right of privacy having been noticed with all its
dimensions, precautions and safeguards to be applied to protect fundamental
rights guaranteed under the Constitution of India, we while proceeding to
decide the issues raised herein have to proceed in the light of nine­Judge
Constitution Bench of this Court as noticed above.

32\. We have been manifestly benefited by able and elaborate submissions
raised before us by many eminent learned senior counsel appearing for both the
parties. Learned counsel for both the parties have advanced their submissions
with clarity, conviction and lot of persuasions. On occasions very passionate
arguments were advanced to support the respective submissions.  34

33\. Different aspects of the case have been taken up and advanced by
different counsel as per understanding between them which enlightened the
Court on varied aspects of the case. The submissions have been advanced on
behalf of the petitioners by learned senior Advocates, namely, Shri Kapil
Sibal, Shri Gopal Subramanium, Shri P. Chidambaram, Shri Shyam Divan, Shri
K.V. Viswanathan, Shri Neeraj Kishan Kaul, Ms. Meenakshi Arora, Shri C.U.
Singh, Shri Anand Grover, Shri Sanjay R. Hegde, Shri Arvind P. Datar, Shri
V.Giri, Shri Sajan Poovayya and Shri P.V. Surendra Nath. A large number of
other counsel also assisted us including Mr. Gopal Sankaranarayanan. On behalf
of respondents arguments were led by the learned Attorney General, Shri K.K.
Venugopal. We have also heard Shri Tushar Mehta, Additional Solicitor General,
Shri Rakesh Dwivedi, learned senior counsel and Shri Zohaib Hossain.

34\. We also permitted Dr. Ajay B. Pandey, Chief Executive Officer, UIDAI to
give a power presentation  35 to explain actual working of the system. After
the power presentation was presented by Dr. Pandey in the presence of the
learned counsel for the parties, learned counsel have also thereafter raised
certain questions in respect of the power presentation, which the respondents
during submissions have tried to explain. In view of the enormity of
submissions raised by the different learned counsel appearing for the
petitioners, we proceed to notice different part of submissions together. As
noted above writ petitions have been filed at two stages, firstly, when UIDAI
Scheme was being impleaded by the Executive order dated 28.01.2009. Secondly,
challenge was raised when Act, 2016 was enacted. The challenge to the Scheme
dated 24.01.2009 contained almost same grounds on which Act, 2016 has been
attacked. Additional ground to challenge the Scheme was that Scheme having not
been backed by law, the entire exercise was unconstitutional and violative of
fundamental rights guaranteed under the Constitution of India and deserved to
be set aside. The Act, 2016 having enacted  36 and now statutory scheme is in
place, we shall first proceed to notice the submissions attacking the Act,
2016 which challenge has been substantial and elaborately raised before us.

Petitioner's Submissions

35\. The submissions advanced by different learned counsel for the petitioners
instead of noticing individually are being noted together in seriatim, which
are as follows:­

36\. The Aadhaar project initiated by Executive notification dated 28.01.2009
as well as impugned Act, 2016 violates Article 21. The constitutional rights
of a person protected under Articles 19 and 21 of the Constitution is violated
as individuals are compelled to part with their demographic and biometric
information at the point of collection. Biometric data is part of one's body
and control over one's body lies on the very centre of the Right of Privacy.
Decisional privacy allows individual to make a  37 decision about their own
body and is an aspect of right of self­determination. The Aadhaar Project
including the Aadhaar Act violate the informational privacy. Data collection
at the enrolment centres, the Data retention at Central Identities Data
Repositories (CIDR), usage and sharing of data violates Right of Privacy.
There is complete absence of safeguards at the stage of collection, retention
and use of data. Act, 2016 and Regulations framed thereunder lack safeguards
to secure sensitive personal data of a person.

37\. The Aadhaar project including Act, 2016 creates an architecture for
pervasive surveillance, which again violate fundamental Right to Privacy.
Personal data collected under the Executive scheme dated 28.01.2009 was
without any individual's consent. The Act, 2016 although contemplate that
enrolment under Aadhaar is voluntary but in actual working of the Act, it
becomes defacto compulsory. The Act, 2016 does not pass the three­fold test as
laid down by Nine Judges Bench in  38 Privacy Judgment ­ K.S. Puttaswamy Vs.
Union of India, (2017) 10 SCC 1, hereinafter referred to as “Puttaswamy case”.
The Three­fold test laid down in Puttaswamy's case are:­

(i) legality, which postulates the existence of law;

(ii) need, defined in terms of a legitimate state aim; and

(iii) proportionality which ensures a rational nexus between the objects and
the means adopted to achieve them;

38\. It is submitted that a law to pass under Article 21 should be a law
according to procedure established by law. The Act, 2016 violates both Article
14 and Article 21 of the Constitution of India. A legitimate State aim, which
ensure that nature and content of the law, which imposes the restriction falls
within the reasonable restrictions mandated by Article 14 is also not
fulfilled. State has not been able to discharge its burden that Aadhaar
project has been launched for  39 a legitimate State aim. The third
requirement, which require that the means that are adopted by the legislature
are proportional to the object sought to be fulfilled by the law is also not
fulfilled since the provisions of the Act and Regulations framed thereunder
does not satisfy the Proportionality Test. The various provisions of Act, 2016
and Regulations framed thereunder are unconstitutional. Section 6 of the Act,
2016 is unconstitutional inasmuch as it enable the respondents to continually
compel residents to periodically furnish demographic and biometric
information. Section 7 of the Act, 2016 is unconstitutional inasmuch as it
seeks to render the constitutional and statutory obligations of the State to
provide benefits, subsidies and services, conditional upon an individual
bartering his or her biometric and demographic information. Section 8 is
unconstitutional since it enables tracking, tagging and profiling of
individuals through the authentication process. Section 8 delineate a regime
of surveillance, which enables persons' physical  40 movements to be traced.
Section 9 of the Act, 2016 is also unconstitutional inasmuch as the Aadhaar
number is de facto serving as proof of citizenship and domicile. The
provisions of Chapter IV, i.e., Sections 11 to 33 are ultra vires and
unconstitutional. The Constitution does not permit the establishment of an
authority that in turn through an invasive programme can claim every Indian
citizen/resident to a central data bank and maintain lifelong records and logs
of that individual. Sections 23 and 54 of the Act, 2016 are also
unconstitutional on the ground of excessive delegation. Section 29 of the Act,
2016 is also liable to be struck down inasmuch as it permits sharing of
identity information. Section 33 is unconstitutional inasmuch as it provides
for the use of the Aadhaar data base for police investigation pursuant to an
order of a competent court. Section 33 violates the protection against
self­incrimination as enshrined under Article 20(3) of the Constitution of
India. Furthermore, Section 33 does not afford an  41 opportunity of hearing
to the concerned individual whose information is sought to be released by the
UIDAI pursuant to the court's order. This is contrary to the principles of
natural justice. Section 47 is also unconstitutional inasmuch as it does not
allow an individual citizen who finds that there is a violation of the Act,
2016 to initiate the criminal process. Section 48, which empowers the Central
Government to supersede UIDAI is vague and arbitrary.

39\. Elaborating submission with regard to Section 7, it is submitted that
Section 7 is unconstitutional and violative of Article 14 making Aadhaar
mandatory, which has no nexus with the subsidies, benefits and services. A
person cannot be forced into parting with sensitive personal information as a
condition for availing benefits or services. Section 7 also falls foul of
Article 14 since firstly such mandatory authentication has caused, and
continues to cause, exclusion of the most marginalised sections of society;
and secondly, this exclusion is not simply a question of poor implementation
that can be  42 administratively resolved, but stems from the very design of
the Act, i.e. the use of biometric authentication as the primary method of
identification. There is large scale exclusion to the mostly marginalised
society not being able to identify themselves by identification process. There
is sufficient material on record to indicate general deprivation, which itself
is sufficient to struck down Section 7 of the Act.

40\. Elaborating submission on unconstitutionality of Section 57, it is
contended that Section 57 allows an unrestricted extension of the Aadhaar
information to users who may be Government agencies or private sector
operators. Section 57 enables commercial exploitation of an individual's
biometrics and demographic information by the respondents as well as private
entities. The provision also ensures creation of a surveillance society, where
every entity assists the State to snoop upon an Aadhaar holder. The use of
Aadhaar infrastructure by private entities is unconstitutional.

43

41\. Elaborating submissions on Section 59, it is contended that Section 59 is
unconstitutional inasmuch as it seeks to validate all action undertaken by the
Central Government pursuant to the notification dated 28.01.2009. Enrolment in
pursuance of notification dated 28.01.2009 having been done without an
informed consent amounts to deprivation of the intimate personal information
of an individual violating the fundamental Right of Privacy. All steps taken
under the notification dated 28.01.2009 were not backed by any law, hence
unconstitutional and clearly violate Article 21, which cannot be cured in a
manner as Section 59 pretend to do.

42\. The Act is unconstitutional since it collects the identify information of
children between five to eighteen years without parental consent. The Aadhaar
architecture adopts foreign technologies, on which UIDAI does not have any
control, exposing data leak endangering life of people and security of nation.

43\. Rule 9 as amended by PMLA Rules, 2017 is  44 unconstitutional being
violative of Articles 14, 19(1)(g), 21 and 300A of the Constitution of India.
Rule 9 also violates Sections 3, 7 and 51 of the Act, 2016 and ultra vires to
the provisions of PMLA Act, 2002\.

44\. Section 139AA of the Income Tax Act, 1961 is liable to be struck down as
violative of Articles 14, 19(1)(g) and 21 of the Constitution in view of
Privacy Judgment – Puttaswamy (supra).

45\. The Mobile Linking Circular dated 23.03.2017 issued by Ministry of
Communications, Department of Telecommunications is ultra vires.

46\. The Aadhaar Act, 2016 has wrongly been passed as a Money Bill. The
Aadhaar Act, 2016 is not a Money Bill. The Speaker of Lok Sabha wrongly
certified the bill as a Money Bill under Article 110 of the Constitution of
India virtually excluding the Rajya Sabha from legislative process and
depriving the Hon'ble President of his power of return. Clauses 23(2)(g),
Section 54(2)(m) and Section 57 of The  45 Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of
Financial and Other Subsidies, Benefits and Services) Bill, 2016 and the
corresponding Sections of the Act, 2016 as notified clearly do not fall under
any of the Clauses of Article 110 of the Constitution. The Act of Speaker
certifying the bill as a Money Bill is clearly violation of constitutional
provisions. Judicial Review of decision of Speaker certifying it as Money Bill
is permissible on the ground of illegality. The Aadhaar Bill being not a money
bill and having been passed by Parliament as a Money Bill, this ground alone
is sufficient to strike down the entire Act, 2016\.

47\. Learned Attorney General replying the above submissions of the counsel
for the petitioners submits:­

48\. In the Privacy Judgment P.S. Puttaswamy case (supra) all nine Judges
uniformly agreed that privacy is a fundamental right traceable to the right to
liberty under Article 21 of the Constitution and hence  46 subject to the same
limitations as applicable to the said Article. It has further been held that
right of privacy is not absolute and is subject to limitations. Justice D.Y.
Chandrachud in his lead judgment laid down that following three tests are
required to be satisfied for judging the permissible limits of the invasion of
privacy under Article 21 of the Constitution:

> (a) The existence of a law

> (b) A legitimate State interest; and

> (c) The said Law should pass the test of proportionality.

49\. The above tests have also been agreed by other Judges who have delivered
the separate judgment. Justice J. Chelameswar and Justice A.N. Sapre have used
the test of compelling State interest whereas Justice R.F. Nariman stated that
if this test is applied, the result is that one would be entitled to invoke
larger public interest in lieu of legitimate State aim. The legitimate State
aim obviously will lead to public interest, hence in the event test of  47
legitimate State aim is fulfilled, the test of public interest stands
fulfilled. After enactment of Act, 2016, the first condition in regard to the
existence of a law stands satisfied. The Act requires only the bare
demographic particulars, while eschewing most other demographic particulars.
The Act further contains adequate safeguards for protection of information and
preventing abuse through a catena of offences and penalties. The provisions of
Act ensure that the law is a just, fair and reasonable and not fanciful,
oppressive or arbitrary.

50\. The legitimate State interest or a larger public interest permeates
through the Act, 2016 which is clearly indicated by the following:

> A. Preventing the dissipation of subsidies and social welfare benefits which
> is covered by Section 7 of the Aadhaar Act;

> B. Prevention of black money and money laundering by imposing a requirement
> by law for linking Aadhaar for opening bank accounts;

C. To prevent income tax evasion by requiring, through an amendment to the
Income Tax Act, that the Aadhaar number be linked with the PAN; and  48 D. To
prevent terrorism and protect national security by requiring that Aadhaar be
linked to SIM cards for mobile phones.”

51\. The Aadhaar Act, 2016 was enacted with prolonged deliberations and study.
The petitioners have failed to establish any arbitrariness in the Act. The
right to life under Article 21 is not the right to a mere animal existence,
but the right to live with human dignity which would include the right to
food, the right to shelter, the right to employment, the right to medical
care, education etc. If these rights are juxtaposed against the right to
privacy, the former will and prevail over the latter. In so far as
implementation of Aadhaar project prior to coming into force of Act, 2016,
since obtaining an Aadhaar number or an enrolment number was voluntary,
especially because of the interim orders passed by this Court, no issue of
violation of any right, leave alone a fundamental right, could arise. The
judgments of this Court in M.P. Sharma and Kharak Singh (supra) being those of
eight Judges and six Judges respectively, holding that the right to privacy is
not a fundamental  49 right, the judgments of smaller benches delivered during
the period upto 2016 would be per incuriam, as a result of which the State
need not to have proceeded on the basis that a law was required for the
purpose of getting an Aadhaar number or an enrolment number. As a result, the
Executive instructions issued for this purpose would be valid as well as the
receipt of benefits and subsidies by the beneficiaries. In any view of the
matter, Section 59 of the Act protects all actions taken during the period
2010 until the passing of the Aadhaar Act in 2016.

52\. Learned Attorney General submitted that Aadhaar Act has rightly been
characterised as Money Bill as understood under Article 110 of the
Constitution. The heart of the Aadhaar Act is Section 7. It is not the
creation of Aadhaar number per se which is the core of the Act, rather, that
is only a means to identify the correct beneficiary and ensure ‘targeted
delivery of subsidies, benefits and services’, the expenditure for which is
incurred from the Consolidated Fund of India.  50 The decision of the Speaker
incorporated into a certificate sent to the President is final and cannot be
the subject matter of judicial review.

53\. The decision and certification of the Speaker being a matter of procedure
is included in the Chapter under the head ‘Legislative Procedure’ which
clearly excluded judicial review. The present issue is squarely covered by the
decisions of this Court.

54\. Section 57, which has been attacked as being untraceable to any of the
sub­clauses of (a) to (f) of Article 110 cannot be looked at in isolation. The
Bill in its pith and substance should pass the test of being a Money Bill and
not isolated provisions.

55\. Learned Additional Solicitor General of India, Shri Tushar Mehta, also
advanced submissions on few aspects of the matter. On Section 139AA of Income
Tax Act, 1961 it is submitted that petitioners can succeed only when they
demonstrate that Section 139AA is violative of right to privacy on the
following tests  51 as laid down by nine­Judge Constitution Bench in
Puttaswamy case:

    
    
         (i)      absence of a law;
    
    
         (ii)     absence of legitimate State interest”
    
    
         (iii)    provisions   being   hit   by   lack   of
                  proportionality;
         (iv)     the   provisions   being   manifestly
                  arbitrary.
    
    
    

56\. It is submitted that two­Judge Bench judgment of this Court in Binoy
Biswam Vs. Union of India and others, (2017) 7 SCC 59, had upheld the vires of
Section 139AA subject to issue of privacy which at that point of time was
pending consideration. It is further submitted that provision pertaining to
Permanent Account Number (PAN) was inserted in the Income Tax Act by Section
139A with effect from 01.04.1989 which obliged every person to quote PAN for
different purposes as enumerated in Section 139A. The Petitioners or anyone
else never felt aggrieved by requirement of getting PAN under Section 139A and
Parliament on considering the legitimate State interest has introduced Section
139AA which is only an  52 extension of Section 139A which requires linking of
PAN with Aadhaar number.

57\. The Income Tax Act was amended by the Parliament by inserting Section
139AA in the legitimate State interest and in larger public interest. The
object of linking was to remove bogus PAN cards by linking with Aadhaar,
expose shell companies and thereby curb the menace of black money, money
laundering and tax evasion. Problem of multiple PAN cards to same individuals
and PAN cards in the name of fictitious individuals are common medium of money
laundering, tax evasion, creation and channeling of black money.

58\. Linking of Aadhaar with PAN is consistent with India’s international
obligations and Goals. India has signed the Inter­Governmental Agreement (IGA)
with the USA on July, 9, 2015, for improving International Tax Compliance and
implementing the Foreign Account Tax Compliance Act. It is submitted that
prior to 01.07.2017 already 1.75 crore tax payers had linked their PAN with
Aadhaar on a voluntary basis. Replying  53 the arguments based on the interim
orders passed by this Court in the present group of petitions, it is submitted
that enactment of Aadhaar Act, 2016 has taken away and cured the basis of the
interim order passed by this Court since one of the submissions which was made
before this Court in passing the interim orders was that there was no law,
that Aadhaar project was being implemented without backing of any law and
during the said period the interim orders were passed. The Aadhaar Act
addresses the concern of this Court as reflected in the interim orders passed
before enactment of the Act.

59\. Shri Mehta further contended that there is presumption to the
constitutionality of a statute and unless one attacking the statute satisfies
the Court that the statute is unconstitutional, the presumption will be there
that statute is constitutional. Shri Mehta has further submitted that there is
no presumption of criminality or guilt on the requirement to link Aadhaar.

54

60\. Elaborating the doctrine of proportionality, Additional Solicitor General
submits that Section 139A fully satisfies the aforesaid test of
proportionality.

61\. Additional Solicitor General in support of Prevention of Money­laundering
(Maintenance of Records) Second Amendment Rules, 2017 submits that the State
has sought to make the provisions of PMLA more robust and ensure that the
ultimate object of the Act is achieved. The Amendment Rules, 2017 place an
obligation on part of the reporting entity to seek the details with regard to
Aadhaar number of every client. It is submitted that the said Rules have to be
read in consonance with the object of the PMLA and the principles of
“beneficial owner” behind the corporate veil of shell companies, etc. It is
submitted that the PMLA empowers the State to utilise the uniqueness of
Aadhaar in order to tackle the problem of money laundering. It is submitted
that the PMLA Act, with a clear emphasis on the investigation of the
biological persons behind the corporate entities, establishes a mechanism
wherein receiving benefits through benami or  55 shell companies through
related/connected Directors, fictitious persons or other personnel is
eliminated.

62\. Section 139AA and PMLA Rules amended in 2017 are co­ordinated in their
operation. The PMLA Rules are not ultra vires. Mr. Mehta has also referred to
international Conventions declaring money laundering to be a very serious
offence. He submits that Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002 was enacted
in the context of concrete international efforts to tackle the menace of money
laundering. Shri Mehta has also emphasised on the necessity of verification of
bank accounts with Aadhaar number. He submits that the verification of bank
account by way of Aadhaar is done for the reason that often bank accounts are
opened in either fictitious names or in the name of wrong persons on the basis
of forged identity documents and financial crimes are committed. It is seen
that accommodation entries are mostly provided through the banking channels by
bogus companies to convert black money into white. Benami transactions
routinely take place through banking channels. All of the above, can  56 to a
large extent be checked by verifying Aadhaar with bank accounts to ensure that
the account belongs to the person who claims to be the account holder and that
he or she is a genuine person. Verification of bank account with Aadhaar also
ensures that the direct benefit transfer of subsidies reach the Aadhaar
verified bank account and is not diverted to some other account. Shell
companies are often used to open bank accounts to hold unaccounted money of
other entities under fictitious identities which will also be curbed once
Aadhaar verification is initiated.

63\. Shri Mehta further contends that impugned PMLA Rules do not violate
Article 300A. Amendment Rules, 2017 also cannot be said to be ultra vires to
the parent Act since it advances the object of the Act and is not ultra vires
of any provision of the Act. The Amendment Rules are required to be placed
before the Parliament which serve a purpose of check by the Legislature. As
per Section 159 of the Act any notification under Section 29 is to be placed
before the Parliament and Parliament may amend or reject the  57 same. The
Rules, 2017 are just, fair and reasonable and in furtherance of the object of
the Act and do not provide for any arbitrary, uncanalised or unbridled power.

64\. Shri Rakesh Dwivedi, learned senior counsel, appearing on behalf of UIDAI
and State of Gujarat has made elaborate submissions while replying the
arguments of petitioners. The right to privacy is part of Article 21. The
autonomy of individual is associated over matters which can be kept private.
These are concerns over which there is a reasonable expectation of privacy.
The reasonable expectation involves two aspects. Firstly, the individual or
individuals claiming a right to privacy must establish that their claim
involves a concern about some harm likely to be inflicted upon them on account
of the alleged act. This concern should be real and not imaginary or
speculative. Secondly, the concern should not be inflated.

58

65\. The Act, 2016 operates in the relational sphere and not in the core,
private or personal sphere of residents. It involves minimal identity
information for effective authentication. The purpose is limited to
authenticate for identification. The Act operates in a public sphere. Section
29 of the Aadhaar Act, 2016 provides protection against disclosure of identity
information without the prior consent of the Aadhaar Number holder concerned.
Sharing is intended only for authentication purposes.

66\. It is submitted that by their very nature the demographic information and
photograph sought to be collected cannot be said to be of such a nature as
would make it a part of a reasonable expectation paradigm. Today, globally all
ID cards and passports contain photographs for identification along with
address, date of birth, gender etc. The demographic information is readily
provided by individuals globally for disclosing identity while relating with
others; while seeking benefits whether provided by government or by private
entities. People who get  59 registered for engaging in a profession, who take
admissions in Schools/Colleges/university, who seek employment in the
government or private concerns and those who engage in various trade and
commerce are all required to provide demographic information and even
photographs. There is no expectation of privacy in providing those information
for the above purposes.

67\. There are lot of enactments which require disclosure of demographic
information comprising name, address, email address etc., for example Central
Motor Vehicle Rules, 1989, Companies Act, 2013, Special Marriage Act, The
Registration of Electoral Rules, 1960, The Citizenship (Registration of
Citizens and Issue of National Identity Cards) Rules, 2009 and the Passports
Act. However, there are certain special contexts in which non­disclosure of
demographic information could be considered as raising a reasonable
expectation of privacy such as where juveniles in conflict with law are
involved or where a rape victim’s identity or medical information is involved.
Thus, unless some such special context or  60 aggravating factor is
established, there would not be any reasonable expectation of privacy with
respect to demographic information.

68\. As regards the core biometric information, comprising finger prints and
iris scans it would be pertinent to bear in mind that the Aadhaar Act is not
dealing with the intimate or private sphere of the individual. The core
biometrics are being collected from residents for authentication use in a
public sphere and in relational context in which regard there is no reasonable
expectation of privacy in relation to fingerprints and iris scans. Iris scan
is nothing but a photograph of the eyes taken from a camera. From fingerprints
and iris scans nothing is revealed with regard to a person.

69\. Use of fingerprints with regard to registration of documents is an
accepted phenomena. The use of mandatory requirement of biometric attendance
is increasing day by day both in public and private sector. Thus, requirement
of fingerprints and iris  61 scan would not attract the fundamental right of
privacy. The fingerprint and iris scan have been considered to be most
accurate and non­invasive mode of identifying an individual.

70\. The information collected under the Act, 2016 does not involve processing
for economic and sociological purposes. Further, in the data center
de­duplication process is based on anonymization and what is stored in the
servers for authentication process are simply templates and encrypted
information of Aadhaar number and demographics. The identity data collected is
stored offline. There is no internet connectivity. Thus, there is more than a
reasonable security protection under the Act.

71\. The rationale of Section 7 lies in ensuring targeted delivery of
services, benefits and subsidies which are funded from the Consolidated Fund
of India. In discharge of its solemn Constitutional obligation to enliven the
Fundamental Rights of life and personal liberty and to eliminate inequality
with a view to  62 ameliorate the lot of the poor and the Dalits, the Central
Government has launched several welfare schemes. Some of such schemes are PDS,
scholarship, mid day meals, LPG subsidies, free education,etc.

72\. The requirement to undergo authentication on the basis of Aadhaar number
is made mandatory by Section 7. This requirement is only for “undertaking
authentication”. However, if authentication fails, despite more than one
attempt then the possession of Aadhaar number can be proved otherwise, i.e.,
by producing the Aadhaar card, and those who do not have Aadhaar number can
make an application for enrolment and produce the enrolment id number (EID).
This takes care of non­exclusion.

73\. Aadhaar Act truly seeks to secure to the poor and deprived persons an
opportunity to live their life and exercise their liberty. By ensuring
targeted delivery through digital identification, it not only provides them a
nationally recognised identity but also attempts to ensure the delivery of
benefits, service  63 and subsidies with the aid of public
exchequer/Consolidated Fund of India. And it does so without impacting the
Fundamental Right to Privacy of the Indians or at best minimally impacting it
with adequate safeguards.

74\. Regarding the numerization or numericalization of individual argument, it
is submitted that the Aadhaar number does not convert the human being into a
number. The objective of the Aadhaar number is to enable authentication which
is done on a 1:1 matching basis, i.e., to say when the requesting entity feeds
the Aadhaar number along with some identity information then the CIDR picks up
the template having that Aadhaar number automatically and matches identity
information with the encrypted information in the template. This Aadhaar
number is, therefore, absolutely essential for the technological success of
authentication. It is, therefore, a technology requirement and it does not
amount to numerization or numericalisation. The contention of the petitioners
ignores the distinction between identity and  64 identification. The 12 digit
Aadhaar number is not given by UIDAI to alter the identity of the individual.
It is provided to the enrolled individual to enable his identification through
authentication. Authentication is a multi dimensional identifying process. The
Aadhaar number is one element or one identifier in the process of
identification through authentication. It is identificational in nature.
Section 2(a) of Aadhaar Act defines Aadhaar number to mean “an identification
number”. Section 2(c) defines authentication as a process requiring submission
of Aadhaar number to CIDR for verification. Further, Section 4(2) provides
that the Aadhaar number shall be a random number and shall bear no relation to
the attributes or identity of the Aadhaar number holder. It is proof of
identity and not identity itself.

75\. Replying the submission of the petitioners that fundamental right of
privacy/dignity/autonomy under Article 21 could not be waived. It is submitted
that Section 7 of Aadhaar Act does not involve any issue of waiver. When an
individual undergoes any  65 authentication to establish his identity to
receive benefits, services or subsidies, he does so to enliven his fundamental
right to life and personal liberty under Article 21.

76\. With regard to Section 57, it is submitted that since an infrastructure
for establishing identity of residents is available, therefore, Parliament
intends to make the use of Aadhaar number available for other purposes
provided the need for the service of authentication arises pursuant to any law
or contract. The rationale seems to be that due to liberalisation and
privatisation in many governmental and public sector zones, private corporate
bodies are operating in parallel and in competition with public sector –
banking, insurance, defence, health etc. These are vital core sectors
absolutely essential for National integrity, National economy and life of
people. In many areas private bodies operate under common regulators such as
TRAI, Airport Authority, IRDA etc. Then there is rapidly growing e­commerce.

66

77\. In Reply to the submission of Shri Kapil Sibal that the real object of
the Act was to provide data to the digital giants like Google, Facebook and
other private players, it is contended that there is no factual foundation for
this submission in any writ petition. In the Act there is a complete bar with
respect to sharing of core biometric information vide Section 29(1). The
non­core biometric information is to be shared only as per the provisions of
the Act and Regulations and with prior consent and only for the purpose of
authentication.

78\. On the submission of the petitioners that power of UIDAI to add identity
information by Regulation is unguided and violative of Article 14, it is
submitted that clauses (g) and (j) of Section 2 use the expression ‘such other
biological attribute’. This general expression needs to be construed by
applying the doctrine of ejusdem generis. The use of word ‘such’ implies
similarity with what is specifically mentioned before the general expression.
The Regulations framed by UIDAI are required to be laid  67 before the
Parliament under Section 55. Section 55 is a mandatory provision. The
Parliament has power to modify the Regulation and also to reject the
Regulation. This is a legislative check on the Regulation making power.

79\. Almost 3% of GDP amounting to trillions of rupees is allocated by
Governments towards subsidies, scholarships, pensions, education, food and
other welfare programmes. But approximately half of it does not reach the
intended beneficiaries. A former Prime Minister said only 15 out of 100 rupees
reaches the target person. This was confirmed by the Planning Commission. In
the Audit Report No.3 of 2000 CAG stated in “Overview” that programmes
suffered from serious targeting problems. It noted that bogus ration cards
were being used for diversions (1.93 crores bogus).

80\. Even otherwise, there is no other identification document which is widely
and commonly possessed by the residents of the country and most of the
identity documents do not enjoy the quality of portability.  68 They also do
not lend assurance and accuracy on account of existence of fake, bogus and
ghost cards. Therefore, there was need of a biometric Aadhaar number which
enables de­duplication and authentication.

81\. Shri Dwivedi submits that security and data privacy is ensured in the
following manner:­

(i) The data sent to ABIS is completely anonymised. The ABIS systems do not
have access to resident’s demographic information as they are only sent
biometric information of a resident with a reference number and asked to
de­duplicate. The de­duplication result with the reference number is mapped
back to the correct enrolment number by the Authorities own enrolment server.

(ii) The ABIS providers only provide their software and services. The data is
stored in UIDAI storage and it never leaves the secure premises.

(iii) The ABIS providers do not store the biometric images (source). They only
69 store template for the purposes of de­ duplication (with reference number).

(iv) The encrypted enrolment packet sent by the enrolment client software to
the CIDR is decrypted by the enrolment server but the decrypted packet is
never stored.

(v) The original biometric images of fingerprints, iris and face are archived
and stored offline. Hence, they cannot be accessed through an online network.

(vi) The biometric system provides high accuracy of over 99.86%. The mixed
biometric have been adopted only to enhance the accuracy and to reduce the
errors which may arise on account of some residents either not having
biometrics or not having some particular biometric.

82\. Biometrics are being used for unique identification in e­passports by 120
countries. Out of these many countries use fingerprints and/or iris scans.
Additionally 19 European Countries have smart National Identity cards having
chips containing  70 biometric information. A number of African and Asian
countries are also using biometrics for identification. The ECHR and ECJ have
not declared the use of biometrics or the collection and storage of data for
the said purpose to be violative of Human Rights. It has infact been upheld in
the context of passports, by the ECJ.

83\. On the submissions that de­duplication/ authentication software has been
received from three foreign suppliers and since the source code of the
algorithm is with the foreign suppliers, therefore, they can easily obtain the
data in the CIDR merely by manipulation of the algorithm, Shri Dwivedi submits
that foreign biometric solution providers only provide the software, the
server and hardware belongs to UIDAI. So far the software is concerned UIDAI
uses the software as licensee. There is no free access to the server room
which is wholly secured by security guards. The enrolment data packet, after
being received in the data center, is decrypted for a short duration to enable
extraction of minutiae and  71 preparation of templates. Once the template is
prepared the entire biometric data is stored offline under the complete
control of the UIDAI officials.

84\. It is correct that the source code for the algorithms provided are
retained by the BSPs which constitutes the intellectual property right of the
BSP, however, it does not introduce any insecurity of data in the CIDR as the
softwares operate automatically in the servers located in the server rooms and
also because the software functions only on the basis of the templates whilst
the biometric data is stored offline.

85\. During the submissions, Shri Dwivedi also emphasised on prohibition of
sharing of core biometric information. As per Section 29(1) read with
Regulation 17(1) of the Aadhaar (Sharing of Information) Regulations, 2016.
Referring to various Regulations of the above Regulations. Shri Dwivedi
submitted that the architecture of Aadhaar and its functioning does not permit
CIDR to note about parties of any transaction  72 or location of the
individual seeking identification of his Aadhaar number. Requesting Agency is
strictly restricted to sharing of only demographic information plus photograph
and for authentication only, and this is also with express and separate prior
consent of the ANH. Requesting Entities cannot share authentication logs with
any person other than the ANH or for grievance redressal and resolution of
disputes or with the Authority for audit and shall not be used for any purpose
other than stated in Regulation 18(5).

86\. Elaborating on security Shri Dwivedi submitted that Section 28(4)
mandates that the UIDAI shall ensure that the agencies appointed by it have in
place the appropriate technical and organizational security measures for the
information and ensure that the agreements or arrangements entered into with
such agencies impose obligations equivalent to those imposed on the Authority
and require such agencies to act only on instructions from the Authority.

87\. RE shall ensure that the identity information of  73 the ANH or any other
information generated during the authentication is kept confidential, secure
and protected against access, use and disclosure not permitted under the Act
and regulations.[Regulation 17(1)(e)]. The private key used for digitally
signing the authentication request and the license keys are kept secure and
access controlled[Regulation 17(1)(f) and 22(3)]. All relevant laws and
regulations in relation to data storage and data protection relating to
Aadhaar based identity information in their systems, that of their agents and
with authentication devices are compiled with [Regulation 17(1)(g)].

88\. Regulation 22(4) provides that RE shall adhere to all regulations,
information security policies, processes, standards, specifications and
guidelines issued from time to time.

89\. By virtue of Section 56 and 61 of the Aadhaar Act, 2016, the provisions
of IT Act, 2000 are applicable except where it is inconsistent with Aadhaar
Act. The regular regime under the IT Act with all its provisions for
punishment and penalty are attracted  74 since the biometric information is an
electronic record and the data is sensitive personal data or information as
defined in the IT Act, 2000. On submission of the petitioner that there is no
mechanism for raising any grievance, Shri Dwivedi submits that UIDAI has set
up grievance redressal cell as contemplated under Section 23(1)(s) of the Act.
Any ANH can make a complaint for redressal of grievance.

90\. The petitioner's submission that Aadhaar Act enables the State to put the
entire population of the country in an electronic leash and to track them all
the time and it has converted itself as the State into a totalitarian State,
it is submitted that none of the four clauses of Regulation 26 entitle the
authority to store data about the purpose for which authentication is being
done. Section 32(3) of the Aadhaar Act specifically prohibits the authority
from collecting, storing or maintaining, whether directly or indirectly any
information about the purpose of authentication. The proviso to Regulation 26
is also to the same effect. Here, “the purpose of authentication” means  75
the nature of activity being conducted by ANH in relation to which the
authentication is required and is being done.

91\. It is submitted that the devices which are used for the purpose of
authentication are not geared or designed to record the nature of the activity
being done by the ANH which necessitates authentication. The device can only
tell the authority about the time of authentication, the identity of the RE,
the PID, the time and nature of response, the code of the device and the
authentication server side configurations. Hence, with the aid of
authentication record it is not possible for the UIDAI to track the nature of
activity being engaged into by the ANH. In fact, in overwhelming majority of
cases the authentication record would not enable the authority to know even
the place/location where the activity is performed by the ANH. The reason is
that there are about 350 number of REs. The REs alone can authenticate with
the help of CIDR and this is done by them through the ASA. In a large number
of cases, the organizations requiring  76 authentication would be doing so
through some RE with whom they have some agreements. To illustrate nic.in is
an RE which provides authentication service to large number of government
organizations who have agreements with it. The authentication record would
only contain information about the identity about the RE. It will give
information only about the RE(nic.in) and not about the organization which is
requiring authentication through the RE. In most cases the authentication is
one time.

92\. It is submitted that biometrics is being increasingly resorted to for
identification purposes by many countries. At least 19 countries in Europe are
using biometric smart cards where data is stored in the chip. These smart
cards are similar to the smart cards which were used under the 2006 Act in
U.K. The important difference lies in the extent of data of the individual
which is stored in the smart card. The European cards unlike the UK, do not
store 50 categories of data which was being stored in the UK card that came to
be abolished in 2010 by the  77 Repealing Act, 2010. In some European
countries the smart cards are issued in a decentralized manner, as in Germany.
But in some other countries the smart cards are issued in a centralized
manner. In either case, the State is possessed of all the information which is
stored in the chip of the smart card, though it may not involve
authentication. These smart cards are considered to be property of the State
and the State can require the production of the smart card for identification
at any time. Estonia is considered to be a pioneer and leader in the field of
the use of biometrics and it has a centralized data base.

93\. It is submitted that the architecture of the Aadhaar Act does not lead to
any real possibility, proximate or remote of mass surveillance in real time by
the State. This is not an Act for empowering surveillance by the State. It
merely empowers the State to ensure proper delivery of welfare measures
mandated by Directive Principles of State Policy(Part IV of the Constitution)
which actually enliven the Fundamental Rights under Article 14, 19 and 21 of
the  78 Constitution for a vast majority of the poor and down trodden in the
country and thereby to bring about their comprehensive emancipation. It seeks
to ensure, justice, social, economic and political for the little Indians.

94\. Responding on the arguments raised by the petitioner on Section 47 of the
Act, it is submitted that Section 47 has rationale. The offences and penalties
under Chapter VII are all intended to maintain the purity and integrity of
CIDR which has been established of the ANH. Secondly, the entire enrolment,
storage in CIDR and authentication exercise is so vast and that any breach can
be handled with efficiency and effectively only by UIDAI. There are similar
enactments which contain similar provisions which have been upheld by this
Court. An individual can make a complaint to UIDAI directly or through
grievance redressal cell. The authority would be obliged to examine the
complaints and to lodge the complaint in the Court as per Section 47.

Additionally, the individual is generally likely to  79 have a complaint of
identity theft, cheating or disclosure. In such a situation he can always
invoke the provisions of Sections 66C, 66D and 72A of the IT Act, 2000. The
said offences carry identical penalties.

95\. Elaborating on Section 59 of the Act, it is submitted that Section 59
purports to provide a statutory basis to the resolution of the Government of
India, Planning Commission dated 28.01.2009 and also to validate anything done
or any action taken by the Central Government under the said resolution.
Section 59 of the Aadhaar Act seeks to continue what was done and the actions
which were taken under the Resolution dated 28.01.2009. Section 59 is clearly
extending its protection retrospectively to that which was done under the
notification dated 28.01.2009.

96\. Section 59 provides a deemed fiction. As a result of this deemed fiction
one has to imagine that all the actions taken under the aforesaid
notifications were done under the Act and not under the aforesaid
notifications.

80

97\. Replying the submission of the petitioner that large scale of marginal
section of the society is deprived due to exclusion from getting the benefits
and the Act violates Article 14 of the Constitution, it is submitted that
there is no exclusion on account of de­duplication. It cannot be denied that
there may be some cases where due to non­identification, a person may have
been put to some dis­advantage but on failure of authentication the
authorities have clear discretion to accept other means of identification to
deliver the subsidies and benefits. In any view of the matter on some
administrative lapses and some mistakes in implementation does not lead to
conclude that Act is unconstitutional and wrong implementation of the Act does
not effect the constitutionality of the statutes.

98\. Learned counsel for the parties have placed reliance on several judgments
of this Court and Foreign Courts in support of their respective  81
submissions which we shall notice while considering the respective submissions
hereinafter.

99\. Apart from hearing elaborate submissions made by the learned counsel for
the petitioners as well as the respondents, we have also heard several learned
counsel for the intervener. The submission made by the intervener has already
been covered by learned counsel for the petitioners as well as for the
respondents, hence it needs no repetition.

100\. We have considered the submissions raised before us. From the pleadings
on record and the submissions made following are the main issues which arise
for consideration:­ (1) Whether requirement under Aadhaar Act to give one's
demographic and biometric information is violative of fundamental right of
privacy ? (2) Whether the provisions of Aadhaar Act requiring demographic and
biometric information from a resident for Aadhaar number are unconstitutional
and do not pass three fold test as laid down in  82 Puttaswamy case ?

(3) Whether collection of data of residents, its storage, retention and use
violates fundamental right of privacy ?

(4) Whether Aadhaar Act creates an architecture for pervasive surveillance
amounting to violation of fundamental right of privacy ?

(5) Whether the Aadhaar Act provides protection and safety of the data
collected and received from individual ?

(6) Whether Section 7 of Aadhaar Act is unconstitutional since it requires
that for purposes of establishment of identity of an individual for receipt of
a subsidy, benefit or service such individual should undergo authentication or
furnish proof of possession of Aadhaar number or satisfy that such person has
made an application for enrolment ? Further the provision deserves to be
struck down on account  83 of large number of denial of rightful claims of
various marginalised section of society and down trodden?

(7) Can the State while enlivening right to food, right to shelter etc.
envisaged under Article 21 encroach upon the rights of privacy of the
beneficiaries ?

(8) Whether Section 29 of the Aadhaar Act is liable to be struck down inasmuch
as it permits sharing of identity information ?

(9) Whether Section 33 is unconstitutional inasmuch as it provides for the use
of Aadhaar data base for Police investigation, which violates the protection
against self­incrimination as enshrined under Article 20(3) of the
Constitution of India ?

(10) Whether Section 47 of Aadhaar Act is unconstitutional inasmuch as it does
not allow an individual who finds that there is a  84 violation of Aadhaar Act
to initiate a criminal process ?

(11) Whether Section 57 of Aadhaar Act which allows an unrestricted extension
of Aadhaar information of an individual for any purpose whether by the State
or any body, corporate or person pursuant to any law or contact is
unconstitutional ?

(12) Whether Section 59 is capable of validating all actions taken by the
Central Government under notification dated 28.01.2009 or under notification
dated 12.09.2015 and all such actions can be deemed to be taken under the
Aadhaar Act?

(13) Whether Aadhaar Act is unconstitutional since it collects the identity
information of children between 5 to 18 years without parental consent ? (14)
Whether Rule 9 as amended by PMLA (Second Amendment) Rules, 2017 is
unconstitutional being violative of Article 14, 19(1)(g), 21 and 300A 85 of
Constitution of India and Section 3,7, 51 of Aadhaar Act. Further, whether
Rule 9 is ultra vires to the PMLA Act, 2002. itself.

(15) Whether circular dated 23.02.2017 issued by the Department of
Telecommunications, Government of India is ultra vires.

(16) Whether Aadhaar Act could not have been passed as Money Bill ? Further,
whether the decision of Speaker of Lok Sabha certifying the Aadhaar (Targeted
Delivery of Financial and other Subsidies, Benefits and Services) Bill, 2016
as Money Bill is subject to judicial review ?

(17) Whether Section 139­AA of the Income Tax Act, 1961 is unconstitutional in
view of the Privacy judgment in Puttaswamy case?

(18) Whether Aadhaar Act violates the Interim Orders passed by this Court in
Writ Petition (C) No. 494 of 2012 & other connected cases?

86

Whether requirement under Aadhaar Act to give one's demographic and biometric
information is violative of fundamental Issue Nos.1 right of privacy ? And and
2 Whether the provisions of Aadhaar Act requiring demographic and biometric
information from a resident for Aadhaar number are unconstitutional and do not
pass three fold test as laid down in Puttaswamy case ?

101\. Before we answer the above issues we need to look into the object and
purpose for which Aadhaar Act was enacted. The Statement of Objects and
Reasons particularly paragraph 5 of such Statement throws light on the object
for which Legislation came into existence. Paragraph 5 of the Statement of
Objects and Reasons is as follows:

> “5. The Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of Financial and Other Subsidies,
> Benefits and Services) Bill, 2016, inter alia, seeks to provide for—

> (a) issue of Aadhaar numbers to individuals on providing his demographic and
> biometric information to the Unique Identification Authority of India;

> (b) requiring Aadhaar numbers for identifying an individual for delivery of
> benefits, subsidies, and services the expenditure is incurred from or the
> receipt therefrom forms  87 part of the Consolidated Fund of India;

> (c) authentication of the Aadhaar number of an Aadhaar number holder in
> relation to his demographic and biometric information;

> (d) establishment of the Unique Identification Authority of India consisting
> of a Chairperson, two Members and a Member­Secretary to perform functions in
> pursuance of the objectives above;

> (e) maintenance and updating the information of individuals in the Central
> Identities Data Repository in such manner as may be specified by
> regulations;

> (f) measures pertaining to security, privacy and confidentiality of
> information in possession or control of the Authority including information
> stored in the Central Identities Data Repository; and

> (g) offences and penalties for contravention of relevant statutory
> provisions.”

102\. Preamble to any Act is a key to read and unfold an enactment. The
Preamble of Aadhaar Act reads:

> “An Act to provide for, as a good governance, efficient, transparent, and
> targeted delivery of subsidies, benefits and services, the expenditure for
> which is incurred from the Consolidated Fund of India, to individuals
> residing in India through assigning of unique identity numbers to such
> individuals and for  88 matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.”

103\. Section 2 of the Act is definition clause. Section 2(a) defines “Aadhaar
number” in the following manner:

> “2(a) “Aadhaar number” means an identification number issued to an
> individual under sub­section (3) of section 3;”

104\. Sections 2(g) and 2(k) define “biometric information” and “demographic
information” which is to the following effect:

> “2(g) “biometric information” means photograph, finger print, Iris scan, or
> such other biological attributes of an individual as may be specified by
> regulations;

> (k) “demographic information” includes information relating to the name,
> date of birth, address and other relevant information of an individual, as
> may be specified by regulations for the purpose of issuing an Aadhaar
> number, but shall not include race, religion, caste, tribe, ethnicity,
> language, records of entitlement, income or medical history;

105\. Section 3 of the Act deals with Aadhaar enrolment. Section 3 is as
follows:

89

> “3.(1) Every resident shall be entitled to obtain an Aadhaar number by
> submitting his demographic information and biometric information by
> undergoing the process of enrolment: Provided that the Central Government
> may, from time to time, notify such other category of individuals who may be
> entitled to obtain an Aadhaar number.

> (2) The enrolling agency shall, at the time of enrolment, inform the
> individual undergoing enrolment of the following details in such manner as
> may be specified by regulations, namely:—

> (a) the manner in which the information shall be used;

> (b) the nature of recipients with whom the information is intended to be
> shared during authentication; and

> (c) the existence of a right to access information, the procedure for making
> requests for such access, and details of the person or department in­charge
> to whom such requests can be made.

> (3) On receipt of the demographic information and biometric information
> under sub­section (1), the Authority shall, after verifying the information,
> in such manner as may be specified by regulations, issue an Aadhaar number
> to such individual.”

106\. The challenge in this batch of cases is challenge to the Act and its
various provisions on the ground that the Act and its provisions violate right
of privacy which is now recognised as fundamental right.  90 All aspects of
privacy right, which is accepted as a fundamental right under Article 21, have
been elaborately and authoritatively dealt by nine­Judge Constitution Bench of
this Court in Puttaswamy case (supra).

107\. Alan F. Westin in his work “Privacy and Freedom” defined privacy as “the
desire of people to choose freely under what circumstances and to what extent
they will expose themselves, their attitudes and their behaviour to others”.

108\. Dr. D.Y. Chandrachud, J., in his opinion (which expresses majority
opinion) in paragraph 3 of the judgment while analysing the concept of privacy
held:

> “3. Privacy, in its simplest sense, allows each human being to be left alone
> in a core which is inviolable. Yet the autonomy of the individual is
> conditioned by her relationships with the rest of society. Those
> relationships may and do often pose questions to autonomy and free choice.
> The overarching presence of State and non­State entities regulates aspects
> of social existence which bear upon the freedom of the individual. The
> preservation of constitutional liberty is, so to speak, work in progress.
> Challenges have to be addressed to existing problems.

> Equally, new challenges have to be dealt with  91 in terms of a
> constitutional understanding of where liberty places an individual in the
> context of a social order. The emergence of new challenges is exemplified by
> this case, where the debate on privacy is being analysed in the context of a
> global information based society. In an age where information technology
> governs virtually every aspect of our lives, the task before the Court is to
> impart constitutional meaning to individual liberty in an interconnected
> world. While we revisit the question whether our Constitution protects
> privacy as an elemental principle, the Court has to be sensitive to the
> needs of and the opportunities and dangers posed to liberty in a digital
> world.”

109\. Dwelling on essential nature of privacy in paragraphs 297 and 298
following has been laid down by Dr. D.Y. Chandrachud, J.:

“297. What, then, does privacy postulate?

Privacy postulates the reservation of a private space for the individual,
described as the right to be let alone. The concept is founded on the autonomy
of the individual. The ability of an individual to make choices lies at the
core of the human personality. The notion of privacy enables the individual to
assert and control the human element which is inseparable from the personality
of the individual. The inviolable nature of the human personality is
manifested in the ability to make decisions on matters intimate to human life.
The autonomy of the individual is associated over matters which can be kept
private. These are concerns over which there is a legitimate expectation of
privacy. The body and the mind are inseparable elements of the human
personality. The integrity of the  92 body and the sanctity of the mind can
exist on the foundation that each individual possesses an inalienable ability
and right to preserve a private space in which the human personality can
develop. Without the ability to make choices, the inviolability of the
personality would be in doubt. Recognising a zone of privacy is but an
acknowledgment that each individual must be entitled to chart and pursue the
course of development of personality. Hence privacy is a postulate of human
dignity itself....

298\. Privacy of the individual is an essential aspect of dignity. Dignity has
both an intrinsic and instrumental value. As an intrinsic value, human dignity
is an entitlement or a constitutionally protected interest in itself. In its
instrumental facet, dignity and freedom are inseparably intertwined, each
being a facilitative tool to achieve the other. The ability of the individual
to protect a zone of privacy enables the realisation of the full value of life
and liberty. Liberty has a broader meaning of which privacy is a subset. All
liberties may not be exercised in privacy.

Yet others can be fulfilled only within a private space. Privacy enables the
individual to retain the autonomy of the body and mind.

The autonomy of the individual is the ability to make decisions on vital
matters of concern to life. Privacy has not been couched as an independent
fundamental right. But that does not detract from the constitutional
protection afforded to it, once the true nature of privacy and its
relationship with those fundamental rights which are expressly protected is
understood. Privacy lies across the spectrum of protected freedoms. The
guarantee of equality is a guarantee against arbitrary State action. It
prevents the State  93 from discriminating between individuals. The
destruction by the State of a sanctified personal space whether of the body or
of the mind is violative of the guarantee against arbitrary State action.
Privacy of the body entitles an individual to the integrity of the physical
aspects of personhood. The intersection between one’s mental integrity and
privacy entitles the individual to freedom of thought, the freedom to believe
in what is right, and the freedom of self­ determination. When these
guarantees intersect with gender, they create a private space which protects
all those elements which are crucial to gender identity. The family, marriage,
procreation and sexual orientation are all integral to the dignity of the
individual. Above all, the privacy of the individual recognises an inviolable
right to determine how freedom shall be exercised.”

110\. This Court has further held that like the right to life and liberty,
privacy is not absolute. Any curtailment or deprivation of that right would
have to take place under a regime of law. In paragraph 313 following has been
held:

> “313. Privacy has been held to be an intrinsic element of the right to life
> and personal liberty under Article 21 and as a constitutional value which is
> embodied in the fundamental freedoms embedded in Part III of the
> Constitution. Like the right to life and liberty, privacy is not absolute.
> The limitations which operate on the right to life and personal liberty
> would operate on the right to privacy. Any curtailment or deprivation of
> that right would have to take  94 place under a regime of law. The procedure
> established by law must be fair, just and reasonable. The law which provides
> for the curtailment of the right must also be subject to constitutional
> safeguards.”

111\. Further elaboration of the core of privacy has been stated in the
following words in paragraphs 322, 323 and 326:

> “322. Privacy is the constitutional core of human dignity. Privacy has both
> a normative and descriptive function. At a normative level privacy subserves
> those eternal values upon which the guarantees of life, liberty and freedom
> are founded. At a descriptive level, privacy postulates a bundle of
> entitlements and interests which lie at the foundation of ordered liberty.

> 323\. Privacy includes at its core the preservation of personal intimacies,
> the sanctity of family life, marriage, procreation, the home and sexual
> orientation. Privacy also connotes a right to be left alone. Privacy
> safeguards individual autonomy and recognises the ability of the individual
> to control vital aspects of his or her life. Personal choices governing a
> way of life are intrinsic to privacy. Privacy protects heterogeneity and
> recognises the plurality and diversity of our culture. While the legitimate
> expectation of privacy may vary from the intimate zone to the private zone
> and from the private to the public arenas, it is important to underscore
> that privacy is not lost or surrendered merely because the individual is in
> a public place. Privacy attaches to the person since it is an  95 essential
> facet of the dignity of the human being.

> 326\. Privacy has both positive and negative content. The negative content
> restrains the State from committing an intrusion upon the life and personal
> liberty of a citizen. Its positive content imposes an obligation on the
> State to take all necessary measures to protect the privacy of the
> individual.”

112\. The first issue which is under consideration is as to whether
requirement under the Aadhaar Act to give one’s biometric and demographic
information is violative of fundamental right of privacy. Demographic and
biometric information has been defined in Section 2 as noted above. Biometric
information and demographic information are two distinct concepts as
delineated in the Act itself. We first take up the demographic information
which includes information relating to the name, date of birth, address and
other relevant information of an individual, as may be specified by
regulations for the purpose of issuing an Aadhaar number. There is also
injunction in Section 2(k) that demographic information shall not include
race, religion, caste, tribe, ethnicity, language,  96 records of entitlement,
income or medical history. Thus, demographic information which are
contemplated to be given in the Act are very limited information. The
Regulations have been framed under Act, namely, Aadhaar (Enrolment and Update)
Regulations, 2016. Regulation 4 enumerates demographic information which shall
be collected from individuals undergoing enrolment. Regulation 4 is as
follows:

> “4. Demographic information required for enrolment. — (1) The following
> demographic information shall be collected from all individuals undergoing
> enrolment (other than children below five years of age):

> (i) Name;
    
    
              (ii)     Date of Birth;
              (iii)  Gender;
              (iv)   Residential Address.
    

> (2) The following demographic information may also additionally be collected
> during enrolment, at the option of the individual undergoing enrolment:
    
    
              (i)      Mobile number;
              (ii)     Email address.
    

> (3) In case of Introducer­based enrolment, the following additional
> information shall be collected:
    
    
              (i)      Introducer name;
              (ii)     Introducer’s Aadhaar number.
                                                                     97
    
         (4)   In   case   of   Head   of   Family   based
         enrolment,   the   following   additional
         information shall be collected:
                (i)     Name of Head of Family;
                (ii)    Relationship;
                (iii)  Head   of   Family’s   Aadhaar
                       number;
                (iv)   One   modality   of   biometric
                       information         of   the
                       Head of Family.
    

> (5) The standards of the above demographic information shall be as may be
> specified by the Authority for this purpose.

> (6) The demographic information shall not include race, religion, caste,
> tribe, ethnicity, language, record of entitlement, income or medical history
> of the resident.”

113\. A perusal of Regulation 4 indicates that information which shall be
collected from individual are his name, date of birth, gender and residential
address. The additional information which can be collected at the option of
the individual is mobile number and e­mail address. Schedule I of the
Regulation contains format of enrolment form which contains columns for
information as contemplated under Regulation 4.

98

114\. The information contemplated under Regulation 4 are nothing but
information relating to identity of the person.

115\. Every person born on earth takes birth at a place at a time with a
parentage. In the society person is identified as a person born as son or
daughter of such and such. The identity of person from the time of taking
birth is an identity well known and generally every person describes himself
or herself to be son or daughter of such and such person.

116\. Every person, may be a child in school, a person at his workplace,
relates himself or herself with his or her parent’s, place of birth etc., in
interaction with his near and dear and outside world a person willingly and
voluntarily reveals his identity to others in his journey of life. The
demographic information are readily provided by individuals globally for
disclosing identity while relating with others; while seeking benefits whether
provided by government or by private entities. People who get  99 registered
for engaging in a profession, who take admissions in schools/colleges/
university, who seek employment in the government or private concerns, and
those who engage in various trade and commerce are all required to provide
demographic information. Hence, it can be safely said that there cannot be a
reasonable expectation of privacy with regard to such information. There are
large number of statutes which provide for giving demographic information by
the individuals. For inclusion of name of a person in the Electoral List as
per the Registration of Electoral Rules, 1960 framed under the Representation
of People Act, 1950, a person is required to give similar demographic
information in Form II, i.e., name, date of birth, gender, current address and
permanent address, which also contains optional particulars of email address
and mobile number. Under Central Motor Vehicle Rules, 1989 person making an
application for driving licence is required to give name, parent, permanent
address, temporary address, date of birth, place of birth, educational
qualification, etc.  100

117\. Under Special Marriage Act, name, condition, occupation, age, dwelling
place, age, etc. are to be given. Thus, providing such demographic information
in most of the statutes clearly indicates that those information are readily
provided and no reasonable expectation of privacy has ever been claimed or
perceived in above respect.

118\. It is well settled that breach of privacy right can be claimed only when
claimant on the facts of the particular case and circumstances have
“reasonable expectation of privacy”. In Court of Appeal in Regina (Wood) v.
Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis, (2009) EWCA Civ 414: (2010) 1 WLR
123, following was held:

> “22. This cluster of values, summarised as the personal autonomy of every
> individual and taking concrete form as a presumption against interference
> with the individual's liberty, is a defining characteristic of a free
> society. We therefore need to preserve it even in little cases. At the same
> time it is important that this core right protected by Article 8, however
> protean, should not be read so widely that its claims become unreal and
> unreasonable. For this purpose I think there are three safeguards, or  101
> qualifications. First, the alleged threat or assault to the individual's
> personal autonomy must (if Article 8 is to be engaged) attain "a certain
> level of seriousness". Secondly, the touchstone for Article 8(1)'s
> engagement is whether the claimant enjoys on the facts a "reasonable
> expectation of privacy" (in any of the senses of privacy accepted in the
> cases). Absent such an expectation, there is no relevant interference with
> personal autonomy. Thirdly, the breadth of Article 8(1) may in many
> instances be greatly curtailed by the scope of the justifications available
> to the State pursuant to Article 8(2). I shall say a little in turn about
> these three antidotes to the overblown use of Article 8.

24\. As for the second ­ a "reasonable expectation of privacy" ­ I have
already cited paragraph 51 of Von Hannover, with its reference to that very
phrase, and also to a "legitimate expectation" of protection. One may compare
a passage in Lord Nicholls' opinion in Campbell at paragraph 21:

> "Accordingly, in deciding what was the ambit of an individual's 'private
> life' in particular circumstances courts need to be on guard against using
> as a touchstone a test which brings into account considerations which should
> more properly be considered at the later stage of proportionality.

> Essentially the touchstone of private life is whether in respect of the
> disclosed facts the person in question had a reasonable expectation of
> privacy."

102

In the same case Lord Hope said at paragraph 99:

> "The question is what a reasonable person of ordinary sensibilities would
> feel if she was placed in the same position as the claimant and faced with
> the same publicity."

In Murray v Big Pictures (UK) Ltd Sir Anthony Clarke MR referred to both of
these passages, and stated:

> "35... [S]o far as the relevant principles to be derived from Campbell are
> concerned, they can we think be summarised in this way. The first question
> is whether there is a reasonable expectation of privacy.

> This is of course an objective question. ...

> 36\. As we see it, the question whether there is a reasonable expectation of
> privacy is a broad one, which takes account of all the circumstances of the
> case. They include the attributes of the claimant, the nature of the
> activity in which the claimant was engaged, the place at which it was
> happening, the nature and purpose of the intrusion, the absence of consent
> and whether it was known or could be inferred, the effect on the claimant
> and the circumstances in which and the purposes for which the information
> came into the hands of the publisher."

103

119\. The reasonable expectation of privacy test was also noticed and approved
in privacy judgment, Dr. D.Y Chandrachud, J. has referred judgment of US
Supreme Court in Katz v. United States, 389 US 347 (1967), following has been
observed by this Court in K.S. Puttaswamy (supra) in paragraph 185:

> “The majority adopted the “reasonable expectation of privacy” test as
> formulated by Harlan, J. in Katz and held as follows:

> “7. [The] inquiry, as Mr Justice Harlan aptly noted in his Katz66
> concurrence, normally embraces two discrete questions. The first is whether
> the individual, by his conduct, has “exhibited an actual (subjective)
> expectation of privacy” … whether … the individual has shown that “he seeks
> to preserve [something] as private”. … The second question is whether the
> individual’s subjective expectation of privacy is “one that society is
> prepared to recognize as “reasonable” ” … whether … the individual’s
> expectation, viewed objectively, is “justifiable” under the circumstances. …

> 8\. … Since the pen register was installed on telephone company property at
> the telephone company’s central offices, petitioner obviously cannot claim
> that his “property” was invaded or that  104 police intruded into a
> “constitutionally protected area”.” Thus the Court held that the petitioner
> in all probability entertained no actual expectation of privacy in the phone
> numbers he dialed, and that, even if he did, his expectation was not
> “legitimate”. However, the judgment also noted the limitations of the Katz
> test:

> “Situations can be imagined, of course, in which Katz66 two­pronged inquiry
> would provide an inadequate index of Fourth Amendment protection.

> … In such circumstances, where an individual’s subjective expectations had
> been “conditioned” by influences alien to well­recognised Fourth Amendment
> freedoms, those subjective expectations obviously could play no meaningful
> role in ascertaining what the scope of Fourth Amendment protection was.”
> (emphasis supplied)

> 120\. After noticing several judgments of US Supreme Court, D.Y.Chandrachud,
> J. in K.S. Puttaswamy (supra)has noted that the reasonable expectation of
> privacy test has been relied on by various other jurisdictions while
> developing the right of privacy.

In paragraph 195 following has been held:

> “195. The development of the jurisprudence on the right to privacy in the
> United States of  105 America shows that even though there is no explicit
> mention of the word “privacy” in the Constitution, the courts of the country
> have not only recognised the right to privacy under various amendments to
> the Constitution but also progressively extended the ambit of protection
> under the right to privacy. In its early years, the focus was on property
> and protection of physical spaces that would be considered private such as
> an individual’s home. This “trespass doctrine” became irrelevant when it was
> held that what is protected under the right to privacy is “people, not
> places”. The “reasonable expectation of privacy” test has been relied on
> subsequently by various other jurisdictions while developing the right to
> privacy.”

121\. As noted above an individual in interaction with society or while
interacting with his close relatives naturally gives and reveals his several
information e.g. his name, age, date of birth, residential address, etc. We
are of the opinion that in giving of those information there is no reasonable
expectation of privacy. Thus, we conclude that demographic information
required to be given in the process of enrolment does not violate any right of
privacy.

122\. Every person born gets a name after his birth. He strives throughout his
life to establish himself to  106 be recognised by society. Recognition by
fellow man and society at large is cherished dream of all human being, for
fulfilling the above dream, he does not hide himself from society rather takes
pride in reasserting himself time and again when occasion arises. He proclaims
his identity time and again.

123\. The right to identity is an essential component of an individual in her
relationship with the State. The identification is only the proof of identity
and everyone has right to prove his identity by an acceptable means. Aadhaar
is contemplated as one PAN INDIA identity, which is acceptable proof of
identity in every nook and corner of the country.

124\. Reference of International Declaration and covenants have been made to
assert that providing for an identity to every resident is an international
obligation of India. In this reference following has been referred to:­ Name
of the Provision Convention [Date of Accession]  107 Universal Article 6:
Everyone has the right to Declaration of recognition everywhere as a person
Human before the law.

    
    
      Rights,1948
      [10.12.1948]
     International     Article   16:  Everyone   shall   have   the
      Covenant on      right   to   recognition   everywhere   as   a
       Civil and       person before the law.
       Political
     Rights, 1976
     [10.04.1979]
     UN Convention     Article 8: States Parties undertake to
     on the Rights     respect   the   right   of   the   child   to
     of the Child,     preserve   his   or   her   identity,
         1989          including nationality, name and family
     [11.12.1992]      relations as recognized by law without
                       unlawful interference. 
    
                       Article   29(1):  States   Parties   agree
                       that the education of the child shall
                       be directed to:....(c) The development
                       of   respect   for   the   child's   parents,
                       his   or   her   own   cultural   identity,
                       language and values, for the national
                       values   of   the   country   in   which   the
                       child   is   living,   the   country   from
                       which he or she may originate, and for
                       civilizations   different   from   his   or
                       her own;....
    
    
    
    
    

125\. We may also notice one of the applications filed by an organisation,
namely, Swatantra, which works for and represents the interests of the
transgender and sexual minorities communities in India. The submission has
been made on behalf of organisation that Aadhaar  108 Act and Rules making the
Unique Identification Number (UID) or the Aadhaar number mandatory and
requiring them to provide their personal demographic and biometric information
for enrolment is a serious infringement of the constitutional right to privacy
and dignity of transgender persons. It is submitted that the transgender
community has experienced a history of legally and socially sanctioned
violence and discrimination from private individuals and State authorities.
Reference of Criminal Tribes Act, 1871 and certain State legislations has been
made in this regard. The applicant also refers to judgment of this Court in
National Legal Services Authority and Union of India and others, 2014 (5) SCC
438, where this Court has held that the freedom of expression includes one's
right to expression of a self­identified gender identity through dress, action
behaviour etc. The submission has been made that making the disclosure of
gender under Section 2 of the Aadhaar Act and Regulation 4 of the Aadhaar
(Enrolment & Update) Regulations violates Article 14 of the Constitution.  109

126\. Further, the Aadhaar Act amounts to discrimination against transgender
persons under Article 15 of the Constitution on the ground of gender. Further,
it is contended that disclosure of gender identity violates Article 21 and
Article 19(1)

(a) of the transgender persons.

127\. We having considered the provisions of the Act and Enrolment and Update
Regulations and having found that disclosure of demographic information does
not violate any right of privacy, the said conclusion shall also be fully
applicable with regard to transgender. This Court in NALSA (supra) has held
that Article 19(1)(a) which provides that all citizens shall have the right to
freedom of speech and expression which includes one's right to expression and
his self­identified gender, it is the right of a person to identify his
gender. In paragraphs 69 and 72 of the judgment following has been laid down:

> “69. Article 19(1) of the Constitution guarantees certain fundamental
> rights, subject to the power of the State to impose restrictions from
> exercise of those rights.

110

> The rights conferred by Article 19 are not available to any person who is
> not a citizen of India. Article 19(1) guarantees those great basic rights
> which are recognized and guaranteed as the natural rights inherent in the
> status of the citizen of a free country. Article 19(1)(a) of the
> Constitution states that all citizens shall have the right to freedom of
> speech and expression, which includes one's right to expression of his
> self­identified gender. Self­identified gender can be expressed through
> dress, words, action or behavior or any other form. No restriction can be
> placed on one's personal appearance or choice of dressing, subject to the
> restrictions contained in Article 19(2) of the Constitution.

> 72\. Gender identity, therefore, lies at the core of one's personal
> identity, gender expression and presentation and, therefore, it will have to
> be protected Under Article 19(1)

> (a) of the Constitution of India. A transgender's personality could be
> expressed by the transgender's behavior and presentation. State cannot
> prohibit, restrict or interfere with a transgender's expression of such
> personality, which reflects that inherent personality. Often the State and
> its authorities either due to ignorance or otherwise fail to digest the
> innate character and identity of such persons. We, therefore, hold that
> values of privacy, self­identity, autonomy and personal integrity are
> fundamental rights guaranteed to members of the transgender community Under
> Article 19(1)

> (a) of the Constitution of India and the State is bound to protect and
> recognize those rights. ”

128\. When this Court has already recognised the  111 constitutional right of
transgenders of their self­ identification and it has been further held that
self­ identification relates to their dignity. Dignity is a human right which
every human being possesses. Article 15 came for consideration in the said
judgment where this Court held that Article 15 has used the expression
'citizen' and 'sex' which expressions are 'gender neutral'. The protection of
fundamental rights is equally applicable to transgenders. Paragraph 82 is as
follows:

> “82. Article 14 has used the expression "person" and the Article 15 has used
> the expression "citizen" and "sex" so also Article 16. Article 19 has also
> used the expression "citizen". Article 21 has used the expression "person".
> All these expressions, which are "gender neutral" evidently refer to
> human­beings. Hence, they take within their sweep Hijras/Transgenders and
> are not as such limited to male or female gender. Gender identity as already
> indicated forms the core of one's personal self, based on self
> identification, not on surgical or medical procedure. Gender identity, in
> our view, is an integral part of sex and no citizen can be discriminated on
> the ground of gender identity, including those who identify as third gender.
> ”

129\. This Court having recognised the right of  112 transgenders to their
self­identity in which transgenders also feel pride as human being, the mere
fact that under Enrolment and Update Regulations they are required to provide
demographic information regarding gender does not, in any manner, affect their
right of privacy. There is no expectation of right of privacy with regard to
gender. The aforesaid right having been clearly recognised by this Court,
expression of those rights of self­identification cannot, in any manner, be
said to affect their right to privacy. We, thus, conclude that with regard to
transgenders also no right of privacy is breached in giving the demographic
information. In so far as biometric information as held above, ample
justification has been found which satisfied the three fold test as laid down
in Puttaswamy case, which is equally applicable to transgender also.

130\. Now, we come to the biometric information as referred to in Section 2(g)
and required to be given in the process of enrolment by a person. Biometric
information means photographs, fingerprints, iris scan  113 and other such
biometric attributes of an individual as may be specified by the regulations.
Biometric informations are of physical characteristics of a person. A person
has full bodily autonomy and any intrusion in the bodily autonomy of a person
can be readily accepted as breach of his privacy. In Regina (Wood) Vs.
Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis (supra), in paragraph 21, following
has been laid down by Lord LJ.:­ “21. The notion of the personal autonomy of
every individual marches with the presumption of liberty enjoyed in a free
polity: a presumption which consists in the principle that every interference
with the freedom of the individual stands in need of objective justification.
Applied to the myriad instances recognised in the Article 8 jurisprudence,
this presumption means that, subject to the qualifications I shall shortly
describe, an individual's personal autonomy makes him ­ should make him ­
master of all those facts about his own identity, such as his name, health,
sexuality, ethnicity, his own image, of which the cases speak; and also of the
"zone of interaction" (the Von Hannover case 40 EHRR I, paragraph 50) between
himself and others. He is the presumed owner of these aspects of his own self;
his control of them can only be loosened, abrogated, if the State shows an
objective justification for doing so.”  114

131\. U.S. Supreme Court in United States Vs. Antonio Dionisio, 35 L.Ed. 2D 67
had occasion to consider physical characteristic of a person's voice in
context of violation of privacy rights. With regard to fingerprints, it was
noticed that the fingerprinting itself involves none of the probing into an
individual's private life. In paragraph Nos. 21, 22 following was stated:­
“[21,22] In Katz v. United States, supra, we said that the Fourth Amendment
provides no protection for what “a person knowingly exposes to the public,
even in his own home or office . . ..” 389 U.S., at 351, 19 L Ed 2d 576. The
physical characteristics of a person's voice, its tone and manner, as opposed
to the content of a specific conversation, are constantly exposed to the
public. Like a man's facial characteristics, or handwriting, his voice is
repeatedly produced for others to hear. No person can have a reasonable
expectation that others will not know the sound of his voice, any more than he
can reasonably expect that his face will be a mystery to the world. As the
Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit stated:

> “Except for the rare recluse who chooses to live his life in complete
> solitude, in our daily lives we constantly speak and write, and while the
> content of a communication is entitled to Fourth Amendment protection . . .
> the underlying  115 identifying characteristics—the constant factor
> throughout both public and private communications—are open for all to see or
> hear. There is no basis for constructing a wall of privacy against the grand
> jury which does not exist in casual contacts with strangers. Hence no
> intrusion into an individual's privacy results from compelled execution of
> handwriting or voice exemplars;

nothing is being exposed to the grand jury that has not previously been
exposed to the public at large.”' United States v. Doe (Schwartz), 457 F2d, at
898­899.

The required disclosure of a person's voice is thus immeasurably further
removed from the Fourth Amendment protection than was the intrusion into the
body effected by the blood extraction in Schmerber. “The interests in human
dignity and privacy which the Fourth Amendment protects forbid any such
intrusions on the mere chance that desired evidence might be obtained.”
Schmerber v. California, 384 US, at 769­770, 16L Ed 2d 908. Similarly, a
seizure of voice exemplars does not involve the “severe, though brief,
intrusion upon cherished personal security,” effected by the “pat­down” in
Terry—“surely . . . an annoying, frightening and perhaps humiliating
experience.” Terry v. Ohio, 392 US, at 24­25, 20 L Ed 2d 889. Rather, this is
like the fingerprinting in Davis, where, though the initial dragnet detentions
were constitutionally impermissible, we noted that the fingerprinting itself
“involves none of the probing into an individual's private life and thoughts
that marks an interrogation or search.” Davis v. Mississippi, 394 US, at 727,
22 L Ed 2d 676: cf. Thom v. New York  116 Stock Exchange, 306 F Supp 1002,
1009.”

132\. The petitioners have relied upon S. and Marper Vs. The United Kingdom, a
judgment of Grand Chamber of European Court of Human Rights dated 04.12.2008.
European Court of Human Rights on an application submitted by Mr. S and Mr.
Marper allowed their claim of violation of Article 8 of Convention. Applicants
had complained that the authorities had continued to retain their fingerprints
and cellular samples and DNA profiles after the criminal proceedings against
them had ended with an acquittal or had been discontinued. In the above
context, nature of fingerprints and DNA samples came to be examined in
reference of breach of Article 8 of the Convention. The retention of DNA
samples and fingerprints was held to be interference with the right to respect
for private life. In paragraph 84, following was held:­ “84. The Court is of
the view that the general approach taken by the Convention organs in respect
of photographs and voice samples should also be followed in respect of
fingerprints. The Government distinguished the latter by arguing that they
constituted neutral, objective and irrefutable material  117 and, unlike
photographs, were unintelligible to the untutored eye and without a comparator
fingerprint. While true, this consideration cannot alter the fact that
fingerprints objectively contain unique information about the individual
concerned allowing his or her identification with precision in a wide range of
circumstances. They are thus capable of affecting his or her private life and
retention of this information without the consent of the individual concerned
cannot be regarded as neutral or insignificant.”

133\. One important observation, which has been made in the above case was
that on the question whether the personal information retained by the
authorities involves any of the private­life aspects, due regard has to be
given to the specific context in which the information at issue has been
recorded. Following was stated in paragraph 67:­ “67............... However,
in determining whether the personal information retained by the authorities
involves any of the private­ life aspects mentioned above, the Court will have
due regard to the specific context in which the information at issue has been
recorded and retained, the nature of the records, the way in which these
records are used and processed and the results that may be obtained (see,
mutatis mutandis, Friedl, cited above, §§49­51, and Peck v. the United
Kingdom, cited above, §59).”  118

134\. The biometric data as referred to in Section 2(g) thus may contain
biological attributes of an individual with regard to which a person can very
well claim a reasonable expectation of privacy but whether privacy rights have
been breached or not needs to be examined in the subject context under which
the informations were obtained.

135\. Having found that biometric information of a person may claim a
reasonable expectation of privacy, we have to answer as to whether obtaining
biometric information in context of enrolment breaches the right of privacy of
individual or not.

136\. D.Y. Chandrachud, J. in Puttaswamy (supra) held that all restraints on
privacy, i.e. whether a person has reasonable expectation of privacy, must
fulfill three requirements before a restraint can be held to be justified. In
Paragraph 319, following has been held:­ “310. While it intervenes to protect
legitimate state interests, the state must nevertheless put into place a
robust regime that ensures the fulfillment of a threefold  119 requirement.
These three requirements apply to all restraints on privacy (not just
informational privacy). They emanate from the procedural and content­based
mandate of Article 21. The first requirement that there must be a law in
existence to justify an encroachment on privacy is an express requirement of
Article 21. For, no person can be deprived of his life or personal liberty
except in accordance with the procedure established by law. The existence of
law is an essential requirement. Second, the requirement of a need, in terms
of a legitimate state aim, ensures that the nature and content of the law
which imposes the restriction falls within the zone of reasonableness mandated
by Article 14, which is a guarantee against arbitrary State action. The
pursuit of a legitimate state aim ensures that the law does not suffer from
manifest arbitrariness. Legitimacy, as a postulate, involves a value judgment.

Judicial review does not re­appreciate or second guess the value judgment of
the legislature but is for deciding whether the aim which is sought to be
pursued suffers from palpable or manifest arbitrariness. The third requirement
ensures that the means which are adopted by the legislature are proportional
to the object and needs sought to be fulfilled by the law. Proportionality is
an essential facet of the guarantee against arbitrary State action because it
ensures that the nature and quality of the encroachment on the right is not
disproportionate to the purpose of the law. Hence, the threefold requirement
for a valid law arises out of the mutual inter­dependence between the
fundamental guarantees against arbitrariness on the one hand and the
protection of life and personal liberty, on the other. The right to privacy,
which is an  120 intrinsic part of the right to life and liberty, and the
freedoms embodied in Part III is subject to the same restraints which apply to
those freedoms. ”

137\. We, thus, have to test the provisions of Aadhaar Act in light of
three­fold test as have been laid down above. The First requirement, which
need to be fulfilled is existence of law. Admittedly, Aadhaar Act is a
Parliamentary law, hence the existence of law is satisfied. Mere existence of
law may not be sufficient unless the law is fair and reasonable. The Aadhaar
Act has been enacted with an object of providing Aadhaar number to individuals
for identifying an individual for delivery of benefits, subsidies and
services. Several materials have been brought on the record which reflect that
in the several studies initiated by the Government as well as the World Bank
and Planning Commission, it was revealed that food grains released by the
Government for the beneficiaries did not reach the intended beneficiaries and
there was large scale leakages due to the failure to establish identity.
Reference to  121 Audit Report No. 3 of 2000 of Comptroller & Auditor General
of India is made in this regard. The Planning Commission of India in its
Performance Evaluation Report titled “Performance Evaluation Report of
Targeted Public Distribution System(TPDS)” dated March, 2005 found as
follows:­ I. State­wise figure of excess Ration Cards in various states and
the existence of over 1.52 Crore excess Ration Cards issued.

II. Existence of fictitious households and identification errors leading to
exclusion of genuine beneficiaries.

III. Leakage through ghost BPL Ration Cards found to be prevalent in almost
all the States under study.

IV. The leakage of food grains through ghost cards has been tabulated and the
percentage of such leakage on an All India basis has been estimated at 16.67%.

V. It is concluded that a large part of the subsidized food­grains were not
reaching the  122 target group.

138\. The Law, i.e., Aadhaar Act, which has been brought to provide for unique
identity for delivery of subsidies, benefits or services was a dire necessity,
which decision was arrived at after several reports and studies. Aadhaar Act
was, thus, enacted for a legitimate State aim and fulfills the criteria of a
law being fair and reasonable. Learned Attorney General has also placed
reliance on report of United Nations titled “Leaving No One Behind: the
imperative of inclusive development”, which has stated as follows:­ “The
decision of India in 2010 to launch the Aadhaar programme to enrol the
biometric identifying data of all its 1.2 billion citizens, for example, was a
critical step in enabling fairer access of the people to government benefits
and services. Programmes such as Aadhaar have tremendous potential to foster
inclusion by giving all people, including the poorest and most marginalized,
an official identify. Fair and robust systems of legal identity and birth
registration are recognised in the new 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
as an important foundation for promoting inclusive societies.”  123

139\. Learned Attorney General has also relied on Resolution of the United
Nations General Assembly dated 25.09.2015 titled “Transforming our World: the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development”. It is submitted that by the said
resolution, the following goal was adopted”­ “16.9 by 2030, provide legal
identity for all, including birth registration”

140\. In this context, judgment of U.S. Supreme Court in Otis R. Bowen,
Secretary of Health and Human Services, et al. Vs. Stephen J. Roy et al., 476
U.S. 693 (1986) is referred where the statutory requirement that an applicant
provide a social security number as a condition of eligibility for the
benefits in question was held to be not violative. It was held that
requirement is facially neutral in religious terms, applies to all applicants
for the benefits involved, and clearly promotes a legitimate and important
public interest. Chief Justice Burger writing the opinion of the Court
stated:­ “The general governmental interests involved here buttress this
conclusion. Governments  124 today grant a broad range of benefits;

inescapably at the same time the administration of complex programs requires
certain conditions and restrictions. Although in some situations a mechanism
for individual consideration will be created, a policy decision by a
government that it wishes to treat all applicants alike and that it does not
wish to become involved in case­by­case inquiries into the genuineness of each
religious objection to such condition or restrictions is entitled to
substantial deference. Moreover, legitimate interests are implicated in the
need to avoid any appearance of favoring religious over nonreligious
applicants.

The test applied in cases like Wisconsin v.

Yoder, 406 U.S. 205, 92 S.Ct. 1526, 32 L.Ed.2d 15 (1972), is not appropriate
in this setting. In the enforcement of a facially neutral and uniformly
applicable requirement for the administration of welfare programs reaching
many millions of people, the Government is entitled to wide latitude. The
Government should not be put to the strict test applied by the District Court;
that standard required the Government to justify enforcement of the use of
Social Security number requirement as the least restrictive means of
accomplishing a compelling state interest. Absent proof of an intent to
discriminate against particular religious beliefs or against religion in
general, the Government meets its burden when it demonstrates that a
challenged requirement for governmental benefits, neutral and uniform in its
application, is a reasonable means of promoting a legitimate public interest.
”  125

141\. Repelling an argument that requirement of providing social security
account number for obtaining financial aid to dependent children violates the
right to privacy, following was held in Doris McElrath Vs. Joseph A. Califano,
in Para 11 :­ “[11] The appellants' principal contention on appeal is that the
federal and state regulations requiring dependent children to acquire and
submit social security account numbers as a condition of eligibility for AFDC
benefits are statutorily invalid as being inconsistent with and not authorized
by the Social Security Act. We find the arguments advanced in support of this
contention to be without merit and hold that the challenged regulations
constitute a legitimate condition of eligibility mandated by the Congress
under the Social Security Act. Accord, Chambers v. Klein, 419 F. Supp. 569
(D.N.J. 1976), aff'd mem., 564 F.2d 89 (3d Cir. 1977); Green v. Philbrook, 576
F.2d 440 (2d Cir. 1978); Arthur v. Department of Social and Health Services,
19 Wn. App. 542, 576 P.2d 921 (1978). We therefore conclude that the district
court properly dismissed the appellants' statutory invalidity allegations for
failure to state a claim upon which relief could be granted. ”

142\. Now, we come to third test, i.e., test of proportionality. D.Y.
Chandrachud, J. in Puttaswamy (supra) has observed “Proportionality is an
essential facet of the guarantee against arbitrary State action  126 because
it ensures that the nature and quality of the encroachment on the right is not
disproportionate to the purpose of the law”. In Modern Dental College and
Research Centre and Others Vs. State of Madhya Pradesh and Others, (2016) 7
SCC 353, Dr. Sikri, J explaining the concept of proportionality laid down
following in Paragraphs 64 and 65:­ “64. The exercise which, therefore, to be
taken is to find out as to whether the limitation of constitutional rights is
for a purpose that is reasonable and necessary in a democratic society and
such an exercise involves the weighing up of competitive values, and
ultimately an assessment based on proportionality i.e. balancing of different
interests.

65\. We may unhesitatingly remark that this doctrine of Proportionality,
explained hereinabove in brief, is enshrined in Article 19 itself when we read
Clause (1) along with Clause (6) thereof. While defining as to what
constitutes a reasonable restriction, this Court in plethora of judgments has
held that the expression “reasonable restriction” seeks to strike a balance
between the freedom guaranteed by any of the sub­clauses of Clause (1) of
Article 19 and the social control permitted by any of the clauses (2) to (6).
It is held that the expression “reasonable” connotes that the limitation
imposed on a person in the enjoyment of the right should not be arbitrary or
of an excessive nature beyond what is required in the interests of public.
Further, in order to be reasonable, the restriction must have a  127
reasonable relation to the object which the legislation seeks to achieve, and
must not go in excess of that object {See P.P.

Enterprises v. Union of India (1982) 2 SCC

33\. At the same time, reasonableness of a restriction has to be determined in
an objective manner and from the standpoint of the interests of the general
public and not from the point of view of the persons upon whom the
restrictions are imposed or upon abstract considerations {See Mohd. Hanif
Quareshi v. State of Bihar 1959 SCR 629). In M.R.F. Ltd. v. State of Kerala
(1998) 8 SCC 227, this Court held that in examining the reasonableness of a
statutory provision one has to keep in mind the following factors:

> (1) The directive principles of State Policy.

> (2) Restrictions must not be arbitrary or of an excessive nature so as to go
> beyond the requirement of the interest of the general public.

> (3) In order to judge the reasonableness of the restrictions, no abstract or
> general pattern or a fixed principle can be laid down so as to be of
> universal application and the same will vary from case to case as also with
> regard to changing conditions, values of human life, social philosophy of
> the Constitution, prevailing conditions and the surrounding circumstances.

> (4) A just balance has to be struck between the restrictions imposed and the
> social control envisaged by Article 19(6).

128

> (5) Prevailing social values as also social needs which are intended to be
> satisfied by the restrictions.

> (6) There must be a direct and proximate nexus or reasonable connection
> between the restrictions imposed and the object sought to be achieved. If
> there is a direct nexus between the restrictions, and the object of the Act,
> then a strong presumption in favour the constitutionality of the Act will
> naturally arise. ”

143\. One of the submissions of the petitioner to contend that proportionality
test is not fulfilled in the present case is; State did not adopt an
alternative and more suitable and least intrusive method of identification,
i.e., smart card or other similar devices. While examining the proportionality
of a Statute, it has to be kept in mind that the Statute is neither arbitrary
nor of an excessive nature beyond what is required in the interest of public.
The Statutory scheme, which has been brought in place has a reasonable
relation to the object which the legislation seeks to achieve and the
legislation does not exceed the object. The object of Aadhaar Act  129 as
noticed above was to provide for unique identity for purposes of delivery of
benefits, subsidies and services to the eligible beneficiaries and to ward of
misappropriation of benefits and subsidies, ward of deprivation of eligible
beneficiaries. European Court of Justice has taken a view that the
proportionality merely involves an assessment that the measures taken was not
more than necessary. Reference is made to the judgment of Digital Rights
Ireland Ltd. Vs. Minister for Communications [2015] QBECJ, wherein it was
held:

> “46 In that regard, according to the settled case law of the court, the
> principle of proportionality requires that acts of the EU institutions be
> appropriate for attaining the legitimate objectives pursued by the
> legislation at issue and do not exceed the limits of what is appropriate and
> necessary in order to achieve those objectives: see Afton Chemical Ltd v
> Secretary of State for Transport (Case C­343/09) [2010] ECR I­7027, para 45;
> the Volker case [2010] ECR I­11063, para 74; Nelson v Deutsche Lufthansa AG
> (Joined Cases C­581/10 and C­629/10) [2013] 1 All ER (Comm) 385, para 71;
> Sky Osterreich GmbH v Osterreichischer Rundfunk (Case C­ 283/11) [2013] All
> ER (EC) 633, para 50; and Schaible v Land Baden­ Wiirttemberg (Case C­
> 101/12) EU:C:2013:66I; 17 October 2013, para

> 29.”

144\. United Kingdom Supreme Court in AB Vs. Her  130 Majesty's Advocate,
[2017] UK SC 25, held that it is not for the Court to identify the alternative
measures, which may be least intrusive. In Para 37 and 39, following has been
held:­ “37. I am not persuaded. It is important to recall that the question of
whether the Parliament could have used a less intrusive measure does not
involve the court in identifying the alternative measure which is least
intrusive. The court allows the legislature a margin of discretion and asks
whether the limitation on the article 8 right is one which it was reasonable
for the Parliament to propose: Bank Mellat v HM Treasury (No 2) [2013] UKSC
38, [2014] AC 700, para 75 per Lord Reed;

39\. The balance, which this court is enjoined to address, is different. It is
the question of a fair balance between the public interest and the
individual's right to respect for his or her private life under article 8. The
question for the court is, in other words, whether the impact of the
infringement of that right is proportionate, having regard to the likely
benefit of the impugned provision.”

145\. The biometric information which are obtained for Aadhaar enrolment are
photographs, fingerprints and iris scan, which are least intrusion in physical
autonomy of an individual. U.S. Supreme Court in John Davis Vs. State of
Mississippi, 394 US 721 (1969),  131 indicated that Fingerprinting involves
none of the probing into an individual's private life and thoughts that marks
an interrogation or search. The physical process by which the fingerprints are
taken does not require information beyond the object and purpose. Therefore,
it does not readily offend those principles of dignity and privacy, which are
fundamental to each legislation of due process. One of the apprehension, which
was expressed by petitioners that since as per definition of biometric
information contained in Section 2(g), further, biological attributes of an
individual may be specified by regulations, which may be more intrusive.
Section 2(g) use the word “such biological attributes”. Thus, applying the
principles of ejusdem generis, the biological attributes can be added by the
regulations, has to be akin to one those mentioned in Section 2(g), i.e.
photographs, fingerprints and iris scan. In event, such biological attributes
is added by regulations, it is always open to challenge by appropriate
proceedings but the mere fact that by regulations any such biometric
attributes  132 can be added, there is no reason to accept the contention that
biological attributes, which can be added may be disproportionate to the
objective of the Act. Biometric information, thus, which is to be obtained for
enrolment are not disproportionate nor the provisions of Aadhaar Act requiring
demographic and biometric information can be said to be not passing three­fold
test as laid down in Puttaswamy (supra) case. We, thus, answer Issue Nos. 1
and 2 in following manner:­ Ans.1 and 2:­ (i) requirement under Aadhaar Act to
give one's demographic and biometric information does not violate fundamental
right of privacy.

(ii) The provisions of Aadhaar Act requiring demographic and biometric
information from a resident for Aadhaar Number pass three­fold test as laid
down in Puttaswamy (supra) case, hence cannot be said to be unconstitutional.

133

ISSUE NOS.3,4 COLLECTION, STORAGE, RETENTION, USE, AND 5 SHARING AND
SURVEILLACE.

146\. The Aadhaar Act provides complete architecture beginning with enrolment.
The enrolment means process to collect demographic and biometric information
from individuals by enroling agencies. The enroling agencies have to set up
enrolment centers and have to function in accordance with the procedure
specified by UIDAI. Section 8 contemplates for authentication for Aadhaar
number which authentication was done by authority. When a request is made for
identification by any requesting entity in respect to biometric or demographic
information of Aadhaar number holder, the authority may engage one or more
entities to establish and maintain central identity data repository. Section
28 provides for the security and confidentiality of information which is to
the following effect:

> 28\. (1) The Authority shall ensure the security of identity information and
> authentication records of individuals.

134

(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Authority shall ensure
confidentiality of identity information and authentication records of
individuals.

(3) The Authority shall take all necessary measures to ensure that the
information in the possession or control of the Authority, including
information stored in the Central Identities Data Repository, is secured and
protected against access, use or disclosure not permitted under this Act or
regulations made thereunder, and against accidental or intentional
destruction, loss or damage.

(4) Without prejudice to sub­sections (1) and (2), the Authority shall—

(a) adopt and implement appropriate technical and organisational security
measures;

(b) ensure that the agencies, consultants, advisors or other persons appointed
or engaged for performing any function of the Authority under this Act, have
in place appropriate technical and organisational security measures for the
information; and

(c) ensure that the agreements or arrangements entered into with such
agencies, consultants, advisors or other persons, impose obligations
equivalent to those imposed on the Authority under this Act, and require such
agencies, consultants, advisors and other persons to act only on instructions
from the Authority.

(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force, and  135 save as otherwise provided in this Act, the Authority or any
of its officers or other employees or any agency that maintains the Central
Identities Data Repository shall not, whether during his service or
thereafter, reveal any information stored in the Central Identities Data
Repository or authentication record to anyone:

> Provided that an Aadhaar number holder may request the Authority to provide
> access to his identity information excluding his core biometric information
> in such manner as may be specified by regulations.

147\. The Act contains specific provision providing that no core biometric
information collected under the Act is shared to anyone for any reason
whatsoever or use for any purpose other than generation of Aadhaar number or
authentication under this Act. The statute creates injunction for requesting
entity to use identity information data for any purpose other than that
specified to the individual at the time for submitting any identification.
Section 29 provides for not sharing information collected or created under
this Act, which is to the following effect:

> “29. (1) No core biometric information, collected or created under this Act,
> shall be—  136

> (a) shared with anyone for any reason whatsoever; or

> (b) used for any purpose other than generation of Aadhaar numbers and
> authentication under this Act.

> (2) The identity information, other than core biometric information,
> collected or created under this Act may be shared only in accordance with
> the provisions of this Act and in such manner as may be specified by
> regulations.

> (3) No identity information available with a requesting entity shall be—

> (a) used for any purpose, other than that specified to the individual at the
> time of submitting any identity information for authentication; or Security
> and confidentiality of information.

> (b) disclosed further, except with the prior consent of the individual to
> whom such information relates.

> (4) No Aadhaar number or core biometric information collected or created
> under this Act in respect of an Aadhaar number holder shall be published,
> displayed or posted publicly, except for the purposes as may be specified by
> regulations.”

148\. Section 30 itself contemplates that biometric information are sensitive
personal data or information. There are strict conditions envisaged in Section
33 for disclosure of information. The  137 disclosure of information is
contemplated only on two contingencies. Firstly, when an order is passed by a
Court not inferior to that of District Judge and secondly when the disclosure
is made in the interest of national security in pursuance of a direction of
the officer not below the rank of Joint Secretary to the Government of India.

149\. Chapter VII of the Act deals with the offences and penalties for
impersonation at the time of enrolment penalty for disclosing identity
information is provided under Sections 34 to 37. Section 38 provides for
penalty who accesses or secures access to the Central Identities Data
Repository. Section 39 provides for penalty who uses or tampers with the data
in the Central Identities Data Repository. Section 40 provides for penalty
whoever, being a requesting entity, uses the identity information of an
individual in contravention of sub­section (3) of section 8. Section 41 deals
with penalty for non­ compliance by an enrolling agency or requesting  138
entity. Section 42 deals with general penalty. Section 42 is as follows:

> “42. Whoever commits an offence under this Act or any rules or regulations
> made thereunder for which no specific penalty is provided elsewhere than
> this section, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may
> extend to one year or with a fine which may extend to twenty­five thousand
> rupees or, in the case of a company, with a fine which may extend to one
> lakh rupees, or with both.”

150\. Regulations have been framed under the Act, namely, (1) The Aadhaar
(Enrolment and Update) Regulations, 2016, (2) The Aadhaar (Authentication)
Regulations, 2016, (3) The Aadhaar (Data Security) Regulations, 2016 and (4)
The Aadhaar (Sharing of Information) Regulations, 2016.

151\. We have already noticed the detailed submissions of learned counsel for
UIDAI. Following are the measures by which Security Data of privacy is
ensured. The security and data privacy is ensured in the following manner:­ i.
The data sent to ABIS is completely anonymised. The ABIS systems do not have
access to resident’s demographic  139 information as they are only sent
biometric information of a resident with a reference number and asked to de­
duplicate. The de­duplication result with the reference number is mapped back
to the correct enrolment number by the Authorities own enrolment server.

ii. The ABIS providers only provide their software and services. The data is
stored in UIDAI storage and it never leaves the secure premises.

iii. The ABIS providers do not store the biometric images (source). They only
store template for the purpose of de­ duplication (with reference number) iv.
The encrypted enrolment packet sent by the enrolment client software to the
CIDRis decrypted by the enrolment server but the decrypted packet is never
stored.

v. The original biometric images of fingerprints, iris and face are archived
and stored offline. Hence, they cannot be accessed through an online network.

vi. The biometric system provides high accuracy of over 99.86%. The mixed
biometric have been adopted only to enhance the accuracy and to reduce the
errors which may arise on account of some residents either not having
biometrics or not having some particular biometric.

152\. After the enrolment and allotting an Aadhaar number to individual the
main function of the authority is authentication of an Aadhaar number  140
holder as and when request is made by the requesting agency. The
authentication facility provided by the authority is under Section 3 of the
Authentication Regulations, 2016 which is to the following effect:

> “3. Types of Authentication.— There shall be two types of authentication
> facilities provided by the Authority, namely—

> (i) Yes/No authentication facility, which may be carried out using any of
> the modes specified in regulation 4(2);

> and

> (ii) e­KYC authentication facility, which may be carried out only using OTP
> and/ or biometric authentication modes as specified in regulation 4(2).”

153\. Various modes of authentication are provided in Regulation 4 of
Authentication Regulations 2016, which are: Demographic authentification; One
time pin­based authentication; Biometric­based authentification and
Multi­factor authentification. A requesting entity may choose suitable mode of
authentication for particular function or business function as per its
requirement.  141

154\. Regulation 7 provides for capturing biometric information by requesting
entity which is to the following effect:

> “7. Capturing of biometric information by requesting entity.— (1) A
> requesting entity shall capture the biometric information of the Aadhaar
> number holder using certified biometric devices as per the processes and
> specifications laid down by the Authority.

> (2) A requesting entity shall necessarily encrypt and secure the biometric
> data at the time of capture as per the specifications laid down by the
> Authority.

> (3) For optimum results in capturing of biometric information, a requesting
> entity shall adopt the processes as may be specified by the Authority from
> time to time for this purpose.”

155\. Regulation 9 deals with process of sending authentification requests.
Sub­Regulation (1) of Regulation 9 contends the safe method of transmission of
the authentication requests.

156\. The Aadhaar (Data Security) Regulations, 2016 contain detail provisions
to ensuring data security. Regulation 3 deals with measures for ensuring
information security. Regulation 5 provides security  142 obligations of the
agencies, consultants, advisors and other service providers engaged by the
Authority for discharging any function relating to its processes.

157\. The Aadhaar (Sharing of Information) Regulations, 2016 also contain
provisions providing for restrictions on sharing identity information. Sub­
Regulation (1) of Regulation 3 provides that core biometric information
collected by the Authority under the Act shall not be shared with anyone for
any reason whatsoever.

158\. Sharing of Information Regulations, 2016 also contain various other
restrictions. Regulation 6 contains restrictions on sharing, circulating or
publishing of Aadhaar number which is to the following effect:

> “6. Restrictions on sharing, circulating or publishing of Aadhaar number. —
> (1) The Aadhaar number of an individual shall not be published, displayed or
> posted publicly by any person or entity or agency. (2) Any individual,
> entity or agency, which is in possession of Aadhaar number(s) of Aadhaar
> number holders, shall ensure security and confidentiality of the Aadhaar
> numbers  143 and of any record or database containing the Aadhaar numbers.

> (3) Without prejudice to sub­regulations (1) and (2), no entity, including a
> requesting entity, which is in possession of the Aadhaar number of an
> Aadhaar number holder, shall make public any database or record containing
> the Aadhaar numbers of individuals, unless the Aadhaar numbers have been
> redacted or blacked out through appropriate means, both in print and
> electronic form.

> (4) No entity, including a requesting entity, shall require an individual to
> transmit his Aadhaar number over the Internet unless such transmission is
> secure and the Aadhaar number is transmitted in encrypted form except where
> transmission is required for correction of errors or redressal of
> grievances.

> (5) No entity, including a requesting entity, shall retain Aadhaar numbers
> or any document or database containing Aadhaar numbers for longer than is
> necessary for the purpose specified to the Aadhaar number holder at the time
> of obtaining consent.”

159\. The scheme of the Aadhaar Act indicates that all parts of the entire
process beginning from enrolment of a resident for allocation of Aadhaar
number are statutory regulated.

160\. The Authentication Regulations, 2016 also limit the period for retention
of logs by requesting entity.  144 Regulation 18(1) which is relevant in this
context is as follows:

> “18. Maintenance of logs by requesting entity.­ (1) A requesting entity
> shall maintain logs of the authentication transactions processed by it,
> containing the following transaction details, namely:—

> (a) the Aadhaar number against which authentication is sought;

> (b) specified parameters of authentication request submitted;

> (c) specified parameters received as authentication response;

> (d) the record of disclosure of information to the Aadhaar number holder at
> the time of authentication;

> and

> (e) record of consent of the Aadhaar number holder for authentication, but
> shall not, in any event, retain the PID information.”

161\. The residents’ information in CIDR are also permitted to be updated as
per provisions of the Aadhaar (Enrolment and Update) Regulations, 2016. An
over view of the entire scheme of functions under the Aadhaar Act and
Regulations made thereunder indicate that after enrolment of resident, his
informations  145 including biometric information are retained in CIDR though
in encrypted form. The major function of the authority under Aadhaar Act is
authentication of identity of Aadhaar number holder as and when requests are
made by requesting agency, retention of authentication data of requesting
agencies are retained for limited period as noted above. There are ample
safeguards for security and data privacy in the mechanism which is at place as
on date as noted above.

162\. Shri Shyam Divan, learned senior counsel appearing for the petitioners
has passionately submitted that entire process of authentication as is clear
from actual working of the Aadhaar programme reveals that Aadhaar Act enables
the State to put the entire population of the country in an electronic leash
and they are tracked 24 hours and 7 days. He submits that putting the entire
population under surveillance is nothing but converting the State into a
totalitarian State. Elaborating his submission, Shri Divan submits that
process of authentication creates authentication records of (1) time of  146
authentication, (2) identity of the requesting entity. Both requesting entity
and UIDAI have authentication transactions data which record the technical
details of transactions. The devices which are used by the requesting entities
have IP address which enables knowledge about geographical information of
Aadhaar number holder with knowledge of his location, details of transaction,
every person can be tracked and by aggregating the relevant data the entire
population is put on constant surveillance. Aadhaar programme endeavours all
time mass surveillance by the State which is undemocratic and violates the
fundamental rights of individual.

163\. The meta data regarding authentication transactions which are stored
with the authority are potent enough to note each and every transaction of
resident and to track his activities is nothing but surveillance. Regulation
26 of Authentication Regulations, 2016 provides storage of meta data related
to the transaction. Regulation 26 which is relevant is as follows:

147

> “26. Storage and Maintenance of Authentication Transaction Data. — (1) The
> Authority shall store and maintain authentication transaction data, which
> shall contain the following information:—

> (a) authentication request data received including PID block;

> (b) authentication response data sent;

> (c) meta data related to the transaction;

> (d) any authentication server side configurations as necessary Provided that
> the Authority shall not, in any case, store the purpose of authentication.”

164\. We may first notice as to what is meta data which is referred to in
Regulation 26 above. The UIDAI receives the requests for authentication of
ANH. The request for authentication received by requesting agency does not
contain any information as to the purpose of authentication neither requesting
agency nor UIDAI has any record pertaining to purpose for which authentication
has been sought by Aadhaar number holder. The meta data referred to in
Regulation 26(c) is only limited technical meta data.

148

165\. Shri Kapil Sibal had submitted that CIDR holds the entire Aadhaar
database retained by CIDR. It has become a soft target for internal/external/
indigenous /foreign attacks and single point of failure. Shri Sibal has
referred to a RBI report which states:

> “Thanks to Aadhaar, for the first time in the history of India, there is now
> a readily available single target for cyber criminals as well as India’s
> external enemies. In a few years, attacking UIDAI data can potentially
> cripple Indian businesses and administration in ways that were inconceivable
> a few years ago. The loss to the economy and citizens in case of such an
> attack is bound to be incalculable.”

166\. He has further submitted that a digital world is far more susceptible to
manipulation than the physical world. No legislation can or should allow an
individual’s personal data to be put at risk, in the absence of a
technologically assured and safe environment. Such level of assurance is
impossible to obtain in the digital space. Biometric, core biometric and
demographic information of an individual, once part of the digital world is
irretrievable: a genie out of the bottle that cannot be put back. The digital
world is a vehicle to benefit the information economy.  149 A move from an
information economy to creating an architecture for an information polity has
far reaching consequences impacting the most personal rights, protected by the
right to privacy. The technology acquired by the UIDAI has also been
criticised by the Opaque Foreign Technologies.

167\. The above submissions have been strongly refuted by learned Attorney
General and learned counsel appearing for the UIDAI. It is submitted by the
respondents that the above submissions regarding mass surveillance have been
made on misconception regarding actual operation of the entire process.

168\. The meta data which is aggregation of authentication transactions does
not contain any detail of actual transaction done by ANH. In the event, in a
period of 30 days, 30 requesting agencies, may be one or different, have
requested for authentication the UIDAI has only the recipient of
demographic/biometric of ANH authentication without any information regarding
purposes of authentication.  150 Thus, even if authentication details are
aggregated, there is no information with the UIDAI regarding purpose of
authentication nor authentication leaves for any trail so as to keep any track
by UiDAI to know the nature of transaction or to keep any kind of surveillance
as alleged. Section 32 sub­section (3) of the Aadhaar Act specifically
prohibits the authority from collecting or maintaining either directly or
indirectly any information for the purpose of authentication.

169\. Proviso to Regulation 26 is also to the same effect i.e. provided that
the authority shall not, in any case, store the purpose of authentication.

170\. Elaborating on CIDR, Shri Dwivedi submits that CIDR is a centralised
database which contains all Aadhaar numbers issued with corresponding
demographic and biometric information. It is a “Protected System” notified
under Section 70 of Information Technology Act, 2000. The storage involves end
to end encryption, logical partitioning, fire walling and anonymisation  151
of decrypted biometric data. The encryption system follows a private
key/public model and the private key is available only with UIDAI at the
processing location. Hence even if data packets are lost or stolen the
biometric information regarding the same cannot be accessed. At the CIDR there
is multi­layer technological security to afford protection from hacking, and
there is also deployment of armed forces to prevent unauthorised physical
access into the CIDR Area. Additionally entry is electronically controlled.
There are CIDR at two location already and some other locations are likely to
be set up to ensure that data is not lost even in the remote eventuality of a
disaster. The CIDR is centrally managed. The templates of finger prints and
iris data are generated in ISO format and the same along with demographic data
and photo are stored securely in the authentication server database. This
database is used for authentication in the manner provided in Aadhaar
(Authentication) Regulation 2016.

152

171\. In view of above, the apprehension raised by Shri Kapil Sibal that CIDR
is a soft target is misplaced.

172\. To support his submission, Shri Shyam Divan, learned counsel for the
petitioner has placed reliance on judgment of the United States Supreme Court
in United States vs. Antoine Jones, 132 S.Ct. 945 (2012).

173\. A large number of foreign judgments touching various aspects of
accumulation of data, retention of data, surveillance, has been cited by both
the parties to support their respective stand. It is necessary to have an over
view of the opinion expressed by various Courts in other countries of the
world. The present age being the age of technology and information, the issues
pertaining to storage and retention of personal data in different contexts
have come up before several Courts of different countries which also need to
be noted.

174\. The petitioners have relied on European Court, Human Rights in S. and
Marper vs. The United Kingdom,  153 2008 (48)EHRR 50. The applicants, S and
Marper had submitted two applications against the United Kingdom, Great
Britain and Northern Ireland under Article 34 of the Convention for the
Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (the Convention). The
applicants complained that the authorities had continued to retain their
fingerprints and cellular samples and DNA profiles after the criminal
proceedings against them had ended with an acquittal or had been discontinued.
The applicants had applied for judicial review of the police decisions not to
destroy the fingerprints and samples which application was rejected. The Court
of appeal upheld the decision of the Administrative Court. The House of Lords
had also dismissed the appeal on 22nd July, 2004. The House of Lords had taken
the view that the mere retention of fingerprints and DNA samples did not
constitute an interference with the right to respect for private life but
stated that, if he were wrong in that view, he regarded any interference as
very modest indeed.

154

175\. BARONESS HALE disagreed with the majority considering that the retention
of both fingerprint and DNA data constituted an interference by the State in a
person’s right to respect for his private life and thus required justification
under the Convention. The application of the applicant was taken by European
Court of Human Rights (Strasbourg Court). The Strasbourg Court noticed that
majority of the Council of Europe member States allow the compulsory taking of
fingerprints and cellular samples in the context of criminal proceedings. The
United Kingdom is the only member State expressly to permit the systematic and
indefinite retention of DNA profiles and cellur samples of persons who have
been acquitted or in respect of whom criminal proceedings have been
discontinued.

176\. Strasbourg Court held that the mere storing of data relating to the
private life of an individual amounts to an interference within the meaning of
Article 8. It was further held that in determining whether the personal
information retained by the  155 authorities involves any of the private­life
aspects mentioned above, the Court will have due regard to the specific
context in which the information at issue has been recorded and retained. In
paragraph 67 following has been laid down:

> “67....However, in determining whether the personal information retained by
> the authorities involves any of the private­life aspects mentioned above,
> the Court will have due regard to the specific context in which the
> information at issue has been recorded and retained, the nature of the
> records, the way in which these records are used and processed and the
> results that may be obtained (see, mutatis mutandis, Friedl, cited above,
> 49­51, and Peck v. The United Kingdom, cited above, 59).”

177\. Following was laid down in paragraph 73 & 77:

> “73. Given the nature and the amount of personal information contained in
> cellular samples, their retention per se must be regarded as interfering
> with the right to respect for the private lives of the individuals
> concerned. That only a limited part of this information is actually
> extracted or used by the authorities through DNA profiling and that no
> immediate detriment is caused in a particular case does not change this
> conclusion (see Aman cited above,

> 69).

> 77\. In view of the foregoing, the Court concludes that the retention of
> both cellular samples and DNA profiles discloses an  156 interference with
> the applicants’ right to respect for their private lives, within the meaning
> of Article 8(1) of the Convention.”

178\. The Court also considered the issue of retention of fingerprints, and
held that retention of fingerprints may also give rise to important private
life concerns. The Court also held that the domestic law must afford
appropriate safeguards to prevent any such use of personal data as may be
inconsistent with the guarantees of Article 8. Following was held in paragraph
103:

> “103. The protection of personal data is of fundamental importance to a
> person’s enjoyment of his or her right to respect for private and family
> life, as guaranteed by Article 8 of the Convention. The domestic law must
> afford appropriate safeguards to prevent any such use of personal data as
> may be inconsistent with the guarantees of this Article (see mutatis
> mutandis, Z., cited above, 95). The need for such safeguards is all the
> greater where the protection of personal data undergoing automatic
> processing is concerned, not least when such data are used for police
> purposes. The domestic law should notably ensure that such data are relevant
> and not excessive in relation to the purposes for which they are stored; and
> preserved in a form which permits identification of the data subjects for no
> 157 longer than is required for the purpose for which those data are
> stored.”

179\. United Kingdom Supreme Court had occasion to consider the issue of
retention of data in Regina (Catt) v. Association of Chief Police Officers of
England, Wales and Northern Ireland and another,(2015) 2 WLR 664 – (2015) UKSC
9. The UK Supreme Court in the above case also noticed the judgment of
Strasbourg in S. and Marper v. The United Kingdom. The appeal before UK
Supreme Court was concerned with the systematic collection retention by police
authorities of electronic data about individuals and whether it is contrary to
Article 8 of the European Convention. The appellant before the Court had
accepted that it was lawful for the police to make a record of the events in
question as they occurred, but contends that the police interfered with their
rights under Article 8 of the Convention by thereafter retaining the
information on a searchable database. After noticing the jurisprudence of the
European Court of Human Rights Lord Sumption stated following in paragraph 33:
158

> “33. Although the jurisprudence of the European Court of Human Rights is
> exacting in treating the systematic storage of personal data as engaging
> article 8 and requiring justification, it has consistently recognised that
> (subject always to proportionality) public safety and the prevention and
> detection of crime will justify it provided that sufficient safeguards exist
> to ensure that personal information is not retained for longer than is
> required for the purpose of maintaining public order and preventing or
> detecting crime, and that disclosure to third parties is properly
> restricted: see Bouchacourt v France, given 17 December 2009, paras 68­69,
> and Brunet v. France (Application No.21010/10) (unreported) given 18
> September 2014, para 36. In my opinion, both of these requirements are
> satisfied in this case. Like any complex system dependent on administrative
> supervision, the present system is not proof against mistakes. At least in
> hindsight, it is implicit in the 2012 report of HMIC and the scale on which
> the database was weeded out over the next two years that the police may have
> been retaining more records than the Code of Practice and the MOPI
> guidelines really required. But the judicial and administrative procedures
> for addressing this are effective, as the facts disclosed on this appeal
> suggest.”

180\. The preponderance of authorities on the subject of retention of data is
that retention of personal data effecting personal life of an individual may
interfere in his right of privacy and the State can justify its retention
subject to proportionality and  159 subject to there being sufficient
safeguards to personal information is not retained for longer than it
required.

181\. Reverting back to the Aadhaar Act, it is clear that requesting entity as
well as authority are required to retain authentication data for a particular
period and thereafter it will be archived for five years and thereafter
authentication data transaction shall be deleted except such data which is
required by the Court in connection with any pending dispute. We had already
noticed that data which is retained by the entity and authority for certain
period is minimal information pertaining to identity authentication only no
other personal data is retained. Thus, provisions of Aadhaar Act and
Regulations made thereunder fulfill three fold test as laid down in Puttaswamy
case (supra), hence, we conclude that storage and retention of data does not
violate fundamental right of privacy.

160

182\. Now, we come to issue of surveillance, which has been very strongly
raised by petitioners. Shri Shyam Divan, learned counsel for the petitioners
has relied on judgment of U.S. Supreme Court in United States Vs. Antoine
Jones, 132 S.Ct. 945 (2012). Antoine Jones, owner and operator of a nightclub
was under suspicion of trafficking in narcotics. A warrant was issued
authorising installation of an electronic tracking device on the jeep
registered in the name of John's wife. Agents installed a GPS tracking device
in the jeep when it was parked in a public parking. On the basis of data
obtained from the device, the Government charged Jones for several offences.
In trial, Jones found a locational data obtained form the GPS device. A
verdict of guilt was returned, which on appeal was reversed by United States,
Appeal for District Columbia.

183\. Matter was taken to the U.S. Supreme Court. Fourth Amendment provides
“the right of the people to be secured in their persons, houses, papers, and
effects, against unreasonable searches and seizures,  161 shall not be
violated.” Justice Scalia, delivering the opinion of the Court affirmed the
judgment of Court of Appeal. Justice Sotomayor concurring wrote:­ “I join the
Court's opinion because I agree that a search within the meaning of the Fourth
Amendment occurs, at a minimum, “[w]here, as here, the Government obtains
information by physically intruding on a constitutionally protected area.”
Ante, at 950, n. 3. In this case, the Government installed a Global
Positioning System (GPS) tracking device on respondent Antoine Jones' Jeep
without a valid warrant and without Jones' consent, then used that device to
monitor the Jeep's movements over the course of four weeks. The Government
usurped Jones' property for the purpose of conducting surveillance on him,
thereby invading privacy interests long afforded, and undoubtedly entitled to,
Fourth Amendment protection. See, e.g., Silverman v. United States, 365 U. S.
505, 511­512 S1 S.Ct. 679, 5 L.Ed.2d 734 (1961). ”

184\. The above case was a case where tracking device, i.e., GPS was installed
in the vehicle with purpose and motive of surveillance and obtaining data to
be used against Jones. Present is not a case where it can be said that Aadhaar
infrastructure is designed in a manner as to put a surveillance on Aadhaar
number holder (ANH).

162

185\. Another judgment which is relied by Shri Shyam Divan is judgment of
European Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg Court in Roman Zakharov Vs.
Russia decided on 04.12.2015. In the above case, the applicant alleged that
the system of secret interception of mobile telephone communications in Russia
violated his right to respect for his private life and correspondence and that
he did not have any effective remedy in that respect. In Para 148 of the
judgment, the case of the applicant was noted in the following words:­ “148.
The applicant complained that the system of covert interception of mobile
telephone communications in Russia did not comply with the requirements of
Article 8 of the Convention, which reads as follows:­ “1. Everyone has the
right to respect for his private and family life, his home and his
correspondence.

2\. There shall be no interference by a public authority with the exercise of
this right except such as is in accordance with the law and is necessary in a
democratic society in the interests of national security, public safety or the
economic well­ being of the country, for the prevention of disorder or crime,
for the protection of health or morals,  163 or for the protection of the
rights and freedoms of others.”

186\. The Court came to the following conclusion:­ "175. The Court notes that
the contested legislation institutes a system of secret surveillance under
which any person using mobile telephone services of Russia providers can have
his or her mobile telephone communications intercepted, without ever being
notified of the surveillance. To that extent, the legislation in question
directly affects all users of these mobile telephone services.”

187\. The Strasbourg Court held that there had been violation of Article 8 of
the Convention. The above case also does not help the petitioners in reference
to Aadhaar structure. Above case was a clear case of surveillance by
interception of mobile telecommunication.

188\. Another judgment relied by Shri Shyam Divan is Digital Rights Ireland
Ltd. Vs. Minister for Communications, Marine and Natural Resources decided on
08.04.2014. Para 1 of the judgment notice:­ "These requests for a preliminary
ruling concern the validity of Directive 2006/24/EC of the European Parliament
and of the Council of 15 March 2006 on the retention of data  164 generated or
processed in connection with the provision of publicly available electronic
communications services or of public communications networks and amending
Directive 2002/58/EC(OJ 2006 L 105, p. 54).”

189\. Directive 2006/24 laid down the obligation on the providers of publicly
available electronic communications services or of public communications
networks to retain certain data which are generated or processed by them.
Noticing various articles of the Directives, the Court in Paragraph 27 noted:­
“27. Those data, taken as a whole, may allow very precise conclusions to be
drawn concerning the private lives of the persons whose data has been
retained, such as the habits of everyday life, permanent or temporary places
of residence, daily or other movements, the activities carried out, the social
relationships of those persons and the social environments frequented by
them.”

190\. The directives were held to be violating the principles of
proportionality. The above case was also a case of retaining data pertaining
to communications by service providers. The retention of communication data is
a clear case of intrusion in privacy. The above is also a case which in no
manner  165 help the petitioners when contrasted with the Aadhaar
architecture.

191\. At this juncture, we may also notice one submission raised by the
petitioners that Aadhaar Act could have devised a less intrusive
measure/means. It was suggested that for identity purpose, the Government
could have devised issuance of a smart card, which may have contained a
biometric information and retain it in the card itself, which would not have
begged the question of sharing or transfer of the data. We have to examine the
Aadhaar Act as it exists. It is not the Court's arena to enter into the issue
as to debate on any alternative mechanism, which according to the petitioners
would have been better. Framing a legislative policy and providing a mechanism
for implementing the legislative policy is the legislative domain in which
Court seldom trench.

192\. We may refer to a judgment of U.K. Supreme Court AB Vs. Her Majesty's
Advocate, [2017] UKSC 25, where U.K. Supreme Court has not approved the
arguments  166 based on less intrusive means. Court held that whether the
Parliament would have used a less intrusive means does not involve the Court
in identifying an alternative measure, which is least intrusive. In Para 37,
following has been laid down:­ “37. I am not persuaded. It is important to
recall that the question of whether the Parliament could have used a less
intrusive measure does not involve the court in identifying the alternative
measure which is least intrusive. The court allows the legislature a margin of
discretion and asks whether the limitation on the article 8 right is one which
it was reasonable for the Parliament to propose: Bank Mellat v HM Treasury (No
2) [2013] UKSC 38, [2014] AC 700, para 75 per Lord Reed; Animal Defenders
International v United Kingdom (2013) 57 EHRR 21, para 110. Had the 2009 Act
provided that the reasonable belief defence would not be available if on an
earlier occasion the accused had been charged with an offence which itself
objectively entailed a warning of the illegality of consensual sexual activity
with older children, the fact that there were other options, which were less
intrusive, to restrict the availability of that defence would not cause an
infringement of the individual's article 8 right. The problem for the Lord
Advocate in this appeal is where to find such a warning. ”

193\. We may profitably note the judgment of Privy Council arising from a
decision of Supreme Court of  167 Mauritius – Madhewoo Vs. State of Mauritius.
The case relates to a national identity card, which was brought in effect by
an Act namely, the National Identity Card Act, 1985 providing for adult
citizens of Mauritius to carry identity cards. The Act was amended in 2013 by
which Government introduced a new smart identity card, which incorporates on a
chip on the citizen's fingerprints and other biometric information relating to
his/her characteristics. A citizen of the Republic of Mauritius did not apply
for National Identity Card and he challenged the validity of the 2013 Act. The
Supreme Court of Mauritius held that the provisions of 1985 Act, which enforce
the compulsory taking and recording of fingerprints of a citizen disclosed an
interference with the appellant’s rights guaranteed under Section 9(1) of the
Constitution. The Section 9(1) provided “except with his own consent, no
person shall be subject to the search of his person or his private or the
entry by others in his premises.” Supreme Court had rejected the challenge to
the other provisions of the  168 Constitution. Matter was taken to the Privy
Council. The challenge made before the Privy Council was noticed in Para 7 of
the judgment, which is to the following effect:­ “7. In this appeal the
appellant challenges the constitutionality of (a) the obligation to provide
fingerprints and other biometric information under section 4, (b) the storage
of that material on the identity card under section 5, (c) the compulsory
production of an identity card to a policeman under section 7(1A) in response
to a request under section 7(1)(b), and (d) the gravity of the potential
penalties under section 9(3) for non­ compliance. He claims, first, that the
implementation of the new biometric identity card is in breach of sections 1,
2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 9, 15, 16 and 45 of the Constitution coupled with article 22 of
the Civil Code (which provides that everyone has the right to respect for his
private life and empowers courts with competent jurisdiction to prevent or end
a violation of privacy) and, secondly, that the collection and permanent
storage of personal biometric data, including fingerprints, on the identity
card are in breach of those sections of the Constitution and that article of
the Civil Code. ”

194\. The Privy Council agreed with the decision of the Supreme Court that
compulsory taking of fingerprints and the extraction of minutiae involved an
interference with the appellant’s Section 9 rights  169 which required to be
justified under Section 9(2). The challenge raised before the Privy Council
has been noticed in Para 25, which challenges were repelled. Paras 25 and 26
are as follows:­ “25. The appellant challenges the Supreme Court’s evaluation
because, he submits, the creation of a reliable identity card system does not
justify the interference with his fundamental rights. He submits that the
obligation to provide his fingerprints interferes with his right to be
presumed innocent and also that an innocuous failure to comply with section
4(2)(c) could give rise to draconian penalties under section 9(3) of the Act
(para 6 above). He also points out that in India a proposal for a biometric
identity card was held to be unconstitutional, and, in the United Kingdom,
libertarian political opposition resulted in the repeal of legislation to
introduce biometric identity cards. The interference, he submits, is
disproportionate.

26\. In the Board’s view, these challenges do not undermine the Supreme
Court’s assessment. First, the requirement to provide fingerprints for an
identity card does not give rise to any inference of criminality as it is a
requirement imposed on all adult citizens. It is true that, if circumstances
arose in which a police officer was empowered to require the appellant to
produce his identity card and the government had issued card readers, the
authorities would have access to his fingerprint minutiae which they could use
for the purposes of identification in a criminal investigation. But that does
not alter the presumption of innocence.

170

Secondly, the penalties in section 9(3) are maxima for offences, including
those in section 9(1), which cover serious offences such as forgery and
fraudulent behaviour in relation to identity cards. The subsection does not
mandate the imposition of the maximum sentence for any behaviour. Thirdly,
while judicial rulings on international instruments and the constitutions of
other countries can often provide assistance to a court in interpreting the
provisions protecting fundamental rights and freedoms in its own constitution,
the degree of such assistance will depend on the extent to which the documents
are similarly worded. ”

195\. As noticed above, learned counsel for the petitioners has raised various
issues pertaining to security and safety of data and CIDR. Apprehensions
raised by the petitioners does not furnish any ground to struck down the
enactment or a legislative policy. This Court in G. Sundarrajan Vs. Union of
India and Others. (2013) 6 SCC 620, had occasion to consider India's National
Policy and challenge to a Nuclear Project, which was launched by the
Government upholding the legislative policy, the Court laid down following in
Paras 15 and 15.1:­ “15. India's National Policy has been clearly and
unequivocally expressed by the legislature in the Atomic Energy Act.

171

National and International policy of the country is to develop control and use
of atomic energy for the welfare of the people and for other peaceful
purposes. NPP has been set up at Kudankulam as part of the national policy
which is discernible from the Preamble of the Act and the provisions contained
therein. It is not for Courts to determine whether a particular policy or a
particular decision taken in fulfillment of a policy, is fair. Reason is
obvious, it is not the province of a court to scan the wisdom or
reasonableness of the policy behind the Statute.

15.1. Lord MacNaughten in Vacher & Sons Ltd. v. London Society of Compositors
(1913) AC 107 HL has stated:

> “......Some people may think the policy of the Act unwise and even dangerous
> to the community......But a Judicial tribunal has nothing to do with the
> policy of any Act which it may be called upon to interpret. That may be a
> matter for private judgment.

> The duty of the Court, and its only duty, is to expound the language of the
> Act in accordance with the settled rules of construction.”

196\. This Court also held that a project cannot be stopped merely on the
ground of apprehension. In the present case, also lot of apprehensions of
possibilities of insecurity of data has been raised. In India, there is no
specific data protection laws  172 like law in place in United Kingdom. In
Privacy judgment – Puttaswamy (supra), this Court has noticed that Shri
Krishna Commission is already examining the issue regarding data protection
and as has been stated by learned Attorney General before us, after the report
is received, the Government will proceed with taking steps for bringing a
specific law on data protection. We need not say anything more on the above
subject. After we have reserved the judgment, Srikrishna Commission has
submitted its report containing a draft Personal Data Protection Bill, 2018 in
July 2018. The report having been submitted, we hope that law pertaining to
Personal Data Protection shall be in place very soon taking care of several
apprehensions expressed by petitioners.

197\. The Aadhaar architecture is to be examined in light of the statutory
regime as in place. We have noticed the regulations framed under Aadhaar Act,
which clearly indicate that regulations brings in place statutory provisions
for data protection, restriction on data sharing and other aspects of the  173
matter. Several provisions of penalty on data breach and violation of the
provisions of the Act and regulations have been provided.

198\. We have no reason to doubt that the project will be implemented in
accordance with the Act and the Regulations and there is no reason to imagine
that there will be statutory breaches, which may affect the data security,
data protection etc. In view of foregoing discussions, we are of the
considered opinion that Statutory regime as delineated by the Aadhaar Act and
the Regulations fulfills the three­ fold test as laid down in Puttaswamy
(supra) and the law, i.e. Aadhaar Act gives ample justification for legitimate
aim of the Government and the law being proportional to the object envisaged.
The petitioners during their submissions have also attacked various provisions
of Enrolment and Update Regulations, Authentication Regulations, Data Security
Regulations and Sharing of Information Regulations. All the above regulations
have been framed in exercise of power under Section 54 of the Act on the
matters covered by  174 the Act. We having held that by collection of data,
its retention, storage, use and sharing, no Privacy Right is breached, we are
of the view that related regulations also pass the muster of three­fold tests
as laid down in K.Puttaswamy case. The provisions of Act in the above regard
having passed the muster of three­fold tests, the related regulations also
cannot be held to breach Right of Privacy. Thus, challenge to regulations
relating to collection, storage, use, retention and sharing fails and it is
held that they do not violate Constitutional Rights of Privacy. In result, we
answer the Issue Nos. 3, 4 and 5 in following manner:­ Ans. 3, 4, 5:­

(i) Collection of data, its storage and use does not violate fundamental Right
of Privacy.

(ii) Aadhaar Act does not create an architecture for pervasive surveillance.

(iii) Aadhaar Act and Regulations provides protection and safety of the data
received  175 from individuals.

Whether Section 7 OF Aadhaar Act is Issue Nos. unconstitutional?

6 and 7 Whether right to food, shelter etc. envisaged under Article 21 shall
take precedence on the right to privacy of the beneficiaries?

199\. Shri Pandit Jawahar Lal Nehru while concluding debate on “Aims and
Objects Resolution” on 22.01.1947 in the Constituent Assembly of India stated:

> “The first task of this Assembly is to free India through a new constitution
> to feed the starving people and cloth the naked masses and to give every
> Indian fullest opportunity to develop himself according to his capacity.
> This is certainly a great task.”

200\. After attaining the freedom the country proceeded to realise the dream
and vision which founding fathers of our democratic system envisaged. The
Constitution of India apart from enumerating various Fundamental Rights
including right to life has provided for Directive Principles of State Policy
under Chapter IV of the Constitution which was to find objectives in  176
governess of the country. Article 38 provided that State shall strive to
promote the welfare of the people by securing and protecting as effectively as
it may a social order in which justice, social, economic and political, shall
inform all the institutions of the national life. It further provided that the
State shall, in particular, strive to minimise the inequalities in income, and
endeavour to eliminate inequalities in status, facilities and opportunities,
not only amongst individuals but also amongst groups of people residing in
different areas or engaged in different vocations.

201\. After enforcement of the Constitution almost all the Governments worked
towards the object of elimination of poverty and to empower marginal/poor
section of the society. The endeavour of the Government was always to frame
policies keeping in view the “little Indian” who is in the centre of all
policies and governance.

202\. Section 7 of the Aadhaar Act is the most important provision of the
Aadhaar Act around which  177 entire architecture of Aadhaar Act has been
built. Section 7 is to the following effect:

> “7. The Central Government or, as the case may be, the State Government may,
> for the purpose of establishing identity of an individual as a condition for
> receipt of a subsidy, benefit or service for which the expenditure is
> incurred from, or the receipt therefrom forms part of, the Consolidated Fund
> of India, require that such individual undergo authentication, or furnish
> proof of possession of Aadhaar number or in the case of an individual to
> whom no Aadhaar number has been assigned, such individual makes an
> application for enrolment: Provided that if an Aadhaar number is not
> assigned to an individual, the individual shall be offered alternate and
> viable means of identification for delivery of the subsidy, benefit or
> service.”

203\. The objects and reasons of the Act as noticed above as well as the
Preamble of the Act focus on targeted delivery of financial and other
subsidies, benefits and services which are envisaged in Section

7\. The petitioners challenge the constitutionality of Section 7. They submit
that Section 7 seeks to render the constitutional and statutory obligations of
the State to provide benefits, subsidies and services, conditional upon an
individual parting with his or her  178 biometric and demographic information.
An individual’s rights and entitlements cannot be made dependent upon an
invasion of his or her bodily integrity and his or her private information
which the individual may not be willing to share with the State. The bargain
underlying Section 7 is an unconscionable, unconstitutional bargain. An
individual has constitutional right to receive benefits, subsidies and
services which is fundamental right and it is State’s obligation to provide
for fulfillment of that fundamental right. He submitted that there is no
rationale in enactment of Section 7 neither there was any legitimate state
interest nor the provision is proportionate. The petitioners submit that
provision of requiring every person to undergo authentication to avail
benefits/services/ entitlements, falls foul of Article 14. Since, firstly such
mandatory authentication has caused, and continues to cause, exclusion of the
most marginalised section of society; and secondly this exclusion is not
simply a question of poor implementation that can be administratively  179
resolved, but stems from the very design of the Act. Learned counsel for the
petitioners have referred to and relied on several materials in support of
their submissions that working of Section 7 has caused exclusion. Since a
large number of persons who are entitled to receive benefits, subsidies and
services are unable to get it due to not being able to authenticate due to
various reasons like old age, change of biometric and other reasons. The
petitioners have referred to affidavits filed by several individuals and NGOs
who after field verification brought materials before this Court to support
their submission regarding large scale exclusion. It is further contended that
State’s contention that Circular dated 24.10.2017 has resolved implementation
issued cannot be accepted. The authentication system in the Aadhaar Act is
probabilistic. Biometric technology does not guarantee 100% accuracy and it is
fallible, refers UIDAI’s own Report on “Role of Biometric Technology in
Aadhaar Entrolment” (2012) has been made where Report stated that biometric
accuracy  180 after accounting for the biometric failure to enrol rate, false
positive identification rate, and false negative identification rate, was
99.768% accuracy. For a population over 119.22 crore enrolled in Aadhaar, it
is a shocking admission of the fact that there are 27.65 lakh people who are
excluded from benefits linked to Aadhaar. It is contended that validity of an
act is to be judged not by its object or form, but by its effect on
fundamental rights. Mandatory authentication at the point of use violates
Article 21. It is contended that the Government has failed to discharge its
burden of proof under Article

21\. The State has also failed to satisfy the test of proportionality which
makes Section 7 unconstitutional.

204\. The petitioners further submit that the claim of the Government that by
Aadhaar authentication the State has been able to save 11 billion per annum is
incorrect and without any basis. It is further submitted that massive savings
under Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme under  181
Financial Benefits Accrued on account for DBT/Aadhaar since 2014 claims of
substantial savings upto 2015­16 the amount of reported savings is shown as
Rs.3000 crores and upto 2016­17 it is shown as Rs.11,741 crores. Referring to
the claim of the Government that he submitted facts of job cards could be only
67,637 were found to be job cards linked to more than one Aadhaar number.
Thus, maximum saving for this period would be 127.88 crores compared to the
inflated figure of Rs.3000 crores. The Financial Benefits claimed under PAHAL
scheme was Rs.14,672 crores which is not correct. Referring to Comptroller and
Auditor General Report, it is pointed out that with respect to 2014­ 15, the
real outcome of savings is only 1.33 crores. He submits that major saving was
on account of decrease in off­take of domestic subsidised cylinders of
consumer and decrease in fuel prices. On Public Distribution System referring
to answer to a question in Lok Sabha on 26.07.2016 it is submitted that the
Minister of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public  182 Distribution has stated
only that approximately 2.33 crores ration cards were deleted during
2013­2016.

205\. Learned Attorney General has referred to material on record to justify
the legitimate state aim which led to enactment of Section 7. Learned Attorney
General refers to Report No.3 of 2000 of the Comptroller and Auditor General
of India which has been brought on record as Annexure R­I to the common
additional affidavit on behalf of respondents. He submits that the Comptroller
and Auditor General in his Report states that 1.93 crore bogus ration cards
were found to be in circulation in 13 States. Report further states that a
signification portion of the subsidised food­grains and other essential
commodities did not reach the beneficiaries due to their diversion in the open
market. The Performance Report of the Planning Commission of India titled
“Performance Evaluation Report of Targeted Public Distribution System (TPDS)”
dated March, 2005 which has been brought on record as Annexure­R­6 to the  183
common additional affidavit on behalf of respondents notes following:

> i. State­wise figure of excess Ration Cards in various states and the
> existence of over 1.52 crore excess Ration Cards issued [Page 362 of CAA]
> ii. Exercise of fictitious households and identification errors leading to
> exclusion of genuine beneficiaries.

> iii. Leakage through ghost BPL Ration Cards found to be prevalent in almost
> all the states under study.[Pg. 369 of CAA) iv. The Leakage of food grains
> through ghost cards has been tabulated and the percentage of such leakage on
> an All India basis has been estimated at 16.67% [Pg.370 of CAA].

> v. It is concluded that a large part of the subsidised food grains were not
> reaching the target group.

206\. Similar reports regarding few subsidies have been referred and relied.

207\. Learned Attorney General has also relied on the  184 report submitted by
V.V. Giri National Labour Institute and sponsored by the Department of Rural
Development, Ministry of Rural Development, Government of India which examined
various aspects of National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme while studying
the schedule of rates for National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme. In
paragraph 12.8 (Annesure R­4) to the common additional affidavit on behalf of
respondents following has been stated:

> 2\. “There was great fraud in making fake cards, muster rolls were not
> maintained properly, and work was not provided to job seekers sometimes. In
> many cases, it was found that workers performed one day’s job, but their
> attendance was put for 33 days. The workers got money for one day while
> wages for 32 days were misappropriated by the people associated with the
> functioning of NREGS.”

208\. Another report dated 09.11.2012 of National Institute of Public Finance
and Policy’s “A Cost­ benefit analysis of Aadhaar” estimated that a leakage of
approximately 12 percent is being caused to the Government on account of ghost
workers and manipulated muster rolls. Thirteenth Finance Commission Report for
185 2010­2015 dated December, 2000 in Chapter 12 states:

> “creation of a biometric­based unique identity for all residents in the
> country has the potential to address need of the government to ensure that
> only eligible persons are provided subsidies and benefits and that all
> eligible persons are covered.”

209\. Various other reports have been referred to and relied by Learned
Attorney General to substantiate his case that there was large leakage and
pilferation of subsidies which were allocated by the Government under
different schemes.

210\. This Court had occasion to consider public distribution system in PUCL
vs. Union of India, (2011) 14 SCC 331, the Court noticed the report of High
Powered Committee headed by Justice D.P. Wadhwa, retired Judge of this Court
who had submitted report on the Public Distribution System. One of the actions
suggested by the Committee was noticed in paragraphs 2 and 12 , Component II:

> “2. In order to implement this system across the country, the following
> actions are suggested by the Committee:

> … … …  186 Component II: Electronic authentication of delivery and payments
> at the fair price shop level. In order to ensure that each card­holder is
> getting his due entitlement, computerisation has to reach literally every
> doorstep and this could take long. Moreover, several States have already
> started implementing smart cards, food coupons, etc. which have not been
> entirely successful. Reengineering these legacy systems and replacing it
> with the online Aadhaar authentication at the time of food­grain delivery
> will take time. This is therefore proposed as Component II.

> 12\. As far as possible, the State Governments should be directed to link
> the process of computerisation of Component 2 with Aadhaar registration.
> This will help in streamlining the process of biometric collection as well
> as authentication. The States/UTs may be encouraged to include the PDs
> related KYR+ field in the data collection exercise being undertaken by
> various Registrars across the country as part of the UID (Aadhaar)
> enrolment.”

211\. This Court again in the same proceeding passed another judgment on
16.03.2012 PUCL vs. Union of India, (2013) 14 SCC 368 in which following was
stated in paragraphs 2 and 4:

> “2. There seems to be a general consensus that computerisation is going to
> help the public distribution system in the country in a big way. In the
> affidavit it is stated that the Department of Food and Public Distribution
> has been pursuing the States to  187 undertake special drive to eliminate
> bogus/duplicate ration cards and as a result, 209.55 lakh ration cards have
> been eliminated since 2006 and the annual saving of foodgrain subsidy has
> worked out to about Rs 8200 crores per annum. It is further mentioned in the
> affidavit that end­to­end computerisation of public distribution system
> comprises creation and management of digitised beneficiary database
> including biometric identification of the beneficiaries, supply chain
> management of TPDS commodities till fair price shops.

> 4\. In the affidavit it is further mentioned that the Government of India
> has set up a task force under the Chairmanship of Mr Nandan Nilekani,
> Chairman, UIDAI, to recommend, amongst others, an IT strategy for the public
> distribution system. We request Mr Nandan Nilekani to suggest us ways and
> means by which computerisation process of the public distribution system can
> be expedited. Let a brief report/affidavit be filed by Mr Nandan Nilekani
> within four weeks from today.”

212\. As noted above the figures as claimed by the respondents regarding
benefits after implementation of Aadhaar scheme in the MGNREGA and PDS etc.
are refuted by the petitioners. Petitioners’ case is that amounts of savings
which are claimed are not correct and at best there was only meager benefit of
savings from the implementation of the scheme. We need not to enter  188 into
the issue regarding respective claims in the above regard. The reasons which
led to enactment of Section 7 that benefits and subsidies are substantially
diverted and are not able to reach have been made out even if saving were not
substantial but meager.

213\. The report and material which have been brought on record by the
Government fully demonstrate the legitimate aim of the State in enacting
Section 7.

This Court in Francis Coralie Mullin vs. Administrator, Union Territory of
Delhi and others, 1981 (1) SCC 608, while elaborating on right of life under
Article 21, held that the right to life includes the right to live with
dignity and all that goes along with it namely the bar necessaries of life
such as adequate nutrition, clothing and shelter.

214\. The United Nation under Universal Declaration of Human Rights also
acknowledges everyone has a right to standard of living which includes food,
clothing, housing and medical care. Article 25 of the Declaration which was
made in 1948 is as follows:  189

“25.1 Everyone has the right to a standard of living adequate for the health
and well­ being of himself and of his family, including food, clothing,
housing and medical care and necessary social services, and the right to
security in the event of unemployment, sickness, disability, widowhood, old
age or other lack of livelihood in circumstances beyond his control.”

215\. The English author, JOHN BERGER said:

> “The poverty of our century is unlike that of any other. It is not, as
> poverty was before, the result of natural scarcity, but of a set of
> priorities imposed upon the rest of the world by the rich. Consequently, the
> modern poor are not pitied...but written off as trash.”

216\. The identification of the poor, as was referred by John Berger is the
first step to realise the UN Declaration of Human Rights as well as the
Fundamental Rights guaranteed under the Constitution of India. The Aadhaar Act
brings into existence a process of identification which is more accurate as
compared to other identity proofs.

190

217\. At this stage, we need to notice one more submission which was raised by
the learned Attorney General. It has been submitted by the learned Attorney
General that subsidies and benefits under Section 7 of the Aadhaar Act are
traceable to Article 21. It is submitted that if the rights which are sought
to be realised by means of Section 7 are juxtaposed against the right of
privacy, the former will prevail over the latter. The issue is as to whether
the State by enlivening right to food and shelter envisaged under Article 21
encroach upon the right of privacy ? There cannot be a denial that there may
be inter se conflict between fundamental rights recognised by the Constitution
in reference to a particular person. The Court has to strive a balance to
leave enough space for exercise of both the fundamental rights.

218\. It cannot be accepted that while balancing the fundamental rights one
right has to be given preference. We may notice that privacy judgment i.e.
Puttaswamy case has noticed and already rejected  191 this argument raised by
the learned Attorney General in paragraph 266 in the following words:

> “266. The Attorney General argued before us that the right to privacy must
> be forsaken in the interest of welfare entitlements provided by the State.
> In our view, the submission that the right to privacy is an elitist
> construct which stands apart from the needs and aspirations of the large
> majority constituting the rest of society, is unsustainable. This submission
> betrays a misunderstanding of the constitutional position. Our Constitution
> places the individual at the forefront of its focus, guaranteeing civil and
> political rights in Part III and embodying an aspiration for achieving
> socio­economic rights in Part IV. The refrain that the poor need no civil
> and political rights and are concerned only with economic well­being has
> been utilised through history to wreak the most egregious violations of
> human rights....”

219\. One of the submissions which has been raised by the petitioners
targeting the Aadhaar authentication is that biometric system under the
Aadhaar architecture is probabilistic. Biometric technology does not guarantee
100% accuracy and it is fallible, with inevitable false positives and false
negatives that are design flaws of such a probabilistic system. We have noted
above the reliance  192 on UIDAI’s Report of the year 2012 where UIDAI itself
has claimed that biometric accuracy was 99.768%. The petitioner is still
criticising that since .232% failures are there which comes to 27.65 lakh
people who are excluded from benefits linked to Aadhaar. The above submission
of the petitioner ignores one aspect of the matter as has been contended by
the respondents that in case where there is biometric mis­match of a person
even possession of an Aadhaar number is treated sufficient for delivery of
subsidies and benefits. Thus, physical possession of Aadhaar card itself may
mitigate biometric mis­match. However, in case of mis­ match instruments are
there to accept other proof of identity, the respondents have referred to
Circular dated 24.10.2017 issued by UIDAI. The Circular dated 24.10.2017 has
been criticised by the petitioners stating that violation of right cannot be
left to vagaries of administration. There cannot be any dispute to the above
propositions. It is the obligation of the State to ensure that there is no
violation of fundamental rights of a person. Section 7  193 is an enabling
provision which empowers the State Government to require that such individual
undergo authentication for receipt of a subsidy, benefit or service but
neither Section 7 nor orders issued by the Central Government and State
Government can be read that in the event authentication of a person or
beneficiary fails, he is not to be provided the subsidies and benefits or
services. The provision is couched as an enabling provision but it cannot be
read as a provision to negate giving subsidies, benefits or services in the
event of failure of authentication. We are of the view that Circular dated
24.10.2017 which fills a gap and is a direction facilitating delivery of
benefits and subsidies does not breach by provisions of the Act.

220\. Now, we come to arguments of exclusion as advanced by the petitioners in
support of their submission that exclusion makes Section 7 arbitrary and
violative of Articles 14 and 21. From the material brought on record by the
parties, we have no reason to doubt that there has been denial to few persons
due to  194 failure of authentication. There is ample material on record to
indicate that prior to enforcement of Aadhaar Scheme there had been large
number of denial of benefits and subsidies to real beneficiaries due to
several reasons as noted above. Functioning of scheme formulated by the
Government for delivery of benefits and subsidies to deserving persons is a
large scale scheme running into every nook and corner of the country. When
such scheme of Government is implemented, it is not uncommon that there may be
shortcomings and some denial. There is no material on record to indicate that
as compared to non­receipt of eligible beneficiaries prior to enforcement of
the Act, there is increase of failure after the implementation of the Act. It
cannot be accepted that few cases of exclusion as pointed out by the
petitioners makes Section 7 itself arbitrary and violative of Articles 14 and
21. Pitfalls and shortcomings are to remove from every system and it has been
fairly submitted by the learned Attorney General as well as learned counsel
for the UIDAI that  195 as and when difficulties in implementation and cases
of denial are brought into the notice, remedial measures are taken. The
respondents are still ready to take such remedial measures to ensure that
there is no denial of subsidies to deserving persons. We, however, are of the
view that denial of delivery of benefits and subsidies to deserving persons is
a serious concern and violation of the rights of the persons concerned. It has
to be tackled at all level and the administration has to gear up itself and
implementation authority has to gear up itself to ensure that rightful
beneficiaries are not denied the constitutional benefits which have been
recognised and which are being implemented by the different schemes of the
Government. Both the Government and UIDAI are fully empowered to make Rules
and Regulations under Sections 53 and 54 of the Aadhaar Act respectively and
exclusions have to be taken care by exercising the power under Section 53 by
the Central Government and under Section 54 by the UIDAI to remedy such
shortcomings and denial. We are sure that both the  196 Central Government and
UIDAI shall advert to the exclusionary factors.

221\. We may also notice a judgment of the US Supreme Court in Otis R. Bowen,
Secretary of Health and Human Services, et al. vs. Stephen J. Roy et al., 476
US 693 (1986). The US Supreme Court held that statutory requirement that a
state agency utilise Social Security numbers in administering the programs in
question does not violate the Free Exercise Clause. The appellants applied and
received benefits under the Aid to Families with Dependent Children program
and the Food Stamp program. They, however, refused to comply, with the
requirement that participants in these programs furnish their state welfare
agencies with the Social Security numbers of the members of their household as
a condition of receiving benefits. Appellants had contended that obtaining a
Social Security number for their 2­year­old daughter, would violate their
Native American religious beliefs. On refusal to give Social Number, benefits
payable to the appellants were terminated. The claim of the  197 appellants
was dismissed. The challenge raised by the appellants was noticed in the
following words:

> “Appellees raise a constitutional challenge to two features of the statutory
> scheme here.4 They object to Congress' requirement that a state AFDC plan
> "must . . . provide (A) that, as a condition of eligibility under the plan,
> each applicant for or recipient of aid shall furnish to the State agency his
> social security account number." 42 U.S.C. § 602(a)(25) (emphasis added).
> They also object to Congress' requirement that "such State agency shall
> utilize such account numbers . . . in the administration of such plan."
> Ibid. (emphasis added).5 We analyze each of these contentions, turning to
> the latter contention first.”

222\. The U.S. Supreme Court upheld the requirement of providing of Social
Security number. Following has been observed:

> “The general governmental interests involved here buttress this conclusion.
> Governments today grant a broad range of benefits;

> inescapably at the same time the administration of complex programs requires
> certain conditions and restrictions. Although in some situations a mechanism
> for individual consideration will be created, a policy decision by a
> government that it wishes to treat all applicants alike and that it does not
> wish to become involved in case­by­case inquiries into the genuineness of
> each religious objection to such condition or restrictions is entitled to
> substantial  198 deference. Moreover, legitimate interests are implicated in
> the need to avoid any appearance of favoring religious over nonreligious
> applicants.

> The test applied in cases like Wisconsin v. Yoder, U.S. 205, 92 S.Ct. 1526,
> 32 L.Ed.2d 15 (1972), is not appropriate in this setting. In the enforcement
> of a facially neutral and uniformly applicable requirement for the
> administration of welfare programs reaching many millions of people, the
> Government is entitled to wide latitude. The Government should not be put to
> the strict test applied by the District Court; that standard required the
> Government to justify enforcement of the use of Social Security number
> requirement as the least restrictive means of accomplishing a compelling
> state interest.17 Absent proof of an intent to discriminate against
> particular religious beliefs or against religion in general, the Government
> meets its burden when it demonstrates that a challenged requirement for
> governmental benefits, neutral and uniform in its application, is a
> reasonable means of promoting a legitimate public interest.”

223\. Another case of the Appellate Division of the Supreme Court of the State
of New York which needs to be noticed is in the matter of Buchanan v. Wing,
664 N.Y. 2d 865. In the above case petitioners were recipients of Aid to
Families with Dependent Children, the facts of the case have been noticed in
the following words:

199

> “Petitioners and their four minor children are recipients of Aid to Families
> with Department Children (hereinafter ADC) (Social Services Law 343 et seq.)
> and food stamps from the Broome County Department of Social Services
> (hereinafter the Department). In February 1996, petitioners received notice
> from the Department that they were to participate in an identity
> verification procedure known as the automated finger imaging system
> (hereinafter AFIS) as a condition of eligibility for benefits required by 18
> NYCRR 351.2(a)(245 A.D. 2d

> 635). Petitioners responded that they would not participate because of their
> religious convictions. Respondent Commissioner of the Department thereafter
> discontinued their ADC and food stamp entitlements for failure to comply.”

224\. The petitioners refused to participate in an identify verification by
procedure known as automated finger imaging system which was a condition of
eligibility for benefits. Upholding the process of verification by finger
imaging following was laid down:

> “We have examined petitioners’ constitutional claims and find them to be
> without merit. In our view, petitioners’ failure to articulate a viable
> claim that they are being required to participate in an invasive procedure
> that is prohibited by their religious beliefs is dispositive of their
> arguments claiming a violation of their freedom to exercise their religion
> pursuant to the Federal and State  200 Constitutions (US Const 1st Amend; NY
> Const, art I, 3). We are also unpersuaded by petitioners’ contention that
> the Department violated NY Constitution, article XVII, 1 (which provides
> that aid and care of the needy are public concerns and shall be provided by
> the State) by discontinuing their public assistance benefits. Since
> petitioners cannot be classified as needy until such time as they are finger
> imaged to determine whether they are receiving duplicate benefits, no
> violation of this constitutional provision has been stated. Moreover,
> contrary to petitioners’ arguments, the discontinuance of public assistance
> to their entire family unit (see, 18 NYCRR 352.30)(245 A.D. 2d 637) does not
> infringe the constitutional rights of their children (who are not named
> petitioners in light of valid legislation premising the eligibility of the
> children within the family unit upon the eligibility of the entire household
> (see, Matter of Jessup v D’Elia, 69 N.Y. 2d 1030).”

225\. Another judgment which has been relied by the respondents is Doris
McElrath v. Joseph A. Califano, Jr., Secretary of Health, Education and
Welfare, 615 F.2d 434. Under Social Security Act, 1935, a public assistance
program of federal and state cooperation providing financial aid to needy
dependent children and the parents or relatives with whom they reside, one of
the conditions which was added so that as a condition of eligibility under the
plan, each  201 applicant for or recipient of aid shall furnish to the State
agency his social security account number. The contention of the appellant was
noticed in paragraph 11 which is to the following effect:

> “[11] The appellants' principal contention on appeal is that the federal and
> state regulations requiring dependent children to acquire and submit social
> security account numbers as a condition of eligibility for AFDC benefits are
> statutorily invalid as being inconsistent with and not authorized by the
> Social Security Act. We find the arguments advanced in support of this
> contention to be without merit and hold that the challenged regulations
> constitute a legitimate condition of eligibility mandated by the Congress
> under the Social Security Act. Accord, Chambers v. Klein, 419 F. Supp. 569
> (D.N.J. 1976), aff'd mem., 564 F.2d 89 (3d Cir. 1977); Green v. Philbrook,
> 576 F.2d 440 (2d Cir. 1978); Arthur v. Department of Social and Health
> Services, 19 Wn. App. 542, 576 P.2d 921 (1978). We therefore conclude that
> the district court properly dismissed the appellants' statutory invalidity
> allegations for failure to state a claim upon which relief could be
> granted.”

226\. The appellant had also contended that disclosure of social security
account number violates their constitutional rights to privacy. Said argument
was  202 rejected. While rejecting the argument following was stated in
paragraph 20:

> “[20] Finally, the appellants maintain that the social security account
> number disclosure requirement violates their constitutional rights to
> privacy and to equal protection of the law. We disagree. The constitutional
> guarantee of the right to privacy embodies only those personal rights that
> can be deemed "fundamental" or "implicit in the concept of ordered liberty."
> Roe v. Wade, : 410 U.S.

> 113, 152, 93 S.Ct. 705, 726, 35 L.Ed.2d 147 (1973). It is equally
> well­settled that "[w]elfare benefits are not a fundamental right . . . ."
> Lavine v. Milne, 424 U.S. 577, 584, n. 9, 96 S.Ct. 1010, 1015, 47 L.Ed.2d
> 249 (1976). Accordingly, we regard the decision of Mrs. McElrath whether or
> not to obtain social security account numbers for her two minor children in
> order to receive welfare benefits as involving neither a fundamental right
> nor a right implicit in the concept of ordered liberty. Chambers v.

> Klein, 419 F. Supp. 569, 583 (D.N.J. 1976), aff'd mem. 564 F.2d 89 (3d Cir.
> 1977). This case is not concerned with a decision impacting the privacy of
> the appellants on the magnitude of criminal sanctions or an absolute
> prohibition on the appellants' conduct. See, e. g., Griswold v. Connecticut,
> : 381 U.S. 479, 85 S.Ct. 1678, 14 L.Ed.652d 510 (1965); Eisenstadt v.
> Baird,: 405 U.S. 438, 92 S.Ct. 1029, 31 L.Ed.2d 349 (1972). Rather, it is
> concerned with a condition of AFDC eligibility and the only sanction for not
> complying is to forego certain governmental benefits. Simply stated, the
> claim of the appellants to receive welfare benefits on their own
> informational terms does not rise to the level of a  203 constitutional
> guarantee. Moreover, the contention that disclosure of one's social security
> account number violates the right to privacy has been consistently rejected
> in other related contexts. See, e.g., Cantor v. Supreme Court of
> Pennsylvania, 353 F. Supp. 1307, 1321­22 (E.D.Pa. 1973); Conant v. Hill, 326
> F. Supp. 25, 26 (E.D.Va. 1971).”

227\. The trends of judgments as noted above do indicate that condition for
identification or disclosing particular identity number for receiving a
benefit from State does not violate any of the Constitutional rights. We,
thus, find that Section 7 fulfills the three fold tests as laid down in
Puttaswamy case.

228\. Shri Gopal Subramanium relying on Article 243G and Eleventh Schedule of
the Constitution submits that Aadhaar Scheme and its authentication for
benefits, subsidies and services militate against the above Constitution
provision and hence are ultra vires to the Constitution. Article 243G deals
with powers, authority and responsibilities of Panchayats, which is to the
following effect:­  204 243G. Powers, authority and responsibilities of
Panchayats:­ Subject to the provisions of this Constitution the Legislature of
a State may, by law, endow the Panchayats with such powers and authority and
may be necessary to enable them to function as institutions of self­government
and such law may contain provisions for the devolution of powers and
responsibilities upon Panchayats, at the appropriate level, subject to such
conditions as may be specified therein, with respect to­­­

(a) the preparation of plans for economic development and social justice;

(b) the implementation of schemes for economic development and social justice
as may be entrusted to them including those in relation to the matters listed
in the Eleventh Schedule.

229\. Article 243G(b) refers to Eleventh Schedule to the Constitution.
Eleventh Schedule contains list of several matters. Shri Subramanium relies on
Item No. 11, 12, 16, 17, 23, 25 and 28, which are as under:­

11\. Drinking Water.

12\. Fuel and Fodder.

16\. Poverty alleviation programme.

17\. Education, including primary and secondary schools.

205

23\. Health and Sanitation, including hospitals, primary health centres and
dispensaries.

25\. Women and child development.

28\. Public distribution system.

230\. Article 243G is an enabling provision, which enable the State
Legislature, by law, to endow the Panchayats with such powers and authorities
as may be necessary to enable them to function as institutions of self­
government. The Items on which State, by law, can endow Panchayats in Eleventh
Schedule are items to deal with subjects enumerated therein. For example, Item
No. 16 deals with Poverty alleviation programme and Item No. 28 deals with
Public Distribution System. State is fully competent to make laws to authorise
the Panchayats to take over all the matters enumerated in Eleventh Schedule.
The question to be considered is as to whether the Aadhaar Act in any manner
militate with Constitutional provisions of Article 243G. The Aadhaar Act is an
Act enacted by Parliament, which is referable to Entry 97 of List I. The
Aadhaar Act has been enacted  206 to provide for efficient, transparent, and
targeted delivery of subsidies, benefits and services, the expenditure for
which is incurred from the Consolidated Fund of India, to individuals residing
in India through assigning of unique identity numbers to such individuals and
for matters connected therewith. The Act, thus, has been enacted to regulate
the expenditure, which is incurred from the Consolidated Fund of India. No
conflict between the Aadhaar Act and any law, which may be enacted by State
under List II is seen. Even if any conflict is supposed, the Doctrine of Pith
and Substance has to be applied to find out nature of two legislations. In
Pith and Substance, the Aadhaar Act cannot be said to be entrenching upon any
law, which may be made by the State under Item No.5 of List II. In this
context, reference is made to judgment of this Court in State of Uttar Pradesh
and Another Vs. Zila Parishad, Ghaziabad and Another, (2013) 11 SCC 783. In
the above case, provisions of Article 243G came to be considered in reference
to public distribution orders issued by the State Government in exercise of
delegated powers under  207 Essential Commodities Act, 1955. The Central
Government in exercise of power under Section 3 of the Essential Commodities
Act, the Government of U.P. issued an order dated 10.8.1999, conferring the
power to allot and cancel the fair price shops in rural areas, with certain
guidelines, on the Gram Panchayats. Subsequently, the State Government
withdrew that order and reinforced the earlier policy dated 03.07.1990 under
which the power was vested with the District Magistrate or an authority
designated by him to allot or cancel the licenses for Fair Price Shops. The
Central Government, in exercise of power under Section 3 of the Essential
Commodities Act, issued an order dated 31.8.2001, wherein its powers were
delegated to State Government. State Government, in pursuance thereof, issued
an order designating the officers of the District level, viz., District
Magistrate, Sub­Divisional Magistrate, District Supply Officer to ensure the
proper supply and distribution of such commodities. Zila Parishad, Ghaziabad
filed a Writ Petition in the High Court challenging the Order dated 13.01.2000
by which the power was withdrawn from the Gram  208 Panchayats. The Writ
Petition was allowed by the High Court against which State of Uttar Pradesh
filed an appeal. The submission was raised before this Court on behalf of the
writ petitioner that denuding the power from Panchayats will be against the
constitutional provision of Article 243G. Such argument on behalf of
petitioner has been noticed in Paragraph 14. This Court after considering the
provisions of Article 243G and other relevant provisions has laid down in
Paras 23 and 24:­ “23. The High Court has considered the nature of the
aforesaid constitutional provision and held as under: (Zila Panchayat case1,
AWC pp. 3981­82, para 16) “16. In our opinion, this provision is only an
enabling provision. It enables the Legislature of a State to endow the
Panchayats with certain powers. … Hence, the Legislature of a State is not
bound to endow the Panchayats with the powers referred to Article 243­G, and
it is in its discretion to do so or not. At any event there is no mention of
the public distribution system in Article 243­G of the Constitution.” Thus, it
is evident that the High Court has taken a view that the provision of Article
243­G is merely an enabling provision, and it  209 is not a source of
legislation. This view seems to be in consonance with the law laid down by
this Court in U.P. Gram Panchayat Adhikari Sangh v. Daya Ram Saroj4 wherein an
observation has been made that Article 243­G is an enabling provision as it
enables the Panchayats to function as institutions of self­government.
Further, this Court noted that such law may contain provisions for the
devolution of powers and responsibilities upon Panchayats, subject to such
conditions as may be specified therein, with respect to the implementation of
schemes for economic development and social justice as may be entrusted to
them, including those in relations to the matters listed in the Eleventh
Schedule. The enabling provisions are further subject to the conditions as may
be specified. Therefore, it is for the State Legislature to consider
conditions and to make laws accordingly. It is also open to the State to
eliminate or modify the same.

24\. Therefore, it is apparent that Article 243­G read with the Eleventh
Schedule is not a source of legislative power, and it is only an enabling
provision that empowers a State to endow functions and devolve powers and
responsibilities to local bodies by enacting relevant laws. The local bodies
can only implement the schemes entrusted to them by the State.”

231\. This Court in the above case has reiterated that Article 243G read with
Eleventh Schedule is not a source of legislative power, and it is only an
enabling provision that empowers a State to endow functions and  210 devolve
powers and responsibilities to local bodies by enacting relevant laws. We,
thus, are unable to accept the submission of Shri Gopal Subramanium that
Aadhaar Act is ultra vires to Article 243G and Eleventh Schedule to the
Constitution.

232\. One more submission of the petitioners which needs to be considered is
regarding probabilistic nature of biometric solution. We proceed on premise
that Aadhaar structure is probabilistic, the petitioners themselves have
referred to UIDAI Report where biometric accuracy has been stated to be
99.768%. Stephen Hawkin in his book: “God Created The Integers” states:

> “Over the centuries, the efforts of these mathematicians have helped the
> human race to achieve great insight into nature, such as the realisation
> that the earth is round, that the same force that causes an apple to fall
> here on earth is also responsible for the motions of the heavenly bodies,
> that space is finite and not eternal, that time and space are intertwined
> and warped by matter and energy, and that the future can only be determined
> probabilistically. Such revolutions in the way we perceive the world have
> always gone hand in hand with revolutions in mathematical thought. Isaac
> Newton could never have formulated his laws without the analytic geometry of
> Rene Descartes and Newton’s own invention of  211 calculus. It is hard to
> imagine the development of either electrodynamics or quantum theory without
> the methods of Jean Baptiste Joseph Fourier or the work on calculus and the
> theory of complex functions pioneered by Carl Friedrich Gauss and Augustin
> Louis Cauchy­ and it was Henri Lebesgue’s work on the theory of measure that
> enabled John von Neumann to formulate the rigorous understanding of quantum
> theory that we have today. Albert Einstein could not have completed his
> general theory of relativity had it not been for the geometric ideas of
> Bernhard Riemann. And practically all of modern science would be far less
> potent (if it existed at all) without the concepts of probability and
> statistics pioneered by Pierre­Simon Laplace.”

233\. The science and technology keeps on changing with pace of time. A
scientific invention or module which is invented or launched keeps on
improving with time. The ready example is improvement in quality and
programmes of mobile phone which has seen steep development in the last one
decade. Even if authentication under Aadhaar scheme is probabilistic as on
date, we have no doubt that the steps will be taken to minimise the mis­natch
and to attain more accuracy in the result. In view of the foregoing discussion
we are of the view that the State has given  212 sufficient justification to
uphold the constitutionality of Section 7. We, thus, answer Question Nos.6 and
7 in the following manner:

Ans.6:­ Section 7 of the Aadhaar is constitutional. The provision does not
deserve to be struck down on account of denial in some cases of right to claim
on account of failure of authentication.

Ans.7:­ The State while enlivening right to food, right to shelter etc.
envisaged under Article 21 cannot encroach upon the right of privacy of
beneficiaries nor former can be given precedence over the latter.

Issue No.8 Whether Section 29 of the Aadhaar Act is liable to be struck down?

234\. The ground to challenge Section 29 is that it permits sharing of
identity information. It is submitted that sharing of identity information is
breach of Right of Privacy. Section 29 is a  213 provision, which contains
restrictions on sharing information as is clear from the heading of the
section. Section 29 sub­section (1) contains prohibition on sharing of any
core biometric information collected or created under this Act. Section 29 for
ready reference is extracted as below:­

29\. Restriction on sharing information. (1) No core biometric information,
collected or created under this Act, shall be—

(a) shared with anyone for any reason whatsoever; or

(b) used for any purpose other than generation of Aadhaar numbers and
authentication under this Act.

(2) The identity information, other than core biometric information, collected
or created under this Act may be shared only in accordance with the provisions
of this Act and in such manner as may be specified by regulations.

(3) No identity information available with a requesting entity shall be—

(a) used for any purpose, other than that specified to the individual at the
time of submitting any identity information for authentication; or

(b) disclosed further, except with the prior consent of the individual to whom
such information relates.

214

(4) No Aadhaar number or core biometric information collected or created under
this Act in respect of an Aadhaar number holder shall be published, displayed
or posted publicly, except for the purposes as may be specified by
regulations.

235\. Sub­section (2) permits sharing of identity information, other than core
biometric information, only in accordance with the provisions of this Act and
in such manner as may be specified by regulations. Further sub­section (3)
prohibits requesting entity to use identity information for any purpose other
than that specified to the individual or to disclose any information without
the consent of individual. Sub­ section (4) provides that no Aadhaar number or
core biometric information shall be published, displayed or posted publicly,
except for the purposes as may be specified by regulations. The attack on
Section 29 that it permits sharing of information is thus wholly misconceived.
The objective of the Act is to protect the information and privacy of an
individual and so the Section is not liable to be struck down on the specious
ground that it permits sharing of the  215 information. Further sub­section
(3) engraft a provision of sharing identity information by requesting entity
with consent of the individual. When a person consents about sharing of his
identity information, he cannot complain breach of Privacy Right. Petitioners
take exception of provision of sub­ section(2), which permits identity
information other than core biometric information to be shared in accordance
with the provisions of this Act and in such manner as may be specified by the
regulations. When an Act or Regulation regulates and controls sharing of the
information, the provision is regulatory and has been engrafted to protect
individual's Privacy Right. The Aadhaar (Sharing of Information) Regulations,
2016 again contains in Chapter II ­ Restrictions on sharing of identity
information. Regulation 3 is restriction on Authority. Regulation 4 is
restriction on requesting entity. Regulation 5 fixes responsibility of any
agency or entity other than requesting entity with respect to Aadhaar number.
Regulation 6 provides restriction on sharing, circulating or publishing of
216 Aadhaar number.

236\. We, thus, conclude that the provision of Section 29 and the Sharing
Regulations contains a restriction and cannot be in any manner be held to
violate any of the constitutional rights of a person. Objective of the Act is
to put restrictions on the sharing information, which also is a legitimate
State aim. The provision under Section 29 which permits sharing of identity
information except core biometric information in accordance with the Act and
Regulations cannot be said to be disproportionate nor unreasonable.
Legislature can very well enumerates circumstances and conditions where
sharing of information becomes necessary. One of the circumstances where
sharing of the information is specifically engrafted in sub­section(2) of
Section 33, which provides that nothing contained in sub­ section (3) of
Section 29 shall apply in respect of any disclosure of information, including
identity information or authentication records, made in the interest of
national security in pursuance of a  217 direction of an officer not below the
rank of Joint Secretary to the Government of India. Thus, the circumstances
which can contemplate for sharing information is reasonable and proportionate.
We, thus, held that provisions of Section 29 is constitutional and does not
deserves to be struck down. Issue No. 8 is answered in the following manner:­
Ans.8:­ Provisions of Section 29 is constitutional and does not deserves to be
struck down.

Issue No.9 Whether Section 33 is Constitutional ?

237\. Section 33 of the Aadhaar Act, 2016 is as follows:

> “33. Disclosure of information in certain cases.­(1) Nothing contained in
> sub­section (2) or sub­section (5) of section 28 or sub­ section (2) of
> section 29 shall apply in respect of any disclosure of information,
> including identity information or authentication records, made pursuant to
> an order of a court not inferior to that of a District Judge:

> Provided that no order by the court under this sub­section shall be made
> without giving an opportunity of hearing to the Authority.

218

> (2) Nothing contained in sub­section (2) or sub­section (5) of section 28
> and clause (b) of sub­section (1), sub­section (2) or sub­ section (3) of
> section 29 shall apply in respect of any disclosure of information,
> including identity information records, made in the interest of national
> security in pursuance of a direction of an officer not below the rank of
> Joint Secretary to the Government of India specially authorised in this
> behalf by an order of the Central Government:

> Provided that every direction issued under this sub­section, shall be
> reviewed by an Oversight Committee consisting of the Cabinet Secretary and
> the Secretaries to the Government of India in the Department of Legal
> Affairs and the Department of Electronics and Information Technology, before
> it takes effect:

> Provided further that any direction issued under this sub­section shall be
> valid for a period of three months from the date of its issue, which may be
> extended for a further period of three months after the review by the
> Oversight Committee.”

238\. The first limb of argument of the petitioner is that Section 33 is
unconstitutional since it provides for the use of the Aadhaar data base for
Police verification which violates the protection against self­incrimination
as enshrined under Article 20(3) of the Constitution of India.

219

239\. Sub­section (1) of Section 33 contains an ample restriction in respect
of any disclosure information which can be done only in pursuance of an order
of the court not inferior to that of a District Judge. The restriction in
disclosure of information is reasonable and has valid justification. The
authority whose duty is to safeguard the entire data has to be heard before
passing an order by the court which amply protects the interest of a person
whose data is to be disclosed. An order of the court not inferior to that of a
District Judge for disclosure of information itself is an ample protection to
that, for no unreasonable purpose data shall be disclosed. Attacking on
sub­section (2) of Section 33, it is contended that although

(i)disclosure of information has been permitted in the interest of the
national security but there is no definition of national security, (ii) there
is no independent oversight disclosure of such data on the ground of security,
(iii)the provision is neither fair nor reasonable. Section (2) of Section 33
is disproportionate and unconstitutional.

220

240\. Section 33 sub­section (2) contains two safeguards. Firstly, disclosure
of information is to be made in the interest of national security and
secondly, in pursuance of a direction of an officer not below the rank of
Joint Secretary to the Government, who is specially authorised in this behalf
by an order of the Central Government. National security, thus, has to be
determined by a higher officer who is specifically authorised in this behalf.
This Court in Ex. Armymen's Protection Services P. Ltd. Vs. Union of India
(UOI) and Ors., 2014 (5) SCC 409, has held that what is in the interest of
national security is not a question of law but that it is matter of a policy.
Following was held in paragraphs 16 and 17:

> “16. What is in the interest of national security is not a question of law.
> It is a matter of policy. It is not for the court to decide whether
> something is in the interest of State or not. It should be left to the
> Executive. To quote Lord Hoffman in Secretary of State for the Home
> Department v. Rehman (2003) 1 AC 153:...in the matter of national security
> is not a question of law. It is a matter of judgment and policy. Under the
> Constitution of the United Kingdom and most other countries, decisions as to
> whether  221 something is or is not in the interest of national security are
> not a matter for judicial decision. They are entrusted to the executive.

> 17\. Thus, in a situation of national security, a party cannot insist for
> the strict observance of the principles of natural justice. In such cases it
> is the duty of the Court to read into and provide for statutory exclusion,
> if not expressly provided in the rules governing the field. Depending on the
> facts of the particular case, it will however be open to the court to
> satisfy itself whether there were justifiable facts, and in that regard, the
> court is entitled to call for the files and see whether it is a case where
> the interest of national security is involved. Once the State is of the
> stand that the issue involves national security, the court shall not
> disclose the reasons to the affected party.”

241\. The International Courts have also dealt the issue. In a case, namely,
Census Act(BverfGE 65, 1), judgment of Federal Constitution Court of Germany,
judgment dated 11.10.2013, the Court had occasion to consider the case in the
context of data processing and protection of individual information against
self­ incrimination and use of their personal data. Dealing with right of
information and self­determination the Court held that individuals have no
right in the sense of absolute, unrestricted control over their data.  222
Following was held by the Court:

> “The guarantee of this right to informational self­determination” is not
> entirely unrestricted. Individuals have no right in the sense of absolute,
> unrestricted control over their data; they are after all human persons who
> develop within the social Community and are dependent upon communication.
> Information, even if related to individual persons, represents a reflection
> of societal reality that cannot be exclusively assigned solely to the
> parties affected. The Basic Law, as has been emphasized several times in the
> case law of the Federal Constitutional Court, embodies in negotiating the
> tension between the individual and the Community a decision in favour of
> civic participation and civic responsibility(see BverfGE 4, 7 [15] ; 8, 274
> [329]; 27, 344 [351 and 352]; 33, 303 [334]; 50, 290 [353]; 56, 37 [49]).

> Individuals must therefore in principle accept restriction on their right to
> informational self­determination in the overriding general public interest.”

242\. Another judgment of European Commission of Human Rights in M.S. against
Sweden was a case that applicant has complained that copies of her medical
records containing information on treatment have been forwarded by the clinic
without her information to the Insurance Co. The case of the applicant was
noticed in paragraph 39 which is to the following effect:  223

> “39. The applicant submits that the women’s clinic’s submission of copies of
> her medical records to the Social Insurance Office without her knowledge or
> consent interfered with her right to respect for her private life. She
> maintains that the information contained in these records were of a highly
> sensitive and private nature. Allegedly, she could not anticipate, when she
> claimed compensation from the Office, that information on the abortion
> performed several years after alleged back injury would be forwarded to the
> Office. She further refers to the fact that the information in question is
> not protected by the same level of confidentiality at the Office as at the
> clinic.”

243\. The Commission held that information was rightly submitted to the
Insurance Co. in accordance with law. It is also relevant to refer the
judgment of this Court in People’s Union for Civil Liberties(PUCL) v. Union of
India, 1997 (1) SCC 301, where the writ petition was filed under Article 32
alleging serious invasion of an individual’s privacy on the account of
Telephone­tapping. The Court adverted to the Indian Telegraph Act, 1885 and
the Rules framed thereunder. The Court has noticed that Section 5(2) of the
Telegraph Act permits the interception of messages in accordance with the said
section, “Occurrence of any  224 public emergency” or “in the interest of
public safety”. In paragraph 28 following was held:

> “28. Section 5(2) of the Act permits the interception of messages in
> accordance with the provisions of the said Section.

> "Occurrence of any public emergency" or "in the interest of public safety"
> are the sine qua non. for the application of the provisions of Section 5(2)
> of the Apt. Unless a public emergency has occurred or the interest of public
> safety demands, the authorities have no jurisdiction to exercise the powers
> under the said Section. Public emergency would mean the prevailing of a
> sudden condition or state of affairs affecting the people at large calling
> for immediate action.”

244\. This Court issued various directions providing for certain safeguards
regarding an order for Telephone­ tapping. Thus, on fulfillment of statutory
conditions when telephonic conversation can be intercepted no exception can be
taken for disclosure of information in the interest of national security.

245\. The power given under Section 33 to disclose information cannot be said
to be disproportionate. The disclosure of information in the circumstances
225 mentioned in Section 33 is reasonable and in the public interest.

246\. We are satisfied that the provision fulfills three fold test as laid
down in Puttaswamy case. There are no grounds to declare Section 33 as
unconstitutional.

247\. We also need to advert to one of the submissions of the petitioner that
permitting disclosure of information for police investigation violates the
protection against self­incrimination as provided under Article 20 sub­clause
(3). It is true that under Section 33 the Court may order for disclosure of
information even for a police investigation. But information so received in no
manner can be said to violate the protection given under Article 20 sub­
clause (3). The basic information which are with the UIDAI are demographic and
biometric information. In this context, reference is made to 11­Judge
Constitution Bench judgment of this Court in State of Bombay vs. Kathi KALU
Oghad, AIR 1961 SC 1808. The  226 Constitution Bench had occasion to consider
sub­clause (3) of Article 20 of the Constitution. In the above case from the
accused who was charged under Section 302/34 IPC during the investigation
prosecution has obtained three specimen of hand­writing which were compared by
his hand­writing which was part of the evidence. A question was raised as to
the admissibility of the specimen of hand­writing, it was contended that use
of specimen of hand­writing violated protection under Article 20(3). This
Court in paragraph 16 laid down following:

> (16) In view of these considerations, we have come to the following
> conclusions :­ (1) An accused person cannot be said to have been compelled
> to be a witness against himself simply because he made a statement while in
> police custody, without anything more. In other words, the mere fact of
> being in police custody at the time when the statement in question was made
> would not, by itself, as a proposition of law, lend itself to the inference
> that the accused was compelled to make the statement, though that fact, in
> conjunction with other circumstances disclosed in evidence in a particular
> case, would be a relevant consideration in an enquiry whether or not the
> accused  227 person had been compelled to make the impugned statement.

(2) The mere questioning of an accused person by a police officer, resulting
in a voluntary statement, which may ultimately turn out to be incriminatory,
is not 'compulsion'.

(3) 'To be a witness' is not equivalent to 'furnishing evidence' in its widest
significance; that is to say, as including not merely making of oral or
written Dagduas but also production of documents or giving materials which may
be relevant at a trial to determine the guilt innocence of the accused.

(4) Giving thumb impressions or impressions of foot or palm or fingers or
specimen writings or showing parts of the body by way of identification are
not included in the expression 'to be a witness'.

(5) 'To be a witness' means imparting knowledge in respect of relevant facts
by an oral statement or a statement in writing, made or given in Court or
otherwise.

(6) 'To be a witness' in its ordinary grammatical sense means giving oral
testimony in Court. Case law has gone beyond this strict literal
interpretation of the expression which may now bear a wider meaning, namely,
bearing testimony in Court or out of Court by a person accused of an offence,
orally or in writing.

(7) To bring the statement in question within the prohibition of  228 Article
20(3), the person accused must have stood in the character of an accused
person at the time he made the statement. It is not enough that he should
become an accused, any time after the statement has been made.”

248\. From what has been held in the above case, it is clear that ‘to be a
witness' is not equivalent to 'furnishing evidence' in its widest
significance. The use of information retained by the UIDAI given by the order
of the Court under Section 33 cannot be said to be violating the protection as
contained under Article 20(3). Thus, Article 20(3) is not violated by
disclosure of information under Section 33. In view of the foregoing
discussion, we hold that Section 33 is constitutional.

249\. One of the decisions on which Shri K.V.

Viswanathan has placed reliance in support of his submission regarding
violation of Article 20(3) as well as Article 21 of the Constitution is Selvi
and others vs. State of Karnataka, 2010(7) SCC 263. In the above case this
Court had considered as to whether certain scientific techniques, namely,
narcoanalysis,  229 polygraph examination and the Brain Electrical Activation
Profile (BEAP)test for the purpose of improving investigation efforts in
criminal cases violate sub­clause (3) of Article 20 as well as Article 21. The
legal issues and questions of law have been noted in paragraphs 2 and 11 to
the following effect:

> “2. The legal questions in this batch of criminal appeals relate to the
> involuntary administration of certain scientific techniques, namely
> narcoanalysis, polygraph examination and the Brain Electrical Activation
> Profile (BEAP) test for the purpose of improving investigation efforts in
> criminal cases. This issue has received considerable attention since it
> involves tensions between the desirability of efficient investigation and
> the preservation of individual liberties. Ordinarily the judicial task is
> that of evaluating the rival contentions in order to arrive at a sound
> conclusion. However, the present case is not an ordinary dispute between
> private parties. It raises pertinent questions about the meaning and scope
> of fundamental rights which are available to all citizens. Therefore, we
> must examine the implications of permitting the use of the impugned
> techniques in a variety of settings.

> 11\. At this stage, it will be useful to frame the questions of law and
> outline the relevant sub­questions in the following manner:

230

> I.Whether the involuntary administration of the impugned techniques violates
> the `right against self­incrimination' enumerated in Article 20(3) of the
> Constitution?

> I­A. Whether the investigative use of the impugned techniques creates a
> likelihood of incrimination for the subject?

> I­B. Whether the results derived from the impugned techniques amount to
> `testimonial compulsion' thereby attracting the bar of Article 20(3)?

> II.Whether the involuntary administration of the impugned techniques is a
> reasonable restriction on `personal liberty' as understood in the context of
> Article 21 of the Constitution? ”

> 250\. After considering large number of cases of this Court as well as
> judgments rendered by Foreign Courts, a conclusion was recorded that those
> tests, since they are a means for imparting personal knowledge about
> relevant facts, hence, they come within the scope of testimonial compulsion
> thereby attracting the protective shield of Article 20(3). In paragraph 189
> following was held:

> “189. In light of the preceding  231 discussion, we are of the view that the
> results obtained from tests such as polygraph examination and the BEAP test
> should also be treated as `personal testimony', since they are a means for
> `imparting personal knowledge about relevant facts'. Hence, our conclusion
> is that the results obtained through the involuntary administration of
> either of the impugned tests (i.e. the narcoanalysis technique, polygraph
> examination and the BEAP test) come within the scope of `testimonial
> compulsion', thereby attracting the protective shield of Article 20(3). ”

> 251\. In so far as question of violation of Article 21 is concerned, this
> Court, in paragraphs 225 and 226 has held:

> “225. So far, the judicial understanding of privacy in our country has
> mostly stressed on the protection of the body and physical spaces from
> intrusive actions by the State. While the scheme of criminal procedure as
> well as evidence law mandates interference with physical privacy through
> statutory provisions that enable arrest, detention, search and seizure among
> others, the same cannot be the basis for compelling a person `to impart
> personal knowledge about a relevant fact'. The theory of interrelationship
> of rights mandates that the right against self­incrimination should also be
> read as a component of `personal liberty' under Article 21. Hence, our
> understanding of the `right to privacy' should account for its intersection
> with Article 20(3). Furthermore, the `rule against involuntary confessions'
> as embodied in Sections 24, 25, 26 and 27 of the Evidence Act, 1872 seeks to
> serve both the  232 objectives of reliability as well as voluntariness of
> testimony given in a custodial setting. A conjunctive reading of Articles
> 20(3) and 21 of the Constitution along with the principles of evidence law
> leads us to a clear answer. We must recognise the importance of personal
> autonomy in aspects such as the choice between remaining silent and
> speaking. An individual's decision to make a statement is the product of a
> private choice and there should be no scope for any other individual to
> interfere with such autonomy, especially in circumstances where the person
> faces exposure to criminal charges or penalties.

> 226\. Therefore, it is our considered opinion that subjecting a person to
> the impugned techniques in an involuntary manner violates the prescribed
> boundaries of privacy. Forcible interference with a person's mental
> processes is not provided for under any statute and it most certainly comes
> into conflict with the `right against self­ incrimination'. However, this
> determination does not account for circumstances where a person could be
> subjected to any of the impugned tests but not exposed to criminal charges
> and the possibility of conviction. In such cases, he/she could still face
> adverse consequences such as custodial abuse, surveillance, undue harassment
> and social stigma among others. In order to address such circumstances, it
> is important to examine some other dimensions of Article 21. ”

> 252\. The nature of tests which were under consideration in the aforesaid
> case, were elaborately noticed by this Court and the tests were found to be
> in nature of  233 substantial intrusion in the body and mind of an
> individual, hence, it was held that they violate Article 20(3) as well as
> Article 21. It is, however, relevant to notice that this Court in Selvi
> judgment itself has noticed the distinction in so far as use of fingerprints
> were concerned. This Court had noticed earlier judgment of State of Bombay
> v. Kathi Kalu Oghad, AIR 1961 SC 1808 with approval. The biometric
> information that is fingerprints and iris scan can not be equated to the
> tests which came for consideration in Selvi's case. Hence, the judgment of
> this Court in Selvi does not in any manner support the case of the
> petitioners. Answer to question No.3 is in following Manner:

> Ans.9: Section 33 cannot be said to be unconstitutional as it provides for
> the use of Aadhaar data base for police investigation nor it can be said to
> violate protection granted under Article 20(3).

234

Issue No.10 Whether Section 47 of the Aadhaar Act is Unconstitutional?

253\. The Petitioner submits that Section 47 of the Aadhaar Act is
unconstitutional since it does not allow an individual who is victim of
violation of Aadhaar Act to initiate a criminal process. It is submitted that
the person who is victim of an offence under the Aadhaar Act has no remedy to
file a complaint and Section 47 of the Act restrict the filing of complaint
only by Authorities or Officers or persons authorised by it.

254\. The above submission is refuted by the respondent that Section 47 has a
rationale. The offences and penalties under Chapter VII of the Aadhaar Act are
all intended to maintain the purity and integrity of CIDR and the entire
enrolment storage in CIDR and authentication exercise can only be efficiently
and effectively handled by UIDAI. Thus, jurisdiction to submit a complaint has
been conferred to UIDAI which is the most entrusted entity for maintaining the
235 purity of Aadhaar Scheme and is also affected by offences committed under
the Aadhaar Act. Section 47 provides as follows:

> “47. Cognizance of Offence ­ (1) No court shall take cognizance of any
> offence punishable under this Act, save on a complaint made by the Authority
> or any officer or person authorised by it.

> (2) No court inferior to that of a Chief Metropolitan Magistrate or a Chief
> Judicial Magistrate shall try any offence punishable under this Act.”

255\. Provisions akin to Section 47 are found in most of Statutes which
Statutes defines offences under the Statute and provide penalty and punishment
thereunder. Following are some of the Statues which contains a provision akin
to Section 47 of Aadhaar Act:

> “1)Section 22 of Mines and Minerals(Development & Regulation) Act, 1957 – No
> Court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under this Act or any
> rules made thereunder except upon complaint in writing made by a person
> authorised in this behalf by the Central Government or the State Government.

2) Section 34 of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 ­ No Court shall
take cognizance of an offence punishable under this Act, save on a complaint
made by or under the authority of the Government or  236 Bureau or by any
officer empowered in this behalf by the Government or the Bureau, or any
consumer or any association recognized in this behalf by the Central or State
Government.

3) Section 26(1) of SEBI Act, 1992 – No Court shall take cognizance of any
offence punishable under this Act or any rules or regulations made thereunder,
save on a complaint made by the Board.

4) Section 34 of Telecom Regulatory Authority of India Act, 1997 – No Court
shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under this Act or the rules or
regulations made thereunder, save on a complaint made by the Authority.

5) Section 57(1) of Petroleum and Natural gas Regulatory Board Act, 2007 – No
Court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under Chapter IX save on
a complaint made by the Board or by any investigating agency directed by the
Central Government.

6) Section 47 of Banking Regulation Act, 1949 – No court shall take a
cognizance of any offence punishable under sub­section (5) of Section 36AA or
Section 46 except upon complaint in writing made by an officer of the Reserve
Bank or, as the case may be, the National Bank generally or specially
authorised in writing in this behalf by the Reserve Bank, or as the case may
be, the National Bank and no court other than that of a Metropolitan
Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the first class or any court superior
thereto shall try any such offence.

7) Section 19 of Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 – No court shall take
cognizance of  237 any offence under this Act except on a complaint made by –
(a) the Central Government or any authority or officer authorised in this
behalf by that Government, or (b) any person who has given notice of not less
than sixty days, in the manner prescribed, of the alleged offence and of his
intention to make a complaint, to the Central Government or the authority or
officer authorised as aforesaid.

8) Section 43 of The Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981 – (1)
No Court shall take cognizance of any offence under this Act except on a
complaint made by – (a) a Board or any officer authorised in this behalf by
it; or (b) any person who has given notice of not less than sixty days, in the
manner prescribed, of the alleged offence and of his intention to make a
complaint to the Board or officer authorised as aforesaid, and no court
inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the
first class shall try any offence punishable under this Act.”

256\. Large number of Special Acts which defines offences under the Act and
their penalty contains provision akin to Section 34 of the Aadhaar Act.
Special Acts are enacted for serving special objects towards offences under
the Act. The initiation and prosecution of offences under the Special Act are
kept by the specified authority to keep the initiation and prosecution in the
hands of the authorities under the  238 Special Act which acts as deterrent
and prosecutions are brought to its logical end. Further, objective of such
provisions is to discourage frivolous and vexatious complaints.

257\. This Court in Rajkumar Gupta versus Lt.Governor, Delhi and Others,
(1997) 1 SCC 556, had occasion to consider Section 34(1) of the Industrial
Disputes Act, 1947 and objective behind putting such restriction. Section 34
of Industrial Disputes Act provided that no Court shall take cognizance of any
offence punishable under this Act or of the abetment of any such offence, save
on complaint made by or under the authority of the appropriate Government.
Section 34 of Industrial Disputes Act is pari materia with Section 47 of the
Aadhaar Act. This Court noticing the objective of Section 34 laid down
following in the paragraph 16. The Court held that Section 34 is in the nature
of limitation on the entitlement of workman or trade union or an employer to
complain of offences under the Act. Following was laid down in paragraph 16:

> “ 16. At the same time, the provisions of  239 Section 34 are in the nature
> of a limitation on the entitlement of a workman or a trade union or an
> employer to complain of offences under the said Act. They should not, in the
> public interest, be permitted to make frivolous, vexatious or otherwise
> patently untenable complaints, and to this end Section 34 requires that no
> complaint shall be taken cognizance of unless it is made with the
> authorization of the appropriate Government.”

258\. In so far as the submission that there is no forum for a person victim
of an offence under Aadhaar Act, suffice to say that Section 47 can be invoked
by the authority on its own motion or when it receives a complaint from a
victim. The authority i.e. UIDAI has varied powers and functions as enumerated
in Section 23 of the Act. It is the authority who is most entrusted in
ensuring that the provisions of the Act are implemented in accordance with the
Act and offenders should be punished. In so far as remedy of victim is
concerned, there are few facts which need to be kept in mind.

259\. The Information Technology Act, 2000 defines electronic record in
Section 2(t) which is to the following effect:­  240 “Section 2(t)­
“electronic record” means data, record or data generated, image or sound
stored, received or sent in an electronic form or micro film or computer
generated micro fiche;”

260\. The demographic and biometric information which is collected for
enrolment of the resident in electronic data as defined in Section 2(t) of
Information Technology Act and expressly stated in Section 30 of Aadhaar Act.
Chapter 11 of the Information Technology Act defines offences. Section 66C,
Section 66D and Section 72 of the Information Technology Act defines offences
and provides for penalty, which is to the following effect:­ “66C. Punishment
for identity theft­ Whoever, fraudulently or dishonestly make use of the
electronic signature, password or any other unique identification feature of
any other person, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to three years and shall also be liable to fine
which may extend to rupees one lakh.

66D. Punishment for cheating by personation by using computer resource­
Whoever, by means for any communication device or computer resource cheats by
personating, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to three years and shall also be liable to fine  241
which may extend to one lakh rupees.

72\. Penalty for breach of confidentiality and privacy – Save as otherwise
provided in this Act or any other law for the time being in force, if any
person who, in pursuance of any of the powers conferred under this Act, rules
or regulations made thereunder, has secured access to any electronic record,
book, register, correspondence, information, document or other material
without the consent of the person concerned discloses such electronic record,
book, register, correspondence, information, document or other material to any
other person shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend
to two years, or with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees, or with both.”

261\. With regard to an offence which falls within the definition of
'offences' a victim can always file complaint or lodge an F.I.R.. Section 46
of the Aadhaar Act clearly provides that the penalties under the Aadhaar Act
shall not interfere with other punishments. Section 46 is as follows:

> “46. Penalties not to interfere with other punishments. ­ No penalty imposed
> under this Act shall prevent the imposition of any other penalty or
> punishment under any other law for the time being in force.”

262\. This Court in State (NCT of Delhi) versus Sanjay, (2014) 9 SCC 772, had
occasion to consider the  242 provisions of Section 22 of the Mines and
Minerals (Development & Regulations) Act, 1957 which provision is similar to
Section 47 of the Aadhaar Act. The question arose that whether in case the
complaint has not been filed by the authority under Section 22, whether
cognizance can be taken of the offence if it falls within definition of any of
the offences under the Indian Penal Code. There was divergence of opinions
between the different High Courts. This Court after noticing earlier judgments
of this Court, laid down following in paragraphs 17 and 73.

“17. Since conflicting views have been taken by the Gujarat High Court, the
Delhi High Court, the Kerala High Court, the Calcutta High Court, the Madras
High Court and the Jharkhand High Court, and they are in different tones, it
is necessary to settle the question involved in these appeals.

73\. After giving our thoughtful consideration in the matter, in the light of
relevant provisions of the Act vis­à­vis the Code of Criminal Procedure and
the Penal Code, we are of the definite opinion that the ingredients
constituting the offence under the MMDR Act and the ingredients of dishonestly
removing sand and gravel from the riverbeds without consent, which is the
property of the State, is a distinct offence under IPC. Hence, for the
commission of offence Under Section 378 IPC, on receipt of the police report,
the  243 Magistrate having jurisdiction can take cognizance of the said
offence without awaiting the receipt of complaint that may be filed by the
authorized officer for taking cognizance in respect of violation of various
provisions of the MMDR Act. Consequently the contrary view taken by the
different High Courts cannot be sustained in law and, therefore, overruled.
Consequently, these criminal appeals are disposed of with a direction to the
Magistrates concerned to proceed accordingly. ”

263\. The limitation as contained in Section 47 in permitting taking
cognizance of any offence punishable under Aadhaar Act only on a complaint
made by the authority or any officer or person authorised by it, has
legislative purpose and objective, as noticed above. We thus do not find any
unconstitutionality in Section 47 of the Aadhaar Act. In view of the foregoing
discussions, the answer to Issue No.10 is in following manner:­ Ans.10:
Section 47 of the Aadhaar Act cannot be held to be unconstitutional on the
ground that it does not allow an individual who finds that there is a
violation of Aadhaar Act to initiate any criminal process.

244 Issue No. 11 Whether Section 57 of Aadhaar Act is unconstitutional?

264\. Section 57 of the Act, which contains a heading “Act not to prevent use
of Aadhaar Number for other purposes under law” provides:­ “57. Act to prevent
use of Aadhaar number for other purposes under law. ­ Nothing contained in
this Act shall prevent the use of Aadhaar number for establishing the identity
of an individual for any purpose, whether by the State or any body corporate
or person, pursuant to any law, for the time being in force, or any contract
to this effect:

Provided that the use of Aadhaar number under this section shall be subject to
the procedure and obligations under section 8 and Chapter VI.”

265\. Attacking the provision of Section 57, petitioners contends that broad
and unlimited scope of activities covered under Section 57 and kinds of
private entities permitted to use Aadhaar is entirely disproportionate beyond
the means and objectives of the Act and without any compelling State
interests. There are no procedural safeguards governing the actions of private
entities and no remedy for undertaking's failure or service denial. The
individual, who wish to be  245 enrolled have given their consent only for
Aadhaar subsidies, benefits and services, which cannot be assumed for other
purposes. Section 57 has to be struck down on the ground of excessive
delegation. “Any purpose” indicates absence of guidelines. Any purpose does
not mean all purposes and several aspects of human existence. Section 57
violates all principles of proportionality.

266\. Refuting the above submission of the petitioners, the respondents
submits that, Section 57 is not an enabling provision, it merely provides as
it states that the provisions of the Act would not prevent the use of Aadhaar
for other purposes. In fact, Section 57 employs limitation on such user for
other purposes, which is engrafted in Proviso to Section 59. The use of
Aadhaar having been made subject to procedure and obligations under Section 8
and Chapter VI, the contract must provide for authentication under Section 8
and protection and formulation under Chapter VI also obviously entail the
operation of Chapter VII (Offences and Penalties). Section 57 does not have
246 any relation to other laws, which may be made by Parliament, the other
laws made by Parliament would have to be tested on their own merits. Section
57 is not a provision enabling the making of a law or rather it is actually a
limitation or restriction to law, which may be made with respect to use of
Aadhaar number. The apprehension expressed by the petitioners is about the
wide extension of use of Aadhaar in private spheres is completely misplaced.

267\. One of the grounds of attack of the petitioners to Section 57 is that it
is disproportionate and does not satisfy the proportionality test as laid down
in Privacy Judgment – Puttaswamy case. Before proceeding further, it becomes
necessary to look into the proportionality test, its content and parameters.

268\. Patanjali Shastri, Chief Justice, as he then was speaking for a
Constitution Bench in State of Madras Vs. V.G. Row, AIR 1952 SC 196, while
elaborating the expression reasonable restrictions on the exercise of right as
occurring in Clause (5) of Article 19 of the  247 Constitution laid down that
reasonable restriction should not be disproportionate. Following was observed
in Paragraph 15:­ “15........It is important in this context to bear in mind
that the test of reasonableness, wherever prescribed, should be applied to
each individual statute impugned, and no abstract standard or general pattern,
of reasonableness can be laid down as applicable to all cases. The nature of
the right alleged to have been infringed, the underlying purpose of the
restrictions imposed, the extent and urgency of the evil sought to be remedied
thereby, the disproportion of the imposition, the prevailing conditions at the
time, should all enter into the judicial verdict. In evaluating such elusive
factors and forming their own conception of what is reasonable, in all the
circumstances of a given case, it is inevitable that the social philosophy and
the scale of values of the Judges participating in the decision should play an
important part, and the limit to their interference with legislative judgment
in such cases can only be dictated by their sense of responsibility and
self­restraint and the sobering reflection that the Constitution is meant not
only for people of their way of thinking but for all, and that the majority of
the elected representatives of the people have, in authorising the imposition
of the restrictions, considered them to be reasonable.”

269\. A Two Judge Bench of this Court in Om Kumar and Others Vs. Union of
India, (2001) 2 SCC 386  248 elaborately considered the concept of
proportionality in reference to legislative action. This Court held that ever
since the principle of proportionality as noted above applied in India,
Jagannadha Rao, J. had referred to judgments of Canadian Supreme Court in R v.
Oakes (1986) 26 DLR 2001 and has noticed the three important components of the
proportionality test. First, the measures adopted must be carefully designed
to achieve the objective in question. They must not be arbitrary, unfair or
based on irrational considerations. In short, they must be rationally
connected to the objective. Secondly, the means, must not only be rationally
connected to the objective in the first sense, but should impair as little as
possible the right to freedom in question. Thirdly, there must be
'proportionality' between the effects of the measures and the objective.

270\. Again, in Teri Oat Estates (P) Ltd. Vs. U.T. Chandigarh and Others,
(2004) 2 SCC 130, Sinha, J. had elaborately reviewed the principle of
proportionality. In Paragraph 46, following has been held:­  249 “46. By
proportionality, it is meant that the question whether while regulating
exercise of fundamental rights, the appropriate or least restrictive choice of
measures has been made by the legislature or the administrator so as to
achieve the object of the legislation or the purpose of the administrative
order, as the case may be. Under the principle, the court will see that the
legislature and the administrative authority “maintain a proper balance
between the adverse effects which the legislation or the administrative order
may have on the rights, liberties or interests of persons keeping in mind the
purpose which they were intended to serve”.

271\. The most elaborate consideration of the Doctrine of Proportionality was
made in Modern Dental College and Research Centre and Others Vs. State of
Madhya Pradesh and Others, (2016) 7 SCC 353. The validity of legislation
passed by State of Madhya Pradesh Legislature came for consideration. The
Court (speaking through Dr. Justice A.K. Sikri, one of us) held that exercise
that is required to be undertaken is the balancing of fundamental right and
restrictions imposed, which is known as Doctrine of Proportionality. In
Paragraph 60, following has been  250 stated:­ “60. …......... Thus, while
examining as to whether the impugned provisions of the statute and rules
amount to reasonable restrictions and are brought out in the interest of the
general public, the exercise that is required to be undertaken is the
balancing of fundamental right to carry on occupation on the one hand and the
restrictions imposed on the other hand. This is what is known as “doctrine of
proportionality”. Jurisprudentially, “proportionality” can be defined as the
set of rules determining the necessary and sufficient conditions for
limitation of a constitutionally protected right by a law to be
constitutionally permissible. According to Aharon Barak (former Chief Justice,
Supreme Court of Israel), there are four sub­ components of proportionality
which need to be satisfied, a limitation of a constitutional right will be
constitutionally permissible if:

> (i) it is designated for a proper purpose;

> (ii) the measures undertaken to effectuate such a limitation are rationally
> connected to the fulfilment of that purpose;

> (iii) the measures undertaken are necessary in that there are no alternative
> measures that may similarly achieve that same purpose with a lesser degree
> of limitation;

> and finally

> (iv) there needs to be a proper relation (“proportionality stricto  251
> sensu” or “balancing”) between the importance of achieving the proper
> purpose and the social importance of preventing the limitation on the
> constitutional right.”

272\. Elaborating the constitutional principles, it was laid down that the
Constitution permit constitutional rights to be limited to protect public
interests or the rights of others. The conflict between two fundamental
aspects, i.e. rights on the one hand and its limitation on the other hand ­ is
to be resolved by balancing the two so that they harmoniously co­ exist with
each other. This balancing is to be done keeping in mind the relative social
values of each competitive aspects when considered in proper context. What
criteria is to be adopted in for a proper balancing has been explained in
Paragraphs 63 and 64:­ “63. In this direction, the next question that arises
is as to what criteria is to be adopted for a proper balance between the two
facets viz. the rights and limitations imposed upon it by a statute. Here
comes the concept of “proportionality”, which is a proper criterion. To put it
pithily, when a law limits a constitutional right, such a limitation is
constitutional if it is proportional. The law imposing restrictions will be
treated as proportional if it is  252 meant to achieve a proper purpose, and
if the measures taken to achieve such a purpose are rationally connected to
the purpose, and such measures are necessary. This essence of doctrine of
proportionality is beautifully captured by Dickson, C.J. of Canada in R. v.

Oakees, (1986) 1 SCR 103 (Can SC), in the following words (at p. 138):

> “To establish that a limit is reasonable and demonstrably justified in a
> free and democratic society, two central criteria must be satisfied.

> First, the objective, which the measures, responsible for a limit on a
> Charter right or freedom are designed to serve, must be “of” sufficient
> importance to warrant overriding a constitutional protected right or freedom
> … Second … the party invoking Section 1 must show that the means chosen are
> reasonable and demonstrably justified. This involves “a form of
> proportionality test…” Although the nature of the proportionality test will
> vary depending on the circumstances, in each case courts will be required to
> balance the interests of society with those of individuals and groups.

> There are, in my view, three important components of a proportionality test.
> First, the measures adopted must be … rationally connected to the objective.
> Second, the means … should impair “as little as possible” the right or
> freedom in question … Third, there must be a proportionality between the
> effects of the measures which are responsible for limiting the Charter right
> or freedom, and the objective which has  253 been identified as of
> “sufficient importance”. The more severe the deleterious effects of a
> measure, the more important the objective must be if the measure is to be
> reasonable and demonstrably justified in a free and democratic society.”

> 64\. The exercise which, therefore, is to be taken is to find out as to
> whether the limitation of constitutional rights is for a purpose that is
> reasonable and necessary in a democratic society and such an exercise
> involves the weighing up of competitive values, and ultimately an assessment
> based on proportionality i.e. balancing of different interests.”

273\. The application of Doctrine of Proportionality, while examining validity
of the Statute has been accepted in other countries as well. Judgments of the
U.S. Supreme Court as well as of United Kingdom, Canadian Supreme Court and
Australian Court shows that they have applied proportionality principle while
judging a Statute. European Court of Human Rights and other international
bodies have recognised the said principle. Privacy judgment in Puttaswamy case
has also accepted the proportionality doctrine for judging validity of a
Statute. In the three­fold test evolved in Privacy Judgment, proportionality
is the third  254 component. Dr. D.Y. Chandrachud, J. in Paragraph 310 has
stated following in respect of proportionality:­ “310. While it intervenes to
protect legitimate State interests, the State must nevertheless put into place
a robust regime that ensures the fulfilment of a threefold requirement. These
three requirements apply to all restraints on privacy (not just informational
privacy). They emanate from the procedural and content­based mandate of
Article 21. The first requirement that there must be a law in existence to
justify an encroachment on privacy is an express requirement of Article 21.
For, no person can be deprived of his life or personal liberty except in
accordance with the procedure established by law. The existence of law is an
essential requirement. Second, the requirement of a need, in terms of a
legitimate State aim, ensures that the nature and content of the law which
imposes the restriction falls within the zone of reasonableness mandated by
Article 14, which is a guarantee against arbitrary State action. The pursuit
of a legitimate State aim ensures that the law does not suffer from manifest
arbitrariness. Legitimacy, as a postulate, involves a value judgment.

Judicial review does not reappreciate or second guess the value judgment of
the legislature but is for deciding whether the aim which is sought to be
pursued suffers from palpable or manifest arbitrariness. The third requirement
ensures that the means which are adopted by the legislature are proportional
to the object and needs sought to be fulfilled by the law. Proportionality is
an essential facet of the guarantee against arbitrary State action because it
ensures that the nature and quality of the  255 encroachment on the right is
not disproportionate to the purpose of the law. Hence, the threefold
requirement for a valid law arises out of the mutual interdependence between
the fundamental guarantees against arbitrariness on the one hand and the
protection of life and personal liberty, on the other. The right to privacy,
which is an intrinsic part of the right to life and liberty, and the freedoms
embodied in Part III is subject to the same restraints which apply to those
freedoms.”

274\. The third requirement ensures that the means which are adopted by the
legislature are proportional to the object and needs sought to be fulfilled by
the law. Proportionality is an essential facet of the guarantee against
arbitrary state action because it ensures that the nature and quality of the
encroachment on the right is not disproportionate to the purpose of the law.

275\. European Court of Justice in Michael Schwarz Vs. Stadt Bochum in its
judgment dated 17.10.2013, while considering a directive of the European
Parliament and on the protection of individuals with regard to the processing
of personal data and on the free movement of such data, has applied the
proportionality  256 principle. Following was laid down in Paragraph 40:­ “40.
Fourth, the Court must establish whether the limitations placed on those
rights are proportionate to the aims pursued by Regulation No. 2252/2004 and,
by extension, to the objective of preventing illegal entry into the European
Union. It must therefore be ascertained whether the measures implemented by
that regulation are appropriate for attaining those aims and do not go beyond
what is necessary to achieve them (see Volker and Markus Schedule and Eifert,
paragraph 74).”

276\. Court of Justice of the European Union in Digital Rights Ireland Ltd.
Vs. Minister for Communications [2015] QBECJ 127 had occasion to consider the
validity of Parliament and Council Directive 2006/24/EC on the retention of
data generated or processed by them in connection with the provision of
publicly available electronic communications services or of public
communications networks. Applying the principle of proportionality, it was
held that principle of proportionality requires that acts of the EU
institutions be appropriate for attaining the legitimate objectives pursued by
the legislation at issue and do not exceed the limits of what is  257
appropriate and necessary in order to achieve those objectives. Following was
laid down in Paragraph 46:

> “46. In summary, Directive 2006/24 is characterised by its functional
> duality. It is, on the one hand, an entirely traditional Directive which
> seeks to harmonise national laws that are disparate (recital (5) in the
> Preamble to Directive 2006/24 states that national laws ”vary considerably”)
> or likely to become so, and was adopted in the interests of the functioning
> of the internal market and precisely calibrated for that purpose, as the
> court ruled in Ireland v European Parliament. However, it is also, on the
> other hand, a Directive which, even in its harmonising function, seeks to
> establish where appropriate, obligations­ in particular data retention
> obligations­ which constitute, as I shall show later, serious interference
> with the enjoyment of the fundamental rights guaranteed to European citizens
> by the Charter, in particular the right to privacy and the right to the
> protection of personal data.”

277\. Another judgment by Court of the Justice of European Union (Grand
Chamber) is Tele2 Sverige AB Vs. Post­och telesyrelsen. A directive of
European Parliament and of the Council concerning the processing of personal
data and the protection of privacy in the electronic communications sector
came for consideration. In Paras 95, 96 and 116 following  258 was laid down:­
“95. With respect to that last issue, the first sentence of Article 15(1) of
Directive 2002/58 provides that Member States may adopt a measure that
derogates from the principle of confidentiality of communications and related
traffic data where it is a ‘necessary, appropriate and proportionate measure
within a democratic society’, in view of the objectives laid down in that
provision. As regards recital 11 of that directive, it states that a measure
of that kind must be ‘strictly’ proportionate to the intended purpose. In
relation to, in particular, the retention of data, the requirement laid down
in the second sentence of Article 15(1) of that directive is that data should
be retained ‘for a limited period’ and be ‘justified’ by reference to one of
the objectives stated in the first sentence of Article 15(1) of that
directive.

96\. Due regard to the principle of proportionality also derives from the
Court’s settled case­law to the effect that the protection of the fundamental
right to respect for private life at EU level requires that derogations from
and limitations on the protection of personal data should apply only in so far
as is strictly necessary (judgments of 16 December 2008, Satakunnan
Markkinapörssi and Satamedia, C­ 73/07,EU:C:2008:727,paragraph 56; of 9
November 2010, Volker und Markus Schecke and Eifert, C­92/09 and C­93/09,
EU:C:2010:662, paragraph 77; the Digital Rights judgment, paragraph 52, and of
6 October 2015, Schrems, C­362/14, EU:C:2015:650, paragraph 92).

116 As regards compatibility with the  259 principle of proportionality,
national legislation governing the conditions under which the providers of
electronic communications services must grant the competent national
authorities access to the retained data must ensure, in accordance with what
was stated in paragraphs 95 and 96 of this judgment, that such access does not
exceed the limits of what is strictly necessary.”

278\. The U.S. Supreme Court while considering the said test has repeatedly
refused to apply the least intrusive test. Vernonia School District Vs. Wayne
Acton, 515 US 646, 132 L.Ed. 2D 564, was a case where a Student Athlete Drug
Policy was adopted by the School District, which authorised random urine
analysis drug testing of students participating in the District School
Athletic Programme. A student was denied participation in Football game since
he and his parents had refused to sign the testing consent forms. The Actons
filed suit, seeking for a declaratory and injunctive relief from enforcement
of the Policy. One of the submissions raised was that Policy is
disproportionate since it asks all the athletes to undergo urine analysis, the
test is not least intrusive test. Repelling the least intrusive test,  260
following was held:­ “As to the efficacy of this means for addressing the
problem: It seems to us self­ evident that a drug problem largely fueled by
the "role model" effect of athletes' drug use, and of particular danger to
athletes, is effectively addressed by making sure that athletes do not use
drugs. Respondents argue that a "less intrusive means to the same end" was
available, namely, "drug testing on suspicion of drug use." Brief for
Respondents 45­46. We have repeatedly refused to declare that only the "least
intrusive" search practicable can be reasonable under the Fourth Amendment.
Skinner, supra, at 629, n.9, 103 l Ed 2d 639, 109 S Ct. 1402 (collecting
cases).

279\. To the same effect is another judgment of U.S. Supreme Court in Board of
Education of Independent School District Vs. Lindsay Earls, 536 US 822=153
L.Ed.2d. 735.

280\. The submission of the respondents that least intrusive test cannot be
applied to judge the proportionality of Aadhaar Act has been refuted by
petitioners. Petitioners submit that least intrusive test is a test, which was
applied in large number of cases and i.e. the test which may ensure that there
is a minimal invasion of privacy. It is submitted that  261 the respondents
could have switched to a smart card, which itself contain the biometric
information of a person. Respondents submitted that least intrusive test has
not been approved either in the Modern Dental (supra) or in the Puttaswamy
case. We are also of the view that there are several reasons due to which
least intrusive test cannot be insisted. For applying the least intrusive
test, the Court has to enter comparative analysis of all methods of
identification available, which need to be examined with their details and
compared. Court has to arrive at finding as to which mode of identity is a
least intrusive. We are of the view that comparison of several modes of
identity and to come to a decision, which is least intrusive is a matter,
which may be better left to the experts to examine. Further, there are no
proper pleadings and material with regard to other modes of identification,
which could have been adopted by the State, to come to a definite conclusion
by this Court.

281\. After noticing the parameters of proportionality, we now need to apply
proportionality and other tests  262 to find out as to whether Section 57
satisfies the proportionality and other tests. Section 57 begins with the
phrase “nothing contained in this Act shall prevent the use of Aadhaar
number.....” for establishing the identity of an individual for any purpose.
Section 57 reveals following concepts and ides, which can be para phrased in
following manner:­

(a) Nothing contained in this Act shall prevent the use of Aadhaar number for
identifying the identity of an individual for any purpose.

(b) Whether by the State or body corporate or private person.

(c) Pursuant to any law, for the time being in force or any contract to this
effect.

282\. The basic theme of the Aadhaar Act to implement the Aadhaar programme
was for purposes of disbursement of subsidies, benefits or services to
individuals entitled for the same. By various notifications issued under
Section 7, the Government has made applicable Aadhaar authentication for large
number of  263 schemes namely 133 in number. The idea behind Section 57 is
that Aadhaar is liberated from the four corners of the Act and it may not be
confined to use under Section 7 alone. The Act does not prohibit the use of
Aadhaar for any other purpose. Section 57 is thus in a way clarificatory in
nature, which enable the use of Aadhaar for any other purposes. The
petitioners have two basic objections. Firstly, they submitted that use of
word “any purpose” is unguided and uncontrolled and secondly it can be used by
body corporate or persons, pursuant to any law, for the time being in force or
any contract to this effect. Puttaswamy judgment has already laid down that
any infringement of Privacy right should pass three­fold test as noticed
above. The first test, which needs to be satisfied for non­intrusion in
privacy right is that it should be backed by law. Section 57 cannot be treated
as a law, which permit use of Aadhaar number for any purpose. The law
providing for use of Aadhaar for any purpose should be rational and
proportional. There has to be some object to be achieved by use of  264
Aadhaar, in a particular case, the legislature has ample power to provide for
legislative scheme by an enactment making use of Aadhaar and use of Aadhaar
has to be backed by a valid law. In event, it is accepted on the strength of
Section 57 that a State or body corporate or person, on the basis of any
contract to this effect, are permitted to use Aadhaar it shall be wholly
unguided and uncontrolled, which is prone to violate the right of privacy.
Section 57 makes use of Aadhaar on two basis. Firstly, “pursuant to any law,
for the time being in force” and secondly “any contract to this effect”. When
the legislature uses the phrase “pursuant to any law, for the time being in
force”, obviously the word law used in Section 57 is a law other than Section
57 of Aadhaar Act, 2016 and the Regulations framed thereunder. When any law
permits user of Aadhaar, its validity is to be tested on the anvil of
three­fold test as laid down in Puttaswamy case, but permitting use of Aadhaar
on any contract to this effect, is clearly in violation of Right of Privacy. A
contract entered between two parties, even  265 if one party is a State,
cannot be said to be a law.

283\. We thus, are of the view that Section 57 in so far as it permits use of
Aadhaar on “any contract to this effect” is clearly unconstitutional and
deserves to be struck down. We may again clarify that Section 57 has to be
read only to mean that it clarifies that nothing contained in Aadhaar Act
shall prevent the use of Aadhaar for establishing the identity of an
individual for any purpose, in pursuant to any law. Section 57 itself is not a
law, which may permit use of Aadhaar for any purpose. There has to be a valid
law in existence, which should also pass the three­ fold test as laid down in
Puttaswamy case for making provision for use of Aadhaar.

284\. In view of the foregoing discussions, we held that Section 57, to the
extent, which permits use of Aadhaar by the State or any body corporate or
person, in pursuant to any contract to this effect is unconstitutional and
void. Thus, the last phrase in main provision of Section 57, i.e. “or any
contract to  266 this effect” is struck down. Issue No. 11 is answered in the
following manner:­ Ans.11:­ Section 57, to the extent, which permits use of
Aadhaar by the State or any body corporate or person, in pursuant to any
contract to this effect is unconstitutional and void. Thus, the last phrase in
main provision of Section 57, i.e. “or any contract to this effect” is struck
down.

Issue No.12 Whether Section 59 is void or unconstitutional?

285\. Learned counsel for the petitioners have submitted that prior to
enactment of Aadhaar Act there was no law and all actions undertaken in
pursuance of the executive order dated 28.01.2009 including taking of
demographic and biometric information of an individual was not backed by any
law violated fundamental right of privacy. Violation of fundamental right of
privacy cannot be cured by any subsequent legislation. It is well settled that
Executive  267 actions, which breach fundamental right of a person must have
the authority of law to support it. A post­ constitutional law or executive
act that violates fundamental rights is still born and void ab initio. Further
there was no consent, let alone informed consent obtained from individuals at
the time of enrolment under the said notification. A validating law must
remove the cause of invalidity of previous acts. The cause of invalidity in
the present case was the absence of a law governing privacy infringements.
However, Section 59 does not create such a legal fiction where the Aadhaar Act
is deemed to have been in existence since 2009. It only declares a legal
consequence of acts done by Union since 2009, which it cannot do. No
procedural safeguards existed pre­2016 and thus, even assuming that Section 59
is validly enacted, it has to be declared unconstitutional for violating
Articles 14 and 21.

286\. Replying the above submissions, respondents submit that Section 59 is
retrospective, saving provision which provides a retrospective effect to the
268 notification dated 28.01.2009 and anything done or action taken by the
Central Government under the said Resolution.

287\. The expression ‘anything done or any action under the Resolution’ is
wide enough to cover all the actions including memorandum of undertaken which
UIDAI executed as Department of Central Government. Section 59 seeks to save
and continue under the said Act what was done under the executive scheme. The
submission that breach of fundamental right cannot be retrospectively cured is
incorrect. The last phrase of Section 59 uses the expression “shall be
deemed”, this expression clearly indicates creation of fiction with the object
of providing legislative support to the action taken before the Act. That
seeks to continue the entire architecture of Aadhaar which established under
the Government Resolution dated 28.01.2009. As a result of deeming provision
all the actions under the aforesaid scheme shall be deemed to have been done
under the Act and not under the aforesaid notification. We may have a look on
Section 59 of the  269 Act which provides:

> “59. Anything done or any action taken by the Central Government under the
> Resolution of the Government of India, Planning Commission bearing
> notification number A­43011/02/2009­ Admin. I, dated the 28th January, 2009,
> or by the Department of Electronics and Information Technology under the
> Cabinet Secretariat Notification bearing notification number S.O. 2492(E),
> dated the 12th September, 2015, as the case may be, shall be deemed to have
> been validly done or taken under this Act.”

288\. Justice G.P. Singh in Principles of Statutory Interpretation, 14th
Edition, while explaining the legal fiction sum up the Principle in the
following words:

> “The Legislature is quite competent to create a legal fiction, in other
> words, to enact a deeming provision for the purpose of assuming existence of
> a fact which does not really exist provided the declaration of non­ existent
> facts as existing does not offend the constitution. Although the word
> ‘deemed’ is usually used, a legal fiction may be enacted without using that
> word. For instance, the words ‘as if’ can also be used to create a legal
> fiction.

> In interpreting a provision creating a legal fiction, the court is to
> ascertain for what purpose the fiction is created, and after ascertaining
> this, the Court is to assume all those facts and consequences which are
> incidental or inevitable corollaries to the giving effect to the fiction.
> But in so  270 construing the fiction it is not to be extended beyond the
> purpose for which it is created, or beyond the language of the section by
> which it is created.”

289\. A Constitution Bench judgment of this Court in M/s. West Ramnad Electric
Distribution Co. Ltd. vs. The State of Madras and another, AIR 1962 SC 1753,
has been heavily relied by the respondents. The Madras Legislature had passed
an Act, the Madras Electricity Supply Undertakings (Acquisition) Act, 1949 for
supply of electricity in the province of Madras. By an order dated 17.05.1951
appellant undertaking was acquired and possession was directed to be taken.
There was challenge to 1949 Act which challenge was upheld by this Court in
Rajahmundry Electric Supply Corporation Ltd. v. State of Andhra Pradesh, AIR
1954 SC 251, on the ground that Act was beyond the legislative competence of
the Madras Legislature. The Madras Legislature passed another Act, the Madras
Electricity Supply Undertakings (Acquisition) Act, 1949, which also received
the Presidential assent. The Act purported to validate the action taken under
the 1949  271 Act. A writ petition was filed in Madras High Court challenging
the action taken under 1949 Act to continue the possession. The writ petition
was dismissed and the matter was taken to this Court. The contention which was
raised before this Court has been noticed in paragraph 8 in the following
words:

> “8....Mr. Nambiar further contends that this notification was invalid for
> two reasons; it was invalid because it has been issued under the Provisions
> of an Act which was void as being beyond the legislative competence of the
> Madras Legislature, and it was void for the additional reason that before it
> was issued, the Constitution of India had come into force and it offended
> against the provisions of Art. 31 of the Constitution, and so, Art. 13(2)
> applied. Section 24 of the Act, no doubt, purported or attempted to validate
> this notification, but the said attempt has failed because the Act being
> prospective, s. 24 cannot have retrospective operation. That, in substance,
> is the first contention raised before us.”

290\. Section 24 of the 1949 Act which created a deeming fiction validating
the actions taken under the earlier Act has been noticed in paragraph 11 which
is to the following effect:

> “11. Let us then construe section 24 and decide whether it serves to
> validate the  272 impugned notification issued by the respondent on the 21st
> September, 1951.

> Section 24 reads thus :­ "Orders made, decisions or directions given,
> notifications issued, proceedings taken and acts of things done, in relation
> to any undertaking taken ever, if they would have been validly made, given,
> issued, taken or done, had the Madras Electricity Supply Undertakings
> (Acquisition) Act, 1949 (Madras Act XLIII of 1949), and the rules made
> thereunder been in force on the date on which the said orders, decisions or
> directions, notifications, proceeding, acts or things, were made, given,
> issued, taken or done are hereby declared to have been validly made, given,
> issued, taken or done, as the case may be, except to the extent to which the
> said orders, decisions, directions, notifications, proceedings, acts or
> things are repugnant to the provisions of this Acts."”

291\. Repelling the submission of counsel for the appellant it was held that
Section 24 had been enacted for the purpose of retrospectively validating
action taken under the provisions of the earlier Act. Following was held in
paragraph 13:

273

> “13....If the Act is retrospective in operation and s. 24 has been enacted
> for the purpose of retrospectively validating actions taken under the
> provisions of the earlier Act, it must follow by the very retrospective
> operation of the relevant provisions that at the time when the impugned
> notification was issued, these provisions were in existence. That is the
> plain and obvious effect of the retrospective operation of the statute.
> Therefore in considering whether Art. 31(1) has been complied with or not,
> we must assume that before the notification was issued, the relevant
> provisions of the Act were in existence and so, Art. 31(1) must be held to
> have been complied with in that sense.”

292\. The submission was made that notification issued under the earlier Act
contravenes Article 31 which is a fundamental right and cannot be cured by the
subsequent law. The contention has been noted in paragraph 15:

> 15\. That takes us to the larger issue raised by Mr. Nambiar in the present
> appeals. He contends that the power of the legislature to make laws
> retrospective cannot validly be exercised so as to care the contravention of
> fundamental rights retrospectively. His contention is that the earlier Act
> of 1949 being dead and non­existent, the impugned notification contravened
> Art. 31(1) and this contravention of a fundamental right cannot be cured by
> the legislature by passing a subsequent law and making it retrospective. In
> support of this argument, he has relied on  274 the decision of this Court
> in Deep Chand v. The State of Uttar Pradesh (1959) Supp. 2 S.C.R. 8.(AIR
> 1959 SC 648)....”

293\. It was held by the Constitution Bench that the Legislature can
effectively exercise power of validating action taken under the law which was
void for the reason that it contravened fundamental right. In paragraph 16
following has been held:

> “16....If a law is invalid for the reason that it has been passed by a
> legislature without legislative competence, and action is taken under its
> provisions, the said action can be validated by a subsequent law passed by
> the same legislature after it is clothed with the necessary legislative
> power. This position is not disputed. If the legislature can by
> retrospective legislation cure the invalidity in actions taken in pursuance
> of laws which were void for want of legislative competence and can validate
> such action by appropriate provisions, it is difficult to see why the same
> power cannot be equally effectively exercised by the legislature in
> validating actions taken under law which are void for the reason that they
> contravened fundamental rights. As has been pointed out by the majority
> decision in Deep Chand's case, the infirmity proceeding from lack of
> legislative competence as well as the infirmity proceeding from the
> contravention of fundamental rights lead to the same result and that is that
> the offending legislation is void and honest. That being so, if the
> legislature can validate actions taken under  275 one class of void
> legislation, there is no reason why it cannot exercise its legislative power
> to validate actions taken under the other class of void legislation. We are,
> therefore, not prepared to accept Mr. Nambiar's contention that where the
> contravention of fundamental rights is concerned, the legislature cannot
> pass a law retrospectively validate actions taken under a law which was void
> because it contravened fundamental rights.”

294\. Shri Shyam Divan submits that the above judgment of this Court in M/s.
West Ramnad Electric Distribution Co.Ltd. is not applicable. He submits that
unlike Section 59 of Aadhaar Act, the provisions in West Ramnad case had no
limiting words such as ‘action taken by the Central Government’. Further even
under the West Ramnad case principle, the action can be saved would have to be
proper under the previous regime. West Ramnad actions were under an earlier
statute that was declared ultra vires, which cannot be saved under Section 59
of the Aadhaar Act. The collection of biometrics from individuals right upto
2016 cannot be described as lawful and intra vires the 2009 notification. If
it were ultra vires the 2009  276 notification, Section 59 of the Aadhaar Act
cannot validate the action.

295\. We have already noticed the ratio of the judgment as stated in paragraph
16 in the judgment in West Ramnad case that even if earlier action which is
sought to be validated was ultra vires and violates constitutional right, it
could have been very well validated by retrospective statute creating a
deeming fiction. We are of the view that ratio laid down in West Ramnad case
is fully applicable in the present case.

296\. Another Constitution Bench in Bishambhar Nath Kohli and others v. State
of Uttar Pradesh and others, AIR 1966 SC 573, had occasion to consider the
deeming fiction as contained under Act 31 of 1950. Section 58(3) of Act 31 of
1950 as deeming provision that anything done or action taken in exercise of
the power conferred under Ordinance 27 of 1949 is to be deemed to have been
done or taken in exercise of the power  277 conferred by or under Act 31 of
1950. In paragraphs 7 and 8 of the judgment following has been laid down:

> “7. By Ordinance 27 of 1949 a proceeding commenced under Ordinance 12 of
> 1949 or anything done or action taken in the exercise of the powers
> conferred under that Ordinance was to be deemed a proceeding commenced,
> thing done and action taken under the former Ordinance as if that Ordinance
> were in force on the date on which the proceeding was commenced, thing was
> done or action was taken. Section 58(3) of Act 31 of 1950 contained a
> similar deeming provision that anything done or action taken in exercise of
> the power conferred under Ordinance 27 of 1949 is to be deemed to have been
> done or taken in exercise of the power conferred by or under Act 31 of 1950,
> as if the Act were in force on the day on which such thing was done or
> action was taken.

> 8\. By this chain of fictions, things done and actions taken under Ordinance
> 12 of 1949 are to be deemed to have been done or taken in exercise of the
> powers conferred under Act 31 of 1950, as if that Act we re in force on the
> day on which such thing was done or action taken. The order passed by the
> Deputy Custodian under s. 6 of Ordinance 12 of 1949 was, therefore, for the
> purpose of this proceeding, to be deemed an order made in exercise of the
> power conferred by Act 31 of 1950 as if that Act were in force on the day on
> which the order was passed.”

297\. The ratio of judgment in West Ramnad(supra) has been repeatedly applied
by this Court in several  278 judgments. Reference is made to Hari Singh and
others vs. The Military Estate Officer and another, 1972 (2) SCC 239, which
was a case rendered by a seven­Judge Constitution Bench. In paragraph 16
following has been held:

> “16. The ruling of this Court in West Ramnad Electric Distribution Co.
> Ltd.(1) case establishes competence of the legislature to make laws
> retrospective in operation for the purpose of validation of action done
> under an earlier Act which has been declared by a decision of the court to
> be invalid. It is to be appreciated that the validation is by virtue of the
> provisions of the subsequent piece of legislation.”

298\. Justice Krishna Iyer, J. in Krishna Chandra Gangopadhyaya and others vs.
The Union of India and others, 1975 (2) SCC 302, while considering validation
of Act held that the Legislature can retrospectively validate what otherwise
was inoperative law or action. In paragraph 25 following has been held:

> “25. The ratio of West Ramnad (supra) is clear. The Legislature can
> retrospectively validate what otherwise was inoperative law or action.
> Unhappy wording, infelicitous expression or imperfect or inartistic drafting
> may not necessarily defeat, for that reason alone, the obvious object of the
> 279 validating law and its retrospective content.”

299\. This Court again in ITW Signode India Ltd. vs. Collector of Central
Excise, 2004 (3) SCC 48, held that curative statutes by their very nature are
intended to operate upon and affect past transaction. In paragraph 61
following has been held:

> “61. A statute, it is trite, must be read as a whole. The plenary power of
> legislation of the Parliament or the State Legislature in relation to the
> legislative fields specified under Seventh Schedule of the Constitution of
> India is not disputed. A statutory act may be enacted prospectively or
> retrospectively. A retrospective effect indisputably can be given in case of
> curative and validating statute. In fact curative statutes by their very
> nature are intended to operate upon and affect past transaction having
> regard to the fact that they operate on conditions already existing.
> However, the scope of the validating act may vary from case to case.”

300\. The argument that an action or provision hit by Article 14 can never be
validated was specifically rejected by this Court in The State of Mysore and
another vs. d. Achiah Chetty, Etc., (1969) 1 SCC 248, in paragraph 15
following has been held:

280

> “15. Mr. S. T. Desai, however, contends that an acquisition hit by Article
> 14 or anything done previously cannot ever be validated, unless the vice of
> unreasonable classification is removed and the Validating Act is ineffective
> for that reason. This argument leads to the logical conclusion that a
> discrimination arising from selection of one law for action rather than the
> other, when two procedures are available, can never be righted by removing
> retrospectively one of the competing laws from the field. This is a wrong
> assumption....”

301\. A statute creates a legal fiction to achieve a legislative purpose. We
may refer to the celebrated judgment of Lord Asquith in East End Dwelling
Co.Ltd. And Finsury Borough Council, 1952 AC 109, following is the enunciation
of Lord Asquith:

> “If you are bidden to treat an imaginary state of affairs as real, you must
> surely, unless prohibited from doing so, also imagine as real the
> consequences and incidents which, if the putative state of affairs had in
> fact existed, must inevitably have flowed from or accompanied it... The
> statute says that you must imagine a certain state of affairs; it does not
> say that having done so, you must cause or permit your imagination to boggle
> when it comes to the inevitable corollaries of that state of affairs.”

302\. Legislature has often created legal fiction to save several actions
which had happened prior to  281 enactment. Reference is made to judgment of
this Court in Nar Bahadur Bhandari and another vs. State of sikkim and others,
(1998) 5 SCC 39. In the above case deeming fiction was created by Section 30
of Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988. Section 30 provides that any action
taken or purported to have been done or taken under or in pursuance of the
Acts so repeated shall be deemed to have been done or taken under 1988 Act.
Following was stated in paragraph 10:

> “10....In the present case, the Act of 1988 is the repealing Act. Sub­sec.
> (2) of Section 30 reads as follows:

> "30(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, but without prejudice to the application
> of section 6 of the General Clauses Act 1897 (10 of 1897), anything done or
> any action taken or purported to have been done or taken under or in
> pursuance of the Acts so repealed shall, in so far as it is not inconsistent
> with the provisions of this Act, be deemed to have been done or taken under
> or in pursuance of the corresponding provision of this Act."

> 12\. The said Sub­section while on the one hand ensures that the application
> of Section 6 of the General Clauses Act is not prejudiced, on the other it
> expresses a different intention as contemplated by the said Section 6. The
> last part of the above  282 Sub­section introduces a legal fiction whereby
> anything done or action taken under or in pursuance of the Act of 1947 shall
> be deemed to have been done or taken under or in pursuance of corresponding
> provisions of the Act of 1988. That is, the fiction is to the effect that
> the Act of 1988 had come into force when such thing was done or action was
> taken.”

303\. An elaborate consideration on deeming fiction was made by three­Judge
Bench of this Court in State of Karnataka vs. State of Tamil Nadu and others,
(2017) 3 SCC 362, one of us, Justice Dipak Misra, as he then was, speaking for
the Court in paragraphs 72 to 74:

> “72. The second limb of submission of Mr. Rohatgi as regards the
> maintainability pertains to the language employed Under Section 6(2) of the
> 1956 Act, which reads as follows:

> “6(2) The decision of the Tribunal, after its publication in the Official
> Gazette by the Central Government under Sub­section (1), shall have the same
> force as an order or decree of the Supreme Court.”

> 73\. Relying on Section 6(2), which was introduced by way of Amendment Act
> 2002 (Act No. 14 of 2002) that came into force from 6.8.2002, it is
> submitted by Mr. Rohatgi that the jurisdiction of this Court is ousted as it
> cannot sit over in appeal on its own decree. The said submission is
> seriously resisted by Mr. Nariman and Mr. Naphade,  283 learned senior
> Counsel contending that the said provision, if it is to be interpreted to
> exclude the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court of India, it has to be
> supported by a constitutional amendment adding at the end of Article 136(2)
> the words "or to any determination of any tribunal constituted under the law
> made by Parliament Under Article 262(2)" and, in such a situation, in all
> possibility such an amendment to the Constitution may be ultra vires
> affecting the power of judicial review which is a part of basic feature of
> the Constitution. Learned senior Counsel for the Respondent has drawn a
> distinction between the conferment and the exclusion of the power of the
> Supreme Court of India by the original Constitution and any exclusion by the
> constitutional amendment. Be that as it may, the said aspect need not be
> adverted to, as we are only required to interpret Section 6(2) as it exists
> today on the statute book. The said provision has been inserted to provide
> teeth to the decision of the tribunal after its publication in the official
> gazette by the Central Government and this has been done keeping in view the
> Sarkaria Commission's Report on Centre­State relations (1980). The relevant
> extract of the Sarkaria Commission's Report reads as follows:

> 17.4.19 The Act was amended in 1980 and Section 6A was inserted. This
> Section provides for framing a scheme for giving effect to a Tribunal's
> award. The scheme, inter alia provides for the establishment of the
> authority, its term of office and other condition of service, etc. but the
> mere creation of such an agency will not be able to ensure implementation of
> a Tribunal's award.

> Any agency set up Under Section 6A  284 cannot really function without the
> cooperation of the States concerned.

> Further, to make a Tribunal's award binding and effectively enforceable, it
> should have the same force and sanction behind it as an order or decree of
> the Supreme Court. We recommend that the Act should be suitably amended for
> this purpose.

> 17.6.05 ­ The Inter­State Water Disputes Act, 1956 should be amended so that
> a Tribunal's Award has the same force and sanction behind it as an order or
> decree of the Supreme Court to make a Tribunal's award really binding.

> 74....Parliament has intentionally used the words from which it can be
> construed that a legal fiction is meant to serve the purpose for which the
> fiction has been created and not intended to travel beyond it. The purpose
> is to have the binding effect of the tribunal's award and the effectiveness
> of enforceability. Thus, it has to be narrowly construed regard being had to
> the purpose it is meant to serve.

> 304\. In paragraphs 75, 76 and 77 following has been laid down:

> “75. In this context, we may usefully refer to the Principles of Statutory
> Interpretation, 14th Edition by G.P. Singh. The learned author has expressed
> thus:

> “In interpreting a provision creating a legal fiction, the court is to
> ascertain for what purpose the  285 fiction is created1, and after
> ascertaining this, the Court is to assume all those facts and consequences
> which are incidental or inevitable corollaries to the giving effect to the
> fiction. But in so construing the fiction it is not be extended beyond the
> purpose for which is created, or beyond the language of the Section by which
> it is created4.

> It cannot also be extended by importing another fiction5. The principles
> stated above are 'well­ settled'. A legal fiction may also be interpreted
> narrowly to make the statute workable.”

> 76\. In Aneeta Hada v. Godfather Travels and Tours, (2012) 5 SCC 661, a
> three­Judge Bench has ruled thus:

> “37. In State of T.N. v. Arooran Sugars Ltd., (1997) 1 SCC 326 the
> Constitution Bench, while dealing with the deeming provision in a statute,
> ruled that the role of a provision in a statute creating legal fiction is
> well settled. Reference was made to Chief Inspector of Mines v. Karam Chand
> Thapar, AIR 1961 SC 838, J.K. Cotton Spg. and Wvg. Mills Ltd. v. Union of
> India, 1987 Supp.

> SCC 350, M. Venugopal v. LIC, (1994) 2 SCC 323 and Harish Tandon v. ADM,
> Allahabad, (1995) 1 SCC 537 and eventually, it was held that when a statute
> creates a legal fiction saying that something shall be deemed to have been
> done which in fact and truth has not been done, the Court has to examine and
> ascertain as to for what purpose and between which persons such a statutory
> fiction is  286 to be resorted to and thereafter, the courts have to give
> full effect to such a statutory fiction and it has to be carried to its
> logical conclusion.”

> 38\. From the aforesaid pronouncements, the principle that can be culled out
> is that it is the bounden duty of the court to ascertain for what purpose
> the legal fiction has been created. It is also the duty of the court to
> imagine the fiction with all real consequences and instances unless
> prohibited from doing so. That apart, the use of the term "deemed" has to be
> read in its context and further, the fullest logical purpose and import are
> to be understood. It is because in modern legislation, the term "deemed" has
> been used for manifold purposes. The object of the legislature has to be
> kept in mind.”

> 77\. In Hari Ram, the Court has held that in interpreting the provision
> creating a legal fiction, the court is to ascertain for what purpose the
> fiction is created and after ascertaining the same, the court is to assume
> all those facts and consequences which are incidental or inevitable
> corollaries for giving effect to the fiction.”

> 305\. Applying the ratio of this Court as noticed above, it is clear that
> Parliamentary legislative intent of Section 59 is to save all actions taken
> by Central Government under the notification dated  287 28.01.2009 and
> notification dated 12.09.2015 deeming the same to have been validly done
> under the Aadhaar Act by creating a legal fiction. The intention to save all
> actions taken under the aforesaid two notifications and treat them to have
> done under that Act is clear, it is the purpose and object of Section

59\. Section 59 has to be interpreted to give meaning to the legislative
intent to hold otherwise shall defeat the purpose of Section 59. As observed,
Legislature by legislative device can cover actions taken earlier while
creating any legal fiction which has actually been done by Section 59.

306\. There is one more submission of the petitioners to be considered.
Petitioner’s case is that there was no consent or informed consent obtained
from individuals for enrolment made consequent to notification dated
28.01.2009, the notification dated 28.01.2009 and the scheme thereafter does
not clearly indicate that the enrolment for Aadhaar was voluntary. This Court
has issued an interim order directing the enrolment be treated as voluntary,
hence, it cannot be  288 accepted that those got enrolled after 28.01.2009 did
not give consent. The individual provided demographic information and gave
biometric information and also signed the enrolment form. The residents after
the enrolment were required to confirm that information contained were
provided by them and are of his own true and correct. On sign slip, he was
required to sign or put his thumb impression themselves. It is on the record
that more than 100 crores enrolment were completed prior to enforcement of
Aadhaar Act 2016. On the basis of Aadhaar Act large number of persons must
have received benefits of subsidies and services, thus, the enrolments prior
to enforcement of Act, 2016 cannot be declared illegal and void. In view of
the aforementioned discussion, we answer the Issue No.12 in the following
manner;

Ans.12:­ Section 59 has validated all actions taken by the Central Government
under the notifications dated 28.01.2009 and  289 12.09.2009 and all actions
shall be deemed to have been taken under the Aadhaar Act.

Issue No. 13 Whether Collecting the identity information of children between 5
to 18 years is unconstitutional?

307\. Section 5 of the Act provides that the Authority shall take special
measures to issue Aadhaar number to women, children, senior citizens, persons
with disability, unskilled and unorganised workers, nomadic tribes or to such
other persons who do not have any permanent dwelling house and such other
categories of individuals as may be specified by regulations. Section 5
contemplates special measures for issuance of Aadhaar number to children. The
Aadhaar (Enrolment and Update) Regulations, 2016 contains some special
measures. One of the special measures is Regulation 5, which provides for
information required for enrolment of children below five years of age.
Regulation 5 is as follows:­

5\. Information required for enrolment of  290 children below five years of
age. — (1) For children below the five years of age, the following demographic
and biometric information shall be collected:

> (a) Name

> (b) Date of Birth

> (c) Gender

> (d) Enrolment ID or Aadhaar number of any one parent, preferably that of the
> mother in the event both parents are alive, or guardian. The Aadhaar number
> or EID of such parent or guardian is mandatory, and a field for relationship
> will also be recorded.

> (e) The address of such child which is the same as that of the linked parent
> / guardian.

> (f) Facial image of the child shall be captured. The biometric information
> of any one parent / guardian shall be captured or authenticated during the
> enrolment.

(2) The Proof of Relationship (PoR) document as listed in schedule II for
establishing the relationship between the linked parent/guardian and the child
shall be collected at the time of enrolment. Only those children can be
enrolled based on the relationship document (PoR), whose names are recorded in
the relationship document.

308\. For children below five, no core biometric  291 informations are
captured and only biometric information of any one parent/guardian is
captured. The objection raised by petitioners is with regard to children
between 5 to 18 years on the ground that they being minors, parental consent
is not taken. We have noted above that for Aadhaar enrolment, for verification
of information consent is obtained from the person submitting for enrolment.
Thus, the enrolment for Aadhaar number is on consent basis. Although, it is
different matter that for the purpose of obtaining any benefit or service, a
person is obliged to enrol for Aadhaar. The petitioners are right in their
submissions that for enrolment of a children between 5 and 18 years, there has
to be consent of their parents or guardian because they themselves are unable
to give any valid consent for enrolment. We, thus, have to read parental
consent in Regulation 4 in so far as children of 5 to 18 years are concerned
so that the provision in reference to children between 5 to 18 years may not
become unconstitutional. We thus answer Question No. 13 in  292 following
manner:­ Ans.13:­ Parental consent for providing biometric information under
Regulation 3 & demographic information under Regulation 4 has to be read for
enrolment of children between 5 to 18 years to upheld the constitutionality of
Regulations 3 & 4 of Aadhaar (Enrolment and Update) Regulations, 2016.

Issue No.14 Whether Rule 9 as amended by the Prevention of Money­Laundering
(Second Amendment) Rules, 2017 is unconstitutional?

309\. For answering the above issue we need to advert to the objects and
scheme of the Prevention of Money­ Laundering Act, 2002(PMLA, 2002). The
scheme as delineated by the Prevention of Money­Laundering (Maintenance of
Records) Rules, 2005 also need to be looked into before coming to the Second
Amendment Rules, 2017. The PMLA, 2002 has been enacted to prevent
money­laundering and to provide for confiscation of property derived from, or
involved in,  293 money­laundering and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto. The Act has long Preamble entire of which needs to be
noted, which is as follows:

> “An Act to prevent money­laundering and to provide for confiscation of
> property derived from, or involved in, money­laundering and for matters
> connected therewith or incidental thereto.

> WHEREAS the Political Declaration and Global Programme of Action, annexed to
> the resolution S­17/2 was adopted by the General Assembly of the United
> Nations at its seventeenth special session on the twenty­ third day of
> February, 1990;

> AND WHEREAS the Political Declaration adopted by the Special Session of the
> United Nations General Assembly held on 8th to 10th June, 1998 calls upon
> the Member States to adopt national money­laundering legislation and
> programme; AND WHEREAS it is considered necessary to implement the aforesaid
> resolution and the Declaration;

310\. Two international declarations have been specifically mentioned in the
Preamble which pave the way for the enactment. The resolution adopted by the
General Assembly of the United Nations on 23rd February, 1990 contained the
recommendations on  294 money­laundering of the Financial Action Task Force
aforesaid. The Political Declaration and Action Plan against money­laundering
by the United Nations General Assembly held on 10.06.1998 which called upon
the States Members of the United Nations to adopt its declaration to the
following effect:

> “Political Declaration and Action Plan against Money Laundering adopted at
> the Twentieth Special Session of the United Nations General Assembly devoted
> to “countering the world drug problem together” New Your, 10 June
> 1998(excerpts) “We, the States Members of the United Nations, … … … …

> 15\. Undertake to make special efforts against the laundering of money
> linked to drug trafficking and, in that context, emphasize the importance of
> strengthening international, regional and subregional cooperation, and
> recommend that States that have not yet done so adopt by the year 2003
> national money­laundering legislation and programmes in accordance with
> relevant provisions of the United Nations Convention against Illicit Traffic
> in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances of 1988, as well as the
> measures for countering money­laundering, adopted at the present session;
    
    
                         …     …    …     …
         “COUNTERING MONEY­LAUNDERING”
                                                              295
    
    
    
    The General Assembly,
    …          …    …     …
    

> Emphasizing the enormous efforts of a number of States to draw up and apply
> domestic legislation that identifies the activity of money­laundering as a
> criminal offence, Realizing the importance of progress being made by all
> States in conforming to the relevant recommendations and the need for States
> to participate actively in international and regional initiatives designed
> to promote and strengthen the implementation of effective measures against
> money­laundering,

1\. Strongly condemns the laundering of money derived from illicit drug
trafficking and other serious crimes, as well as the use of the financial
systems of States for that purpose;

2\. Urges all States to implement the provisions against money­laundering that
are contained in the United Nations Convention against Illicit Trafficking in
Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances of 1988 and the other relevant
international instruments on money­laundering, in accordance with fundamental
constitutional principles, by applying the following principles:

(a) Establishment of a legislative framework to criminalize the laundering of
money derived from serious crimes in order to provide for the prevention,
detection, investigation and prosecution of the crime of money­laundering
through, inter alia:

(i) Identification, freezing, seizure and confiscation of the proceeds of
crime;

296

(ii) International cooperation; and mutual legal assistance in cases involving
money­ laundering;

(iii) Inclusion of the crime of money­ laundering in mutual legal assistance
agreements for the purpose of ensuring judicial assistance in investigations,
court cases or judicial proceedings relating to that crime;

(b) Establishment of an effective financial and regulatory regime to deny
criminals and their illicit funds access to national and international
financial systems, thus preserving the integrity of financial systems
worldwide and ensuring compliance with laws and other regulations against
money­ laundering through:

(i) Customer identification and verification requirements applying the
principle of "know your customer", in order to have available for competent
authorities the necessary information on the identity of clients and the
financial movements that they carry out;

(ii) Financial record­keeping;

(iii) Mandatory reporting of suspicious activity;

(iv) Removal of bank secrecy impediments to efforts directed at preventing,
investigating and punishing money­laundering;

(v) Other relevant measures;

(c) Implementation of law enforcement measures to provide tools for, inter
alia:

(i) Effective detection, investigation, prosecution and conviction of
criminals engaging in moneylaundering activity;

(ii) Extradition procedures;

297

(iii) Information­sharing mechanisms;”

311\. The modern world is more focused on economic growth. Every nation tries
to march forward in achieving the rapid economic growth. Economics is factor
which not only plays a major role in the future of nation but also in all
human organisations. Most of the individuals also aspire for their financial
well being but for the financial system and working of economic, road blocks
are felt both by the nations and human organisations. The siphoning away of
huge volumes of money from normal economic growth poses a real danger to the
economics and affects the stability of the global market which also empowers
corruption organised crime. Proceeds of money­laundering are disguised to
acquire properties and other assets or to make investments. At some stage
money­laundering involves conversion process with the objective to give the
appearance that the money has a legitimate source. The banking and financial
secrecy is another bottleneck for countries who genuinely want to counter
money­laundering. It is inherent in the activity of  298 money­laundering to
keep the entire process secret. The Parliament with the objectives outlined in
the international declaration enacted the PMLA Act. Para 1 of the Statement of
Objects and Reasons of Act is stated as follows:

> “STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS It is being realised, world over, that
> money­laundering poses a serious threat not only to the financial systems of
> countries, but also to their integrity and sovereignty. Some of the
> initiatives taken by the international community to obviate such threat are
> outlined below:—

> (a) the United Nations Convention Against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs
> and Psychotropic Substances, to which India is a party, calls for prevention
> of laundering of proceeds of drug crimes and other connected activities and
> confiscation of proceeds derived from such offence.

> (b) the Basle Statement of Principles, enunciated in 1989, outlined basic
> policies and procedures that banks should follow in order to assist the law
> enforcement agencies in tackling the problem of moneylaundering.

> (c) the Financial Action Task Force established at the summit of seven major
> industrial nations, held in Paris from 14th to 16th July, 1989, to examine
> the problem of money­laundering has made forty recommendations, which
> provide the foundation material for comprehensive legislation to combat the
> problem of moneylaundering. The  299 recommendations were classified under
> various heads. Some of the important heads are—

> (i) declaration of laundering of monies carried through serious crimes a
> criminal offence;

> (ii) to work out modalities of disclosure by financial institutions
> regarding reportable transactions;

> (iii) confiscation of the proceeds of crime;

> (iv) declaring money­laundering to be an extraditable offence; and

> (v) promoting international co­ operation in investigation of
> moneylaundering.

> (d) the Political Declaration and Global Programme of Action adopted by
> United Nations General Assembly by its Resolution No. S­17/2 of 23rd
> February, 1990, inter alia, calls upon the member States to develop
> mechanism to prevent financial institutions from being used for laundering
> of drug related money and enactment of legislation to prevent such
> laundering.

> (e) the United Nations in the Special Session on countering World Drug
> Problem Together concluded on the 8th to the 10th June, 1998 has made
> another declaration regarding the need to combat moneylaundering. India is a
> signatory to this declaration.

> ….................................”

312\. Paragraph two of the Statement of Objects and Reasons noticed the
legislative process which was  300 initiated by introducing the Prevention of
Money­ Laundering Bill, 1998 which was introduced in the Lok Sabha. The Bill
was referred to the Standing Committee on Finance, which submitted its report
on 04.03.1999 to the Lok Sabha. Various recommendations of the Standing
Committee were accepted by the Central Government and made provisions of the
said recommendations in the Bill. Thereafter, the Bill was presented in the
Parliament which after receiving the assent of the President published in the
Gazette on 01.07.2005. Act, 2002 has been amended by various Parliamentary
Acts. By amendments made in the year 2013 by Act 2 of 2013, the Legislature
has attempted to keep the pace with the other countries of the world by making
more stringent provision to prevent money­ laundering which is the root as
well as the result of the black money economy. Money­laundering is defined
under Section 3 which is to the following effect:

> “3. Offence of money­Laundering.­Whosoever directly or indirectly attempts
> to indulge or knowingly assists or knowingly is a party or is actually
> involved in any process or activity connected proceeds of crime including
> its concealment, possession,  301 acquisition or use and projecting or
> claiming it as untainted property shall be guilty of offence of
> money­laundering.”

313\. Section 2 (ha) defines client and Section 2(wa) defines reporting entity
which are as follows;

> “2.(ha) "client" means a person who is engaged in a financial transaction or
> activity with a reporting entity and includes a person on whose behalf the
> person who engaged in the transaction or activity, is acting;

> (wa) "reporting entity" means a banking company, financial institution,
> intermediary or a person carrying on a designated business or profession;”

314\. Section 12 lays down various obligations on reporting entity to maintain
records. Section 12(1)(c) reads:

> “Section 12. Reporting entity to maintain records.­(l) Every reporting
> entity shall­ … … … …

> (c) verify the identity of its clients in such manner and subject to such
> conditions, as may be prescribed; “  302

315\. The Central Government in exercise of its rule making power has made
Rules, namely, the Prevention of Money­laundering (Maintenance of Records)
Rules, 2005 (hereinafter referred to as “Rules, 2005). In the present case
challenge is to Rule 9 as amended by Second Amendment Rules, 2017. We may thus
notice the amendments made in Rule 9 by Second Amendment Rules, 2017\. By
Second Amendment Rules, 2017, sub­Rule (4) to sub­Rule (9) of Rule 9 were
substituted in following manner:

> “(b) in rule 9, for sub­rule (4) to sub­rule (9), the following sub­rules
> shall be substituted, namely:— “(4) Where the client is an individual, who
> is eligible to be enrolled for an Aadhaar number, he shall for the purpose
> of sub­rule (1) submit to the reporting entity,—

> (a) the Aadhaar number issued by the Unique Identification Authority of
> India; and

> (b) the Permanent Account Number or Form No. 60 as defined in Income­tax
> Rules, 1962, and such other documents including in respect of the nature of
> business and financial status of the client as may be required by the
> reporting entity:

303

> Provided that where an Aadhaar number has not been assigned to a client, the
> client shall furnish proof of application of enrolment for Aadhaar and in
> case the Permanent Account Number is not submitted, one certified copy of an
> 'officially valid document' shall be submitted.

> Provided further that photograph need not be submitted by a client falling
> under clause (b) of sub­rule (1).

(4A) Where the client is an individual, who is not eligible to be enrolled for
an Aadhaar number, he shall for the purpose of sub­rule (1), submit to the
reporting entity, the Permanent Account Number or Form No. 60 as defined in
the Income­tax Rules, 1962:

Provided that if the client does not submit the Permanent Account Number, he
shall submit one certified copy of an ‘officially valid document' containing
details of his identity and address, one recent photograph and such other
documents including in respect of the nature or business and financial status
of the client as may be required by the reporting entity.

(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub­rules (4) and (4A), an
individual who desires to open a small account in a banking company may be
allowed to open such an account on production of a self­attested photograph
and affixation of signature or thumb print, as the case may be, on the form
for opening the account:

> Provided that­

> (i) the designated officer of the banking company, while opening the  304
> small account, certifies under his signature that the person opening the
> account has affixed his signature or thump print, as the case may be, in his
> presence;

(ii) the small account shall be opened only at Core Banking Solution linked
banking company branches or in a branch where it is possible to manually
monitor and ensure that foreign remittances are not credited to a small
account and that the stipulated limits on monthly and annual aggregate of
transactions and balance in such accounts are not breached, before a
transaction is allowed to take place;

(iii) the small account shall remain operational initially for a period of
twelve months, and thereafter for a further period of twelve months if the
holder of such an account provides evidence before the banking company of
having applied for any of the officially valid documents within twelve months
of the opening of the said account, with the entire relaxation provisions to
be reviewed in respect of the said account after twenty­four months;

(iv) the small account shall be monitored and when there is suspicion of money
laundering or financing of terrorism or other high risk scenarios, the
identity of client shall be established through the production of officially
valid documents, as referred to in sub­rule (4) and the Aadhaar number of the
client or where an Aadhaar number has  305 not been assigned to the client,
through the production of proof of application towards enrolment for Aadhaar
along with an officially valid document;

Provided further that if the client is not eligible to be enrolled for an
Aadhaar number, the identity of client shall be established through the
production of an officially valid document;

(v) the foreign remittance shall not be allowed to be credited into the small
account unless the identity of the client is fully established through the
production of officially valid documents, as referred to in sub rule (4) and
the Aadhaar number of the client or where an Aadhaar number has not been
assigned to the client, through the production of proof of application towards
enrolment for Aadhaar along with an officially valid document:

Provided that if the client is not eligible to be enrolled for the Aadhaar
number, the identity of client shall be established through the production of
an officially valid document.

(6) Where the client is a company, it shall for the purposes of sub­rule (1),
submit to the reporting entity the certified copies of the following
documents:—

(i) Certificate of incorporation;

(ii) Memorandum and Articles of Association;

306

(iii) A resolution from the Board of Directors and power of attorney granted
to its managers, officers or employees to transact on its behalf;

(iv) (a) Aadhaar numbers; and

(b) Permanent Account Numbers or Form 60 as defined in the Income­tax Rules,
1962.

issued to managers, officers or employees holding an attorney to transact on
the company’s behalf or where an Aadhaar number has not been assigned, proof
of application towards enrolment for Aadhaar and in case Permanent Account
Number is not submitted an officially valid document shall be submitted:

Provided that for the purpose of this clause if the managers, officers or
employees holding an attorney to transact on the company's behalf are not
eligible to be enrolled for Aadhaar number and do not submit the Permanent
Account Number, certified copy of an officially valid document shall be
submitted.

(7) Where the client is a partnership firm, it shall, for the purposes of
sub­rule (1), submit to the reporting entity the certified copies of the
following documents:—

(i) registration certificate;

(ii) partnership deed; and

(iii) (a) Aadhaar number; and

(b) Permanent Account Number or Form 60 as defined in the Income­tax Rules,
1962.

307

issued to the person holding an attorney to transact on its behalf or where an
Aadhaar number has not been assigned, proof of application towards enrolment
for Aadhaar and in case Permanent Account Number is not submitted an
officially valid document shall be submitted:

Provided that for the purpose of this clause, if the person holding an
attorney to transact on the company's behalf is not eligible to be enrolled
for Aadhaar number and does not submit the Permanent Account Number, certified
copy of an officially valid document shall be submitted.

(8) Where the client is a trust, it shall, for the purposes of sub­rule (1)
submit to the reporting entity the certified copies of the following
documents:—

(i) registration certificate;

(ii) trust deed; and

(iii) (a) Aadhaar number; and

(b) Permanent Account Number or Form 60 as defined in the Income­tax Rules,
1962, issued to the person holding an attorney to transact on its behalf or
where Aadhaar number has not been assigned, proof of application towards
enrolment for Aadhaar and in case Permanent Account Number is not submitted an
officially valid document shall be submitted:

Provided that for the purpose of this clause if the person holding an attorney
to transact on the  308 company's behalf is not eligible to be enrolled for
Aadhaar number and does not submit the Permanent Account Number, certified
copy of an officially valid document shall be submitted.

(9) Where the client is an unincorporated association or a body of
individuals, it shall submit to the reporting entity the certified copies of
the following documents:—

(i) resolution of the managing body of such association or body of
individuals;

(ii) power of attorney granted to him to transact on its behalf;

(iii) (a) the Aadhaar number; and

(b) Permanent Account Number or Form 60 as defined in the Income­tax Rules,
1962, issued to the person holding an attorney to transact on its behalf or
where Aadhaar number has not been assigned, proof of application towards
enrolment for Aadhaar and in case the Permanent Account Number is not
submitted an officially valid document shall be submitted; and

(iv) such information as may be required by the reporting entity to
collectively establish the legal existence of such an association or body of
individuals:

Provided that for the purpose of this clause if the person holding an attorney
to transact on the company’s behalf is not eligible to be enrolled for Aadhaar
number and does not  309 submit the Permanent Account Number, certified copy
of an officially valid document shall be submitted.”

(c) after sub­rule (14), the following sub­rules shall be inserted, namely,—
“(15) Any reporting entity, at the time of receipt of the Aadhaar number under
provisions of this rule, shall carry out authentication using either e­KYC
authentication facility or Yes/No authentication facility provided by Unique
Identification Authority of India.

(16) In case the client referred to in sub­rules (4) to (9) of rule 9 is not a
resident or is a resident in the States of Jammu and Kashmir, Assam or
Maghalaya and does not submit the Permanent Account Number, the client shall
submit to the reporting entity one certified copy of officially valid document
containing details of his identity and address, one recent photograph and such
other document including in respect of the nature of business and financial
status of the client as may be required by the reporting entity.

(17) (a) In case the client, eligible to be enrolled for Aadhaar and obtain a
Permanent Account Number, referred to in sub­rules (4) to (9) of rule 9 does
not submit the Aadhaar number or the Permanent Account Number at the time of
commencement of an account based relationship with a reporting entity, the
client shall submit the same within a period of six months  310 from the date
of the commencement of the account based relationship:

Provided that the clients, eligible to be enrolled for Aadhaar and obtain the
Permanent Account Number, already having an account based relationship with
reporting entities prior to date of this notification, the client shall submit
the Aadhaar number and Permanent Account Number by 31st December, 2017\.

(b) As per regulation 12 of the Aadhaar (Enrolment and Update) Regulations,
2016, the local authorities in the State Governments or Union­territory
Administrations have become or are in the process of becoming UIDAI Registrars
for Aadhaar enrolment and are organising special Aadhaar enrolment camps at
convenient locations for providing enrolment facilities in consultation with
UIDAI and any individual desirous of commencing an account based relationship
as provided in this rule, who does not possess the Aadhaar number or has not
yet enrolled for Aadhaar, may also visit such special Aadhaar enrolment camps
for Aadhaar enrolment or any of the Aadhaar enrolment centres in the vicinity
with existing registrars of UIDAI.

(c) In case the client fails to submit the Aadhaar number and Permanent
Account Number within the aforesaid six months period, the said account shall
cease to be operational till the time the Aadhaar number and  311 Permanent
Account Number is submitted by the client:

Provided that in case client already having an account based relationship with
reporting entities prior to date of this notification fails to submit the
Aadhaar number and Permanent Account Number by 31st December, 2017, the said
account shall cease to be operational till the time the Aadhaar number and
Permanent Account Number is submitted by the client.

(18) In case the identity information relating to the Aadhaar number or
Permanent Account Number submitted by the client referred to in sub­rules (4)
to (9) of rule 9 does not have current address of the client, the client shall
submit an officially valid document to the reporting entity.”

316\. The challenge to Second Amendment Rules, 2017 is on the ground that it
violate Articles 14, 19(1)(g), 21 and 300A of the Constitution of India;
Sections 3, 7 and 51 of the Aadhaar Act and also ultra vires to the provisions
of PMLA Act, 2002.

317\. Elaborating his submissions Shri Arvind P. Datar learned senior counsel
submits that Second Amendment Rules violate Article 14 and 21 since persons
choosing  312 not to enrol for Aadhaar number cannot operate bank account and
valid explanation has to be given as to why all banks have to be
authenticated.

318\. Violative of Article 19(1)(g) because the Rules refer to companies,
firms, trusts, etc. whereas Aadhaar Act is only to establish identity of
individuals. Violative of Article 300A since even temporary deprivation can
only be done by primary legislation. The Second Amendment Rules do not pass
proportionality test. No proper purpose has been established. No explanation
has been given that the measures undertaken to such are rationale and
connected to the fulfillment of the purpose and there are no alternative
measures with a lesser degree of legislation. When the banks have already
verified all accounts as per e­KYC norms, it is completely arbitrary to make
permanent linking/seeding of all Aadhaar numbers with the bank accounts.
Second Amendment Rules fail to satisfy the proportionality test, are
irrational, and manifestly arbitrary.  313

319\. Shri Tushar Mehta, learned Additional Solicitor General refuting the
submission, submits that Second Amendment Rules carry on the object of 2002,
Act. The verification of bank account by way of Aadhaar is done for the reason
that often bank accounts are opened in either fictitious names or in the name
of wrong persons on the basis of forged identity documents and financial
crimes are committed. It is seen that accommodation entries are mostly
provided through the banking channels by bogus companies to convert black
money into white. Benami transactions routinely take place through banking
channels. All of the above, can to a large extent be checked by verifying
Aadhaar with bank accounts to ensure that the account belongs to the person
who claims to be the account holder and that he or she is a genuine person.
Verification of bank account with Aadhaar also ensures that the direct benefit
transfer of subsidies reach the Aadhaar verified bank account and is not
diverted to some other account. Shell companies are often used to open bank
accounts to hold unaccounted money of other  314 entities under fictitious
identities which will also be curbed once Aadhaar verification is initiated.

320\. Now, we come to the respective submissions of the parties. A perusal of
the Second Amendment Rules, 2017 indicates that the State has sought to make
the provisions of PMLA more robust and ensure that the ultimate object of the
Act is achieved. Aadhaar Act, 2016 having been enacted with effect from
01.07.2016, it was decided to get the accounts verified by Aadhaar. Amended
Rules help all concerned to detect fictitious, ghost and benami accounts. The
object of the PMLA and the definition of beneficial owner Act seeks to
traverse behind the corporate veil of shell companies and spurious Directors
in order to ascertain the real natural persons controlling the accounts in the
reporting entities. The Amendment Rules applicable to reporting entities and
the legitimate aim sought to be achieved by the State that is conclusive
identification of a natural person or the beneficial owner. The statutory
rules cast an obligation on all account holders to get their identity verified
by  315 Aadhaar mechanism and those who are already holding account in the
reporting entity they are required to submit the Aadhaar number or proof of
their applied Aadhaar identity. When a statute puts obligation on account
holder to get identity verification in a particular manner a person chose not
to obtain Aadhaar number cannot complain his dis­entitlement of operating his
account. The submission of the petitioner that there is no valid explanation
as to why all bank accounts have to be authenticated also cannot be accepted.
Aadhaar provides a mechanism truly identifies an account holder, which
eliminates fraudulent accounts existed of non­existed persons and in ghost
names. The object of inserting the Rule is to make it possible to weed out
fake and duplicate PANs and false bank accounts. The Second Amendment Rules
are step in direction to cure the menace of fake bank accounts held by the
shell companies in the name of dummy directors, money laundering, terror
financing etc. It is relevant to notice that Aadhaar number is required to be
given at the time of opening of the  316 account based relationship and not
for every transaction conducted by an account holder of the bank. Those who
have already existing accounts are required to submit only once their Aadhaar
number for verification. The requirement of Aadhaar number being given only
for once is not any cumbersome or undue burden on an account holder. The
object of the Second Amendment Rules is towards the legitimate aim of the
State and having nexus with the object sought to be achieved by the enactment.
The submission of Aadhaar number only once by an account holder is a
proportionate measure. We have already referred to judgments where doctrine of
proportionality has been expounded. While adjudging a statutory provision from
the angle of the proportionality the Court has to examine as to whether
statutory measure contained in statutory provision is not excessive as against
the object which seeks to achieve. The legislature has margin of discretion
while providing for one or other measures to achieve an object. Unless the
measures foully unreasonable and disproportionate, court does  317 not
normally substitutes its opinion. On the basis of Rule 9(17)(c), petitioner
contends that in the event account holder fails to submit the Aadhaar number
and PAN within a period as mentioned in the aforesaid Rules account shall
cease to be operational till the time Aadhaar number and PAN is submitted by
the client. Petitioner alleged violation of Article 300A. The petitioner’s
case is that account of a person is his property to which he cannot be
deprived, saved by the authority of law. For non­submission of Aadhaar number
and PAN only consequence which is contemplated by sub­rule (c) is that account
shall cease to be operational. We are of the view that the account remains
belonging to the account holder and the amount in the account is only his
amount and there is no deprivation of the property of account holder. Under
the banking rules and procedures, there are several circumstances where
account becomes un­operational. A non­operational account also is an account
which belongs to the account holder and amount laying in the non­operational
account is neither forfeited by the  318 bank nor taken out from the said
account. Further, account is ceased operational only till the time Aadhaar
number and PAN is submitted. The consequences provided is only to effectuate
the purpose of the Act and the Rules i.e. account be verified by Aadhaar
mechanism. It is not the intent to deprive the account holder of the amount
lying in the account. We, thus, do not find any substance in the submission of
the petitioner that Rule 9(17)(c) violates right under Article 300A. Aadhaar
number providing for verification of an account also cannot be held to be
violating right under Article 21. The reporting entity i.e. banks and
financial institutions under various statutes are required to provide
information of a bank account to different authorities including income tax
authority, account verification by Aadhaar is not for the purpose of keeping a
track on the transaction done by an individual. As noted above Aadhaar number
has to be given only once for opening of the account or for verification of
the account and transactions are not  319 to be made on the basis of Aadhaar
verification each time.

321\. One of the submissions which has been made by the petitioner also is
that Rules violate Article 19(1)(g). It is submitted that Rule refers to
companies, firms, trusts etc. whereas Aadhaar Act is only to establish
identity of individual. For example sub­rule (6) of Rule 9 as amended by
Second Amendment Rules, 2017 provides that where client is a company, it shall
for the purposes of sub­rule (1), submit to the reporting entity the certified
copies of the documents enumerated therein. Rule requiring Aadhaar number and
PAN or Form 60 as defined in Income Tax Rules, 1962, issued to managers,
officers or employees holding an attorney to transact on the company’s behalf,
is for the purpose to find out the beneficial owner behind the company. One of
the objects of the Act is to detect money­laundering wherever it is found.
Inquiring details of the company to find out shell companies and ghost
companies and the real beneficial owner cannot be said to be foreign to the
320 object of the Act. Companies, partnership firms, trusts or incorporated
institutions or body of individuals cannot complain any violation of rights
under Article 19(1)(g). There is no amount of restriction in the right of
aforesaid in carrying out any profession, or any trade or business.
Petitioners have also contended that amended Rule 9 also violates Section 3, 7
and 51 of the Aadhaar Act. Section 3 provides for enrolment under Aadhaar
scheme. Section 7 provides for requirement of proof of Aadhaar number for
receipt of certain subsidies, benefits and services, etc. Section 51 relates
to delegation by the authority to any Member, officer of the authority or any
other person such of the powers and functions under the said Act except the
power under Section 54. Rules cannot be held in any manner violating Sections
3, 7 and 51. The rules provide for use of Aadhaar for verification of bank
account by law as contemplated by Section 57 of the Aadhaar Act.

322\. It is further submitted that Amendment Rules are also ultra vires to the
PMLA, 2002. Shri Arvind P  321 Datar has also referred to judgment of the U.K.
Supreme Court in Bank Mellat v. Her Majesty’s Treasury, (2013) UKSC 39. He has
relied on principle of proportionality as summed in paragraph 20 which is to
the following effect:

> “20....The classic formulation of the test is to be found in the advice of
> the Privy Council, delivered by Lord Clyde, in De Freitas v Permanent
> Secretary of Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries, Lands and Housing [1999] 1
> AC 69 at 80. But this decision, although it was a milestone in the
> development of the law, is now more important for the way in which it has
> been adapted and applied in the subsequent case­law, notably R (Daly) v
> Secretary of State for the Home Department [2001] 2 AC 532 (in particular
> the speech of Lord Steyn), R v Shayler [2003] 1 AC 247 at paras 57­59 (Lord
> Hope of Craighead), Huang v Secretary of State for the Home Department
> [2007] 2 AC 167 at para 19 (Lord Bingham of Cornhill) and R (Quila) v
> Secretary of State for the Home Department [2012] 1 AC 621 at para 45. Their
> effect can be sufficiently summarised for present purposes by saying that
> the question depends on an exacting analysis of the factual case advanced in
> defence of the measure, in order to determine (i) whether its objective is
> sufficiently important to justify the limitation of a fundamental right;
> (ii) whether it is rationally connected to the objective; (iii) whether a
> less intrusive measure could have been used; and (iv) whether, having regard
> to these matters and to the severity of the consequences, a fair balance has
> been struck between the rights of  322 the individual and the interests of
> the community. These four requirements are logically separate, but in
> practice they inevitably overlap because the same facts are likely to be
> relevant to more than one of them.”(emphasis added)

323\. The principles of proportionality as noticed in the aforesaid judgment
are substantially same which had been laid down in Puttaswamy case and Modern
Dental (supra) only one difference in the above two judgments is that although
both the judgments noticed the least intrusive test but in ultimate conclusion
the said test was not reflected in the ratio of the above two judgments.

324\. In the foregoing discussions, we come to the conclusion that Rule 9 of
Second Amendment Rules, 2017 fully satisfies three­fold test as laid down in
Puttaswamy case and the submission that the Rule is unconstitutional has to be
rejected. We answer Issue No. 14 in the following manner:­ Ans.14:­ Rule 9 as
amended by PMLA (Second Amendment) Rules, 2017 is not unconstitutional and
does not violate Articles 14, 19(1)(g), 21 & 300A  323 of the Constitution and
Sections 3, 7 & 51 of the Aadhaar Act. Further Rule 9 as amended is not ultra
vires to PMLA Act, 2002.

Issue No. 15 Circular dated 23.03.2017 issued by Ministry of Communications,
Department of Telecommunications

325\. The petitioners have attacked the circular dated 23.03.2017 and
submitted that the circular is ultra vires. By circular dated 23.03.2017,
Department of Telecommunications has directed that all licensees shall
re­verify all existing mobile subscribers (prepaid and postpaid) through
Aadhaar based e­kyc process. Petitioners submitted that linking the sim with
Aadhaar number is breach of privacy violating Article 21 of the Constitution.
Elaborating their challenge, it is contended that circular dated 23.03.2017 is
not covered by any of the provisions of Aadhaar Act neither Section 7 nor
Section 57. Circular dated 23.03.2017 is not a law under Part III of the
Constitution and thus same cannot put any restriction on privacy right. It is
submitted that  324 circular dated 23.03.2017 does not satisfy three­fold test
as laid down in Privacy judgment.

326\. Learned counsel for the respondents justifying the linking of Aadhaar
with sim card submits that non­ verifying sim cards, have caused serious
security threats, which has been noticed by this Court in several judgments.
It is submitted that circular dated 23.03.2017 was issued on the basis of
recommendation of Telecom Regulatory Authority of India. Respondents further
submits that circular dated 23.03.2017 has been issued in reference to this
Court's direction in Lokniti Foundation Vs. Union of India and Another, (2017)
7 SCC 155. This court having approved the action, no exception can be taken by
the petitioner to the circular dated 23.03.2017. It is submitted that the
Central Government, which has right to grant license can always put a
condition in the license obliging the licensee to verify the sim cards under
the Aadhaar verification. To impose such condition is in the statutory power
granted to the Government under Section 4 of the Indian Telegraph  325 Act,
1885.

327\. We need to scrutinise the circular dated 23.03.2017 on the ground of
attack alleged by the petitioners and justification as offered by the
respondents. Circular dated 23.03.2017 has been addressed by the Ministry of
Communications, Department of Telecommunications to all Unified
Licensees/Unified Access Service Licensees/Cellular Mobile Telephone Service
Licensees with subject: implementation of orders of Supreme Court regarding
100% E­KYC of existing subscribers. Para 1 to 3 of the circular may be
noticed, which are to the following effect:­ “Hon'ble Supreme Court, in its
order dated 06.02.2017 passed in Writ Petition (C) No. 607/2016 filed by
Lokniti Foundation v/s Union of India, while taking into cognizance of
"Aadhaar based E­KYC process for issuing new telephone connection" issued by
the Department, has inter­alia observed that "an effective process has been
evolved to ensure identity verification, as well as, the addresses of all
mobile phone subscribers for new subscribers. In the near future, and more
326 particularly, within one year from today, a similar verification will be
completed, in case of existing subscribers." This amounts to a direction which
is to be completed within a time frame of one year.

2\. A meeting was held on 13.02.2017 in the Department with the telecom
industry wherein UIDAI, TRAI and PMO representatives also participated to
discuss the way forward to implement the directions of Hon'ble Supreme Court.

Detailed discussions and deliberations were held in the meeting. The
suggestions received from the industry have been examined in the Department.

3\. Accordingly, after taking into consideration the discussions held in the
meeting and suggestions received from telecom industry, the undersigned is
directed to convey the approval of competent authority that all Licensees
shall re­verify all existing mobile subscribers (prepaid and postpaid) through
Aadhaar based E­KYC process as mentioned in this office letter no. 800­
29/2010­VAS dated 16.08.2016. The instructions mentioned in subsequent
paragraphs shall be strictly followed while carrying out the re­verification
exercise.”  327

328\. The circular of the Department of Telecommunications directing the
licensees to mandatorily verify existing sim subscribers in turn resulted in
mobile telephone service licensees directing the subscribers to get their sim
seeded with Aadhaar. Repeated messages and directions have been issued by
Cellular Mobile Telephone Service operators. Compulsory seeding of Aadhaar
with mobile numbers has to be treated to be an intrusion in Privacy Right of a
person. Any invasion on the Privacy Right of a person has to be backed by law
as per the three­fold test enumerated in Puttaswamy case (supra). Existence of
a law is the foremost condition to be fulfilled for restricting any Privacy
Right. Thus, we have to first examine whether circular dated 23.03.2017 can be
said to be a 'law'.

329\. The law as explained in Article 13(3) has to be applied for finding out
as to what is law. Article 13(3)(a) gives an inclusive definition of law in
following words:­

(a) “law” includes any Ordinance, order, bye­  328 law, rule, regulation,
notification, custom or usage having in the territory of India the force of
law;

330\. The circular dated 23.03.2017 at best is only an executive instruction
issued on 23.03.2017 by the Ministry of Communications, Department of
Telecommunications. The circular does not refer to any statutory provision or
statutory base for issuing the circular. The subject of circular as noted
above indicate that circular has been issued for implementation of orders of
Supreme Court regarding 100% E­KYC based re­verification of existing
subscribers. It is necessary to notice the judgment of this Court dated
06.02.2017, a reference to which is made in the circular itself. The order
dated 06.02.2017 was issued by this Court in a Writ Petition filed by Lokniti
Foundation Vs. Union of India and Another, (2017) 7 SCC 155. The petitioners
have filed a writ petition with a prayer that identity of each subscriber and
also the members should be verified so that unidentified and unverified
subscribers cannot misuse mobile phone. After issuing the notice, Union  329
of India had filed a counter affidavit, where Union of India stated that
Department has launched Aadhaar based E­KYC for issuing mobile connections on
16.8.2016.

331\. Paras 2 to 6 of the judgment, which is relevant for the present purpose
are as follows:­

2\. Consequent upon notice being issued to the Union of India, a short counter
affidavit has been filed on its behalf, wherein, it is averred as under:

> “22. That however, the department has launched `Aadhaar based E­KYC for
> issuing mobile connections' on 16th August, 2016 wherein the customer as
> well as Point of Sale (PoS) Agent of the TSP will be authenticated from
> Unique Identification Authority of India (UIDAI) based on their biometrics
> and their demographic data received from UIDAI is stored in the database of
> TSP along with time stamps. Copy of letter No.800­ 29/2010­VAS dated
> 16.08.2016 is annexed herewith and marked as Annexure R­1/10.

> 23\. As on 31.01.2017, 111.31 Crores Aadhaar card has been issued which
> represent 87.09% of populations.

However, still there are substantial number of persons who do not have Aadhaar
card because they may not be interested in having Aadhaar being 75 years or
more of age or not availing  330 any benefit of pension or Direct Benefit
Transfer (DBT). Currently Aadhaar card or biometric authentication is not
mandatory for obtaining a new telephone connection.

As a point of information, it is submitted that those who have Aadhaar
card/number normally use the same for obtaining a new telephone connection
using E­KYC process as mobile connection can be procured within few minutes in
comparison to 1­2 days being taken in normal course.

24\. That in this process, there will be almost `NIL' chances of delivery of
SIM to wrong person and the traceability of customer shall greatly improve.
Further, since no separate document for Proof of Address or Proof of Identity
will be taken in this process, there will be no chances of forgery of
documents.”

3\. The learned Attorney General, in his endeavour to demonstrate the
effectiveness of the procedure, which has been put in place, has invited our
attention to the application form, which will be required to be filled up, by
new mobile subscribers, using e­KYC process. It was the submission of the
learned Attorney General, that the procedure now being adopted, will be
sufficient to alleviate the fears, projected in the writ petition.

4\. Insofar as the existing subscribers are concerned, it was submitted on
behalf of the Union of India, that more than 90% of the subscribers are using
pre­paid connections. It was pointed out, that each pre­paid connection
holder, has to per force renew his  331 connection periodically, by making a
deposit for further user. It was submitted, that these 90% existing
subscribers, can also be verified by putting in place a mechanism, similar to
the one adopted for new subscribers. Learned Attorney General states, that an
effective programme for the same, would be devised at the earliest, and the
process of identity verification will be completed within one year, as far as
possible.

5\. In view of the factual position brought to our notice during the course of
hearing, we are satisfied, that the prayers made in the writ petition have
been substantially dealt with, and an effective process has been evolved to
ensure identity verification, as well as, the addresses of all mobile phone
subscribers for new subscribers. In the near future, and more particularly,
within one year from today, a similar verification will be completed, in the
case of existing subscribers. While complimenting the petitioner for filing
the instant petition, we dispose of the same with the hope and expectation,
that the undertaking given to this Court, will be taken seriously, and will be
given effect to, as soon as possible.

6\. The instant petition is disposed of, in the above terms.”

332\. Para 5 of the judgment contains the operative portion of the order,
which states "we dispose of the same with the hope and expectation, that the
undertaking given to this Court, will be taken  332 seriously, and will be
given effect to, as soon as possible”. The order of this Court as extracted
above itself states that the Court itself did not give any direction rather
noticed the stand of Union of India where it informed to the Court that the
department has already launched Aadhaar based e­KYC for issuing mobile
connections. For 90 per cent of the existing subscribers, Attorney General has
stated that an effective programme would be devised at the earliest and will
be completed within one year.

333\. We are clear in our mind that this Court on 06.02.2017 only noticed the
stand of the Union of India and disposed of the writ petition expecting that
undertaking given to this Court shall be given effect to.

334\. The circular dated 23.03.2017 cites the order of this Court as a
direction, which according to department was to be completed within the time
frame of one year. Circular further states that the meeting was held on
13.02.2017 in the Department with the  333 telecom industry wherein UIDAI,
TRAI and PMO representatives also participated.

335\. This Court thus in Lokniti case (supra) did not examine the Aadhaar
based e­KYC process in context of right of privacy. Thus, the order of this
Court dated 06.02.2017 cannot absolve the Government from justifying its
circular as per law.

336\. One of the submissions, which has been raised by the respondents to cite
a statutory base to the circular is that the circular has been issued in
pursuance of recommendation made by TRAI under Section 11(1)(a) of TRAI Act,
1997. Section 11 of the TRAI Act, 1997 provides for function of authority
Section 11(1)(a):­

(a) make recommendations, either suo motu or on a request from the licensor,
on the following matters, namely:—

(i) need and timing for introduction of new service provider;

(ii) terms and conditions of licence to a service provider;

(iii) revocation of licence for non­ compliance of terms and conditions of
licence;

334

xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx

337\. One of the functions of the TRAI is to give recommendations as per
Section 11(1)(a) on the matters enumerated therein. The recommendations of
TRAI were only recommendations and the mere fact that circular dated
23.03.2017 was issued after the recommendation was sent by TRAI, circular
dated 23.03.2017 does not acquire any statutory character. Circular dated
23.03.2017 thus cannot be held to be a law within the meaning of Part III of
the Constitution.

338\. Shri Rakesh Dwivedi, learned counsel appearing for the respondents has
submitted that the Central Government being licensor, it is fully entitled to
provide for any condition in its license, which condition becomes binding on
the licensee. Referring to license agreement for Unified Licensees, Shri
Dwivedi submits that one of the conditions in the agreement was Condition No.
16.1 which is to the following effect:­ "16.1 The Licensee shall be bound by
the  335 terms and conditions of this License Agreement as well as
instructions as are issued by the Licensor and by such
orders/directions/regulations of TRAI as per provisions of the TRAI Act, 1997
as amended from time to time.”

339\. Shri Dwivedi has also relied on a number of judgments in support of his
submissions that conditions can be validly laid down. he has relied on
Bagalkot Cement Co. Ltd. Vs. R.K. Pathan and Others, AIR 1963 SC 439, where
this Court while considering the Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) Act,
1946 observed that object of the Act was to require the employers to make the
conditions of employment precise and definite and the Act ultimately intended
to prescribe these conditions in the form of Standing Orders so that what used
to be governed by a contract herebefore would now be governed by the Statutory
Standing Orders.

340\. The above judgment at best can be read to mean that conditions, which
are enumerated in the Standing Orders become statutory conditions. No benefit
of the judgment can be taken by the respondents in the  336 present case since
even if it is put in the condition in the agreement between licensee and
subscribers that licensee shall be bound to instructions as issued by
licensor, the said condition does not become statutory nor take shape of a
law. Sukhdev Singh and Others Vs. Bhagatram Sardar Singh Raghuvanshi and
Another, (1975) 1 SCC 421 was relied, where this Court held that rules and
regulations framed by ONGC, LIC and Industrial Finance Corporation have the
force of law. There cannot be any denial that rules framed under statutory
provisions will have force of law, thus, this case has no application.
Similarly, reliance on Lily Kurian Vs. Sr. Lewina and Others, (1979) 2 SCC
124, Alpana V. Mehta Vs. Maharashtra State Board of Secondary Education and
Another, (1984) 4 SCC 27, St. Johns Teachers Training Institute Vs. Regional
Director, National Council for Teacher Education and Another, (2003) 3 SCC 321
were all cases, where conditions were laid down under the regulations, which
were statutory in nature. Those cases in no manner help the respondents.

337

341\. Shri Dwivedi has also relied on judgment of this Court in Union of India
and Another Vs. Association of Unified Telecom Service Providers of India and
Others, (2011) 10 SCC 543. This Court referring to Section 4 of the Telegraph
Act laid down following in paragraph 39:­ “39. The proviso to Sub­section (1)
of Section 4 of the Telegraph Act, however, enables the Central Government to
part with this exclusive privilege in favour of any other person by granting a
license in his favour on such conditions and in consideration of such payments
as it thinks fit. As the Central Government owns the exclusive privilege of
carrying on telecommunication activities and as the Central Government alone
has the right to part with this privilege in favour of any person by granting
a license in his favour on such conditions and in consideration of such terms
as it thinks fit, a license granted under proviso to Sub­section (1) of
Section 4 of the Telegraph Act is in the nature of a contract between the
Central Government and the licensee.”

342\. There cannot be any dispute to the right of the Central Government to
part with exclusive privilege in favour of any person by granting license on
such a condition and in consideration of such terms as it  338 thinks fit. But
mere issuing an instruction to the licensees to adopt mandatory process of
e­KYC by Aadhaar verification in no manner exalt the instructions or
directives as a law. Circular dated 23.03.2017, thus, cannot be held to be a
law and direction to re­verification of all existing mobile subscribers
through Aadhaar based e­KYC cannot be held to be backed by law, hence cannot
be upheld.

343\. There is one more aspect of the matter, which needs to be looked into.
Aadhaar Act has only two provisions under which Aadhaar can be used, i.e.
Section 7 and Section 57. Present is not a case of Section 7 since present is
not a case of receiving any subsidy, benefit or service. What Section 57
contemplate is that "use of Aadhaar can be provided by a law". Words "by a
law" used in Section 57 obviously mean a valid law framed by competent
legislation and other than the Aadhaar Act. No law has been framed by
permitting use of Aadhaar for verification of sim of existing subscribers.
There being no law framed for such use of Aadhaar, Section 57 is also not
attracted.  339

344\. There are only above two contingencies, where Aadhaar can be used and
circular dated 23.03.2017 being not covered by any of above contingencies,
circular dated 23.03.2017 deserves to be set aside. Ans.15:­ Circular dated
23.03.2017 being unconstitutional is set aside.

Issue No. 16 Whether Aadhaar Act is a Money Bill and decision of Speaker
certifying it as Money Bill is not subject to Judicial Review of this Court?

345\. The Aadhaar Act has been passed by Parliament as Money Bill. Shri P.
Chidambaram, learned senior counsel appearing for the petitioners contends
that Aadhaar Act is not a Money Bill, it being not covered by any of the
Clauses under Article 110 of the Constitution of India. He further submits
that decision of the Speaker certifying Aadhaar Bill as Money Bill being
illegal and contrary to the express constitutional provisions deserves to be
interfered with and such decision of the Speaker is also subject to Judicial
Review by this Court. The word “only”  340 used in Article 110 has
significance and a Bill, which does not contain only, the provisions
pertaining to Clause (a) to (f) cannot be regarded as Money Bill. Respondents
cannot fall on Clause (g) to support the Money Bill, which clause cannot be
invoked unless the provisions of Bill are covered by any of the clauses from
(a) to (f).

346\. Shri K.K. Venugopal, learned Attorney General refuting the above
submission submits that Aadhaar Bill has correctly been passed as Money Bill.
He submits that the certification granted by Speaker that Aadhaar Bill is a
Money Bill has been made final by virtue of Article 110(3), hence it cannot be
questioned in any Court. The decision of Speaker certifying the Bill as Money
Bill is not subject to Judicial Review. It is further submitted by learned
Attorney General that even on looking the Aadhaar Bill on merits, it satisfies
the conditions as enumerated under Article 110(1). He submits that Aadhaar
Bill is clearly referable to Clause(c), Clause(e) and Clause(g) of Article
110(1). He submits that the  341 heart of the Aadhaar Act is Section 7 which
is with regard to payment of subsidies, benefits or services and for which the
expenditure is incurred form the Consolidated Fund of India. Article 122 also
puts an embargo in questioning validity of any proceedings in Parliament.
Certification of Bill as Money Bill is matter of Parliamentary procedure hence
Article 122 also save the said decision from being questioned in a Court of
Law.

347\. Article 110 and Article 122, which falls for consideration in the
present case are as follows:­ “110. Definition of "Money Bills".­ (1) For the
purposes of this Chapter, a Bill shall be deemed to be a Money Bill if it
contains only provisions dealing with all or any of the following matters,
namely:­

(a) the imposition, abolition, remission, alteration or regulation of any tax;

(b) the regulation of the borrowing of money or the giving of any guarantee by
the Government of India, or the amendment of the law with respect to any
financial obligations undertaken or to be undertaken by the Government of
India;

(c) the custody of the Consolidated Fund or the Contingency Fund of  342
India, the payment of moneys into or the withdrawal of moneys from any such
Fund;

(d) the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of India;

(e) the declaring of any expenditure to be expenditure charged on the
Consolidated Fund of India or the increasing of the amount of any such
expenditure;

(f) the receipt of money on account of the Consolidated Fund of India or the
public account of India or the custody or issue of such money or the audit of
the accounts of the Union or of a State; or

(g) any matter incidental to any of the matters specified in sub­clauses

(a) to (f).

(2) A Bill shall not be deemed to be a Money Bill by reason only that it
provides for the imposition of fines or other pecuniary penalties, or for the
demand or payment of fees for licences or fees for services rendered, or by
reason that it provides for the imposition, abolition, remission, alteration
or regulation of any tax by any local authority or body for local purposes.
(3) If any question arises whether a Bill is a Money Bill or not, the decision
of the Speaker of the House of the People thereon shall be final.

4) There shall be endorsed on every Money Bill when it is transmitted to the
Council of States under article 109, and when it is presented to the President
for assent under article 111, the certificate of the Speaker of the House of
the People signed by him that it is a Money Bill.

343

122\. Courts not to inquire into proceedings of Parliament.­(1) The validity
of any proceedings in Parliament shall not be called in question on the ground
of any alleged irregularity of procedure.

(2) No officer or member of Parliament in whom powers are vested by or under
this Constitution for regulating procedure or the conduct of business, or for
maintaining order, in Parliament shall be subject to the jurisdiction of any
court in respect of the exercise by him of those powers.”

348\. We need to first advert to the submission pertaining to question as to
whether decision of Speaker certifying the Bill as Money Bill is subject to
Judicial Review of this Court or being related to only procedure, is immuned
from Judicial Review under Article 122. Article 110(3) gives finality to the
decision of the Speaker of the House of the People on question as to whether a
Bill is Money Bill or not. The word occurring in sub­article (3) of Article
110 are “shall be final”. Article 122(1) puts an embargo on questioning the
validity of any proceeding in the Parliament on the ground of any alleged
irregularity or procedure. The Constitution uses different expressions in
different articles like “shall be  344 final”, “shall not be questioned”,
“shall not be questioned in any Court of Law” etc.

349\. This Court has examined the scope of Judicial Review in reference to
Parliamentary proceedings. A similar Constitutional provision giving finality
to the decision of the Speaker is contained in Para 6 of Tenth Schedule where
a question whether a person has become disqualified or not is to be referred
to the decision of the Chairman or the Speaker and his decision shall be
final. Para 6 sub­clause(1) is quoted as below:­ “6. Decision on questions as
to disqualification on ground of defection.— (1) If any question arises as to
whether a member of a House has become subject to disqualification under this
Schedule, the question shall be referred for the decision of the Chairman or,
as the case may be, the Speaker of such House and his decision shall be final:

Provided that where the question which has arisen is as to whether the
Chairman or the Speaker of a House has become subject to such
disqualification, the question shall be referred for the decision of such
member of the House as the House may elect in this behalf and his decision
shall be final.”  345

350\. The Constitution Bench had occasion to consider Para 6 in Kihoto
Hollohan Vs. Zachillhu and Others, 1992 Supp. (2) SCC 651, Justice M.N.
Venkatachaliah, as he then was elaborately considered the rival contentions.
It was also contended before this Court that in view of the finality of the
decision of the Speaker in Para 6 of Tenth Schedule, the decision of the
Speaker is beyond Judicial Review. In Para 78, following has been stated:­
“78. These two contentions have certain overlapping areas between them and
admit of being dealt with together. Paragraph 6(1) of the Tenth Schedule seeks
to impart a statutory finality to the decision of the Speaker or the Chairman.
The argument is that, this concept of `finality' by itself, excludes Courts'
jurisdiction. Does the word "final" render the decision of the Speaker immune
from Judicial Review? It is now well accepted that a finality clause is not a
legislative magical incantation which has that effect of telling off Judicial
Review. Statutory finality of a decision presupposes and is subject to its
consonance with the statute...............” In Para 80 to 85, following has
been held:­

80\. In Durga Shankar Mehta v. Raghuraj Singh, AIR 1954 SC 520 the order of
the Election Tribunal was made final and  346 conclusive by Section 105 of the
Representation of the People Act, 1951. The contention was that the finality
and conclusiveness clauses barred the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court under
Article 136. This contention was repelled. It was observed: (AIR p. 522)
...[B]ut once it is held that it is a judicial tribunal empowered and obliged
to deal judicially with disputes arising out of or in connection with
election, the overriding power of this Court to grant special leave, in proper
cases, would certainly be attracted and this power cannot be excluded by any
parliamentary legislation.

... But once that Tribunal has made any determination or adjudication on the
matter, the powers of this Court to interfere by way of special leave can
always be exercised......

... The powers given by Article 136 of the Constitution however are in the
nature of special or residuary powers which are exercisable outside the
purview of ordinary law, in cases where the needs of justice demand
interference by the Supreme Court of the land....

Section 105 of the Representation of the People Act certainly gives finality
to the decision of the Election Tribunal so far as that Act is concerned and
does not provide for any further appeal but that cannot in any way cut down or
effect the overriding powers which this Court can exercise in the matter of
granting special leave under  347 Article 136 of the Constitution.

81\. Again, in Union of India v. Jyoti Prakash Mitter [1971] 3 SCR 483 a
similar finality clause in Article 217(3) of the Constitution camp up for
consideration. This Court said: (SCC pp.410­1, Para32) ...The President acting
under Article 217(3) performs a judicial function of grave importance under
the scheme of our Constitution. He cannot act on the advice of his Ministers.

Notwithstanding the declared finality of the order of the President the Court
has jurisdiction in appropriate cases to set aside the order, if it appears
that it was passed on collateral considerations or the rules of natural
justice were not observed, or that the President's judgment was coloured by
the advice or representation made by the executive or it was founded on no
evidence."

82\. Referring to the expression "final"

occurring in Article 311(3) of the Constitution this Court in Union of India
v. Tulsiram Patel, [1985] Supp. 2 SCR 131 held: (SCC p.507. Para 138) ...The
finality given by Clause (3) of Article 311 to the disciplinary authority's
decision that it was not reasonably practicable to hold the inquiry is not
binding upon the court. The court will also examine the charge of mala fides,
if any, made in the writ petition. In examining the relevancy of the reasons,
the court will consider the situation which according to the disciplinary
authority made it come  348 to the conclusion that it was not reasonably
practicable to hold the inquiry. If the court finds that the reasons are
irrelevant, then the recording of its satisfaction by the disciplinary
authority would be an abuse of power conferred upon it by Clause (b)....

83\. If the intendment is to exclude the jurisdiction of the superior Courts,
the language would quite obviously have been different. Even so, where such
exclusion is sought to be effected by an amendment the further question
whether such an amendment would be destructive of a basic feature of the
Constitution would arise. But comparison of the language in Article 363(1)
would bring out in contrast the kind of language that may be necessary to
achieve any such purpose.

84\. In Brundaban Nayak v. Election Commission of India [1965] 3 SCR 53, in
spite of finality attached by Article 192 to the decision of the Governor in
respect of disqualification incurred by a member of a State Legislature
subsequent to the election, the matter was examined by this Court on an appeal
by special leave under Article 136 of the Constitution against the decision of
the High Court dismissing the writ petition filed under Article 226 of the
Constitution.

Similarly in Union of India v. Jyoti Prakash Mitter [1971] 3 SCR 483, in spite
of finality attached to the order of the President with regard to the
determination of age of a Judge of the High Court under Article 217(3) of the
Constitution, this Court examined the legality of the order passed by the
President during the pendency of an appeal filed under Article 136 of the
Constitution.

85\. There is authority against the acceptability of the argument that the
word  349 "final" occurring in Paragraph 6(1) has the effect of excluding the
jurisdiction of the Courts in Articles 136, 226 and 227.”

351\. The above Constitution Bench Judgment clearly support the case of the
petitioners that finality attached to the decision of the Speaker under
Article 110(3) does not inhibit the Court in exercising its Judicial Review.
We may also refer to the Constitution Bench judgment of this Court in Special
Reference No. 1 of 1964, AIR 1965 SC 745 where this Court had occasion to
consider Article 212, which is a provision relating to the legislature of the
State para materia to Article 122. Constitution Bench has held that what is
protected under Article 212 from being questioned is on the ground of any
alleged irregularity or procedure. The said ground does not apply in case of
illegality of the decision. The next case, which needs to be considered is
again a Constitution Bench judgment of this Court in Raja Rampal Vs. Hon'ble
Speaker, Lok Sabha and Others, (2007) 3 SCC 184. The Constitution Bench in the
above case had occasion to  350 consider the question of issue of Judicial
Review of a decision of Speaker disqualifying from membership of the
Parliament. A submission was raised before the Court by virtue of Article 122
of the Constitution, which puts an embargo on questioning any proceeding of
the Parliament, the decision of the Speaker is immuned from the Judicial
Review. The above submission has been noticed in Para 364 of the judgment in
following words:­ “364. The submissions of the learned Counsel for the Union
of India and the learned Additional Solicitor General seek us to read a
finality clause in the provisions of Article 122(1) in so far as parliamentary
proceedings are concerned. On the subject of finality clauses and their effect
on power of judicial review, a number of cases have been referred that may be
taken note of at this stage. ”

352\. In Paras 376, 377, 384 and 386 following has been held:­ “376. In our
considered view, the principle that is to be taken note of in the
aforementioned series of cases is that notwithstanding the existence of
finality clauses, this Court exercised its jurisdiction of judicial review
whenever and  351 wherever breach of fundamental rights was alleged. The
President of India while determining the question of age of a Judge of a High
Court under Article 217(3), or the President of India (or the Governor, as the
case may be) while taking a decision under Article 311(3) to dispense with the
ordinarily mandatory inquiry before dismissal or removal of a civil servant,
or for that matter the Speaker (or the Chairman, as the case may be) deciding
the question of disqualification under Para 6 of the Tenth Schedule may be
acting as authorities entrusted with such jurisdiction under the
constitutional provisions. Yet, the manner in which they exercised the said
jurisdiction is not wholly beyond the judicial scrutiny. In the case of the
Speaker exercising jurisdiction under the Tenth Schedule, the proceedings
before him are declared by Para 6(2) of the Tenth Schedule to be proceedings
in Parliament within the meaning of Article

122\. Yet, the said jurisdiction was not accepted as non­justifiable. In this
view, we are unable to subscribe to the proposition that there is absolute
immunity available to the Parliamentary proceedings relating to Article
105(3). It is a different matter as to what parameters, if any, should
regulate or control the judicial scrutiny of such proceedings.

377\. In U.P. Assembly case (Special Reference No.1 of 1964), AIR 1965 SC 745,
the issue was authoritatively settled by this Court, and it was held, at SCR
pp. 455­56, as under: (AIR p.768, para 62) “Article 212(1) seems to make it
possible for a citizen to call in question in the appropriate court of law the
validity of any proceedings  352 inside the legislative chamber if his case is
that the said proceedings suffer not from mere irregularity of procedure, but
from an illegality. If the impugned procedure is illegal and unconstitutional,
it would be open to be scrutinized in a court of law, though such scrutiny is
prohibited if the complaint against the procedure is no more than this that
the procedure was irregular.” (Emphasis supplied)

384\. The prohibition contained in Article 122(1) does not provide immunity in
cases of illegalities. In this context, reference may also be made to Sarojini
Ramaswami v. Union of India, (1992) 4 SCC 506. The case mainly pertained to
Article 124(4) read with the Judges (Inquiry) Act, 1968. While dealing, inter
alia, with the overriding effect of the rules made under Article 124(5) over
the rules made under Article 118, this Court at pp. 187­88 made the following
observations: (SCC p. 572, para 94) “94. We have already indicated the
constitutional scheme in India and the true import of clauses(4) and (5) of
Article 124 read with the law enacted under Article 124(5), namely, the Judges
(Inquiry) Act, 1968 and the Judges (Inquiry) Rules, 1969, which, inter alia
contemplate the provision for an opportunity to the Judge concerned to show
cause against the finding of 'guilty' in the report before Parliament takes it
up for consideration along with the motion for his removal. Along with the
decision in U.P. Assembly Case  353 (Special Reference No. 1 of 1964) has to
be read the declaration made in Sub­Committee on Judicial Accountability,
(1991) 4 SCC 699 that 'a law made under Article 124(5) will override the rules
made under Article 118 and shall be binding on both the Houses of Parliament.
A violation of such a law would constitute illegality and could not be immune
from judicial scrutiny under Article 122(1).' The scope of permissible
challenge by the Judge concerned to the order of removal made by the President
under Article 124(4) in the judicial review available after making of the
order of removal by the President will be determined on these considerations.”
(Emphasis supplied)

386\. Article 122(1) thus must be found to contemplate the twin test of
legality and constitutionality for any proceedings within the four walls of
Parliament. The fact that the U.P. Assembly case (Special Reference No.1 of
1964) dealt with the exercise of the power of the House beyond its four walls
does not affect this view which explicitly interpreted a constitutional
provision dealing specifically with the extent of judicial review of the
internal proceedings of the legislative body. In this view, Article 122(1)
displaces the English doctrine of exclusive cognizance of internal proceedings
of the House rendering irrelevant the case law that emanated from courts in
that jurisdiction. Any attempt to read a limitation into Article 122 so as to
restrict the court's jurisdiction to examination of the Parliament's procedure
in case of unconstitutionality, as opposed to illegality  354 would amount to
doing violence to the constitutional text. Applying the principle of
"expressio unius est exclusio alterius" (whatever has not been included has by
implication been excluded), it is plain and clear that prohibition against
examination on the touchstone of "irregularity of procedure"

    
    
         does   not   make   taboo   judicial   review   on
         findings          of          illegality             or
         unconstitutionality.” 
    
    
    
    

353\. The above case is a clear authority for the proposition that Article 122
does not provide for immunity in case of illegality. What is protected is only
challenge on the ground of any irregularity or procedure. The immunity from
calling in question the Parliamentary decision on the ground of violation of
procedure as has been provided in the Constitution is in recognition of the
principles that Parliament has privilege regarding procedure and any challenge
on the ground of violation of any procedure is not permissible.

354\. Shri K.K. Venugopal relied on Two Judgments of this Court in support of
his submission namely, Mohd. Saeed Siddiqui Vs. State of Uttar Pradesh and
Another,  355 (2014) 11 SCC 415 and Yogendra Kumar Jaiswal and Others Vs.
State of Bihar and Others, (2016) 3 SCC

183\. He submits that in both the decisions, this Court while dealing with the
question of challenge to Money Bill has clearly held that the decision of
Speaker certifying a Bill as Money Bill is final and cannot be questioned.

355\. We need to consider the above decisions in detail. Mohd. Saeed Siddiqui
(supra) was a judgment delivered by a Three Judge Bench of this Court. U.P.
Lokayukta Act and U.P. Lokayukta (Amendment) Act, 2012 was subject matter of
challenge. One of the submissions in that regard has been noted in Para 12,
which is to the following effect:­ “12. It was further submitted by Mr.
Venugopal that the Amendment Act was not even passed by the State Legislature
in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution of India and is, thus, a
mere scrap of paper in the eye of the law. The Bill in question was presented
as a Money Bill when, on the face of it, it could never be called as a Money
Bill as defined in Articles 199(1) and 199(2) of the Constitution of India.
Since the procedure for an Ordinary Bill was not followed and the assent of
the Governor was obtained to an inchoate and incomplete Bill  356 which had
not even gone through the mandatory requirements under the Constitution of
India, the entire action was unconstitutional and violative of Article 200 of
the Constitution of India.”

356\. This Court after noticing Articles 199 and 212, which are pari materia
to Articles 109 and 122 stated that proceeding in support of legislature
cannot be called into question on the ground that they have not been carried
on in accordance with the rules of business. This Court considered the issues
from Paragraphs 34 to 38, which is to the following effect:­ “34. The above
provisions make it clear that the finality of the decision of the Speaker and
the proceedings of the State Legislature being important privilege of the
State Legislature, viz., freedom of speech, debate and proceedings are not to
be inquired by the Courts. The "proceeding of the legislature" includes
everything said or done in either House in the transaction of the
Parliamentary business, which in the present case is enactment of the
Amendment Act. Further, Article 212 precludes the courts from interfering with
the presentation of a Bill for assent to the Governor on the ground of
non­compliance with the procedure for passing Bills, or from otherwise
questioning the Bills passed by the House. To put it clear, proceedings inside
the legislature cannot be called into question on the ground that they  357
have not been carried on in accordance with the Rules of Business. This is
also evident from Article 194 which speaks about the powers, privileges of the
Houses of the Legislature and of the members and committees thereof.

35\. We have already quoted Article 199. In terms of Article 199(3), the
decision of the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly that the Bill in question
was a Money Bill is final and the said decision cannot be disputed nor can the
procedure of the State Legislature be questioned by virtue of Article 212. We
are conscious of the fact that in the decision of this Court in Raja Ram Pal
v. Lok Sabha (2007) 3 SCC 184, it has been held that the proceedings which may
be tainted on account of substantive or gross irregularity or
unconstitutionality are not protected from judicial scrutiny.

36\. Even if it is established that there was some infirmity in the procedure
in the enactment of the Amendment Act, in terms of Article 255 of the
Constitution the matters of procedures do not render invalid an Act to which
assent has been given by the President or the Governor, as the case may be.

37\. In M.S.M. Sharma v. Shree Krishna Sinha AIR 1960 SC 1186 and Mangalore
Ganesh Beedi Works v. State of Mysore, AIR 1963 SC 589, the Constitution
Benches of this Court held that:

> (i) the validity of an Act cannot be challenged on the ground that it
> offends Articles 197 to 199 and the procedure laid down in Article 202;

> (ii) Article 212 prohibits the validity of any proceedings in a Legislature
> of a State from being called in question on the ground of  358 any alleged
> irregularity of procedure; and

> (iii) Article 255 lays down that the requirements as to recommendation and
> previous sanction are to be regarded as a matter of procedure only.

> It is further held that the validity of the proceedings inside the
> legislature of a State cannot be called in question on the allegation that
> the procedure laid down by the law has not been strictly followed and that
> no Court can go into those questions which are within the special
> jurisdiction of the legislature itself, which has the power to conduct its
> own business.

> 38\. Besides, the question whether a Bill is a Money Bill or not can be
> raised only in the State Legislative Assembly by a member thereof when the
> Bill is pending in the State Legislature and before it becomes an Act. It is
> brought to our notice that in the instant case no such question was ever
> raised by anyone. ”

357\. This Court came to the conclusion that question pertaining to the
procedure in the House could not have been questioned by virtue of Article
212. Another judgment, which has been relied by learned Attorney General is
judgment of this Court in Yogendra Kumar Jaiswal (supra). The above judgment
was rendered by Two Judge Bench. This Court in the above case examined the
question whether introduction of  359 Orissa Special Courts Act, 2006 as a
Money Bill could be called in question in a Court. This Court considered the
issue in Paragraphs 38 to 43, which are to the following effect:­ “38. First,
we shall take up the issue pertaining to the introduction of the Bill as a
Money bill in the State Legislature. Mr. Vinoo Bhagat, learned Counsel
appearing for some of the appellants, has laid emphasis on the said aspect.
Article 199 of the Constitution, defines “Money Bills”. For our present
purpose, Clause (3) of Article 199 being relevant is reproduced below:

> “199.(3). If any question arises whether a Bill introduced in the
> legislature of a State which has a Legislative Council is a Money Bill or
> not, the decision of the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly of such State
> thereon shall be final.

We have extracted the same as we will be referring to the authorities as
regards interpretation of the said clause.

39\. Placing reliance on Article 199, the learned Counsel would submit that
the present Act which was introduced as a money bill has remotely any
connection with the concept of money bill. It is urged by him that the State
has made a Sisyphean endeavour to establish some connection. The High Court to
repel the challenge had placed reliance upon Article 212 which stipulates that
the validity of any proceedings in the Legislature of a State shall not be
called in question on the ground of any alleged irregularity of procedure.

40\. The learned Counsel for the appellants  360 has drawn inspiration from a
passage from Powers, Privileges and Immunities of State Legislatures. In re,
Special Reference No. 1 of 1964 AIR 1965 SC 745, wherein it has been held that
Article 212(1) lays down that the validity of any proceedings in the
legislature of a State shall not be called in question on the ground of any
alleged irregularity of procedure and Article 212(2) confers immunity on the
officers and members of the legislature in whom powers are vested by or under
the Constitution for regulating procedure or the conduct of business, or for
maintaining order, in the legislature from being subject to the jurisdiction
of any court in respect of the exercise by him of those powers. The Court
opined that Article 212(1) seems to make it possible for a citizen to call in
question in the appropriate court of law the validity of any proceedings
inside the Legislative Chamber if his case is that the said proceedings suffer
not from mere irregularity of procedure, but from an illegality. If the
impugned procedure is illegal and unconstitutional, it would be open to be
scrutinised in a court of law, though such scrutiny is prohibited if the
complaint against the procedure is not more than that the procedure was
irregular. Thus, the said authority has made a distinction between illegality
of procedure and irregularity of procedure.

41\. Our attention has also been drawn to certain paragraphs from the
Constitution Bench decision in Raja Ram Pal v. Lok Sabha (2007) 3 SCC 184. In
the said case, in paras 360 and 366, it has been held thus: (SCC pp.

347 & 350) “360. The question of extent of judicial review of parliamentary
matters has to be resolved with  361 reference to the provision contained in
Article 122(1) that corresponds to Article 212 referred to in M.S.M.

Sharma v. Shree Krishna Sinha AIR 1960 SC 1186 [Pandit Sharma (2)]. On a plain
reading, Article 122(1) prohibits "the validity of any proceedings in
Parliament” from being 'called in question' in a court merely on the ground of
"irregularity of procedure". In other words, the procedural irregularities
cannot be used by the court to undo or vitiate what happens within the four
walls of the legislature. But then, "procedural irregularity" stands in stark
contrast to "substantive illegality' which cannot be found included in the
former. We are of the considered view that this specific provision with regard
to check on the role of the judicial organ vis­à­vis proceedings in Parliament
uses language which is neither vague nor ambiguous and, therefore, must be
treated as the constitutional mandate on the subject, rendering unnecessary
search for an answer elsewhere or invocation of principles of harmonious
construction.

* * * 

366\. The touchstone upon which parliamentary actions within the four walls of
the legislature were examined was both the constitutional as well as
substantive law. The proceedings which may be tainted on account of
substantive illegality or unconstitutionality, as opposed to those suffering
from mere irregularity thus cannot be held  362 protected from judicial
scrutiny by Article 122(1) inasmuch as the broad principle laid down in
Bradlaugh (1884) LR 12 QBD 271 : 53 LJQB 290 :

50 LT 620 (DC), acknowledging exclusive cognizance of the legislature in
England has no application to the system of governance provided by our
Constitution wherein no organ is sovereign and each organ is amenable to
constitutional checks and controls, in which scheme of things, this Court is
entrusted with the duty to be watchdog of and guarantor of the Constitution.”

42\. In this regard, we may profitably refer to the authority in Mohd. Saeed
Siddiqui v.

State of U.P. (2014) 11 SCC 415, wherein a three­Judge Bench while dealing
with such a challenge, held that Article 212 precludes the courts from
interfering with the presentation of a Bill for assent to the Governor on the
ground of non­compliance with the procedure for passing Bills, or from
otherwise questioning the Bills passed by the House, for proceedings inside
the legislature cannot be called into question on the ground that they have
not been carried on in accordance with the Rules of Business.

Thereafter, the Court referring to Article 199(3) ruled that the decision of
the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly that the Bill in question was a Money
Bill is final and the said decision cannot be disputed nor can the procedure
of the State Legislature be questioned by virtue of Article 212. The Court
took note of the decision in Raja Ram Pal (supra) wherein it has been held
that the proceedings which may be tainted on account of substantive or gross
irregularity or unconstitutionality are not protected from  363 judicial
scrutiny. Eventually, the Court repelled the challenge.

43\. In our considered opinion, the authorities cited by the learned Counsel
for the appellants do not render much assistance, for the introduction of a
Bill, as has been held in Mohd. Saeed Siddiqui (supra), comes within the
concept of "irregularity" and it does come with the realm of substantiality.
What has been held in the Special Reference No. 1 of 1964 (supra) has to be
appositely understood. The factual matrix therein was totally different than
the case at hand as we find that the present controversy is wholly covered by
the pronouncement in Mohd. Saeed Siddiqui (supra) and hence, we unhesitatingly
hold that there is no merit in the submission so assiduously urged by the
learned Counsel for the appellants.”

358\. The consideration in the above case indicate that this Court has merely
relied on judgment of Three Judge Bench in Mohd. Saeed Siddiqui (supra). The
Court based its decision on finality attached to the decision of the Speaker
in Article 199(3) as well as bar on challenge of proceeding of the legislature
on an irregularity procedure as contained in Article

212\. The question is, where a Speaker certify a Bill as a Money Bill and it
is introduced and passed as a Money Bill, this only a question of procedure or
not? Article 107 contains provisions as to introduction of  364 passing of
bills. Article 107(2) state that subject to the provisions of Articles 108 and
109, a Bill shall not be deemed to have been passed by the Houses of
Parliament unless it has been agreed to by both Houses of Parliament. However,
the requirement of passing a Bill by both the Houses is not applicable in case
of Money Bills. Article 110 defines as to what is the Money Bill. A Money Bill
is constitutionally defined and a Bill shall be a Money Bill only if it is
covered by Article 110(1). A Bill, which does not fulfill the conditions as
enumerated in Article 110(1) and it is certified as Money Bill, whether the
Constitutional conditions enumerated in Article 110(1) shall be overridden
only by certificate of Speaker?

359\. We have noticed the Constitution Bench Judgment in Kihoto Hollohan
(supra) and Raja Ram Pal (supra) that finality of the decision of the Speaker
is not immuned from Judicial Review. All Bills are required to be passed by
both Houses of Parliament. Exception is given in case of Money Bills and in
the case of joint sitting of both houses. In event, we accept the  365
submission of learned Attorney General that certification by Speaker is only a
matter of procedure and cannot be questioned by virtue of Article 122(1), any
Bill, which does not fulfill the essential constitutional condition under
Article 110 can be certified as Money Bill bye­passing the Upper House. There
is a clear difference between the subject “irregularity of procedure” and
“substantive illegality”. When a Bill does not fulfill the essential
constitutional condition under Article 110(1), the said requirement cannot be
said to be evaporated only on certification by Speaker. Accepting the
submission that certification immunes the challenge on the ground of not
fulfilling the constitutional condition, Court will be permitting
constitutional provisions to be ignored and bye­ passed. We, thus, are of the
view that decision of Speaker certifying the Bill as Money Bill is not only a
matter of procedure and in event, any illegality has occurred in the decision
and the decision is clearly in breach of the constitutional provisions, the
366 decision is subject to Judicial Review. We are, therefore, of the view
that the Three Judge Bench Judgment of this Court in Mohd. Saeed Siddiqui
(supra) and Two Judge Bench judgment of this Court in Yogendra Kumar Jaiswal
(supra) does not lay down the correct law. We, thus, conclude that the
decision of the Speaker certifying the Aadhaar Bill as Money Bill is not
immuned from Judicial Review.

360\. We having held that the decision of Speaker certifying the Aadhaar Bill
as a Money Bill is open to Judicial Review. We now proceed to examine as to
whether Speaker's decision certifying the Aadhaar Bill as Money Bill
contravenes any of the Constitutional provisions, i.e., Whether the decision
is vitiated by any Constitutional Illegality? For determining the main issue,
which need to be answered is as to whether Aadhaar Bill is covered by any of
Clauses (a) to (f) of Article 110(1). That Clause(g) shall be applicable only
when any of Clauses (a) to (f) are attracted. Clause (g) which contemplate
that any matter incidental to any of the matters specified in sub­  367
clauses (a) to (f), can be a provision in a Bill presupposes that main
provisions have to fall in any of the Clauses (a) to (f). The heart of the
Aadhaar Act is Section 7, which is to the following effect:­ “7. Proof of
Aadhaar number necessary for receipt of certain subsidies, benefits and
services, etc.­ The Central Government or, as the case may be, the State
Government may, for the purpose of establishing identity of an individual as a
condition for receipt of a subsidy, benefit or service for which the
expenditure is incurred from, or the receipt therefrom forms part of, the
Consolidated Fund of India, require that such individual undergo
authentication, or furnish proof of possession of Aadhaar number or in the
case of an individual to whom no Aadhaar number has been assigned, such
individual makes an application for enrolment:

Provided that if an Aadhaar number is not assigned to an individual, the
individual shall be offered alternate and viable means of identification for
delivery of the subsidy, benefit or service.”

361\. A condition for receipt of a subsidy, benefit or service for which the
expenditure is incurred from, or the receipt therefrom forms part of, the
Consolidated Fund of India, has been provided by Section 7, i.e. undergoing of
an individual to an authentication. The Preamble of the Act as well as objects
and reasons as  368 noticed above also indicate that the Act has been enacted
to provide for, as a good governance, efficient, transparent, and targeted
delivery of subsidies, benefits and services, the expenditure for which is
incurred from the Consolidated Fund of India, to individuals residing in India
through assigning of unique identity numbers to such individuals and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. Thus, the theme of the Act
or main purpose and object of the Act is to bring in place efficient,
transparent and targeted deliveries of subsidies, benefits and services, which
expenditure is out from the Consolidated Fund of India. Thus, the above
provisions of the Act is clearly covered by Article 110(1)(c) and (e).

362\. Shri P. Chidambaram, learned counsel for petitioners has laid much
emphasis on the word “only“ as occurring in Article 110(1). The word “only”
used in Article 110(1) has purpose and meaning. The legislative intendment was
that main and substantive provisions should be only any or all of the clauses
369 from (a) to (f). In event, the main and substantive provision of the Act
are not covered by Clauses (a) to

(f), the said Bill cannot be said to be a Money Bill. It will not be out of
place to mention here that in Constituent Assembly, an amendment was moved for
deletion of word “only” on 20.05.1949, Hon'ble Shri Ghanshyam Singh Gupta
moved the amendment in Draft Article 90. It is useful to extract the above
debate, which is to the following effect:­ The Honourable Shri Ghanshyam Singh
Gupta (C.P. & Berar: General): Sir, I beg to move:

"That in clause (1) of article 90, the word `only' be deleted."

This article is a prototype of Section 37 of the Government of India Act which
says that a Bill or amendment providing for imposing or increasing a tax or
borrowing money, etc. shall not be introduced or moved except on the
recommendation of the Governor­General. This means that the whole Bill need
not be a money Bill: it may contain other provisions, but if there is any
provision about taxation or borrowing, etc. It will come under this Section37,
and the recommendation of the Governor­General is necessary. Now article 90
says that a Bill shall be deemed to be a money Bill if it contains only
provisions dealing with the imposition, regulation, etc., of any tax or the
borrowing of money, etc. This can mean that if there is a Bill which has other
provisions and also a  370 provision about taxation or borrowing etc., it will
not become a money Bill. If that is the intention I have nothing to say; but
that if that is not the intention I must say the word "only" is dangerous,
because if the Bill does all these things and at the same time does something
else also it will not be a money Bill. I do not know what the intention of the
Drafting Committee is but I think this aspect of the article should be borne
in mind.”

363\. After discussion, Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad also suggested that the position
of the word “only” in connection with Amendment No.1669 should be specially
considered. It is a word which is absolutely misplaced. On that day, the
consideration was deferred and again in the debate on 06.06.1949, Constituent
Assembly took up the discussion. The President of the Constituent Assembly
placed the amendment for vote on 08.06.1949, which amendment was negativated.
Thus, use of word “only” in Article 110(1) has its purpose, which is a clear
restriction for a Bill to be certified as a Money Bill.

364\. Other provisions of the Act can be said to be incidental to the above
matter. The architecture of  371 the Aadhaar Act veer round the Government's
constitutional obligation to provide for subsidies, benefits and services to
the individuals, who are entitled for such subsidies, benefits and services.
Section 24 contemplates the appropriation made by Parliament by law for grant
of sums of money for the purposes of Aadhaar Act. The disbursement of
subsidies, benefits and services from the Consolidated Fund of India is in
substance, the main object of the Act for which Aadhaar architecture has been
envisaged and other provisions are only to give effect to the above main theme
of the Act. Other provisions of the Act are only incidental provisions to main
provision. Section 57 on which much attack has been made by the learned
counsel for the petitioners that it cannot be covered by any of the provisions
from (a) to (f) of Article 110(!). Suffice it to say that Section 57 is a
provision which clarifies that nothing contained in Aadhaar Act shall prevent
the use of Aadhaar number for establishing the identity of an individual for
any purpose, whether by the State or any body corporate or  372 person,
pursuant to any law, for the time being in force, or any contract to this
effect. The applicability of the provision of Section 57 comes into play when
Aadhaar Number is allocated to an individual after completing the process
under the Act. Section 57 is also a incidental provision covered by
sub­clause(g) of Article 110(1). Section 57 is a limitation imposed under the
Act on the use of Aadhaar Number by State or any body corporate or any private
party. We, thus, are of the view that Aadhaar Bill has rightly been certified
as the Money Bill by the Speaker, which decision does not violate any
constitutional provision, hence does not call for any interference in this
proceeding. Issue No. 16 is answered in the following manner:­ Ans.16:­
Aadhaar Act has been rightly passed as Money Bill. The decision of Speaker
certifying the Aadhaar Bill, 2016 as Money Bill is not immuned from Judicial
Review.

373 Issue No.17 Whether Section 139­AA of the Income Tax Act, 1961 is
unconstitutional in view of the Privacy judgment in Puttaswamy case?

365\. Section 139­AA was challenged by a bunch of writ petitions, which were
decided by this Court in Binoy Viswam Vs. Union of India and Others, (2017) 7
SCC 59. The writ petitions were disposed of upholding the vires of Section
139­AA. Para 136 of the judgment contains operative portion, which is to the
following effect:­ “136. Subject to the aforesaid, these writ petitions are
disposed of in the following manner:

136.1 We hold that the Parliament was fully competent to enact Section 139­AA
of the Act and its authority to make this law was not diluted by the orders of
this Court.

136.2. We do not find any conflict between the provisions of the Aadhaar Act
and Section 139AA of the Income Tax Act inasmuch as when interpreted
harmoniously, they operate in distinct fields.

136.3. Section 139­AA of the Act is not discriminatory nor it offends equality
Clause enshrined in Article 14 of the Constitution. 136.4. Section 139­AA is
also not violative of Article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution insofar as it
mandates giving of Aadhaar  374 enrollment number for applying for PAN cards,
in the income tax returns or notified Aadhaar enrollment number to the
designated authorities. Further, the proviso to Sub­ section (2) thereof has
to be read down to mean that it would operate only prospectively.

136.5 The validity of the provision upheld in the aforesaid manner is subject
to passing the muster of Article 21 of the Constitution, which is the issue
before the Constitution Bench in Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 and
other connected matters. Till then, there shall remain a partial stay on the
operation of the proviso to Sub­section (2) of Section 139­AA of the Act, as
described above. No cost.”

366\. As per the above judgment, the validity of the provisions of
Section­139AA was upheld subject to passing the muster of Article 21 of the
Constitution, which was the issue pending before the Constitution Bench in
Writ Petition (C) No. 494 of 2012 and other connected matters. The
Constitution Bench Judgment in Puttaswamy was delivered on 24.08.2017. Right
of Privacy has been held to be fundamental right, any restriction on such
fundamental right has been held to be valid when it passes the muster of
three­fold test as laid down there. In the lead judgment of Dr.  375 Justice
D.Y. Chandrachud, three­fold test are:­

(a) The existence of law;

(b) A legitimate State interest and

(c) such law should pass the test of proportionality.

367\. Dr. Justice Chandrachud has delivered the judgment for himself and three
other Hon'ble Judges, Justice Sanjay Kishan Kaul in paragraph 639 has upheld
the test of proportionality. As a result, at­least five out of nine Judges
requires the proportionality test to be applied. In addition to tests
propounded by a Constitution Bench in Puttaswamy case, an additional test as
propounded by a Five Judges Constitution Bench of this Court in Shayara Bano
Vs. Union of India, (2017) 9 SCC 1, Justice R.F. Nariman has laid down a test
of “manifest arbitrariness”. Reading the Nine Judge Bench decision in
Puttaswamy case and Five Judge Bench decision in Shayara Bano's case, the
Petitioner can succeed to the challenge to Section 139­AA only if they
successfully demonstrate the said provision to be violative of Right to
Privacy  376 on the basis of the following tests:­

(i) Absence of law;

(ii) Absence of Legitimate State Interest;

    
    
         (iii)    The   provision   being   hit   by   lack   of
                  proportionality.
         (iv)     The   provision   being   manifestly   arbitrary,
                  which   can   be   traced   to   Article   14.     [The
    

test to determine “manifest arbitrariness” is to decide whether the enactment
is drastically unreasonable and / or capricious, irrational or without
adequate determining principle”]

368\. The learned Attorney General relies on following interest, which
according to him are safeguarded by Section 139­AA to satisfy the legitimate
State interest:­ a. To prevent income tax evasion by requiring, through an
amendment to the Income Tax Act, that the Aadhaar number be linked with the
PAN; and b. Prevention, accumulation, circulation and use of black money and
money laundering by imposing a requirement by law for linking Aadhaar for
opening bank accounts;

c. To prevent terrorism and protect national  377 security and prevention of
crime by requiring that Aadhaar number be linked to SIM cards for mobile
phones.

369\. Binoy Viswam has examined Section 139­AA on the Principle of Doctrine of
Proportionality in Paragraphs 123 to 125:­ “123. Keeping in view the aforesaid
parameters and principles in mind, we proceed to discuss as to whether the
“restrictions” which would result in terms of the proviso to sub­section (2)
of Section 139­AA of the Act are reasonable or not.

124\. Let us revisit the objectives of Aadhaar, and in the process, that of
Section 139­AA of the Act in particular.

125\. By making use of the technology, a method is sought to be devised, in
the form of Aadhaar, whereby identity of a person is ascertained in a flawless
manner without giving any leeway to any individual to resort to dubious
practices of showing multiple identities or fictitious identities. That is why
it is given the nomenclature “unique identity”. It is aimed at securing
advantages on different levels some of which are described, in brief, below:

125.1. In the first instance, as a welfare and democratic State, it becomes
the duty of any responsible Government to come out with welfare schemes for
the upliftment of poverty­stricken and marginalised sections of the society.
This is even the ethos of Indian  378 Constitution which casts a duty on the
State, in the form of “directive principles of State policy”, to take adequate
and effective steps for betterment of such underprivileged classes. State is
bound to take adequate measures to provide education, health care, employment
and even cultural opportunities and social standing to these deprived and
underprivileged classes. It is not that Government has not taken steps in this
direction from time to time. At the same time, however, harsh reality is that
benefits of these schemes have not reached those persons for whom that are
actually meant.

125.1.1. India has achieved significant economic growth since Independence. In
particular, rapid economic growth has been achieved in the last 25 years,
after the country adopted the policy of liberalisation and entered the era of,
what is known as, globalisation. Economic growth in the last decade has been
phenomenal and for many years, the Indian economy grew at highest rate in the
world. At the same time, it is also a fact that in spite of significant
political and economic success which has proved to be sound and sustainable,
the benefits thereof have not percolated down to the poor and the poorest. In
fact, such benefits are reaped primarily by rich and upper middle classes,
resulting into widening the gap between the rich and the poor.

125.1.2. Jean Dreze and Amartya Sen pithily narrate the position as under:

“Since India’s recent record of fast economic growth is often celebrated, with
good reason, it is extremely important to point to the fact that the  379
societal reach of economic progress in India has been remarkably limited. It
is not only that the income distribution has been getting more unequal in
recent years (a characteristic that India shares with China), but also that
the rapid rise in real wages in China from which the working classes have
benefited greatly is not matched at all by India’s relatively stagnant real
wages. No less importantly, the public revenue generated by rapid economic
growth has not been used to expand the social and physical infrastructure in a
determined and well­planned way (in this India is left far behind by China).
There is also a continued lack of essential social services (from schooling
and health care to the provision of safe water and drainage) for a huge part
of the population. As we will presently discuss, while India has been
overtaking other countries in the progress of its real income, it has been
overtaken in terms of social indicators by many of these countries, even
within the region of South Asia itself (we go into this question more fully in
Chapter 3, ‘India in Comparative Perspective’).

To point to just one contrast, even though India has significantly caught up
with China in terms of GDP growth, its progress has been very much slower than
China’s in indicators such as longevity, literacy, child undernourishment and
maternal mortality. In South Asia itself, the much poorer economy of
Bangladesh has caught up with and overtaken India in  380 terms of many social
indicators (including life expectancy, immunisation of children, infant
mortality, child undernourishment and girls’ schooling). Even Nepal has been
catching up, to the extent that it now has many social indicators similar to
India’s, in spite of its per capita GDP being just about one third. Whereas
twenty years ago India generally had the second best social indicators among
the six South Asian countries (India, Pakistan, Bangladesh, Sri Lanka, Nepal
and Bhutan), it now looks second worst (ahead only of problem­ridden
Pakistan). India has been climbing up the ladder of per capita income while
slipping down the slope of social indicators.” 125.1.3. It is in this context
that not only sustainable development is needed which takes care of
integrating growth and development, thereby ensuring that the benefit of
economic growth is reaped by every citizen of this country, it also becomes
the duty of the Government in a welfare State to come out with various welfare
schemes which not only take care of immediate needs of the deprived class but
also ensure that adequate opportunities are provided to such persons to enable
them to make their lives better, economically as well as socially. As
mentioned above, various welfare schemes are, in fact, devised and floated
from time to time by the Government, keeping aside substantial amount of money
earmarked for spending on socially and economically backward classes. However,
for various reasons including corruption, actual benefit does not reach those
who are supposed to receive such benefits. One of the main  381 reasons is
failure to identify these persons for lack of means by which identity could be
established of such genuine needy class.

Resultantly, lots of ghosts and duplicate beneficiaries are able to take undue
and impermissible benefits. A former Prime Minister of this country has gone
on record to say that out of one rupee spent by the Government for welfare of
the downtrodden, only 15 paisa thereof actually reaches those persons for whom
it is meant. It cannot be doubted that with UID/Aadhaar much of the malaise in
this field can be taken care of.

125.2. Menace of corruption and black money has reached alarming proportion in
this country. It is eating into the economic progress which the country is
otherwise achieving. It is not necessary to go into the various reasons for
this menace. However, it would be pertinent to comment that even as per the
observations of the Special Investigation Team (SIT) on black money headed by
Justice M.B. Shah, one of the reasons is that persons have the option to quote
their PAN or UID or passport number or driving licence or any other proof of
identity while entering into financial/business transactions. Because of this
multiple methods of giving proofs of identity, there is no mechanism/system at
present to collect the data available with each of the independent proofs of
ID. For this reason, even SIT suggested that these databases be
interconnected. To the same effect is the recommendation of the Committee
headed by Chairman, CBDT on measures to tackle black money in India and abroad
which also discusses the problem of money laundering being done to evade taxes
under the garb of shell companies by the persons who hold multiple bogus PAN
numbers under  382 different names or variations of their names. That can be
possible if one uniform proof of identity, namely, UID is adopted. It may go a
long way to check and minimise the said malaise.

125.3. Thirdly, Aadhaar or UID, which has come to be known as the most
advanced and sophisticated infrastructure, may facilitate law­enforcement
agencies to take care of problem of terrorism to some extent and may also be
helpful in checking the crime and also help investigating agencies in cracking
the crimes. No doubt, going by the aforesaid, and may be some other similarly
valid considerations, it is the intention of the Government to give fillip to
Aadhaar movement and encourage the people of this country to enrol themselves
under the Aadhaar Scheme.”

370\. In Paragraphs 122 to 125 of Binoy Viswam, it has also been observed that
the measures taken may go a long way to check and minimise the malaise of
black money.

371\. Dr. Justice D.Y. Chandrachud in Puttaswamy case in Paragraph 311 has
stated:­ “311. …......Prevention and investigation of crime and protection of
the revenue are among the legitimate aims of the State. Digital platforms are
a vital tool of ensuring good governance in a social welfare State.

Information technology – legitimately deployed is a powerful enabler in the
spread of innovation and knowledge.”  383

372\. In Puttaswamy case, Justice Sanjay Kishan Kaul has noted the European
Union General Data Protection Regulation and observed that restrictions on the
right to privacy may be justifiable on the ground of regulation of taxes and
financial institutions. In Paragraph 640, Justice Kaul has held:­ “640. It
would be useful to turn to the European Union Regulation of 2016.

Restrictions of the right to privacy may be justifiable in the following
circumstances subject to the principle of proportionality:

(a) Other fundamental rights: The right to privacy must be considered in
relation to its function in society and be balanced against other fundamental
rights.

(b) Legitimate national security interest.

(c) Public interest including scientific or historical research purposes or
statistical purposes.

(d) Criminal offences: The need of the competent authorities for prevention
investigation, prosecution of criminal offences including safeguards against
threat to public security;

(e) The unidentifiable data: The  384 information does not relate to
identified or identifiable natural person but remains anonymous. The European
Union Regulation of 2016 refers to “pseudonymisation” which means the
processing of personal data in such a manner that the personal data can no
longer be attributed to a specific data subject without the use of additional
information, provided that such additional information is kept separately and
is subject to technical and organisational measures to ensure that the
personal data are not attributed to an identified or identifiable natural
person;

(f) The tax, etc.: The regulatory framework of tax and working of financial
institutions, markets may require disclosure of private information. But then
this would not entitle the disclosure of the information to all and sundry and
there should be data protection rules according to the objectives of the
processing. There may however, be processing which is compatible for the
purposes for which it is initially collected.”

373\. Section 139­AA thus clearly enacted to fulfill the legitimate State
interest. Section 139­A which came into effect w.e.f. 01.04.1989 provide for
Permanent Account Number (PAN) and the provision also provided that statutory
mandatory provisions as to  385 when “every person” shall quote such number
(PAN number) for various purposes as enumerated in Section 139A. Introduction
of Section 139­AA is an extension and implication of Section 139A. The
introduction of Section 139­AA was for the purpose of eliminating duplicate
PANs from the system with the help of a robust technology solution.

374\. The new Section 139­AA in the Income Tax Act seeks to remove bogus PAN
cards by linking with Aadhaar, expose shell companies and thereby curb the
menace of black money, money laundering and tax evasion. The fact that the tax
base of India is very narrow and that we are a largely tax non­compliant
society is evident from some of the startling figures in the budget speech of
the Finance Minister. Linking of PAN with Aadhaar will at least ensure that
duplicate and fake PAN cards which are used for the purpose of tax evasion
will be eliminated and is one of the many fiscal measures to eliminate black
money from the system.

386

375\. The Binoy Viswam has referred to other relevant rationals for enactment
of Section 139­AA. Section 139­AA also cannot be said to be disproportionate.
The section has been enacted to achieve the legitimate State aim. Section
139­AA is a law framed by Parliament, which require linking of the Aadhaar
with PAN. The means which are sought to be achieved by such enactment cannot
be said to be disproportionate in any manner. It has been further submitted
that Section 139­AA unfairly attracts only individual assessees and not other
tax paying assessees, who may also be involved in financial frauds. The above
submission need not detain us since Aadhaar number can be obtained by the
individuals and not by the entities hence Section­139AA can only apply to
individuals. In any event, the legislature cannot be expected to address all
issues relating to a particular evil at one go. Section 139­AA is a required
first step to weed out fake PANs for individuals; it is perfectly acceptable
for the legislature to weed out fake PANs for other tax­paying entities at a
later stage. Such  387 a view is also endorsed in judicial decisions. In Namit
Sharma Vs. Union of India, (2013) 1 SCC 745 (per Swatanter Kumar, J.) this
Court observed:­ “43. The rule of equality or equal protection does not
require that a State must choose between attacking every aspect of a problem
or not attacking the problem at all, and particularly with respect to social
welfare programme. So long as the line drawn by the State is rationally
supportable, the courts will not interpose their judgment as to the
appropriate stopping point.…........”

376\. Thus, the legislature is within its remit to only target individual
assessees with Section 139­AA, and not every other tax­paying entity. The law
does not have to provide for complete coverage of tax­payers who may be
indulging in financial fraud but may envisage 'degrees of harm' and act on
that basis. In this context, the Aadhaar number is being mandated for all
individual assessees. This is applicable to natural persons as well as persons
who together constitute legal persons (e.g. Partners in a partnership, members
of a company etc.) and hence provides significant coverage to weed out
duplicate PANs and hence reduce the incidence of financial and  388 tax frauds
through these means. Aadhaar's inclusion into PAN is meant to curb tax
evasion, sham transactions, entry providers which are rampantly carried out on
account of bogus PANs. Aadhaar's unique de­duplication based on biometric
identification has been hailed as the most sophisticated system by the World
Bank. Inclusion of Aadhaar into PAN eliminates the inequality between honest
tax payers and non­compliant, dishonest ones who get away without paying
taxes. Inclusion of Aadhaar into PAN promotes rather than negates equality. It
bolsters equality and is consistent with Article 14.

377\. In result, Section 139­AA is fully compliant of three­fold test as laid
down in Puttaswamy's case. Section 139­AA, thus does not breach fundamental
Right of Privacy of an individual and Section 139­AA cannot be struck down on
that ground.

Ans.17:­ Section 139­AA does not breach fundamental Right of Privacy as per
Privacy Judgment in Puttaswamy case.

389

Issue No. 18 Whether Aadhaar Act violates the Interim Orders passed by this
Court in Writ Petition (C) No. 494 of 2012?

378\. The petitioners submits that this Court has passed various Interim
Orders in Writ Petition (C) No. 494 of 2012 from 23.09.2013 to 15.10.2015. On
23.09.2013, this Court directed “In the meanwhile, no person should suffer not
getting the Aadhaar card inspite of the fact that some authority had issued a
circular making it mandatory and when any person applies to get the Aadhaar
Card voluntarily, it may be checked whether that person is entitled for it
under the law and it should not be given to any illegal immigrant”.

379\. On 11.08.2015, this Court issued following order:­ “Having considered
the matter, we are of the view that the balance of interest would be best
served, till the matter is finally decided by a larger Bench if the Union of
India or the UIDA proceed in the following manner:­  390

1\. The Union of India shall give wide publicity in the electronic and print
media including radio and television networks that it is not mandatory for a
citizen to obtain an Aadhaar card;

2\. The production of an Aadhaar card will not be condition for obtaining any
benefits otherwise due to a citizen;

3\. The Unique Identification Number or the Aadhaar card will not be used by
the respondents for any purpose other than the PDS Scheme and in particular
for the purpose of distribution of foodgrains, etc. and cooking fuel, such as
kerosene. The Aadhaar card may also be used for the purpose of the LPG
Distribution Scheme;

4\. The information about an individual obtained by the Unique Identification
Authority of India while issuing an Aadhaar card shall not be used for any
other purpose, save as above, except as may be directed by a Court for the
purpose of criminal investigation.” By subsequent order of 15.10.2015, some
more Schemes were included.

380\. It is submitted that the Central Government and the State Government
issued various notifications numbering 139, requiring Aadhaar authentication
for various benefits, subsidies and schemes. The issuance of such orders is in
breach of above Interim Orders passed by this Court.

391

381\. In Binoy Viswam (supra) an argument was advanced that enactment of
Section 139­AA was in breach of the Interim Order passed in Writ Petition (C)
No. 494 of 2012\. The said argument was considered and in Para 99 it was held
as follows:

> “99. Main emphasis, however, is on the plea that Parliament or any State
> Legislature cannot pass a law that overrules a judgment thereby nullifying
> the said decision, that too without removing the basis of the decision. This
> argument appears to be attractive inasmuch as few orders are passed by this
> Court in pending writ petitions which are to the effect that the enrolment
> of Aadhaar would be voluntary. However, it needs to be kept in mind that the
> orders have been passed in the petitions where Aadhaar Scheme floated as an
> executive/administrative measure has been challenged. In those cases, the
> said orders are not passed in a case where the Court was dealing with a
> statute passed by Parliament. Further, these are interim orders as the Court
> was of the opinion that till the matter is decided finally in the context of
> right to privacy issue, the implementation of the said Aadhaar Scheme would
> remain voluntary. In fact, the main issue as to whether Aadhaar card scheme
> whereby biometric data of an individual is collected violates right to
> privacy and, therefore, is offensive of Article 21 of the Constitution or
> not is yet to be decided. In the process, the Constitution Bench is also
> called upon to decide as to whether right to privacy is a part of Article 21
> of the Constitution at all. Therefore, no final decision has been taken. In
> a situation like  392 this, it cannot be said that Parliament is precluded
> from or it is rendered incompetent to pass such a law. That apart, the
> argument of the petitioners is that the basis on which the aforesaid orders
> are passed has to be removed, which is not done. According to the
> petitioners, it could be done only by making the Aadhaar Act compulsory. It
> is difficult to accept this contention for two reasons: first, when the
> orders passed by this Court which are relied upon by the petitioners were
> passed when the Aadhaar Act was not even enacted. Secondly, as already
> discussed in detail above, the Aadhaar Act and the law contained in Section
> 139­AA of the Income Tax Act deal with two different situations and operate
> in different fields. This argument of legislative incompetence also,
> therefore, fails.”

382\. We have noticed that the Writ Petition (C) No. 494 of 2012 was filed at
the time when Aadhaar Scheme was being implemented on the basis of executive's
instructions dated 28.01.2009. In the Writ Petition filed prior to enactment
of Act, 2016, challenge to Aadhaar Scheme was founded on following:­ i. The
requirement of making Aadhaar mandatory for availing benefits under various
social service schemes by way of an executive order and ii. Concerns regarding
the right to privacy of the individuals, which emanated on  393 account of
collection of biometric data under the Aadhaar scheme, which is without any
legislative backing.

383\. Aadhaar Act, 2016 gives legislative backing to the Aadhaar Scheme. The
Act contains specific provisions prohibiting disclosure of core biometric
information collected in Aadhaar enrolment. It is submitted that Schemes
notified under Section 7 of the Act were on the strength of Aadhaar enactment
and cannot be said to be a violation of interim orders of this Court. The
submission that interim orders directed the Aadhaar to be voluntary, it is
submitted by the respondent that consent was obtained from individuals, who
came for enrolment under the Aadhaar Act. It is submitted that all those, who
were enrolled under the Statutory Scheme dated 28.01.2009, the consent was
given by the individuals in verifying their informations.

384\. We, thus, conclude that Aadhaar Act cannot be struck down on the ground
that it is in violation of interim orders passed by this Court in Writ
Petition (C) No. 494 of 2012. Issue No. 18 is answered in  394 following
manner:­ Ans.18:­ The Aadhaar Act does not violate the interim orders passed
in Writ Petition (C) No. 494 of 2012 and other Writ Petitions.

385\. I had gone through the erudite and scholarly opinion of Justice
A.K.Sikri (which opinion is on his own behalf and on behalf of Chief Justice
and Justice A.M.Khanwilkar) with which opinion I broadly agree. Rule 9 as
amended by PMLA (Second Amendment) Rules, 2017 has been struck down by my
esteemed brother which provision has been upheld by me. My reasons and
conclusions are on the same line except few where my conclusions are not in
conformity with the majority opinion.

CONCLUSIONS:­

386\. In view of above discussions, we arrive at following conclusions:­ (1)
The requirement under Aadhaar Act to give one's demographic and biometric
information does not violate fundamental right of  395 privacy.

(2) The provisions of Aadhaar Act requiring demographic and biometric
information from a resident for Aadhaar Number pass three­fold test as laid
down in Puttaswamy (supra) case, hence cannot be said to be unconstitutional.
(3) Collection of data, its storage and use does not violate fundamental Right
of Privacy.

(4) Aadhaar Act does not create an architecture for pervasive surveillance.

(5) Aadhaar Act and Regulations provides protection and safety of the data
received from individuals.

(6) Section 7 of the Aadhaar is constitutional. The provision does not deserve
to be struck down on account of denial in some cases of right to claim on
account of failure of authentication. (7) The State while enlivening right to
food, right to shelter etc. envisaged under Article 21 cannot encroach upon
the right of privacy of beneficiaries nor former can be given precedence over
the latter.

396

(8) Provisions of Section 29 is constitutional and does not deserves to be
struck down.

(9) Section 33 cannot be said to be unconstitutional as it provides for the
use of Aadhaar data base for police investigation nor it can be said to
violate protection granted under Article 20(3).

(10) Section 47 of the Aadhaar Act cannot be held to be unconstitutional on
the ground that it does not allow an individual who finds that there is a
violation of Aadhaar Act to initiate any criminal process.

(11) Section 57, to the extent, which permits use of Aadhaar by the State or
any body corporate or person, in pursuant to any contract to this effect is
unconstitutional and void. Thus, the last phrase in main provision of Section
57, i.e. “or any contract to this effect” is struck down.

(12) Section 59 has validated all actions taken by the Central Government
under the notifications dated 28.01.2009 and 12.09.2009 and all actions shall
be deemed to have been taken under the Aadhaar Act.

397

(13) Parental consent for providing biometric information under Regulation 3 &
demographic information under Regulation 4 has to be read for enrolment of
children between 5 to 18 years to uphold the constitutionality of Regulations
3 & 4 of Aadhaar (Enrolment and Update) Regulations, 2016.

(14) Rule 9 as amended by PMLA (Second Amendment) Rules, 2017 is not
unconstitutional and does not violate Articles 14, 19(1)(g), 21 & 300A of the
Constitution and Sections 3, 7 & 51 of the Aadhaar Act. Further Rule 9 as
amended is not ultra vires to PMLA Act, 2002.

(15) Circular dated 23.03.2017 being unconstitutional is set aside.

(16) Aadhaar Act has been rightly passed as Money Bill. The decision of
Speaker certifying the Aadhaar Bill, 2016 as Money Bill is not immuned from
Judicial Review.

(17) Section 139­AA does not breach fundamental Right of Privacy as per
Privacy Judgment in Puttaswamy case.

398

(18) The Aadhaar Act does not violate the interim orders passed in Writ
Petition (C) No. 494 of 2012 and other Writ Petitions.

387\. Now, we revert back to the batch of cases, which have come up for
consideration before us.

388\. We having considered and answered the issues arising in this batch of
cases, all the Writ Petitions filed under Article 32 deserves to be disposed
of in accordance with our conclusions as noted above. All Transfer
Cases/Transfer Petitions are also deserves to be decided accordingly.

389\. Now, we come to the Criminal Appeal arising out of S.L.P. (Crl.) No.
2524 of 2014. The above S.L.P. (Crl.) arose out of an order passed by Judicial
Magistrate First Class dated 22.10.2013 by which Judicial Magistrate First
Class directed DG, UIDAI and Dy. Dg. UIDAI Technology Centre, Bangalore to
provide the necessary data to the respondent C.B.I. The said order was
challenged in the High Court by means of Criminal Writ Petition, in which the
order was passed by the High Court on 26.02.2014 giving rise to S.L.P. (Crl.)
No. 2524 of 2014.  399

390\. We have noticed above that according to Aadhaar Act Section 33
disclosure of information can be made as per sub­section (1) pursuant to an
order of Court, not inferior to that of District Judge. The order directing
for disclosure of information having been passed by Judicial Magistrate First
Class, in the present case, the order is not in consonance with sub­section
(1) of Section 33, hence the order passed by Judicial Magistrate, First Class
dated 22.10.2013 and order of the High Court passed in reference to the said
order deserves to be set aside. Criminal Appeal is allowed accordingly.

391\. No case is made out to initiate any contempt proceedings in the contempt
applications as prayed for. All the contempt petitions are dismissed.

392\. In result, this batch of cases is decided in following manner:­

(i) All the Writ Petitions filed under Article 32 as well as Transfer Cases
are disposed of as per our conclusions recorded above.

400

(ii) Criminal Appeal arising out of S.L.P.

(Criminal) No. 2524 of 2014 is allowed.

(iii) All the contempt applications are closed.

393\. Before we part, we record our deep appreciation for the industry, hard
work and eloquence shown by learned counsel for the parties appearing before
us, which was amply demonstrated in their respective arguments. Learned
counsel have enlightened us with all relevant concerned materials available in
this country and abroad. The concern raised by these Public Interest
Litigations is a concern shown for little Indian for whom the Society,
Government and Court exists. We appreciate the concern and passion expressed
before us by learned counsel appearing for both the parties as well as those,
who were permitted to intervene in the matter. We close by once more recording
of our appreciation for the cause espoused in these cases.

..............................J.

( ASHOK BHUSHAN ) NEW DELHI, SEPTEMBER 26, 2018.

