

Madras High Court

Commissioner Of Income Tax, Tamil ... vs Southern Switchgear Ltd. on 29 March,
1983

Equivalent citations: 1984 148 ITR 273 Mad

Author: Ramanujam

Bench: G Ramanujam, P Shanmugam

JUDGMENT Ramanujam, J.

1\. The first batch of five references is at the instance of the Revenue while
the second batch of five cases is at the instance of the assessee against the
same orders of the Tribunal.

2\. The assessee-company entered into a collaboration agreement with a foreign
company by names Messrs. Brush Electrical Engineering Co. Ltd., U.K., December
12, 1963. Under the said agreement, the foreign company agreed to provide the
assessee-company technical add and information in the manufacture of low
tension switchgear, high mention switchgear, etc., and the right to sell such
products. The foreign company also agreed to keep the Indian company posted
with the latest and modern developments in the field of manufacture of
switchgears and transformers and to trains the necessary personnel at the U.K.
factory, etc., Under the said agreement, the assessee-company agreed to pay as
consideration for the services rendered by the foreign company a lump sum of
20,000 sterling payable in five equal instalments of 4,000 sterling each, the
first installment to be paid three months after the date of the agreement and
subsequent payments at intervals of 12 months from the first payment. For the
year 1966-67, the assessee-company claimed the payment made to the foreign
companies a revenue expenditure.

3\. The ITO, however, held that as the consideration paid in the form of
royalty was an enduring benefit to the assessee, a part of it will have to be
disallowed. He, therefore, deducted from the loss claimed by the assessee for
the assessment year 1966-67, the technical collaboration fees and 1/4th of the
royalty paid and similarly for the assessment years 1967-68, 1968-69, 1969-70
and 1971-72. The details of the disallowance for each of the years are given
below.

\------------------------------------------------------------------------

    
    
    Asst. year              Disallowed                     Disallowed
                        technical collaboration            1/4th royalty
                               fees
    ------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                 Rs.                          Rs.
    1966-67                     3,340                        1,311
    1967-68                    10,494                       23,523
    1968-69                    11,702                       32,685
    1969-70                     9,028                       32,082
    1970-71                    12,788                       54,349
    ------------------------------------------------------------------------  
     
    
    

On appeal, the AAC referred to the various clauses of the collaboration
agreement, in particular, to clauses 3,6,15, 21 and 23, and came to the
conclusion that the acquisition of the technical know-how and other services
for which the technical aid fees was paid was of a permanent nature and would
always be availed of by the assessee-company for its own business and
industrial requirements, and therefor, there was definitely an element of
capital expenditure in the technical and aid fees paid. He, however, did not
agree with the ITO that the entire payment of technical aid fees could be
treated as capital expenditure. He restricted the disallowance to 1/4th of the
gross payment of the technical aid fees, since according to him that alone
could be termed to represent capital expenditure. He further held that his
finding with reference to technical aid fees would apply with equal force to
the claim of payment of royalty, and, therefore, he confirmed the disallowance
of 1/4th in respect of royalty. Against the orders of the AAC, both the
assessee-company and the Revenue filed appeals and cross-objections before the
Tribunal. The Revenue contended that the AAC erred in holding that 1/4th of
the expenditure towards technical aid fees alone had to be considered as
capital. The Tribunal after considering the various clauses in the
collaboration agreement dated December 12, 1963, in extenso, came to the
conclusion that as per the said clauses of the agreement, the technical
knowledge that the assessee obtained through this agreement was an enduring
advantage and benefit in so far as the same was available to the assessee for
its manufacturing and industrial process even after the termination of the
agreement, and that in view of the decision of this court in Transformer &
Switchgear Ltd., v. CIT [1976] 103 ITR 352, 1/4th of the technical aid fees
has rightly been disallowed as relating to capital expenditure. In this view,
the Tribunal upheld the order of the AAC relating to both the disallowance of
1/4th of the technical aid fees and 1/4th of the royalty amount. Aggrieved by
the order of the Tribunal, both the Revenue and the assessee filed reference
applications before the Tribunal and the Tribunal has referred the following
common questions for the opinion of this court.

"1. Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the entire
claim of payment of technical aid fees and 1/4th of the royalty to the foreign
collaborator under the collaboration agreement dated December 12, 1963, is
liable to be disallowed ?

2\. If the first question is answered in the negative, whether the
disallowance of 1/4th of the above claim is justified ?"

4\. The first question comprises of two issues, on relating to the technical
aid fees and other relating to the royalty. So far as the issue relating to
the disallowance of the technical aid fees paid to the foreign collaborator is
concerned, as already seen, the Tribunal has purported to follow the decision
of this court in Transformer & Switchgear Ltd., v. CIT [1976] 103 ITR 352,
which was rendered with reference to an agreement containing similar closes
wherein this court has observed as under (at p. 357) :

"As seen from the relevant portions of the agreement extracted above, the
agreement covered the technical aid and assistance for the establishments,
starting of work and the operating of the factory for manufacture of
transformer of all kinds and types. Dominate shall also make available to the
assessee its procedures, designs, experience and technical know-how in respect
of the same. In consideration, the assessee agreed to pay 3% of their annual
turnover. The duration of the agreement was for 10 years and at the end of
that period it would automatically be extended for another period of five
years unless the renewal was terminated. The assessee even after the expiry of
the period of the agreement could use the methods of production, procedure,
experiments, improvements, which had been made available to them in pursuance
of the agreement, but only subject to the condition that its obligation to
keep them secret still continues even after termination. It was also subject
to another condition that the transformers and switchgears manufactured by the
assessee shall not be exported to certain countries. Thus, the assessee had
acquired knowledge or advantage of an enduring nature. Therefore, the amount
paid was not an admissible deduction." In that case, the portion of the fee
relatable to the supply of technical know-how, patents and designs was taken
as an expense anchored to acquire an asset of a permanent nature and as such
held to be capital in nature, but the fee referable to the user of the patents
and designs was held to be revenue expenditure. Since the sum paid was a
composite payment, 50% of the claim was disallowed as relating to capital
expenditure. This was upheld by this court. The same view has been taken by
this court in Fenner Woodroffe & Co. Ltd., v. CIT [1976] 102 ITR 665. In that
case, this court held that it is the aim and object of the expenditure that
would determine the character of the sum whether it is capital or revenue and
that neither the source nor the manner of payment may be of any consequence.
This court further held that, on the facts of that case, the amounts paid were
not admissible as business expenditure under the I.T. Act, since the question
of apportionment of the expenditure which was a composite one was not referred
to the High Court. This court has again considered a similar collaboration
agreement between an Indian company and a foreign company containing similar
terms as in the instant case in M.R. Electronic Components Ltd., v. CIT [1982]
136 ITR 305. It was held, in that case, that as the foreign company had under
taken to advise the assessee on the construction and equipment of its works
and also on the processes and manufactures, and as the object of the
expenditure was with reference to the erection of the factory, to that extent
the payment would be disallowed as not relating to the carrying on of the
business, and that if a portion of the consideration was attributable to the
manufacture of fresh items, there will be an element of acquisition of a right
exploitable in future and, hence, it would not relate to the running of the
business, and that, therefore, the Tribunal was justified in its conclusion
that 25% of the payment under the collaboration agreement has to be disallowed
as being capital in nature.

Keeping in view the principles laid down by this court in the above three
cases, let us analyse the various clauses of the collaboration agreement dated
December 12, 1963. The relevant and important clauses of the agreement are set
out below : or under letters patent under which it may be entitled to grant
licences; (i) An exclusive licence to manufacture, use and sell during the
continuance of this agreement the scheduled products within India; and

(ii) A non-exclusive licence to sell the scheduled products in the export
territories subject always however to the provisions of this agreement and to
any restrictions or obligations from time to time upon BRUSH in respect of
such letters patent. Such licence or licences shall be in such reasonable form
as S. S. may require so as to enable it to have the full benefit of such
letters patent in accordance with the provisions of this clause and during the
continuance of this agreement.

(b) Subject to the provisions of this agreement, BRUSH shall furnish S. S.
which one complete set of the working drawings, specifications and other
written manufacturing information and data relating to the manufacture of each
type of the scheduled products according to the latest developments and
currently in standard use by BRUSH so as to enable S. S. to establish the
manufacture in India on a commercial basis of each type of the scheduled
products to the specifications and standards used by BRUSH at the respective
dates of commencement of manufacture of each type of the scheduled products
together with a list of all jigs, tools, etc., and drawings and data for jig,
tools, fixtures and patterns as are made in India and the schedule of the
machine tools necessary for the production of the scheduled products. All
drawings, specifications and other date aforesaid furnished to S. S. shall be
in the English language with measurements shown in the system currently used
by BRUSH but shall be the property of S. S. on the condition that S. S. hereby
agrees to hold such property subject always to the continued fulfillment by S.
S. of all the obligations contained in clause a : 1 16(c), 6(d), 23 & 25 of
this Agreement and the period of ten years thereafter. The parties hereto
shall from time to time draw up by mutual consolation a time-table regarding
the supply of BRUSH to S. S. of all drawings and specifications and other date
hereinbefore offered to in respect of each type of the scheduled products.

5\. BRUSH hereby agrees and undertakes that it will not during the continuance
of this agreement manufacture in India any scheduled products or grant or
furnish or make available to any other person, firm or company any
manufacturing information, licence, rights and date for scheduled products in
India.

6\. S. S. hereby agrees with BRUSH at all times during the continuance of this
Agreement :

(a) To use its best endeavours to manufacture the scheduled products so as to
meet the demands within India for the scheduled products to an adequate
commercial extent and on reasonable terms and shall cause scheduled products
so manufactured to be of such quality and in all respects in their respective
kinds and shall give such service in respect thereof as will maintain the
reputation of products associated with the name of BRUSH and as will not cause
injury to the reputation of BRUSH.

(b) To affix or attach to or stamp, emboss or impress in a conspicuous place
and in a permanent manner on all scheduled products manufactured or sold by S.
S. the words following :

"Manufactured under Licence from Brush Electrical Engineering Company Limited
of England".

A similar statement shall appear with reasonable prominence in all literature,
advertisements and others sales media of S. S. relating to the scheduled
products. (c) To use all drawings, specifications, technical information and
date supplied by BRUSH here under only in connection with the manufacture and
sale of the scheduled products.

7\. BRUSH shall have the right :

(a) to nominate such of its own staff as it considers necessary to supervise
the erection of the S. S. factory premises, the layout of the machine tools
and the organization of all workshops therein.

(b) Subsequent to the commencement of manufacture of S. S. to have undisputed
control for a minimum period of three years or less at its discretion of all
manufacturing processes and activities;

(c) to recommend appointment or dismissal of any employees directly concerned
with the manufacturing process of the scheduled products.

(d) Subsequent to the initial period of three years or less after commencement
of manufacture as referred to in clause (b) of this clause BRUSH shall at its
discretion be entitled to maintain at S. S.'s factory for such period as it
shall decide such technical staff as it considers necessary for the efficient
production of the scheduled products and S. S. undertakes to carry out without
delay whatever recommendations are made by such staff always, provided that in
the event of any dispute, the Board of Directors of Brush shall have the right
to make the final decision.

8\. As consideration for the licences hereby granted and for the information
and goods to be supplied and services to be rendered by BRUSH under this
Agreement S. S. shall pay to BRUSH.

(a) Such sin as after deductions required under India law shall equal 20,000
sterling which sum shall be paid in equal installments of 4,000 sterling each,
the first payment to be made three months after the date hereof and successful
payments at intervals of twelve months after the due date of the first
payment.

"(b)(i) A royalty on all switchgear products and parts thereof sold by or on
behalf of S. S within India and at the rate of 2 1/2% on the nest invoiced
price of all low and at the rate of 5% on the net invoiced sales price of all
high tension switchgear products and parts thereof.

(ii) A royalty on all switchgear products and parts thereof sold by or on
behalf of S. S within the export territories at the rate of 7% on the net
invoiced sales prices thereof.

(iii) In the event of any assemblies, components for parts of such products as
aforesaid being purchased by S. S from BRUSH, then the total BRUSH invoiced
price (excluding freight, carriage and insurance charges) of all such items
shall be deducted from the total net invoiced sales price before calculating
the royalty payable to BRUSH.

9\. This agreement shall commence at and from the date of signature and
subject to termination as provided in clause 22 shall remain in force for ten
years and thereafter shall remain in force subject to either party giving the
other notice in writing to terminate at any time.

10\. Upon the termination of the agreement : (a) any licences, permissions,
authorities granted by BRUSH in favour of S. S. in respect of any patent or
similar rights shall determine and S. S. shall forthwith return to BRUSH all
copies of drawings specifications, information and other data in the
possession or under the control of S. S. and relating in whole or in part to
the designs or intentions which are the subject of patent or similar rights
owned or controlled by BRUSH in India.

(b) S. S. hereby agrees to continue to observe the obligations contained in
clauses 6(e) and 6(d) and 25 of this agreement throughout the period of ten
years commencing upon the termination of this agreement but in all other
respect, S. S. shall have the right to use and to continue to use all
information, methods, processes and formulae acquired in pursuance of this
agreement so far as the same shall not relate to patents or similar rights
owned or controlled by BRUSH in India. Provided always that this right shall
not apply in the event of this Agreement being terminated by BRUSH pursuant to
either clause 22 or clause 24 hereof. 25. All licences, rights and benefits
granted or to be granted to S. S. under this agreement are personal to S. S.
and shall not be transferable or divisible and S. S. shall not at any time
assign or attempt to assign all or any part of this agreement to any third
party or grant any sub-licence to or otherwise assist any person, firm or
company regarding the manufacture of the scheduled products save that in the
event an order is made or an effective resolution is passed for the winding up
of S. S. for the purpose of amalgamation or reconstruction, S. S. may assign
its rights and obligations hereunder to any company which at the time the
order is made or the resolution is passed is a subsidiary as defined in the
Indian Companies Act of S. S." A perusal of the above clauses clearly
indicates that the technical knowledge the assessee-company obtained through
this agreement from the foreign company secured to the assessee an enduring
advantage and benefit in that the same was available to the assessee for its
manufacturing and industrial processes even after the termination of the
agreement. The technical assistance contemplated in the agreement covers the
establishment of the factory and the operation thereof for the manufacture of
transformers of all kinds and types.

11\. The foreign company also makes available to the assessee its procedures,
designs, experience and technical know-how in respect of the same. Though the
duration of the agreement is five years, the assessee even after the expiry of
the period, could use the methods of production, procedure, experiments,
improvements which had been made available to them in pursuance of the
agreement. Thus, the assessee had acquired a knowledge of enduring nature.
Further, apart from the technical know-how supplied by the foreign company and
the grant of patent rights, the foreign company has agreed not to manufacture
in India any of the scheduled products or to grant or make available to any
other person, firm or company any manufacturing information, licences, rights
for any one of the scheduled products in India, thus conferring an exclusive
benefit on the assessee-company to manufacture and sell the scheduled
products. The conferment of an exclusive benefit to manufacture and sell the
articles which are the subject-matter of the agreement cannot be said to be a
part of a mere know-how agreement. The right to make or manufacture certain
goods exclusively in India should be taken to be an independent right secured
by the assessee from the foreign company which is of an enduring nature.
Therefore, the principle laid down by this court in Transformer & Switchgear
Ltd., v. CIT [1976] 103 ITR 352, Fenner Woodroffe & Co. Ltd., v. CIT [1976]
102 ITR 665 and M R Electronic Components Ltd., v. CIT [1982] 136 ITR 305,
straightway applies, and, therefore, the entire technical fees cannot be
allowed as a revenue expenditure. The learned counsel for the assessee relies
on the decision of the Supreme Court in CIT v. Ciba of India Ltd., , Mysore
Kirloskar Ltd., v. CIT [1978] 114 ITR 443 (Kar) [FB] and Praga Tools Ltd., v.
CIT [FB]. But these decisions do not assist the petitioner. In Mysore
Kirloskar Ltd., v. CIT [1978] 114 ITR 443, the Full Bench of the Karnataka
High Court, after considering the terms of the know-how agreement in that
case, held that under the agreements, the assessee acquired merely the right
to draw upon the technical knowledge of the foreign companies for a limited
period, for the purpose of carrying on its business, that the foreign
companies did not part with any of their assets absolutely for ever or for a
limited period of time, that they continued to have the right to use their
knowledge and, even after the agreements had run their course, their rights in
this behalf was not lost, that the assessee had not, therefore, acquired any
asset or advantage of an enduring nature for the benefit of its business and
that the payments were, therefore, revenue in nature and were deductible. The
Full Bench followed the decision of the Supreme Court in CIT v. Ciba of India
Ltd., . In the said case, the Supreme Court has held that in making the
technical knowledge available to the Indian company, the foreign company did
not part with any assets of its business or advantage of an enduring nature
for the purpose of business. The decision in Praga Tools Ltd., v. CIT [FB], is
also to the same effect. All the above three cases dealt with a mere know-how
agreement under which the Indian company acquired only technical knowledge
from the foreign company and did not acquire any other right or advantage of
an enduring nature for the purpose of its business, unlike the facts in this
case. Here, in addition to the acquisition of technical knowledge, the
assessee-company got an exclusive right to manufacture and sell its articles
without any objection from anyone including the foreign company and this is
clearly an advantage of enduring nature. It is well-established that even
without acquisition of an asset, a right of a permanent advantage could be
acquired and the cost of acquisition of such a right could be taken to be
capital expenditure. In Regent Oil Co. Ltd., v. Strick (Inspector of Taxes)
[1966] AC 295; [1969] 73 ITR 301, the House of Lords had expressed the view
that payment made by an assessee to secure exclusive sales stations are
payments for permanent assets and for an enduring benefit, and, therefore, the
expenditure is capital in nature. Lord Reid in that case observed thus (at
page 312-313) :

"Whether a particular outlay by a trader can be set against income or must be
regarded as a capital outlay has proved tone a difficult question...... So it
is not surprising that no one test or principle or rule of thumb is paramount.

The question is ultimately a question of law for the court, but it is a
question which must be answered in the light of all the circumstances which it
is reasonable to take into account, and the weight which must be given to a
particular circumstance in a particular case must depend rather on common
sense than on strict application of any single legal principle."

12\. We have, therefore, to hold, following the above said decisions of this
court that in this case, the Tribunal its right in holding that 25% of the
technical fee has to be taken as a capital expenditure and as such cannot be
allowed as a revenue expenditure.

13\. Coming to the second issue as to whether the Tribunal is right in
upholding the disallowance of 25% of the royalty paid, the ITO, the appellate
authority as well as the Tribunal have all concurrently held that the
disallowance of 25% of the royalty is justified. Under the terms of the know-
how agreement, the royalty is payable on all switchgear products and the parts
thereof sold on behalf of the Indian company at the rate of 2 1/2% of the
invoice value of all low tension switchgear products at 5% in all the high
tension switchgear parts and a royalty of 7% in all switchgear products
exported. Thus, it is seen that the assessee paid a royalty for the
acquisition of an exclusive privilege of manufacturing and selling the
products. The acquisition of such a right has rightly been treated partly
towards capital and party towards the revenue. The Tribunal has chosen to
estimate the value of that portion of the royalty which is relatable to
acquisition of right of an enduring nature. In this view, the Tribunal is
right in holding that 25% of the royalty is to be disallowed.

14\. The result is, the first question his answered partly in favour of the
Revenue and partly in favour of the assessee and the second question is
answered in the negatives and against the assessee. The assessee will pay the
costs of the Revenue. Counsel's fee Rs. 500 one set.

