

Andhra High Court

Kcp Ltd., Ramakrishna Cements vs State Of A.P. And Others on 1 October, 1999

Equivalent citations: 1999 (6) ALD 445, 1999 (6) ALT 569

Author: P. Venkatarama Reddi

Bench: P V Reddi, B P Rao

ORDER P. Venkatarama Reddi, J

1\. In his writ petition, the petitioner questions (lie action of the
respondents in levying and collecting the tax under Non-Agricultural Lands
Assessments Act (hereinafter referred to as the 'Act') on the lands held by
the petitioner on mining lease and seeks quashing of the order dated 20-5-1999
passed by the RDO, Narasaraopet, confirming the demand notice dated 8-9-1997
issued by the MandalRevenue Inspector, Durgi, Guntur District. The petitioner
seeks a further direction to refund the amount of Rs.29,17,884/- paid by it
under protest. The demand relates to the Faslis 1403 to 1407 (corresponding to
the years 1993 to 1997).

2\. Under the Scheme of the Act, the Mandal Revenue Inspector is empowered to
make the assessment. The Mandal Revenue Officer is the appellate authority and
the RDO is the revisional authority. In determining the tax and disposing "of
the appeals and revisions thereon against the demands raised by the primary
authority, the three authorities concerned undoubtedly exercise quasi-judicial
functions. The facts of the case reveal that the three authorities have made a
mockery of this quasi-judicial function and betrayed the confidence reposed in
them by the Legislature and turned a nelson's eye to the law laid down and the
directions given by this Court. We have initiated contempt proceedings suo
motu against the respondents 3 and 4 in the writ petition.

3\. The MRI, Durgi, issued a notice in Form I under Rule 3 of A.P. Non-
agricultural Land Assessment Rules proposing to hold an enquiry in connection
with the assessment under the said Act. The petitioner was required to furnish
the documents relating to mining lease of lands in Polapalli village. No other
details were mentioned in the notice. Strangely, the enquiry was posted to the
second day after the date of issuance of the notice. The petitioner's lawyer
promptly replied to the notice. He brought to the notice of the Revenue
Inspector that the petitioner holds about 152 acres of mineral-bearing lands
which serve as a source for providing raw material for Cement Industry. In the
reply, the Revenue Inspector's attention was drawn to five-Judge Full Bench
decision of this Court in Mahabakswarappa v. Commissioner of Land Revenue,
(FB). The relevant passage was extracted. It maybe mentioned that the Full
Bench of five Judges held in that case that the lands held on mining lease
cannot be subjected to tax under the Act unless the terms of the lease provide
for payment of such tax. The Full Bench put it on the ground that the State
Legislature lacked competence to levy tax on the mineral-bearing lands covered
by the leases granted under the Mines and Minerals (R&D) Act (Central Act). It
was pointed out by the petitioner that the lease agreement entered into
between the petitioner and the Government of Andhra Pradesh did not provide
for levy of NALA tax. Without dealing with the contentions of the petitioner
and without even referring to the judgment of this Court, the demand was
raised on 8-9-1997 in Form II in a cyclostyled proforma. In this, the extent,
the location and the faslis for which the assessment made were only given. The
total tax demanded was Rs.20,17,884/-, which the petitioner paid under protest
on 16-7-1997. The learned Government Pleader for Taxes tells us that the said
payment was made because the petitioner's representative agreed before the
Collector on 27-8-1997 to pay the tax. It is the assertion of the petitioner
that it had no option but to pay the tax as the District Collector was not
prepared to give no objection certificate for renewal of lease. This averment
is not denied.

4\. The petitioner promptly questioned the demand notice issued by the MRI,
Durgi, in Writ Petition No.22103 of 1997. It may be stated that the State of
A.P., represented by the Secretary, Revenue Department and the MRI, Durgi,
were parties in the said writ petition. This Court dismissed the writ petition
on 15-9-1997 on the ground that the petitioner had an alternative remedy of
appeal. However, an observation was made that the appeal if filed shall be
disposed of "in accordance with law and taking note of the judgment of this
Court referred to above", i.e., the judgment inMahabaleshwarappa v.
Commissioner of Land Revenue, (supra).

5\. The petitioner then filed an appeal before the MRO (Respondent No.4
herein). The MRO, forsaking his independent status as an appellate authority
sought for instructions of the District Collector as 10 the disposal of the
appeal in the light of the contentions raised in the appeal. The Collector,
Guntur, in his communication dated 24-6-1998 took an absurd stand that the
judgment in Mahabahshwarappa's case (supra), was not applicable to the
petitioner's case as it was not a party to the judgment. He even called for
the explanation of the MRO as to why the payment was accepted under protest.
Obviously, based on this communication, the MRO dismissed the appeal on
16-2-1999. The following arc the four reasons given by him which are either
irrelevant or palpably erroneous. The third reason given is in fact
contemptuous as elaborated later.

"(i) The Mandal Revenue Inspector has issued NALA demand approved by the
Revenue Divisional Officer, Narasaraopet as per the orders of the Full Bench
of High Court, A.P., Hyderabad, in their ruling in WP No.2965 of 1989, dated
29-4-i 993. This is a judgment of a Full Bench of three Judges rendered prior
to the five Judge Bench decision in Mahabaleswarappa case.

(ii) Under Section 12 (b) (1) NALA Act, 1963, the lands leased out for any
commercial, industrial or other than non-agricultural purposes are liable for
NALA.

(iii) The orders of the Hon'ble High Court issued in WP No.1364 of 1987 and
Batch are not applicable to appellant-Company as it is not a party in the
above writ petition and

(iv) There is no provision in the NALA Act to refund the amount, once paid to
the Government under NALA though the amount was paid under protest."

6\. Revision was filed under Section 6 of the Act before the Revenue
Divisional Officer (Respondent No.3 herein). The Revisional authority also
took the same untenable contemptuous stand in rejecting the revision petition
on the ground that the petitioner was not a party to the Special Bench
Judgment in Mahabaleswarappa's case (supra). He also observed that the State
Government was the competent authority to levy the tax under NALA Act which
observation runs directly contrary to the Special Bench Judgment of this Court
in which it was held that the State lacks competence to levy tax on non-
agricultural lands meant for mining operations and therefore, the levy and
collection of tax under NALA Act was illegal unless mining lease deed itself
provides for such payment. The RDO reiterated the stand of the appellate
authority (MRO) that there was no provision for refund of tax paid under
protest, which on the face of it is an utterly untenable plea. Such a stand
exposes the attitude of the third respondent to deny the legitimate relief by
hook or crook or betrays lack of comprehension of the basics of law by which
he is bound. If that reasoning is accepted, a law abiding citizen by paying
tax and thereafter contesting in appeal would suffer irretrievable prejudice.
He cannot hope to get back the money even if the tax was collected in blatant
violation of law.

7\. The question whether the tax is leviable tinder the Act in respect of the
lands held on mining lease and exclusively used for mining purposes, is no
longer res Integra. The Special Bench decision in Mahabaleswarappa's case
(supra), categorically lays down the legal positionthat the State has no
legislative competence to levy tax on such lands and the authorities acting
under the Act cannot assess and collect the tax on the lands granted on mining
lease unless it is one of the terms of the lease deed itself that such tax is
liable to be paid by the lessee. Admittedly, the lease deed has no such
stipulation. In view of this position, the learned Government Pleader could
not support the demand notice issued by the MRI, which was confirmed by the
appellate and revisional authorities. There is one more aspect which we would
like to point out. The MRO and the RDO who are invested with the appellate and
revisional powers are supposed to discharge the quasi-judicial functions. They
have ignored the basic and fundamental rule that the appellate or the
revisional authority is to act independently and that they cannot surrender
their discretion and faculty of judgment to an administrative superior. This
basic principle which is firmly rooted in our legal system and which has
become an integral part of the administration of law, has been thrown to winds
by respondents 3 and 4. The District Collector instead of refraining from
giving advice in a matter falling within the realm of appeal/revision, thought
it fit to give instructions as to the grounds on which the appeal could be
rejected. While doing so, the District Collector found a convenient ruse to
circumvent the judgment of this Court and failed to bear the distinction
between the administrative subordination and the statutory functions. The
District Collector obviously thought that he could interfere with the method
and manner of exercise of functions by appellate and revisional authorities,
though the District Collector does not anywhere figure in the Scheme of the
Act. The directions to ignore the decision of the Full Bench of this Court on
the ground that the petitioner was not a party thereto and respondents 3 and 4
faithfully acting pursuant to such directions obviously amounts to contempt of
Court for which action has been initiated by us. We have no hesitation in
quashing the impugneddemand notice issued by the fifth respondent and the
orders passed by the third and fourth respondents confirming that illegal
demand.

8\. Coming now to the suo motu contempt proceedings, we have no manner of
doubt that respondents 3 and 4 by refusing to apply the law laid down by this
Court in Mahabaleswarappa's case (supra) and virtually brushing aside the
judgment on the ground that the writ petitioner was not a party thereto, have
committed civil contempt and they are liable to be punished under the Contempt
of Courts Act,

9\. It is significant to note that the writ petitioner questioned the very
same demand notice in Writ Petition No.22103 of 1997. This Court relegated the
petitioner to the alternative remedy while making a specific observation that
the MRO shall dispose of the appeal "in accordance with law taking note of the
judgment". In this order, the respondents 3 and 4 herein are not parties. Only
the Mandal Revenue Officer (Respondent No,5 herein) was a party. It is not
clear from the record Whether respondents 3 and 4 were apprised of the order
passed in Writ Petition No.22103 of 1997. In the objections filed or in the
appeal grounds, there was no reference to this order. Though there is a strong
possibility that a copy of the order would have been made available to the
respondents by the Revenue Inspector, there is no clinching proof to the
effect that respondent Nos.3 and 4 were aware of the observations made in Writ
Petition No.22103 of 1997 filed by the very same petitioner. If they were
aware of the same, the contempt would have been in an aggravated form. But in
view of the doubt prevailing in our mind, we proceed on the premise that the
order in Writ Petition No.22103 of 1997 was not brought to the notice of
respondent Nos.3 and 4. Even then, as already observed, the said officials
cannot extricate themselvesfrom the charge of contempt. The very fact that the
law laid down by this Court in Mahabaleswarappa's case (supra) in categorical
terms was not followed on the ostensible ground that the petitioner was not a
party thereto itself amounts to wilful disobedience of the authoritative
pronouncement of the High Court and amounts to civil contempt within the
meaning of Section 2(b) of the Act. It may even amount to criminal contempt
falling under clause (iii) of Section 2(b). It is to be noted that the law
laid down by this Court is of general application. It is not confined to the
determination and application of law between the parties in a particular case.
The question as to competence of the State Legislature to legislate on the
subject and the competence of the designated authorities under the Act to
demand tax on the mining lands came up for consideration before the Full
Bench. The binding nature of this judgment cannot be whittled down in the
manner in which respondents 2 to 4 sought to do it. When this Court declared
that the instrumentalities of the State have no competence to levy and demand
tax, the respondents arc duty bound to follow it and the judgment declaring
the law cannot be swept aside on the flimsy ground that the law was declared
in the case of some other party.

10\. The attitude adopted and the stand taken by the respondents 2 to 4 impels
us to restate certain fundamental principles of law of contempt and remind
them of their duties and obligations towards the judgment of this
Constitutional Court. As there is growing tendency to ignore the
pronouncements of this Court by the executive and quasi-judicial authorities,
we feet that time has come to reiterate the well settled legal position with
reference to the judgments of the Supreme Court.

I2t. As long back as in 1962, in East India Commercial Company v. Collector of
Customs, , Subba Rao, J.,(as he then was) had this to say on the binding
nature of the law laid down by the High Court within its territories in
relation to which it exercises jurisdiction:

"Section 167(8) of the Sea Customs Act can be invoked only if an order issued
under Section 3 of the Act was infringed during the course of the import or
export. The Division Bench of the High Court held that a contravention of a
condition imposed by a licence issued under the Act is not an offence under
Section 5 of the Act. This raises the question whether an Administrative
Tribunal can ignore the law declared by the highest Court in the State and
initiate proceedings in direct violation of the law so declared. Under Article
215, every High Court shall be a Court of record and shall have all the powers
of such a Court including the power to punish for contempt of itself. Under
Article 226, it has a plenary power to issue orders or writs for the
enforcement of the fundamental rights and for any other purpose to any person
or authority, including in appropriate cases any Government, within its
territorial jurisdiction. Under Article 227, it has jurisdiction over all
Courts and Tribunals throughout the territories in relation to which it
exercises jurisdiction. It would be anomalous to suggest that a Tribunal over
which the High Court has superintendence can ignore the law declared by that
Court and start proceedings in direct violation of it. If a Tribunal can do
so, all the Subordinate Courts can equally do so, for there is no specific
provision, just like in the case of Supreme Court, making the law declared by
the High Court binding on subordinate Courts. It is implicit in the power of
supervision conferred on a superior Tribunal that all the Tribunals subject to
its supervision should conform to the law laid down by it. Such obedience
would also be conducive to their smoothworking: otherwise, there would be
confusion in the administration of law and respect for law would irretrievably
suffer. We, therefore, hold that the law declared by the highest Court in the
State is binding on authorities or Tribunals under its, superintendence, and
that they cannot ignore it either in initiating a proceeding or deciding on
the rights involved in such a proceeding. If that be so, the notice issued by
the authority signifying the launching-of proceedings contrary to the law laid
down by the High Court would be invalid and the proceedings themselves would
be without jurisdiction."

12\. The dicta of the Supreme Court in the extracted passage should dispel any
misgivings about the need to give effect to and apply the law laid down by the
High Court in all cases that arise before the concerned authorities, but not
merely to the cases of particular party in whose case the decision was
rendered.

13\. In B. Mishra v. B. Dixit, , it was observed:

"Contempt of Court is disobedience to the Court, by acting in opposition to
the authority, justice and dignity thereof. It signifies a wilful disregard or
disobedience of the Court's order; it also signifies such conduct as tends to
bring the authority of the Court and the administration of law into
disrepute."

14\. That was a case in which a judicial officer functioning as a Commissioner
of Hindu Religious Endowments, Orissa, declined to follow a direct decision of
the Orissa High Court on the question of appointment of interim Trustee, while
disposing of a revision petition. The Supreme Court found him guilty of
contempt and found no bona fides in his plea that the pendency of the petition
for leave to appeal to Supreme Court gave him an impressionthat the decision
need not be followed. The Supreme Court referred with approval the
observations of Subba Rao, J., in East India Commercial Company Case (supra)
and observed:

"Under Article 227 of the Constitution, the High Court is vested with the
power of superintendence over the Courts and Tribunals in the State. Acting as
a quasi-judicial authority under the Orissa Hindu Religious Endowments Act,
the appellant was subject to the superintendence of the High Court.
Accordingly the decisions of the High Court were binding on him. He could not
get away from them by adducing factually wrong and illegitimate reasons."

The conduct of the appellant in not following the previous decision of the
High Court was commented upon in the following words:

"The conduct of the appellant in not following the previous decision of the
High Court is calculated to create confusion in the administration of law. It
will undermine respect for law laid down by the High Court and impair the
constitutional authority of the High Court. His conduct is therefore
comprehended by the principles underlying the law of contempt. The analogy of
the inferior Court's disobedience to the specific order of a superior Court
also suggests that his conduct falls within the purview of the law of
contempt. Just as the disobedience to a specific order of the Court undermines
the authority and dignity of the Court in a particular case, similarly, any
deliberate and mala fide conduct of not following the law laid down in the
previous decision undermines the constitutional authority and respect of the
High Court. Indeed, while the former conduct has repercussions on an
individual case and on a limited number of persons, the latter conduct has a
muchwider and more disastrous impact. It is calculated not only to undermine
the constitutional authority and respect of the High Court generally, but is
also likely to subvert the Rule of law and engender harassing uncertainty and
confusion in the administration of taw."

Their Lordships further clarified:

"Our view that a deliberate and mala fide conduct of not following the binding
precedent of the High Court is contumacious does not unduly enlarge the domain
of contempt- It would not stifle a bona fide act of distinguishing the binding
precedent, even though it may turn out to be mistaken."

The above observations of the Supreme Court together with what we have said
above should serve as warning bells to the executive or statutory authorities
who are inclined to find an excuse to circumvent the decision of the High
Court or the law laid down therein in exercise of the jurisdiction under
Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution. They must note that if the judgment
of the High Court is not acceptable or they feel aggrieved of the judgment,
the remedy lies in questioning the judgment according to law in the Apex Court
or taking resort to such other remedy as is open to them as per law. So long
as the judgment holds the field and the said judgment is not distinguishable,
the law declared therein is binding on all the persons and instrumentalities
of the State and the failure to follow the law as interpreted and expounded by
the High Court would amount to contempt. Not only that, the rule of law which
is the bed-rock of our democratic Constitution will face a grave threat and
there will be chaos in the administration of justice.

15\. We, therefore, find the Mandal Revenue Officer and the Revenue
DivisionalOfficer guilty of contempt of Court. They appeared in the Court on
the date of first hearing of the contempt case and expressed regrets for what
had happened. They have tendered unqualified apology in the counter-affidavit.
As observed supra, there is no definite indication that they were aware of the
Division Bench judgment in Writ Petition No.22103 of 1997 filed by the
petitioner-Company. Moreover, as already noted, the contemptuous stance of
these officials has emanated to a large extent from the illegal instructions
given by the then District Collector. In these circumstances, we would not
like to impose the sentence of imprisonment or fine. We admonish them and warn
them to be careful in future. We further direct that the said two officials
should pay exemplary costs of Rs.1,000/-cach. These amounts shall be remitted
to the credit of the District Legal Services Authority, Guntur, within two
weeks. The said amount shall be paid from out of their own funds.

16\. In the normal course, we would have thought of initiating proceedings
against the District Collector who by his illegal instructions put the
respondents 3 and 4 on a wrong track. But in view of the fact that nearly two
years have elapsed from the date on which the District Collector sent the
offending communication and in view of the period of limitation prescribed in
Section 20, we refrain at this stage to take action against the District
Collector under Contempt of Courts Act.

17\. The contempt case is disposed of accordingly.

18\. The writ petition is allowed with costs quantified at Rs.2,000/- and the
respondents are directed to take steps for the refund of the tax paid by the
petitioner within a period of three months from the date of receipt of this
judgment.

