

Delhi High Court

The Commissioner Of Income-Tax vs Vasavi Pratap Chand on 11 December, 2001

Equivalent citations: 95 (2002) DLT 595

Bench: S Sinha, A Sikri

JUDGMENT

1\. Interpretation of certain provisions of Wealth-tax Act, 1957 (hereinafter
referred to as the Act) is involved in these set of references.

The question which has been referred for the opinion of this Court is as
under:

"Whether on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Tribunal was
legally correct in coming to the conclusion that the loan of Rs. 113,258/-
obtained by the assessed on the security of the Life Insurance Policies is
deductible in computing her net wealth u/s 2(m)(ii) of the Wealth-tax Act,
1957?"

2\. For the purpose of disposal of these matters, fact of the matter would be
noticed from WTR 25 of 1980.

The respondent is an assessed under the Wealth-tax Act. Partap Chand, husband
of the assessed had obtained a loan against certain policies from LIC. The
assessed was trustee as well as beneficiary of these policies. A sum of Rs.
1,13,258/ was obtained by way of loan and assignment of the said policy. A
part of the loan was invested in purchase of shares and another part thereof
was used for making advances to others. She filed a return under the Wealth-
tax Act showing net wealth at Rs. 875384/ for the assessment year 1975-76
which included the value of certain shares including those which had been
purchased out of the aforesaid loan. She claimed deduction for total liability
of Rs. 138731/- which included the aforesaid loan amount of Rs. 113,258/-. The
Wealth-tax officer assessed the liability of the assessed at Rs. 138731/- .
The net wealth was thus determined at Rs. 926620/-. The Commissioner of Wealth
Tax was however, of the view that the order passed by the Wealth-tax Officer
was erroneous and prejudicial to the interest of the Revenue. He issued a show
cause notice on 30.11.1977 calling upon her to explain why the liability
relating to the aforesaid loan amount should not be deducted from the value of
her assets. The Commissioner was of the opinion that the said amount does not
fall within the purview of the term net wealth as laid down in Section
2(m)(ii) of the Act. The contentions raised by the assessed in her show cause
were rejected.

Against the order of the Commissioner, the assessed preferred an appeal to the
Tribunal. The Tribunal allowed the said appeal by an order dated 25.6.1979
holding that the Commissioner of Wealth-tax was not justified in withdrawing
the relief already granted by the Wealth-tax officer by holding that his order
was erroneous in so far as it was prejudicial to the interests of the revenue.

Upon an application filed by the CIT, the Tribunal referred the aforesaid
question to this Court for its opinion.

3.Mr Sanjiv Khanna, learned counsel appearing for Revenue would submit that
undisputedly the LIC policies are exempted from the purview of Wealth-tax Act
under Section 5 of the said Act. According to the learned counsel if the
benefit arising out of the policy could only be derived upon attaining
maturity with the last payment made in relation thereto, the same would not
attract the definition of 'net wealth' as contained in Section 2 of the Act.
Learned counsel would submit that the provisions of Sections 3, 4, and 5 of
the Wealth Tax Act must be read harmoniously and so read, the amendment
carried out in the definition to word 'chargeable' from, 'payable' would not
attract the mischief rule.

The words 'chargeable' and 'payable' according to Mr Khanna are synonymous. In
support of the said contention reliance has been placed by him on CIT V.
Vaidyanathan (1985) 153 ITR 11, Apoorva Shanti Lal v CWT [1982) 135 ITR 182
and CWT v. Premnarayan Garg (1982) 134 ITR 315. Our attention was also drawn
to the fact that this aspect of the matter had although been accepted by the
Tribunal but it erred in proceeding on the basis that insurance policy is not
one of the excluded assets.

Mr Anup Sharma, learned counsel appearing for the respondent, on the other
hand, would submit that the minority view in CIT V. Vaidyanathan ( supra) has
been approved by the Division Bench in CIT V. Vasant 186 ITR 91. Learned
counsel would contend that the expression payable used in Section 5 must be
construed having regard to the fact that the assets must at first be
'chargeable' to tax and then a question would arise as to whether the same is
'payable' or not.

Mr Khanna in reply pointed out that Bombay High court has not determined the
question involved in this case and only in relation to another contention, the
minority view of the Full Bench of madras High Court was followed.

Interpretation clause contained in Section 2 of the Act begins with the words
"unless the context otherwise requires".

4\. Assets has been defined in Section 2(e) to mean :

"assets" includes property of every description, moveable or immovable, but
does not include-

(1) in relation to the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April,
1969, or any earlier assessment year-

(i)agricultural land and growing crops, grass or standing trees on such land;

(ii)any building owned or occupied by a cultivator of, or receiver of rent or
revenue out of agricultural land Provided that the building is on or in the
immediate vicinity of the land and is building which the cultivator or the
receiver of rent or revenue by reason of his connection with the land requires
as a dwelling house or a store-house or an out-house."

The said definition is of wide amplitude.

Section 2(m) defines 'net wealth' in the following terms:

(m) "net wealth" means the amount by which the aggregate value computed in
accordance with the provisions of this Act of all the assets, wherever
located, belonging to the assessed on the valuation date, including assets
required to be included in his net wealth as on that date under this Act, is
in excess of the aggregate value of all the debts owed by the assessed on the
valuation date other than-

(i)debts which under Section 6 are not to be taken into account;

(ii)debts which are secured on or which have been incurred in relation to, any
property in respect of which wealth -tax is not chargeable under this Act: and

(iii)xxxxxxxxx In this context, it may be noted that S. 2(m)(ii), as it
originally stood prior to its amendment in 1964 by the Wealth- tax (
Amendment) Act, 1964, reads thus :

"debts which are secured on, or which have been incurred in relation to any
asset in respect of which wealth-tax is not payable under this Act."

The only difference that has been made by the amendment is that the word
"payable" has been replaced by the word "chargeable"

Section 3 of the Act states that Wealth-tax shall be chargeable for every
assessment year in respect of net wealth of the assessed on the corresponding
valuation date. Section 3 however, is subject to other provisions contained in
the Act. Section 5 of the Act states that wealth tax shall not be payable in
respect of certain assets and such assets shall not be included in the net
wealth of the assessed. The only question which thus falls for our
consideration is applicability of the definition of net wealth as contained in
Section 2 of the Act in the fact of the present matter vis--vis Sections 3, 4
and 5 of thereof.

It is now trite that the expression occurring in the interpretation clause
should ordinarily be given the same meaning unless the context otherwise
requires. In a recent decision, the Apex Court in the Central Bank vs.
Ravindra and Ors, referred to the decision in Farrell v. Alexander, (1976) 2
All. E.R. 721 at 736 which is in the following terms:

"where the draftsman uses the same word or phrase in similar contexts, he must
be presumed to intend it in each place to bear the same meaning".

The court having accepted invitation to embark upon interpretative expedition
shall identify on its radar the contextual use of the word or expression and
then determine its direction avoiding collision with icebergs of in
consistency and repugnancy.

5\. It is also trite that the legislator is presumed to know the law. In Dadi
Jagannadham v. Jammalu Ramlu and Ors reported in 2001 AIR SCW 3051 it has been
held :

"13. We have considered the submissions made by the parties. The settled
principles of interpretation are that the Court must proceed on the assumption
that the legislature did not make a mistake and that it did what is intended
to do. The Court must, as far as possible, adopt a construction which will
carry out the obvious intention of the legislature. Undoubtedly if there is a
defect or an omission in the words used by the legislature, the Court would
not go to its aid to correct or make up the deficiency. The court could not
add words to a statute or read words into it which are not there, especially
when the literal reading produces an intelligible result. The Court cannot aid
the legislature's defective phrasing of an Act or add and mend, and by
construction, make up deficiencies which are there"

6.It is further well settled in view of Gurudevdatta Vksss Maryadit v. State
of Mahrashtra, that the Court will construe the statute having regard to its
literal meaning wherein it was held:

"26.Further we wish to clarify that it is a cardinal principle of
interpretation of statute that the words of a statute must be understood in
their natural, ordinary or popular sense and construed according to their
grammatical meaning, unless such construction leads to some absurdity or
unless there is something in the context or in the object of the statute to
suggest to the contrary. The golden rule is that the words of a statute must
prima facie be given their ordinary meaning. It is yet another rule of
construction that when the words of the statute are clear, plain and
unambiguous, then the courts are bound to give effect to that meaning,
irrespective of the consequences. It is said that the words themselves best
declare the intention of the law-giver. The courts have adhered to the
principle that efforts should be made to give meaning to each and every word
used by the legislature and it is not a sound principle of construction to
brush aside words in a statute as being in apposite surpluses, if they can
have a proper application in circumstances conceivable within the
contemplation of the statute."

7.It is not in dispute that the Courts while interpreting the statute must
notice the law as it stood before the amendment

8.In Principles of Statutory interpretation by Shri G.P. Singh, 7th Edn at
page 98, it is stated as under:

"When the material words are capable of bearing two or more constructions the
most firmly established rule for construction of such words of all statutes in
general ( be they penal or beneficial, restrictive or enlarging of the common
law)" is the rule laid down in Heydon's case (1584) 3 Co. Rep. 7a, p. 7B: 76
ER 637 which has "now attained the status of a classic ( Kanailal Sur v.
Paramnidhi Sadhukhan . The rule ;which is also known as purposive
construlction or mischief rule, enables consideration of four matters in
construing an Act: i) What was the law before the making of the Act, ii) what
was the mischief or defect for which the law did not provide, iii) what is the
remedy that the Act has provided and iv) what is the reason of the remedy. The
rule then directs that the Courts must adopt that construction ,which shall
suppress the mischief and advance the remedy. The rule was explained in the
Bengal Immunity Co .v State of Bihar by S.R. Das, CJ, as follows: " It is a
sound rule of construction of a statute firmly established in England as far
back as 1584 when Heydon's case was decided that for the sure and true
interpretation of all Statutes in general ( be they penal or beneficial,
restrictive or enlarging of the common law) four things are to be discerned
and considered :

1st - What was the common law before the making of the Act;

2nd - What was the mischief and defect for which the common law did not
provide 3rd - What remedy the Parliament hath resolved and appointed to cure
the disease of the commonwealth, and 4th - The true reason of the remedy ;

and then the office of all the judges is always to make such construction as
shall suppress the mischief and advance the remedy and to suppress subtle
inventions and evasions for continuance of the mischief, and pro privato
commodo, and to add force and life to the cure and remedy, according to the
true intent of the makers of the Act, pro bono publico.

9.The question which must be raised and answered is whether the assets
chargeable and payable carry different meaning or the same meaning. In other
words, are the said words interchangeable. Black's Law Dictionary ( Sixth Edn)
defines these words as under:

Chargeable :This word, in its ordinary acceptation, as applicable to the
imposition of a duty or burden signifies capable of being charged, subject to
be charged, liable to be charged or proper to be charged.

Payable : Capable of being paid; suitable to be paid, admitting or demanding
payment, justly due, legally enforceable. A sum of money is said to be payable
when a person is under an obligation to pay it. Payable may therefore signify
an obligation to pay at a future time but when used without qualification,
term normally means that the debt is payable at once, as opposed to owing."

Both the words, therefore are not interchangeable.

10.The scheme of Wealth-tax Act in our opinion would suggest that the said
words 'chargeable' and 'payable' carry different meaning. The statute states
that the tax shall not be payable in respect of certain assets and property or
income. The payability of tax may or may not depend on the chargeability of
the tax. In other words, the assets, property or income may be chargeable to
tax but may not be payable having regard to extent of exemption provided for
in the schedule appended to an Act. It is axiomatic that if the assets or
property is not chargeable to tax, no tax would be payable but the converse
may be true. In a situation of this nature therefore an attempt must be made
to give effect to both the expression 'chargeable' and 'payable', having
regard to the intention of the Parliament as reflected in different provisions
of the Act as mentioned hereinbefore. We may notice that even in the Income-
tax Act, the words 'chargeable' and 'payable' have been used in different
provisions thereof.

11\. Section 3 is the charging provision. The same does not exclude the
applicability of the interpretation of "net wealth" as contained in Section
2(m)(i)(ii) of the Act.

12.The schedule to the Act provides that no wealth tax is payable in cases
where the net wealth exceeds a particular figure. This only implies that the
net wealth is chargeable to wealth tax in terms of Section 3 of the Act but
the same may not be payable having regard to the limit prescribed by reason of
the schedule appended thereto. Having regard to the fact that in the
definition of net wealth both the expression 'means' and 'includes,' are
employed the same must be held to be exhaustive. Reference in this connection
may be made to CIT V. Venkateswara Hatcheries (1999) 237 ITR 174.

13.It may be that chargeability to tax never operates on gross amount but
nothing is payable as wealth-tax until by process of computation of it forms
part of net wealth. The decision rendered in CIT v. Srinivasa Setty 128 ITR
294, Bawa Shiv Charan Singh v. CIT, 149 ITR 29, CIT V. Harprsasad & Co. 99 ITR
118 were referred to in different context. The Court in these cases was
dealing with the concept of loss.

14.No assets is chargeable to wealth tax. The Apex Court in Sudhir Chandra
Nawn v. Wealth-tax Officer, Calcutta and Ors [1968] 69 ITR 897 while
considering the question as regards the constitutional validity of the Wealth
Tax Act and also wealth tax held:

"It is a tax on the capital value of the assets of individuals and companies
on the valuation date. The wealth- tax is not imposed on the components of the
assets of the assessed; it is imposed on the total assets which the assessed
owns, and in determining the net wealth not only the encumbrances specifically
charged against any item of asset, but the general liability of the assessed
to pay his debts and to discharges his lawful obligations have to be taken
into account. In certain exceptional cases, where a person owes no debts and
is under no enforceable obligation to discharge any liability out of his
assets, it may be possible to break up the tax which is leviable on the total
assets into components and attribute a component to lands and buildings owned
by an assessed. In such a case, the component out of the total tax
attributable to lands and buildings may in the matter of computation bear
similarity to a tax on lands and buildings levied on the capital or annual
value under entry 49 of List II. But the legislative authority of Parliament
is not determined by visualizing the possibility of exceptional cases of taxes
under two different heads operating similarly on taxpayers."

15.It may thus legitimately be inferred that the expression "property not
chargeable to wealth-tax" occurring in Section 2(m)(ii) would manifest
legislative intent that the property and asset may fall in Section 2(e) of the
Act but would only include net wealth for the purpose of taxability. The said
act therefore must be read in the aforesaid context. Computation of net wealth
would be based on charge of wealth tax in terms of Section 3 of the Act. The
definition of "net wealth" as contained in Section 2(m)(ii) fits in the scheme
of charging provision, inasmuch as the word assets as defined in Section 2(e)
of the Act covers the tax incurred by the assessed. Thus, any property which
does not fall within the definition of assets under Section 2(e) would not be
charged to wealth tax.

16.It is true that a Full Bench of Madras High Court in CIT V., Vaidyanathan
153 ITR 11 has held that by reason of such amendment no material change was
effected. It was held thus : "The rule of strict construction applies only to
charging sections and not to machinery sections. Section 2(m) of the W.T. Act,
1957, is not a charging section and the rule of strict construction cannot be
applied to it. The principle of "purposive construction" has to be applied.
This is a construction which will promote the general legislative purpose
underlying the provision. Section 2(m)(ii) speaks of debts which are secured
on or which have been incurred in relation to any property in respect of which
wealth-tax is not chargeable under the Act. In case where an asset is only
partially exempt from chargeability to wealth-tax, then it must be necessarily
follow that the portion of the debt secured on such portion of the asset or
incurred in acquiring such portion of the asset has to be excluded from
reckoning. This construction will be in harmony with the scheme and purpose of
the W.T. Act"

17.With utmost respect we cannot subscribe to his said view. Rule of purposive
construction may be taken recourse to when literal meaning attributed to a
provision of statute leads to an absurdity. Such is not the cash here. It is,
in our view possible to give effect to the definition of 'net wealth' in
implementing Section 3 vis--vis Section 5 of the Act The minority view
expressed by Balsubramaniam, J. commends to us. The view expressed runs thus:

"Section 2(m)(ii) does not speak of exempted assets. It only refers to
property in respect of which wealth-tax is not chargeable. This phrase must be
understood as meaning "property in respect of which wealth-tax is not at all
chargeable". "Not at all" is not a gloss. It is very much a part of the
meaning. If the secured properties fit in with the meaning of Section
2(m)(ii), the connected debts go out of the reckoning. But if the properties
are not comprehended by Section 2(m)(ii), the general rule of deductibility
operates and this general rule knows no restrictions. In other words,
depending on its relation to the asset in question, a debt is either
deductible or not deductible. Section 2(m)(ii) does not contain any provision
for partial abatement, or apportionment, of a debt under which part of it is
deductible and part of it is not. On the words of Section 2(m)(ii) , once an
asset which secured the debt is treated as an asset on which wealth-tax is
chargeable, even though a part of the value of the asset is exempt from tax,
the whole of the secured debt must be deducted.":

18.The legislature does not make an amendment unnecessarily. The amendment so
carried out therefore must be given its full effect. To the aforesaid extent
the mischief rule or 'Heyden's rules' must be applied having regard to the
different expressions 'chargeable' and 'payable' carry, particularly when the
said expression are not interchangeable. In this connection, we may refer to
the decision of the Apex Court in CIT v. Podar Cement Pvt. Ltd. [1997] 226 ITR
625, where their Lordships observed as under :

"At this juncture, we can also refer to the judgment cited by Mr. Syali
regarding updating construction of the words used in the statute. In State
(through CBI/New Delhi v. SJ Choudhary, , this Court has quoted the following
passage with approval in support of updating construction ( page 433 of [996]
2SCC):

"Statutory Interpretation by Francis Bennion, 2nd edn, Section 288 with the
heading 'Presumption that updating construction to be given' states one of the
rules thus (page 617) :

(2) It is presumed that Parliament intends the court to apply to an ongoing
Act a construction that continuously updates its working to allow for changes
since the Act was initially framed ( an updating construction). While it
remain s law, it is to be treated as always speaking. This means that in its
application on any date, the language of the Act, though necessarily embedded
in its own time, is nevertheless to be construed in accordance with the need
to treat it as current law.

In the comments that follow it is pointed out that an ongoing Act is taken to
be always speaking. It is also, further stated thus (pp. 618-19) :

In construing an ongoing Act, the interpreter is to presume that Parliament
intended the Act to be applied at any future time in such a way as to give
effect to the true original intention. Accordingly the interpreter is to make
allowances for any relevant changes that have occurred, since the Act's
passing, in law, social conditions, technology, the meaning of words, and
other matters. Just as the US Constitution is regarded as " a living
Constitution", so an ongoing British Act is regarded as "a living Act". That
today's construction involves the supposition that Parliament was catering
long ago for a state of affairs that did not then exist is no argument against
that construction. Parliament, in the wording of an enactment, is expected to
anticipate temporal developments. The drafts will try to foresee the future,
and allow for it in the wording.

An enactment of former days is thus to be read today. In the light of dynamic
processing received over the years, with such modification of the current
meaning of its language as will now give effect to the original legislative
intention. The reality and effect of dynamic processing provides the gradual
adjustment. It is constituted by judicial interpretation, year in and year
out. It also comprises processing by executive officials."

It was further observed :

Assuming that there are two possible interpretations on section 22 of the Act,
which is akin to a charging section, it is well settled, that the one which is
favorable to the assessed has to be preferred.

Furthermore, for the purpose of computing the net wealth, the source of
acquisition of assets may not have much relevance. The said assets have
admittedly been acquired by the assessede. Policies are issued by LIC for
particular purpose. Although loan can be obtained from LIC against such policy
but the same by itself cannot be said to be object and purpose thereof. Assets
had been acquired by the assessed by investing the amount in shares and by
grant of loan or advance to other persons.

19.We may notice that the income derived from such investment would be
subjected to income tax and thus there does not exist any reason as to why the
same shall not form part of the 'assets' for the purpose of Wealth-tax Act.
The source of acquiring the money for such investment may not be relevant.
What is relevant is the extent of assets in the hands of the assessed at the
relevant time. If any assets acquired by investment from loan from any other
source could form part of assets we fail to understand as to why the same
principle would not apply to acquisition of assets by investment of money
which was procured by way of loan by pleading LIC policies. This aspect of the
matter has not been considered in deciding by the courts. Vaidyanathan's case
( supra) , Apoorva Shanti Lal's case ( supra) and Premnarayan Garg's case
(supra).

20.It may be true that the Bombay High court in the Commissioner of Wealth Tax
v. Vasant Kumar Govindi Kotak (1990) 186 ITR 91 did not go into the question
from this point of view but it is profitable to notice that therein it was
held: " On the words of section 2, once an asset which secures the debt is
treated as an asset on which wealth tax is chargeable, even though a part of
the value of the asset is exempt from tax, the whole of the secured debt must
be deducted."

The policy amount would be payable only upon its maturity but the same by
itself in our considered view cannot be it a ground to exclude any assets
acquired out of the loan from LIC by securing the policies. The loan could
have been obtained from any other source. Selection 5(1)(4) of the Act has
provided for exemption. An exemption of the clause may be strictly construed
and the same cannot be interpreted in such a manner so as to take away a
benefit to which the assessed may otherwise be entitled to.

In Federation of A.P. Chambers of Commerce & Industry V. state of A.P. , the
Apex Court observed thus:-

" It is trite law that a taxing statute has to be strictly construed and
nothing can be read into it. In the classic passage from Cape Brandy
Syndicate, (1921) 1 KB 64,71 which was noticed in the judgment under appeal,
it was said :

"In a taxing Act one has to look merely at which is clearly said. There is no
room for any intendment. There is no equity about a tax. There is no
presumption as to a tax. Nothing is to be read in, nothing is to be implied.
One can look fairly at the language used."

This view has been reiterated by this Court time and again. Thus, in State of
Bombay v. Automobile and Agricultural Industries Corpn (1961) 12 STC 122, this
Court said:

"But the courts in interpreting a taxing statute will not be justified in
adding words thereto so as to make out some presumed object of the
legislature. If the legislature has failed to clarify its meaning by the use
of appropriate language, the benefit thereof must go to the tax payers. It is
settled law that in case of doubt, that interpretation of a taxing statute
which is beneficial to the taxpayer must be adopted".

21.In view of the aforesaid discussion the reference is answered in
affirmative and in favor of the assessed and against the revenue.

The reference is disposed of accordingly.

