

Andhra High Court

Bhavirisetti Deva Mohana Rao And ... vs State Of Andhra Pradesh on 25 July,
1985

Author: J Reddy

Bench: B J Reddy, Sreeramulu

JUDGMENT Jeevan Reddy, J.

1\. This Criminal Revision Case has been referred to a Division Bench in view
of the conflict of opinion in this Court with respect to the question whether
the time limit prescribed by sub-r. (3) of R. 7 of the Prevention of Food
Adulteration Rules, 1955, is mandatory or directory. Sub-Rule (3) of R. 7 says
:

"The Public Analyst shall, within a period of forty-five days from the date of
receipt of any sample for analysis, deliver to the Local Health Authority a
report of the result of such analysis in Form III".

In this case, the report was delivered to the Local Health Authority on the
forty-seventh day. It is agreed that, if the time limit prescribed in R. 7(3)
is held to be mandatory this Revision ought to be allowed. The other
contentions raised in the Criminal Revision Case would come up for
consideration only if it is held that the said requirement of R. 7(3) is not
mandatory, but only directory.

2\. The Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954 has been enacted by the
Parliament to make provisions for prevention of adulteration of food. Section
7 prohibits the manufacture, sale, storage, or distribution of any
adulterated, misbranded, or prohibited food or articles of food, and also says
that an article of food, the sale whereof is regulated by a license, shall not
be sold except in accordance with the conditions of such licence. Even the
manufacture and sale of adulterant is prohibited. Section 8 provides for the
appointment of Public Analysts, holding prescribed qualifications, and S. 9
provides for appointment of Food Inspectors. Section 10 empowers the Food
Inspector to take sample of any article of food from any person in possession
of the same and, for that purpose, he is invested with certain powers of
entry, inspection and seizure. The procedure for seizure is also prescribed by
the Act. After effecting the seizure, the Food Inspector is obliged to send,
immediately by the succeeding working day of seizure, a sample of the article
of food seized to the concerned Public Analyst in the prescribed manner.
Section 13 requires the Public Analyst to deliver, in the prescribed form, a
report of the result of his analysis of the food article sent to him, to the
Local Health Authority. On receipt of such report, if the Local Health
Authority decides to prosecute the person from whom the food article was
seized, a complaint will be made to the appropriate Court in the prescribed
manner. Sub-section (2) of S. 13 requires that, soon after the institution of
the prosecution, a copy of the report of the Public Analyst shall be sent to
the person from whom the food article has been seized. It is open to such
person, if he so desires, to apply to the Court within ten days of the receipt
of the report of the Public Analyst, to have the sample of the article of food
kept with the local Health Authority analysed by the Central Food Laboratory.
If such an application is made, the Court shall require the Local Health
Authority to comply with the said request, and then proceed with the enquiry.

3\. Rules have been framed by the Central Government in exercise of the powers
conferred upon it by S. 23 of the Act. Rule 7 deals with the duties of a
Public Analyst. It would be appropriate to set out the Rule in its entirely.

"7. Duties of a Public Analyst :-

(1) On receipt of a package containing a sample for analysis from a food
inspector or any other person, the Public Analyst or an officer authorised by
him shall compare the seals on the container and the outer cover with specimen
impression received separately and shall note the condition of the seals
thereon.

(2) The Public Analyst shall cause to be analysed such samples of articles of
food as may be sent to him by the food inspector or by any person under the
Act.

(3) The Public Analyst shall, within a period of forty-five days from the date
of receipt of any sample for analysis, deliver to the Local (Health) Authority
a report of the result of such analysis in Form III :

Provided that where any such sample does not conform to the provisions of the
Act or these rules, the Public Analyst shall deliver four copies of such
report to the said Authority :

Provided further that the Public Analyst shall forward a copy of such report
also to the person who purchased an article of food and forward the same to
him for analysis under S. 12 of the Act."

4\. Rule 9A, which has been introduced in 1977, requires that "the Local
Health Authority shall immediately after the institution of prosecution
forward copy of the report of the result of analysis in Form III delivered to
him under sub-r. (3) of R. 7, by registered post or by hand as may be
appropriate, to the person from whom the sample of the article was taken by
the Food Inspector, and simultaneously also to the person, if any, whose name
and address and other particulars have been disclosed under S. 14A of the
Act".

5\. A review of the above provisions makes the following position clear : once
a Food Inspector seizes an article of food on the belief that it is
adulterated, he shall send the sample thereof to the concerned Public Analyst
"by the immediately succeeding working day". Another sample is kept with the
Local Health Authority. The Public Analyst shall analyse the food article sent
to him and deliver his report to the Local Health Authority" within a period
of forty-five days from the date of receipt of ...... sample for analysis".
After the receipt of this report, the competent authority shall decide whether
to institute the Prosecution, or not. There is no provision either in the Act
or in the Rules - and it is very important to remember this - prescribing any
time limit within which the prosecution should be launched or the complaint
made to the Court, as the case may be. In the light of the scheme of the
enactment, it can no doubt be said that the decision whether to prosecute the
person concerned, or not, should be taken with due diligence and the
prosecution, if decided to be launched, should be instituted with reasonable
promptitude; but, beyond that, it is not possible to say, in the absence of
any provision in the Act or in the Rules. Of course, once a prosecution is
instituted or a complaint laid, as the case may be, then sub-section (2) of S.
13, read with R. 9A, springs into action. It requires that, immediately upon
the institution of the prosecution, a copy of the report of the Public Analyst
should be sent to the person concerned (accused), and the latter has an option
to apply to the Court, within ten days of the receipt of the report, to send
the sample kept with the Local Health Authority, for analysis by the Central
Food Laboratory. Sub-section (3) of S. 13 gives an overriding effect to the
certificate issued by the Director of Central Food Laboratory, over the report
of the Public Analyst. It is in the light of these provisions that we have to
decide the question referred to us.

6\. Whether a provision of law is directory or mandatory has always been a
vexed question. Several tests have been evolved by the Courts from time to
time; but ultimately, it is a question to be decided in each given case in the
light of the language employed in the provision, the object underlying it, and
the general scheme of the context and the enactment in which it occurs. The
mere use of the word "shall" is held not to be conclusive, but only an
indication. Generally it is held that, if the consequences of non-compliance
are set out, it is a sure indication of the intention of the Legislature : See
State of U.P. v. Manzodhan Lal Srivastava, . In this case, the question was
whether sub-clause (c) of clause (3) of Art. 320 of the Constitution, which
requires the Public Service-Commission to be consulted in all disciplinary
matters affecting a person serving the Government in a Civil Capacity, is
mandatory or directory. While examining the said question, it was observed :

"Does the Constitution provide for the contingency as to what is to happen in
the event of non-compliance with the requirements of Art. 320(3)(c) ? It does
not, either in express terms or by implication, provide that the result of
such non-compliance is to invalidate the proceedings ending with the final
order of the Government."

This aspect was held to have a direct bearing on the question whether the said
provision is mandatory, or not. It was held that the said provision was not
mandatory.

7\. There is no provision in the Prevention of Food Adulteration Rules, or the
Act, which provides the consequence that follows if the Public Analyst does
not deliver his report within forty-five days, as prescribed in R. 7(3). The
sub-rule, no doubt, uses the expression "shall", but, the question is whether
the said time limit prescribed for delivering the report, is mandatory. The
contention of Sri T. Bali Reddy, the learned counsel for the petitioners, is
that, having regard to the several provisions in the Act and the Rules, and
the context in which R. 7(3) occurs, the said requirement should be held to be
mandatory. He submits that this is also necessary from the point of view of
the accused who should not be kept in a state of uncertainty too long. He
brought to our notice that, almost all the High Courts in the country, as also
a learned single Judge of this Court, have taken a consistent view that the
said requirement is mandatory. He also brought to our notice the legislative
history of this sub-rule. Initially, the sub-rule merely required that the
Public Analyst shall, after the analysis has been completed, "forthwith supply
to the person concerned a report in Form III of the result of such analysis".
The amendment effected in 1968, prescribed for the first time, the period of
sixty days for sending the report to the person concerned. By another
amendment in 1978, the period of sixty days was reduced to forty-five days :
it is now required that the report shall be delivered to the Local Health
Authority within the said period of forty-five days. It is also brought to our
notice that, by another amendment effected recently, the period of forty-five
days has been reduced to forty days. This aspect has been relied upon as
indicating the concern of the rule-making authority to ensure the prompt
delivery of the Public Analyst's report.

8\. On the other hand, it is contended by the learned Public Prosecutor that
the said requirement is not mandatory. Reliance is placed upon the decision of
Ramaswamy, J., of this Court, in support of this contention.

9\. In our opinion, two important factors must be kept in mind while answering
the above question, viz. (i) that R. 7(3) deals with a stage anterior to the
institution of the prosecution. By the date of receipt of the report of the
Public Analyst, the matter has not yet gone to the Court. Indeed, it is on the
basis of this report that a decision will be taken by the appropriate
authority whether to institute a prosecution, or not; and (ii) that, neither
the Act nor the Rules prescribe or provide any time limit within which the
prosecution - if it is decided to be instituted - has to be instituted. When
there is no time limit prescribed for instituting the prosecution, from the
date of the receipt of the report of the public Analyst, we fail to see any
reason for holding the said period of forty-five days as mandatory. Once the
Rule is held to be mandatory, even the delay of one day would be fatal, and we
see no reason for holding so. This is not to say that the Public Analyst can
ignore the time limit prescribed under R. 7(3) and can send his report at any
time he chooses. He must, in all cases, try to comply within the said time
limit. But, if in a given case there is a slight delay of a few days, it
should not be held that the very report is void, nor should it be held that
such a report cannot form the basis for the appropriate authority to decide
whether to institute a prosecution, or not. Indeed, if the delay is too long
the Court may refuse to attach any value to such a report. But, we find it
difficult to say that merely because a time limit is prescribed, it is
necessarily the outer limit and that, even a day's delay should make the
report void, or inadmissible in law.

10\. The matter can be looked at from another angle a test which was also
applied in Manbodhanlal Srivastava's case (supra) - viz., whether R. 7(3)
confers a right upon the accused, or is it merely a procedural provision. As
pointed out hereinbefore, R. 7(3) deals with a stage anterior to the
institution of the prosecution. Indeed, no prosecution has yet begun, and the
accused has not come into the picture. The matter is still at the stage of
investigation. It is, no doubt, true that both in public interest and also
from the point of view of the accused, it is necessary that these matters
should be disposed of expeditiously, it is equally true that many of the food
articles are perishable articles, and if the analysis is delayed too long, the
analysis may not be correct; but, we are told that some preservatives are
added in the case of perishable articles, so that they are available in the
same state till they are analysed; in any event, the law does not prescribe
that the analysis should be carried out on the same day the sample is
received, or on the next day, but gives a sufficiently long period of forty-
five days for analysis and communication of the report. Be that as it may, it
is clear that it is not a right given to the accused, but only a procedural
provision designed to speed up the investigating process leading to the
institution of the prosecution.

11\. We shall now refer to the decisions taking a contrary view, and to the
reasoning thereof. In State v. Nisar Ahmed, (1981) 1 APJL 392 Ramanujulu
Naidu, J. held :

"The object of R. 7(3) of the Rules is that within the stipulated time, the
report of the Public Analyst should be despatched, as otherwise the weight or
sanctity attached to his report would not be there. In my view, the provisions
of R. 7(3) of the Rules are mandatory in character and any infraction or
violation thereof does not justify acceptance of the report of the Public
Analyst to sustain conviction of an accused person under the Act."

The same view was reiterated by the learned Judge in another decision, in Food
Inspector, Kovvur v. Jaladanki Rajamma, (1984) 2 APLJ 223 : (1985 Cri LJ 658)
disagreeing with the view taken by Ramaswamy, J., in Public Prosecutor v.
Subbaratnam, (1983) 2 APLJ (HC) 212 : (1983 Cri LJ 1801).

12\. In Food Inspector, Palghat Municipality v. K. M. Moose, 1984 Cri LJ 563,
a Bench of the Kerala High Court came to the same conclusion. The reasons for
holding the Rule mandatory, are the following : (i) if the analysis is done
within a certain time prescribed, the fate of the accused will be decided
early; (ii) in the case of certain articles of food, it is highly desirable
that analysis be done as early as possible; any delay in the analysis may
defeat the very purpose of analysis and would cause unnecessary and avoidable
inconvenience; (iii) R. 7(3) relates to the essence of the thing to be
performed and to matter of substance, and is not a mere rule of convenience.
The time limit is prescribed to ensure that the article of food is analysed
before it gets deteriorated and the report is promptly delivered, thereby
enabling the authority at launch the prosecution; (iv) it is also intended to
safeguard the right given to the accused by sub-section (2) of S. 13, read
with R. 9-A; (v) the scheme of the Act and the Rules disclose a time-schedule;
therefore, wherever a time limit is prescribed, it can only be the outer
limit, indicating its imperative nature; and (vi) holding R. 7(3) to be
directory only would encourage slackness on the part of Public Analysts to the
detriment of the accused. The very fact that the period has been reduced from
sixty to forty-five days, is itself indicative of the keenness of the rule-
making authority that the Public Analyst should discharge his duties within
the period prescribed.

13\. To the same effect is the decision of the Madras High Court in State
Public Prosecutor v. Meenakshi Achi, 1972 Cri LJ 1684. A learned single Judge
held that the time limit prescribed by R. 7(3) is the outer limit, and is
unrelaxable. It was held that this time limit is closely connected with the
right conferred upon the accused by S. 13(2) of the Act.

14\. In State of Maharashtra v. Z. V. Paryan, 1981 Cri LJ 383, a Bench of the
Bombay High Court held that R. 7(3) is mandatory in every sense. The reasoning
given by the Madras High Court is Meenakshi Achi's case, 1972 Cri LJ 1684 was
applied and followed. Indeed, this is the view taken by the Bombay High Court
consistently in several decisions which are referred to by the Division Bench
of the Kerala High Court in the decision referred to above.

15\. It is brought to our notice that in (1983) 1 FAC 140, the Punjab &
Haryana High Court has also taken the same view.

16\. With great respect to the learned Judges who took the above view, we find
ourselves unable to agree. We are unable to see any direct nexus between R.
7(3), and the right conferred upon the accused by S. 13(2), read with the R.
9A. The said right of the accused springs into action, or arises, only when a
prosecution is instituted and R. 7(3) deals with a stage anterior thereto. We
must reiterate that we should not be understood as saying that the time limit
prescribed in R. 7(3) should altogether be ignored, or that any amount of
delay would be countenanced by Courts. Indeed, there may be some articles of
food where analysis should be done and the result communicated sooner than
forty-five days. But, once the law recognizes forty-five days as the time
limit, the question before us is whether the delay of even a few days should
be held as vitiating the said report, which would be the result if we hold the
Rule to be mandatory. The legislative history of this Rule, no doubt,
indicates the concern of the rule-making authority that the Public Analyst
should conduct the analysis and communicate his report with reasonable
expedition; but that does not necessarily mean that report sent a day or two,
or a few days later then forty-five days, should be treated as void and as of
no effect. Particularly in the absence of any provision fixing the time limit
within which the prosecution should be instituted after receiving the Public
Analyst's report, and for the several reasons recorded by us hereinbefore we
are unable to agree with the said view.

17\. Now we shall refer to the decisions taking the other view. In Public
Prosecutor v. Subbaratna, (1983) 2 APLJ (HC) 212 : (1983 Cri LJ 1801),
Ramaswamy, J. dealt with his question. The learned Judge drew support for the
said proposition from the decision of the Supreme Court in Dalchand v.
Municipal Corporation, Bhopal, , dealing with R. 9-A. The learned Judge
further held that, inasmuch as the Local Health Authority has no control over
the actions of the Public Analyst and there may also be delays in
communication, it would not serve the purpose of the Act to hold the said Rule
to be mandatory. In this behalf, the learned Judge relied upon the proposition
affirmed in Dattatraya v. State of Bombay, , to the effect.

"............ generally speaking the provisions of a statute creating public
duties are directory and those conferring private rights are imperative. When
the provisions of a statute relate to the performance of a public duty and the
case is such that to hold null and void acts done in neglect of this duty
would work serious general inconvenience or injustice to persons who have no
control over those entrusted with the duty and at the same time would not
promote the main object of the legislature, it has been the practice of the
Courts to hold such provisions to be directory only, the neglect of them not
affecting the validity of the acts done."

We agree with the conclusion arrived at by the learned Judge. The other
decision taking this view is Babulal v. State, 1969 All LJ 757. But, we find
that there is no specific discussion about sub-rule (3) of R. 7, except a
general observation that it is not mandatory. This decision was followed by
the Orissa High Court in State v. Satyabadi Jena, 1974 Cri LJ 879, as laying
down that R. 7(3) is not mandatory.

18\. We may now refer to a few decisions which though not dealing with R.
7(3), throw light on the problem. In Dalchand v. Municipal Corporation,
Bhopal, 1983 Cri LJ 448 (SC), which has been relied upon by Ramaswamy, J. the
question was whether R. 9(j) of the Prevention of Food Adulteration Rules,
which required that the report of the Public Analyst should be served upon the
accused within ten days of the receipt of the report, is mandatory or
directory. Chinnappa Reddy, J., sitting singly, after observing that the
question whether a provision is mandatory or directory has to be decided with
reference to the context and purpose of enactment, held as follows :-

"Where the design of the statute is the avoidance or prevention of public
mischief, but the enforcement of a particular provision literally to its
letter will tend to defeat that design, the provision must be held to be
directory, so that proof of prejudice in addition to non-compliance of the
provision is necessary to invalidate the act complained of. It is well to
remember that quite often many rules, though couched in language which appears
to be imperative, are no more than mere instructions to those entrusted with
the task of discharging statutory duties for public benefit. The negligence of
those to whom public duties are entrusted cannot by statutory interpretation
be allowed to promote Public mischief and cause public inconvenience and
defeat the main object of the statute. It is as well to realise that every
prescription of a period within which an act must be done, is not the
prescription of a period of limitation with painful consequences if the act is
not done within that period. R. 9(j) of the Prevention of Food Adulteration
Act, as it then stood, merely instructed the Food Inspector to send by
registered post copy of the public Analyst's Report to the person from whom
the sample was taken within 10 days of the receipt of the Report. Quite
obviously the period of 10 days was not a period of limitation within which an
action was to be initiated or on the expiry of which a vested right accrued.
The period of 10 days was prescribed with a view to expedition and with the
object of giving sufficient time to the person from whom the sample was taken,
to make such arrangements as he might like to challenge the Report of the
Public Analyst, for example, by making a request to the Magistrate to send the
other sample to the Director of the Central Food Laboratory for analysis.
Where the effect of non-compliance with the rule was such as to wholly deprive
the right of the person to challenge the Public Analyst's Report by obtaining
the report of the Director of the Central Food Laboratory, there might be just
cause for complaint, as prejudice would then be writ large. Where no prejudice
was caused there could be no cause for complaint. I am clearly of the view
that R. 9(j) of the Prevention of Food Adulteration Rules was directory and
not mandatory."

19\. Indeed, R. 9(j) deals with a stage subsequent to the institution of the
prosecution, and yet the learned Judge held that it is not mandatory. Since R.
7(3) deals with an anterior stage, and also because the law does not prescribe
the period within which the prosecution should be instituted, after receiving
the report of the Public Analyst, R. 7(3) must be held to be directory only.
Indeed, in the said decision of the Supreme Court a Bench decision of this
Court in Public Prosecutor v. Murlidhar, 1977 Cri LJ 1634, holding that R.
9(j) is mandatory, was held to have been decided wrongly.

20\. Another decision to be referred to is the decision of a learned single
Judge of this Court in G. Chandramouli v. State, 1978 Cri LJ 549. The question
before the learned Judge was whether the requirement is S. 11(3) which
requires that when a sample of any article of food is taken, "the Food
Inspector shall by the immediately succeeding working day, send a sample of
the article of Food ........" to the Public Analyst, is mandatory or
directory. The learned Judge held that it is not mandatory.

21\. For the above reasons, we hold that the time limit prescribed in R. 7(3)
cannot be held to be mandatory, but only directory. This does not, however,
mean that the Public Analyst can ignore the said requirement. He must in all
cases, observe that said time limit. Indeed, where there is undue delay, the
Court may ignore the report on that ground alone. In the event of undue delay,
the Court may presume prejudice, without calling for proof thereof. But, it is
not possible to hold that the delay of even a few days would by itself vitiate
the report and make it void, or inadmissible, or of no effect. The matter must
be left to be decided in each case, having regard to the nature of the article
of food, and having regard to the delay in sending the Public Analyst's
report, and all other circumstances, whether the delay in that given case is
relevant or not, and if relevant, to what extent it affects the prosecution
case.

22\. We shall now take up other contentions raised in this Criminal Revision
Case. It is contended that the notice under S. 13(2) was not served upon the
1st accused. Though the prosecution has alleged that the notice was sent by
Registered Post, there is no proof that it was received by A-1, though it was
received by the other accused. It is, therefore, stated that the 1st accused
was disabled from exercising the right conferred upon him under S. 13(2), in
such a situation. This contention was not raised in both the Courts below. It
is essentially a question of fact. Undoubtedly, the notice contemplated by
Rule 9-A was sent to both the accused, on the next day of the institution of
the prosecution. It was, admittedly, received by the second accused, and
though they are father and son and were defended by the same counsel, no
application was made by him under S. 13(2). It is, therefore, not possible to
hold, on the material before us, that the 1st accused was not served with
notice under R. 9-A.

23\. Another contention urged is that, at the time of the inspection, A-1 was
not present in the shop and, therefore, in any event, he cannot be held
guilty. The decision, of the Supreme Court in Smt. Manibai v. State of
Maharashtra, , is relied upon. We are unable to agree with this contention
either. A-1 is the licensee; there is no allegation that he was not actually
carrying on the business. At the time of inspection, his mother was there. It
is not the accused's case that his mother was in charge of, or was conducting
the business. Mere temporary absence from the shop at the time of inspection
does not mean that the 1st accused was not in charge of the business, or that
he was not actually conducting the business. The situation may be different
where there are joint licenses, or where the business is done by an
incorporated body; but, there is no room in this case for holding that the 1st
accused was either not actually conducting the business, or that he was not in
charge of the business. The decision of the Supreme Court, therefore, has no
application herein.

24\. The last contention is that, though the report of the Public Analyst was
received by the Local Health Authority on 15-2-1982, the prosecution was
instituted only on 6-7-1982, i.e., with a delay of 4 1/2 months. While we
certainly do not appreciate this delay, it is not possible to hold, in the
facts and circumstances of this case, that any prejudice has resulted to the
petitioners on that account. No such argument was also urged in the Courts
below.

25\. For the above reasons, the Criminal Revision Case fails, and is
dismissed.

However, having regard to the age of second accused and the facts of the case
of R.I. is converted into S.I. in the case of both the accused.

26\. Revision Dismissed.

