

Income Tax Appellate Tribunal - Delhi

Cadence Design Systems (India) ... vs Dcit, New Delhi on 5 January, 2018

    
    
                IN THE INCOME TAX APPELLATE TRIBUNAL
                      DELHI BENCH: 'I-2', NEW DELHI
    
              BEFORE SH. AMIT SHUKLA, JUDICIAL MEMBER
                                 AND
                 SH. O.P. KANT, ACCOUNTANT MEMBER
    
                             ITA No. 380/Del/2015
                           Assessment Year: 2010-11
    
    M/s. Cadence Design Systems Vs.          DCIT, Circle -5(2), New Delhi
    (India) Pvt. Ltd., O Floor, Hotel
    The Suryaa, New Friends
    Colony, New Delhi
    PAN : AAACC1138Q
               (Appellant)                            (Respondent)
    
                 Appellant by        Sh. Nageshwar Rao, Adv.
                 Respondent by       Sh. H.K. Choudhary, CIT(DR)
    
                             Date of hearing                13.11.2017
                             Date of pronouncement          05.01.2018
    
                                    ORDER
    

PER O.P. KANT, A.M.:

This appeal by the assessee is directed against order dated 15/12/2014 of the
Deputy Commissioner of Income Tax, Circle-5(2), New Delhi (hereinafter
referred to as "the Assessing Officer") for assessment year 2010-11, which has
been passed pursuant to the direction of the Ld. Dispute Resolution Panel
(DRP). The grounds of appeal raised by the assessee are reproduced as under:

"1 The final assessment order dated 15 December 2014 passed by the Deputy
Commissioner of Income Tax, Circle 5(2) New Delhi ('Learned AO') pursuant to
the directions of the Hon'ble Dispute Resolution Panel ('DRP'), draft
assessment order passed by Learned AO and the order dated 11 December 2014
passed by Additional Commissioner of income Tax,  2 ITA No. 380/Del/2015
Transfer Pricing Officer-1(3), New Delhi ('Learned TPO'), is bad in law and
void-ab-initio.

2 That on facts and in law, the Learned AO has erred in computing the total
income of the Appellant at INR 33,20,95,411 as against the returned income of
INR 28,10,94,267 by making an upward adjustment of INR 4,89,94,226 and INR
20,06,918 with respect to transfer pricing ("TP") and corporate tax matters,
respectively.

Part I - Transfer Pricing Grounds 3 That on facts of the case and in law, the
DRP/TPO/AO have erred in rejecting the economic analysis undertaken by the
Appellant by conducting a fresh economic analysis for international
transaction pertaining to provision of IT back office support services
("impugned transaction").

4 That on facts of the case and in law, the DRP/TPO/AO have erred in rejecting
certain companies and adding certain companies to the final set of alleged
comparable companies on an ad-hoc basis, thereby resorting to cherry picking
of comparable companies for benchmarking the impugned transaction.

5 That on facts of the case and in law, the DRP/TPO/AO have erred in selecting
companies in the final set of alleged comparables which have different
business / operating models as compared to the Appellant for the impugned
transaction.

6 That on facts of the case and in law, the DRP/TPO/AO erred and vitiated the
principle of natural justice by not giving due cognizance to the detailed
analysis and technical arguments submitted by the Appellant in respect of
certain companies considered/rejected for benchmarking of impugned
transaction.

7 That on facts of the case and in law, the DRP has grossly erred in giving a
direction to rectify the arithmetical errors in the computation of the
operating margins of alleged comparable companies in compliance with the
Income Tax Act ("the Act") without appreciating that Indian regulations do  3
ITA No. 380/Del/2015 not enumerate the methodology for computing operating
margins which may apply to the Appellant. DRP has erred in directing the TPO
to re-compute margins of alleged comparables using safe harbour rules without
understanding that:

· Appellant has not applied for being assessed under safe harbor provisions ·
Safe harbour provisions do not reflect arm's length nature of margins · Safe
harbour rules cannot be applied retrospectively and are only applicable for
assessment year ("AY") 2013-14 and AY 2014-15 on specific application by a
taxpayer 8 That on facts of the case and in law, the DRP/TPO/AO have erred in
conducting a fresh economic analysis by using arbitrary filters for
identifying companies comparable to the Appellant. The arbitrary filters
applied by the TPO and confirmed by the DRP/Assessing Officer inter-alia
include the following:

· Rejecting companies having turnover less than INR 5 Crores;

· Rejecting companies having different accounting year than that of the
Appellant;

· Rejecting company having employee cost less than 25 percent of the total
sales.

· Rejection of companies identified by the Appellant on account of having
peculiar economic circumstances which are not in line with the industry trend,
companies which showed diminishing revenue trend; and · Rejecting companies
having export revenue less than 75 per cent of the operating revenue.

9 That on facts of the case and in law, the DRP/ TPO/AO have erred by
selecting certain companies which are earning super normal profits as
comparable to the Appellant for the impugned transaction.

10 That on facts of the case and in law, the DRP/TPO/AO have failed to make
appropriate adjustments to account for varying risk profiles of the Appellant
vis-a-vis the alleged comparables for impugned transaction and in the process
4 ITA No. 380/Del/2015 inter-alia neglected the Indian transfer pricing
regulations, international guidelines on transfer pricing and judicial
precedence in this regard.

11 That on facts of the case and in law, the DRP and TPO/AO have erred by not
considering that the adjustment to the arm's length price, if any, should be
limited to the lower end of the 5 percent range as the Appellant has the right
to exercise this option under the second proviso to section 92C(2) of the Act.

12 That on facts of the case and in law, the DRP/ TPO/AO have erred in using
single year data for financial year ("FY") 2009- 10 of alleged comparable
companies without considering the fact that the same was not available to the
Appellant at the time of complying with the transfer pricing documentation
requirements and disregarding the Appellant's claim for use of multiple year
data for computing the arm's length price.

13 That on facts of the case and in law, the DRP/TPO/AO have erred in
erroneously allocating the indirect costs on the basis of the respective
segmental revenue of the Appellant and re- determined the operating margin of
the Appellant for the impugned transaction.

14 That on facts of the case and in law, the DRP/AO has erred in confirming
that AO/TPO has discharged his statutory onus by establishing that the
conditions specified in clause (a) to

(d) of Section 92C(3) of the Act have been satisfied before disregarding the
arm's length price determined by the Appellant and proceeding to determine the
arm's length price.

Part II - Corporate Tax Grounds 15 That on the facts and circumstances of the
case and in law, the AO/ DRP erred in facts placed on record.

16 That on the facts and circumstance of the case and in law, the AO/ DRP
erred in holding that the Appellant intentionally debited director's salary to
non STP unit to reduce its taxable income, without appreciating the operating
model (cost plus mark-up) of the Appellant.

5

ITA No. 380/Del/2015 17 Without prejudice to grounds 15 and 16 above, the AO/
DRP erred in not shifting the income linked with director's remuneration cost,
from non-STP unit to STP unit, based on the operating model of the Appellant.

18 That on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Learned AO has
erred in initiating penalty under section 271(1 )(c) of the Act, as
consequences of the additions made in the assessment order passed under
section 143(3) read with section 144C of the Act.

19 That on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Learned AO has
erred in charging interest under section 234B of the Act, as consequence of
the additions made in the assessment order passed under section 143(3) read
with section 144C of the Act.

The above grounds of appeal are mutually exclusive & without prejudice to each
other. The Appellant craves leave to add, amend, vary, omit or substitute any
of the aforesaid grounds of appeal at any time before or at the time of
hearing of the appeal.

The Appellant prays for appropriate relief based on the said grounds of appeal
and the facts and circumstances of the case.

2\. Briefly stated facts of the case are that the assessee company filed its
return of income on 17/09/2010, declaring total income of Rs.28,10,94,267/-.
The case was selected for scrutiny and notice under section 143(2) of the
Income-tax Act, 1961 (in short 'the Act') was issued and complied with. In
view of the international transactions carried out by the assessee with its
Associated Enterprises (AEs), the Assessing Officer referred the matter of
determination of Arm's Length Price (ALP) of international transactions to the
Ld. Transfer Pricing Officer (TPO). The Ld. TPO vide his order dated
20/01/2014 under section 92CA(3) of the Act, computed arm's length price (ALP)
of the international transactions by making adjustment of Rs.21,54,03,221/-.
On the basis of  6 ITA No. 380/Del/2015 the order of the Ld. TPO, the
Assessing Officer proposed addition of Rs.21,54,03,221/-. The Assessing
Officer also proposed reduction in deduction of Rs.20,06,918/- under section
10A of the Act in view of the re-allocation of director's salary amount in STP
and non-STP units. The Assessing Officer issued a draft assessment order on
24.03.2014 proposing above two additions. The assessee filed its objections to
the draft assessment order before the Ld. DRP. After considering the
submission of the assessee, the Ld. DRP issued directions on 11/11/2014 to the
Assessing Officer. The Assessing Officer after incorporating the direction of
the Ld. DRP, issued final assessment order under section 143(3) read with
section 144C of the Act on 15.12.2014. Aggrieved with the said order, the
assessee is in appeal before the Tribunal raising the grounds as reproduced
above.

3\. The ground Nos.1 and 2 have been stated as general in nature, therefore,
would get covered while adjudicating the issues raised in other grounds of
appeal and not required to adjudicate upon specifically.

4\. The ground nos. 3 to 14 are related to transfer pricing adjustment. In the
case of the assessee, there are two segments i.e. "Software Research &
Development Service" and "Information Technology (IT) back-office support
services". In the transfer pricing adjustment, the assessee has pressed before
us for exclusion and inclusion of certain comparables in IT back-office
support services only. The issue of exclusion/inclusion of comparables has
been challenged in ground No. 4, 5, 6 ,8 and 9 only. Other grounds have not
been pressed before us, thus, balance grounds of transfer pricing adjustment
are dismissed as infructuous.

5\. Before adjudicating the transfer pricing grounds challenged by the
assessee, it is relevant to reproduce background of the transfer pricing
adjustment.

7

ITA No. 380/Del/2015 5.1 The assessee is a wholly-owned subsidiary of 'Cadence
Design Systems' Inc., USA (in short 'CDS'). The assessee submitted profile of
the "CDS" Group as well as its own profile before the lower authorities. The
Ld. DRP has reproduced detailed profile of the group as well as the assessee
company. According to the submission of the assessee, the "CDS" supplies
electronic design technologies and services, which assists customers in
designing high-performance electronic systems and Integrated Circuits (ICs).
The "CDS" and its group companies are engaged in developing Electronic Design
Automation (EDA) software and hardware, its sales and also licensing .

5.2 The assessee company was established in India to undertake software
research and development services, related information technology back-office
support services and related pre-sales marketing and post sales technical
support services. According to the assessee, it is a captive contract service
provider and compensated on a cost plus markup basis for the services rendered
to its Associated Enterprises (AEs).

5.3 The functions performed by the assessee and the "CDS" with regard to
identified transactions, which have been reproduced by the Ld. DRP in their
order, are extracted as under:

> · Conceptualization of services The SPL is generally a 3 Phases, multi step
> process involving the collaboration among Product Management, Marketing and
> Product Engineering. The 3 phases of Product Engineering are Product
> Definition, Product Development and Servicing.

In the Product Definition (Conceptualization) phase, a value proposition and a
product prototype are developed based on customer feedback from the servicing
phase, surveys, competitive analysis, the product leader's vision for future
and CDS's overall vision for the product category. Then, marketing  8 ITA No.
380/Del/2015 research is performed to test the value proposition and the
marketing feasibility of a product prototype; The product leadership team and
product engineers will work with the marketing research team to address
software engineering issues and technical feasibility. When the prototype is
finalized the next phase of the lifecycle begins.

The second phase is Product Development, which is a 5 step process involving
determination of the requirements, design, implementation; verification and
release. Again, each stage is a collaborative effort among the Product
Engineering Team, the Marketing Team and Product Management to ensure that the
product is on track to meet the value proposition framework. Product
Engineering is a generic term to identify software architecture development,
design, code development, testing and various other technical services.

The final phase is known as Servicing. In this phase, the marketing team is
researching and tracking product awareness and perceptions, customer
satisfaction deployment and user experience. This information is used by the
product leaders to help determine the concept of the next version of the
product.

Cadence India's Role in the SPL The most important aspect of determining the
marketability and profitability of a software product is the decision of
"what" to develop next. This decision is made at CDS, based on the factors
described above in the Product Definition Phase ("PDP"). All of the work in
the PDP is performed outside of India.

Cadence India's role is limited to rendering software research and development
services to CDS. All decisions regarding Product Definition are made by CDS.
In particular, all decisions regarding which products to develop, product
design and how much to invest in such development are made by the CDS. Cadence
India is involved in rendering software development services as per the
directions and guidance provided by CDS.

· Marketing and business development  9 ITA No. 380/Del/2015 CDS
conceptualizes the marketing strategy for the sale of its products and
services and undertakes functions such as customer lead identification,
marketing and securing the orders for the products to be developed. As part of
its marketing function, CDS is involved in the identification of key
prospective customers and understanding their requirements.

Being a captive unit of CDS, Cadence India does not undertake any marketing or
business development functions.

· Requirement analysis CDS provides the software module specifications,
instructions, product specifications for the software to be developed by
Cadence India. Based on instructions/information provided by CDS, the
requirements are internally analyzed by Cadence India and converted into
functions and features of the intended application.

Upon receiving the approval from CDS, the development work is commenced by
Cadence India.

· Coding, testing and documentation Cadence India undertakes code development
in accordance with product specifications defined by CDS. The code generated
is subsequently tested to ensure that functions performed by the code are in
accordance with the protocol design and standard specifications. Cadence India
generates and makes available documentation for the software developed and
transferred. The software "developed by Cadence India is subsequently
integrated into the final software product by CDS and other Cadence group
entities.

· Project management Although the day-to-day management of the project is
undertaken by Cadence India, CDS is responsible for the overall project
management. CDS regularly conducts meetings to analyse the progress and
monitors the project plan.

· Quality control, testing and integration  10 ITA No. 380/Del/2015 Cadence
India is responsible for ensuring that requisite quality/ performance
standards are complied with while rendering services.

5.4 The assessee reported following international transactions:

International Transactions Method Value (INR) Provision of software research
and TNMM using development services Operating profit as 1,57,79,32,410 PLI
Operating Cost TNMM using Provision of IT back office support services
Operating profit as 42,69,64,705 PLI Operating Cost TNMM using Provision of
pre-sales marketing and post-

    
    
                                                     Operating profit as    34,16,72,056
     sales technical support services
                                                     PLI Operating Cost
                                                        TNMM using
     Payment of bank guarantee                       Operating profit as        1,60,417
                                                     PLI Operating Cost
    

Payment of interest towards foreign currency loan CUP Method 41,07,358
Purchase of free of cost assets from No benchmarking associated enterprises
required Receipt of share under Employee Stock Purchase Plan from Cadence
Design No benchmarking System Inc. required 5.5 The Ld. AO/TPO made adjustment
only in respect of two transactions as under:

    
    
    
    
     S.  Nature of international ALP                    ALP             Adjustment
     No. transaction              determined by         determined      under section
                                  the assessee          by the TPO      92CA (INR)
                                  (INR)                 (INR)
     1.  IT back-office support 42,69,64,705            500492805       73683663
         services( ITes services)
     2.  Software research and 1577357496               1719077054      141719558
         development services
         Total                                                          215403221
                                         11
                                                            ITA No. 380/Del/2015
    
    
    
    

5.6 During the year under consideration, no adverse inference was drawn by the
Ld. TPO for pre-sales marketing and post-sales technical support services
rendered by the assessee.

5.7 As regard to the software research and development service segment , the
Ld. DRP provided relief to the assessee with regard to the adjustment made by
the Ld. TPO and due to which, entire adjustment made to software research and
development service segment stands deleted.

5.8 As regard to IT back-office support services segment, the assessee
reported that it has rendered services on cost plus margin of 15%. The
assessee had entered into an agreement with "CDS" under which, the assessee
was responsible for providing IT back-office support services comprising of
UNIX/WINDOW administration and support; Internal helpdesk services;
application document & support; Web development and support and customer
support. In its transfer pricing study, the assessee accepted TNMM as the most
appropriate method and determined Profit Level Indicator (PLI) of operating
profit /operating cost (OP/OC) at 15.00% , which was revised by the Ld. TPO to
16.23% in view of allocation of depreciation of Palladium Machine. The
assessee selected 10 comparables with weighted averages margin PLI. The
comparables selected by the taxpayer are reproduced as under:

> OP/OC (%) as calculated Sl. No. Company Name by the taxpayer 1 CG Vak
> Software and exports Ltd. 0.53 2 Cosmic Global Limited 16.59 3 Informed
> Technologies Ltd. 31.46 4 Microgenetics Systems Ltd. 6.49 5 R Systems
> International Ltd. 7.15 6 Jindall Intellicom Pvt. Ltd. 18.67 7 Omega
> Healthcare Limited 15.31 E4e Healthcare business services 8 Pvt. ltd. 21.01
> 12 ITA No. 380/Del/2015 9 Caliber point Business Sol. Ltd. 21.92 10 Axia IT
> & T Ltd. 13.51 5.9 Ld. TPO rejected seven comparables selected by the
> assessee as under:
    
    
      Sl. No.             Comparables                         TPO's Comments
    
                CG VAK Software and Exports            Fails turnover filter
      1
                Limited (Segmental)
                Informed Technologies Limited          Turnover is less than Rs. 5
      2                                                crores
                R Systems International Limited        Financial year ending other
      3
                                                       than March 31
      4         Caliber Point Business Solutions       This comparable has different
                Ltd                                    financial year ending.
                                                       Rejected.
      5         Axis-IT&T Limited.                     It fails export sales filter.
                                                       Rejected.
                Omega Healthcare Limited               No annual report is available in
      6
                                                       public domain
      7         Microgenetics System Ltd.              Sales less than 5 crore, fails
      a                                                turnover filter
    
    
    

> 5.10 Further Ld. TPO used following new comparables:

> SL. No, Company Name 1 Accentia Technologies 2 Eclerx Services Ltd.
    
    
                     3         Fortune Infotech Ltd.
                     4         Igate Global Solns. Ltd.
                     5         TCS E Serve Intnl. Ltd.
                     6         TCS E-Serve Ltd.
                     7         Infosys BPO
    
    
    

> 5.11 The comparables finally selected by the TPO under IT back-office
> support service are as under:
    
    
                  SL. No. Company Name                            OP/OC%)
                                                 13
                                                                       ITA No. 380/Del/2015
    
    
    
                1          Accentia Technologies               43.07
                2          Cosmic Global Limited               18.28
                3          Infosys BPO Ltd.                    31.46
                4          Jihdall Intellicom Pvt. Ltd.        18.67
                5          Eclerx Services Ltd.                55.97
                6          Fortune Infotech Ltd.               22.8
                7          . igate Global Solns. Ltd.          24.54
                8          TCS E Serve Intnl. Ltd.             53.8
                9          TCS E-Serve Ltd.                    63.38
                           e4e Healthcare Business services
                10                                          31.03
                           Ltd.
                           AVG                              36.30
    
    
    

> 5.12 The Ld. TPO took current year data for comparison. The Ld. TPO applying
> average PLI (OP/OC) of 36.30%, computed the adjustment to Rs.7,36,83,663/-.

> 5.13 The Ld. DRP directed to exclude the comparable "E-clarx" and include
> "Omega" to the set of comparables companies selected by the Ld. TPO. In view
> of the directions of Ld. DRP, the adjustment to IT back-

office support services has been revised by the Ld. TPO in order giving effect
dated 11/12/2014 to Rs.4,89,94,226/-. The list of comparables retained in the
final list of comparables is reproduced as under:

> I.T back Office Support Services Sl. No. Name of the Company F.Y. 2009-10 1
> Accentia Technologies Limited 38.41% 2 Cosmic Global Limited 19.29% e4e
> Healthcare Business Services Private 3 Limited 27.22% 4 Fortune Infotech
> Limited 16.05% 5 iGate Global Solutions Limited 22.38% 6 Infosys BPO Limited
> 30.32%"
    
    
          7         jindal Intellicom Private Limited                     13.3/7%
                    Omega Healthcare Management Services                  13.21%
          8
                    Private Limited
          9         TCS e-Serve Limited                                   62.23%
          10        TCS e-Serve International Limited                     54.13%
          11        eClerx Services Limited                                 NC
                                             14
                                                               ITA No. 380/Del/2015
    
    
    
                Arithmetic mean                                    29.66
    
    
    
                      Operating cost             367,082,316
                      Arm's length margin        29.66%
                      Ann's length price         475,958,931
                      Transfer Price             426,964,705
                      Adjustment                 48,994,226
    
    
    
    
    

> 5.14 Before us, Ld. counsel of the assessee argued for exclusion of the four
> companies included by the Ld. TPO, namely, (i) TCS e-serve International
> ltd., (ii) TCS e-serve Ltd., (iii) Accentia Technologies Ltd.,

> (iv) Infosys BPO Ltd. and inclusion of the two companies rejected by the Ld.
> TPO, namely, (i) CG- VAK Software & Exports Ltd (Segmental) and

> (ii) R systems International Limited (Segmental).

5.15 We have heard the rival submission and perused the relevant material on
record and accordingly, the grounds of the appeal related to
exclusion/inclusion of comparables are adjudicated as under:

6\. First we take up the issue of exclusion of companies considered comparable
by the Ld. Transfer Pricing Officer (A) TCS E-serve International Ltd.

6.1 Before us, the Ld. counsel relying on the submission made before the Ld.
TPO and the Ld. DRP, submitted that due to peculiar economic circumstances,
the company need to be excluded. He submitted that pursuant to acquisition by
the Tata Group (page 258-259 of the annual report), there is exceptional rise
in turnover (173 percent) and profit (283 percent). He further submitted that
the company was engaged in providing technical services like software testing,
verification and validation of softwares, transaction processing including
processing,  15 ITA No. 380/Del/2015 collection, customer care and payments to
corporate and retail clients of Citigroup and voice-based services (page 3 of
audited accounts of the company), which are functionally different from ITES
services rendered by the assessee. According to the Ld. counsel for a variety
of services rendered, no segment data was available (page 39 of the Annual
Report of the company). The Ld. counsel further submitted to exclude the
company on the ground of the deemed related party transactions (RPT).
According to him, the company provided services to 'Citigroup Global Services
holding LLC', which was the holding company till 31/12/2008. He submitted that
services have been continued to be provided under the agreement entered into
with Citigroup by erstwhile entity during which period the transaction was
controlled in terms of Chapter X and consequently the terms and condition
under which services rendered during the appeal continued to be incomparable.
The Ld. counsel further submitted that the company was having access to 'Tata'
brand and due to which it was entitled to higher margins associated with the
use of reputed brand unlike the assessee, who was a captive service provider
working on cost plus mark-up model.

6.2 The Ld. CIT(DR), on the other hand, submitted that increase in turnover or
profit cannot be a ground for exclusion of the company. He submitted that
turnover of the company is in the range of the turnover of the assessee.
Further, he referred to page 282 of the compilation of the Annual Reports and
submitted that it is clearly mentioned that the company was engaged in
providing Information Technology Enabled Services (ITes)/Business Processing
Outsourcing (BPO) services. The testing, verification and validation of the
software was done at the time of implementation of software only, and thus, it
cannot be said that activity of the company is different from the assessee
company. According to him, there was no requirement of separate segment. On
the issue of  16 ITA No. 380/Del/2015 deemed RPT, he submitted that TCS Ltd
has become the holding company w.e.f. 1st January, 2009 and, thus, in the year
under consideration, the TCS Ltd is the holding company and, therefore,
transaction of the company with city group clients is no more related party
transactions. He further submitted that Ld. counsel has not given any evidence
as the transaction was still governed by the old agreements. On the issue of
'TATA' brand, he submitted that first of all, 'Tata' brand has not affected
the PLI of the company. Secondly, the assessee was also using "Cadence" brand.
Further, he referred to page 281 of the compilation of the Annual Reports and
submitted that the company incurred only expenses of Rs. 37.38 Lakhs towards
'Tata' brand equity contribution, which is 0.43% of the total expenses only.
In view of submission, he stated that action of Ld. DRP in retaining the
company as comparable was justified.

6.3 We have heard the rival submission and perused the relevant material on
record. The contention of the Ld. counsel to reject the company as comparable
on the ground of rise in turnover and profit as compared to last year, is not
tenable. Under the transfer pricing provisions of the Act, the company is to
be compared on the basis of FAR (functions carried out, assets employed and
risk taken). Once the company is found to be comparable in FAR analysis, in
our opinion rise in turnover or profit compared to earlier year cannot be a
ground enough for its exclusion from the set of comparables. In normal
business scenario, there cannot be a fixed rate of growth and fluctuations in
the growth is normal part of business activity, which cannot be made a basis
for exclusion of the company from the set of comparables, if otherwise it is
functionally similar.

6.4 The second contention of the Ld. counsel that company is functionally
dissimilar, is also not found to be correct. On page 31 of the  17 ITA No.
380/Del/2015 Annual Report of the company, background and principal activities
have been mentioned under Schedule 'N' of Notes To Account. The relevant
extract is reproduced as under:

> "1. Background and Principal activities TCS e-Serve International Limited is
> engaged in the business of providing Information Technology - Enables
> Services (ITes)/Business Processing Outsourcing (BPO) services, primarily to
> Citigroup entities globally. The Company's operations broadly comprise of
> transaction processing and Technical Services. Transaction Processing
> includes the broad spectrum of activities involving the processing,
> collections, customer care and payments in relation to the services offered
> by Citigroup to its corporate and retail clients. Technical Services involve
> software testing, verification and validation of software at the time of
> implementation and data centre management activities."

6.5 Thus, it is evident from the Annual Report of the company for the year
under consideration that primarily the company is not engaged in software
development and it was engaged in providing IT enabled services (ITes) only.
The technical services of software testing, verification and validation the
software were carried out at the time of implementation of software only and
are in the nature of back-office support. On perusal of the service agreement
between "CDS" and the assessee, we find that the assessee was also engaged in
application development and support, web development etc. The relevant part of
the agreement which is available on page 871 of the assessee's paper book is
reproduced as under:

> "Article II SUBJECT MATTER OF THE CONTRACT

> 1\. Authorization: Cadence India is authorized to provide the following
> services to die company and its affiliates: Back Office IT operations,
> comprising of UNIX / Windows Administration and Support; Internal  18 ITA
> No. 380/Del/2015 Helpdesk Services: Application Development & Support; Web-
> Development & Support (collectively. 'IT Back Office Support') and Customer
> Support services."

6.6 The Ld. DRP in its order on page 43 has reproduced other pages of the
Annual Report of the company indicating that the company was engaged in BPO
services or ITES.

6.7 In view of the comparison of the services rendered by the assessee and the
services rendered by the company , we are of the opinion that the company
cannot be rejected on the ground of functional dissimilarity.

6.8 Further, the contention of Ld. counsel to exclude the company on the
ground of non-availability of segment information is also not tenable as the
company was functioning in one segment of ITES only. 6.9 The contention of the
Ld. counsel for exclusion on the ground of deemed RPT is also not acceptable.
w.e.f. 01/01/2009, the Tata consultancy services Ltd is the holding company of
the company and thus during the entire period under consideration i.e.
01/04/2009 to 31/03/2010, the transactions with Citigroup Companies cannot be
held as related party transactions in the case of the company. We agree with
the contention of the Ld. CIT(DR), that the assessee has not brought on record
any evidence that the assessee company continued to provide services to the
city group companies on the basis of agreements contracted prior to
01/01/2009. Even if, we consider that the services were provided under a long-
term contract, still it cannot be deemed a related party transaction in view
of the change of ownership. 6.10 Further, the contention of Ld. counsel of
impact of 'Tata' brand on profitability of the company is also not tenable in
view of the facts the no evidence has been brought on record as how the 'Tata'
brand has impacted the profitability of the company. Further, the expenditure
19 ITA No. 380/Del/2015 corresponding to contribution to 'Tata' brand by the
company, is also very small part (0.43%) of the total operational expenses of
the company. 6.11 In view of the above discussion, we uphold the finding of
the DRP in retaining TCS E-serve International Ltd. in the set of comparables.

(B) TCS E-serve Ltd.

7\. The Ld. counsel submitted to exclude the company from the set of
comparables on the grounds similar to the grounds taken in the case of TCS
e-serve International Ltd. The Ld. CIT(DR) also repeated same arguments .

7.1 The Ld. counsel submitted that pursuant to the acquisition by 'Tata'
group, there is increase in revenue of 12.17% and growth in profit before tax
of 226%. The reasons for excluding a company from set of comparables on the
basis of turnover or profit has already been rejected by us while examining
the comparability of TCS e-serve international Ltd. The Ld. counsel further
submitted that the company is functionally dissimilar with assessee company.
The Ld. counsel submitted that the company was engaged in providing technical
services like software testing, verification and validation of software. This
contention is identical to the contention raised in the case of TCS e-serve
international Ltd. On perusal of the Annual Report of the company, we find
that it has rendered services identical to the services rendered by TCS
e-serve international Ltd. In Schedule 'O' to the notes of account of the
company, available on page 105 of the Annual Report, the principal activities
of the company reported are as under:

> "1. Background and principal activities TCS e-Serve Limited is engaged in
> the business of providing Information Technology - Enables Services
> (ITes)/Business  20 ITA No. 380/Del/2015 Process Outsourcing (BPO) service,
> primarily to Citigroup entities globally.

> The company's operations broadly comprise of transaction processing and
> technical services. Transaction processing includes the broad spectrum of
> activities involving the processing, collections, customer care and payments
> in relation to the services offered by Citigroup to its corporate and retail
> clients. Technical service involve software testing, verification and
> validation of software at the time of implementation and date centre
> management activities.

7.2 Thus, we find that the activities of the company are identical to the
activities of TCS e-serve International Ltd., which are held to be in the
nature of ITes and functionally similar to the assessee. Accordingly, we hold
that the company cannot be excluded on the ground of functional dissimilarity.

7.3 The arguments of the Ld. counsel on the issue of non-availability of
segment information, deemed related party transactions and entity having
access to Tata brand are identical to the arguments taken in the case of TCS
e-serve international Ltd. Thus following our finding in the case of
comparable TCS e-serve international Ltd, we reject these arguments taken in
respect of TCS e-serve Ltd also. 7.4 In view of the discussion, we uphold the
direction of the Ld. DRP in retaining, TCS e-serve limited as a valid
comparable.

(C) Accentia Technologies Ltd.

8\. The Ld. counsel submitted that the company is functionally different from
the assessee company. He referred to page 4, 5 and 39 of the Annual Report and
submitted that the company was engaged in diversified services which include
HRCM (using Saas Model), Knowledge Process Outsourcing (KPO) and Legal Process
Outsourcing (LPO) and separate segment information for HRCM is not available.
The Ld. counsel drawn our attention to page 73 of the Annual Report and  21
ITA No. 380/Del/2015 submitted that the company owns significant intangible
assets in the form of goodwill, Brands and IPRs, which constitutes 57% of the
value of assets.

8.1 He further referred to page 79 of the Annual Report and submitted that
during the year, a company namely, 'Asscent Infoserve Private Limited'
amalgamated with the company. He further referred to page 37 of the Annual
Report and submitted that during the year, the company acquired 'IQ Group' of
companies in the United Kingdom. 8.2 The Ld. counsel submitted that the
company has been excluded by the Tribunal in assessee's own case in assessment
year 2009-10, being functionally different and extraordinary events. 8.3 The
Ld. CIT(DR) submitted that the company is not a software development company
and it earned its revenue from healthcare information technology management.
He referred to pages 77 of the Annual Report and submitted that in schedule 8,
income other than income from coding, interest income and income from exchange
fluctuations are in the nature of IT enabled services. The Ld. CIT(DR)
supported the finding of the Ld. DRP that percentage of non-IT enabled
services was only 15.03%, hence it was predominantly an ITES provider. He
further referred to pages 39 of the Annual Report and submitted that "Saas" is
effectively a software application delivery model in which the clients pay to
access and use software functionally or a network through a hosted web native
platform operated by the software vendor, either independently or through
third-party. According to him "SaaS" model mean only 'software as a service'
and not development of software. 8.4 The Ld. counsel in his rejoinder referred
to page 39 of the annual report and submitted that the acquisition of the IQ
group companies UK was a strategic move in the direction to to increase the
capability of the service delivery to offer the "SaaS" model to its clients.
The Ld. counsel  22 ITA No. 380/Del/2015 also referred to page 79 of the paper
book and submitted that the company itself has admitted that in view of the
amalgamation during the year under consideration, the figures of current year
were not comparable with those of the previous year.

8.5 We have heard the rival submission and perused the relevant material on
record. We find that the in assessment year 2009-10 in the case of the
assessee itself, the company has been excluded by the Tribunal in ITA No.
2074/Del/2014. The relevant finding of the Tribunal is reproduced as under:

> "14.3 We have considered the rival submissions and also perused relevant
> finding given in the impugned order. Accentia Technologies Ltd. has two main
> business areas namely, health care receivable cycle management services and
> software products for BPOs. It earns substantial part of its income from
> coding activities which is primarily related to e-software development.
> Various streams of income shown in the annual report reflects that it has
> income from medical transcription, billing and collections, income from
> coding, etc. It is not in dispute that segmental information for each
> streams of income are not available, therefore, it would be very difficult
> to benchmark profit margin with the assessee-company, which is only
> rendering back office support services. Another important fact which is
> borne out/ from the its annual report is that, during the year under
> consideration, assessee has acquired business of Oak Technologies Inc. USA
> which has led to rapid increase in its customer base. Such acquisition
> definitely has an impact on the trading result and can distort profit
> margin. Thus, we hold that Accentia Technologies Ltd. cannot be included in
> the list of final comparables and accordingly, the same is directed to be
> excluded."

8.6 We note that the company has been excluded on the ground of lack of
segment information of various streams of income and events of acquisition of
companies. We find that in the year under consideration also the income
derived by the company is from various streams  23 ITA No. 380/Del/2015
including medical transcription; Billings and collection, income from coding
etc and no segmental information of each of the streams are available.
Similarly, the company has itself mentioned in the Annual Report that due to
acquisitions of companies during the year, its results were not comparable
with the earlier year.

8.7 Thus, in view of the identical facts during the year under consideration,
respectfully following the decision of the Tribunal in assessment year
2009-10, we hold that company cannot be included in the set of comparables and
accordingly, we direct the AO/TPO to exclude it from the set of comparables.

(D) Infosys BPO Ltd.

9\. The Ld. counsel referred to page 135 of the Annual Report and submitted
that the company was engaged in rendering wide array of services including
customer service outsourcing, finance and accounting, knowledge services,
human resource outsourcing, legal process outsourcing, sales and fulfillment,
sourcing and procurement, banking and capital outsourcing, media outsourcing,
energy outsourcing, retail etc, which cannot be compared with the services of
back-office support attended by the assessee. According to him, no segmental
data of different functional activity is reported in the Annual Report. He
further referred to page 177 of the Annual Report and submitted that the
company has incurred heavy expenses of Rs. 69.16 lakhs for brand building and
advertising, which is assisted in earning high profit, whereas no such
expenses were incurred by the assessee. The Ld. counsel further referred to
page 203 of the Annual Report and submitted that the company was having a
turnover of Rs.1,126.66 crores, whereas the assessee was having revenue of
42.70 crores from provision of IT back- office support services. He further
referred to page 115, 116 and 233 of  24 ITA No. 380/Del/2015 the Annual
Report and submitted that the company has acquired 'McCamish Systems LLC'
during the year under consideration, which has impacted the profitability of
the company.

9.1 Ld. CIT(DR), on the other hand, submitted that all the activity reported
might be in different verticals but the function carried out falls under the
category of BPO or ITES only. He submitted that the company in the profit and
loss account has reported its revenue from business process management
services, which being ITES segment, no separate reporting for different
verticals was required ,for selecting the company as comparable. On the issue
of high brand value expenses, the Ld. CIT(DR) supported the finding of the Ld.
DRP that the assessee has not brought on record any evidence of AMP
expenditure incurred by the company resulted into higher profit. On the issue
of large scale of operation, the Ld. CIT(DR) submitted that the turnover of
the assessee was in the comparable range of the turnover of the company and it
was not too low as compared to the comparable company. On the issue of
acquisition of McCamish Systems LLC, the Ld. CIT(DR) submitted that the
assessee has not demonstrated any effect on the PLI of the company. He further
referred to page 121 of the Annual Report of the company and submitted that
only member's interest had been purchased and there is no merger or demergers
due to acquisition. He submitted that due to purchase of members interest in
the said LLC, actually there was a loss and it has not increased the profit of
the company. Accordingly, he submitted that the assessee failed to demonstrate
increase in profit due to this event of acquisition. 9.2 We have heard the
rival submission and perused the relevant material on record. We note from
page 7 of the Annual Report of the company that it was established in April
2002 as the business process outsourcing subsidiary of the Infosys
technologies Ltd. The Annual  25 ITA No. 380/Del/2015 Report further mentioned
that it is among the top 10 third-party BPO company in India according to the
ranking of National Association of software and service companies (NADDCOM).
Thus, the contention of the Ld. counsel that the company provided wide array
of the services, is not relevant as far as the function of BPO carried out by
the company are similar to the functions carried out by the assessee. When,
the assessee itself has characterized its activity as BPO, in such
circumstances, the functions of the company cannot be held as the dissimilar.
9.3 With regard to contention of the Ld. counsel of high brand value expenses
on brand building and advertising amounting to Rs.69,16,780/- , we find that
the total expenses on brand building in advertisement constituted 0.1% of the
total turnover and which is insignificant. Further we agree with the
contention of the Ld. CIT(DR) that the assessee has not brought on record any
evidence that such expenditure has resulted into higher profit to the
comparable company. Thus we reject the contention of the Ld. counsel of having
impact of higher brand value expenses on the profitability of the company.

9.4 On the issue of large scale operations of the company, we find that
company was having turnover of Rs.1,126.63 crores as against Revenue of
Rs.42.70 crores reported by the assessee from provision of IT back- office
support services. The turnover of the companies 26.38 times the turnover of
the assessee. In our opinion, turnover of the company cannot be a ground for
rejecting a comparable until and unless, there is wide variation. Accordingly,
this contention of the Ld. counsel of the assessee for excluding the company
as comparable, is also rejected. 9.5 Further, the Ld. counsel objected the
inclusion of the company on the ground of acquisition of Maccamish Systems
LLC. Before the Ld. DRP also the assessee failed to adduce any evidence as how
the merger had impacted the profitability of the company. Further, we have  26
ITA No. 380/Del/2015 observed from page 13 of the Annual Report of the
company, which reads as under:

> "Consequent to the purchase of Members Interest in McCanmish Systems LLC
> ("McCamish"), Infosys BPO has become the sole member of McCamish with effect
> from December 4, 2009. During the period from December 4, 2009 to March 31,
> 2010 the company generated revenue of Rs.38.02 Crore with a loss of Rs.17.67
> Croes................."

9.6 Thus, it is evident that acquisition of McCamish Systems LLC has
contributed revenue of Rs. 38.02 crores and loss of Rs. 17.67 crores,
therefore, there is no increase in exceptional profit due to acquisition of
the said LLC. Thus, the contention of the Ld. counsel of having increase in
the profitability due to acquisition, is not tenable. 9.7 In view of the above
discussion, we uphold the direction of the Ld. DRP to retain the 'Infosys BPO
Ltd.' as a valid comparable for back- office support service transaction

10\. Now, we take up the request of the assessee for inclusion of the two
comparables .

(A) CG VAK Software and Exports Ltd.

11\. The Ld. counsel submitted that company has been rejected by the Ld. TPO
on the basis of inappropriate turnover filter. According to him, the turnover
of the company was Rs.5,94,28,000/- as reported on page 490 of the compilation
of the Annual Report. He further submitted that the company also qualifies
employee cost to operating cost filter. He referred to page 176 of the paper
book and submitted that employee cost of the company was 76.73%. He further
submitted that the company has been included as comparable in assessee's own
case in assessment year 2009-10 by the Tribunal relying on the Delhi High
Court ruling in the  27 ITA No. 380/Del/2015 case of 'Chryscapital Investment
Adviser India Private Limited Vs. DCIT in ITA No. 417/2014 wherein it was held
the turnover cannot be reason for rejecting a functionally similar company.
11.1 Ld. CIT(DR), on the other hand, relying on the finding of the Ld. DRP,
submitted that during the year under consideration the company was mainly
involved into software development and revenue from ITES/BPO service was only
14% i.e. 83 lakhs and, thus, the turnover of the BPO segment was extremely
small as compared to the turnover of the assessee. According to the Ld.
CIT(DR), as per the contention of the Ld. counsel the total turnover of the
assessee company was more than Rs. 5 crore, but the turnover of the BPO
segment was only 82.78 Lacs, thus it fails the turnover filter of Rs. 5 crore.
11.2 We have heard the rival submission and perused the relevant material on
record. We find that in the assessment year 2009-10 also the turnover of the
company was less than Rs.1 crore, however, the Tribunal in ITA No.
2074/Del/2014 for the assessment year 2009-10 in the case of the assessee
directed the TPO to include the company as a comparable company. The relevant
finding of the Tribunal is reproduced as under:] "18.3 We have heard the rival
submissions and perused the relevant finding given in the impugned order. The
main reason for not including this company is that its turnover is less than
Rs.1 crore. So far as exclusion of this comparable on basis of turnover filter
criteria of less than Rs.1 crore, we find that, first of all, it was a
comparable chosen by the assessee and at the time of selection process the
assessee as stated had not applied any turnover filter for accepting or
rejecting the comparables. Once the turnover filter has not been applied at
the quantitative level then comparability has to be done on qualitative level
based on FAR analysis. If on FAR analysis it is found that there are
differences on account of either assets deployed, risk assumed materially
affecting the cost or margin then only comparability analysis fails in such
cases. Further, under the TNMM, the comparability of an international
transaction with an  28 ITA No. 380/Del/2015 uncontrolled transaction is to be
seen with reference to functions performed after taking into assets employed
and the risk assumed. While reckoning the comparability analysis under TNMM,
the main emphasis is into net margin realized on the transactions undertaken
and not the price of the product or services. The transfer pricing rules under
Rule 10B and 10C also contemplate for eliminating the material effects and to
make reasonably accurate adjustment for eliminating the differences on account
of such material effects. Mere circumstance of a company which otherwise
confirm to the comparability analysis in terms of Rule 10B(2) and (3), huge
profit or huge turnover ipso facto does not lead to its exclusion unless and
of course it is shown that turnover or huge profit is on account of factor
leading to a different results in FAR analysis. We find that the Honhle Delhi
High Court in the case of Ciyscapital Investment Advisors India Pvt. Ltd. vs.
DCIT (supra) after detailed analysis of rule 10B(3), same principle has been
reiterated that if the company is functionally comparable then same cannot be
rejected on the basis of turnover. The Hon'ble High Court in its very detailed
judgment wherein it was required to answer, whether the comparable can be
rejected on the ground that they have high profit margin as compared to the
assessee in TP analysis, has also dealt upon the turnover factor in detail and
reiterated that if the company is functionally comparable then same cannot be
rejected on the basis of turnover. Thus, following the ratio laid down by the
Hon'ble Delhi High Court, we hold that the company cannot be held to be
incomparable simply on the ground of low turnover, unless it is demonstrated
that the assets and risk are completely different and are incomparable. Thus,
we direct the TPO to include CG Vak Software And Exports Ltd. as a comparable
company."

11.3 Since in the year under consideration also the Ld. DRP has rejected the
company on the ground that it does not fulfill the turnover criteria of five
crore, respectfully, following the finding of the Tribunal (supra), we set
aside the direction of the Ld. DRP and direct the AO/TPO to include 'CG Vak
Software and exports Ltd' (segment) as a comparable company.

29

ITA No. 380/Del/2015 R Systems International Ltd.

12\. The Ld. counsel referred to pages 522, 523 and 611 of the compilation of
the Annual Report and submitted that the company was engaged in providing IT
solutions and BPO services, which being functionally similar to the
transaction of the assessee under consideration. He further submitted that
filter of different financial year applied by the Ld. TPO is not an
appropriate filter. The Ld. counsel submitted that the company has been
included as comparable by the Tribunal in assessee's own case for assessment
year 2009-10, wherein relying on the ruling of the Hon'ble Punjab and Haryana
High Court in CIT versus Mercer Consulting India Private Limited (ITA No. 101
of 2015), it is held that if the audited quarterly results can be used to
compute margin for the year ending on March 2009, then company should be
included in the final set of comparables. 12.1 The Ld. CIT(DR), on the other
hand, relied on the finding of the Ld. DRP in para-6.5.2 of their order and
submitted that it is very difficult to carryout adjustment, assumptions,
classification etc of the comparable to bring the transaction at par with the
international transaction and therefore, such comparable should be eliminated
from the set of comparables.

12.2 We have heard the rival submission and perused the relevant material on
record. We find that the Ld. DRP in para-6.5.2 of their order has given
finding on the principle whether comparable having different financial year
should be considered or not. The relevant finding of the Ld. DRP is extracted
as under:

"6.5.2 DRP Findings:

The issue of Comparables maintaining accounts in terms of period other than
the financial year has befen considered by this Panel as under:

30

ITA No. 380/Del/2015

1\. So far as the issue of requirement of data pertaining to the F.Y.

as provided in rule 10B{4) is concerned, the submission of taxpayer that there
is no impediment in law to use data even if the comparables do not maintain
their accounts in terms of financial year, the same is correct. However, Rule
10B{4) is not to be read in isolation. This rule has been provided for the
purpose of determination, analysis and benchmarking of international
transaction with an appropriate comparable in uncontrolled transactions for
the purpose of determination of Arm's Length Price (ALP). So, the determining
factors as identified by this Panel are:

i. Whether the taxpayer/the Department will be able to identify an
Uncontrolled comparable to benchmark an international transaction of the
taxpayer who is maintaining data and accounts in terms of financial year.

ii. Whether the taxpayer/ the Department will be able to carry out such
adjustments so as to make the uncontrolled transactions materially identical
with that of the taxpayer if such comparable is not maintaining its accounts
financial year wise.

iii. Whether the taxpayer/ the Department will be able to apply such filters
to be applied to publicly available data so as to bring out only those
companies which are broadly functionally similar to that of the taxpayer if
the comparable is not maintaining its account financial year wise.

2\. In cases of companies, the data in respect of which are available publicly
and which maintain accounts other than in terms of the financial year,
following adjustments are required to be ' carried out in order to bring the
data at par with that of the taxpayer:

i. Apportion the data from preceding or subsequent period so as to make data
equivalent to the financial year available for comparison with the
international transaction.

31

ITA No. 380/Del/2015 ii. While apportioning such data, adequate care needs to
be taken so that the Profit Level Indicators are computed comparably.

3\. For the determination of profit level indicators, certain entries having
bearing on the cost and income are- interest, provisions, losses/ gains on
account of foreign exchange, etc, which normally as per the business practice
are accounted for at the end of the accounting year. Under both the
situations, whether the data pertaining to the period prior to the accounting
year or subsequent to the accounting year are integrated with the relevant
portion of the accounting year of the comparable, the same gives a lopsided
picture of the accounts so far as the financial year data is concerned. Since,
there is no requirement as per company law or as per accounting standards that
the data pertaining to a particular quarter needs to be closely
compartmentalized by providing for various provisions etc. for each quarter,
the validity of such data for the purpose of comparability will be a matter of
question mark. Also, some of the companies provide for depreciation at the end
of the accounting period. Apportionment of such depreciation on pro- rata
basis to a particular quarter or month will be a difficult proposition.

4\. Most important many of the companies maintaining accounts other than on
financial year basis do not keep such data in public domain. Such
inaccessibility of vital information in public domain may not render the
comparison the warranted judicious effect creates a hurdle wherein the effort
required to search for such comparables data for the financial year is not
commensurate with the result.

5\. In addition, in order to reach at such uncontrolled comparables, the
taxpayer as well as the TPOs apply certain filters in accordance with the
provisions of Rule 10B. For e.g. the filter of export income/ realization is
applied for comparison of an international transaction involving export of
goods and services; filter of related party transaction is applied for the
purpose of identifying only those comparables which are functioning in a
relatively uncontrolled environment. It is difficult to apportion information
required for applying such filters if the accounting period is not congruent
to the accounting period of the taxpayer. In order to carry out FAR analysis,
taxpayers and the TPOs  32 ITA No. 380/Del/2015 apply the filter of networth.
Generally, networth of a company is determined on the last day of the
accounting year. Therefore, apportionment of data will again lead to lopsided
indicator for comparability analysis.

6\. Rule 10C(2)(c) provides for the requirement of "the availability, coverage
and reliability of data necessary for application of the method." In the light
of the discussions made in the above paragraphs, the reliability of such data
is a question mark and as such the requirement of the rule will not be
fulfilled if the comparable does not maintain its accounts in terms of
financial

7\. It will also be very difficult to carry out adjustments, assumptions,
classifications, etc, of such comparables to bring the transactions at par
with the international transactions in such situations.

In view of the above, the question as referred to in para 1 above cannot be
justifiably answered to treat the comparables maintaining accounts in terms of
period other than the financial year to be treated as uncontrolled transaction
for the purpose of determination of ALP. The Panel, therefore, rejects the
objection of the taxpayer on this account."

12.3 However, we note that the Tribunal in ITA No. 2074/Del/2014 for
assessment year 2009-10 in the case of the assessee itself has held the
company as comparable despite being different financial year. The relevant
finding of the Tribunal is reproduced as under: "19.2 We have heard rival
submissions and also perused the relevant finding given in the impugned order.
This comparables company has been rejected not on the ground of functionality
albeit on the ground that it is following the financial year accounting from
January to December (i.e. calendar year). Though a comparable company
following a different financial year may not be generally taken for
comparability analysis, however, if financial data is available for all the
quarters including January to March and it is otherwise possible to determine
the value of the transaction as well as the profitability during the
corresponding period, then it suffices the comparability criteria. Because,
ultimately the core point in comparability analysis is to benchmark the margin
of a given period of a comparable uncontrolled transaction with controlled
transaction. If the financials of the corresponding period is available then
it  33 ITA No. 380/Del/2015 cannot be rejected simply on the ground that it
has a different financial year. As brought out on record by the Ld. Counsel
before us submitted that the audited accounts of R- Systems for the year
ending 31.12.2008 and for the quarter starting from 31.01.2008 to 31.03.2009
is available and once such an audited statement is available, then the
proportionate working for 31.03 2009 can easily be deduced. If there are no
major incident of factors disturbing the profit margin in that quarter, whose
results are being worked out and the transactions of the Company are carried
out in the normal course of business, then we do not find any reason to reject
the comparable out rightly on the aforesaid ground. The working of PLI based
on audited accounts as incorporated above clearly clinches the point. The
Hon'ble P&H High Court in CIT Vs. M/s. Mercer Consulting India Pvt. Ltd., in
the context of R-Systems only had made a very important observation which
reads as under:-

"27. The TPO excluded the case of R-Systems International Limited from the
list of comparables. The ITAT included the same. The Transfer Pricing Officer
excluded the case of R- Systems International Limited on the ground that it
follows the calendar year i.e. 1st January to 31st December for maintaining
its annual account whereas the accounting year of the assessee is 1st April to
31st March. The Transfer Pricing Officer followed an order passed by the
Mumbai Bench of the Tribunal in ACIT v. Hapag Lloyd Global Services Ltd. 2013-
TH-68-ITATMUM-TP in which it had been held that a company with a different
financial year ending cannot be compared.

28\. We are unable to agree with the decision of the Transfer Pricing Officer
and of the DRP that affirmed it. The view taken by the Tribunal commends
itself to us. It is not the financial year per se that is relevant. Even if
the financial years of the assessee and of another enterprise are different it
would make no difference. If it is possible to determine the value of the
transactions during the corresponding period, the purpose of comparables would
be served. The question in each case is whether despite the financial years of
the assessee and of the other enterprise being different, the financials of
the corresponding period of each of them are available. If they are, the
Transfer Pricing Officer must refer to the corresponding period of both the
entities in determining whether the two are comparable or not for the purpose
of determining the ALP.

29\. As noted by the Tribunal, the audit accounts ofR System International
Ltd. for the year ending 31.12.2008 had been given under one column and the
data for the quarter ending 31.03.2009 and 31.03.2008 (both audited) had been
given in two other columns. Thus, as rightly held by the Tribunal, if from the
yearly data ending 31.12.2008, the results of the quarter ending 31.03.2008
are excluded and if the results for the quarter ending 31.03.2009 are
included, it is possible to obtain the data for the financial year 01.04.2008
to 31.03.2009.

34

ITA No. 380/Del/2015

30\. This view is not contrary to Rule 10(B)(4) which reads as under:-

"10B(4) The data to be used in analysing the comparability of an international
transaction shall be the data relating to the financial year in which the
international transaction has been entered into."

31\. The Rule does not exclude from consideration the data of an entity merely
because its financial year is different from the financial year of the
assessee. What the Rule requires is that the data to be used in analyzing the
financial results of an uncontrolled transaction with an international
transaction shall be the data relating to the financial year in which the
international transaction has been entered into. Thus, so long as the data
relating to the financial year is available, it matters not, if the financial
year followed is different. In the case before us the data relating to the
relevant financial year of R-Systems International Limited is available.

32\. We are, therefore, entirely in agreement with the decision of the
Tribunal that if the data relating to the financial year in which the
international transaction has been entered into is directly available from the
annual accounts of that comparable, the same cannot be held as not passing the
test of sub-rule (4) of Rule 10 B."

Thus, respectfully following the judgment of Hon'ble High Court, we hold that
this company should be accepted as comparable company for the purpose of
benchmarking the assessee's margin."

12.4 Since in the year under consideration also the company has been rejected
on the ground of different financial year, but the relevant data for the
concerned financial year can be deducted from the data available from the
Annual Reports and thus in the facts and circumstances of the case,
respectfully following the finding of the Tribunal (supra), we set aside the
direction of the Ld. DRP and direct the AO/TPO to include the company in the
set of comparables.

13\. As far as the issue of working out margin of the comparable for the
period from 01/04/2009 to 31/03/2010 is concerned, the Hon'ble High Court of
Punjab and Haryana in Mercer Consulting India Private Limited (supra) in the
context of 'R system' observed that if from the data ending on 31/12/2008, the
result of the quarter ending 31/03/2008 are excluded and if the results for
the quarter ending 31/03/2009 are included, it is  35 ITA No. 380/Del/2015
possible to obtain the data for the financial year 01/04/2008 to 31/03/2009.
The Hon'ble High Court further observed that said view is not contrary to Rule
10(B)(4) of Income Tax Rules, 1962. Since the Tribunal (supra) in assessment
year 2009-10 in the case of the assessee has followed the decision of the
Hon'ble Punjab and Haryana High Court in Mercer Consullting India Private
Limited (supra), We feel it appropriate to restore this issue to the Ld.
AO/TPO for computation of margin of the company for the period from 01/04/2009
to 31/03/2010 from the adjusted data of relevant years. The assessee is
directed to provide relevant audited accounts of the company.

14\. Accordingly, the grounds of the appeal related to transfer pricing
adjustment are allowed partly for statistical purpose.

15\. The corporate issues raised in ground numbers 15 to 17, relate to
allocation of directors remuneration between STP unit and non-STP unit. Before
us, both the parties admitted that this matter had come for consideration
before the Tribunal in the assessee's own case in assessment year 2008-09 in
ITA No. 39/Del/2013 order dated 20/05/2016, wherein the matter has been
remanded back to the file of the AO for fresh examination.

15.1 We have gone through the decision of the Tribunal and the relevant
finding, and find that this precise issue has been dealt by the Tribunal in
assessee's own case. We also find that the Tribunal in assessment year 2009-10
in ITA No. 2074/Del/2014 following the decision of the Tribunal in assessment
year 2008-09 has restored the matter back to the file of the Assessing
Officer. The relevant observation of the Tribunal in ITA No. 39/Del/2013 for
assessment year 2008-09 is reproduced as under:

36

ITA No. 380/Del/2015 "26.1 After going through the decision of the Tribunal
and the relevant finding given in the impugned order, we find that this
precise issue has been dealt by the Tribunal in the assessee's own case. The
relevant observation of the Tribunal is reproduced hereunder:-

"14. In support of the grounds i.e. Ground Nos. 6 to 8, the Learned AR
submitted that the Assessing Officer has erred in not correctly verifying the
record submitted during the course of assessment proceedings contrary to DRP
directions. He was not justified in disallowing income-tax holidays claimed by
the assessee in respect of STP unit hi its 8th year of operation. The
authorities below have also erred in allocating director's remunerations
between STP unit and non-STP units by ignoring the facts placed on record and
holding that the assessee intentionally debited director's salary to non-STP
units to reduce its taxable income without appreciating the operating model
being followed by the assessee. The Learned AR submitted that assessee's STP
unit has its own finance/operational team which is responsible for the day to
day affairs/functioning of the said unit. The directors of the assessee have
no active involvement on the affairs of STP units. All cost related STPI unit
and non- STPI unit of assessee were being booked into irrespective unit and no
apportionment was required/done for any other cost. He submitted further that
assessee was operating on cost + mark up arrangements with its overseas group
companies. Under the said arrangement, the assessee was entitled to receive
pre- agreed mark up on cost incurred by it. Allocating cost from non- STP unit
to STP unit will result in reducing the cost based for the assessee, which
will eventually lead to lower taxable income. Thus, the reason provided by the
Assessing Officer for making the adjustment does not stand correct in the case
of assessee. The Learned AR submitted that in the subsequent years 2009-10 and
2010-11, the claimed deduction under sec. 1OA was allowed. He referred page
Nos. The Learned AR also tried to point out typographical and arithmetical
errors in the working of the disallowance under sec. 10A of the Act by the
Assessing Officer at page Nos. 6 to 8 of the assessment order.

xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx  37 ITA No.
380/Del/2015

19\. Considering the above submissions, we find that in the case of CTT vs.
Western Outdoor Interactive (P) Ltd. (supra), the Hon'ble High Court has been
pleased to hold that benefit of deduction under sec, 10A is available for a
particular number of years on satisfaction of certain conditions under
provisions of the Act and unless relief granted for first assessment year in
which claim is made and accepted, the Assessing Officer cannot withdraw relief
for subsequent years, Undisputedly, it is 8th year of the claim of deduction
under sec. 1 OA of the Act made by the assessee and it has been allowed in
earlier years and in subsequent remaining two assessment years, i.e. 2009-10
and 2010-11. Before the ITAT, as discussed above, the Learned AR has tried to
meet out the objections raised by the Assessing Officer in making the
disallowance of the claimed deduction. In brief, the submission of the
assessee against the objection of the Assessing Officer that the assessee has
intentionally debited directors' salary to non-STP units to reduce its taxable
income, the submission of the assessee remained that the assessee maintains
its account in a manner that costs relating to STP and non-STP units are
booked in the respective units; MD responsible for establishing/leading
strategic R&D partnership and R&D central operations functions for NOIDA site
where major portion ofR&D work was carried out; director financed responsible
for finance and accounting, legal, tax and company secretarial compliance
functions at Noida; STP unit at Bangalore since has its own core management
staff and each person is responsible for their areas, the cost of such
personnel are debited to their undertaking only; and appellant operates own
cost plus model, hence, increase in cost in non-STPI unit will result in
increase in Revenue and, therefore, results in increase in tax liability.
Against the objection of the Assessing Officer that separate books of account
are not maintained, the submissions of the assessee remained that as per the
provisions of law, there is no requirement of maintaining separate books of
account for a unit eligible to claim deduction under sec. 10A of the Act; and
that it is the 8 year of claim of deduction under sec. IOA of the Act and the
claim of deduction under sec. 1OA of the Act only needs to be seen in first
year. Against the objection of the Assessing Officer that additions shown in
block of computers is not in agreement with records maintained in computers,
the submissions of the assessee remained that as per fixed assets schedule
provided to the Assessing Officer total addition in computer made during
financial year 2007-08 in STP unit was  38 ITA No. 380/Del/2015 Rs. 32,05,095;
in the assessment order, the Assessing Officer stated that as per details
provided to him,addition made in block of computer was of Rs.31,73,495 which
is against the facts on record; the Assessing Officer compared alleged
additions of Rs.31,73,495 with details extracts from SAP and wrongly concluded
that amounts do not match. The Learned AR in his above submissions has pointed
out as to how the Assessing Officer has committed mistake in coming to the
conclusion that amounts do not match. The Learned AR submitted that total
addition made to block of computers as per SAP details after correcting above
mistakes made by the Assessing Officer is Rs.32,05,095 which matches with
fixed assets scheduled submitted to the Assessing Officer during assessment
proceedings. Against the objection of Assessing Officer that invoices raised
in US dollars are not verifiable with amounts recorded in books as some
amounts is in INR, the submission of the assessee remained that all the
details on account of service income was furnished before the Assessing
Officer; invoices are usually raised in USD, however, if there is. an
adjustment entry to be passed, same is passed in INR in the ledger account;
and audit adjustment entry was passed by auditor for financial year 2007-08;
bonus expenses pertaining to financial year 2008-09 inadvertently considered
by Cadence India as cost for financial year 2007-08 and as the assessee
operates on a cost plus model invoice on such cost was raised already in
financial year 2007-08; etc. The grievance of the assessee in this regard also
remained that the Assessing Officer has not followed DRP's directions. It was
submitted that as per directions issued by the DRP, the Assessing Officer was
directed to rectify the details of accounts submitted by the assessee with
regard to additions in the computer account and differed Revenue. Keeping in
view these material submissions of the assessee, we set aside the matter to
the file of the Assessing Officer to verify the above submissions and decide
the issue afresh in view of the decision of Hon'ble Bombay High Court in the
case of CIT vs. Western Outdoor Interactive Pvt. Ltd. (supra). The ground Nos.
6 to 8 are thus allowed for statistical purposes."

26.2 Thus, respectfully following the earlier year's precedence, we also
remand back this issue to the file of the Assessing Officer with similar
directions and to be decided in the same manner.

39

ITA No. 380/Del/2015 Accordingly, grounds No. 20 to 22 are treated as allowed
for statistical purposes."

15.2 Thus, respectfully following the earlier years precedence, we accordingly
set aside the direction of the Ld. DRP and restore the issue back to the file
of the Assessing Officer with similar directions and to be decided in the same
manner. Accordingly, grounds No. 15 to 17 of the appeal are treated as allowed
for statistical purpose.

16\. In the result, appeal of the assessee is allowed partly for statistical
purposes.

The decision is pronounced in the open court on 5th Jan., 2018.

    
    
                Sd/-                                         Sd/-
        (AMIT SHUKLA)                                    (O.P. KANT)
      JUDICIAL MEMBER                               ACCOUNTANT MEMBER
    Dated: 5th January, 2018.
    RK/-(D.T.D)
    Copy forwarded to:
    1.     Appellant
    2.     Respondent
    3.     CIT
    4.     CIT(A)
    5.     DR
                                                       Asst. Registrar, ITAT, New Delhi
     

