

Bombay High Court

Westin Sankalp Developers vs Ajay Sikandar Rana And 2 Ors on 14 January, 2021

Bench: G.S. Patel

    
    
                                                                           22-CARBPL-221-2020.DOC
    
    
    
    
                       Shephali
    
    
    
                            IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT BOMBAY
                                   ORDINARY ORIGINAL CIVIL JURISDICTION
                                          IN ITS COMMERCIAL DIVISION
                              COMM ARBITRATION PETITION (L) NO. 221 OF 2020
    
    
                            Westin Sankalp Developers                                 ...Petitioner
                                  Versus
                            Ajay S Rana & Ors                                      ...Respondents

Mr Rajesh Singh, i/b Nidhi B Singh, for the Petitioner. Mr Ravindra S
Pachundkar, for Respondents Nos. 1 & 2\. Mr Nilesh S Parate, for Respondent
No. 3.

    
    
                                                  CORAM:         G.S. PATEL, J
                                                                 (Through Video Conference)
                                                  DATED:         14th January 2021
                            PC:-
    
    
                       1.         Heard through video conferencing.
    
    
    

2\. I have heard both sides. I am not in the least impressed with Shephali
Mormare Mr Pachundkar's arguments on behalf of Respondents Nos. 1 and 2, that,
though members of the 3rd Respondent society, they can Digitally signed by
Shephali Mormare Date: 2021.01.15 11:26:13 +0530 continue to oppose re-
development. As our Court has noted in several other matters, it is not open
to any dissenting member of a society to hold the interest of other members of
the society to ransom. The law is settled that a member has no independent
right as a member of the society to oppose such development. If a  Page 1 of 3
14th January 2021 22-CARBPL-221-2020.DOC member has any grievances against the
society, there is a remedy provided in the forum of exclusive jurisdiction
under the Maharashtra Cooperative Societies Act 1960. The 1st and 2nd
Respondents are unable to realize that by causing this delay they have
rendered themselves liable -- including in damages -- for any loss caused not
only to the Petitioner but also to the society and other members of the
society as well.

3\. All contentions as between the society and these two members are of course
kept open for appropriate proceedings in a court of competent jurisdiction.

4\. The prayers in this petition, to which I will return to on the next date,
seek forcible removal of Respondents Nos. 1 and 2 from the society building so
that redevelopment can proceed. All other members have vacated. The difculty
in making any order today is that since March 2020, the Petitioner has not
invoked arbitration nor fled a Section 11 Application. A Section 9 Petition is
obviously a step in aid as an interim measure pending arbitration. I cannot
conceive of a situation where a Petitioner obtains an order on a Section 9
Petition but does not follow through with an Application under Section 11 for
an arbitration at all. This would pervert the purpose of Section 9, turning
into a summary eviction action. That can never be the purpose or intent of
Section 9.

5\. Mr Singh readily acknowledges that he will fle the necessary Application
under Section 11 preceded by the requisite notice invoking arbitration and
serve these. I do not see that there is any  Page 2 of 3 14th January 2021
22-CARBPL-221-2020.DOC question of fling any Afdavit in Reply to any such
Arbitration Application. It is for Mr Singh to decide whether Respondents Nos.
1 and 2 need to be made parties to such an Section 11 Application or not.

6\. Mr Singh states that the Arbitration Application will be fled and served
on or before 22nd January 2021.

7\. I am making it clear that Respondents Nos. 1 and 2 are not entitled to
refuse service. If they do so, it will be seen as an act of contempt of Court
and will be dealt with accordingly. Mr Pachundkar states that he has
instructions to accept service on behalf of Respondents Nos. 1 and 2 in all
matters relating to this development agreement.

8\. List the present Section 9 Petition for orders along with Section 11
Application in physical Court on 29th January 2021.

9\. This order will be digitally signed by the Private Secretary of this
Court. All concerned will act on production of a digitally signed copy of this
order.

(G. S. PATEL, J)  Page 3 of 3 14th January 2021

