

Bombay High Court

The Secretary Of State vs Mask And Co. on 15 March, 1940

Equivalent citations: (1940) 42 BOMLR 767

Author: Thankerton

Bench: Thankerton, G Rankin, M Jayakar

JUDGMENT Thankerton, J.

1\. The sole question for determination in this appeal is as to the
jurisdiction of the civil Courts to entertain the suit. The appeal is taken
from a judgment and order of the High Court of Judicature at Madras, dated
February 2, 1938, which set aside a decree of the Subordinate Judge at
Cuddalore, dated March 30, 1937 (which had dismissed the respondents' suit on
the ground of want of jurisdiction), and directed the Subordinate Judge to
restore the suit to the file and to dispose of it on the merits.

2\. The respondents are a firm of merchants, having their head office at Pan-
ruti in the Province of Madras, and, in the course of their business, they
import betel-nuts from Java into British India. The facts in the present suit,
which was filed by the respondents on April 10, 1934, are not materially in
dispute. The suit relates to two consignments of betel-nuts, imported by the
respondents in December, 1932, from Java to Pondicherry by sea, and thereafter
by rail to Panruti. These consignments, which originally consisted of 3,927
bags in all, were repacked at the Port of Pondicherry, owing to damage to the
gunnies, into 4,063 bags, before importation into British India. The
consignments were imported into the Province of Madras by rail and carts from
Pondicherry to Panruti by various instalments, the first of which consisted of
1,000 bags imported through the Customs station at Pondicherry on December 31,
1932. The remaining bags were imported in several instalments in the months of
February, March and November, 1933, through the Customs stations at
Pondicherry and Madalapet.

3\. It appears that, prior to this occasion, the respondents had been in the
habit of importing their betel-nuts at the port of Cuddalore in the Province
of Madras, but, in the beginning of the year 1932, the Customs Collector at
that port had assessed a similar consignment of 3,605 bags as boiled betel-
nuts subject to duty on a tariff value, contrary to1 the respondents'
contention that they should be assessed as raw betel-nuts, subject to duty ad
valorem. In the hope that they might achieve an assessment in accordance with
their contention, the respondents altered their place of importation in the
case of the consignments here in question, but their disappointment in that
respect has given rise to the present suit, in which they seek to challenge;
the adverse decision in a civil suit.

4\. On the arrival of the consignments at Pondicherry, the respondents wrote
on December 27, 1932, to the Collector of Customs, Madras, asking to be
allowed to import the goods as raw sliced betel-nuts and not as boiled. As
they anticipated an increase in the ad valorem duty to come into effect at the
beginning of 1933, they requested a telegraphic reply, which they received on
December 29, 1932, saying, If you desire import before January first you must
import goods and deposit duty calculated on higher tariff value Inspector will
at time of taking deposit and passing goods take sealed samples for test and
will also deliver to you other sealed samples to enable you to appeal if
necessary.

The respondents thereupon imported 1,000 bags on December 31, 1932, and paid
the higher duty under protest to the Assistant Inspector of Customs at
Pondicherry Railway Chauki, samples being duly taken. After examination of the
samples, the Assistant Collector of Customs, Madras, wrote to the respondents
on February 28, 1933, as follows:-

I have to state that on examination of the samples from the consignment in
question, it has been found that the betel-nuts imported are ' boiled', The
1,000 bags cleared on December 31, 1932, are therefore assessable at 37 1/2
per cent, on a tariff valuation of Rs. 23 per cwt. and the remaining bags, if
cleared, will be liable to duty at 45 per cent on a tariff value of Rs. 16 per
cwt.

An appeal by the respondents against this decision was dismissed by the
Collector of Customs on June 20, 1933. The matter was taken to the Government
of India in revision, but by their order dated August 13, 1933, the Government
of India confirmed the Collector's decision. The present suit was filed on
April 10, 1934.

6\. In the suit the respondents seek to recover the excess amount collected
from them by levying duty upon a tariff value of Rs. 23 per cwt. upon 1,000
bags and of Rs. 16 per cwt. upon the remainder, viz., 3,063 bags instead of
levying duty upon the invoice value of Rs. 10-9-1 per cwt. In para. 14 of the
plaint they state that the cause of action arose on August 18, 1933, when
their petition for revision to the Government of India was thrown, out.
Various issues were framed by the Subordinate Judge, but it was decided to
determine in the first instance Issue No. 3-" Has this Court no jurisdiction
to entertain' this suit and is the suit barred by the provisions of the Sea
Customs Act ? " By a judgment delivered on March 30, 1937, the Subordinate
Judge held that the Court had no jurisdiction to entertain the suit and
dismissed the suit. An appeal was allowed by the High Court on February 2,
1938, and the Subordinate Judge was directed to proceed to dispose of the suit
on the merits. This appeal is from that decision.

7\. While the imposition of the duties here in question is regulated by the
Land Customs Act (Act XIX of 1924), the matter in issue arises under certain
provisions of the Sea Customs Act (Act VIII of 1878) which are incorporated,
subject to the necessary verbal modifications, by Section 9 of the Land
Customs Act, and the schedule to the Act. The Section s of the Sea Customs Act
which are material are contained in Chapter XVII of the Act, which is headed
"Procedure relating to Offences, Appeals, &c," and which includes Section s
169 to 193. The material Section s are as follows:-

182\. In every case, except the cases mentioned in Section 167, Nos. 26, 72
and 74 to 76 both inclusive, in which, under this Act, anything is liable to,
confiscation or to increased rates of duty;

or any person is liable to a penalty, such confiscation, increased rate of
duty or penalty may be adjudged-

(a) without limit, by a Deputy Commissioner or Deputy Collector of Customs, or
a Customs-collector;

    
    
         *       *     *      *
     
    
    186. The award of any confiscation, penalty or increased rate of duty under this Act by an officer of Customs shall not prevent the infliction of any punishment to which the person affected thereby is liable under any other law.
     
    
    

188\. Any person deeming himself aggrieved by any decision or order passed by
an officer of Customs under this Act may, within three months from the date of
such decision or order, appeal therefrom to the Chief Customs-Authority, or,
in such cases as the Local Government directs, to any officer of Customs not
inferior in rank to a Customs-collector and empowered in that behalf by name
or in virtue of his office by the Local Government.

Such authority or officer may thereupon make such further enquiry and pass
such order as he thinks fit, confirming, altering or annulling the decision or
order appeal ed against:

Provided that no such order in appeal shall have the effect of subjecting any
person to any greater confiscation, penalty or rate of duty than has been
adjudged against him in the original decision or order.

Every order passed in appeal under this Section shall, subject to the power of
revision conferred by Section 191, be final.

189\. Where the decision or order appealed against relates to any duty or
penalty leviable in respect of any goods, the owner of such goods, if desirous
of appealing against such decision or order, shall, pending the appeal,
deposit in the hands of the Customs-collector at the port where the dispute
arises the amount demanded by the officer passing such decision or order.

When delivery of such goods to the owner thereof is withheld merely by reason
of such amount not being paid, the Customs-collector shall, upon such deposit
being made, cause such goods to be delivered to such owner.

If upon any such appeal it is decided that the whole or any portion of such
amount was not leviable in respect of such goods, the Customs-collector shall
return such amount or portion (as the case may be) to the owner of such goods
on demand by such owner.

190\. If, upon consideration of the circumstances under which any penalty,
increased rate of duty or confiscation has been adjudged under this Act by an
officer of Customs, the Chief Customs-Authority is of opinion that such
penalty, increased rate or confiscation ought to be remitted in whole or in
part, or commuted, such Authority may remit the same or any portion thereof,
or may, with the consent of the owner of any goods ordered to be confiscated,
commute the order of confiscation to a penalty not exceeding the value of such
goods.

191\. The Local Government may, on the application of any person aggrieved by
any decision or order passed under this Act by any officer of Customs or Chief
Customs-Authority, and from which no appeal lies, reverse or modify such
decision or order.

193\. When a penalty or increased rate of duty is adjudged against any person
under this Act by any officer of Customs, such officer, if such penalty or
increased rate be not paid, may levy the same by sale of any goods of the said
person which may be in his charge, or in the charge of any other officer of
Customs....

Under Section 9 of the Land Customs Act, references to a Chief Customs Officer
in the Sea Customs Act are to be deemed to refer to a Collector of Land
Customs, references to a Customs Collector to a Lands Customs Officer, and
references to Officers of Customs to Collectors of Land Customs or Land
Customs Officers. Further, by Section 4 of the Central Board of Revenue Act
(Act IV of 1924), the Governor-General in Council was substituted for the
Local Government in Section 191 of the Sea Customs Act.

8\. At the hearing before the Board, the appellant maintained that the
decision of the Assistant Collector of Customs, dated February 28, 1933, was a
" decision or order passed by an officer of Customs " within the meaning of
Section 188 of the Sea Customs Act, and that the decision of the Collector of
Customs on appeal therefrom, dated June 20, 1933, which had been confirmed on
revision under Section 191, was final, and excluded the jurisdiction of the
civil Courts. He maintained that the only right of challenge of a decision or
order by an Officer of Customs was by an appeal under4 Section 188 and that
the jurisdiction of the civil Courts was excluded. Alternatively, he
maintained that the right of appeal conferred by Section 188 constituted a
procedure which was alternative to procedure in the civil Courts, and that as
the respondents, in their option, had chosen to proceed under Section 188,
they were bound by that election, and were thus excluded from resort to the
civil Courts.

9\. There can be little doubt that adjudications as to confiscations,
increased rates of duty or penalties made under the power conferred by Section
182 are decisions or orders within the meaning of Section 188, and the
appellant submitted in the first place that the decision of the Assistant
Collector in the present case was an adjudication as to increased rate of duty
under Section 182. In their Lordships' opinion this contention is untenable,
as the decision was as to the normal rate of duty, whereas an increased rate
of duty connotes something in the nature of a penalty, an illustration of
which is to be found in Section 167, No. 35, where goods in excess of the
manifest or not corresponding with the specification are liable to
confiscation or to be charged with such increased rates of duty as the Chief
Officer of Customs directs.

10\. The appellant next maintained that the decision or order referred to in
Section 188 was not confined to adjudications under Section 182, but included
decisions by an officer of Customs as to the rate of duty applicable to
particular goods, which necessarily involved the determination of the
particular category in the tariff classification into which the goods fell,
and that, accordingly, the decision of the Assistant Collector in this case
was a decision or order within the meaning of Section 188. The respondents, on
the other hand, maintained that the decisions or orders referred to in Section
188 related only to adjudications under Section 182. This argument of the
respondents was not mentioned by the Subordinate Judge, and his judgment does
not suggest any doubt of the applicability of Section 188. But it was raised
in the High Court, who decided it in favour of the appellant.

11\. Their Lordships are of opinion that the High Court were right in deciding
that Section 188 is applicable. The words " decision or order " are wide
words, and they appear to be of a more general nature than the adjudications
referred to in Section 182, which are also referred to as awards in Section
186. The difference of language in Section s which are in such close
juxtaposition primarily suggests an intention to cover a wider area in Section
188. It is suggested that the heading of the chapter-" Procedure relating to
Offences, Appeals, etc." -rather indicates that the appeals are correlated
with the offences. Their Lordships are unable to draw any such inference. The
chapter is one relating to procedure and not a chapter relating to offences;
indeed, it might be suggested that if the provisions as to appeals were merely
part of the procedure relating to offences, there would be no occasion for a
separate mention of appeals in the heading., But, in their Lordships' opinion,
the heading of the chapter is of no material assistance in the construction of
Section 188.

12\. In the next place, the proviso in Section 188, which is limited to
adjudications under Section 182, does not, in the opinion of their Lordships,
necessarily involve the narrower construction of the opening words of the
Section . If the latter had expressly referred to any decision or order under
Section 182 or any other Section in the Act, the proviso would have been drawn
in exactly the same terms. But Section 189 uses terms naturally applicable to
any duty leviable under any part of the Act.

13\. Their Lordships agree with the High Court that there is no reason for
limiting the words " any decision or order passed. . .under this Act" in
Section 188 to decisions or orders passed under Section 182. Their Lordships
are unable to agree with the somewhat tentative opinion expressed by Sir
Charles Innesin Hari Bhanji v. The Secretary of State for India (1879) I.L.R.
4 Mad. 344,353 which is referred to by the High Court. That opinion was not
relevant to the case before the learned Judge, which related to an illegal
levy of duty under the Act of 1863.

14\. The Sea Customs Act, 1878, was passed to consolidate and amend the law
relating to the levy of Sea Customs-duties which was then regulated by the
Consolidated Customs Act (Act VI of 1863), which was repealed by the Act of
1878. If there were any doubt as to the proper construction of Section 188 of
the 1878 Act, it would undoubtedly be legitimate to consider the previous law
which it was consolidating and amending, and their Lordships desire to add
that their view already expressed as to the construction of Section 188 is
confirmed by a consideration of the provisions of the Act of 1863. The
material provisions of the latter Act are as follows:-

VI. If any dispute shall arise between any Officer of Customs, and any Master
or Commander of a vessel, or importer, exporter, owner, or consignee of goods,
or agent, or other person, in respect to any matter (not specially provided
for by any law for the time being in force) relating to the importation,
exportation, or ware-housing of any goods, or to the levy of any Duty or
penalty thereon, or to any seizure or forfeiture thereof, the Chief Customs-
authority of the Presidency or place in which such dispute shall have arisen
shall settle the same, subject to an appeal to the Local Government, acting
under the general instructions of the Governor-General of India in Council.

CLXXXIV. If any dispute shall arise as to the proper rate of Duty payable in
respect of any goods imported into, or exported from any Port in British
India, the importer, exporter, owner, or consignee of such goods, or his
agent, shall deposit in the handa of the Officer in charge of the Customs
House at the Port of importation or exportation respectively, the amount of
Duty demanded by such Officer, pending the decision of the Chief Customs-
authority. Upon payment of such deposit and compliance with the provisions of
this Act relating to the entry of such goods, the Officer in charge of the
Custom House shall cause the goods to be delivered to such importer, exporter,
owner, or consignee, or his agent.

CCXVIII. In every case in which, under this Act, any vessel, cart, or other
means of conveyance or any horse or other animal is liable to confiscation; or
any goods are liable to confiscation or to increased rates of Duty; or any
person in charge of or owning a vessel, or landing or shipping goods, or
passing them through the Custom House, is liable to a penalty, an Officer in
charge of a Custom House may, unless it be otherwise provided in this or any
other Act relating to the Customs, adjudge such confiscation, penalty, or
increased rates of Duty.

CCXX. In any case adjudicated by an Officer of Customs, any party aggrieved by
the award may appeal to the Chief Customs-authority of the Presidency or
place, or to any superior Officer of Customs empowered in that behalf by the
Local Government. It shall thereupon be lawful for such authority or superior
Officer to make such further enquiry, and to pass such order as he shall think
proper, confirming, altering, or annulling the original award. Provided that
no such order in appeal shall have the effect of subjecting any person to any
greater confiscation, penalty, or rates of Duty than shall have been adjudged
against him in the original award.

CCXXI. The award of any confiscation, penalty, or increased rates of Duty
under this Act by an Officer of Customs shall not interfere with any
punishment to which the person affected thereby shall be liable under any
other law.

CCXXIII. If, upon consideration of the circumstances under which any penalty
or confiscation has been adjudged under this1 Act, by an Officer of Customs or
by a Magistrate, the Chief Customs-authority of the' Presidency or place shall
be of opinion that such penalty or confiscation ought to be remitted in whole
or in part, or commuted, such Chief Customs-authority may remit the same or
any portion thereof, or may commute any order of confiscation to a penalty not
exceeding the value of the goods ordered to be confiscated.

Section 6 appears under the heading of " General Rules"; Section 184 under "
Miscellaneous Provisions "; and the other four Section s under " Offences and
Penalties." In their Lordships' opinion, it is clear that the provisions of
Section 6 and of Section 220 are both now incorporated in Section 188 of the
later Act, the subject-matter of the appeal being altered from an " award " to
a " decision or order," and the heading of the chapter being altered to "
Procedure relating to Offences, Appeals, etc." Section 184 of the 1863 Act is
reproduced in Section 189, while Section 221 is reproduced as Section 186 of
the 1878 Act, before Section 188, and Section 223 reappears as Section 190 of
the later Act.

15\. The decision of the Assistant Collector therefore; falls within the terms
of Section 188 of the Sea Customs Act of 1878, and the respondents in fact
acted on that view, and exercised the right of appeal conferred by that
Section and by Section 191. It is now necessary to determine whether the order
of the Collector of Customs, dated June 20, 1933, which dismissed the appeal
under Section 188, and which was confirmed by the Governor-General in Council
on an application under Section 191, excludes the jurisdiction of the civil
Courts to entertain a challenge of the merits of that decision. It is settled
law that the exclusion of the jurisdiction of the civil Courts is not to be
readily inferred, but that such exclusion must either be explicitly expressed
or clearly implied. It is also well settled that even if jurisdiction is so
excluded, the civil Courts have jurisdiction to examine into cases where the
provisions of the Act have not been complied with, or the statutory tribunal
has not acted in conformity with the fundamental principles of judicial
procedure. Many of the cases referred to in the judgments below are of this
nature, and are not relevant to the present case, in which there are no
allegations of that nature.

16\. Section 188 provides that "every order passed in appeal under this
Section shall, subject to the power of revision conferred by Section 191, be
final." By Section s 188 and 191 a precise and self-contained code of appeal
is provided in regard to obligations which are created by the statute itself,
and it enables the appeal to be carried to the supreme head of the executive
government. It is difficult to conceive what further challenge of the order
was intended to be excluded other than a challenge in the civil Courts.

17\. Further, it is to be noted that the same finality clause applies equally
to appeals against adjudications under Section 182 and to appeals against
decisions or orders as to the rate of duty leviable under the tariff; their
Lordships are unable to construe this clause differently according as it
applies to these two classes of appeals, as apparently the High Court were
prepared to do. In their judgment the High Court refer with approval to the
unreported decision of Courts Trotter J. in C. S. No. 747 of 1920, in which he
held that the suit, which challenged the adjudication of a fine under Section
182, was barred by Section 188, and the learned Judges add, " We think that
the decision in that case is, if we may say so, not open to exception and it
does not help the Government in this case, because the Act of the Customs
Authorities in that case was an adjudication." Later, the learned Judges
rejected the argument that Section 188 only applied to decisions or
orderspassed by Customs Authorities when acting under Section 182, and held
that the opening words of Section 188 were not so limited. Nevertheless, they
held, as regards the present case, that the finality clause was not so worded
as to exclude the jurisdiction of the civil Courts. Their Lordships are unable
to agree with this distinction.

18\. Their Lordships are of opinion that in this case the jurisdiction of the
civil Courts is excluded by the order of the Collector of Customs on the
appeal under Section 188, and it is unnecessary to consider whether, prior to
taking such appeal under Section 188 the respondents would have been entitled
to resort to the civil Courts, or whether they would have been confined to the
right of appeal under Section 188.

19\. The determination of this question must rest on the terms of the
particular statute which is under consideration, and decisions on other
statutory provisions are not of material assistance, except in so far as
general principles of construction are laid down. The main principles to be
observed in the present case are to be found in the well-known judgment of
Willes J. in The Wolverhampton New Waterworks Co. v. Hawkesford (1859) 6 C. B.
(N.S.) 336, 356, which was approved of in the House of Lords in Neville v.
London " Express" Newspaper, Limited [1919] A.C. 368. The question is whether
the present case falls under the third class stated by Willes J., viz., where
the statute creates a liability not existing atcommon law, and gives also a
particular remedy for enforcing it ....Withrespect to that class it has always
been held, that the party must adopt the form of remedy given by the statute.

20\. It has been held that the jurisdiction of the civil Courts is excluded in
three cases in which an appeal under Section 188 had been taken-C. S. No. 747
of 1920, already referred to, Bhiwandiwala & Co. v. Secy, of State , which is
referred to by the High Court, and Thin Yick v. Secretary of State for India
in Council [1939] 1 Cal. 257, Each of these cases related to an appeal against
an adjudication under Section 182. In the case referred to in 71 M. L.J.,
Notes of Recent Cases, p. 40, Varada-chariar J. held that jurisdiction was not
excluded in circumstances similar to the present case, except that there had
been no appeal under Section 188, and, for the reasons already explained,
their Lordships do not find it necessary to consider the question. Similarly,
in the cases of Vacuum Oil Co. v. Secretary of State for India (1932) L.R. 59
I.A. 258:s. c. 34 Bom. L.R. 1057 and Ford Motor Co. of India v. Secretary of
State for India (1937) L.R. 65 I.A. 32: s.c. 40 Bom. L.R. 269, no appeal had
been taken under Section 188; the question of jurisdiction was not in issue,
though in the former case an issue had been framed, but it was abandoned by
the Advocate General. It was submitted on behalf of the respondents that an
exclusion of the subject's right of resort to the civil Courts would be ultra
vires of the Indian Legislature in view of the provisions of Section 32 of the
Government of India Act, 1915, which re-enacted Section 65 of the Government
of India Act of 1858, and reference was made to Secretary of State for India
v. Moment (1912) L.R. 40 I.A. 48:s. c. 15 Bom. L.R. 27, which was a case of
tortious trespass on land. But. in their Lordships' opinion, neither Section
32 nor the principleinvolved in the decision in Moment's case affect the
validity of an Act of the Indian Legislature which creates an obligation and
provides an exclusive code for its determination; such an obligation is not
covered by Sub-section (2) of Section 32.

21\. On the whole matter, their Lordships are of opinion that the decision of
the Subordinate Judge was correct, and they will humbly advise His Majesty
that the appeal should be allowed, that the order of the High Court should be
set aside and that the decree of the Subordinate Judge should be restored. The
appellant will have the costs of the appeal, and also his costs in the High
Court.

