

Delhi High Court

King Features Syndicate Inc. & ... vs Sunil Agnihotri & Ors. on 11 April, 1997

Author: K Ramamoorthy

Bench: K Ramamoorthy

JUDGMENT K. Ramamoorthy, J.

1\. The plaintiffs have filed this suit claiming the following reliefs :-

"A. The defendant be restrained by a permanent injunction from :

I. releasing the television serial, cinematograph film or any other such
production, entitled 'Phantom' and/or 'Betaal';

II. making any television serial, cinematograph film or any other production
which infringe the copyright of the plaintiffs;

III. using in respect of its television serial or in any other manner
whatsoever, any name or likeness of a character from the plaintiffs comic book
"The Phantom" or the story-line contained therein or in any other manner
passing off its television serial as having some connection with the
plaintiffs;

B. The decree for a mandatory injunction be passed against the defendants to
hand over the plaintiff, the pilot tape and all tapes and other matrices
whatsoever which contain the infringing recordings of the plaintiff's works.

C. A degree for damages for Rs. 5,00,500/- be passed against the defendants
and in favour of the plaintiffs.

D. Costs of the suit be awarded in favour of the plaintiffs;

2\. In IA 20/97 plaintiffs have asked for an injunction praying the following
relief :

"A. The defendant be restrained by a interlocutory injunction from :

I. releasing the television serial, cinematograph film or any other such
production, entitled "Phantom" and/or "Betaal";

II. making any television serial, cinematograph film or any other production
which infringe the copyright of the plaintiffs.

III. using in respect of its television serial or in any other manner
whatsoever, any name or likeness of a character from the plaintiffs' comic
book "The Phantom" or the story-line contained therein or in any other manner
passing off its television serial as having some connection with the
plaintiffs.

B. An order for a mandatory injunction be passed against the defendants
ordering them to hand over the plaintiffs, the pilot tape and all tapes and
other matrices whatsoever which contain the infringing recordings of the
plaintiff's works."

3\. The main grievance of the plaintiffs against the first defendant is that
(1) there has been an infringement of copyright in the artistic work of
Pantham character; (2) There has been infringement of copyright of the
plaintiffs in the literary work including the story line inter play between
characters, the sequence of events, circumstances and instances and the comic
book called the Pantham; (3) The first defendant has been passing off his
Television serial as and for the Television serial of the plaintiffs by using
the title, characters and other features which to make a complete picture and
is attempting to cause confusion among the members of the public, in
particular, the children who views these pictures by the great interest.

4\. The case of the first defendant in short is that no doubt at the first
instance he was inspired by the work of the plaintiff's projecting Phantom but
subsequent to the notice and communication from the plaintiffs he had been
very careful and he had not copied any of the works of the plaintiffs and if a
person views the films the effect of the two films would be known and that
would vindicate the case of the first defendant.

5\. The learned Counsel for the parties after great industry and research made
their submissions supported by a catena of decisions with skill and ability
within the time schedule and they could highlight their points of view with
ability and aplomb. I must place on record that the learned Counsel confined
their submissions to the core of the issues and I was greatly benefited and I
could reflect on their submissions without any difficulty.

6\. The case of the plaintiffs briefly stated is that plaintiff No. 1, King
Features Syndicate, Inc. is owner of the copyright in the well-known comic
character. The Phantom, which is well known as 'The Ghost Who Walks'. The
Phantom is a fictional character and the copyright in the story line (literary
and dramatic work) and the drawings and the likeness of The Phantom and its
other characters (artistic work) vests with the first plaintiff. By virtue of
the International Copyright Order, 1991, the provisions of the Copyright
(Amendment) Act, 1994 are applicable to the work of the first plaintiff. The
second plaintiff Hearst Corporation, USA owns the trade mark and licensing
rights in 'The Phantom'. The name Phantom and the character of Phantom are
subject matter of trade marks registrations. The said name and the character
have been registered in countries including the U.S.A., Australia, Austria,
Argentina, Canada, China, Egypt, Finland, France, Great Britain, Germany, Hong
Kong, Indonesia, Italy, Japan, S. Korea, Malaysia, Norway, Phillipines,
Portugal, South Africa, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
Thailand, U.A.E., Uruguay and Venezuela. The main projection of the case of
the plaintiff is in the following terms :-

"The Phantom, character is a costumed hero who has no special superpowers, but
has indepth knowledge of the jungle and its animals and human inhabitants and
is quick on the draw and has a good upper-cut. The story-line revolves around
the legend that keeps villains at bay - he is the Ghosh who has been walking
for 400 years. The story-line starts from Africa when the first Phantom was
washed up on a remote store of the fictional country of Bengala. A skull cave,
a wife named Diana, a white horse and a wolfhound, jungle tribes, monkey
postmen and pygmies are some of the prominent features and characters of the
comic book and which are very closely related to and have become associated
with "The Phantom".

According to the plaintiffs the Comic strips of "The Phantom" have been a
major success among the reading public all over the world. The first plaintiff
through its licensees have also manufactured a number of goods including toys
and other like goods in which "The Phantom" and other characters which form
part of the story-line, have been used. The second plaintiff Hearst
Entertainment Inc., which is a wholly owned subsidiary of plaintiff No. 2
recently produced an animated television series entitled "Phantom 2040. That
has been a success. The copyright of the Television series vests with Hearst
Entertainment Inc. This motion picture has been released in several parts of
the world including U.S.A., Australia, Hong Kong, Malaysia, New Zealand,
Phillipines, Singapore, Taiwan, Thailand; South Africa, Finland, Sweden,
Colombia, Brazil, Dominican Republic, Mexico, Panama, Trinidad, and Australia.
Furthermore, the film is due to be released in other parts of the world
including the United Kingdom, Germany, Argentina, Chile, Peru, Uruguay, Turkey
and Croatia by the end of 1996 or beginning of the year 1997.

7\. The plaintiffs would state that the comic books featuring "The Phantom"
have been available in India since the past many decades. The Phantom is also
available in Hindi under the name "Betaal" which is nothing but Hindi
equivalent of "The Phantom". Some of the Indian Publications in which comic
strips of "The Phantom" have been appearing for a long time in India, the
details are given as under :-

\------------------------------------------------------------------

    
    
    Publication                                         Year 
    ------------------------------------------------------------------ 
     Malayala Manorama (Kerala)                          1963 
     Bombay Samachar (Bombay)                                            
     at least since 1976 
     The Hitavada (Nagpur)                                            
     at least since 1979 
     Naya Bharat (Nagpur, Bhopal, Raipur, 
     Bilaspur Jabalpur, Indore, Gwalior)                  1959 
     Ananda Bazar Patrika (Calcutta)                      1958 
     Prajavani (Bombay)                                   1972 
     Sudha (Bangalore)                                    1979 
     ------------------------------------------------------------------ 
     
      
     
     
    
    

All these publications have been made under the licenses from the plaintiffs.
The Phantom has become exclusively associated with the plaintiffs and only
with the plaintiffs. It is asserted by the plaintiffs that "each comic strip
published by the plaintiff or with the authority or license of the plaintiff
the world over has a clear notice informing members of the public that the
copyright vests in plaintiff No. 1 and that the worldwide rights are
reserved." The plaintiffs referred to the Screen Channel dated 12-1-1996 from
which the plaintiffs had come to know that the first defendant had adopted the
plaintiff's character and the concept being fully aware of the copyright laws.
The first defendant has gone on record with the statement "Copyright in our
country, means the right to copy, and to copy freely". The first defendant has
also gone on record saying that "The Court case will only fetch me tremendous
publicity and it would not harm him too much". By letter dated 18-4-1996 the
plaintiffs issued a letter to the first defendant to "immediately cease and
desist from any development, production, or other use of "The Phantom" or any
of the characters of other material thereof. A reminder was sent on 30-4-1996.
By letter dated 18-5-1996 the first defendant admitted that he was producing a
serial entitled 'Betaal' but he denied the claim of the plaintiffs. The first
defendant stated in the reply that entire story, concept, character and the
ideas of the serial 'Betaal' are mine and they are not based on any other
story or on the comic strip 'The Phantom'. By letter dated 11-6-1996 the
plaintiffs requested a copy of the story of the television serial by the first
defendant. On 27-6-1996 the first defendant enclosed a copy of the script and
the script was in Hindi language. In the edition of Sunday Review dated
30-6-1996 the Times of India published an article entitled "The Phantom of the
soap opera". In the narrative of the news article, some of the similarities of
the between the television serial of the first defendant and the Phantom comic
strips of the plaintiffs were discussed. In the news article the first
defendant had stated :-

"It was inspired by the Phantom, I admit. When I first read those comics I
used to wonder who no one was making a film about them because they had all
the elements of a good film - love, action, adventure and an exotic
atmosphere. But now that I am making it I've created my own story and my own
themes."

On 2-7-1996 the plaintiffs again requested the first defendant not to exploit
the Phantom of the plaintiffs. The plaintiffs received a letter dated
6-8-1996. Again by letter dated 8-8-1996 the plaintiffs warned the first
defendant that they would not permit the violation of the rights by the first
defendant. The plaintiffs received a letter dated 8-10-1996 from the first
defendant. On 18-10-1996 wrote to the first defendant that the first defendant
was attempting to infringe their rights. The first defendant sent a copy of
the pilot episode of 'Betaal'. Viewing of the pilot episode of the 'Betaal'
would prove the case of the plaintiffs. According to the plaintiffs, the
characters, locations, persons, titles and logos are being used by the first
defendant, the making and telecast of the serial 'Betaal' of the first
defendant through the second defendant would amount to gross infringement of
the plaintiff's rights.

8\. The first defendant filed the written statement repudiating the claim of
the plaintiffs. Apart from raising the point relating to the competency of the
plaintiffs to file the suit and proper representation of the plaintiffs in the
suit, the first defendant had stated the name Vetal/Betaal is a well known
mythological name in India which has been in existence for more than 900 years
and the plaintiffs have no exclusive right to use the said name. The name
Phantom is not the original idea of the plaintiffs. The first defendant has
stated :-

"In fact, to the own showing of the plaintiffs, the author Mr. Lee Falk was
inspired by a story published in the New York Journal by the name "Yellow Kid"
and it is from here Mr. Lee Falk adopted the idea. Moreover, the mask dress of
the character of Phantom was also an inspiration from a ballet which Mr. Lee
Falk saw during those days. Even the word Phantom originated as a purely
descriptive expression meaning "ghost" around which the story revolved.
Needless to mention that even today both children and adults are fascinated by
Ghost stories which invariably are surrounded in mystery and magic. For this
reason no exclusive right subsists in this regard with the plaintiffs and the
present suit is not maintainable. It would not be out of place to mention that
the story of the answering defendant also revolves around a ghost, magic and
fantasy and as under law an idea not being copyrightable, the answering
defendant is well within its rights to adopt the said idea and develop the
same in his own original expression."

In the preliminary submissions, the first defendant had stated :-

"A. that Vetal/Betaal is a Sanskrit Classic and is available in five versions.

B. The earliest version of Vetal/Betaal is preserved in Sanskrit 'Bharat Katha
Manjari' written by Semendra, who belonged the earlier part of 11th century
AD.

C. The second version of Vetal/Betaal is preserved in Katha Sarit Sagar
written by Somdev, who belonged the later part of 11th century AD.

D. The other three remaining versions of Vetal/Betaal belong to the earlier
part of 15th century i.e. 1487 AD and 16 & 17th century adapted, translated or
re-written by Shivdas, Vallabhdas & Jambhaldutt respectively.

E. It was the period when classical Sanskrit was giving way to more popular
spoken languages like Apabhaavbrahansha and Paisachi. In this period of
transition - Sanskrit classic Vetal/Betaal passed into Folklore.

F. The last composer of Vetal/Betaal was written by a legendary Jambhaldutt,
who belonged to the later part of 16th century and earlier part 17th century.

G. Another reference of Vetal/Betaal is available in famous Prachin Bharatiya
Sanskriti Kosh from the Vedic Period to 12th century. This compilation was
done by Dr. Hardev Bahari of Allahabad University and this reference book of
utmost authenticity and has been published by Vidya Prakashan Mandir, New
Delhi-110002. The reference of Vetal/Betaal appears in this Classic at page
368 where it is clearly mentioned that Vetal/Betaal is a kind ghost and its
stories are available in the Indian Historical Books in Vedas and Puranas. It
is also further mentioned that there are two kinds of Vetal/Betaal one is
Rudra Vetal and another is Agni Vetal. In this very para, Vetal/Betaal is
connected with Kind Vikramaditya. The next word in this very
collection/Dictionary says that the word Vetal Pachisi which means a
collection of folklore, and also gives reference of 25 questions to be asked
by King Vikramaditya to Vetal and also reference to the famous Jambhaldutt.

H. Another reference appears in Pauranik Kosh authored by Rama Prased Sharma.
The reference of word Vetal/Betaal appears on page 477 and the definition of
Vetal/Betaal as given in Pauranik Kosh is a person who belongs to a Ghost race
and who used to live in the cremation ground. (This has been the inspiration
of the answering defendant proposed tele serial). The very next word is Vetal
Janani and the definition is mother of Kumar Karthikeya. Thus it is apparent
that Kumar Karthikeya being brother of Lord Ganesh and Devi Parvathi, wise of
Lord Shiva being the mother of Vetal/Betaal.

I. Another Dictionary by the title Bhasha Shabdha Kosh by Dr. Ram Shankar
Shukla Rashal, the first edition of this Dictionary was published in the year
1936, and at page 1159, it says that Vetal/Betaal means a person from the
Ghost race and door keeper of Lord Shiva. Similarly at page 1165 the word
Vetal/ Betaal appears again showing the meaning guard; gate-keeper of Lord
Shiva and a person from the Ghost race.

J. Similarly another Hindi dictionary published by Diamond Publications at
page 784 shows that the word Vetal/Betaal meaning gatekeeper of Lord Shiva and
a person from the Ghost race.

K. Similarly another series of books have been brought out by Greenland
Publications, 4425 Nai Sarak, Delhi-110006 that the name Vikram Aur Vetal and
the said book was and is in circulation from time immemorial.

L. A Tele-Serial is directed by the famous Ramanand Sagar was telecasted the
same in 26 Episodes on Doordarshan over three years back under the title
Vikaram Aur Betaal.

M. Another Book Betaal Paichisi has been published and on the second page, it
is clearly mentioned that Betaal Paichisi are stories of folklore and are
prevalent since ancient times. It further goes on to mention the said stories
were earlier in Sanskrit at the time King Mohd Shah of Delhi there were
various poets and literary figures, who were living on those days of poet with
the name Sorath read the story to the kind in such a beautiful manner with
king being impressed, ordered the story to be translated in Braj Bhasa.
Gradually the story became so famous and Lord Wellesley, the then Governor
General of India ordered for translation of the story into common Hindi
language. At that time in the year 1803, Hindi Poet Shri Lalu Lalji translated
the Betaal/Vetal in Hindi.

N. Similarly Sudhal Mishra also translated in Hindi and Mir Amman of Merrut
translated the same in Urdu language. They translated various Folklore in the
commonly spoken languages those Folklore contains Vikram Aur Vetal, Kissa Tota
Maina, Hatim Tai, Taramati Ki Kahani and many others which are legendary
characters.

These translations were made in the year 1803 and were maintained in the Fort
Williams College, Calcutta under the directions of Lord Wellesley.

O. The Book Vetal Pancavimsati written & edited by Mr. NA Gore, MA, Dip Lib,
University of Poona was written in 1947 and published in 1952 that the name
Vetal Pancavimsati of Jambhaldutt. The introduction of this clearly shows that
Jambhaldutt has written 25 tales of Vetal titled Vetal Pancavimsati which are
available in 5 Sanskrit versions. The said versions have already been
explained above by the defendants and the said book relates back to some where
the 15th/ 16th century.

P. Thus it is apparent that Vetal/Betaal is a legendary name and title of
Indian history and civilization and since it originates from the Vedic period
and goes into mythological period and then becomes the part of Indian Folklore
& folk story re-written in simple Hindi and Urdu in the year 1803 and was kept
in Fort Williams College, Calcutta for the benefit of English Officers, who
wanted to come in contact with the Indian society and its mythology."

Therefore, according to the first defendant he has not committed infringement
of the copyright of the plaintiffs nor is he guilty of passing off. The
registered mark 2040 Phantom is totally different from the character portrayed
by the first defendant. The first defendant is not aware any production of
television serial entitled "Phantom 2040". The first defendant is aware that
M/s. Paramount Pictures have released a motion picture under the name Phantom
and a view of the said motion picture and the pilot episode of the first
defendant would show that the claim of the plaintiffs is totally unfounded.
The first defendant denies that Baitaal is equivalent to Phantom in Hindi. It
is stated by the first defendant that use of the title Vetal by the plaintiffs
and/or licensees assuming to be true but without admitting it, they have been
de minimis and of no legal consequences. About the press publication it is
stated by the first defendant.

"In reply to para 10 of the plaint, it is submitted by the defendants that the
said article so published by the Magazine Screen Journal is a distorted one.
Subsequently on 20th December 1996, another article was published by the same
magazine on page 17 stating that Betaal is not Phantom. Shri Sunil Agnihotri
comes clean on issue of copyright. The defendants, herein have clearly stated
that he had met. The Hearst Corpn and was able to convince them that this
project was entirely different from the Phantom Comic Strips. It is further
stated by Shri Agnihotri in the interview "Sunil blames a section of the press
for the misunderstanding. Some irresponsible journalists described; as one of
the most expensively short serials being made and referred to it as Phantom
when the points out it was actually titled Betaal. "Just because my serial is
set in the jungles and also has a horse, dog and bird, does not mean I am
making Phantom. He further goes on saying that it is his character and created
by him. Shri Agnihotri, the defendant No. 1 in regard to the lead character in
his proposed serial wearing a masked body suit clearly explains that most
comic characters including Superman & Batman also appears in similar body
suits. The defendants further submit that the news article so published in the
Screen Channel of January, 1996 is a distorted one."

I do not want to deal further with the averments in the written statement
because the allegations referred to by me above would suffice for the disposal
of the interlocutory application.

9\. In the replication, the plaintiffs would deny what is stated by the first
defendant in paragraph 8 of the written statement about Mr. Lee Falk. In
paragraph 8 of the replication, it is stated thus :-

"The averments made in paragraph 8 are wholly irrelevant and are denied. It is
denied that the story line, the dress and/or the name "The Phantom" is not
original. It is denied that Mr. Lee Falk was inspired by any story published
in the New York Journal by the name "Yellow Kid" and that Mr. Falk adopted the
idea from any such story. It is denied that the mask dress was inspired from a
ballet. It is further denied that "The Phantom" is a purely descriptive
expression. The plaintiffs have no objection if the first defendant uses
"Ghost" as the title of its television serial, or the name of its character.
It is denied that the television serial of the first defendant is an original
expression of the first defendant. The first defendant has given statements to
the effect that a project based on the plaintiff's character "The Phantom" has
been his dream project and that the has "borrowed" the plaintiff's "character
and concept". The first defendant has stated that he has been impressed by the
character even as a young child and has gone on record stating that his serial
is based on the "Ghost Who Walks". This itself is a clear admission that the
first defendant has copied. In fact, the first defendant has been so brazen
about copying that he has actually gone to the press stating that "copyright
in our country means the right to copy .... And to copy freely", which is
exactly what the first defendant has done. The first defendant's own documents
show that the main character in the first defendant's serial "wears a body-
suit and mask just like the Phantom of the picture books."

It is asserted in the replication that it is not only the idea but the manner
of expression of the idea, as indeed the total concept and feel of the
plaintiff's comic books which has been copied by the first defendant. The
plaintiffs have also filed an affidavit by Mr. Gulshan Rai, who is stated to
be the Joint Managing Director of M/s. Diamond Comics P. Ltd. He has stated in
the affidavit that M/s. Diamond Comics has been publishing comic books of the
Phantom for more than 10 years. According to the affidavit of the deponent the
title 'Betaal' is very closely associated with the plaintiffs and if
television serial entitled 'Betaal' is telecasted in India, the viewing public
is likely to think that the serial is based on Phantom. The affidavit is dated
25-3-1997. The deponent of the affidavit has given the approximate sales of
books since 1990 to 1996 in the following terms :-

> \---------------------------------------------------------------
    
    
            Year                            Quantity Sold (Approximate)
         ---------------------------------------------------------------
            1990                                     3,00,000 
            1991                                     3,20,000 
            1992                                     3,28,000 
            1993                                     3,95,000 
            1994                                     4,05,000 
            1995                                     4,15,000 
            1996                                     4,39,000 
          --------------------------------------------------------------- 
      
     
    
    

10\. On 26-3-1997 the learned senior Counsel for the plaintiffs Mr. Arun
Jaitley submitted that the following similarities and differences could be
seen which are relevant for deciding the copyright infringements :-

"1. The main character in the defendant's serial is called Betaal which is the
Hindi equivalent of Phantom. Betaal wears a masked body suit identical to that
of The Phantom. The purple body hose, with striped blue and black underpants,
high boots, eye mask, two guns on either side of the hip, striped cuffs, have
been copied entirely. Subsequently, the defendant changed the color from
purple to black (exactly as in black and white comics of the plaintiff).
Betaal wears a swastika symbol on his belt buckle instead of the skull on the
belt buckle of The Phantom. (The peace sign of The Phantom Worn on his ling
resembles the swastika).

2\. Betaal lived in a full cave identical to that of The Phantom. The skull
cave has now been substituted by a bat cave after objections were raised by
the plaintiffs and the defendant sought legal opinion.

3\. Betaal rides a white horse and has a German Shepherd dog, a bird (vulture/
eagle), and a chimpanzee, exactly as in the plaintiff's comics, where the
Phantom rides a white horse (Hero/Toofan), has a wolf (Devi/Shera) (which
looks exactly like a German Shepherd dog), a Falcon (Flaka), and a chimpanzee
(Chee Chee).

4\. The settings in both are of a jungle, the people of the jungle, are
tribunals and the tribals are oppressed by villains (poachers) and the main
character is their saviour. The Jungle is called Dongralu in the defendant's
serial instead of Denkali in plaintiff's comics. Whereas the jungle settings
in the defendant's episode are based on an Indian jungle, the snippets used in
the pilot episode by the defendant are those of an African Jungle. The
plaintiff's comics are based on a fictions jungle island in Africa. The
defendant's serial also has drawls as part of the Jungle tribes, which portray
the pygmies in the plaintiff's comics.

5\. The plaintiffs comics has a character "Moz Baba" who has seen The Phantom
over generations and knows all about them. He is the character who knows all
the old jungle saying. In the defendant's serial "Shangrila Baba" is a 108
year old man who saw The Phantom a hundred years ago when he was only 8 years
old and it is he who has all the old jungle tales, including those Betaal
having existed over a hundred years ago.

6\. In the plaintiff's comics The Phantom has a love affair with a lady from
the civilised world (Diana). In the defendant's serial also there is a lady
who comes to the jungles from the civilised world and falls in love with
Betaal. This character was initially christened "Diana", but the name was
later changed to "Sonu" (This is apparent from the Hindi script submitted by
the defendant to the plaintiffs, wherein in one place the character "Sonu" has
been described as "Diana".

7\. The phrase "The Phantom never dies" was popularised by the plaintiffs.
According to the plaintiffs story-line. The Phantom continues from generation
to generation thereby giving an impression that The Phantom never dies. This
concept has been copied by the defendant. In the defendant's episode his
character Betaal also never died and is resurrected after 100 years and will
be resurrected every 100 years."

8\. The Phantom is known as "The Ghost who Walks" ("Chalta Phirta Pret" in
Hindi). In the defendant's serial Betaal is also a ghost who walks.

9\. Just as the first Phantom makes a pledge to a skull to fight civil forces,
Betaal also takes an oath to fight civil by breaking skull.

10\. The plaintiff's comics have the figure of The Phantom carved out on stone
and also has a mountain called "Phantom Head". In the defendant's serial,
Shangrila Baba is a sculptor who carves out Betaal in stone.

11\. In the defendants serial Betaal has sworn to returned fight evil and
poachers, exactly as in the plaintiff's comics, wherein the first Phantom
swore to fight "piracy, cruelty and injustice". Most stories in the
plaintiff's comic books deal with The Phantom fighting poachers.

12\. The defendant's serial also has a giant (Adimanav), exactly as in a few
comics of the plaintiff.

13\. The defendant's serial has a forest officer and a forest patrol exactly
as in the plaintiff's comics."

11\. The learned senior Counsel also referred to what is stated by the first
defendant in the written statement in the following terms :-

"the entire story, concept, characters and idea of the said serial Betaal are
mine and are not based on any other story or the comic strips."

"the answering defendant was inspired by the idea of Phantom but the same has
been differently and innovatively portrayed by the answering defendant in his
proposed television serial."

12\. The learned senior Counsel for the plaintiffs on 27-3-1997 referred to
the various authorities on the point elaborating his arguments that the first
defendant has infringed the copyright of the plaintiffs in the artistic and
literary work and has been trying to pass off by this television serial, the
main work of the plaintiffs. The Supreme Court in R. G. Anand v. Delux Films ,
laid down the following principles which have to be borne in mind while
determining the question of the infringement of the copyright :-

"1. There can be no copyright in an idea, subject-matter, themes, plots or
historical or legendary facts and violation of the copyright in such cases is
confined to the form, manner and arrangement and expression of the idea by the
author of the copyrighted work.

2\. Where the same idea is being developed in a different manner, it is
manifest that the source being common, similarities are bound to occur. In
such a case the courts should determine whether or not the similarities are on
fundamental or substantial aspects of the mode of expression adopted in the
copyrighted work. If the defendant's work is nothing but a literal imitation
of the copyrighted work with some variations here and there it would amount to
violation of the copyright. In other words, in order to be actionable the copy
must be a substantial an material one which at once leads to the conclusion
that the defendant is guilty of an act of piracy.

3\. One of the surest and the safest test to determine whether or not there
has been a violation of copyright is to see if the reader, spectator or the
viewer after having read or seen both the works is clearly of the opinion and
gets an unmistakable impression that the subsequent work appears to be a copy
of the original.

4\. Where the theme is the same but is presented and treated differently so
that the subsequent work becomes a completely new work, no question of
violation of copyright arises.

5\. Where however apart from the similarities appearing in the two works there
are also material and broad dissimilarities which negative the intention to
copy the original and the coincidences appearing in the two works are clearly
incidental no infringement of the copyright comes into existence."

13\. The Supreme Court held that "the fundamental fact which has to be
determined where a charge of violation of the copyright is made by the
plaintiff against the defendant is to determine whether or not the defendant
not only adopted the idea of the copyrighted work but has also adopted the
manner, arrangement, situation to situation, scene to scene with minor changes
or super-additions or embellishment here and there." The Supreme Court
proceeded to say "if on a perusal of the copyrighted work the defendant's work
appears to be a transparent rephrasing or a copy of a substantial an material
part of the original, the charge of plagiarism must stand proved. Care however
must be taken to see whether the defendant has merely disguised piracy or has
actually reproduced the original in a different form, different tone,
different tenor so as to infuse a new life into the idea of the copyrighted
work adopted by him. In the latter case there is no violation of the
copyright".

14\. The Supreme Court noticed that the main theme of the play was
provincialism and the central idea of the 'film' was provincialism and evils
of parochialism. After referring to the facts and circumstances of the play
and the film and noticing the similarities, the Supreme Court dismissed the
appeal confirming the decision of the lower court. The Supreme Court
ultimately held :-

"Thus, applying the principles enunciated above and the various tests laid
down to determine whether in a particular case there has been a violation of
the copyright we are of the opinion that the film produced by the defendants
cannot be said to be a substantial or material copy of the play written by the
plaintiff. We also find that the treatment of the film and the manner of its
presentation on the screen is quite different from the one written by the
plaintiff at the stage. We are also satisfied that after seeing the play and
the film no prudent person can get an impression that the film appears to be a
copy of the original play nor is there anything to show that the film is a
substantial and material copy of the play. At the most the central idea of the
play, namely, provincialism is undoubtedly the subject matter of the film
along with other ideas also but it is well settled that a mere idea cannot be
the subject-matter of copyright. Thus, the present case does not fulfill the
conditions laid down for holding that the defendants have made a colorable
imitation of the play.

On a close and careful comparison of the play and the picture but for the
central idea (provincialism which is not protected by copyright), from scene
to scene, situation to situation, in climax to anti-climax, pathos, bathos, in
texture and treatment and purport and presentation, the picture is materially
different from the play. As already indicated above, applying the various
tests outlined above we are unable to hold that the defendants have committed
an act of piracy in violating the copyright of the play."

15\. The learned senior Counsel for the plaintiffs relied on the judgment this
Court in Raja Pocket Books v. Radha Pocket Books (1997 PTC 84). The facts
briefly stated are :

The plaintiff Raja Pocket Books is engaged in the business of publishing and
distribution of paper back novels, books and comics. One of the comic book is
a series titled 'Nagraj', which is popularly among the younger generation. The
character depicted in the plaintiff's comic book. Nagraj is attired in a green
colour body stocking giving the impression of serpentine skin and red trunk is
with a belt, which appears to be a snake. The character of 'Nagraj' was
designed for and on behalf of the plaintiffs by late Sh. Jagdish Pankaj in
June 1985. Later, a professional artist continued to create the series
revolving around the exploits of the character Nagraj. Therefore, the
plaintiff owned the copyright in the comic book series tipped 'Nagraj' as well
as in the fictitious character of 'Nagraj', its get up and appearance. The
defendant used the same get up, published paper pack novel and comics naming
the character 'Nagesh'. The plaintiff alleged that the comic series proposed
and published by the defendant under the title 'Nagesh' would amount to
outright infringement of the plaintiff's copyright in the series 'Nagraj'.

16\. The learned Judge held :-

"The rules of comparison to be adopted in judging the resemblance would be
those as are stated in the decision of the Supreme Court in R. G. Anand's case
(supra), namely, an unmistakable impression that the subsequent work appears
to be, the copy of the original. Similarly about the theme of visual,
phonetical similarity and over all impression of the two works that the same
is likely to deceive such a man or cause confusion that he may make mistake in
the goods of defendant for that of the plaintiff Nagraj and Nagesh having same
meaning, namely, King snakes; Colour of comics is also green, gauntlets are
ripped in both cases, functionally, both are capable of doing same and similar
work, namely, sealing the walls and the roofs alike, hurling snakes, causing
the objects to melt and the snakes capable of returning back and merging in
the body of the character. For the purpose of climbing, both use the same
material, namely, rope in he form of snake."

17\. The learned Judge held "The defendant has no right to use same
distinguishing or essential features or convey the same idea in any of its
work." The learned Judge allowed the application for injunction.

18\. I may state at the stage that the facts in the instant case are
different. I viewed the film of the plaintiffs and also the pilot episode of
the first defendant. Except an idea from Mr. Lee Falk being the same the two
films are distinct and different and I am not able to find any similarities.
The learned Senior Counsel for the plaintiffs submitted that the jungle seen,
poachers, and old man Baba, and chimpanzee are all characters copied from the
plaintiff's work. The learned Counsel Mr. Ajay Sahni for the first defendant
submitted that the plaintiffs themselves through the book published in Hindi
Phantom, which is at page 246, of the type set filed by the plaintiffs giving
details about the work had stated thus (a translation in English as given
below) :-

"In about 150 countries of the world Phantom has been read over, by old and
young and are very popular. The originator of this powerful character Phantom
is Lee Falk, who has also created the story of Mandrake. The stories of
Phantom and his works are quite adventurous and interesting.

Lee Falk while studying in the American Universities though of earning some
extra pocket money. Then there he came across some published pictures in the
New York Journal entitled Yellow Kid and was quite inspired and started making
some caricature and wrote some stories. But he was not satisfied. As a matter
of coincidence, a neighbour of Lee Falk who was quite fond of trekking in the
jungles used to narrate those adventurous stories to the kids of the locality.

Lee Falk was impressed by his neighbours character in his stories added some
romance and lie to that character. Around that time Lee Saw a ballet with a
man wearing the body hose and the mask and Lee immediately made his comic
character wears the same mask and the body hose. Now Phantom was born. But
despite all efforts. Lee could not exploit his character and could not sell
the same. But Lee did not lose heart but continued his work and at last, lady
luck smiled on him.

One day when Lee had gone out, the son of the owner of King Features Syndicate
came to his room and came across these features. He liked them so much and
after Lee's return he had a long discussion on the features and the deal was
struck. Lee sold his features for a handsome amount to King Features Syndicate
and also got contracted with them. In the year 1937, a campaign was launched
and the features were printed and which were accepted by the public at large.
It went of well and so was the reputation of the comic. Through this digest,
the Diamond Comic is trying to sell translated comic in Hindi for the Indian
public."

Therefore, according to Mr. Sahni, the Phantom is an idea obtained by the
plaintiffs from another source and their assertion in the plaint that it was
invented by them is not correct and, therefore, the whole foundation of the
plaintiff's case crumbles down. Prima facie, I of the view that the plaintiffs
have not established that they have got copyright in artistic work 'Phantom'
or the literary work in the story line interplay, location and the incidents.

19\. The learned senior Counsel for the plaintiffs relied upon the judgment of
the Madras High Court in C. Cunniah v. Balraj & Co. , where the picture 'Bala
Mugugan' printed and published by the respondents in appeal was a colourable
imitation of the picture "Mayura Priya' of the plaintiffs in which the
plaintiffs own the copyright. The Madras High Court held that the work of the
respondents did not constitute independent work. The Division Bench of the
Madras High Court had given very cogent reasons in coming to the conclusions
and that case is easily distinguishable. The ratio laid down therein would not
apply to the facts of the case on hand.

20\. The learned senior Counsel for the plaintiff also relied upon the
judgment of the Madras High Court reported in K. R. Venugopala v. Sangu
Ganesan (1971 Cri LJ 1098), wherein the learned Single Judge of the Madras
High Court referred to observations of an English decision wherein it was said
:-

"There might be and there will be obvious differences deliberately introduced
to avoid a possible charge of infringement. If the court, on a comparison of
the appellant's picture with the infringing picture, comes to the conclusion
there the latter picture was consciously copied from the work of the former,
that will be sufficient to hold that the copyright is infringed."

There can be no exception to what is stated above but each case has to be
considered on its facts and circumstances.

21\. The learned senior Counsel for the plaintiffs stressed and tried to
derive support from the observation of Kakewich J. in Hanfsataengl v. W. H.
Smith ((1905) 1 Ch. 519), wherein the learned Judge observed "A copy is that
which comes so near to the original as to suggest that original to the mind of
every person seeing it." The learned senior Counsel emphasised that the
principle stated above has to be applied to the facts of this case and
according to him, the similarities would show a substantial part of the
plaintiff's work is reproduced by the first defendant. I am not able to accept
this submission.

22\. The learned senior Counsel for the plaintiffs then referred to a judgment
of the Division Bench of the Calcutta High Court in Mohendra Chundra Nath v.
Emperor , wherein the Calcutta High Court held :-

"In deciding whether there is an infringement of copyright in pictures, the
question is whether the offending pictures are copies of substantial portions
of the copyright pictures. The figures may have been reduced in the offending
pictures and sight modifications may have been introduced or the clothes and
colours may have been different but it is sufficient if the main figures have
an identical pose."

23\. The learned senior Counsel for the plaintiffs sought assistance from the
judgment of the Madras High Court in The Daily Calendar Supplying Bureau v.
The United Concerns , wherein the High Court held :

"What is essential is to see whether there is a reproduction of substantial
part of the picture. There might be and there will be obvious differences
deliberately introduced to avoid a possible charge of infringement. A bad copy
does not cease to be a copy. If on comparison the court comes to the
conclusion that the defendant's picture was consciously copied from the work
of the plaintiff, that would be sufficient to hold that copyright is
infringed. The Court held that the defendant's picture reproduced substantial
parts of the plaintiff's picture, its plan, its design, its arrangement of all
the important component parts, which help an artist to obtain a representation
of the idea of a deity."

24\. The learned senior Counsel for the plaintiffs relied upon the judgment of
the Bombay High Court in N. T. Raghunathan v. All India Reporter Ltd. (AIR
1971 Bom. 48), the Court held that head notes prepared by the plaintiff was
copied by the defendant and the defendant not only had copied the idea but
also the comparison of the ideas and the form in which they were expressed in
the plaintiff's digest.

25\. The learned senior Counsel for the plaintiffs relied upon the judgment
reported in Harman Pictures v. Osborne ((1967) 2 All E.R. 324), which has been
considered by the Supreme Court in R. G. Anand's case and it is not necessary
to dilate any further on this case.

26\. Relating to fictional character, the learned senior Counsel for the
plaintiff relied upon the judgment of the House of Lords in King Features
Syndicate v. Kleeman ((1941) 2 All ER 403), the House of Lords laid down the
test in the following terms :-

"The test to be applied is purely visual, the sketch and brooch being compared
oculist subject a fidelibus. The appellant's copyright is in the actual sketch
and not in the idea. There would be no infringement if the respondent had
independently produced a similar figure without copying the sketch directly or
indirectly. The question is whether there was copying of the actual sketch.
Here the only evident of actual copying direct or indirect is similarity in
regard to the figure, which is a substantial part of the sketch, between the
copyright work and the alleged infringement. I think, however, that where
there is substantial similarity, such similarity is prima facie evidence of
copying, which the party charged may refute by evidence that, notwithstanding
the similarity, there was no copying, but independent, creation."

27\. The learned senior Counsel for the plaintiffs referred to Detective
Comics Inc. v. Buns Publications (111 F. 2d 432), (Circuit Court in U.S.A.)
wherein the character involving 'Superman' was adopted by the defendant in its
periodicals christened as Wonderman. The Court found that the defendant had
used more than the general types and ideas and had appropriated the pictorial
and literary details embodied in the plaintiff's copyright.

28\. The learned senior Counsel for the plaintiffs relied upon the following
decisions for the same proposition :-

1\. Conan Properties v. Conans Pizza Inc., 752 F 2d 145 (1985).

2\. Shaw Bros (Hong King) Ltd. v. Golden Harvest (H.K.) Ltd., 1972 RPC 559.

3\. Children's Television Workshop Inc. v. Woolworth (NSW) Ltd., 1981 RPC 187.

4\. Mirage Studios v. Counter-Feat Clothing Co. Ltd., 1991 FSR 145.

29\. I have gone through those cases and the Courts in each of those cases ad
referred to the facts and had come to the conclusion after analysing the
facts. Therefore, those cases do not really advance the case of the
plaintiffs.

30\. Regarding the protection of the title, the learned senior Counsel for the
plaintiffs submitted that like a trade mark a title of a work is intangible
and incorporeal copyright and is entitled to be protected. The learned senior
Counsel relied upon a passage from the judgment of the Circuit Bench from the
United States reported in Rogers v. Grimaldi (875 F. 2d 994). The learned
senior Counsel also relied upon the judgment of this court in Globe Super
Parts v. Blue Super Flame Industries (1986 PTC 235), and B.K. Engineering v.
U.B.H.I. Enterprises .

31\. Relating to vernacular equivalents, the learned senior Counsel relied
upon the judgment of the Supreme Court in National Sewing Thread v. James
Chadwick , relating to the trade marks "Eagle" used by the respondents before
the Supreme Court and 'Eagle Brand' by the appellant for the same product
sewing thread was used. The respondents James Chadwick started a passing off
action and that failed. In 1942 the appellants applied for registration before
the Registrar of Trade Marks, Bombay for the registration of the Vulture Brand
under the Table Marks Act, 1940. The Registrar of Trade Marks came to the
conclusion "that the Appellants' mark so nearly resembled the mark of the
Respondents as to be likely to deceive or cause confusion. He further held
that to describe the mark of the Appellants as "Vulture Brand". When the
device was that of an eagle was misleading and liable to cause confusion."
That was reversed by the Single Judge of the Bombay High Court. There was an
appeal to the Division Bench at the instance of the respondents. That appeal
was allowed and the decision of the Division Bench was taken up to the Supreme
Court. After considering the get up and other factors, the Supreme Court held
:-

"So far as the present case is concerned the goods sold under the Respondents'
trade mark are, well-known and are commonly asked for 'as "Eagley" or "Eagle",
and the particular feature of the trade mark of the Respondents by which the
goods are identified and which is associated in the mind of the purchaser is
the representation of an Eagle appearing in the trade mark. If the trade mark
conveys the idea of an Eagle and if an unwary purchaser is likely to accept
the goods of the Appellants as answering the requisition for Eagle good', then
undoubtedly the Appellants' trade mark is one which would be likely to deceive
or cause confusion. It is clear to us that the bird in the Appellants' trade
mark is likely to be mistaken by an average man of ordinary intelligence as an
Eagle and if he asked for Eagle goods and he got goods bearing this trade mark
of the Appellants it is not likely that he would reject them by saying that
this cannot be an Eagle. Two years prior to the application for registration,
the Respondents (Appellants ?) described this particular bird an Eagle and
called their brand Eagle Brand. The same bird was later on described by them a
vulture and the explanation offered was that they so described owing to an
honest and 'bona fide' mistake. We have no hesitation in holding that the
Appellants' camouflaging an Eagle into a vulture by calling it such is likely
to cause confusion. Whatever else may be said about the bird in the
Appellants' trade mark it certainly does not represent a vulture or look like
a vulture of any form or shape. What has been named by the plaintiffs as a
vulture is really an eagle seated in a different posture ? That being so the
High Court was perfectly right in the view that Shah J. was in error in
interfering with the discretion possessed and exercised by the Registrar, and
that the Appellants had failed to discharge the onus that rested heavily on
them to prove that the trade mark which they wanted the Registrar to register
was not likely to deceive or cause confusion."

32\. The learned senior Counsel relied upon the judgment of the Madras High
Court reported in T. G. Balaji Chettiar v. Hindustan Lever , where it was held
that the mark Surian, the Tamil equivalent of 'Sun' was hand, to be
deceptively similar. The learned senior Counsel also relied upon the judgment
of this Court reported in Surya Roshni v. Electronic Sound (1996 IPLR 1).

33\. After the films were seen, the learned senior Counsel for the plaintiffs
made his submissions on 1-4-1997. The films were viewed on 27-3-1997. It was
submitted that the plaintiff's character and defendant No. 1's character in
the film the dramatical attributes are similar.

\------------------------------------------------------------------

    
    
     Plaintiff's Character                      Defendant's Character
    ------------------------------------------------------------------ 
     The character continues from           
    In the script it is mentioned generation to generation wearing       
    "Sonu is very much impressed by the same distinctive costume           
    the Super Hero. Not knowing its giving an impression that it is        
    a ghost gets infatuated towards the same person, hence the             
    him." - This itself is clearly phrases "The Phantom Never             
    indicative of the fact that the Dies" and "The Ghost Who Walks."       
    character will not show they                                        
    attributes of a ghost but                                        
    as he has risen from the grave                                        
    after a hundred years the                                        
    impression being                                        
    conveyed is that "it is the                                        
    ghost who walks" and "it never                                        
    dies". 
     The character has made his home in     
    The defendant has filed documents a cave.                                
    to show that literal meaning of                                        
    Betaal/Vetaal in Hindi is a man                                        
    who lives in a cave, exactly as                                        
    the plaintiffs character. 
     The character is only a human with     
    The character has no qualities of highly specialised skills. He is fast  
    a ghost. He is not impervious to in drawing his guns and moves with     
    bullets, he cannot walk through lightning speed. Needs a horse for     
    objects, he cannot fly, he cannot transportation and a wolf and a        
    even scale walls. He needs high falcon for protection and a            
    boots on his feet to walk, guns chimpanzee for delivering mail an      
    for protection, a horse for messages.                              
    transportation and a dog and                                        
    falcon for protection and a                                        
    chimpanzee. 
     The first Phantom was born when his    
    The defendant's character also father was killed by pirates and       
    "breaks a skull" and takes an he takes "oath' before a skull to      
    "oath". A ghost taking oath ? The avenge his to father's death and       
    defendant has attempted rely on i fight evil forces.                     
    the quote of Lord Krishna in                                        
    Shri Bhagwad Gita that whenever                                        
    there is evil on earth. I (Lord                                        
    Krishna) will take rebirth.                                        
    According to Shri Bhagwad Gita                                        
    also rebirth will be in the form                                        
    of a human and not a ghost. What                                        
    the defendant is therefore                                        
    attempting to state is that his                                        
    character (Betaal) is an avatar                                        
    of Lord Krishna in a human form. 
     The character signifies 21             
    The character was buried and has generations, each of which are         
    a tomb stone. He too is therefore buried and have a tomb stone. The      
    a Christian. A Christian relying character is therefore a Christian by  
    on the Gita and wearing of religion.                              
    swastik and taking oath before a                                        
    Shivling by breaking a Skull ? 
     The character signifies 21             
    The character also has a tomb generations with each of the past      
    stone. On the tomb stone is generations having a tomb in its       
    inscribed "died 1897" (in i memory.                                
    English). The defendant's                                        
    character was therefore alive a                                        
    hundred years ago, but has                                        
    become a ghost only now in 1997.                                        
    As people all over the world                                        
    (Including Europe) had heard of                                        
    and read about Betaal, these                                        
    stories were about a real man                                        
    and not a ghost. 
     One of the distinctive features of     
    As the tomb stone had an the character is that it comes from    
    inscription in English it the civilised world, is educated and   
    portrays that 100 years ago has a dual identity (The Phantom and   
    "Betaal" came from the civilised Mr. Walker). It is under these         
    world. Even 100 years ago Betaal circumstances that the character       
    lived in a cave - a civilised has made a cave his home in the        
    man was living in a cave ? A jungle.                                
    real man with the name "Betaal" ? 
     Being a character which is a normal    
    Despite being a ghost, he still human being, for continuity of future  
    has "Sonu/Diana" being infatuated generations it is important that the   
    with him and falling in love with character has a wife. It is here that  
    him, not knowing he is a ghost character "Diana" fits in.             
    despite, in the very first                                        
    episode itself, witnessing him                                        
    rise from the grave. 
     The character is essentially the 21st  The character rises from the 
    generation of a family which over the  
    grave after a 100 years and has years has built up a relationship and  
    a readymade loyal horse, dog, loyalty of a horse, dog, a             
    chimpanzee and a falcon. chimpanzee and a falcon. 
     ----------------------------------------------------------------------- 
    
     
     
    
    

It was submitted by the learned senior Counsel that from this it is clear that
the intention of the first defendant was to sail as close to the plaintiffs as
possible and give the viewers a clear impression that his character is indeed
"The Phantom". The learned senior Counsel for the plaintiffs also give details
about story line of the plaintiffs and the first defendant and the interplay
between major characters. Regarding copying of situations and incidents, the
following details are given :-

"main character lives in a natural cave of a distinctive shape (skull/bat) in
the jungle.

main character has a predecessor(s) who also lived in the same cave and had
the same attributes.

main character falls in love with a lady from who comes in search of main
character from civilised world.

main character takes oath to fight civil forces before a skull.

main character rides a horse - the horse is not a dumb animal but actively
participates with the main character in fighting evil forces. The horse also
appears in many incidents without its ride and has actually independently
saved the main character from trouble.

main character has a wold who is an extremely intelligent animal and who
participates and assists main character in many ways. He is an extremely
obedient servant to his master (the main character).

a chimpanzee assists in delivering messages and indeed provides substantial
assistance to the main and associated characters.

an intelligent carnivorous bird (falcon) which also assists main character in
many ways.

poachers shooting wild animals in Africa riding in Jeeps.

the forest giant knows of the main character (pg 45).

the main character carved in stone.

the old man of the jungle is aware of all the hidden secrets of the jungle.

I am not able to accept the arguments of the learned senior Counsel for the
plaintiffs about features mentioned above.

34\. The learned senior Counsel for the plaintiffs relied upon the opinion
expressed by the Authors in various text books wherein the learned Authors had
expressed the same opinion as in the cases referred to by me above.

35\. The learned Counsel for the first defendant Mr. Ajay Sahni submitted that
copyright law is not concerned with the reproduction of the ideas, but with
reproduction of the form in which ideas are expressed.

36\. It is not necessary to refer to the other details but in the light of the
principles of law laid down by the Supreme Court in (supra) it is not
necessary to indulge in any exercise in formulating any new principles for
being applied to the facts of this case. The learned Counsel Mr. Ajay Sahni
submitted that comic Tarzan had similar features and the use of vulture/eagle,
the forest officers and other things are quite common in all the comics and
the plaintiffs cannot claim any copyright. The learned Counsel also referred
to Bat woman, comic Robin and Comic Superman wherein also the similar things
are found.

37\. The learned senior Counsel for the plaintiffs on 4-4-1997 submitted a
note reiterating the submissions made already in a different from.

38\. On a consideration of the conspectus of the facts submitted before me, I
am very clear in my mind that the first defendant is not at all guilty of
infringing the copyright of the literary and artistic work of the plaintiffs
and he is not guilty of passing off.

39\. The learned senior Counsel for the plaintiffs relied upon the news item
published wherein the statement alleged to have been made by the first
defendant is published. According to the learned senior Counsel the first
defendant had clearly admitted that he had copied the work of the plaintiffs.
Relating to the character Diana in the script sent by the first defendant,
which is in Hindi, we can find the name Diana. Therefore, the first defendant
had clearly taken out the work of the plaintiffs and had copied the same.

40\. It is not the case of the plaintiffs that the first defendant is
publishing comics, using the name and the materials and the character used by
the plaintiffs. We are concerned with only the tele serial now attempted by
the first defendant. If a person uses materials from what may be called
exiting in the planet and uses them for a different purpose, though idea may
be the same as pointed out by the Supreme Court, there is no infringement or
passing off. The central idea in the work of the plaintiffs and the work of
the first defendant is not at all the same. What is contended by the
plaintiffs is the wearing of the mask by the main character and the other
activities of the main character in the work of the plaintiffs are used by the
first defendant in his work. Finally, there is no basis. The story projected
by the first defendant is entirely different and simply because there are
horses, dogs and chimpanzees and an old man called Baba with jungle background
one cannot say there is any infringement by the other. The learned Counsel for
the first defendant submitted that all characters in all comics are shown to
wear masks and that is done to maintain suspense. The plaintiffs have not
produced materials to show that they have been continuously using the mark
Vetal/Betaal which would entitle them relating to the passing off characters
and other features. On 25-3-1997 the plaintiffs filed type set of papers. Page
1 of the type set Hindi word "Betaal Parampara" is mentioned. That year is not
mentioned. Page 2 Indrajal Comics Betaal is mentioned. That is of the year
1984. At page 3 also I find the word Betaal. That is of the year 1983. At page
41 see the name Betaal. In page 5 Betaal is mentioned. The year is not shown.
In page 6 also Betaal is mentioned. In page 7 Betaal is mentioned. At pages 8,
and 10 Betaal is mentioned. From page 11 onwards different matter is referred
to. At page 15 a page of a particular Comic Journal is shown wherein,
according to the plaintiffs, the bust of the Phantom and the Denkali Jungle
are shown. From page 16, I am able to see a dog and horse. In page 17 also a
page of the comic is shown wherein the plaintiffs have indicated Moz Baba and
Diana from the civilised world. In page 18 also Moz Baba is indicated. In page
19 the marriage of ghost is shown. Page 20 a page from a Comic Journal where
the plaintiffs had indicated the Phantom without its costume. At page 21 the
plaintiffs had highlighted the first of Phantom wearing Swastika. Therefore, I
cannot say that the plaintiffs have established any copyright in Betaal. The
assertion in the plaint is "in fact the Hindi Comic strips of the plaintiffs
are also christened Betaal. But no foundation has been laid for establishing
the copyright. As pointed by the Supreme Court, the Courts have to consider
the whole impact of the work impugned on the viewers as against the work of
the plaintiffs. Therefore, larnof the view that the plaintiffs have not
established, aspirin facie, strong case for the grant of injunction. When it
is so, I need not go into the question of balance of convenience. Accordingly,
I.A. 20/97 is dismissed. There shall be no orders to costs.

S. No. 10/97 Post the matter for framing of issues on the 20th of August 1997.

41\. Application dismissed.

