

Delhi High Court

Commissioner Of Income-Tax, ... vs Bhai Sunder Dass & Sons P. Ltd. on 28 May,
1985

Equivalent citations: 1986 158 ITR 195 Delhi

Author: D Kapur

Bench: D Kapur, S Bhandare

JUDGMENT D.K. Kapur, J.

1\. The following question has been referred to us at the instance of the
Commissioner of Income-tax in relation to the assessment year 1969-70 :

"Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the payment of
Rs. 87,200 made by the assessed company to M/s. K. Laier A. G. Switzerland in
terms of the collaboration agreement constitutes revenue expenditure or
capital expenditure ?"

2\. The facts of the case show that the assessed which is a private limited
company paid a sum of Rs. 87,200 to its collaborator, a Swiss firm. The
agreement between the parties was in the form of a license contract. According
to the Income-tax Officer, the payment was of capital nature. The assessed
appealed to the Appellate Assistant Commissioner who was of the view that the
decision in Ciba's case [1968] 69 ITR 692, was distinguishable. On a further
appeal to the Tribunal, it was held that no sale of an asset was involved.
Some technical information and knowledge available to the Swiss firm was
permitted to be utilised by the assessed. Thus, the amount was treated as a
revenue expenditure and allowed as a deduction.

3\. It is contended by the learned counsel for the Department that the payment
was for the know-how and was in a lump sum form. Therefore, it was a capital
expenditure. Reference was made to a decision of the Allahabad High Court in
Ram Kumar Pharmaceutical Works v. CIT [1979] 119 ITR 33, where it was held
that the know-how had been acquired without any limit of time. It was not
limited to the period of payment of royalty.

4\. In the case of CIT v. Ciba of India Ltd. [1968] 69 ITR 692, the Supreme
Court held that no exclusive use of the patents and trade marks of the Swiss
company had been passed on to the assessed. It was held that the assessed was
a licensee for a limited period with a right to use the patents and trade
marks. It was also held that no asset was parted with by the Swiss company and
hence no assets or any advantage of enduring nature was obtained by the
assessed company. A most important part of the agreement was that on its
termination, the assessed would stop using the patents and trade marks except
in respect of the stocks-in-hand and would return to Ciba of Basle or such
other person as may be appointed, all the scientific data and material sent to
it. The court held that the rights emerging from the agreement were that the
license was for a period of five years liable to be terminated on certain
eventualities even before the expiry of that period. The object was to obtain
technical assistance, but the information was not to be parted with to any
third party and, hence, it was nothing more than a license.

5\. Turning now to the facts of the present case, before looking at any other
reported case, it is necessary to examine the terms of the agreement. The
contract related to certain types of motor concrete vibrators manufactured by
Laier, which were permitted to be manufactured by the assessed in India. A
lump sum price of 50,000 Swiss francs was to be paid to the Swiss party for
the "know-how" and drawings which would facilitate the manufacture in India. A
royalty of 3% was to be paid on the net sale price of the manufacture. The
contract was for a period of five years ; the assessed was not to give the
information to anybody else. There was, however, no agreement for the return
of any drawings, etc., to the Swiss party at the conclusion of the contract.

6\. So, the information parted with in favor of the assessed company would
exclusively belong to the assessed. The real problem is whether this does not
amount to an enduring benefit in favor of the assessed.

7\. It is now necessary to turn to a previous decision of this court in
Shriram Refrigeration Industries Ltd. v. CIT [1981] 127 ITR 746, in which the
technical assistance agreement was with Westinghouse of U.S.A. Under that
agreement, an exclusive license was granted in India which was not to be
transferred or assigned. There was also a term that all technical and
scientific information would continue to remain the legal property of
Westinghouse.

8\. In that case, the Tribunal had held that a sum of Rs. 2,39,084 spent by
the assessed was a capital expense, but the High Court held that it was a
revenue expense. The reason given by this court for this judgment was as
follows :

"The principle laid down by the Supreme Court in the above decision is that if
the agreement results in the absolute transfer of technical knowledge to the
assessed, the assessed could be said to have acquired an asset of enduring
advantage but where the payment is made only for obtaining access to
information which does not become its own, the payments can not be elevated to
the status of payment of a capital nature."

9\. The court on further examination held :

"The information remained that of Westinghouse and there was no sale
involved."

10\. A similar point came before the Madras High Court in M.R. Electronic
Components Ltd. v. ClT [1982] 136 ITR 305. In that case, it was held that the
payments under the agreement could be divided into two parts, one part being
capital in nature and the other revenue. The right to manufacture some fresh
items was considered as the acquisition of a right exploitable in future which
was capital.

11\. As already pointed our earlier in this judgment, the exact term which is
involved in the present case is the payment of the lump sum price. The term
relating to this is clause (6) which reads as follows :

"LAIER will make available to BHAI all necessary drawings and the
documentation for the manufacture of vibrators, convertors, generators,
furthermore for the corresponding jigs and fixtures. For the know-how and the
fore-mentioned drawings BHAI shall pay to LAIER a lump sum price of Swiss
francs 50,000 subject to Indian taxes payable immediately on receipt of the
necessary permit."

12\. What we have to see is whether the know-how or the drawings represent a
capital expenditure or a revenue expenditure. The other terms in the agreement
need not be set out here because they deal with various steps that the Swiss
party had to take for bringing about the manufacture of the goods such as
export of components at various times. The agreement also provides for the
training of specialists for bringing about the production. The only
restriction as far as the assessed is concerned is that the information
regarding the making of the high frequency vibrators is not to be passed on to
others. The real point is that there is nothing about the return of the know-
how to the Swiss party.

13\. Assume for instance that the contract is terminated immediately after
these drawings have been received. Then there is nothing said as regards the
utilisation of the information and the drawings, limiting the user by the
assessed for any length of time. The only restriction which would continue to
apply is the restriction on parting with the information to others. This makes
the present case a kind of borderline case regarding the expenditure. The
assessed gets the advantage of the drawings as well as the know-how regarding
the high frequency concrete vibrators in the sense that the Swiss party does
not lose that knowledge and does not deprive itself of the right to make the
machines. Can it be said that there was no sale ? On the other hand, as far as
the assessed is concerned, it is of an enduring nature because there is no
term to the effect that the information cannot be used even after the
agreement ends.

14\. In another judgment of the Madras High Court, Fenner Woodroffe & Co. Ltd.
v. CIT [1976] 102 ITR 665, it was held that the agreement was a sale of the
know-how. References were made to Lord Radcliffe's speech in Jeffrey v. Rolls-
Royce Ltd. [1962] 40 TC 433 ; [1965] 56 ITR 580 (HL) decided by the House of
Lords and to other English cases. It was held that "know-how" is an intangible
asset. Quoting from Lord Denning's speech in Musker v. English Electric Co.
Ltd. [1964] 41 TC 556, it was observed that "know-how" had two qualities. The
"know-how" could be sold to others and could also be used to produce an
enduring result by utilisation in manufacture.

15\. The problem of the present case is whether or not the information
supplied to the assessed is of an enduring nature enabling the manufacture of
high frequency motor concrete vibrators covered by the agreement.

16\. Mr. Ahuja, for the respondent, has urged us to accept the fact that the
present case does not lead to obtaining of any enduring benefit to the
assessed. For this purpose, he has urged us to construe the agreement only as
a license agreement similar to the one in Ciba's case and the case of Shriram
Refrigeration. He says that the payments to be made to the Swiss company were
divided into two parts, one a lump sum amount and the other a payment of
royalty. What did the assessed get under the agreement ? For this purpose, Mr.
Ahuja states that the information regarding the method of manufacture was
given as well as the sole manufacturing right in India. This is provided in
term No. 2 of the license agreement. At the same time, the assessed was
debarred from giving the mechanical and other principles for manufacture of
the high frequency vibrators to any other person. So, it was only a personal
right. The term of the agreement is limited by clause 9 to five years from the
date of commencement of production.

17\. We have to consider what is the effect of the contract after the period
of five years. Does the assessed company have the benefit of an enduring
nature after five years or does the right elapse. There are no terms in the
contract regarding this matter and that is why there is a difficulty in the
construction of the agreement.

18\. In ClT v. S.L.M. Maneklal Industries Ltd. [1977] 107 ITR 133, the Gujarat
High Court considered the effect of some collaboration agreements. Part of the
agreement was that workshop, drawings, manufacturing instructions and other
instructions for erecting factories for manufacturing machinery came to the
Indian company. The Income-tax Officer held that expenses attributable to the
obtaining of information was a capital expense. This was examined by the High
Court. The High Court held that when some information or know-how was obtained
as part of a larger contract, i.e., a collaboration agreement, it became very
necessary to critically examine the entire transaction. One of the points that
prevailed with the court was that after the termination of the agreement, the
assessed could not utilise the drawings and, therefore, the expenditure was
revenue in nature. The court actually followed the judgment in Ciba's case,
but referred to a large number of other cases relating to the same point.

19\. A very large number of cases have been cited before us. The agreements in
each case have been critically examined by the courts. It is difficult to
apply the facts of one case to the facts of another case. Every one of the
collaboration agreements and other agreements are full of complex questions
peculiar to the agreements in question. If we are to examine the ratio of
other cases and apply the same to the facts of the present case, we feel that
the result is not likely to be fruitful.

20\. The principles on which such agreements have to be examined are really
well settled. There can be an agreement by which the utilisation of know-how
is transferred ; there can be an agreement by which know-how is allowed to be
utilised in a restricted manner ; there can be an agreement in which know-how
has to be transmitted as part of a larger agreement of collaboration. There
may conceivably be other types of agreements in which a question can arise as
to whether the know-how has been acquired as a capital asset by the assessed.

21\. As pointed out earlier, this is a borderline case. The agreement, most
definitely, divides the payment to be received under the agreement into two
parts. One is a lump sum price to be paid when the drawings and information
regarding the mode of manufacture of the vibrators is obtained by the
assessed. The other payment is a royalty to be paid to the Swiss party on the
(sale of the) manufactured articles. At the same time, the assessed got the
sole right to manufacture the articles in India to the exclusion of other
parties. Also, the information was not to be transmitted to any third party,
nor was the method of manufacturing to be communicated to others. It,
therefore, appears to be a case where the assessed has the information and
know-how but he can only use it himself. He cannot give it to anybody else.
Nevertheless, the advantage of the know-how is received by the assessed and
can lead to a benefit of enduring nature to the assessed.

22\. How then does this case differ from the case of Shriram Refrigeration
[1981] 127 ITR 746 (Delhi). There also the information was obtained from
Westinghouse by the assessed. It had to be returned to the American company at
the end of the agreement. There is no such term in the present case. So, it
can be argued, and has been argued, by the learned counsel for the Revenue,
that this is a benefit of an enduring nature.

23\. It was held in the case of Shriram Refrigeration [1981] 127 ITR 746
(Delhi), that the utilisation of the information must be contrasted with the
purchase of the information. We would, therefore, prefer to follow that line
of reasoning and hold that notwithstanding the fact that there is no term for
the return of the drawings, this information can only be utilised by the
assessed for the manufacture of the vibrators in India under the license
agreement.

24\. It is a case in which an implied term must be supplied that when the
license comes to an end, then the assessed loses the right to manufacture the
vibrators. This inevitable result is achieved by reading clauses (2), (6) and
(9) of the agreement together. Under clause (2), Bhai, which is the name given
to the assessed, obtained the sole manufacturing rights from the Swiss party ;
under clause (9), the contract was for a period of five years. We have been
told during the arguments that the contract did not subsist for very long in
this case. In any event, it is an agreement limited to five years. Under
clause (6), the drawings and know-how are to be given to Bhai by Laier (the
Swiss party) against payment of 50,000 Swiss francs. We take it that this
know-how and drawings can only be used for the manufacture of Laier high
frequency motor concrete vibrators. If the right to manufacture comes to an
end, these plans cannot be used. At the same time, the plans are not to be
communicated to any other person and nor anybody was to be assisted in making
the vibrators. It is provided by clause (13).

25\. The sum and substance of the agreement is that it is a kind of
collaboration agreement. The sole manufacturing right was passed to the
assessed for five years. Obviously, you cannot manufacture a thing unless you
know how to make it. As a necessary part of the arrangement, the information
as to how to make the vibrators had to come to the assessed. We cannot imagine
a situation in which Bhai could make the machines without the information. It
would follow that the lump sum payment did not result in an advantage of an
enduring nature to the assessed but must be considered as part of the expense
for manufacturing the machines in India. The agreement could very well have
been that the Swiss party has agreed to help in the manufacture of vibrators
in India on payment of a particular amount. This expense cannot, therefore, be
treated as a capital expense, though it appears very much like a capital
expense.

26\. The distinction between the capital and revenue expense is sometimes
difficult to ascertain although the two things are distinct and yet they tend
to overlap at particular points. If an entrepreneur has to manufacture
anything, he must first get the necessary machinery and plant for making the
article. He must also get the information as to how that machinery is to be
utilised in the making of the goods that he wants to market. The expense on
the manufacturing machinery and plant is most definitely a capital
expenditure. The question as to whether the information obtained for running
that machinery is a capital expense or a revenue expense becomes a problematic
question. For instance, the manufacturer may buy the know-how from another
party or he may engage the services of an expert who knows how to do the
manufacture. If he gets expert managerial staff, the expense could be of
revenue in nature except to the extent utilised for setting up the machinery.
In the present case, the information is given by way of plans and drawings for
making the article. It could be considered to be capital, but as the
utilisation is limited to manufacturing the goods of the Swiss party for a
limited period, it has to be treated as a revenue expenditure in the light of
the judgment of the Supreme Court in Ciba's case [1968] 69 ITR 692. After a
careful examination of the question, which is indeed a difficult one, we think
that we should hold that the amount is a revenue expenditure.

27\. There is another way of looking at this problem. The Swiss party who is
manufacturing vibrators in Switzerland had to be induced to enter into the
agreement permitting the Indian party to make the goods normally manufactured
in Switzerland by the Swiss party. For such an agreement, the Swiss party
might prefer to get a lump sum to start with and a small payment periodically
or, it might prefer to get no "down" payment, but a larger share in the
profits. Normally, not knowing what the consequence might be later, a party
will prefer a larger "down" payment. That is the way in which most of these
agreements are worded. A substantial sum paid initially is followed by some
royalty. The point which requires emphasis is the fact that the foreign party
did not permit the information and know-how to be used by anyone else. It is,
therefore, a kind of license agreement and not a sale of the now-how. Viewed
from this angle, which is a different line of reasoning, it must be held that
the sum of 50,000. Swiss francs paid initially was really a method by which
the Swiss party got its consideration for giving the manufacturing right for
five years to the assessed. It was the payment for the license and not a
payment for the know-how. The know-how was communicated to the assessed-
company company as a part and parcel of the collaboration agreement. Without
the know-how, the agreement could not work. So, by this line of line of
reasoning also, it must be held that the amount is a revenue expenditure and
not a capital expenditure. The question referred to us is answered
accordingly. Due to the complexity of the case, the parties are left to bear
their own costs.

