

Delhi High Court

Ansul Industries vs Shiva Tobacco Company on 16 January, 2007

Author: S Khanna

Bench: S Khanna

JUDGMENT Sanjiv Khanna, J.

1\. The appellant, M/s Ansul Industries, and the respondent, M/s Shiva Tobacco
Company, both manufacture and sell chewing tobacco. Chewing tobacco
manufactured/sold by the appellant is marketed under the trade mark 'Udta
Panchhi' and the chewing tobacco manufactured/sold by the respondent is
marketed under the brand name 'Panchhi Chaap'.

2\. The respondent claims that they started using the brand name 'Panchhi
Chaap' in 1973 and is also the registered user of the said trade mark label
under the Trade and Merchandise Marks Act, 1958 (hereinafter referred to as
the Act) since in 1974. The appellant claims his lineage to the trade mark
'Udta Panchhi' through Mr. Krishan Bansal, father of Mr. Anand Bansal, sole
proprietor of the appellant. It is claimed that Mr. Krishan Bansal adopted the
trade mark 'Udta Panchhi' in March, 1982.

3\. Learned trial Court by the impugned order dated 30th July, 2005 has
allowed application of the respondent under Order XXXIX, Rules 1 and 2 of the
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (hereinafter referred to as the Code, for short)
and restrained the appellant from using the mark "Panchhi". While doing so,
learned trial Court has held that the respondent being a prior user and a
registered owner of the mark "Panchhi" is entitled to injunction against the
appellant notwithstanding the delay in approaching the Court and in filing the
suit for permanent injunction. The respondent filed the suit for permanent
injunction against the appellant in 1997.

4\. Number of contentions have been raised by the appellant and the
respondent. For proper appreciation, I have discussed these contentions under
different heads. (A) Whether the marks 'Udta Panchhi' and 'Panchhi Chaap'are
deceptively similar.

5\. In a world where consumer has bewildering choices and options to purchase
products, manufacturers and dealers have used marks to identify their products
and distinguish them from others. With passage of time manufacturers and
traders acquire goodwill associated with the marks. Common law protects
invasion into the proprietary rights of a trader/manufacturer who has acquired
goodwill in a mark. On invasion of the said proprietary right, the owner or
the proprietor of the mark has right to initiate passing off action against
the infringer. This action is based on deceit and the proprietor in order to
succeed has to prove actual passing off or that the use of the mark had
actually caused confusion or damage. He is also to prove and establish that
the mark is associated and identified with the goods of the said proprietor
and the infringer is using the said mark or a deceptively similar mark with
the object of inducing customers to buy goods that do not belong to the
proprietor.

6\. The above quasi proprietary right in common law was given statutory
recognition under the Act, On registration of a mark, the registered
proprietor is entitled to enforce his statutory right against the infringer
without having to establish and prove goodwill in the mark and its association
with the claimant. On registration of the mark certain statutory rights flow
from the statute. When a statutory right is challenged, the registered
proprietor is entitled to initiate action for infringement.

7\. In Anglo-Dutch, Colour & Varnish Works Pvt. Ltd. v. India Trading House
this Court after referring to decisions of the Supreme Court has down the
following tests for comparing two marks:

(i) The question whether the two marks are so similar as likely to cause
confusion or deceive is one of the first impression. It is for the Court to
decide this question.

(ii) The question has to be approached by applying the doctrine of fading
memory, i.e. form the point of view of a man of average intelligence having
imperfect recollection.

(iii) Whether the overall visual and phonetic similarity of the two marks is
likely to deceive such man or cause confusion that he may mistake the goods of
the defendant for those of the plaintiff.

(iv) The other questions are:

(i) Who are the persons who are likely to be deceived, and

(ii) What rules of comparison are to be adopted in judging whether such
resemblance exists.

8\. The question of infringement under Section 29 of the Act is decided
whether the mark of the defendant is likely to deceive or cause confusion', In
Amritdhara Pharmacy v. Satya Deo Gupta Supreme Court referring to Kerly on
Trade Marks, 8th Edn. Observed:

For deceptive resemblance two important questions are:

(1) who are the persons whom the resemblance must be likely to deceive or
confuse, and (2) what rules of comparison are to be adopted in judging whether
such resemblance exists. As to confusion, it is perhaps an appropriate
description of the state of mind of a customer who, on seeing a mark thinks
that it differs from the mark on goods which he has previously bought, but is
doubtful whether that impression is not due to imperfect recollection.

9\. Supreme Court also quoted Parker, J. in Pianotist Co. Application, Re, as
under-

You must take the two words. You must Judge of them, both by their look and by
their sound. You must consider the goods to which they are to be applied. You
must consider the nature and kind of customer who would be likely to buy those
goods. In fact, you must consider all the surrounding circumstances; and you
must further consider what is likely to happen if each of those trade marks is
used in a normal way as a trade mark for the goods of the respective owners of
the marks. If, considering all those circumstances, you come to the conclusion
that there will be a confusion, that is to say, not necessarily that one man
will be injured and the other will gain illcit benefit, but that there will be
a confusion in the mind of the public which will lead to confusion in the
goods - then you may refuse the registration, or rather you must refuse the
registration in that case.

10\. Case law on the subject was examined by the Supreme Court in Cadila
Health Care Ltd. v. Cadila Pharmaceuticals Ltd. . It was held that it was
necessary to apply both the visual and phonetic or sound tests. The question
whether the two marks were likely to cause confusion and deception in the mind
of the buyers was decided on the basis of first impression. It was observed:

With respect, we are unable to agree that the principle of phonetic similarity
has to be jettisoned when the manner in which the competing words are written
is different and the conclusion so arrived at is clearly contrary to the
binding precedent of this Court in Amritdhara case , where the phonetic
similarity was applied by judging the two competing marks. Similarly, in Durga
Dutt Sharma case , it was observed that:

In an action for infringement the plaintiff must, no doubt, make out that the
use of the defendants mark is likely to deceive, but where the similarity
between the plaintiffs and the defendants mark is so close either visually,
phonetically or otherwise and the Court reaches the conclusion that there is
an imitation, no further evidence is required to establish that the plaintiffs
rights are violated.

11\. Thus, it is well settled that when the question whether the mark causes
or is likely to cause deception or confusion arises before a Court, the
standard applied is not that of a vigilant consumer or a trader, but standard
of an unwary normal customer of the said product. The Court has to consider
and examine whether a consumer of the product is likely to be deceived or
confused after examining broad and dominant features of the two marks and
whether there is overall similarity that is likely to mislead a purchaser.
Both the marks have to be considered as a whole.

12\. Question of confusion cannot be decided by keeping the two marks by each
other and noting similarities and differences between the two marks. Right in
a trade mark is with reference to trade and commerce. Question of deception
and confusion has to be examined and dealt with from commercial point of view.
The law gives protection to the proprietor of the trade mark if there is
likelihood of deception or confusion. The impression created by looking at the
two marks and the significant feature and idea behind the two marks that would
be formed in the mind of the purchaser is the relevant criteria. Similarity
and affinity in sound is also an important criteria. Ocular comparison is not
decisive. Sound test is important as customers ask for the goods by name.

13\. Even when action for passing of under common law is initiated, the
essential features of both the marks are taken into consideration to examine
whether the alleged infringer is passing of his goods as that of the other and
causing injury to goodwill and business of the other.

14\. Chewing tobacco is used by illiterate and semi literate consumers. We
have to examine the question of deception or confusion or likelihood thereof,
from the eyes of the said consumers. The word "Panchhi" in the mark 'Udta
Panchhi' and 'Panchhi Chaap' enjoy prominence and is the focal point of the
two marks. Colour of the packing may be different but likelihood of deception
and confusions is likely to result due to phonetic similarity and the use of
the word "Panchhi" in both the marks. The shop keepers seeling chewing tobacco
in many cases will be illiterate or semi literate. Invariably customers ask
for product of this kind by its name "Panchhi". Some consumers are also likely
to believe that the two products are from the same source Picture of the
flying bird is another essential feature of the two marks, which is common to
both. Thus, there cannot be any doubt that deception or confusion is likely to
arise in view of the similarity in the trade mark 'Udta Panchhi' and Panchhi
Chaap'.

(B) Whether injunction should be denied on the ground of delay and laches.

15\. This was a core question on which parties had addressed arguments in
great depth and detail.

16\. A few prima facie facts may be noticed. Partnership firm Shiva Tobacco
Company of Mr. Shiv Prasad Aggarwal, Mr. Rattan Kumar Aggarwal, Mr. Mahender
Kumar Bansal and Mr. Rajender Mohan (minor) adopted the trade mark Panchhi
Chaap' and started marketing chewing tobacco under the said mark. They applied
for registration of the said mark, which was allowed on 13th July, 1977 with
effect from 6th July, 1974.

17\. Mr. Krishan Bansal, father of Mr. Anand Bansal, as per the appellant
started marketing chewing tobacco under the mark 'Udta Panchhi' on 12th March,
1982. At that time he was doing business as a sole proprietor of Bansal
Tobacco Store.

18\. The suit for injunction was filed by the respondent on 15th May, 1997. On
this ground it was submitted by the appellant that the suit was filed after
nearly 15 years from the date the predecessor in interest of the appellant,
i.e. father of Mr. Anand Bansal, adopted the trade mark 'Udta Panchhi for
selling chewing tobacco.

19\. However, the respondent had submitted that laches or delay was not a good
ground to deny injunction in a case of infringement. It was stated that in
case of a registered mark, question of delay and laches was not relevant as
the suit/injunction application is based upon a statutory right. Secondly,
delay by itself was not material unless there was acquiescence or consent.
Lastly, the appellant was guilty of deceitful and dishonest initial adoption
or fraud and, therefore, not withstanding allegation of acquiescence,
injunction must follow.

20\. The appellant, on the other hand, submitted that delay and laches was an
important factor, when an owner of trade mark allows and permits third parties
to market and sell their products under a similar trade mark. In these
circumstances principles of acquiescence apply. Reference was made to doctrine
of reverse confusion. It was pointed out that the sales of the appellant were
much more than the sales of the respondent.

21\. Whether delay or laches can non-suit, a proprietor of a trade mark or
dis-entitle him from claiming interim injunction or injunction, has been
subject matter of controversy and discussion in several decided cases. These
Judgments may now be noticed.

22\. This Court in the case of Fair Deal Corporation (P) Ltd. v. Vijay
Pharmaceuticals, 1985 (5) PTC 80 (Del), vacated the interim injunction granted
in favor of the plaintiff, after holding that by conduct the plaintiff had
allowed the defendant therein to believe that it could market its products
under the mark, which it was contended, offended the registered mark. A
similar approach has been adopted in Gillette Company and Others v. A.K.
Stationery and Ors. 2001 PTC (21) 513 (Del). In this case reference was made
to earlier decision of this Court in Shri Gopal Engineering and Chemical Works
v. P.O.M.X Laboratory AIR 1992 Delhi 302 and Peshawar Soap and Chemicals
Limited v. Godrej Soap Limited 2001 PTC (21) 1 (Del). However, while dealing
with these two cases, learned Judge noticed that in the case of Shri Gopal
Engineering (supra) there was unexplained delay coupled with concurrent use
and in the case of Peshawar Soap (supra) there was acquiescence and the rival
was allowed to build up his reputation. Acquiescence it was held gave legal
legitimacy to the non-exclusive user of the descriptive word, which if
contemporaneously challenged, would have entitled the first user to
injunction. Reference was made to Judgment of the Supreme Court in Wander
Limited and Another v. Antox India Private Limited, 1991 (11) PTC 1 (SC),
wherein it was held that object of interlocutory injunction was to preserve
status quo but at the same time the Court can on the basis of prima facie case
restrain the defendant from causing injury to the plaintiff. The Court while
doing so, had to weigh the need of the plaintiff and the defendant and
determine the balance of convenience. In other words, the Court had to
consider equities and prejudice which were likely to be caused by grating an
interim injunction order.

23\. In the case of Standard Electricals Limited v. Rocket Electricals and
Another, (2004) 28 PTC 26, another single Judge of this Court after examining
the principles governing grant of ad interim injunction, inter alia, held that
as both the parties had been using the mark "standard" for last 20 years and
there was no constructive or visual resemblance and goods of both the parties
were advertised and prima facie had carved out market for each product and had
not caused any confusion or deception in the trade, interim injunction should
not be granted. It was held that balance of convenience was not in favor of
the plaintiff therein. However, learned Judge also noticed at delay or laches
by itself alone was not a good ground to refuse interim injunction. It was
held that common law remedy for passing off action cannot be defeated by delay
or inaction itself. In the said case, the Court also found that a number of
other parties had been using the trade mark "standard" with suffix and pre-fix
in relation to electrical, allied or cognate goods but that had not caused any
confusion and deception in the minds of the consumers/traders and, therefore,
prima facie it was held that the marks were not similar and identical so as to
cause deception.

24\. In the case of Shri Gopal Engineering (supra), Jaspal Singh, J. invoked
the doctrine vigilantivus non-dorminentibus suppetit (If you want law to help,
you must keep awake) to deny interim relief of injunction. However, the Court
noticed decision of this Court in Hindustan Pencils Private Limited v. India
Stationery Products Co. , and held that in the said case the use of the mark
was fraudulent and on coming to know of infringement the plaintiff therein had
filed an application for cancellation of the registration of the copyright. It
was held that the defendant's adoption of the mark in Shri Gopal case was
honest and concurrent and there was nothing to show that the presence of the
defendant had caused any prejudice.

25\. In the case of Hindustan Pencils Private Limited and Ors. v. Universal
Trading Co. 2000 PTC (20) 561(Del) (DB), a Division Bench of this Court
noticed that both the parties had been using the same mark for nearly 20-26
years and it was held that the goods belonging to the two parties did not
belong to the same category and, therefore, there was no question of deception
or confusion. The registration of mark in favor of one party, did not apply to
the goods manufactured and sold by the other party. The Court also came to the
conclusion that there was honest concurrent user covered by Section 12(3) of
the Act. Another ground that persuaded the Court to dismiss the appeal was
that an application for registration of trade mark was moved by the defendant
therein, to which opposition was filed but the same was abandoned by the
plaintiff. The business of the defendant thereafter had expanded and prospered
and, therefore, he would have suffered serious prejudice and hardship in case
interim injunction was granted.

26\. In the case of Swarn Singh Trading v. Usha Industries and Anr. AIR 1986
Delhi 342 : 1986 (6) PTC 287 (Del) (DB), Division Bench of this Court held
that delay in matter of applying for injunction in some cases could be fatal.
However, while dealing with a statutory right, delay itself did not destroy
the right to apply for injunction. An exclusive right to use registered trade
mark cannot be reduced to a nullity. However, in a case of a similar mark as
opposed to the same mark, concurrent user coupled with delay could be a ground
to refuse injunction. Here again the Court carved out an exception and held
where common public could be deceived into purchasing goods belonging to the
registered proprietor, it was the duty of the Court to protect the registered
mark. The Court should not refuse injunction even if there was some delay when
the mark was the same as it would tantamount to permitting a fraud being
practiced the unwary customers.

27\. Reliance was also placed by the appellant on the decision of the
Karnataka High Court in the case of Rangoon Chemical Works Private Limited v.
Royal Medicals 1997 (17) PTC 625. In this case the learned Judge noticed that
there was inordinate delay of at least 20 years in filing the suit, though the
products of the defendant therein had been in the market for nearly three
decades and, therefore, balance of convenience was not in favor of granting
injunction, as the party seeking injunction had remained quiet and allowed the
other side to expand and develop its business. Asking the defendant after
three decades of hard work to change and adopt a different mark would have
caused a serious hardship.

28\. In the Power Control Appliances v. Sumeet Machines Private Limited , the
plea taken by the second user was that of an implied consent or at least
waiver. It was stated that the registered owner had dis-entitled himself from
grant of equitable relief by reason of unexplained delay and suppression of
facts. It was also stated that the balance of convenience was in favor of the
second user. The Supreme Court referred to Section 30(1)(b) of the Act and
held that acquiescence was one of the defenses available. Acquiescence it was
held was standing by, when another person was evading the proprietor's rights
and was spending money on his trade mark. Acquiescence was course of conduct
inconsistent with claim for exclusive rights on a trade mark. It implied
positive act and not merely silence or want of any action. Acquiescence was
only a facet of delay and was established when the registered owner knowingly
stands by and allows the second user to build up an important trade.
Acquiescence it was held leads to an inference of grant of a license,
sufficient to create a new right in the second user. In such cases, it was
necessary to establish that the registered owner stood by and knowingly
allowed the second user to proceed and spend money in ignorance of the fact
that the registered owner had right and means to insert the said right.
Distinction was made between mere negligence and acquiescence.

29\. In Midas Hygiene Industries (P) Limited v. Sudhir Bhatia , it was held
that in cases of infringement of trade mark, normally an injunction order must
follow and mere delay in bringing an action was not sufficient to defeat right
to injunction. Grant of injunction also follows when prima facie it was
established that adoption of mark itself dishonest. It may be relevant to
state here that in the case Midas Hygiene Industries (P) Limited, Division
Bench of this Court had held that delay and laches and dis-entitled the
plaintiff to grant of interim injunction.

30\. This Court in the case of Hindustan Pencils Limited v. India Stationery
Products Co. and Anr. 1989 (9) PTC 61 (Del) had observed that inordinate delay
by itself was not analogous or similar to laches. Mere passage of time cannot
constitute laches but if, the alleged infringer was lulled into a false sense
of security and the alleged infringer had acted relying upon the said lapses,
question of laches can be examined and gone into as the Court always has
discretion to pass an interim injunction order. While dealing with the concept
of acquiescence, it was explained that the same was different form delay and
laches. Reference was made to the explanation given by Kerly on Trade Marks,
wherein it was observed that in a classic case of acquiescence, the proprietor
knowing his rights does nothing, that the infringer ignores them. The
Proprietor had encouraged the infringer with the result that the infringer
acts upon his mistaken belief and worsens his position. Kerly held that until
and unless the conduct of the proprietor was unconscionable, defense of
acquiescence or laches was not sufficient. Kerly, however, made a distinction
between the defense based on delay and laches and cases where a mark has
become "public juric" Reference was also made to Electrolux v. Electrix, 71
RPC 23 wherein five different pre-requisites for establishing acquiescence in
the nature of fraud were required to be considered and satisfied before relief
of injunction could be denied to the proprietor. The Court, however, noticed
that the question of acquiescence and laches was a grey area and sometimes
Courts had refused to grant interim injunction on the said ground, though it
cannot be a valid ground to deny relief of permanent injunction. This
distinction between interim injunction and permanent injunction did not find
favor with the Court.

31\. Distinction was also made in a case of a fraudulent infringer, who has
knowingly and deliberately violated the rights of the proprietor. A person who
had deliberately infringed upon another's mark, it was held, cannot complain
and hide behind defense of delay laches or acquiescence, as the infringement
at the very initial stage itself was fraudulent. Delay and laches by itself
would not bestow, fraud with character of legality. Reference was also made to
Me CARTHY on Trade Marks wherein it was observed that the Court must also take
into consideration necessity to protect third party interest i.e. the general
public or the buyer of the goods. It was the right of the public not to be
deceived and confused. After examining various aspects this Court held as
under:

30\. It would appear to be difficult to accept that relief of temporary
injunction should not be granted, because of the delay on the part of the
plaintiff, even though the Court feels, at that point of time, that ultimately
permanent injunction will have to be granted.

31\. Even though there may be some doubt as to whether laches or acquiescence
can deny the relief of a permanent injunction, judicial opinion has been
consistent in holding that if the defendant acts fraudulently with the
knowledge that he is violating the plaintiffs rights then in that case, even
if these is an inordinate delay on the part of the plaintiff in taking action
against the defendant, the relief of injunction is not denied. The defense of
laches or inordinate delay is a defense inequity. In equity both the parties
must come to the Court with clean hands. An equitable defense can be put up by
a party who has acted fairly and honestly. A person who is guilty of violating
the law or infringing or usurping somebody else's right cannot claim the
continued misuse of the usurped right. It was observed by Romer, J. in the
matter of an application brought by J.R. Parkington and Coy. Ltd., 63 RPC 171
at page 181 that "in my Judgment, the circumstances which attend the adoption
of a trade mark in the first instance are of considerable importance when one
comes to consider whether the use of that mark has or has not been a honest
user. If the user in its inception was tainted it would be difficult in most
cases to purify it subsequently". It was further noted by the learned Judge in
that case that he could not regard the discreditable origin of the user as
cleansed by the subsequent history. In other words, the equitable relief will
be afforded only to that party who is not guilty of a fraud and whose conduct
shows that there had been, on his part, an honest concurrent user of the mark
in question. If a party, for no apparent or a valid reason, adopts, with or
without modifications, a mark belonging to another, whether registered or not,
it will be difficult for that party to avoid an order of injunction because
the Court may rightly assume that such adoption of the mark by the party was
not an honest one. The Court would be justified in concluding that the
defendant, in such an action, wanted to cash in on the plaintiffs name and
reputation and that was the sole, primary or the real motive of the defendant
adopting such a mark. Even if, in such a case, there may be an inordinate
delay on the part of the plaintiff in bringing a suit for injunction, the
application of the plaintiff for an interim injunction cannot be dismissed on
the ground that the defendant has been using the mark for a number of years
Dealing with this aspect Harry D. Nims in his "The Law of Unfair Competition
and Trade-Marks". Fourth Edition, Volume Two at page 1282 noted as follows:

Where infringement is deliberate and willfull and the defendant acts
fraudulently with knowledge that he is violating plaintiffs rights, essential
elements of estoppel are lacking and in such a case the protection of
plaintiffs rights by injunctive relief never is properly denied. "The doctrine
of estoppel can only be invoked to promote fair dealings.

32\. It would appear to me that where there is an honest concurrent user by
the defendant then inordinate delay or laches may defeat the claim of damages
or rendition of accounts but the relief of injunction should not be refused.
This is so because it is the, interest of the general public, which is the
third party in such cases, which has to be kept in mind. In the case of
inordinate delay of laches, as distinguished from the case of an acquiescence,
the main prejudice which may be caused to the defendant is that by reason of
the plaintiff not acting at an earlier point of time the defendant has been
able to establish his business by using the infringing mark. Inordinate delay
or laches may be there because the plaintiff may not be aware of the
infringement by the defendant or the plaintiff may consider such infringement
by the defendant as not being serious enough to hurt the plaintiffs business.
Nevertheless, if the Court comes to the conclusion that prejudice is likely to
be caused to the general public who may be misled into buying the goods
manufactured by the defendant thinking them to be the goods of the plaintiff
then an injunction must be issued. The Court may, in appropriate cases, allow
some time to the defendants to sell off their existing stock but an injunction
should not be denied.

32\. Calcutta High Court in the case of Allergen Inc. v. Milment Oftho
Industries and Anr. 1999 PTC 19 examined the question of laches and delay and
held that the infringer cannot rely upon the goodwill, if any, they had built
up after receiving objection from the proprietor. Reference in this regard was
made to Judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of N.R. Dongre v. Whirlpool
Corporation . Persistence of the infringer it was held, cannot be a factor to
dent interim relief when interest of general public required protection from
deception and confusion. In such cases delay was of no consequence. Delay it
was observed cannot defeat the proprietor's right if the alleged infringer had
expanded his business after being put to notice.

33\. This Court again in Revlon Incorporate v. Sarita Manufacturing Co. 1997
(17) PTC 394 (Del.), examined the question of delay and laches. The defendants
therein were using the trade mark Revlon openly and continuously since 1969.
They had also advertised in various media. This Court relied upon Judgment in
the case of Hindustan Pencils (supra) and Dr. Ganga Prasad Gupta and Sons v.
S.C. Gudimani AIR 1986 Delhi 329 : 1986 (6) PTC 17 (Del), and held that
injunction cannot be denied on the ground of delay. However, I may mention
here that in the said case, the considerations that weighed with the Court was
that no explanation was given by the infringer as to how they came to adopt
the trade mark Revlon. It was held that the adoption of the said trade mark
was not honest and, therefore, delay and laches were not a good ground to deny
relief. Similarly, in the case of Novartis AG v. Wanbury Limited and Anr. 2005
(31) PTC 75 [Del.] it was held where adoption of the mark itself was dishonest
and fraudulent, mere delay in bringing action for infringement for trade mark
was not a ground to deny injunction and to non-suit the proprietor if
otherwise his claim was genuine. Difference was made between mere negligence
and acquiescence. The Court also referred to the importance of honesty of user
by the alleged infringer. The second user was required to show circumstances
leading to adoption of the trade mark at the first instance.

34\. Recently, Supreme Court again examined this issue in Ramdev Food Products
Private Limited v. Arvind Bhai Ram Bhai Patel . It was held that defense of
acquiescence could be upheld if the proprietor assents to or stands by in
relation to acts by another person. The Court felt that lapse of time, unless
accompanied by other reasons by itself, alone was not sufficient to deny grant
of interim injunction. Where the alleged infringer had built up trade with the
specific knowledge of the proprietor, the. prejudice suffered by the infringer
was a relevant factor and an additional circumstance to deny injunction.

35\. In the case of Whirlpool Appliances Ltd. v. N.R. Dongre 1996 (16) PTC 415
(Del), learned single Judge and in the case of N.R. Dongre v. Whirlpool
Appliances Ltd. 1996 (16) PTC 476 (Del) (DB), the Division Bench after
examining the various provisions of the Act in depth and detail had come to
the conclusion that registration of a mark does not create a trademark.
Registration exists independently. Registration gives statutory protection to
the proprietor. The Act stipulates consequence of registration. With reference
to Sections 28(3), 30(1)(b), 31 and 33 of the Act and it was held that a
proprietor of a registered mark cannot file or initiate infringement action
against another registered proprietor of an identical or similar mark.
However, registered user had exclusive right in relation to goods against
third persons in respect of which it had been registered. The Act, however,
did not give protection to a registered user against a prior user even if the
prior user had not registered his mark. A prior user was entitled to initiate
passing off action even against the registered user. The Act by itself did not
destroy vested rights of the prior user under the common law even against the
registered user.

36\. On reading the above Judgments, the following broad principles can be
culled out:

37\. A proprietor of a registered mark is entitled to statutory rights and on
infringement of those rights, he can initiate appropriate action for
injunction and damages. The person against whom action is initiated can defend
himself against proceedings for infringement on the basis of statutory
defenses available to him under the Act, specially Section 30 as well as
defenses available to him under the common law.

38\. Implied or express consent to use of a trademark under Section 30(1)(b)
of the Act is a statutory defense to a suit for infringement. Consent involves
affirmative acceptance and not merely standing by and absence of objection.
Affirmative acceptance can be in writing and can be termed as express consent.
Implied consent can be oral and by conduct. The conduct, however, must
indicate acceptance and not mere inaction or inactivity. Inaction in every
case without anything more does not lead to an inference of implied consent.
However where the plaintiff has laid by and inspite of his right by his
conduct has encouraged the defendant to alter his condition and the latter has
acted upon this faith of encouragement so held out, the plaintiff loses his
claim to claim injunction. This is clear from the decision of the Supreme
Court in the case of Sumeet Machines (supra) which has been quoted with
approval in the case of Ramdev Foods (supra). (See also P. John Chandy and Co.
(P) Ltd. v. John P. Thomas ). Where there is consent, action for infringement
must fail. Consent whether implied or express is a complete defense to action
for infringement.

39\. When infringement action is initiated on the basis of a registered mark
and prayer for interim injunction is made, Court will on the basis of common
law principles decide the application for injunction after examining:

1\. Whether Prima facie case for infringement is made out.

2\. Whether balance of convenience is in favor of the proprietor or the
alleged infringer and

3\. Whether the proprietor is liable to suffer irreparable loss refer Wander
v. Antox (supra).

40\. While examining question of convenience, delay in initiating action for
infringement by itself is not fatal. Delay may be fatal for claiming damages.
Difference has been made between mere delay and laches. Laches being prolonged
delay with inaction. Laches alone is not normally considered to be a ground to
reject an injunction application. There should be something in addition to and
more than laches that will tilt the balance of convenience in favor of a third
party viz a registered proprietor of a mark. Court will in these circumstances
and in addition to laches examine whether the said delay has caused prejudice
to the third party. When a proprietor allows his good will to be used by a
third party and allows him to grow and expand and thereby makes the third
party believe that he has no objection to use of the mark, then the third
party who has built up his sales will suffer prejudice, if he is suddenly
asked to stop. However, on the question of prejudice, the onus is on the
defendant.

41\. While eyimining the question of delay, Courts go into the question
whether delay is inordinate and whether there is any excuse or reason for the
delay. If the delay is inordinate from the date of knowledge and no ground,
reason or excuse for the delay is forthcoming, coupled with the prejudice
which is likely, interim or permanent injunction can be refused. While
examining the question of excuse, the Court will examine the conduct of the
proprietor, when and how the third party adopted the mark subject matter of
action and after the proprietor came to know about the said adoption, what
steps and action he had taken. Failure to immediately file a suit for
injunction can always be explained by the proprietor. Registration of a
similar mark in favor of the second user or separate proceedings between the
parties relating to the mark or it's registration can be basis or a ground and
excuse for the delay.

42 While examining the question of balance of convenience, the Courts have
also held that where initial adoption itself is fraudulent, subsequent use or
even prejudice does not tilt the balance of convenience in favor of a third
party. If the initial adoption itself is dishonest, injunction must follow.
Fraud or illegal adoption does not become valid and legal. Honesty in adoption
must, therefore, be established and proved by the defendant.

43\. While examining the question of balance of convenience, Court is required
to take into consideration public interest i.e. interest of the buyers and the
consumers. If public interest is affected, delay is of no consequence.

44\. In view of the entire case law discussed above, the following principles
of law emerge:

(i) Mere delay is not sufficient to defeat grant of injunction in cases of
infringement of trade mark. Delay is not a bar to enforce and claim a legal
right.

(ii) Consent in addition to other statutory defenses is a complete defense to
action for infringement.

(iii) Consent may be expressed or implied but inaction in every case without
anything more does not lead to an inference of implied consent. Implied
consent means conduct inconsistent with claim of exclusive right over the
trade mark, trade name etc. Implied consent implies standing by or allowing
the defendant to invade rights and by conduct encouraging the defendant to
expend money, expand business, alter their condition etc. in contravention of
the rights of the proprietor. In the case of Power Control Appliances v.
Sumeet Machines (P) Limited (supra), Supreme Court has held that acquiescence
implies positive act and not merely silence or inaction as is involved in
laches.

(iv) defenses under the common law are also available to the defendant.

Prior user is a valid defense.

(v) Balance of convenience between the parties should be taken into
consideration by the Court, while deciding the question of grant of
injunction. Unexplained laches accompanied by prejudice and/or other reasons
can be a ground to deny injunction. However, prejudice in such cases does not
mean mere simplictor delay. Onus in this regard is on the defendant.

(vi) Where initial adoption by the defendant itself is vitiated by fraud
and/or is dishonest, delay is no a valid ground to allow misuse. If user is at
the inception is tainted by fraud and dishonesty, continuous use does not
bestow legality.

(vii) Interest of general public who are the purchasers and buyers has to be
protected. In case to protect general public/consumers, injunction order is
required to be passed, delay by itself is not un-surpassable obstacle.

45\. Reading of the above paragraphs and the Judgments referred to show that
certain broad parameters have been formulated and applied by the Courts to
decide whether in a case for infringement, interim injunction should be
granted. However, at the same time facts and circumstances of each case have
to be carefully scrutinised, whether there is honest and concurrent user,
implied or express consent, fraud or tainted initial user, public interest,
etc., to determine and decide whether interim injunction should be granted.

C. Honest and concurrent user as defense to action for infringement.

46\. On the basis of Section 12(3) of the Act, the appellant had submitted
that no interim injunction order should be passed in favor of the respondent.
Section 12 of the Act reads as under:

12\. Prohibition of registration of identical or deceptively similar trade
marks. - (1) Save as provided in Sub-section (3) no trade mark shall be
registered in respect of any goods or description of goods which is identical
with or deceptively similar to a trade mark which is already registered in the
name of a different proprietor in respect of the same goods or description of
goods.

(2) Where separate applications are made by different persons to be registered
as proprietors respectively of trade marks which are identical or nearly
resemble each other in respect of the same goods or description of goods, the
Registrar may defer the acceptance of the application or applications bearing
a later date until after the determination of the proceedings in respect of
the earlier application, and may dispose of such application or applications
in the light of the evidence tendered in relation to earlier application and
the oppositions thereto, if any.

(3) In case of honest concurrent use or of other special circumstances which,
in the opinion of the Registrar, make it proper so to do, he may permit the
registration by more than one proprietor of trade marks which are identical or
nearly resemble each other (whether any such trade mark is already registered
or not) in respect of the same goods or description of goods subject to such
conditions and limitations, if any as the Registrar may think fit to impose.

47\. Sub-section (1) of the said Section states that no trade mark in respect
of goods or description of the goods identical or deceptively similar to a
trade mark which is already registered in the name of a different proprietor
shall be again registered in name of a third person. Sub-section (3) is an
exception to the general rule and states that in cases of honest and
concurrent use registration of same trade mark can be made in favor of more
than one proprietor, subject to conditions and limitations, if any, that the
Registrar may impose. It is well settled that the power of registration under
Sub-section (3) of Section 12 is a discretionary power. It is also well
settled that requirements of Sub-section (3) of Section 12 is honest as well
as concurrent use by a third person other than the registered proprietor. The
onus is on the third person to show and establish that the conditions of said
Sub-section are satisfied. The Registrar while deciding a plea under Section
12(3) of the Act has to take into account the following factors:

(a) The honesty of adoption and use by the third person.

(b) The concurrent user with reference to duration, area and volume of sales
of the third person.

(c) Public convenience and whether public is liable to be confused due to
resemblance of the two marks, whether there have been instances of confusion.

(d) Balance of convenience and/or inconvenience to the public if the mark of
the third party is registered.

However, it must be remembered that Section 12(3) relates to registration of
trade marks by a third person and is exception to the general rule of
registration. In the present case the respondent has benefit of registration
of various trade marks in his favor and this Court is not deciding or
adjudicating whether or not the Registrar should have granted registration in
favor of the appellant by exercising its discretionary power under Section
12(3) of the Act.

49\. It may also be stated here that the appellant had filed objections under
the various provisions of the Act for removal of and expunging trade mark
containing the words "Panchhi Chaap". These objections have been dismissed by
the Intellectual Property Appellate Court vide order dated 16th November,
2006. Learned tribunal has held that the registration is valid and statutory
advantages and presumptions under Section 32 of the Act have accrued in favor
of the respondent. The other grounds on which challenge to registration was
made were also dismissed.

50\. Section 28 of the Act confers certain rights on a proprietor of the
registered trade mark like the respondent. The said proprietor has exclusive
right to use the trade mark in relation to the goods in respect of which trade
mark is registered and obtain relief in respect of infringement. Section 29
provides for consequences on infringement of the trade mark. Section 30 of the
Act is a non-obstante clause and stipulates that the acts which do not
constitute infringement of a right to use the registered trade mark. Section
30(1)(b) of the Act provides that expressed or implied consent to use a trade
mark by a third person does not amount to infringement. Section 30 does not
use the expression 'honest and concurrent user. However, Courts have allowed
defendants to set up defense on the basis of honest and concurrent user.

51\. In the present matter, the appellant had made an application for
registration of trade mark "Udta Panchhi" through it's predecessor in interest
Mr. Krishan Bansal, then trading as sole proprietor of "Bansal Tobacco Store".
This application was opposed by the respondent. The Registrar of trade marks
vide order dated 17th November, 1973 allowed the application of the appellant
relying upon Section 12(3) of the Act and granted registration of the mark
"Udta Panchhi" in favor of the appellant. The respondent thereafter filed a
petition under Article 227 of the Constitution of India before the Delhi High
Court and the operation of the order passed by the Registrar was stayed. This
petition under Article 227 of the Constitution of India was disposed of on 5th
March, 2003 with the appellant making a statement that he was no longer
interested in pursuing his application for registration and he shall be at
liberty to file an appropriate application before the Registrar after making
changes in design of the trade mark. It was stated that the appellant had made
changes in design of the trade mark of the label, that he wanted to adopt and
in respect of which he would be filing an appropriate application. In view of
the statement, the petition under Article 227 of the Constitution of India was
disposed of as infructuous with the clarification that the said petition had
not been disposed of on merits and nothing mentioned in the impugned order
passed by the Registrar would go to the detriment of the respondent and to the
benefit of the appellant herein.

52\. Honesty of adoption at the initial stage itself has to be established to
take benefit of concurrent registration under Section 12(3) of the Act. If the
user at the inception is dishonest, subsequent concurrent user will not purify
the dishonest intention. Commercial honesty at the initial stage of adoption
is required. What is protected is innocent use of a mark by two or more
persons unknown to each other and unaware of the mark used by the other.
Adoption must be honest, bona fide and without any knowledge on the part of
the adopter. The onus and burden is on the defendant to show that the user and
adoption at the initial stage was honest.

53\. It is not the case of the appellant that the mark "Panchhi" was being
simultaneously and extensively used by number of parties. The respondent had
adopted and started using the trade mark Panchhi Chaap in 1973. From 1974 till
1989, they procured five separate registration under the Act. The word
"Panchhi" is not common to tobacco and is not a generic or descriptive word
relating to chewing tobacco.

54\. The appellant claims to have adopted the mark "Udta Panchhi" in 1982 and
had moved an application for registration in 1990. Admittedly, therefore, the
respondent is a prior user. As per figures placed on record by the respondent
between the period 1973-74 he had sales under the trade mark/label "Panchhi
Chaap" varying between Rs. 1,43,950 to Rs. 5,71,690 per annum. The sale
figures are substantial keeping in view the purchasing power and value of
Rupee during this period. Prima facie, it appears that the appellant was aware
and had knowledge about the trade mark "Panchhi Chaap", when he adopted the
trade mark "Udta Panchhi" in 1982 in respect of chewing tobacco manufactured
by him. Admittedly, in the initial years from 1982 till 31st March, 1985, the
sales of the appellant's predecessor varied between Rs. 2,452 to Rs. 24,735
only. Pricing of the products is also virtually same and the users are common.
No doubt get-up, colours etc. of the wrapper of the appellant was/is different
from that of the respondent but the word "panchhi" is common and the word
"panchhi" with drawing of a flying bird is the most distinct and essential
feature in both the wrappers. Chewing tobacco as already stated above is used
by semi educated and illiterate persons in mostly cities, small towns and
villages. Being persons belonging to the same trade and dealing with same
goods, it is difficult to believe at this stage that the appellant was not
aware of the mark "Panchhi" at the time of initial adoption and use in 1982.
In these circumstances, prima facie it is not possible to hold that the
initial adoption by the appellant was honest. Prima facie it is difficult to
believe that the appellant or his predecessor in interest was not aware that
the respondent was marketing and selling chewing tobacco under the trade mark
"Panchhi Chaap". However, it is clarified that this finding is subject to
evidence which will be adduced by the parties. Observations made above are not
binding and it will be for the trial Court to' adjudicate and decide this
aspect on the basis of evidence. (The appellant has filed a chart giving
details of its turnover duly certified by a chartered accountant. This chart
was not filed before the trial Court and shall have to be proved by evidence.)
Principle of Reverse Confusion.

55\. It was submitted on behalf of the appellant that the principle of reverse
confusion is applicable to the facts of the present case and the said doctrine
has been accepted in ALLIANZ, 2002 (24) PTC 177 (Del). The doctrine of reverse
confusion comes into operation when a third person's goods or service enjoys a
better reputation in the market than those of the registered proprietor and
the situation is reverse in the sense that customers are likely to approach
the registered proprietor's goods/service thinking that they are of the third
person. It is the reverse of the traditional confusion. I do not think this
situation exists in the present case. The Registered user does not want to
ride on the goodwill and mark of the subsequent user. Merely because sales of
the appellant are higher in volume or monetary terms, it does not mean that
doctrine of reverse confusion is applicable. (D) Whether the suit filed by the
plaintiff is for infringement on basis of 1974 registration is maintainable.

56\. It is admitted by the appellant that the respondent has as many as five
separate registrations under the Act. It is, however, stated that all
registrations except Registration No. 297415 are subsequent to appellant's
established user since 1982. Relying upon Section 33 of the Act and Section 34
of the Trade Marks Act, 1999, it was submitted that no case for infringement
is made out against the appellant except for Registration No. 297415. With
regard to the said registration it was submitted that distinctive label as a
whole was registered and the said registration would not give any exclusive
right to the respondent in respect of particular word or name mentioned in the
label. Reliance was placed upon Registrar of Companies v. Ashok Chandra . It
was further submitted that though in some cases test of "essential features"
has been prescribed but those decisions relate to cases in which words have
been registered and not the entire label. Reliance was also placed upon
Section 17 of the Trade Marks Act, 1999.

57\. This question need not detain me in view of the recent decision of the
Supreme Court in the case of Ramdev Food Products (supra). The Supreme Court
referred to Sections 15 and 17 of the Act and held that deception could be in
respect of any prominent feature of the registered trade mark. While referring
to Ashok Chandra's case (supra), Supreme Court noticed that the word 'shree'
was not regarded as an important feature of the device so as to give exclusive
statutory right to the proprietor. It was also held that the said case was
decided on its own facts. Reading of the decision of the Ashok Chandra's case
(supra) also shows that the issue involved was in respect of registration of
trade mark and the Registrar as a matter of practice had in several cases
refused to register "shree" as a trade mark or a disclaimer was enforced if it
was a part of the trade mark. The Court held that it would be invidious
discrimination in case the word "shree" used as a part of the trade mark label
was held to be exclusive property of the registered proprietor. Statutory
right it was held, did not exist in the word "shree". Section 13 of the Trade
Marks Act, 1940 was referred to. Reference was made to tendency on the part of
some proprietors to expand operation of their trade mark beyond legitimate
four corners. The Registrar, as a matter of fact, found that the word "shree"
was not adapted to distinguish the goods of the proprietor and, therefore,
registration without disclaimer would cause embarrassment to other traders.
Contention of the appellant therefore has to be rejected. The respondent is
entitled to sue for infringement.

(E) Whether the respondent is a registered owner of the registered mark:

58\. On behalf of the appellant it was argued that Shiva Tobacco Company in
whose favor the trademark was registered in the year 1974 is not the same
Shiva Tobacco Company which has filed the suit for damages and injunction
against the appellant. It was stated that Shiva Tobacco Company in 1973-74 had
four partners including late Mr. Mahender Bansal and late Mr. Shiv Prasad
Aggarwal had expired in 1980 and 1982 respectively. Reference was made to
Section 42 of the Partnership Act and it was stated that on dissolution of a
firm, the partners are not entitled to appropriate it's property including
goodwill. It was claimed that the partnership firm-Shiva Tobacco Company stood
dissolved in 1982 and thereafter the partners were entitled to the value of
their share in the assets and the registration under the Act in favor of the
said firm ceased to exist.

59\. It is difficult to accept the said contention of the appellant. It is
admitted by the appellant that Shiva Tobacco Company was a registered
proprietor of the label containing the word "Panchhi Chaap". There is a
distinction between reconstitution of a partnership firm and dissolution
Initially, the respondent-partnership firm consisted of the father and his
three sons. Father and one son died but two other sons have continued as
partners of the firm Shiva Tobacco Company without any objection and hindrance
from any legal representative of the partners who have expired. There is
nothing on record to show that the partnership firm-Shiva Tobacco Company
consisting of two brothers is not the registered owner of the mark containing
the word "Panchhi Chhap" registered in 1974. Intellectual Property Appellate
Board in its order dated 16th November, 2006 has accepted the plea of the
respondent in this regard. Prima facie on the basis of documents and pleading
of the parties it cannot be said that the respondent-Shiva Tobacco Company is
not the owner of the registered trademark.

(F) Merits and prima facie facts

60\. I have already referred to my prima facie finding on the question of
initial adoption by the appellant of the mark "Panchhi" and held that the same
is not honest. With these findings, it cannot be said that in equity the
respondent is not entitled to any relief of injunction.

61\. Matter has also to be examined from the question of balance of
convenience. It was submitted that there was 23 years delay on the part of the
respondent to ask for injunction including 10 years during which the matter
had remained pending in Courts. It was submitted that sales of the appellant
under the mark "udta panchhi" exceed the sales by the respondent under the
mark "panchhi chaap". It was submitted that in view of the exceptional
circumstances and delay, it would be unjust and unfair to grant interim
injunction against the appellant. Reference was made to substantial amounts
that have been spent by the appellant on advertisements and publicity.

62\. In order to decide this question, with reference to the legal position
explained above, some facts may be noticed. It is admitted that the respondent
had started marketing chewing tobacco from 1973 in the name and style of
"panchhi chhap". Its label containing the word "panchhi" with the image of a
flying bird were registered in 1974. The sale figures of the respondent from
1973-1982 show that the sales had varied between Rs. 1,43,950 to Rs. 5,21,645
for the year 1982-83.

63\. The sales of the respondent as per the figures given by him was Rs.
24,735 and Rs. 2,452 in the year 1982-1983 and 1983-1984 and Rs. 11,021 in
1984-85. The sales of the appellant were in the range of Rs. 1,83,000 to Rs.
2,64,000 between the period 1985-86 and 1987-88. Thereafter, there was a jump
in the year 1988-89, when the sales reached figure of Rs. 5,22,000, with
further increase to Rs. 8,80,000 in the year 1989-90. Jump was again seen in
the year 1991-92, when the appellant claims he had turn over of more than Rs.
33.50 lacs. In the year 1992-93, the sales reached almost Rs. 59 lacs. In the
year 1993-1994 sales were more than Rs. 74.59 lacs. As per the appellant his
total sale is more than Rs. 7 crores. In comparison sales of the respondent
under the mark "panchhi chhap" were about Rs. 1 crore in the year 1995-96.

64\. The above figures show that from 1989 onwards sales of the appellant had
increased and picked up. In the year 1990, the appellant had applied for
registration of the label including the word "udta panchhi" under the Act.
This was objected to by the respondent. The objections remained pending for
some time but in 1993, the objection was overruled and registration was
granted in favor of the appellant. The respondent challenged the said
direction by filing Civil Miscellaneous Main Petition in the Delhi High Court
against the registration granted in favor of the appellant and operation of
the order passed by the Registrar was stayed. The explanation given by the
respondent is tb at from 1990 onwards parties have been in litigation relating
to the mark "panchhi". The appellant had succeeded in getting registration in
his favor in 1993 by relying upon Section 12(3) of the Act. In these
circumstances the respondent could not have filed a suit for infringement
against a registered owner. Therefore, there is no question of acquiescence on
the part of the respondent. The respondent was not keeping quiet but
contesting the claim of the appellant. (I) am not going into the question
whether acquiescence should be positive). In the present case, the respondent
had protested and objected to registration of the trade mark including the
name "panchhi" with the flying bird. In 1993 the matter was decided in favor
of the appellant, though operation of the order was stayed by the High Court
by an interim order. However, the respondent has explained that an getting
injunction order from a Court on the basis of infringement of trade mark in
these circumstances was impossible. It was only on 5th September, 2003 that
the Civil Miscellaneous Main No. 474/1993 was disposed of with the appellant
withdrawing his request for registration of the mark. It cannot be said that
the respondent had remained quiet and silent and allowed the appellant to
knowingly use and expend money before filing the suit in 1997. The appellant
was fully conscious of the objection raised by the respondent to the use of
the word "Panchhi" with the flying bird. The appellant took risk in spite of
the objection raised by the respondent. It is unfortunate that adjudication
takes time but delay in decisions by itself cannot cause prejudice to the
statutory rights of the parties. The explanation given by the respondent at
least after 1990 prima facie does not disclose acquiescence or laches coupled
with estoppel. If the appellant continued with the mark "panchhi" with the
flying bird, it was at his own risk. The appellant was fully aware of the
consequences.

65\. As far as period 1982-90 is concerned, the matter requires trial and
evidence. There is no evidence or material on record to show that during this
time the respondent had knowingly kept quiet. Till 1985-86, turn over of the
appellant was small and till 1989 there was a marginal increase in sales and
only a small amount was spent on advertisement. Another important fact, which
may be noticed is that the first newspaper advertisement placed on record with
regard to use of the mark "udta panchhi" relates to October, 1992. For the
period prior to 1992, no advertisement has been placed on record. Reference
may also be made to discussion under the heading "whether respondent is guilty
of fraud and concealment of facts".

66\. However, this is merely a prima facie view and the question whether the
respondent had knowingly kept quiet till 1990 and the legal consequences
thereof will have to be decided in the light of evidence led by the parties in
the trial.

(F) Whether respondent is guilty of fraud and concealment of facts.

67\. The appellant has highlighted that the respondent in the plaint has
failed to mention the proceedings between them and Bansal Tobacco Store,
orders passed by the Registrar of Trademarks and also made false statements
about their total expenditure on advertisements. It was also argued that the
respondent has given wrong date, March, 1997, relating to cause of action as
the respondent was aware that the mark "Udta Panchhi" was being used since
1990. Reliance was placed upon several decisions in which it has been held
that a person who conceals or makes misrepresentation in the plaint, is not
entitled to discretionary relief of injunction.

68\. There cannot be any quarrel with the above proposition. However, the
question is whether the respondent is guilty of concealment of facts and/or
has made any misrepresentation. The respondent has submitted that he was not
aware of any association between Ansul Industries and Bansal Tobacco Store
and, therefore, the facts relating to claim of Bansal Tobacco Store and the
proceeding between the two were not mentioned in the plaint. It was also
stated that change in name from Bansali Tobacco Store to Ansul Industries was
not informed to the Registrar of Trademarks.

69\. Prima facie, I find merit in the submission made by the respondent. One
of the reasons for this prima facie finding is that the respondent has not
gained anything by concealling facts relating to claim made by Bansal Tobacco
Store in respect of the label "Udta Panchhi". Concealing these facts would not
have served any purpose as the history of litigation and claim of Bansal
Tobacco Store was equally well-known and in the knowledge of Bansal Tobacco
Store and Mr. Anand Bansal. On the basis of the plaint, ex-parte injunction
Order dated 15th May, 1997 was passed in favor of the respondent and against
the appellant herein. Thereafter, written statement and application under
Order XXXIX, Rule 4 of the Code was filed by the appellant pointing out that
Ansul Industries was successor of Bansal Tobacco Store. The respondent on 23rd
May, 1997 fairly conceded before the Trial Court that the ex-parte injunction
Order may be suspended and the matter may be fixed for arguments on merits.
Thus, the respondent acted fairly after the relevant facts relating to
succession of Bansal Tobacco Store by Ansul Industries were disclosed and came
to the knowledge of the respondent. The application for interim injunction
thereafter remained pending from 1997 till it was decided vide Order dated
30th July, 2005, after taking into consideration respective stand of the
parties.

70\. Though it is claimed by the appellant that Mr. Anand Bansal changed the
name of his sole proprietorship concern from M/s Bansal Tobacco Store to M/s
Ansul Industries in or about 1994, there is no evidence and material to show
that this fact was communicated and informed to the Registrar or the
respondent. Documents filed by the appellant show that Mr. Anand Bansal was
using the name Bansal Tobacco Store as well as Ansul Industries in 1994. As
per documents filed by the appellant, Bill No. 12 dated 8th May, 1994 was
issued by Ansul Industries in favor of the Bansal Tobacco Store. There are
letters written in the years 1991-94 on the letter head of Ansul Industries
relating to account of Bansal Tobacco Store. The registration with the Central
Excise in the name of Ansul Industries was done in 1995 as per certificate
dated 20th March, 1995. Similarly, the certificate issued by Central Excise in
favor of Anand Kumar Bansal, proprietor Bansal Tobacco Store is dated 1992.
Prima facie therefore, it appears that the respondent is not guilty of
deliberate concealment of facts and mis-statement.

71\. In view of the above findings the present Appeal is dismissed. However,
the appellant is granted three months time to comply with the injunction Order
passed by the learned Trial Court and dispose of its pending stock/wrappers,
etc.

72\. It is also clarified that the observations made in this Order are
tentative and based on prima facie view taken by this Court. Learned Trial
Court will dispose of the Suit on the basis of evidence adduced by the parties
and without being influenced by any of the observations on facts made in this
Order.

73\. In the facts and circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to
costs.

