

Calcutta High Court

Wallmax India Enterprises ... vs The Deputy Controller Of Patents & ... on 30
November, 2017

    
    
                             ORDER SHEET
                    IN THE HIGH COURT AT CALCUTTA
                             ORIGINAL SIDE
    
    
                            AID No.6 of 2017
    
             WALLMAX INDIA ENTERPRISES PRIVATE LIMITED
                              Versus
         THE DEPUTY CONTROLLER OF PATENTS & DESIGNS & ANR.
    
                                 AND
    
                            AID No.7 of 2017
    
             WALLMAX INDIA ENTERPRISES PRIVATE LIMITED
                              Versus
         THE DEPUTY CONTROLLER OF PATENTS & DESIGNS & ANR.
    
                                 AND
    
                            AID No.8 of 2017
    
             WALLMAX INDIA ENTERPRISES PRIVATE LIMITED
                              Versus
         THE DEPUTY CONTROLLER OF PATENTS & DESIGNS & ANR.
    
    
    
    BEFORE:
    The Hon'ble JUSTICE SOUMEN SEN
    Date : 30th November, 2017.
    
    
                                                                Appearance:
                                                    Mr. Jishnu Saha Sr. Adv.
                                                    Mr. Rishad Medora, Adv.
                                               Mr. Soumava Mukherjee, Adv.
    
                                             Mr. Ranjan Bachawat Sr. Adv.
                                                 Mr. Debnath Ghosh, Adv.
                                         Ms. Pubali Sinha Chowdhury, Adv.
    
                                                   Mr. Sunil Singhania, Adv.
    
                                           Mr. Rabi Prosad Mookerjee, Adv.
                                               2
    
    
    
    
              The Court: The order passed by the Deputy Controller of Patents and
    
    Designs filed on 26th December, 2016 by the appellant under Section 19 for
    
    referring the cancellation proceeding to the High Court of Delhi is a subject
    
    matter of challenge in this appeal. It is also not in dispute that the issue raised
    
    before the Controller is one of the issues to be decided by the Delhi High Court
    
    where the respondent no.2 has initiated a prior proceeding for infringement of its

design. The controller relying on a decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in
Godrej Sara Lee Limited Versus Reckitt Benckiser Australia Pty. Limited and
Another reported at (2010) 2 SCC 535, has rejected the said application and
has decided to dispose of the application for cancellation of design on
merits. The learned Counsel appearing for the parties have agreed before this
Court that mere pendency of the application before the Controller should not
be taken as a ground for adjournment of the interlocutory application pending
before the Delhi High Court.

Mr. Saha learned Senior Counsel submits that since the Delhi High Court is in
seisin over the matter, till the suit is disposed of by the Delhi High Court
the proceeding before the Controller may be stayed and the appellant shall not
seek an adjournment of the interlocutory application pending before the Delhi
High Court on the ground of pendency of the cancellation application. The
parties are in agreement that any decision in the suit by the Delhi High Court
would be binding upon the Controller and this Court also is of the same
opinion. Although the Controller is having the jurisdiction to decide the
validity of a design, if  3 challenged but having regard to the fact that a
prior proceeding between the parties touching on the same issue which is
pending before the Delhi High Court, the proceedings before the Controller
shall remain stayed till disposal of the suit.

AID No.6 of 2017, AID No.7 of 2017 and AID No.8 of 2017 stand disposed of. The
order of the Deputy Controller of Patents and Designs, accordingly, set aside.

(SOUMEN SEN, J.) sp/

