

Supreme Court of India

M/S R.N. Jadi & Brothers & Ors vs Subhashchandra on 10 July, 2007

Author: P Balasubramanyan

Bench: P.K. Balasubramanyan

    
    
               CASE NO.:
    Appeal (civil)  2925 of 2007
    
    PETITIONER:
    M/s R.N. Jadi & Brothers & Ors
    
    RESPONDENT:
    Subhashchandra
    
    DATE OF JUDGMENT: 10/07/2007
    
    BENCH:
    P.K. BALASUBRAMANYAN
    
    JUDGMENT:
    

JUDGMENT CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2925 OF 2007 (Arising out of S.L.P. (C) No. 14606 of
2006) P.K. BALASUBRAMANYAN, J.

1\. I respectfully agree. The High Court was in error in setting aside the
order of the trial court accepting the written statement filed by the
defendants, in the circumstances of the case. I am prompted to make a few
observations in the context of the discussion by my learned brother on the
scope of the related provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure.

2\. It is notorious that suits were being dragged on by defendants in suits by
not filing their written statements within a reasonable time. We are not
unaware of cases where written statements were not filed even within two or
three years of the filing of the suits. The control expected to be exercised
by courts, by the scheme of the Code, was not being exercised leading to
slackness in the matter of filing of pleadings in defence. It was in that
context that the relevant provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure were
amended, the laudable object being to avoid delay in the disposal of suits.
The Amended Order VIII Rule 1 fixes a time limit for the filing of written
statements. But, Parliament did not stop with amending Order VIII Rule 1 alone
i.e. introducing a time limit for filing written statements and restricting
the power of the court to grant extension of time for filing written
statements as 90 days from the date of service of summons. The power for
extension of time granted to the court under Section 148 of the Code was
curtailed by introducing an outer time limit of 30 days from the date
originally fixed or granted. Thus, the legislative intent to limit or curtail
the power of the court to extend the time for filing a written statement is
obvious from a conjoint reading of these provisions.

3\. In addition to the time limit prescribed in Order VIII Rule 1 of the Code,
it is provided in Order V Rule 1 that the summons issued to the defendant
should itself provide that he has to appear and file his written statement
within one month of receipt of it and limiting the power of the court to
extend the time for written statement to 90 days. The summons is to be
accompanied by a copy of the plaint. It simultaneously introduced Rule 14 to
Order VII providing that where the plaintiff sues upon a document or relies
upon a document in his possession or power, in support of his claim, he shall
enter such documents in a list and shall produce it in court when the plaint
is presented by him and shall at the same time deliver the document and copy
thereof to be filed with the plaint. Sub-rule (3) was introduced to provide
that if the document is not included in the list, or is not produced with the
plaint, it was not to be produced without the leave of the court and without
the leave of the court it shall not be received in evidence on his behalf at
the hearing of the suit.

4\. In such a position, normally no injustice would be caused to the defendant
in insisting upon his filing the written statement at least within 90 days of
having received the summons in the suit. I think that it would be proper to
avoid an interpretation that may tend to thwart the legislative intent in such
circumstances.

5\. It is true that procedure is the handmaid of justice. The court must
always be anxious to do justice and to prevent victories by way of technical
knock-outs. But how far that concept can be stretched in the context of the
amendments brought to the Code and in the light of the mischief that was
sought to be averted is a question that has to be seriously considered. I am
conscious that I was a party to the decision in Kailash vs. Nankhu and others
(2005 (4) SCC 480) which held that the provision was directory and not
mandatory But there could be situations where even a procedural provision
could be construed as mandatory, no doubt retaining a power in the court, in
an appropriate case, to exercise a jurisdiction to take out the rigor of that
provision or to mitigate genuine hardship. It was in that context that in
Kailash vs. Nankhu and others (supra) it was stated that the extension of time
beyond 90 days was not automatic and that the court, for reasons to be
recorded, had to be satisfied that there was sufficient justification for
departing from the time limit fixed by the Code and the power inhering in the
court in terms of Section 148 of the Code. Kailash is no authority for
receiving written statements, after the expiry of the period permitted by law,
in a routine manner.

6\. A dispensation that makes Order VIII Rule 1 directory, leaving it to the
courts to extend the time indiscriminately would tend to defeat the object
sought to be achieved by the amendments to the Code. It is, therefore,
necessary to emphasize that the grant of extension of time beyond 30 days is
not automatic, that it should be exercised with caution and for adequate
reasons and that an extension of time beyond 90 days of the service of summons
must be granted only based on a clear satisfaction of the justification for
granting such extension, the court being conscious of the fact that even the
power of the court for extension inhering in Section 148 of the Code, has also
been restricted by the legislature. It would be proper to encourage the belief
in litigants that the imperative of Order VIII Rule 1 must be adhered to and
that only in rare and exceptional cases, the breach thereof will be condoned.
Such an approach by courts alone can carry forward the legislative intent of
avoiding delays or at least in curtailing the delays in the disposal of suits
filed in courts. The lament of Lord Denning in ALLEN vs. SIR ALFRED McALPINE &
SONS [(1968) 1 All E.R. 543] that law's delays have been intolerable and last
so long as to turn justice sour, is true of our legal system as well. Should
that state of affairs continue for all times?

