

Supreme Court of India

Balai Chandra Hazra vs Shewdhari Jadav on 21 February, 1978

Equivalent citations: 1978 AIR 1062, 1978 SCR (3) 147

Author: D Desai

Bench: Desai, D.A.

    
    
               PETITIONER:
    BALAI CHANDRA HAZRA
    
    	Vs.
    
    RESPONDENT:
    SHEWDHARI JADAV
    
    DATE OF JUDGMENT21/02/1978
    
    BENCH:
    DESAI, D.A.
    BENCH:
    DESAI, D.A.
    BEG, M. HAMEEDULLAH (CJ)
    BHAGWATI, P.N.
    
    CITATION:
     1978 AIR 1062		  1978 SCR  (3) 147
     1978 SCC  (2) 559
     CITATOR INFO :
     D	    1988 SC1531	 (185)
    
    
    ACT:
    West  Bengal  Premises	Tenancy	 Act,  1956,  S.  13  Sub-S.
    3-A--Whether  retroactive  operation of Sub-s.3A  of  S.  13
    offends Art. 19(1)(f) of the Constitution of India.
    Letters	 Patent	 Appeal under Clause 15--Whether  the  Court
    hearing an appeal under clause 15 of the Letters Patent	 can
    grant permission to amend the pleadings at that stage, while
    working out the mechanics consequent to a change in law.
    Powers	of  the	  Appellate Court under	 Clause	 15  of	 the
    Letters	 Patent	 of a High Court to record  findings  of  an
    appreciation  of fresh additional evidence--Whether  consent
    can  confer  jurisdiction to take  additional  evidence	 and
    appreciate it on a Court which lacks inherent jurisdiction.
    Art.  136 of the Constitution of India--Intervention by	 the
    Supreme	 Court, when leave limited to specific	grounds	 and
    appeal by certificate, scope explained.
    West Bengal Premises Tenancy Act, 1956 S. 17-E--Scope of.
    
    
    
    HEADNOTE:
    The suit for eviction of defendant-appellant from the ground
    floor	of  premises  No.  16/lA,  Ram	Ratan	Bose   Lane,
    Shyambazar, which the appellant was occupying as a tenant on
    a monthly rent of Rs. 37/- on the ground that the respondent
    required the same for his own use and occupation, ended in a
    decree	in  favour of the respondent and  was  confirmed  in
    appeal	by the First Appellate Court.  In the Second  Appeal
    to  the	 High  Court  at  Calcutta,  the  appellant   sought
    permission to adduce additional evidence to the effect	that
    the  requirement of the landlord stood satisfied because  he
    had  recovered	possession of four rooms on  the  first	 and
    second	floors	of the same building.	The  appellant	also
    contended that the suit filed by the respondent-landlord was
    incompetent, it having been instituted within a period of  3
    years of the acquisition of his interest as landlord in	 the
    premises by transfer and was accordingly hit by	 sub-section
    3-A of s. 13 of the West Bengal Premises Tenancy Act,  1956,
    as  amended  by	 the West Bengal  Premises  Tenancy  (Second
    Amendment)  Act,  1969.	  The  contentions  raised  by	 the
    appellant  in the Second Appeal were overruled by  the	High
    Court and the appeal was dismissed and the decree for  evic-
    tion  was  affirmed.   Upon a  certificate  granted  by	 the
    learned	 Single	 Judge	of  the	 High  Court  the  appellant
    preferred  an appeal under clause-15 of the Letters  Patent.
    When  the appeal under Clause-15 of the Letters	 Patent	 was
    pending	 in the High Court, respondent-plaintiff in view  of
    the  Court's decision in B. Banerjee v. Anita Pan, [1975]  2
    S.C.R.	774, sought and obtained leave to amend	 the  plaint
    and  consequently the appellant defendant  filed  additional
    written	 statement  and thereafter the	Court  framed  fresh
    issues arising from the amended pleadings as under:
    	      1.    Is	the premises in	 dispute  reasonably
    	      required	by the plaintiff respondent for	 his
    	      own  occupation and for the occupation of	 the
    	      members of his family ?
    	      2.    Is	  the	 plaintiff-respondent	  in
    	      possession   of	any   reasonably    suitable
    	      accommodation?
    Oral  and documentary evidence were permitted to be  adduced
    and  thereafter	 the  appeal  was  set	down  for   hearing.
    Ultimately  the appeal was dismissed, affirm the decree	 for
    eviction.
    148
    Allowing the tenant's appeal by certificate, the Court
    HELD : 1. The retroactive operation of sub-section 3A of  s.
    13  of the West Bengal Premises Tenancy Act, 1956  does	 not
    offend	Art. 19 (1) (f) on the ground  of  unreasonableness.
    [153 F]
    B.   Banerjee v. Anita Pan, [1975] 2 S.C.R. 774 reiterated.
    2.   While   working  out  the	mechanics  consequent	upon
    upholding the validity of sub-section 3-A it was open to the
    Court  hearing	the appeal under Clause-15  of	the  Letters
    Patent to grant permission to amend pleadings. [153 G]
    3.   Ordinarily,  an appellant is not entitled in an  appeal
    under clause-15 of the Letters Patent to be heard on  points
    which  have  not  been raised before the  Judge	 from  whose
    judgment  of appeal is preferred.  If in second	 appeal	 the
    findings  of fact recorded by the first Appellate Court	 are
    taken  as  binding,  unless  fresh  additional	evidence  is
    permitted  to be led when again appreciation of evidence  to
    record	a  finding  of fact  would  become  necessary,	that
    position  is not altered, even if amendment of pleadings  is
    granted	 which puts into controversy some new facts  allowed
    in  amended pleadings and therefore, the Court	hearing	 the
    second	appeal after granting amendment could not take	over
    the function of the trial court or the first Appellate Court
    and  undertake appreciation of evidence and record  findings
    of facts.  That is not the function of the Court hearing the
    second appeal under s. 100 as envisaged by the Code of Civil
    Procedure.  The provision contained in s. 103 which  defines
    the power of the High Court to determine a question of	fact
    while  hearing	second appeal makes this clear.	  But,	this
    power  of the Court is limited to evidence on  record  which
    again is sufficient to determine an issue of fact  necessary
    for disposal of the appeal and which has not been determined
    by  the	 lower appellate court or 'which  has  been  wrongly
    determined by such Court. [154 D-G]
    4.   When  pleadings are amended at the stage of the  appeal
    under clause-15 Of the Letters Patent and fresh	 allegations
    of  facts  are	thus introduced	 in  the  controversy  which
    necessitate  additional evidence being permitted,  it  would
    not  be open to the Court to proceed to record evidence	 and
    to  appreciate the evidence and record findings of  fact,  a
    function which even ordinarily is not undertaken by the High
    Court  hearing the Second Appeal, much less can it  be	done
    while  hearing	an  appeal under Clause-15  of	the  Letters
    Patent. [154 G-H]
    5.   When  on  account	of  a  subsequent  change  in	law,
    amendment of the pleadings is granted which raises  disputed
    questions of fact the situation would not be one governed by
    0.41  R.27  of the Civil Procedure Code.  At that  stage  it
    could  not  be said that the Appellate Court  is  permitting
    production  of additional evidence, oral or  documentary  on
    the  ground that the Court from whose decree the  appeal  is
    preferred has refused to admit evidence which ought to	have
    been  admitted or the Appellate Court requires any  document
    to be produced or any witness to be examined to enable it to
    pronounce  the	judgment.  Nor would the  situation  be	 one
    which  could  be covered under the expression  "other  subs-
    tantial cause". [154 H, 155 A]
    6.   To	 avoid	hardship to the plaintiff the  proper  thing
    would  be to grant leave to amend the pleadings and to	give
    an equal opportunity to the defendant to controvert if he so
    chooses	 what the plaintiff contends by	 amended  pleadings.
    But   once  that  is  done  immediately	 the   question	  of
    jurisdiction of the Court hearing the appeal under clause-15
    of  the	 Letters Patent would arise and if  the	 appeal	 was
    entertained against a judgment rendered by the High Court in
    Second Appeal the limitations on the power of the High Court
    hearing	 the  Second  Appeal  will  ipso  facto	 limit	 and
    circumscribe  the jurisdiction of the Appellate	 Bench.	  If
    the  High Court while hearing the Second Appeal,  where	 the
    amended pleadings substantially raise disputed questions  of
    fact which need resolution afresh after additional evidence,
    could  not undertake the exercise of recording evidence	 and
    appreciating  it and recording findings of fact,  but  could
    appropriately remand the case to the trial Court, the  Bench
    hearing	 appeal against the judgment in Second Appeal  could
    not  enlarge its jurisdiction by undertaking that  forbidden
    exercise. [155 C-F]
    149
    7.   When  a  Bench  of a High Court is	 hearing  an  appeal
    preferred upon a certificate granted under Clause-15 of	 the
    Letters	 Patent by a Single Judge of the High Court  who  by
    his  judgment has disposed of the of the Second Appeal,	 the
    Appellate  Bench would be subject to the limitation  on	 its
    power  and  jurisdiction  to  appreciate  or   re-appreciate
    evidence and to record findings fact which were never raised
    before	the trial court or the First Appellate Court as	 the
    pleadings  were	 permitted  to	be amended  by	it  and	 the
    question  was  raised for the first time before it,  to	 the
    same extent as the High Court hearing the Second Appeal with
    constrains  of	Ss.  100 and 103  of  the  Code.   Admitting
    evidence  is  entirely different from  appreciating  it	 and
    acting upon it. [155 F-G]
    	      Indrajit	Pratap Sahi v. Amar Singh and  Ors.,
    	      Law  Reports 50 I.A. 183, Surinder  Kumar	 and
    	      Ors. v. Gian Chand & Ors, [1958] SCR 548, held
    	      inapplicable.
    8.   If the Court lacks inherent jurisdiction, no amount  of
    consent can confer jurisdiction.  The failure on the part of
    the appellant to object to the High Court hearing an  appeal
    under  Clause-15 of the Letters Patent taking oral  evidence
    in  respect  of the amended pleadings would not	 clothe	 the
    Bench  with jurisdiction to record fresh oral  evidence	 and
    proceed to appreciate the same and record findings of facts.
    [156 C, 157B]
    	      Ledgard  v. Bull, Law Reports, 13 I.A. 134  at
    	      p. 145 Meenakshi Naidoo v. Subramaniya Sastri,
    	      Law  Reports,  14	 I.A.  160;  discussed	 and
    	      applied.
    9.   When  the leave is limited on certain grounds it  would
    not  be	 appropriate  to put in	 a  narrow  and	 grammatical
    construction  of the grounds as if construing a	 statute  or
    some  rule, regulation or order of a public  authority.	  As
    far  as	 possible the grounds should not  be  very  strictly
    construed or should not be construed in such a manner as  to
    make  the  special leave grant	under  Art.  self-defeating.
    Attempt	 of  the  Court must be to find	 out  what  was	 the
    grievance or contention that was being put forth before	 the
    Court which appealed to the Court in granting special  leave
    under Art. 136. [157 G. H, 158 A]
    10.  (a)  Article 136 confers power on the Supreme Court  in
    its  discretion	 to grant special leave	 from  any  judgment
    decree,	 determination,	 sentence or order in  any  case  or
    matter,	 passed	 or  made by any court or  tribunal  in	 the
    territory  'of	India.	 Ordinarily once  special  leave  is
    granted it is against the judgment, decree etc.	 However, by
    practice Supreme Court sometimes limits the leave to certain
    specific  points.   If	the leave  is  limited	to  specific
    points,	 obviously  the whole case is not  open	 before	 the
    Court hearing the appeal.
    [158 A-D]
    	      Nafe Singh & Anr. v. State of Haryana,  [1971]
    	      3	 SCC  934 Jagdev Singh & Anr.  v.  State  of
    	      Punjab, A.I.R. 1973 SC 2427; referred to.
    	      Addagada	 Raghavamma  &	Anr.   v.   Addagada
    	      Chanchamma  & Anr. [1964] 2 SCR 933; held	 not
    	      applicable.
    10.  (b)   Once	  a  certificate  is  granted	this   Court
    undoubtedly  has the power as a Court of Appeal to  consider
    the correctness of the decision appealed against from, every
    stand point whether on questions of fact or law.  It may  in
    Its  wisdom  not interfere with the concurrent	findings  of
    fact   but  there  is  no  bar	to  its	 jurisdiction	from
    interfering with the same.  But when an appeal is  preferred
    under  Art.  136 and the leave is limited  to  the  specific
    grounds	 the  scope of appeal cannot be enlarged  so  as  to
    extend beyond what is permissible to be urged in support  of
    the grounds to which the leave is limited.  Undoubtedly	 the
    scope  of  the	appeal would be limited to  the	 grounds  in
    respect	 of which the leave is granted but the grounds	must
    be  broadly  construed	to  ascertain  the  question  raised
    therein	 and not in a narrow or pedantic manner	 by  literal
    interpretation of the language used. [158 G. H, 159 A-B]
    10.  (c)  Although an order of this Court confining  special
    leave  under  Art.  136, to certain  points  would  imply  a
    rejection  of it so far as other points are concerned,	yet,
    this  Court  has a constitutional power under  Art.  137  of
    reviewing   its	 own  orders.	This  power  may   in	very
    exceptional cases consistently with
    150
    rules  made  under  Art.  145  of  the	Constitution  be  so
    exercised in the interest of justice as to expand the  leave
    itself	subject to due notice to the  respondents  concerned
    and fair opportunity to meet the results of an extension  of
    grounds of appeal. [159 B-C]
    10.  (d)  In  the  instant case,  the  appellant-tenant	 was
    substantially contending that in view of the introduction of
    Sub-Section  3-A  of  S. 13, the suit  when  instituted	 was
    incompetent and that on a construction of S. 17E  introduced
    in  the	 parent Act by S. 4 of the  West    Premises Tenancy
    (complete)  Act,  1970, the decree would  be  unenforceable.
    The contention was that by amendment of pleading a suit when
    instituted  was incompetent, should not have  been  rendered
    competent.  From that springs the question about the court's
    jurisdiction  to deal with the suit subsequent to  amendment
    of  pleadings.	If it is one compact ground it can  be	said
    that  the contention raised herein, if not  explicit,  would
    certainly  be  implicit	 in the	 grounds  limited  to  which
    special Leave was granted and, therefore, this Court can not
    refuse to entertain it.
    [159-C-E]
    11.  Sub-section  (3A) of S, 13 bars a suit for eviction  on
    any of the grounds mentioned in clause& (f) and (ff) of Sub-
    section	 (1) of S. 13 for a period of three years since	 the
    acquisition  of interest by landlord in the  premises.	 The
    suit  should, therefore, have been filed three	years  after
    the  purchase  of  the	property  by  the  respondent.	 The
    respondent  would  have	 been then required to	show  as  to
    whether	 he required the premises and whether he  had  other
    reasonably  suitable accommodation.  The enquiry would	have
    been  related  to  the time when the suit  could  have	been
    competently  instituted.  After focusing attention  on	this
    point, the trial Court would appreciate evidence and  record
    findings  of  fact  which can be re-examined  by  the  first
    Appellate  Court being the final court of facts.  This	very
    opportunity  was  denied  to  the  appellant  by  the  Bench
    arrogating the jurisdiction to itself to record evidence and
    to  proceed to appreciate the same and reach conclusions  of
    fact which become final.  Therefore, considerable  prejudice
    was caused to the appellant by the procedure followed by the
    Court and this Court will be amply justified in	 interfering
    with it and remand  the same. [159 G-H, 160 A-B]
    12.  (a) By S. 17E power was conferred upon the Court to set
    aside the decrees   passed  in suits brought by	 transferee-
    landlord  within  three years from the date of the  date  of
    transfer.   When appeal is pending it would be open  to	 the
    tenant	to  raise the contention that the  suit	 has  become
    incompetent;  but  where  the appeal is not  pending  or  an
    execution application is pending and the tenant is still not
    physically  evicted,  it  would	 be  open  to  him  to	take
    advantage of the provisions contained in S. 17E. [160 C-E]
    12.  (b)  The  provision  contained in S.  17E	provides  an
    additional  remedy  covering  classes of  cases	 of  tenants
    against	 whom decree for eviction was made but there was  no
    pending	 appeal against the decree.  If the  tenant  applies
    under S. 17E he could get relief on the only ground that the
    decree	was  on the ground mentioned in Clause (f)  of	Sub-
    section	 (1)  of  S. 13 and not the  other  grounds  because
    relief was sought to be granted by the provisions  contained
    in  S.	17E  to those tenants against whom  the	 decree	 for
    eviction was made under 8.13(1)(f). Therefore, it could	 not
    be said that once a specific remedy under S. 17E is provided
    for the:benefit of tenant under a decree for eviction on the
    ground mentioned in S. 13 (1) (f), that is the only way	 and
    no  other in which he could get relief.	 If so,	 his  appeal
    would  become  incompetent.   Remedy  under  S.	 17E  is  an
    additional  remedy.   More particularly it appears  for	 the
    benefit	 of these tenants against Whom decree  for  eviction
    was made under S.13(1)(f) and appeal by whom was not pending
    so  that they could protect themselves against eviction,  by
    landlords whose suits had become incompetent in view of	 the
    provisions  contained in Sub-section (3A) of S. 13. [160  G,
    161 A-C]
    
    
    
    JUDGMENT:
    

CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION : Civil Appeal No. 1138 of 1977\.

(From the Judgment and Order dt. 12-8-76 of the High Court of Judicature at
Calcutta in Letters Patent No. 184 of 1974.) 151 A. K. Sen and Sukumar Ghosh
for the Appellant. Niren De and D. N. Mukherjee for the Respondent. The
Judgment of the Court was delivered by DESAI, J.-This appeal by special leave
arises from a suit filed by the plaintiff respondent for eviction of defendant
appellant from the ground floor of premises No. 16/lA, Ram Ratan Bose Lane,
Shyambazar, which the appellant was occupying as a tenant on a monthly rent of
Rs. 37/-, on the ground that the respondent required the same for his own use
and occupation. The suit ended in a decree in favour of the respondent and was
confirmed in appeal by the Additional District Judge. The appellant thereupon
preferred Second Appeal to the High Court at Calcutta. In the second appeal
the appellant sought permission to adduce additional evidence to the effect
that the requirement of the landlord stood satisfied because he had recovered
possession of four rooms on the first and second floors of the same building.
A contention was also raised by him that the suit filed by the landlord was
incompetent, it having been instituted within a period of three years of the
acquisition of his interest as landlord in the premises by transfer and was
accordingly hit by sub-section (3A) of section 13 of the West Bengal Premises
Tenancy Act, 1956, as amended by the West Bengal Premises Tenancy (Second
Amendment) Act, 1969. The contentions raised by the appellant in the second
appeal were overruled by the High Court and the appeal was dismissed and the
decree for eviction was affirmed. Upon a certificate granted by the learned
single Judge of the High Court the appellant preferred appeal under clause 15
of the Letters Patent. When the appeal under clause 15 of the Letters Patent
was pending in the High Court, respondent plaintiff sought and obtained leave
to amend the plaint and consequently the appellant defendant filed additional
written statement. Thereafter the court framed fresh issues arising from the
amended pleadings as under :

> "1. Is the premises in dispute reasonably required by the plaintiff-
> respondent for his own occupation and for the occupation of the members of
> his family?
    
    
    	      2.    Is	  the	 plaintiff-respondent	  in
    	      possession   of	any   reasonably    suitable
    	      accommodation ?"
    

> Oral and documentary evidence was permitted to be adduced and thereafter the
> appeal was set down for hearing.

Ultimately the appeal was dismissed affirming the decree for eviction. Hence
the present appeal by special leave. It is an admitted position that the
building of which suit promises form part was purchased by the landlord on
October 1, 1963 and notice dated June 16, 1964 terminating the tenancy was
served upon the tenant. The landlord filed title suit No. 198 of 1964 on
August 27, 1964, against the tenant.

152

By the amending Act 34 of 1969 West Bengal Premises Tenancy Act, 1956
(hereinafter referred to as the 'parent Act') was amended. Clause (f) of
sub-s. (1) of s. 13 of the parent Act was substituted by s. 4 of the Amending
Act as under :-

> "(f) subject to the provisions of sub-section (3A) and section 13A, where
> the premises are reasonably required by the landlord for purposes of
> building or rebuilding or for making thereto substantial additions o r
> alterations, and such building or rebuilding, or additions or alterations,
> cannot be carried out without the premises being vacated; (ff) subject to
> the provisions of sub-section (3A), where the premises are reasonably
> required by the landlord for his own occupation if he is the owner or for
> the occupation of any person for whose benefit the premises are held and the
> landlord or such person is not in possession of any reasonably suitable
> accommodation;"

> A new sub-s. (3A) was added after sub-s. (3) of s. 13 as under "(3A) where a
> landlord has acquired his interest in the premises by transfer, no suit for
> the recovery of possession of the premises on any of the grounds mentioned
> in clause (f) or clause (ff) of sub-section (1) shall be instituted by the
> landlord before the expiration of a period of three years from the date of
> his acquisition of such interest Provided that a suit for the recovery of
> the possession of the premises may be instituted on the ground mentioned in
> clause (f) of sub- section (1) before the expiration of the said period of
> three years if the controller, on the application of the landlord and after
> giving the tenant an opportunity of being heard, permits, by order, the
> institution of the suit on the ground that the building or rebuilding, or
> the additions or alterations, as the case may be, are necessary to make the
> premises safe for human habitation."

By  s. 13 of the Amending Act, the amendments in the parent Act introduced by
ss. 4, 7, 8 and 9 of the Amending Act were made retroactive, being applicable
to suits including appeals which were pending at the date of the commencement
of the Amending Act. Constitutional validity of sub-s. (3A) introduced in s.
13 was challenged before a Division Bench of the Calcutta High Court in
Sailendra Nath v. S. E. Dutt.(1) The High Court voided only that part of
sub-s. (3A) of s. 13 by which it was made retroactive by applying it to
pending suits and appeals as being ultra vires of Art. 19(1)(f) of the
Constitution on the ground of unreasonableness. The matter came before this
Court and in B. Banerjee v. Anita Pan, (2) Krishna Iyer, J. speaking for the
majority observed as under (1) A.I.R. 1971 Cal. 331.

(2) [1975] 2 S.C.R. 774.

153

> "We see in the amendment Act no violation of Art. 19(1) (f) read with 19(5).
> The same High Court, in a later case Kalyani Dutt v.

Promila Bala Dassi, ILR (1972) 2 Cal. 660, came to the same conclusion by what
it called independently considering the question'. We discern nothing
substantially different in th e analysis or approach to merit review of ou r
result. We hold s. 13 of the Amendment Act valid and repel the vice of
unreasonableness discovered in both the reported rulings of the High Court."

While upholding constitutional validity of sub-s. (3A) of s. 13, in order to
work out the mechanics of the application of amending provisions to pending
actions, with a view to avoiding multiplicity of litigation as well as
protraction of litigation it was suggested that the plaintiff landlord may put
in fresh pleadings wherever the suit is pending and the tenant should be given
an opportunity to fit,-- his written statement and the Court should dispose of
the matter after giving both sides the right to lead additional evidence. It
was observed that it would certainly be opened to the appellate court either
to take evidence directly or to call for a finding. Expeditious disposal of
belated litigation will undoubtedly be a consideration with the Court in
exercising this discretion. The proviso to sub-s. (3A) can also be complied
with if the plaintiff gets the permission of the Rent Controller in the manner
laid down therein before filing his fresh pleadings. Pursuant to the decision
rendered by this Court in B. Banerjee's case (supra), the High Court in the
pending Letters Patent Appeal permitted the plaintiff to amend the plaint
whereupon the defendant filed additional written statement and fresh issues
were framed as hereinbefore set out and after permitting the parties to lead
oral and documentary evidence the appeal was disposed of as hereinabove
mentioned.

Mr. Niren De appearing for the respondent at one stage attempted to contend
that to the extent sub-s. (3A) of s. 13 is made retroactive it is ultra vires
article 19 (1) (f) and thus he wanted to reopen the controversy settled by
this Court in B. Banerjee's case. We were not persuaded by any such submission
and we accept the ratio in B. Banerjee's case that the retroactive operation
of sub-s. (3A) of s. 13 does not offend article 19 (1) (f) on the ground of
unreasonableness.

Mr. A. K. Sen learned counsel who appeared for the appellant vigorously
contended that the Bench hearing appeal under clause 15 of the Letters Patent
has no jurisdiction to take fresh evidence even if it permits amendment of the
pleadings. While working out the mechanics consequent upon upholding the
validity of sub-s. (3A) it was open to the Court hearing the appeal under
clause 15 of the Letters Patent to grant permission to amend the pleadings. By
a catena of decisions Order 6, Rule 17 of the Code of Civil Procedure has been
interpreted to mean that leave to amend may be granted at any stage of the
proceedings which may include appeal or even second appeal. But, urged Mr.
Sen, that the jurisdiction of the Court hearing an appeal under clause 15 does
not extend to 11-211SCI/78 154 taking and appreciating evidence and recording
findings of facts on issues that may_have to be determined arising from
amended pleadings. It was said that Order 41, Rules 25 and 27 are exhaustive
of the powers of the appellate court to take additional evidence.
Simultaneously it was pointed out that s. 100 prescribes the peripheral limits
of the Court's jurisdiction while hearing a second appeal. Section 100 as it
stood at the relevant time permitted a second appeal to the High Court from
every decree passed in appeal by any Court subordinate to High Court on any of
the_following grounds, viz., (a) the decision being contrary to law or to some
usage having the force of law; (b) the decision having failed to determine
some material issue of law or usage having the force of law; (c) a substantial
error or defect in the procedure provided by the Code or by any other law for
the time being in force, which may possibly have produced error or defect in
the decision of the case upon the merits. It was submitted that if this is the
peripheral limit of jurisdiction of a court hearing second appeal, it is just
not conceivable that a Bench hearing an appeal under clause 15 of the Letters
Patent upon a certificate granted by the single Judge could have a wider
jurisdiction than the court hearing the second appeal.

There is a near concensus amongst the various High Courts that ordinarily an
appellant is not entitled in an appeal under clause 15 to be heard on points
which have not been raised before the judge'from whose judgment the appeal is
preferred. Now, if in second appeal the findings of fact recorded by the first
appellate court are taken as binding unless fresh additional evidence is
permitted to be led when again appreciation of evidence to record a finding of
fact would become necessary, that position is not altered even if amendment of
pleadings is granted which puts into controversy some new facts alleged in
amended pleadings and therefore the Court hearing the second appeal after
granting amendment could not take over the function of the trial court or the
first appellate court and undertake appre- ciation of evidence and record
finding,, of facts. That is not the function envisaged by the Code of the
Court hearing second appeal under s. 100. This becomes crystal clear from the
provision contained in s. 103 which defines the power of the High Court to
determine a question of fact while hearing second appeal. But this power of
the Court is limited to evidence on record which again is sufficient to
determine an issue of fact necessary for disposal of the appeal and which has
not been determind by the lower appellate Court or which has been wrongly
determined by such court. When pleadings are amended at the stage of the
appeal under clause 15 of the Letters Patent and fresh allegations of facts
are thus introduced in the controversy which necessitate additional evidence
being permitted it would not be open to the Court to proceed to record
evidence and to appreciate the evidence and record findings of fact, a
function which even ordinarily is hot undertaken by the High Court bearing the
second appeal, much less can it be done while hearing an appeal under clause
15 of the Letters Patent. When on account of a subsequent change in law,
amendment of the pleadings is granted which raises disputed questions of fact,
the situation would not be one governed by Order 155 41, r. 27. At that stage
it could not be said that the appellate court is permitting production of
additional evidence, oral or documentary on the ground that the court from
whose decree the appeal is preferred has refused to adduce evidence which
ought to have been admitted or the appellate court requires any documents to
be produced or any witness to be examined to enable it to pronounce judgment.
Not would the situation be one which could be covered under the expression
"other substantial cause". Once pleading are permitted to be amended which
bring into focus altogether new or fresh disputed questions of fact which have
to be resolved on additional evidence that would be necessary to be led, the
function is one of appreciation of evidence more appropriately to be
undertaken by the trial court or at the most the first appellate court but not
the High Court hearing the second appeal or an appeal under clause 15 of the
Letters Patent. It is not for a moment suggested that at the stage at which
leave to amend pleadings has been granted the High Court was not competent to
grant it.In fact, in an identical situation in B. Banerjee's case (supra)
'this Court had in terms indicated that to avoid hardship to the plaintiff
landlord the appropriate thing would be to grant leave to amend the pleading
and five an equal opportunity to the defendant to controvert if lie so chooses
what the plaintiff contends by amended pleading. But once that is done
immediately the question of jurisdiction of the court hearing the appeal under
clause 15 of the Letters Patent would arise and if the appeal was entertained
against the judgment rendered by the High Court in second appeal the
limitations on the power of the High Court hearing the second appeal will ipso
facto limit and circumscribe the jurisdiction of the appellate Bench. If the
High Court while hearing second appeal, conceding that it could have allowed
amendment of pleading, where the amended pleadings substantially ;raise
disputed questions of fact which need resolution afresh after additional
evidence, could not undertake the exercise of recording evidence and
appreciating it and recording findings of fact, but would appropriately remand
the case to the trial court, the Bench hearing the appeal against the judgment
in second appeal could Pot enlarge its jurisdiction by-undertaking that
forbidden exercise. It would, therefore, appear that when a Bench of a High
Court is hearing an appeal ;preferred upon a certificate granted under clause
15 of the Letters Patent by a single judge of the High Court who by his
judgment has disposed of the second appeal the appellate bench would be
subject to the limitation on its power and jurisdiction to appreciate or
reappreciate evidence and to record finding of fact which were never raised
before the trial court or the first appellate court as the pleadings were
permitted to be amended by it and the question was raised for the first time
before it, to the same extent as the High Court hearing second appeal with
constraints of ss. 100 and 103 of the Code. It must be distinctly understood
that admitting evidence is entirely different from appreciating it and acting
upon it. The Judicial Committee of the Privy Council in Indrajit Pratap Sahi
v. Amar Singh & Ors.,(1) was concerned with the ambit of jurisdiction of the
appellate court to admit evidence under Order 41, r. 27. It was held that the
jurisdic-

(1) Law Reports 50 I.A. 183.

156

tion can be exercised at the instance of a party and the Judicial Committee
has unrestricted power to admit documents where sufficient grounds have been
shown for their having not been produced at the initial stage of the
litigation. This view was affirmed by this Court in Surinder Kumar & Ors. v.
Gian Chand & Ors.(1) But that has no relevance to the situation under
discussion here.

Mr. De, however, contended that the appellant had agreed or in fact had never
objected to the appellate Bench examining witnesses and recording findings of
fact on appreciation of evidence and that it would not now be open to the
appellant to resile from the position adopted by him and he is estopped from
doing it. This contention raises the vexed question whether consent can confer
jurisdiction on a court which lacks inherent jurisdiction. If the Court lacks
inherent jurisdiction no amount of consent can confer jurisdiction. This is
settled by a long line of decisions commencing from Ledgard v. Bull, (2)
wherein the Judicial Committee was examining the question whether a District
Judge could entertain a suit complaining infringement of patent not upon
institution before him but by transfer from the Court of the subordinate Judge
where it was instituted. It was accepted that if the suit was instituted in
the court of the District Judge, the Distt. Judge had jurisdiction to
entertain it but a very narrow and limited question was examined whether the
Distt. Judge could entertain it on transfer from the Court of the Subordinate
Judge. It was also pointed out that the defendant who had raised a contention
as to the jurisdiction of the Distt. Judge to hear the suit had given his
positive consent to the transfer of the suit. Even then the Judicial,
Committee held as under :

> "The District Judge was perfectly competent to entertain and try the suit,
> if it were competently brought, and their Lordships do not doubt that, in
> such a case, a defendant may be barred, by his own conduct, from objecting
> to irregularities in the institution of the suit. When the Judge has no
> inherent jurisdiction over the subject-matter of a suit, the parties cannot,
> by their mutual consent, convert it into a proper judicial process, although
> they may constitute the Judge their arbiter, and be bound by his decision on
> the merits when these are submitted to him'.

Consent in such a situation could not be interpreted as waiver of the
objection nor could it confer jurisdiction where- the Court inherently lacked
jurisdiction to try the suit.

This very principle was reaffirmed in Meenakshi Naidoo V. Subramamya
Sastri,(3) wherein the High Court in appeal against the order of the District-
Judge had set aside the order of the Distt. Judge appointing the appellant on
the Committee of the Pagode in the Madras Presidency. When the matter was
before the High Court it was never (1) [1958] S.C.R. 548.

(2) Law Reports 13 I.A. 134 at p. 145.

(3) Law Reports, 14 I.A. 160.

157

contended that the appeal was incompetent and such a contention was raised
before the Judicial Committee for the first time. Following the decision in
Ledgard v. Bull (supra), it was held that when the Judge has no inherent
jurisdiction over the subject matter of a suit, the parties cannot by their
mutual consent convert it into a proper judicial process, although they may
constitute the Judge their arbiter, and be bound by his decision on the merits
when these are submitted to him. Therefore, the failure on the part of the
appellant to object to the High Court hearing an appeal under clause 15 of the
Letters Patent taking oral evidence in respect of the amended pleadings would
not cloth the Bench with jurisdiction to record fresh oral evidence and
proceed to Appreciate the same and record findings of facts.

Mr. De next contended that the contention now raised by the appellant is not
open to him in view of the limited leave granted by this Court under Article
136 of the Constitution. While granting special leave to appeal against the
judgment of the Division Bench of the High Court, this Court made an order as
under :

> "Special leave is granted limited only to grounds Nos. 2 and 5 of the
> special leave petition."

> Grounds Nos. 2 and 5 are as under "2. For that the impugned judgment of the
> High Court is vitiated by manifest error in law that by granting amendment
> of plaint on July 11, 1975 which was originality filed on June 16, 1964
> within 3 years from the purchase of the suit premises by the landlord, the
> suit can be taken out of the mandatory prohibition laid down in sub-section
> (3A) of section 13 of the W.B. Premises Tenancy Act.

> 5\. For that the impugned judgment is vitiated by a manifest error of law
> and the learned judges failed to take into consideration the provisions of
> section 17E of the W.B. Premises Tenancy Act introduced by the W.B. Premises
> Tenancy (Amendment) Act, 1970 to the effect that even the decrees passed in
> earlier suits in contravention of the provisions of sub-section (3A) of
> section 13 of the Act should be vacated."

A very narrow, literal and verbal interpretation of grounds Nos. and 5 may
prima facie indicate that the question in terms now raised would not be
covered by ground either 2 or 5.But it would not be proper to put tomorrow an
interpretation on the language employed in grounds nos. 2 and 5. When leave is
limited to certain grounds it would no the appropriate to put a very narrow
and grammatical construction of the grounds as if we were construing a statute
or some rule, regulation or order of a public authority. More often it is our
experience while hearing applications for special leave that grounds set out
in special leave application are overlapping and fairly often repeated, and
even occasionally vague. Therefore, as far as 158 possible, the grounds should
not be very strictly construed or should not be construed in such a manner as
to make the special leave grant-ed under Article. 136 self-defeating. Attempt
of the Court must be to find out what was the grievance or contention that was
being put, forth before the Court which appealed to the Court in granting
special leave under Article 136. Article 136 confers power on this Court in
its discretion to grant special leave from any judgment, decree,
determination, sentence or order in any case or matter, passed or made by any
court or tribunal in the territory of India. Ordinarily once special leave is
granted it is against the judgment, decree, etc. However, by practice this
Court sometimes limits the leave to certain specific: points. If the leave is
limited to specific points, obviously the whole case is not open before the
Court hearing the appeal. In Nafe Singh & Anr. v. State of Haryana,(1) this
Court declined to examine the question whether on evidence the case was proved
to the satisfaction of the Court, because special leave was limited to the
question of sentence. Similarly, in Jagdev Singh & Anr. v. State of Punjab,(-)
leave was limited to the applicability of the Probation of Offienders Act and
accordingly this Court did not permit enlargement of the leave observing that
the scope of the leave was confined to the limitations specified in the order
granting special leave and will not be enlarged for considering the
correctness of the conviction for the particular offence. It was, however,
urged that where a certificate is granted by the high Court under Article 133
specifying the question of law in respect of which the certificate is granted,
this Court did not limit the scope of the appeal to the terms of the
certificate. In Addagada Raghavamma & Anr. v. Addagada Chenchamma & Anr.(3),
while negativing a preliminary objections to the effect that the certificate
granted by the High Court under Article 133(1) must govern the scope of the
appeal to the Supreme Court for otherwise the said certificate would become
otiose, the Court held that the terms of the certificate did not circumscribe
the scope of the appeal and once a proper certificate is granted the Supreme
Court undoubtedly has power as a court of appeal to, consider the correctness
of the decision appealed against from everystand point whether of questions of
fact or law. It was held that if the certificate is good, the provisions of
Article 133 did not confine the scope of the appeal to the certificate. This
decision cannot help the appellant because when a certificate is granted under
Article 133 (1) as. it stood prior to the Constitution (Thirtieth Amendment)
Act, 1972, an appeal lay to the Supreme Court from any judgment, decree or
final' order, if the High Court certified the case falling under clauses (a),
(b) or (c). Once a certificate is granted this Court undoubtedly has the power
as a Court of Appeal to consider the correctness of the decision appealed
against from every standpoint whether on questions of fact or law. It may in
its wisdom not interfere with the concurrent findings of fact but there is no
bar to its jurisdiction from interfering with the same. But when an appeal is
preferred under Article 136 and the leave is limited to the specific grounds,
the scope of appeal cannot be (1) [1971] 3 S.C.C. 934.

(2) A.I.R. 1973 S.C. 2427.

(3) [1964] 2 S.C.R. 933.

159

enlarged so as to extend beyond what is permissible to be urged in support of
the grounds to which the leave is limited. Undoubtedly, therefore, the scope
of the appeal would be limited to the grounds in respect of which the leave is
granted, but having said this, it must be made distinctly clear that the
grounds must be broadly construed to ascertain the real question raised
therein and not in it narrow or pedantic manner by literal interpretation of
the language used.

Again, it must be borne in mind that, although, an order of this Court
confining special leave under article 136 to certain points would imply a
rejection of it so far as other points are concerned, yet, this Court as a
constitutional power under article 137 of reviewing its own order. This power
may, in very exceptional cases, consistently with, rules made under article
145 of the Constitution, be so exercised, in the interests of justice, as to
expand the leave itself subject to due notice to the respondents concerned
that fair opportunity to meet the results of an extension of grounds of
appeal., The appellant tenant was substantially contending that in view of the
introduction of sub-section (3A) of s. 13, the suit when instituted was
incompetent and that on a proper construction of s. 17E introduced in the
parent Act by s. 4 of the West Bengal Premises Tenancy (Complete) Act, 1970,
the decree would be unenforceable. The contention was that by amendment of
pleading a suit when instituted was incompetent, should not have been rendered
competent. From that springs the question about the court's jurisdiction to
deal with the suit subsequent to amendment of pleadings. If it is one compact
ground it can be said that the contention raised herein, if not explicit,
would certainly be implicit in the grounds limited to which special leave was
granted and, therefore, we cannot refuse to entertain it. It was lastly urged
that ultimately whether the High Court should appreciate the evidence and
record findings of fact or remand it to, the trial Court is a matter within
the discretion of the High Court and that if the High Court has exercised the
discretion one way, this Court should not interfere with the same. It was
further said that rules of procedure are not made for the, purpose of
hindering justice but for advancing substantial justice. It was, further said
that the appellant tenant was given full opportunity to produce his evidence
and had the benefit of. appreciation of evidence by a Bench of two judges of
the High Court and that it would be paying undue and undeserved respect to the
rules of procedure to remand the matter at this stage. Once the amendment is
allowed, the basic approach to the suit would undergo a change. Sub-section
(3A) of s. 13 bars a suit for eviction on any of the grounds mentioned in
clauses (f) and (ff) of sub-s. (1) of s. 13 for a period of three years since
the acquisition of interest by landlord in the premises. The suit should,
therefore, have been filed three years after the purchase of property by the
respondent. The respondent would have been then required to show as to whether
he required the premises and whether he had other reasonably suitable
accommodation. The enquiry would have been related to the time when the suit
could have been competently instituted. After focusing attention on this 160
point, the trial court would appreciate evidence, and record findings of fact
which can be reexamined by the first appellate court being the final court of
facts. This very opportunity was denied to, the appellant by the Bench
arrogating the jurisdiction to itself to record evidence and to proceed to
appreciate the same and reach conclusions of fact which become final.
Therefore, considerable prejudice was caused to the appellant by the procedure
followed by the court and this Court will be amply justified in interfering
with the same. Ile remand, there fore, is inevitable. Before concluding the
judgment, we must advert to one contention raised by Mr. De for the
respondent. It was urged that the appellant tenant leaving failed to take
advantage of s. 17E introduced-by the West Bengal Premises Tenancy Amendment
(Complete) Act, 1970, it is not open to him to challenge the decree of
eviction passed against him. By  s. 17E power was conferred upon the court to
set aside certain decrees passed in suits brought by transferee landlords
within three years of the date of transfer. In fast this was the necessary
corollary of the introduction of sub-s. (3A) in s. 13 and making it
'retroactive. There may be tenants against whom decree- for eviction was made
at the instance of transferee landlords whose suits would be otherwise
incompetent in view of sub-s. (3A.) of  s. 13. Now, it may be that even though
the decree for eviction was passed by the Court, the tenant may have continued
in possession because some proceedings may be pending or for some other
reason. In such a situation, upon an application made by the tenant within a
period of 60 days, from the date of commencement of the Amending Act, the
Court was required to set aside the decree for eviction. When appeal is
pending it would Pe open to the tenant to raise the contention that the suit
has become incompetent, but where the appeal is not pending or an execution
application is- pending and the tenant is still not physically evicted, it
would be open to him to take advantage of the provisions contained in s. 17E.
The present appellant appears to have made an application purporting to be
under S. 17E on 25th April 1970 in the Court of Additional Munsif at Sealdah.
On this application notice was ordered to be issued to the other side. Notice
of the application appears to have been refused by the respondent looking to
the order sheet of the learned Munsif dated 9th September 1970. This was
treated as proper service and the present appellant was directed to take steps
to produce certain unpunched court-fee stamps. The appellant appears to have
failed to take necessary steps and the application was rejected for want of
prosecution. It was contended that once the appellant applied under  S. 17E
for setting aside the decree of eviction, the decree has become binding and it
is not open to him to question the correctness of the decree. There is no
merit- in this connection because the appeal in which the decree was
questioned was still pending. The provision contained in S. 17E provides an
additional remedy covering classes of cases of tenants against whom decree for
eviction was made but there was no pending appeal against the decree. If the
submission of Mr. De is accepted, the provisions contained in S. 17E would be
rendered nugatory. We specifically asked Mr. De a question as to what would
161 be the position where a decree for eviction is made on two grounds, one
under s. 13(1) (f) and the other under other provisions of s. 13 and the
appeal of the tenant is pending. Would the appeal become incompetent if
the-.tenant does not apply under s. 17E ? If the tenant applies under s. 17E
he can get relief on the only ground that the decree was on the ground
mentioned in clause (f) of sub-s. (1) of s. 13 and not the other grounds
because relief was sought to be granted by the provisions contained in s. 17E
to those tenants against whom decree for eviction was made under  s. 13(1)
(f). Would the appeal in such a situation become incompetent in part and
remain competent for the other part ? Therefore, it could not be said that
once a specific remedy under s. 17E is provided for the benefit of tenants
under a decree for eviction on the ground mentioned in  s. 13(1) (f), that is
the only way and no other in which he could get relief. If so, his appeal
would become incompetent. Remedy under s. 17E is an additional remedy. More
particularly it appears for the benefit of those tenants against whom decree
for eviction was made under  s. 13 (1) (f) and appeal by whom was not pending
so that they could protect themselves against eviction by landlords whose
suits had become incompetent in view of the provisions contained in sub-s.
(3A) of s. 13.

Accordingly, this appeal is allowed and the decree for eviction made by all
the Courts against the appellant is set aside and the suit is remanded to the
trial court to proceed further from the stage after amendments of pleadings
were granted by the High Court and the relevant issues were framed pursuant to
the amended pleadings. In the circumstances of this case there shall be no
order as to costs of appeal in this Court.

    
    
    S.R.	      Appeal allowed : Case remanded.
    162
    
    
    
    

