

Madras High Court

The Clan Line Steamers Ltd. vs Gordon Woodroffe And Co. And Ors. on 6
November, 1978

Equivalent citations: (1979) 1 MLJ 349

Author: C Paul

JUDGMENT C.J.R. Paul, J.

1\. This appeal has been preferred against the order of Padmanabhan, J., on
Application No. 2640 of 1978 in C.S. No. 26 of 1978, refusing to revoke the
leave to sue granted to the first respondent-plaintiff under Clause 12 of the
Letter Patent.

2\. The first respondent-plaintiff, M/s. Gordon Woodroffe and Co. (Madras)
Private Limited, filed the suit C.S. No. 26 of 1978 on the original side of
this Court against respondents 2 to 4 for a declaration that the termination
of the plaintiff's appointment as the first defendant's agents at Madras,
Kakinada and Visakhapatnam together with the plaintiff's function as the first
defendant's co-ordinating agent for the first defendant's trade from India and
as the first defendant's controlling agent for Cuddalore, Masulipatinam.
Nagapattinam and Trivandrum is illegal, void, inoperative and not binding on
the plaintiff and for a permanent injunction restraining the first defendant
or their agents or servants or anybody claiming under or through them from
interfering with the possession and enjoyment of the property of the
plaintiff, namely, Clan Line Agency for the Ports of Madras, Kakinada and
Visakhapatnam together with the plaintiff's functioning as the first
defendant's coordinating agent for their trade from India and functioning as
their controlling agent for Cuddalore, Masulipatnam Nagapattinam and
Trivandrum and also restraining the first defendant from taking away the said
agency from the plaintiff and from appointing the second or the third
defendant or any other person or company or firm as their agents, or in the
alternative directing the 1st defendant to pay a sum of Rupees one crore to
the plaintiff as and for damages.

3\. Among the allegations contained in the plaint, the material ones in so far
as this appeal is concerned, are the following : By a written agreement dated
2lst September, 1878 entered into between the plaintiff-company and the first
defendant, the plaintiff was appointed the sole steamer agent for the Clan
Line Steamers Ltd. U.K. and under the agreement the plaintiff acquired 1/64th
share of the Clan Line Vessels 'Clan Alpine' and 'Clan Fraser and accordingly
the plaintiff invested large amounts of money for building up and expanding
the cargo trade in the three ports of Madras, Kakinada and Visakhapatnam and
due to the tremeudous, extraordinary and special efforts made by the
plaintiff, the cargo traffic had increased by leaps and bounds and the
plaintiff-company was induced to enter into the aforesaid agreement on the
basis that the agency was irrevocable and it was on that basis that the
Plaintiff expended enormous amounts for building up the agency, business : and
the plaintiff had always performed the terms of the agency and has always been
willing and ready to perform the terms of the agreement. But on 25th October,
1977, the second defendant informed Mr. Vishnu Mohan, one of the Directors of
the plaintiff-company that he had received a notice of termination of the
agency from the first defendant and on 1st November, 1977 the second defendant
showed the notice of termination dated 19th October, 1977. The plaintiff
contends that the termination of the agency is arbitrary, capricious and
without any valid reason and for no sufficient cause and the reasons given in
the letter of termination were totally unfounded and without any basis and the
termination of the agency by first defendant was under the erroneous
assumption that there was a directive from the Reserve Bank of India Â£0
discontinue the agency activities from 1st January, 1978 and the first
defendant who is persisting in sticking to its decision has appointed the
second defendant as its agent even after knowing that the second defendant had
made mispresentation and had manoeuvred to grab the agency for himself at the
expense of the company. The plaintiff further contended that it was entitled
to reasonable notice before termination of the agency and also for
compensation. It might be noted that it was asserted in the plaint that the
first defendant was carrying on steamer business in India at Calcutta, Bombay,
Cochin and Madras and other ports through agents and the third defendant-
company was started by the second defendant for taking over the agency. The
plaintiff had filed the suit O.S. No. 450 of 1977 against defendants 2 and 3
for a permanent injunction restraining them from, taking over the steamer
agency. The present suit C.S. No. 26 of 1978 was subsequently filed.

4\. It might be noted that this suit was filed without obtaining leave under
Clause 12 of the Letters Patent, for it is asserted in the plaint that the
cause of action arose at Madras where the first defendant carries on business
through its agents. Subsequently, Application No. 1771 of 1978 was filed in
the present suit for impleading the Clan Line Steamers Ltd., as the fourth
defendant on the ground that the proposed fourth defendant was the principal
of the first defendant-company which, has been carrying on the business of
Clan Line Steamers Ltd, and the Fourth defendant was a necessary party,
inasmuch as it is the principal, first defendant-company; and Application No.
1742 of 1978 was filed by the plaintiff for leave under Clause 12 of the
Letters Patent to institute the suit against the proposed fourth defendant.
Leave was thereupon granted on 20th April, 1978. It is to revoke that leave
that Application No. 2640 of 1978 was filed by the fourth defendant.

5\. It was contended on behalf of the proposed fourth defendant that the suit
should have been filed against the first defendant, only after obtaining leave
under Clause 12 of the Setters Patent. Inasmuch as it has been asserted in the
plaint that the first defendant is carrying on business in Madras through its
agent leave to sue under Clause 12 was not obtained when the suit was
instituted. Since the other defendants themselves raised the contention that
the proposed fourth defendant was a necessary party to the suit and the suit
was bad for non-joinder, the plaintiff had to file the application for
impleading the proposed fourth defendant and since the proposed fourth
defendant is carrying on business in London, leave has to be necessarily
obtained under Clause 12 of the Letters Patent before the proposed fourth
defendant is actually impleaded in the suit.

6\. Padmanabhan, J. after considering the matter with reference to the
authorities cited by both sides rejected the contention advanced on behalf of
the proposed fourth defendant that when the plaintiff seeks to add the
proposed fourth defendant as a party, leave cannot be granted by this Court
under Clause 12 of the Letters Patent, since leave had not been originally
granted at the time of the institution of the suit. He also found that the
balance was also in favour of not revoking the leave already granted. The
proposed fourth defendant has therefore come up in appeal against that order.

7\. It has been contended by Mr. Govind Swaminathan on behalf of the appellant
first of all that since leave to sue had not been obtained when the suit was
originally filed the suit is non est and consequently there can be no question
of adding a new party or obtaining leave in that suit under Clause 12 of the
Letters patent subsequent to the institution of the suit even on the ground
that a new party is proposed to be added; and secondly that if leave to sue
should have been obtained at the time of the institution of the suit that
defect cannot be cured by now asking for leave to sue on the ground that a new
party is proposed to be added.

8\. With regard to the first contention of Mr. Govind Swaminathan that since
leave to sue had not been obtained against the first defendant at the time of
the institution of the suit, the suit is nonest and as such there cannot be
any addition of any new party and asking, for leave to sue in respect of that
party, we have to mention that while disposing of O.S.A. No. 22 of 1978
preferred by the plaintiff against the order dismissing his application for
injunction, we had dealt with the objection, of the first defendant that the
suit against him is not maintainable at all in view of the fact that leave to
sue had not been obtained under Clause 12 of the Letters Patent, even though
the first defendant does not actually carry on any business within the
jurisdiction of this Court and we observed:

As regards the objection based on Clause 12 of the Letters Patent that no
leave to sue has been obtained before the filing of the suit even though the
first respondent does not carry on any business within the jurisdiction of
this Court, we are prima facie of the view that the first respondent should be
deemed to be carrying on its business within the limits of this Court through
its agent, the appellant and on the date of suit, therefore, the question of
obtaining leave to sue does not arise. The question whether the first
respondent carried on business through its agent within the limits of this
Court is also a matter that requires elaborate consideration at the time of
the trial after evidence is let in.

Therefore it cannot be contended at this stage that that the suit filed
against the first defendant is non est. It is only during the trial of the
suit after evidence is let in that it could be decided whether or not the
first defendant is carrying on business within the jurisdiction of this Court
through its agents and if it is eventually found that the first defendant is
not carrying on any business within the jurisdiction of this Court through its
agents and as such leave to sue should have been obtained under Clause 12 of
the Letters Patent and for want of such leave the suit is not maintainable,
the legal consequence arising from that situation would necessarily follow as
has been pointed out by Padmanabhan, J. As far as the first defendant is
concerned, undoubtedly, if leave to sue was required under Clause 12 of the
Letters Patent and if it had not been obtained at the time of the institution
of the suit, that defect cannot be cured by subsequently granting leave to sue
under Clause 12 of the Letters Patent That is a well-settled proposition of
law which cannot be disputed.

9\. Where leave under Clause 12 is necessary, the granting of such leave is a
condition precedent to the Court having jurisdiction to entertain the suit,
and therefore such leave has to be obtained at the time of the institution of
the suit. vide-Shctnlchandra Rampratap and Ors. v. Bhikatnchand Ganeshlal and
Ors. A.I.R. 1929 Bom. 468, Motilal Tribhovandas Choksey v. Shankarlal Chhaglal
A.I.R. 1939 Bom. 345, Bimal Singh Kothari and Anr. v. Mur Mills Co. Ltd. and
Ors. , Krishitish Kumar Som v. Stale of Bihar and Laliteshwar Singh v.
Rameswar Singh I.L.R. 34 Cal. 619.

10\. Mr. Govind Swaminathan on behalf of the appellant has contended that
inasmuch as the suit was not originally instituted after obtaining leave under
Clause 12, subsequently leave under Clause 12 cannot be asked for or obtained
even when, by way of amendment, a new cause of action or an alternative cause
of action is sought to be introduced or an additional party is sought to be
impleaded and consequently leave to sue in so far as the proposed fourth
defendant is concerned, should not have been granted. In support of his
contention, Mr. Govind Swaminathan has relied first of all on the decision in
Motilal Tribhovandas Choksey v. Shankarlal Chhanganlal A.I.R. 1939 Bom. 345.
That was a case where a suit was filed by 6 partners in a firm against the
defendant alleging that the defendant had given instructions to the six
plaintiffs to effect transactions on his behalf and they worked as his brokers
and as a result of carrying out the transactions those 6 plaintiffs had
suffered a loss and they claimed the same from the defendant. Since the
defendant was a resident of Surat it was asserted in the plaint that a part of
the cause of action had arisen in Bombay within the jurisdiction of the Bombay
High Court and as such leave under Clause 12 of the Letters Patent was
obtained at that stage and the plaint was filed. But subsequently when the
defendant appeared in response to the summons he raised the contention that he
had dealings only with an individual Motilal Tribhovandas Choksey and not with
the plaintiff firm and that the firm, namely, the six plaintiffs together had
no cause of action against him at all. Thereupon the learned Chamber Judge
granted unconditional leave to defend to the defendant. (The suit was filed as
a summary suit) and thereafter the plaint was amended and Motilal Tribhovandas
Choksey, the individual continued the suit in his own name, but no, leave
under Clause 12 of the Letters Patent was obtained at the time when the
amendment was made. It was held by the learned Judge (Kania, J.) of the Bombay
High Court that the obtaining of leave under Clause 12 of the Letters Patent
was the foundation of the jurisdiction and such leave must be obtained before
the institution of the suit and cannot be granted afterwards and further as
held in Rampurtab Samruthroy v. Premsukh Chandanmal (1891) I.L.R. 15 Bom. 93
the leave granted was confined to the cause or causes of action set forward in
the plaint at the time the leave was granted and hence the plaint cannot be
amended so as to alter the cause of action and if an amendment, which would
alter the cause of action was made, it necessarily follows that fresh leave
should be obtained in respect of the altered cause of action and no leave
having been obtained when Motilal, the individual, desired to carry on the
suit, the suit has to be dismissed. It might be noted that Kania, J. did not
consider the question as to whether leave to sue under Clause 12 of the
Letters Patent could have been asked for and obtained before the plaint was
sought to be amended by altering the cause of action.

11\. The next decision cited by Mr. Govind Swaminathan is the one in Barasat
Basirhat Light Railway Co. Ltd. v. District Board 24 Parganas (1944) I.L.R. 2
Cal. 101 : A.I.R. 1946 Cal. 23. There the defendant-Board neither resided nor
carried on business within the jurisdiction and only part of each cause of
action arose within the jurisdiction and consequently leave of the Court was
required before the Court could entertain any of the claims in the suit and
leave was obtained under Clause 12 of the Letters Patent institute the suit at
the time when the only claim made was under certain agreements. But by an
amendment, the company, in the alternative, claimed reliefs under Sections 65,
70 and 72 of the Indian Contract Act. It was held that the new reliefs asked
for were not different forms of relief in respect of the cause of action
originally contained in the plaint but each was a fresh cause of action, for
which leave was required under Clause 12 of the Letters Patent. Referring to
the decision in Rampurtab Samruthroy v. Premsukh Chandanmal (1891) I.L.R. 2
Cal. 101 : A.I.R. 1946 Cal. 23, where it was held that the grant of leave is a
judicial act relating solely to the cause of action set forth in the plaint at
the time leave was obtained and that such leave affords the very foundation of
the jurisdiction and is not available to confer jurisdiction in respect of a
different cause of action which was not judicially considered at the time
leave was granted and that subsequently the plaint cannot be amended so as to
alter the cause of action and that therefore the Court cannot try a different
cause of action save in another suit, Gentle, J. of the Calcutta High Court
held that the grant of leave is a condition precedent to the Court having
jurisdiction to receive such a suit and an amendment to a plaint raising a new
cause action upon which a claim is made is not a fresh suit but is an
additional claim made in an existing suit. It was pointed out hat leave to Sue
was not sought with respect to the cause of action in the amendment either at
the time application was made to amend or when leave was given for the
amendment or when the plaint with the amendment was presented to the Court and
as such the Court had no jurisdiction to receive, try and determine the claims
upon the causes of action in the amendment to the plaint since leave was not
previously obtained in respect of those causes of action before the suit in
which those claims are made was instituted. But then, the learned Judge did
not consider or decide the question whether leave to sue can be asked for and
obtained with respect to the new causes of action at the time when the
application was made to amend. Nevertheless, since the learned Judge has
pointed out that leave to sue was not sought for, either at the time when the
application was made to amend or when leave was given for the amendment it
would appear that he was of the view that leave to sue could have been asked
for and obtained at he time when the application to amend the plaint was made.

12\. The third decision cited by Mr. Govind Swaminathan is the one in Kshitish
Kumar Son v. State of Bihar . In that case the learned single Judge of the
Calcutta High Court, while dealing with an application for amendment of the
plaint, by which amendment the cause of action was sought to be altered and a
new cause of action added, held that no such amendment Can be ordered if it
required leave to be granted under Clause 12 at the time of the amendment, and
it follows that leave under Clause 12 cannot be granted in such a case at any
stage after the institution of the original suit. The learned Judge after
referring to a number of authorities, namely, Laliteshwar Singh v. Rameshwar
Singh (1907) I.L.R. 34 Cal. 619, Rampurtab Samruthroy v. Premsukh Chandamal
(1891) I.L.R. 15 Bom. 93, Motilal Tribhovandas v. Shankarlal Chhaganlal A.I.R.
1939 Bom. 93, Barsast Basirhat Light Railway Co. Ltd. v. District Board A.I.R.
1946 Cal. 23 and Benoy Shankar v. Chhotelal , summarised the result of those
authorities as follows:

1\. Where leave under Clause 12 of the Letters Patent is necessary, the
granting of such leave is the condition precedent to the Court having
jurisdiction to entertain the suit.

2\. Therefore, such leave is to be obtained at the time of the institution of
the suit.

3\. Where by amendment of a plaint, a cause of action is altered or a new
cause of action added, it is not a new suit but the old suit in a new form In
such a case, no amendment can be ordered if it requires leave to be granted
under Clause 12 of the Letterse Patentat the time of the amendment.

4\. It follows that leave under Clause 12 of the Letters Patent cannot be
granted in such a case, at any stage after the institution of the original
suit.

5\. But where a new party is added, the suit as regards the added party must
be deemed to have been commenced on the date when he was so added.
Consequently, if the cause of action against the added party requires leave
under Clause 12 of the Letters Patent it is open to the Court to grant such
leave, if asked for at the time of the amendment, and if such leave has not
been asked for or obtained in such a case, the Court has no jurisdiction to
entertain the suit against such an added defendant.

13\. We notice that in the aforesaid decision a distinction has been made
between suits in which by amendment of plaint, the cause of action is altered
or a new cause of action is added and suits in which a new party is sought to
be added, and the cause of action against the party proposed to be added,
requires leave under Clause 12 of the Letters Patent, and it has been held
that in the former case leave under Clause 12 cannot be granted after the
institution of the original suit, but in the latter it is open to the Court to
grant such leave if asked for at the time of the amendment. It might be noted
that the case now before us would come under the latter category.

14\. In Rampartab Samrathrai and Anr. v. foolibai and Goolibai (1896) I.L.R.
20 Bom. 766, it was held that where a defendant is added who does nor reside
within the jurisdiction of the High Court and against whom the cause of action
has not arisen wholly within that jurisdiction leave must be obtained afresh
under Clause 12 of the Latters Patent even if leave had been obtained when the
suit was originally filed. Now, it might be noted that in the case before us
the proposed fourth defendant who is sought to be added does not reside within
the jurisdiction of this Court and the cause of action against him has not
arisen wholly within the jurisdiction of the Court and as such leave must be
obtained under Clause 12 of the Letters Patent afresh to sue him even if leave
had been obtained when the suit was originally filed, and the fact that leave
had not been obtained when the suit was originally instituted, would not in
anyway affect the request for lease asked for when the proposed fourth
defendant is sought to be added. The aforesaid decision appears to Support the
contention of Mr. Chellasami for the respondent that leave can be obtained
under Clause 12 of the Letters Patent when a new defendant who does not reside
within the jurisdiction of the Court and against whom the cause of action has
not arisen wholly within that jurisdiction is sought to be added.

15\. In Devidatt Ramniranjandas v. Shriram Narayandas A.I.R. 1932 Bom. 291
when the suit was instituted the plaintiffs obtained leave under Clause 12 of
the Letters Patent on the allegation that the material part of the cause of
action had arisen in Bombay. But when however some defendants were
subsequently added as party defendants the plaintiffs did not obtain fresh
leave under Clause 12. It was held that the force of an order granting leave
was exhausted when the suit was filed and where a defendant who was not
residing within the jurisdiction was added after the institution of the suit,
fresh leave must be obtained at the time of the application to add him as a
party if the cause of action had arisen in part only within the jurisdiction.
This decision also lends support to Mr. Chellasami's contention.

16\. In Amritalal Mullick v. Sesh Prakash Mullick it has been observed by the
learned Judge of the Calcutta High Court that "in a suit when a new party is
sought to be added by way of amendment, the suit is a new suit as against the
added party. When amendment is allowed and order made in that behalf a new
suit comes into existence. It is not emphatically the old suit. If the new
suit cannot be received, tried and determined" by this Court under Clause 12
of the Letters Patent, why should the leave be not asked for and granted by
the Court? Ordinarily a suit is initiated by the presentation of the plaint
and when the Court accepts it and has it registered and numbered, the plaint
is "received" by the Court. The Code also provides that after the institution
of a suit a party can be added and the law is that so far as the added parties
are concerned, it is a new suit. It is only when the order adding a new party
is perfected and plaint amended that the Court can be said to have received a
suit so far as the added party is concerned. It follows that in suits in which
leave under Clause 12 of the Letters Patent is necessary before t he order of
amendment is prayed for, leave under Clause 12 becomes necessary if not
imperative. It is a fallacy to contend that a suit can be initiated only by
presentation of the plaint and the Court "receives" a suit when it accepts the
plaint and not otherwise. A suit can also be initiated against a new party by
making an application for amendment and the Court receives the suit as against
him when after granting leave the Court adds the party s and then amends the
plaint by bringing the new party on record. The presentation of the plaint and
registration of the suit is there-s fore, not the only way in which the Court
"receives" a suit in law. For reasons given above a suit instituted after
obtaining leave under Clause 12 of the Letters Patent can be amended in law
and there is nothing in the 1 wording of Clause 12 of the Letters Patent to
prevent the Court from granting leave under Clause 12 to amend the plaint by
adding parties, in the case of a suit instituted after obtaining leave under
Clause 12 of the Letters Patent."

17\. Mr. Govind Swaminathan, however, emphasiss the words, "there is nothing
in the wording of clause of the Letters Patent to prevent the Court from
granting leave under Clause 12 to amend the plaint by adding parties, in the
case of a suit instituted after obtaining leave under Clause 12 of the Letters
Patent" and he has argued that, inasmuch as the suit as originally framed was
not instituted after obtaining leave under Clause 12 of the Letters Patent
leave cannot now be asked for under Clause 12 even when new parties are to be
added. In other words, his argument is that leave under Clause 12 of the
Letters Patent could be asked for and obtained when new parties are added only
when originally the suit had been instituted after obtaining leave under
Clause 12 of the Letters Patent and since in this case leave under Clause 12
was not obtained before filing the suit as it was originally framed, the Court
cannot grant leave under Clause 12 even when new parties are sought to be
added. We arc however unable to agree with this contention of Mr. Govind
Swaminathan, for the preponderance of authorities docs not support that
contention.

18\. In Biswanath Agarwalla v. Smt. Dhapu Dabi Jafodia and Ors. it was held
that in a suit for land partly situate within and partly outside jurisdiction,
instituted after obtaining leave under Clause 12 no fresh leave for amendment
is necessary if the plaint is subsequently amended, by introducing a new cause
of action relating to land situate wholly within the jurisdiction of the
Court. It was observed that by the amendment a new suit, a it were is being
instituted and since it relates to a land situate wholly within the
jurisdiction of that Court no leave under Clause 12 of the Letters Patent is
necessary. We are of the view that if a suit had been instituted against
defendant in respect of whom leave to sue under Clause 12 need not be obtained
since he is residing or carrying on business within the jurisdiction of the
Court but subsequently anew party is sought to be added, against whom, under
Clause 12 of the Letters Patent, leave to sue would be required, inasmuch as
he does not reside or carry on business within the jurisdiction of the Court,
there could be no objection to the Court granting such leave, for in effect a
new suit is being instituted against the new party.

19\. Clause 12 of the Letters Patent says that the High Court of Judicature at
Madras, in exercise of its ordinary original civil jurisdiction shall be
empowered to receive, try and determine suits of every description if, in the
case of suits for land or other immovable property, such land or property
shall be situated, or, in all other cases, if the cause of action shall have
arisen, either wholly, or in case the leave of the Court shall have been first
obtained, in part, within the local limits of the ordinary original
jurisdiction of the High Court, or if the defendant at the time of the
commencement of the suit shall dwell or carry on business or personally work
for gain, within such limits. On the ground that the first defendant is
carrying on business though his agent within the jurisdiction of the Court,
the plaintiff did not obtain leave under Clause 12 of the Letters Patent, for
such leave under Clause 12 of the Letters Patent would not be necessary if the
defendant at the time of the commencement of the suit was dwelling or carrying
on business or was personally working for gain within the limits of the
jurisdiction of this Court. But the proposed fourth defendant is not dwelling,
carrying on business or personally working for gain within the jurisdiction of
this Court and as such leave should be obtained under Clause 12 only against
the proposed fourth defendant. The suit against the proposed fourth defendant
would be a new suit and even if the suit against the first defendant is held
to be not maintainable eventually, on the ground that leave under Clause 12 of
the Letters Patent had not been obtained, the suit against the other
defendants, including the proposed fourth defendant, would still remain
unaffected. Such being the case, we do not think that the question of grant of
leave under Clause 12 as against the proposed fourth defendant in any way
hinges upon the question as to whether the suit against the first defendant
had been properly received by obtaining leave under Clause 12 of the Letters
Patent. We are unable to accept the contention of Mr. Govind Swaminathan on
behalf of the appellant that in as much as in most of the decisions referred
to by us above the suits had been originally instituted after obtaining leave
under Clause 12 of the Letters Patent and when an additional defendant was
sought to be added after obtaining leave under Clause 12 of the Letters
Patent, the Court granted such leave afresh in the case of the defendant
sought to be newly added, this Court cannot grant leave under Clause 12 of the
Letters Patent and allow the proposed fourth defendant to be impleaded since
originally the suit was instituted against the 1st defendant without obtaining
leave under Clause 12 of the Letters Patent.

20\. Mr. Chellaswamy on behalf of the first respondent - plaintiff raises also
the question of waiver and submission to the jurisdiction of this Court; but
we do not think that there is any submission to the jurisdiction of this Court
or any waiver, for at the earliest opportunity he objection had been taken.

21\. It should be noted that the application for impleading the proposed
fourth defendant had to be filed because of the contention raised by the other
defendants that the proposed fourth defendant is a necessary party to the suit
and the suit is bad for non-joinder of necessary parties. It should also be
noted that on behalf of the plaintiff company it is contended that when the
suit was originally filed there was no necessity to obtain leave of Court,
because according to the assertions made in the plaint, the first defendant is
carrying on business through its agent in Madras. But since the proposed
fourth defendant is carrying on business in London leave has to be necessarily
obtained before he is added as a party. Such being the case the fact that the
suit as originally instituted was instituted without obtaining leave under
Clause 12, would not be a bar to the Court granting leave under Clause 12 when
a new defendant is sought to be added and when the suit in respect of that
defendant can only be instituted after obtaining leave under Clause 12 in view
of the fact that that defendant is not residing or carrying on business within
the urisdiction of the Court.

22\. In Muthusami v. Krishnaswami the suit as originally tiled was for
specific performance of a contract for the sale of certain lands in Salem
District entered into at Madras and for an injunction restraining the second
defendant from bringing about a breach of the said eon-tract and leave was
obtained under Clause 12 of the Letters Patent. But subsequently on the
plaintiff coming to know that the second defendant claimed to be a purchaser
of the same property under a sale deed, filed an application for amendment of
the plaint contending that the sale in favour of the second defendant was sham
and nominal and the second defendant was not a bona fide purchaser for value
without notice and added the relief of directing the execution of the sale
deed by the second defendant also and along with the application for amendment
an application for leave to sue on the basis of the plaint sought to be
amended was also filed. The question that arose for consideration was, "does
the circumstance that previous leave to institute had been obtained in a suit
disentitle the plaintiff from asking for an amendment of the plaint in the
suit so instituted?" While considering the question, the decisions in
Rampurtab v. Premsukh (1891) I.L.R. 15 Bom. 93 Motilal v. Shankaralal A.I.R.
1939 Bom. 345 and Barasat Basrihal Light Railway Co. Limited v. District Board
24 Parganas I.L.R. (1944) 2 Cal. 101 were considered; and the learned Judge
held as follows:

I am of opinion that in cases where the Court, on an application of the
plaintiff, considers that the plaint has to be amended so as to include a
cause of action, which was not originally in the plaint, on the ground that
such an amendment is necessary, it does not prevent the Court from granting
such an amendment merely for the reason that it was a suit instituted after
obtaining previous leave to sue under Clause 12 of the Letters Patent. It does
not also preclude the plaintiff from giving effect to such an order by
carrying out the amendment or presenting an amended plaint, before which,
however he should apply for and obtain leave to sue on the cause of action
described in the amendment under Clause 12 of the Letters Patent. Such an
application for leave can be filed and leave can be granted, if it comes
within the scope of Clause 12 of the Letters Patent.

These observations indicate that even when a plaint is amended by introducing
a new cause of action, a Court can grant leave under Clause 12 of the Letters
Patent and that there is nothing in Clause 12 of the Letters Patent to show
that the plaint instituted under Clause 12 would not include an amended plaint
and if an amended plaint after obtaining the leave to amend is to be received
and the cause of action arising therein is to be tried and determined which
cannot be done without previous leave being obtained, there is no reason why
such leave to present an amended plaint should not be granted under Clause 12
on a fresh application stating the cause of action on which the amendment has
been applied for and the reasons for grant of leave under Clause 12. This
decision of course is in conflict with the view of the Calcutta High Court in
Kshitish Kumar Son v. State of Bihar in so far as amendments of plaints,
introducing a new cause of action is concerned. In the case now before us, no
new cause of action is sought to be introduced. The reason for adding in Clan
Line Steamers Ltd., as the fourth defendant and for amending the plaint is to
claim the same reliefs against the Clan Line Steamers Ltd., in respect of the
same cause of action.

23\. Coming now to the question of the balance of convenience which was also
considered by Padmanabhan, J., it has been held in Mimal Singh v. Muir Mills
Co. Limited as follows:

In considering the question whether leave granted should be revoked or not,
the question of convenience is a material factor, though the convenience of
the parties is not to be weighed in a delicate balance. The nature of the suit
and the question of comparative expenses are material considerations. But mere
balance of convenience is not enough. It must be proved to the satisfaction of
the Court that either the expenses or the difficulties of trial in this Court
are so great that injustice will be done to the defendant. But at the same
time, the Court ought not to exercise the jurisdiction, if by so, doing an
injustice is caused to the plaintiff.

24\. Again in regard to the principle to be followed by the Appellate Court in
interfering with an order passed by a trial Judge refusing to revoke a leave
granted under Clause 12 of the Letters Patent it has been observed in the said
decision as follows:

The revocation of leave is entirely a matter of discretion with the trial
Judge and a Court of Appeal will be very slow to set aside the discretion,
unless it is proved that he has misdirected himself as to the facts or on the
law. It may be that the Court of Appeal does not see eye to eye with the trial
Judge in such matter, but that is no ground for setting aside the discretion
exercised by the trial Judge.

In Bhulka Bros Ltd. v. Govindram Bros. Ltd. (an unreported decision) which has
been referred to in the above decision it was held as follows:

The plaintiff is the dominus has and has the right to choose his own forum.
This right of choice is, however, not absolute, and the Court has the power in
a proper case to interfere with the plaintiff's choice and revoke leave if the
Court considers that the forum has been chosen by the plaintiff 'mala fide' or
that the forum chosen is such that if the Court permits the suit to go on, the
other party would be so handicapped in his defence that it would lead to
injustice or that the balance of convenience is decided by or overwhelmingly
against the suit going on in the forum chosen by the plaintiff.

It is asserted now before us on behalf of this respondent-plaintiff that the
entire evidence regarding the subject-matter of the suit would be available
only in Madras, for the main ground on which the suit has been filed is that
the second defendant, who was the chairman of the plaintiff-company at the
relevant time misused his position as chairman of the company and the trust
reposed in him at such chairman and induced the proposed fourth defendant and
the first defendant to terminate the agency of the plaintiff and give it to
the third defendant company which was formed by the second defendant. Further,
in the case now before us there are no circumstances which would show that the
plaintiff has chosen this forum mala fide, nor can it be said that the forum
chosen is such that if the Court permits the suit to go on, the other party
would be so handicapped in his defence that it would lead to injustice or that
the balance of convenience is decidedly or overwhelmingly against a suit going
on in the forum chosen by the plaintiff.

25\. We therefore find that Padmanabhan, J. was right in having refused to
revoke the leave which he had granted under Clause 12 of the Letters Patent to
sue the proposed fourth defendant. This appeal is therefore dismissed with
costs.

