

Gujarat High Court

Parvez Rustamji Bharda vs Navrojji Sorabji Tamboly ... on 1 February, 2000

Author: C Thakkar

Bench: C.K.Thakkar, P Majmudar

JUDGMENT C.K. Thakkar, J.

1\. This appeal is instituted by the appellant against summary dismissal of
First Appeal No. 7389 of 1998 by the learned Single Judge on December 9, 1999.

2\. The case of the appellant is that there is a trust known as "Navsari
Malesar Behdin Anjuman Trust", at Navsari registered under the Bombay Public
Trusts Act, 1950 (hereinafter referred to as `Act'). According to the
appellant, before 1950 Act came into force, there was Parsi Public Trust Act
and the trust was registered under that Act. After 1950 Act came into force,
it was registered under the present Act. It is also the case of the appellant
that Change Report No. 722 of 1984 was filed for addition of two members in
the Managing Committee of the trust. The allegation of the appellant is that
without following the procedure prescribed under the Act, Rules and the trust
deed, the Change Report was granted by the Assistant Charity Commissioner on
February 25, 1987. An appeal against the said order was dismissed by the Joint
Charity Commissioner on May 4, 1989. Being aggrieved by the said order, Misc.
Civil Application No. 160 of 1989 was filed by the appellant under Section 72
of the Act in the District Court which came up for hearing before the
Assistant Judge, Valsad, who by his judgment and order dated September 30,
1998 dismissed the application. Since the appellant was not satisfied by the
order passed by the Assistant Judge , he preferred First Appeal No. 7389 of
1998 which was summarily dismissed by the learned Single Judge on December 9,
1999. Learned Single Judge, in the impugned order, observed that the
authorities below, after appreciating the facts and circumstances, recorded a
finding that respondent No.1 was entitled to become a member of the trust and
of the Managing Committee and there was no reason to interfere with the said
finding based on evidence. It is this order which is challenged by the
appellant in the present LPA.

3\. When Mr. Bharda for the appellant started arguing the matter on merits, we
posed a question to him as to how LPA would be maintainable. He submitted that
the order passed by the learned Single Judge was in FA and hence, under Clause
15 of the Letters Patent of Bombay as applicable to this Court, an intra-court
appeal against a "judgment" rendered by a Single Judge in FA would be
competent and accordingly, the appellant has filed the present LPA which is
required to be decided on merits.

4\. In our view, present LPA was not maintainable as the point was covered by
the decision of the Division Bench of this Court in Hiragar Dayagar vs.
Ratanlal, (1972) 13 GLR 181, wherein, the Division Bench of this Court held
that first appeal from an order passed by the District Court under the Bombay
Public Trusts Act,1950 would be in the nature of second appeal. No LPA,
therefore, as of right, under Clause 15 of the Letters Patent would lie and
such appeal would be competent only after getting certificate of fitness as
required by Clause 15. Learned counsel stated that he was not aware of the
said decision. He, therefore, sought some time which we granted. Thereafter,
we have heard the learned counsel at length.

5\. It was submitted by Mr. Bharda that LPA against an order passed by the
learned Single Judge in FA is maintainable. He submitted that the nomenclature
given to the proceedings initiated by the appellant in this court is First
Appeal and hence, LPA would be maintainable. He conceded that the decision of
the Division Bench of this Court in Hiragar Dayagar has covered the point and
it is against the appellants, but almost in similar circumstances, a question
had come up for consideration before High Court of Bombay in Khivaraj
Chhagniram vs. Shivshanker, AIR 1974 Bom. 40. In that case also, a similar
preliminary objection was raised on behalf of the respondent that no LPA would
lie against an order passed in FA by the learned Single Judge of the Bombay
High Court under Section 72 of the Act, which was negatived by the Division
Bench observing that proceedings before the learned Single Judge of the High
Court can be said to be proceedings in FA and aggrieved party has right to
file LPA under Clause 15 of the Letters Patent.

6\. The question, therefore, before us is as to whether LPA against the order
passed by the learned Single Judge in FA under Section 72 of the Act would be
competent. In our opinion, such appeal would not lie and the point is no more
res-integra as it is covered by the Division Bench of this Court in Hiragar
Dayagar. In Hiragar Dayagar, almost in identical situation, the court was
called upon to consider the provisions of Sections 70 to 76 of the Act read
with Clause 15 of the Letters Patent and maintainability of LPA.

7\. Clause 15 of the Letters Patent of Bombay as applicable to this Court,
reads thus:

"15. And we further ordain that an appeal shall lie to the said High Court of
Judicature at Fort William in Bengal from the judgment (not being a judgment
passed in the exercise of appellate jurisdiction in respect of a decree or
order made in the exercise of appellate jurisdiction by a Court subject to the
superintendence of the said High Court, and not being an order made in the
exercise of revisional jurisdiction and not being a sentence or order passed
or made in the exercise of power of superintendence under the provisions of
sec, 107 of the Government of India Act or in the exercise of criminal
jurisdiction) of one Judge of the said High Court or one Judge of any Division
Court, pursuant to sec. 108 of the Government of India Act, and that
notwithstanding anything hereinbefore provided an appeal shall lie to the said
High Court from a judgment of one Judge of the said High Court or one Judger
of any Division Court, pursuant to sec. 108 of the Government of India Act
made (on or after the first day of February 1929) in the exercise of appellate
jurisdiction in respect of a decree or order made in the exercise of appellate
jurisdiction by a court subject to the superintendence of the said High Court
, where the Judge who passed the judgment declares that the case is a fit one
for appeal; but that the right of appeal from other judgments of Judges of the
said High Court or of such Division Court shall be to Us. Our heirs or
successors in Our or Their Privy Council, as hereinafter provided."

8\. In Hiragar Dayagar, this Court observed that Clause 15 provides a right of
appeal from a judgment of one Judge of the High Court to a Division Bench of
the High Court. It, however, states that an appeal shall lie from "a judgment
of one Judge of the High Court in the exercise of appellate jurisdiction in
respect of a decree or order made in the exercise of appellate jurisdiction by
a court subject to the superintendence of the High Court where the Judge who
passed the judgment declares that the case is a fit one for appeal". In other
words, if a Single Judge of the High Court exercises appellate jurisdiction
against a decree passed in exercise of appellate jurisdiction and renders a
judgment, no appeal as of right would lie against such judgment.

9\. In Hiragar Dayagar, ambit and scope of the expression `appellate
jurisdiction' was considered by the Division Bench. Referring to the relevant
provisions of the Act, Bhagwati, C.J. (as he then was) observed:

"The argument of the appellants was that sec. 72 sub-sec. (1) speaks only of
an application to the court to set aside the decision of the Charity
Commissioner and it does not provide for an appeal against the decision of the
Charity Commissioner . It is significant, pointed out the appellants, that
though the legislature has used the word "appeal" in Secs. 70 and 71, it has
departed from this nomenclature in sec. 72 and while dealing with the
proceedings under sec. 72, it has deliberately and advisedly omitted to use
the word "appeal" and characterised that proceeding as an application. The
proceeding under sec. 72 cannot, therefore, be regarded as an appeal to the
District Court against the decision of the Charity Commissioner and when the
District Court exercises its jurisdiction in relation to an application under
sec. 72, it does not exercise appellate jurisdiction but it exercises a
special jurisdiction conferred upon it by sec. 72. If, contended the
appellants, the legislature intended to confer appellate jurisdiction on the
District court, the legislature would have used the well known and familiar
expression "appeal" which it has used in Secs. 70 and 71 but the legislature
not having used this expression, the inference must be inevitably raised that
t he jurisdiction which the legislature intended to confer on the District
court under sec. 72 was not appellate jurisdiction but jurisdiction of a
special nature. The Charity Commissioner who is the fourth respondent before
us supported this line of argument advanced on behalf of appellants.
Respondents Nos. 1 to 3, however, urged that the nomenclature used by the
legislature in sec. 72 was immaterial. What was required to be considered was
as to what was the real nature and character of the jurisdiction conferred on
the District court and this could be determined only on a proper consideration
of the scope and ambit of the powers exercisable by the District court in an
application under sec. 72. Respondents Nos.1 to 3 pointed out that the powers
conferred on the District court while dealing with an application under sec.
72 were, clearly appellate powers and though the word "appeal" was not used by
the legislature, it was really appellate jurisdiction which was being
exercised by the District court while dealing with an application under
section 72. These were the rival contentions of the parties which we shall now
proceed to consider."

10\. Considering earlier decisions, the Court proceeded to state:

"Now, it may be noticed that the District court in an application under sec.
72 is given the power to confirm revoke or modify the decision of the Charity
Commissioner and there are no limits or fetters upon this power. The entire
matter which was before the Charity Commissioner is at large before the
District court and the District court has full and complete power to review
the decision of the Charity Commissioner, either on law or on fact, in such
manner as it thinks proper. If this be not an appellate power, it is difficult
to see what else it can be. It is true that the Charity Commissioner is not
subordinate to the District court in the sense that the District court has no
power of superintendence over the Charity Commissioner but there can be no
doubt that inter alia in the matter of his decisions under sec. 70, the
Charity Commissioner is inferior to the District court in that the District
court has power to revoke or modify his decisions. What is of the essence of
an appeal is that a superior tribunal should have the power to review the
decisions of the inferior tribunal and that power of the District court
certainly has under sec. 72. The District court, as we have already pointed
out, may confirm, revoke or modify the decisions of the Charity Commissioner
on an application under sec. 72. The District court may also, in the exercise
of its inherent power under section 76 read with sec. 151 of the Code of Civil
Procedure, make an order of remand to the Charity Commissioner, if the
District court thinks it necessary to do so in a proper case. Vide Chandrakant
v. Charity Commissioner, VI GLR 649. We may point out that sub-section (1A) of
sec. 72 also reinforces the view that the power conferred on the District
court under sec. 72 is an appellate power. The provision enacted in sec. (1A)
of sec. 72 is in identical terms as Order 41 Rule 27 of the Code of Civil
Procedure and it emphasizes that what the District court is called upon to do
under sec. 72 is to review the correctness of the decision of the Charity
Commissioner on the evidence which was before him and this is clearly a
charateristic of appellate power. There can, therefore, be no doubt that
though the word "appeal" is not used by the Legislature and the proceeding
under sec. 72 is designated as an application, the jurisdiction conferred on
the District court while dealing with such proceeding is appellate
jurisdiction.

11\. The Court thus concluded that when the District Court dealt with an
application under Section 72 of the Act, it exercised appellate jurisdiction
and when the learned Single Judge heard an appeal against that order, he can
be said to have exercised appellate jurisdiction against a decree passed in
exercise of appellate jurisdiction and consequently, no LPA would lie without
getting a certificate of fitness from the learned Single Judge who decided the
matter. Since in that case, no such certificate of fitness was obtained, LPA
was held not maintainable.

12\. It is no doubt true that the Division Bench of the High Court of Bombay
in Khivaraj Chhagniram had taken a contrary view. But apart from the fact that
the said judgment is not binding to this court and Hiragar Dayagar is binding
to us, reading Khivaraj Chhagniram, it is obvious that attention of the Court
was not invited to the decision of this Court in Hiragar Dayagar. Moreover,
the Division Bench of the Bombay High Court in Khivaraj Chhagniram did not
consider relevant provisions of the Act. It was also of the view that Clause
15 of the Letters Patent must be construed in the light of the words and
expressions used therein by giving natural meaning and one should not go
beyond the express language of the said Clause.

13\. The Court stated:

"14. It may be remembered that a remedy like an appeal is a creature of law.
Unless an appeal is so provided, there does not seem any right in a litigant
to approach some higher court or tribunal by way of an appeal. The expression
"appeal" is also a term of an art. The legislature which is fully aware of the
difference between the various remedies has chosen in the circumstances of
this case, the expression may.... apply' under section 72 as against the
expression `an appeal' under sections 70 and 71. Ordinarily, it is true that
went original jurisdiction is being exercised the litigating parties have a
right to lead evidence. It is a fundamental right of a party of being heard.
The hearing which denies the right of leading evidence could hardly be
described as hearing However, we do not think how the legislature could not
divide the right of being heard into different parts and provide a particular
tribunal for leading evidence and another tribunal having a higher experience
and position to re-examine the entire evidence recorded, by way of an
independent remedy. Whether this remedy would be an appeal must depend upon
the language used by the legislature. It may be that the functions performed
by the court under this remedy may have similarity with the functions
performed otherwise by the appellate courts. It may be that the legislature
has resorted to this time saving device by directing evidence to be recorded
before the Deputy or Assistant Charity Commissioner and a further examination
of that evidence by way of an appellate remedy by a higher departmental
officer viz. Charity Commissioner. However, when the first remedy to approach
to a civil court is made available the legislature has in terms provided an
application and not an appeal. It would not be therefore proper to confuse the
nature and the functions of the court under section 72 with the technical
remedy of an appeal which has to be so provided by the legislature."

14\. The Court, therefore, concluded:

"16. In the present case, the narrow question is, whether the Letters Patent
Appeal could be filed, as the language goes, as of right or must be filed only
with the leave of the learned Single Judge? Undoubtedly both are rights of
appeal. In one case the party can directly approach a Division Bench and try
its luck. In the other case, he has first to obtain leave of that Judge who
had decided the matter and then file the appeal. Undoubtedly, the second
remedy is more onerous and seeks to curtail the right of appeal to some
extent. If it could be held in the present case that the court under section
72 was itself exercising the appellate jurisdiction, then undoubtedly, the
present appeals filed without the leave of the learned Single Judge are
incompetent. Such appeals lie only with his leave and not otherwise. If
otherwise it could be held, as the natural meaning of the expression suggests,
that section 72 provides a remedy by way of an application only, and though
the inquiry held by the District court seems to have some semblance of an
appellate jurisdiction, it is not a jurisdiction created by the legislature as
an appellate jurisdiction. It is only where the jurisdiction is appellate and
a decision in exercise of such jurisdiction is given, and the High court has
also exercised the appellate jurisdiction, that the bar contemplated by Clause
15 of the Letters Patent of obtaining leave of the court seems to come in."

15\. On the basis of the above reasoning, the court negatived the preliminary
objection raised on behalf of the respondent and held that LPA was
maintainable.

16\. We may, however, state that after Hiragar Dayagar, and Khivaraj
Chhagniram, the point came up for consideration before the Supreme Court in
Ramchandra Govardhan Pandit vs. Charity Commissioner, State of Gujarat, AIR
1987 SC 1598. The Apex Court was called upon to consider correctness or
otherwise of two conflicting views - one of the High Court of Gujarat in
Hiragar Dayagar and other of the High Court of Bombay in Khivaraj Chhagniram.
Approving the view of the High Court of Gujarat and over-ruling the view of
the High Court of Bombay, the Supreme Court observed:

"8. We have considered the reasoning in the three judgments referred above.
With respect, we find it difficult to agree with the reasoning in AIR 1974
Bom. 40. We agree with the reasoning in the other two cases. The slender
thread on which the appellants' arguments rest is the absence of the word
"appeal" in S. 72(1). That alone cannot decide the issue. If the well known
word "appeal" had been used in this section that would have clinched the
issue. It is the absence of this word that has necessitated a closer scrutiny
of the nature, extent and content of the power under S. 72(1).

9\. The power of the District Court in exercising jurisdiction under S. 72 is
a plenary power. It is true that the Commissioner is not subordinate to the
District Court but the District Court has power to correct, modify, review or
set aside the order passed by the Commissioner. All the characteristics of an
appeal and all the powers of an appellate court are available to the District
Court while deciding an application under S. 72. To decide this case, we must
be guided not only by the nomenclature used by the section for the proceedings
but by the essence and content of the proceedings. That being so, we have no
hesitation to hold that the proceedings before the District Court under S.
72(1) are in the nature of an appeal and that District Court exercises
appellate jurisdiction while disposing Court and hence Cl.15 of the Letters
Patent is directly attracted."

17\. The above view was reiterated by the Supreme Court in Naranbhai Dayabhai
Patel vs. Suleman Isubji Dadabhai, AIR 1996 SC 1184.

18\. From the above discussion, in our judgment, the legal position is fairly
well settled and it is that when a Single Judge of a High Court renders a
judgment in exercise of jurisdiction under Section 72 of the Bombay Public
Trusts Act, 1950, he exercises appellate jurisdiction against a decree passed
or order made in exercise of appellate jurisdiction. To put it differently, he
exercises jurisdiction as a second appellate Court and not as a first
appellate Court and hence, a party aggrieved by a `judgment' rendered by the
Single Judge cannot, as of right, file an intra-court appeal to a Division
Bench of the same High Court without obtaining certificate of fitness from the
Single Judge who decided the matter.

19\. At this stage, learned counsel for the appellant submitted that he would
seek a certificate of fitness from the learned Single Judge and file an intra-
court appeal. We are afraid, even that course is now no more open to the
appellant in view of amendment and insertion of Section 100-A in the Code of
Civil Procedure, 1908 as inserted by Act 104 of 1976. The said section reads :

"100A. Notwithstanding anything contained in any Letters Patent for any High
Court or in any other instrument having the force of law or in any other law
for the time being in force, where any appeal from an appellate decree or
order is heard and decided by a Single Judge of a High Court, no further
appeal shall lie from the judgment, decision or order of such single Judge in
such appeal or from any decree passed in such appeal."

20\. We may state that constitutional validity of Section 100-A is not
challenged before us. In view of provisions of Section 100A, now, no LPA
against an order passed by the learned Single Judge of this Court would be
competent. There is, therefore, no question of obtaining certificate of
fitness from the learned Single Judge who delivered the judgment impugned in
the present LPA.

21\. For the foregoing reasons, we are of the view that the present LPA is not
maintainable and deserves to be dismissed only on that ground. We may state
that as we are holding LPA to be incompetent and dismiss it only on that
ground, we refuse to enter into merits of the matter. LPA is accordingly
dismissed.

