

Bombay High Court

Pravardhan Seeds Private Limited vs Mahyco Monsanto Biotech (India) ... on 23
July, 2020

Bench: R.D. Dhanuka

    
    
    kvm
    
    
    
    
            IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT BOMBAY
               ORDINARY ORIGINAL CIVIL JURISDICTION
                     IN ITS COMMERCIAL DIVISION
    
          COMMERCIAL ARBITRATION PETITION NO. 737 OF 2019
                            WITH
                NOTICE OF MOTION NO. 1262 OF 2019
                              IN
          COMMERCIAL ARBITRATION PETITION NO. 737 OF 2019
    
    Nuziveedu Seeds Ltd.
    having its Registered Office at Survey
    No.69, Kandlakoya Gundlapochampally
    (Panchayat), Medchal Mandal, Ranga
    Reddy District 501 404, Andhra Pradesh.             ... Petitioner/
                                                            Applicant
                         Versus
    
    Mahyco Monsanto Biotech (India) Pvt.
    Ltd., having its Registered Office at Ahura
    Centre, B-Wing, 5th Floor, 96, Mahakali
    Cave Road, Andheri (East),
    Mumbai - 400 093.                                   ... Respondent
    
    
                          ALONG WITH
          COMMERCIAL ARBITRATION PETITION NO. 738 OF 2019
                             WITH
             NOTICE OF MOTION (STAMP) NO. 937 OF 2019
                              IN
          COMMERCIAL ARBITRATION PETITION NO. 738 OF 2019
    
    
    Prabhat Agri Biotech Ltd.
    havint its Registered Office at 8-2-277/45,
    1st Floor, UBI Colony, Road No. 3, Banjara
    Hills, Hyderabad, Telangana - 500 034.              ... Petitioner/
    India.                                                  Applicant
                       Versus
    
    Mahyco Monsanto Biotech (India) Pvt.
    Ltd., having its Registered Office at Ahura
    Centre, B-Wing, 5th Floor, 96, Mahakali
    Cave Road, Andheri (East),
    Mumbai - 400 093.                                   ... Respondent
    
    
    
    
           ::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020           ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:29 :::
     kvm
                                          -: 2 :-
                                                              CARBP-737-19.doc
    
                          ALONG WITH
          COMMERCIAL ARBITRATION PETITION NO. 892 OF 2019
                             WITH
                NOTICE OF MOTION NO. 1885 OF 2019
                              IN
          COMMERCIAL ARBITRATION PETITION NO. 892 OF 2019
    
    Pravardhan Seeds Private Limited
    having its Registered Office at No.8-2-
    277/45, UBI Colony, Road No. 3, Banjara               ... Petitioner/
    Hills, Hyderabad - 500 034.                               Applicant
                     Versus
    
    Mahyco Monsanto Biotech (India) Pvt.
    Ltd., having its Registered Office at Ahura
    Centre, B-Wing, 5th Floor, 96, Mahakali
    Cave Road, Andheri (East),
    Mumbai - 400 093.                                     ... Respondent
    
                                          .......
    Mr. Darius Khambata, Senior Advocate along with Mr. Aditya Mehta
    along with Mr. Anand Desai, Mr. Ravi Prakash, Mr. Ryan Dsouza,
    Mr.Aditya Sharma and Mr.Aditya Ajay i/by M/s.DSK Legal, Advocate
    for the Petitioner in CARBP/737/2019.
    
    Mr. Rohan Kadam along with Mr. Varghese Thomas, Mr. Yohaann
    Limathwalla and Mr. Jash Shah i/by M/s.J.Sagar Associates, for the
    Petitioner in CARBP/738/2019.
    
    Mr. Navroz Seervai, Senior Advocate along with Ms. Lizum Wangdi,
    along with Mr. Aditya Mehta, Mr. Anand Desai, Mr. Ravi Prakash, Mr.
    Ryan Dsouza, Mr.Aditya Sharma and Mr.Aditya Ajay i/by M/s.DSK
    Legal, for the Petitioner in CARBP/892/2019.
    
    Mr.Iqbal Chagla, Senior Advocate along with Mr.Sharan Jagtiani,
    Mr.Nirman Sharma, Mr. Shriraj Dhruv, Mr. Rishi Aggarwal, Mr. Karan
    Luthra, Mr. Shantanu Aggarwal, Mr.Adarsh Ramanujan, Ms.Heenal
    Desai, Ms. Mansi Chheda i/by M/s.Dhru & Co., for the Respondent in
    CARBP/737/2019.
    
    Mr. Janak Dwarkadas, Senior Advocate along with Mr.Sharan Jagtiani,
    Mr.Nirman Sharma, Mr. Shriraj Dhruv, Mr. Rishi Aggarwal, Mr. Karan
    Luthra, Mr. Shantanu Aggarwal, Mr.Adarsh Ramanujan, Ms.Heenal
    Desai, Ms. Mansi Chheda i/by M/s.Dhru & Co., for the Respondent in
    CARBP/738/2019.
    
    
    
    
           ::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020             ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:29 :::
     kvm
                                             -: 3 :-
                                                                    CARBP-737-19.doc
    
    
    
    Mr. Pravin Samdani, Senior Advocate along with Mr.Sharan Jagtiani,
    Mr.Nirman Sharma, Mr. Shriraj Dhruv, Mr. Rishi Aggarwal, Mr. Karan
    Luthra, Mr. Shantanu Aggarwal, Mr.Adarsh Ramanujan, Ms.Heenal
    Desai, Ms. Mansi Chheda i/by M/s.Dhru & Co., for the Respondent in
    CARBP/892/2019.
                                             .......
    
                                         CORAM : R.D. DHANUKA, J.
                                         RESERVED ON : 6th FEBRUARY, 2020
                                         PRONOUNCED ON : 23rd JULY, 2020
    
    JUDGMENT :
    

. By Arbitration Petition No.737 of 2019 filed under section 34 of the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996, the petitioner has impugned the
majority arbitral award dated 16th January,2019 and order dated 11th May, 2017
passed by the Arbitral Tribunal under section 16 of the Act dismissing the
said application.

2\. By Arbitration Petition No.738 of 2019, the petitioner has impugned the
arbitral award dated 16th January,2019 and the order dated 11th May, 2017
passed by the Arbitral Tribunal under section 16 of the Act dismissing the
said application.

3\. Commercial Arbitration Petition No.892 of 2019 is filed by the petitioner
under section 34 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 inter alia
praying for setting aside the impugned award dated 30 th March,2019 rendered
by the sole arbitrator and order dated 11th October,2017 passed by the learned
arbitrator rejecting the application filed by the petitioner under section 16
of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (for short the said Arbitration
Act). By consent of parties, the aforesaid petitions were heard together
finally at the admission stage and are being disposed of by a common order.

::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:29 :::

kvm  -: 4 :- CARBP-737-19.doc FACTS IN COMMERCIAL ARBITRATION PETITION NO. 737
OF 2019

4\. In Arbitration proceedings before the Arbitral Tribunal, the petitioner
was the original respondent whereas the respondent herein was the original
claimant. It was the case of the petitioner that the respondent had developed
transgenic cotton variety seeds impregnated with the Bt.genes due to which the
variety expresses a trait of producing an endotixin which can be the toxic to
certain insects which are referred to as cotton bollworms. The Bt.genes/trait
becomes a part of cotton genome and is inherited into the progeny through
natural propagation. It was the case of the petitioner that the Bt.trait can
be transferred as a part of normal cotton breeding process for developing new
cotton varieties which also express Bt. trait.

5\. On 20th January,2004, the petitioner and the respondent entered into a
Sub-Licence Agreement (hereinafter referred to as the '2004 SLA'). The
respondent gave 50 cotton seeds of transgenic variety with Bt.trait to the
petitioner with a right to develop new Bt. cotton varieties using proprietary
varieties of the petitioner and to sell cotton hybrid seeds with Bt. trait
under applicable patent rights for a period of 10 years. The said 2004 SLA was
extended from time to time until 10 th March,2015 when renamed Bollgard
Technology Licence Agreement dated 10th March,2015 was executed between the
petitioner and the respondent for continuation of the rights granted under
2004 SLA .

6\. It was the case of the petitioner that the said 2015 SLA was continuation
of the 2004 SLA. According to the petitioner, the respondent did not transfer
any technology, confidential information or  ::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 :::
Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:29 ::: kvm  -: 5 :- CARBP-737-19.doc knowhow
under 2004 to the petitioner but had only provided 50 Donor seeds of a
transgenic variety which was used by the petitioner to develop several new
proprietary Bt.cotton varieties which were multiplied under agriculture
operations to produce seeds and sell to farmers.

7\. It was the case of the petitioner that under the said two agreements, the
respondent was liable to pay to the petitioner and has paid one time non-
refundable fee of Rs.50 lakhs. The respondent was also required to pay the
amount as and by way of royalty fees/trait fees/ trait value on every 450gm
packet of Bt.Cotton seeds of the proprietary varieties of the petitioner sold
every year.

8\. It was the case of the petitioner that since the year 2006-2007, the trait
value charged and collected by the respondent had been subject to the various
State Government Price Control Notifications. Since the year 2016, the said
trait value was being regulated by the Central Government under the Cotton
Seeds Price (Control) Order 2015\. There were MRTP Proceedings filed against
the respondent. Several interventions were made by the State Government in the
interest of farmers. The petitioner along with other domestic seed producing
companies issued letters to the respondent requesting the respondent to charge
the trait value commensurate with the State Government Price Control
Notifications as opposed to the contractual trait value under the 2015 SLA and
for refund of excess trait value paid during 2010 to 2014 over the State
Government Price Control Notifications. Similar letters were also addressed on
23 rd July, 2015 and 10th August,2015.

::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:29 :::

kvm  -: 6 :- CARBP-737-19.doc

9\. The respondent however neither gave any response to the said letters nor
refunded any amount. On 1st August,2015, the respondent herein filed a
petition under section 9 of the Arbitration Act against the petitioner inter
alia praying for an order of deposit of the amount claimed against the
petitioner under the said 2015 SLA. On 16th October,2015, the petitioner
addressed a letter to the respondent demanding refund of the excess trait
value paid during 2010 to 2014. On 14th November,2015, the respondent issued a
notice thereby terminating the said 2015 SLA. On 23rd November,2015, the
petitioner called upon the respondent to withdraw the said notice of
termination dated 14th November,2015.

10\. On 2nd November,2015, the Government of India filed a reference before
the Competition Commission of India (hereinafter referred to as the said CCI)
seeking investigation and action against respondent and its group companies
for allegedly contravening the provisions of the Competition Act. On 15 th
December,2015, the petitioner and its two subsidiary companies filed an
Information before the said CCI against the respondent and its group companies
complaining about several anti-competitive clauses and abusive conduct of the
respondent including charge of high trait value over the State Government
Price Control Notifications.

11\. It is the case of the petitioner that on 10 th February,2016, the said
CCI passed an order holding that there existed a prima facie case of
contravention of the provisions of section 3(4) and section 4 of the
Competition Act by the respondent and its group companies and directed the
Director General to investigate into the matter. The CCI also passed an
interim order dated 13th April, 2016 restraining the  ::: Uploaded on -
23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:29 ::: kvm  -: 7 :-
CARBP-737-19.doc respondent from enforcing post termination obligations
against the petitioner and its group companies. It is the case of the
petitioner that several other parties had also filed complaints with CCI
relating to various clauses of SLA so executed alleged to be anti-competitive
and alleging abusive conduct of the respondent against them.

12\. According to the petitioner, there was delay of over two years in
submitting Investigation Report by the Director General to the CCI due to non-
cooperation by the respondent and its group companies. The said CCI therefore
levied a monetary penalty upon the respondent and its other group companies.
On 28th June, 2018, the Director General submitted a Investigation Report
before the said CCI. By letter dated 12th March,2019, the said CCI directed
the parties including 18 officials of the respondent and Monsanto group
companies under section 48 of the Companies Act to collect non-confidential
Investigation Report by filing an undertaking that the Investigation Report
would not be used for any purpose other than those provided under the
Competition Act and Rules thereunder.

13\. On 18th February,2016, the respondent and its group companies filed an
infringement suit before the Delhi High Court i.e. C.S. (Comm.) No.132 of 2016
alleging that pursuant to the termination of the 2015 SLA, the petitioner had
infringed the patent rights of the respondent by selling cotton seeds with Bt.
trait. The petitioner filed a counter claim in the said suit inter alia
praying for invocation of the patent of the respondent on the ground that the
plants, plant varieties, seeds, essentially biological processes etc. and the
seed production activities of the petitioner were excluded subject matter
under the Patents Act, 1970. In the said infringement suit, the learned Single
::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:29 ::: kvm
-: 8 :- CARBP-737-19.doc Judge of the Delhi High Court passed an interim order
on 28 th March,2017. The said infringement suit is pending before the Delhi
High Court.

14\. On 23rd February,2016, the respondent invoked the arbitration agreement
under the said 2015 SLA to get the disputes settled by way of arbitration
having arisen due to non payment of the balance trait value by the petitioner.
The respondent nominated a former judge of the Supreme Court as its nominated
arbitrator. The petitioner vide its letter dated 9th March,2016 appointed its
nominee arbitrator. The nominee arbitrators appointed by the petitioner and
the respondent thereafter appointed a former judge of the Supreme Court as the
presiding arbitrator. On 31st January,2017, the respondent filed its statement
of claim before the Arbitral Tribunal. On 6 th July, 2017, the petitioner
filed its statement of defence and the counter claim before the Arbitral
Tribunal. The respondent filed its reply to the counter claim on 31st July,
2017.

15\. The petitioner filed an application under section 16 of the Arbitration
Act raising a plea of jurisdiction and praying for dismissal of the claims
made by the respondent for want of jurisdiction. Without prejudice to the
prayers for dismissal for want of jurisdiction, the petitioner prayed that the
arbitral reference be suspended till the final adjudication of the proceedings
before the Competition Commission of India. The respondent filed reply to the
said application under section 16 of the Arbitration Act filed by the
petitioner. By an order dated 5 th December,2016, the Arbitral Tribunal
dismissed the said application filed by the petitioner under section 16 of the
Arbitration Act.

16\. In the said order, it was made clear that all the observations made  :::
Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:29 ::: kvm  -: 9
:- CARBP-737-19.doc by the Arbitral Tribunal in the said order had been only
for the limited purpose of the deciding application filed by the petitioner
under section 16 of the Arbitration Act. The Tribunal did not express any
opinion on the merits of the matter. The Tribunal made it clear that it would
be open for the parties to raise all objections available to them and the
Tribunal would consider and decide such objections in accordance with law
without being influenced or inhibited by the observations made in the said
order by the Arbitral Tribunal. The said order dated 11 th May,2017 passed by
the Tribunal is also impugned by the petitioner in this petition along with
arbitral award.

17\. The Arbitral Tribunal framed about 16 points for determination. Both the
parties led oral as well as documentary evidence before the Arbitral Tribunal.
The witness examined by the respective party was cross examined by the other
party. Both the parties also filed written submissions before the Arbitral
Tribunal in the application filed under section 16 as well as after conclusion
of the oral submissions. Two of the arbitrators made an arbitral award dated
16 th January,2019 allowing the claim of the respondent partly and directed
that the respondent (original claimant) is entitled to and the petitioner
(original respondent) is liable to pay to the respondent herein a sum of
Rs.117.46 crores towards trait value for sales between 1 st April, 2015 and
14th November,2015 under Sub-Licence Agreement, 2015 along with interest at
the rate of 6% per annum from the date of invocation of the arbitration i.e.
23rd February,2016 till the date of the award and interest at the rate of 12%
per annum from the date of the award till the date of payment/realization.

18\. The arbitral Tribunal rejected rest of the claims made by the  :::
Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:29 ::: kvm  -:
10 :- CARBP-737-19.doc respondent. The counter claim raised by the petitioner
and set off pleaded by the respondent were dismissed as 'not pressed'. The
learned third arbitrator delivered a dissenting award dismissing the claims
made by the respondent. Being aggrieved by the majority award dated 16th
January,2019 and order dated 11th May, 2017 passed by the Arbitral Tribunal,
the petitioner filed Commercial Arbitration Petition No.737 of 2019.

SUBMISSIONS MADE BY MR.DARIUS KHAMBATA, LEARNED SENIOR COUNSEL FOR THE
PETITIONER IN COMMERCIAL ARBITRATION PETITION NO. 737 OF 2019 :-

19\. Mr.Khambata, learned senior counsel for the petitioner invited my
attention to various clauses of the agreement entered into between the
parties, various averments made by the parties in various pleadings filed
before the Arbitral Tribunal, various paragraphs from the oral evidence led by
the parties before the Arbitral Tribunal, the orders passed by the CCI, order
passed by the Delhi High Court in the infringement suit held by the respondent
against the petitioner, the order passed by the Arbitral Tribunal under
section 16 of the Arbitration Act, various findings rendered in the majority
award rendered by the Arbitral Tribunal and the grounds raised by the
petitioner in the arbitration petition.

20\. Learned senior counsel placed reliance on Articles 1.3, 1.11, 1.16, 1.22,
1.24, 1.25, 2, 2.05, 3.01, 3.01(v), 9, 11.02 and 11.03. of the said 2015 SLA.
Learned senior counsel invited my attention to the preamble of the Competition
Act, sections 3, 4, 18 to 20, 26, 26(7), 27(d) (e), 33, 36, 41, 41(2), 45,
53A, 60 to 62 of the Competition Act. He invited my attention to the order
passed by the CCI under section  ::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded
on - 24/07/2020 03:43:29 ::: kvm  -: 11 :- CARBP-737-19.doc 26(2) of the
Competition Act and would submit that the said CCI had already rendered
various prima facie findings about the violation of section 3(4), 4 read with
section 19(3) of the Competition Act and has held that in view of the
contravention of various provisions of the said Act, case was made out for
investigation in the matter. Out of seven members of the said CCI, only one
member had differed.

21\. It is submitted by the learned senior counsel that the arbitration notice
was issued by the respondent on 23rd February,2016 only after such prima facie
findings were rendered by the said CCI against the respondent. In support of
this submission, learned senior counsel invited my attention to paragraphs 16
to 20, 24 and 26 of the order passed by the CCI making various prima facie
findings against the respondent. Learned senior counsel invited my attention
to various points for determination framed by the Arbitral Tribunal and the
findings rendered thereon by the Arbitral Tribunal.

22\. It is submitted by the learned senior counsel that the dispute between
the parties referred to the Arbitral Tribunal arose from a Sub- Licence
Agreement dated 10th March, 2015 which was a renewal of Sub-Licence Agreement
dated 21st February, 2004. Under the said 2015 SLA, the petitioner was
required to pay to the respondent the royalty "Trait Value" or trait fee to
the respondent which was to be computed based on the quantity of hybrid cotton
seeds containing the Bt. genes sold by the petitioner. The respondent had made
a claim before the Arbitral Tribunal for recovery of trait value for the
period of 1st April,2015 to 14th November,2015 of which the petitioner had
paid Rs.13.24 crores to the respondent leaving a balance of Rs.117.46 crores.

::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:29 :::

kvm  -: 12 :- CARBP-737-19.doc

23\. It is submitted by the learned senior counsel that the respondent was
abusing its dominance by charging an excessive, unreasonable and
discriminatory Trait Value under the said 2015 SLA. The said SLA was thus void
under sections 3 and 4 of the Competition Act. The issue regarding the
validity of the SLA was already a subject matter of the proceedings before the
said CCI and was not capable of being adjudicated by the Arbitral Tribunal.
The claims made by the respondent was predicated on the enforceability of the
said 2015 SLA and thus were not arbitrable. The said agreement was forbidden
by section 3(j) of the Patents Act, 1970. The validity of the patent of the
respondent which was the subject matter of the said 2015 SLA had been already
challenged by the petitioner in the proceedings between the parties before the
Delhi High Court. He submits that if the patent of the respondent would be
revoked in those proceedings filed before the Delhi High Court, such
revocation would operate in rem and would result in a complete failure of
consideration under the said 2015 SLA.

24\. The Government of India also had filed complaints before the said CCI
that the said 2015 SLA and other similar agreements were anti-competitive
agreements and in abuse of dominance under sections 3 and 4 of the Competition
Act. Those proceedings before the CCI were still pending when respondent had
invoked the arbitration agreement and had filed its claim before the Arbitral
Tribunal. The disputes between the Arbitral Tribunal included the issues
relating to competition law which were not arbitrable. The petitioner had
already raised a plea before the Arbitral Tribunal that the said 2015 SLA was
void under the provisions of the Competition Act.

::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:29 :::

kvm  -: 13 :- CARBP-737-19.doc

25\. It is submitted by the learned senior counsel that on 27 th
November,2015, the Government of India had filed a Reference under section
19(1)(b) of the Competition Act with the said CCI. It was a specific case of
the Government of India in the said reference that various representations
were made by it regarding the unreasonable high prices of Bt. cotton seeds due
to charging of high royalties in the name of trait value by the respondent.
The said complaint also referred to the dominant position which it was
exploiting in an anti-competitive manner. The Government of India requested
the said CCI to prescribe appropriate terms including trait value/royalties
under the Sub-Licence Agreements so that the technology license was given at
reasonable terms to all seed companies.

26\. It is submitted by the learned senior counsel that the petitioner and its
group companies filed information under section 19(1)(a) of the Competition
Act with the CCI placing on record various violations of the provisions of the
Competition Act allegedly committed by the respondent. Learned senior counsel
invited my attention to the order dated 10th February,2016 passed by the
Investigation Officer on the said information filed by the petitioner and the
reference filed by the Government of India making various prima facie
observations against the respondent and holding that the conduct of the
respondent prima facie appears to be in violation of section 4 of the Act. He
submits that the respondent had invoked arbitration clause on 23rd
February,2016 only after such prima facie findings were rendered by the said
CCI by order dated 10th February,2016 against the respondent.

27\. Learned senior counsel submits that on 13 th April,2016, the said CCI
passed an order under section 33 of the Competition Act holding  ::: Uploaded
on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:29 ::: kvm  -: 14 :-
CARBP-737-19.doc that the provisions of SLA which required the petitioner to
destroy its entire seed, parent lines and germplasm on termination of the SLA
were prima facie in contravention of sections 3(4) and 4 of the Competition
Act. The CCI restrained the respondent from enforcing those onerous post-
termination conditions of the said 2015 SLA and directed the Director General
to expedite its investigation and submits its report at the earliest.

28\. It is submitted that an order under section 33 of the Arbitration Act is
definite expression of satisfaction recorded by the CCI upon due application
of mind and requires a higher degree of satisfaction than the formation of a
prima facie view under section 26(1) of the Competition Act. The said CCI
considered the present case to be a compelling and exceptional case. The CCI
had also directed the Director General to conduct an investigation into all
the complaints filed by the petitioner and various other parties including the
State of Telangana, All India Kisan Sabha, National Seed Association of India
and other domestic seed producing companies. He submits that the Director
General after conducting its investigation, filed its Investigation Report
with the said CCI on 28th June, 2018.

29\. The said Director General also had prepared a non-confidential version of
the Investigation Report on 14th February,2019. The respondent had charged a
higher trait value than that fixed by certain State Governments on the pretext
that there was a litigation pending in relation to the same. The charging of
differential trait value by the respondent in various States has also found to
be discriminatory and an abuse of monopolistic position. Learned senior
counsel placed reliance on the judgment of Supreme Court in case of
Competition  ::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020
03:43:29 ::: kvm  -: 15 :- CARBP-737-19.doc Commission of India vs. Steel
Authority of India, (2010) 10 SCC 744 and in particular paragraphs 117 and 119
in support of this submission.

30\. It is submitted by the learned senior counsel that the entire claim made
by the respondent was for recovery of trait value as per the terms of the said
2015 SLA. It was a specific plea raised by the petitioner before the Arbitral
Tribunal that the said 2015 SLA was void under the provisions of Competition
Act. The validity of the said agreement was pending adjudication before the
said CCI even prior to the invocation of the arbitration. He invited my
attention to the various averments made in the application filed by his client
under section 16 of the Arbitration Act before the Arbitral Tribunal, reply
filed by the respondent to the said application before the Arbitral Tribunal
and would submit that the dispute before the Arbitral Tribunal and the said
CCI were interlinked. He submits that the scheme of the Competition Act
expressly and impliedly excludes adjudication of competition law disputes
through arbitration.

31\. After inviting my attention to various provisions of the said Competition
Act already referred to aforesaid, learned senior counsel would submit that
the provision of the Competition Act vests vast and plenary powers upon the
CCI and empowers to pass various orders/grant reliefs which a civil court or
Arbitral Tribunal cannot grant. He relied upon section 27 of the Competition
Act and would submit that once the CCI is satisfied that there has been a
contravention of sections 3 and 4 of the Competition Act, it may direct that
the contract in question "shall stand modified to the extent and in the manner
as may be specified" by it. He submits that under section 28, CCI is empowered
to pass an order of division of an enterprise  ::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020
::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:29 ::: kvm  -: 16 :- CARBP-737-19.doc
enjoying a dominant position to ensure that it does not abuse its dominant
position. CCI is empowered to issue interim orders restraining a party from
contravening sections 3 and 4. CCI is conferred with the power to mould and
regulate its own procedure under section 36 and has the same powers as are
vested in a civil court. He also placed reliance on section 41(2) in support
of this submission.

32\. Learned senior counsel placed reliance on section 61 of the Competition
Act and would submit that the said provision clearly ousts the jurisdiction of
a civil court in respect of any matter, which the said CCI is empowered to
determine under the Competition Act. There is an implied exclusion of all
other forums, including Arbitral Tribunals in respect of the matters which are
adjudicated upon exclusively upon by the CCI. Even the Arbitral Tribunal is
denuded of its jurisdiction to decide such matters which are to be adjudicated
upon exclusively by the said CCI. The said CCI alone is exclusively empowered
to determine whether the preliminary state of facts exists or not. The
question as to whether the said 2015 SLA is even capable of being impugned
under the Competition Act i.e. the existence of the state of facts necessary
to invoke the jurisdiction of the said CCI is a jurisdictional fact which can
be determined and adjudicated only by the said CCI and not by the Arbitral
Tribunal.

33\. Learned senior counsel placed reliance on section 62 of the Competition
Act and would submit that the provisions of the Competition Act shall be in
addition to and not in derogation of the provisions of any other law in force.
The said CCI has exclusive jurisdiction to decide issues regarding the
validity of an agreement under the Competition Act. The said Competition Act
is a complete  ::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020
03:43:29 ::: kvm  -: 17 :- CARBP-737-19.doc code and it excludes the
jurisdiction of civil courts and Arbitral Tribunals. The said Act provides a
complete statutory framework for adjudication of all disputes pertaining to
the matters of competition law and is a complete self-contained code providing
the statutory right of protection and remedies against anti-competitive
conduct. Learned senior counsel placed reliance on the judgment of Delhi High
Court in case of Jindal Steel & Power Ltd. vs. Union of India, 2012(127) DRJ
285 and in particular paragraphs 24, 25 and 28.

34\. Learned senior counsel for the petitioner submits that the Arbitration
Act carries with it a negative import that only such acts as are mentioned are
permissible to be done and acts not mentioned are prohibited. Any remedy would
have to be found within that statutory code itself. Since sufficient and
adequate remedies are provided under the Competition Act for deciding disputes
relating to violation of the provisions of the Competition Act, the remedy to
enforce those statutory provisions lies exclusively within the Competition Act
and the jurisdiction of an Arbitral Tribunal to decide such disputes is
barred. In support of this submission, learned senior counsel placed reliance
on the judgment of Supreme Court in case of Fuerst Day Lawson vs. Jindal
Exports Limited, (2011) 8 SCC 333 and in particular paragraphs 84, 88 and 89,
judgment of Supreme Court in case of Vimal Kishor Shah vs. Jayesh Dinesh Shah,
(2016) 8 SCC 788 and in particular paragraphs 50, 51 and 53 and judgment of
this court in case of Dinesh Jaya Poojary vs. M/s.Malvika Chits India Pvt.
Ltd., 2019 SCC Online Bom 1121 and in particular paragraphs 28 to 35 and 37 to
39.

35\. It is submitted by the learned senior counsel that since the validity of
the said 2015 SLA itself is under challenge under the  ::: Uploaded on -
23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:29 ::: kvm  -: 18 :-
CARBP-737-19.doc Competition Act, the Arbitral Tribunal can only order
recovery of contractual dues under such contract after the CCI first rules on
the issue of the validity of the contract. It is submitted that though the
petitioner accepts that the CCI cannot pass orders for recovery of contractual
dues, that would not detract from the fact that it is only the CCI which can
determine whether a contract, on the basis of which a claim for contractual
dues is made, is void under section 3 of the Competition Act or not. Learned
senior counsel placed reliance on the judgment of Supreme Court in case of
Girnar Traders vs. State of Maharashtra, (2011) 3 SCC 1 and in particular
paragraphs 79 and 80 and judgment of Delhi High Court in case of Union of
India vs. Competition Commission of India, 2012 (128) DRJ 301 and in
particular paragraphs 1, 8, 12 to 16.

36\. It is submitted by the learned senior counsel that the disputes involving
competition law issues are non-arbitrable. He submits that where legislation
confers exclusive jurisdiction to special or to the exclusion of ordinary
civil courts to decide certain classes of dispute, then none of such disputes
concerning such legislature are arbitrable. This would be as a matter of
public policy. Since the Competition Act reserves the adjudication of disputes
relating to competition law exclusively to the CCI and the National Company
Law Appellate Tribunal, such disputes are not arbitrable.

37\. The question as to whether or not any conduct constitutes an anti-
competitive trade practice prohibited under section 3 of the Competition Act
is something which the CCI has exclusive jurisdiction to determine. It is not
open for an Arbitral Tribunal to proceed on an assumption that the SLA does
not violate section 3 of the Competition  ::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 :::
Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:29 ::: kvm  -: 19 :- CARBP-737-19.doc Act,
especially when proceedings in this regard were already pending before the
CCI. In support of the aforesaid submission, learned senior counsel placed
reliance on the judgment of Supreme Court in case of A.Ayyasamy vs.
A.Paramasivam, (2016) 10 SCC 386 and in particular paragraph 14, judgment of
Supreme Court in case of Emaar MGF Land Limited vs. Aftab Singh, 2018 SCC
Online SC 2771 and in particular paragraph 32, judgment of this court in case
of Kingfisher Airlines Ltd. vs. Capt.Prithvi Malhotra, 2011 SCC Online Bom
1999 and in particular paragraphs 14, 16, 20 and 21.

38\. Learned senior counsel also placed reliance on the judgment of Supreme
Court in case of Pawan Hans Ltd. vs. Union of India (2003) 5 SCC 71 and
judgment of Delhi High Court in case of Telefonaktiebolaget LM Ericsson (PUPL)
vs. Competition Commission of India, (2016) SCC Online Delhi 1591.

39\. The next submission of the learned senior counsel for the petitioner is
that the proceedings before the CCI were pending even prior to the date of the
respondent invoking arbitration agreement relating to the validity of the said
2015 SLA and thus the Arbitral Tribunal ought to have awaited the decision of
the said CCI regarding the validity of the said 2015 SLA under the provisions
of the Competition Act. The monetary claim made by the respondent under the
said 2015 SLA was totally dependent upon the issue of the validity of the said
2015 SLA which was pending before the CCI. The said issue was jurisdictional
fact. The existence of the said SLA was a sine qua non for the exercise of the
jurisdiction by the Arbitral Tribunal.

40\. It is submitted that if the said CCI declares the said 2015 SLA as  :::
Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:29 ::: kvm  -:
20 :- CARBP-737-19.doc void under section 3 of the Competition Act, such
agreement would not be an enforceable contract. In that event, the respondent
could not have made any monetary claim arising under such agreement. The
Arbitral Tribunal could not have conferred the jurisdiction upon itself by
wrongly assuming the existence of a jurisdictional fact. The cause of action
for recovery of contractual dues based on the agreement has to be a valid and
enforceable contract in law.

41\. Learned senior counsel placed reliance on section 10 of the Specific
Relief Act, 1963 and would submit that for enforceability of a contract under
the provisions of the Specific Relief Act, there has to be an agreement
enforceable by law as provided under section 2(h) of the Contract Act.
Anything done in contravention of a statute cannot be made the subject matter
of an action. Learned senior counsel for the petitioner placed reliance on the
judgment of Supreme Court in case of Arun Kumar vs. Union of India (2007) 1
SCC 732 and in particular paragraphs 74, 76 and 84. Learned senior counsel
placed reliance on the judgment of this court in case of Sundrabai Sitaram vs.
Manohar Dhondu, AIR 1933 Bom.262 and in particular paragraphs 2, 3, 5 to 9 of
the said judgment.

42\. It is submitted by the learned senior counsel that since the validity and
enforceability of the SLA is an inherent part of the cause of action of the
respondent, if the said 2015 SLA is found unenforceable in law, the entire
agreement including arbitration clause would not be enforceable. The
arbitration agreement itself would not exist in law in such a situation. In
support of this submission, learned senior counsel strongly placed reliance on
the judgment of Supreme Court in case of Garware Wall Ropes Ltd. vs. Coastal
Marine ::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:29
::: kvm  -: 21 :- CARBP-737-19.doc Constructions & Engineering Ltd., (2019) 9
SCC 209 and in particular paragraphs 16, 17, 19, 20, 22 and 29. He also placed
reliance on the judgment of Supreme Court in case of Competition Commission of
India vs. Bharti Airtel Ltd., (2019) 2 SCC 521 and in particular paragraphs
100 to 114.

43\. It is submitted by the learned senior counsel that in the order dated
11th May, 2017 passed by the Arbitral Tribunal under section 16 of the
Arbitration Act, the Tribunal has prima facie observed that it did not find
merit in the contention raised by the petitioner in respect of the
jurisdiction of the Arbitral Tribunal. At the same time, the Arbitral Tribunal
noted that several issues raised by the parties which require adjudication at
an appropriate stage including the issue whether the provisions of the
Competition Act apply to the present case or not. In support of this
submission, learned senior counsel placed reliance on paragraphs 46, 47, 51
and 52 of the order dated 11th May, 2017 passed by the Arbitral Tribunal. He
submits that it is thus clear that the Arbitral Tribunal accepted the position
that it could not proceed with the arbitration without finally deciding the
issue of jurisdiction.

44\. Learned senior counsel invited my attention to the issue nos. 2, 3, 3(a)
to 3(f) framed by the Arbitral Tribunal for determination. He submits that the
Arbitral Tribunal does not even purport to determine the plea of jurisdiction
raised by the petitioner. Such plea of jurisdiction was not a stand alone
plea. It is weeded inextricably to the defence, since the very enforceability
and validity of the said agreement depends on it. The case of the petitioner
before the Arbitral Tribunal was that the Tribunal had no jurisdiction to
adjudicate upon the claim i.e. the dispute and not merely the plea of lack of
jurisdiction  ::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020
03:43:29 ::: kvm  -: 22 :- CARBP-737-19.doc etc. Reply to the issue nos. 3(a)
to 3(f) by the Arbitral Tribunal are not in any way a determination of the
plea of the petitioner as to the jurisdiction of the Arbitral Tribunal.

45\. Learned senior counsel invited my attention to the findings rendered by
the Arbitral Tribunal in paragraph (51) of the impugned award holding that for
deciding jurisdiction of a court (Tribunal), what is relevant is the averments
made in the plaint (statement of claim) by the plaintiff (claimant) and not
what is pleaded by the defendant (respondent) in the written statement
(statement of defence). He also invited my attention to the findings of the
Arbitral Tribunal in paragraphs 52 to 54 and would submit that the Tribunal
has erroneously held that the Tribunal has jurisdiction to consider the case
of the claimant on the basis of the averments in the statement of claim. The
Tribunal has refused to determine the jurisdiction of the dispute. Though in
the impugned award, the Arbitral Tribunal concluded that the issue no.2 could
be decided by the CCI as far as issue no.3 is concerned, it did not express
any opinion. He submits that it is clear that the Arbitral Tribunal merely
assumed the existence of the jurisdictional fact whether the said agreement is
valid under the Competition Act which was a sine qua non for it to exercise
jurisdiction.

46\. It is submitted by the learned senior counsel that the Arbitral Tribunal
has bifurcated the dispute into the claim and the objection as to the
jurisdiction by holding that the issue of jurisdiction about the validity of
the agreement can be decided by the said CCI however dispute into the claim
could be decided by the Arbitral Tribunal which recourse was not permissible.
He submits that even if some aspects of  ::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 :::
Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:29 ::: kvm  -: 23 :- CARBP-737-19.doc the
disputes are arbitrable but some other aspects are non-arbitrable, the entire
dispute become non-arbitrable. In support of this submission, learned senior
counsel placed reliance on the judgment of Supreme Court in case of Booz Allen
Hamilton Inc. vs. SBI Homes Finance Limited, (2011) 5 SCC 532 and in
particular paragraphs 50 to 52 and in case of Sukanya Holding vs. Jayesh H.
Pandya, (2003) 5 SCC 531 and in particular paragraphs 16 and 17.

47\. It is submitted by the learned senior counsel that though the petitioner
had expressly raised various defences under the Competition Act regarding the
invalidity of the SLA and the Arbitral Tribunal had framed issues 2 and 3
based on those defences, the Arbitral Tribunal had ignored the defences raised
by the petitioner in its statement of defence and has decided those issues by
only looking at the averments in the statement of claim. Learned senior
counsel invited my attention to the findings rendered by the learned Arbitral
Tribunal in paragraphs 78 to 86 of the impugned award rejecting the
jurisdictional objection raised by the petitioner by merely stating that the
reliefs sought by the respondent only relates to the alleged breaches of the
said 2015 SLA and therefore the Arbitral Tribunal had jurisdiction to deal
with the same. The Tribunal completely ignored the fact that the
jurisdictional plea raised by the petitioner pertained entirely to the
enforceability of the claim itself and involved matters relating to the
Competition Act which could only be adjudicated by the CCI.

48\. It is submitted by the learned senior counsel that even in a civil suit,
where a question of jurisdiction is raised, it can either be decided on a
demurrer or as an issue in the proceedings. If it is decided on a demurrer, it
is to be decided taking the statements contained in the  ::: Uploaded on -
23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:29 ::: kvm  -: 24 :-
CARBP-737-19.doc plaint to be correct. However, where the objection is decided
as an issue in the proceedings, it would have to be decided after giving the
parties an opportunity to lead evidence. He submits that the Arbitral Tribunal
could not have decided issue nos. 2 and 3 on a demurrer based on the statement
of claim and ignoring the statement of defence and evidence led by the
petitioner. In support of this submission, learned senior counsel placed
reliance on the judgment of Supreme Court in case of Man Roland
Druckimanchinen AG vs. Multicolour Offset Ltd., (2004) 7 SCC 447 and in
particular paragraph 18.

49\. It is submitted that it was not the case of the respondent that by
deciding issue nos. 3(a) to 3(f), the Arbitral Tribunal in any manner
determined the plea of the petitioner on objection as to jurisdiction. It was
the case of the respondent itself that there was no requirement in law to even
look at the plea of the petitioner as to jurisdiction since only the statement
of claim had to be seen by the Arbitral Tribunal.

50\. Learned senior counsel invited my attention to section 16 and section
7(1) of the Arbitration Act and would submit that the jurisdictional objection
raised under section 16 is not to be determined on a demurrer based only on
the pleadings in the statement of claim like under Order 7 Rule11 of the Code
of Civil Procedure but is to be decided after considering the defence raised
in the statement of defence. He submits that under section 7(1) of the
Arbitration Act, it is made clear that an arbitration agreement is an
agreement to submit 'disputes' to arbitration whereas section 16(2) requires
jurisdictional objection regarding the existence/validity of the arbitration
agreement to be raised not later than the submission of the statement of
defence. He submits that the Arbitral Tribunal is bound to see whether the
::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:29 ::: kvm
-: 25 :- CARBP-737-19.doc dispute is arbitrable or not. He relied upon
paragraph 34 of the judgment of the Supreme Court in case of Booz Allen
Hamilton Inc. (supra).

51\. It is submitted by the learned senior counsel that the disputes arises
where there is a claim and a denial and repudiation of the claim. There can
only be a dispute when claim is asserted by one party and denied by the other.
In support of this submission, learned senior counsel placed reliance on the
judgment of Supreme Court in case of Major (Retd.) Inder Singh Rekhi vs. Delhi
Development Authority, (1988) 2 SCC 338 and in particular paragraph 4. He
submits that while ruling on its own jurisdiction, the Arbitral Tribunal may
embark upon an inquiry into the issues raised by the parties to the dispute.
The issues are the disputed questions upon which the parties are at variance
and desirous of obtaining a decision of the court. He relied upon the judgment
of the Supreme Court in case of Indian Farmers Fertilizer Co-operative Ltd.
vs. Bhadra Products, (2018) 2 SCC 534 and in particular paragraph 18 and in
case of Gangai Vinayagar Temple vs. Meenakshi Ammal, (2009) 9 SCC 757 and in
particular paragraph 53.

52\. It is submitted by the learned senior counsel that the Arbitral Tribunal
has permitted the recovery of the trait value in excess of that prescribed
under statutory price control notifications issued by the various State
Governments from the petitioner. Various State Governments had introduced
legislation to inter alia regulate the maximum sale price including the trait
value charged for the Bt. cotton seed. He relied upon the Andhra Pradesh
Cotton Seeds (Regulation pf Supply Distribution, Sale and Fixation of Sale
Price) Act, 2007 and the Maharashtra Cotton Seeds (Regulation of Supply,
Distribution, Sale  ::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on -
24/07/2020 03:43:29 ::: kvm  -: 26 :- CARBP-737-19.doc and Fixation of Sale
Price) Act, 2009. He relied upon A.P. Act and the explanatory statement
thereto and would submit that the State Government had clearly intended on
fixing the maximum sale price of the Bt. hybrid cotton planting seeds
including the trait value. Similarly intent could be noticed under section 10
of the Maharashtra Act to fix the maximum sale price of the Bt.cotton seed
including the trait value. section 10 of the Maharashtra Act is pari materia
to section 11 of the AP Act.

53\. Learned senior counsel invited my attention to the Article 11.03 of the
said 2015 SLA and would submit that under the said Article, the parties are
entitled to seek modification of the agreement if it is found to be in
conflict with the prevailing laws. He also relied upon the definition of 'law'
provided under Article 1.22 of the SLA which includes statutory price control
notifications issued by the State Government under the AP Act and Maharashtra
Act. State Government had fixed the maximum selling price of cotton seeds and
the maximum trait value/royalty that could be charged by the respondent under
the 2015 SLA. He submits that the maximum trait value fixed by these
notifications was much lower than the trait value prescribed under the said
2015 SLA.

54\. Learned senior counsel placed reliance on Article 11.03 of the SLA and
would submit that under the said clause any of the party could have pointed
out any conflict in any of the provisions with the laws or regulations of any
country of any party, then the party concerned shall notify the other parties
thereof and appropriate modifications of this agreement shall be made by the
parties hereto to avoid such conflict and to ensure lawful performance. Though
such request or  ::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020
03:43:29 ::: kvm  -: 27 :- CARBP-737-19.doc modification was made by the
petitioner, the respondent rejected the said request and terminated the said
agreement on 14 th November, 2015\.

55\. Learned senior counsel placed reliance on the order dated 28 th
March,2017 passed by the learned Single Judge of the Delhi High Court in the
proceedings filed by the respondent against the petitioner i.e. C.S.(Comm.)
132 of 2016 and would submit that while holding that the termination of the
agreement by the respondent dated 14th November, 2015 was illegal, considered
the impact of the fixation of the maximum trait value by the state price
control notifications on the SLA in light of Article 11.03. He submits that
Delhi High Court has rendered prima facie finding that the termination of the
agreement by the respondent was unlawful, agreement stands reinstated but the
obligation to pay trait value will have to be in accordance with Indian law.

56\. Learned senior counsel invited my attention to the order passed by the
Division Bench of the Delhi High Court against the said order passed by the
learned Single Judge and would submit that the Division Bench of the Delhi
High Court dismissed the appeal filed by the respondent bearing appeal no.FAO
(OS) (Comm.) No. 76 of 2016. The petitioner had also filed a separate appeal
being FAO (OS) (Comm.) No.86 of 2016 challenging the directions passed by the
learned Single Judge. On 11th April, 2018, the Division Bench allowed the
appeal filed by the petitioner and revoked the patent of the respondent over
Bt.cotton seeds.

57\. The respondent filed Special Leave Petition before the Hon'ble  :::
Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:29 ::: kvm  -:
28 :- CARBP-737-19.doc Supreme Court which was converted as Civil Appeal Nos.
4616-4617 of 2018. He submits that the respondent did not challenge the order
of dismissal of the appeal filed by the respondent. The Division Bench of the
Delhi High Court accepted the finding of the learned Single Judge on the issue
of wrongful termination of the said 2015 SLA and the modification of the same
in terms of the trait value fixed under the price control modification.

58\. Learned senior counsel invited my attention to the order dated 8 th
January, 2019 passed by the Supreme Court allowing the Civil Appeal Nos.
4616-4617 of 2018 filed by the respondent and setting aside the order passed
by the Division Bench of the Delhi High Court. The Supreme Court restored the
order passed by the learned Single Judge. He submits that the respondent had
conceded before the Supreme Court that the claim of the respondent of trait
value had to be in accordance with the trait value fixed by the price control
notifications issued under the state cotton seeds Acts.

59\. It is submitted by the learned senior counsel that in view of the
statements made by the respondent before the Supreme Court and in view of the
Supreme Court restoring the order passed by the learned Single Judge of Delhi
High Court, the respondent could not maintain a claim for recovery of trait
value from the petitioner in excess of that fixed under the state price
control notifications i.e. Rs.90/-, Rs.50/- and Rs.20/- per packet in Andhra
Pradesh, Telangana and Maharashtra respectively. The Arbitral Tribunal had
directed the petitioner to pay trait value of approximately Rs.163/- per
packet to the respondent which is clearly in violation of the state price
control notification. The Arbitral Tribunal ignored the judgments/orders of
the superior courts  ::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on -
24/07/2020 03:43:29 ::: kvm  -: 29 :- CARBP-737-19.doc and directed the
petitioner to pay to the respondent the trait value as per the rates
prescribed in the 2015 SLA.

60\. Learned senior counsel strongly placed reliance on the judgment of
Supreme Court in case of Associate Builders vs. DDA, (2015) 3 SCC 49 and in
particular paragraph 27 and judgment of Supreme Court in case of Ssangyong
Engineering & Construction Co. Ltd. vs. National Highways Authority of India,
2019 9 SCC OnLine SCC 677 and in particular paragraphs 16 and 17 and would
submit that the impugned arbitral award is contrary to the principles of law
laid down by the Supreme Court in case of Associate Builders (supra) and
judgment of Supreme Court in case of Ssangyong Engineering & Construction Co.
Ltd. (supra).

61\. It is submitted by the learned senior counsel that the trait value sought
to be recovered by the respondent from the petitioner in the arbitral
proceedings was nothing but a royalty for a licence of purported patent of the
respondent granted to the petitioner under the said 2015 SLA and was sought to
be claimed as compensation for the use of its patent. In support of this
submission, learned senior counsel relied upon Articles 1.24, 1.25, 1.32,
2.01, 2.05(k), 2.05(l), 3.01, 9.02(b)(i), 9.04 and 9.06 of the said 2015 SLA.
He submits that the petitioner had urged before the Arbitral Tribunal that the
patent of the respondent was invalid in view of section 3(j) of the Patents
Act, 1970 which expressly prohibits the patenting of plants, in whole or part
thereof including seeds, varieties and essential biological processes.

62\. It is submitted that the rights of the respondent if any in respect of
its technology could only be protected under the Protection of Plant  :::
Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:29 ::: kvm  -:
30 :- CARBP-737-19.doc Varieties and Farmers Rights Act, 2001 (for short PPVFR
Act) which is a sui generis legislation for the protection of plant varieties,
farmers rights and breeders' rights. The respondent could not have a valid
patent in respect of such technology purportedly licensed under the said 2015
SLA. The said rights claimed by the respondent under the said 2015 SLA are
forbidden by law. The said 2015 SLA was void and thus no payment was required
to be made by the petitioner to the respondent under the said agreement.

63\. It is submitted by the learned senior counsel that the disputes relating
to the patent rights are not arbitrable. The Patents Act is also a self
contained code and provides for a framework for adjudication of disputes
pertaining to patents. He relied upon sections 64, 104 and 107 of the Patents
Act. In support of his submission that the remedies of the parties are
specifically provided under those provisions of the Patents Act, he relied
upon judgment of Supreme Court in case of Vimal Kishor Shah (supra) and would
submit that the claim arising out of the patent under the said 2015 agreements
were thus not arbitrable. He also placed reliance on the judgment of Supreme
Court in case of A.Ayyasamy (supra) in support of this plea.

64\. It is submitted by the learned senior counsel that since the said 2015
agreement is void being in contravention of the PPVFR Act, no award could have
been made directing the petitioner to make payment to the respondent under the
said 2015 SLA. He submits that after enactment of section 3(j) of the Patents
Act and the PPVFR Act, the respondent's Bt. gene (being a part of seed/plant)
could only be protected under the PPVFR Act and not under the Patents Act. The
said PPVFR Act seeks not only to establish an effective system of plant  :::
Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:29 ::: kvm  -:
31 :- CARBP-737-19.doc varieties protection but also seeks to encourage the
development of new plant varieties and rights of breeders. If the respondent
is allowed to enforce the said 2015 SLA which purports to be a patent licence
of a part of the seed/plant, it would defeat the provisions of the PPVFR Act.

65\. Learned senior counsel relied upon sections 2(r), 2(x), 2(za), section
15, section 26 of PPVFR Act read with Rule 40 to 43 of the PPVFR Rules,
section 92 in support of his submission that the said Act is an enactment
containing certain safeguards for farmers who have been conferred with the
right to use, save, exchange, share, sell, sow and resow farm produce and the
same is also applicable to the seeds. He placed reliance on the judgment of
the Delhi High Court in case of Emergent Genetics India Private Limited vs.
Shailendra Shivam, 2011(125) DRJ 173 and in particular paragraph 36. He
submits that the said Act is a legislation enacted as a part of the public
policy and is for the benefit of the farming and agricultural community at
large.

66\. Learned senior counsel invited my attention to the judgment of Supreme
Court in case of Shri Lachoo Mal vs. Shri Radhey Shyam, (1971) 1 SCC 619 and
in particular paragraphs 6 and 8 which judgment is relied upon by the Arbitral
Tribunal to hold that the benefit sharing mechanism under section 26 of the
PPVFR Act is a personal benefit available to the petitioner and therefore the
petitioner could have waived such personal benefit by electing to enter into
the SLA. He submits that this view of the Arbitral Tribunal is totally
erroneous and contrary to the provisions of the PPVFR Act. The petitioner
could not have waived the benefit, if any available to its under the said
PPVFR Act.

67\. Learned senior counsel strongly placed reliance on section 92 of  :::
Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:29 ::: kvm  -:
32 :- CARBP-737-19.doc the PPVFR Act and would submit that the said provision
gives the Act overriding effect over any law or "instrument" inconsistent with
its provisions. He submits that a contract, including the SLA, would be
covered under the word 'instrument' used in section 92 and thus the said Act
has overriding effect on the said 2015 SLA. Learned senior counsel placed
reliance on the judgment of Supreme Court in case of Vishnu Pratap Sugar Works
(P) Ltd. vs. Chief Inspector of Stamps (U.P.), AIR 1968 SC 102 and in
particular paragraph 3. He also placed reliance on the judgment of Supreme
Court in case of Murlidhar Aggarwal vs. State of Uttar Pradesh, (1974) 2 SCC
472 and in particular paragraph 33 and also judgment of Supreme Court in case
of Nagindas Ramdas vs. Dalpatram Ichharam, 1974 1 SCC 242 and in particular
paragraph 19.

68\. Learned senior counsel for the petitioner submits that when the
arbitration proceedings proceeded to the stage of final hearing, the
respondent's patent had been revoked by the Division Bench of the Delhi High
Court. After the final hearing was concluded in the arbitration, but before
the impugned award was pronounced, the Supreme Court vide its judgment set
aside the judgment of the Division Bench order and remanded the matter to a
learned Single Judge of the Delhi High Court, inter alia to consider the issue
regarding the validity of the patent of the respondent.

69\. Learned senior counsel invited my attention to the letter dated 14th
January,2019 addressed by the petitioner's advocate to the Arbitral Tribunal
requesting the Tribunal for the oral hearing to explain the effect and
consequence of the said Supreme Court judgment. However, without hearing the
parties on the implications of the Supreme Court  ::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020
::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:29 ::: kvm  -: 33 :- CARBP-737-19.doc
judgment, the Arbitral Tribunal proceeded for rendering of the arbitral award.
The Arbitral Tribunal only heard the parties on whether the petitioner was
entitled to make submissions on the implications of the Supreme Court
judgment. The Arbitral Tribunal clarified that it had decided the disputes
which was the subject matter of arbitration on their own merits and based on
material placed before it, without prejudice to the rights and contentions of
the parties in other proceedings before other fora.

70\. Learned senior counsel submitted that since the entire arbitration
proceedings were conducted at a time when the order of the Division Bench
revoking the respondent's patent over Bt.cotton seed was in operation, the
Arbitral Tribunal thus ought to have heard the parties on the effect of the
said Supreme Court judgment which had set aside the judgment of the Division
Bench of the Delhi High Court. If the Arbitral Tribunal would have granted
hearing on those aspect before rendering the arbitral award, the petitioner
could have explained the impact of the Supreme Court judgment and would have
submitted that the validity of the respondent's patent was pending
adjudication in the proceedings before the Delhi High Court and if the
respondent's patent was ultimately revoked, then there would be a complete
failure of consideration under the said 2015 SLA.

71\. Learned senior counsel for the petitioner submits that various findings
rendered by the Arbitral Tribunal were based on the factually incorrect
premise. Section 2(3) of the Arbitration Act has to be read with sections 60
and 61 of the Competition Act. Section 60 of the Competition Act clearly
provides that the provisions of the said Act would have effect notwithstanding
anything thereof contacting any  ::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded
on - 24/07/2020 03:43:29 ::: kvm  -: 34 :- CARBP-737-19.doc other law for the
time being in force. The Arbitral Tribunal ought to have interpreted sections
60 to 62 of the Competition Act harmoniously. Arbitral Tribunal could not have
read section 62 in such a way as to render the mandate of sections 60 and 62
of the Competition Act nugatory.

72\. Mr.Iqbal Chagla, learned senior counsel for the respondent on the other
hand invited my attention to the various paragraphs of the pleadings,
documents forming part of the record before the Arbitral Tribunal, evidence
led by the parties, various orders passed by the Delhi High Court and the
Supreme Court in the infringement suit, order passed by the said CCI, order
passed by the Tribunal under section 16 of the Competition Act and the
findings recorded by the Arbitral Tribunal in the majority award, various
provisions of the 2015 SLA. It is submitted that after realizing the benefit
of the technology of the respondent, the petitioner and its associate
companies had approached the respondent for the said sub-licence to
commercially use the same. The petitioner obtained benefits under the said
Sub-Licence Agreement and never avoided the said sub-licence.

73\. It is submitted that under the said 2015 SLA, on the sale of a seed
packet worth upto Rs.930/-, the petitioner was liable to pay to the respondent
approximately Rs.163.28/- per packet exclusive of taxes. This amount claimed
by the respondent has already been collected from the farmers and pocketed by
the petitioner and its associate companies. Learned senior counsel placed
reliance on the paragraph 5.4 of the affidavit in reply dated 20 th February,
2019 filed by the petitioner in Commercial Arbitration Petition (L) No.151 of
2019.

74\. It is submitted by the learned senior counsel that the relevant  :::
Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:29 ::: kvm  -:
35 :- CARBP-737-19.doc period for the arbitration proceedings was 1st April,
2015 to 14th November, 2015. The respondent had claimed amount of Rs.117
crores with interest. The petitioner had used MMBL Bollgard II ® technology of
the respondent to produce Bt. cotton seeds and sell them to the farmers. He
submits that for the Draft Red Herring Prospectus of the petitioner of a year
prior to the claim period, the Bt. cotton seeds business of the petitioner was
69.73% i.e. approximately 70% of their business. The total revenue of the
petitioner for the Financial Year 2015-16 was Rs.1054 crores as is reflected
by the petitioner in the affidavit in reply dated 20th February,2019 filed by
the petitioner in petition filed by the respondent under section 9 of the
Arbitration Act in this court. The net profit for the Financial Year 2015-16
even according to the petitioner was Rs.154 crores as reflected in the said
affidavit.

75\. It is submitted that on one hand, the petitioner has failed to make
payment of trait value under the terms of the contract for the technology of
the respondent and on the other hand has used the very same technology to make
and sell seeds to farmers at the maximum selling price and has earned huge
revenues and profits from it. He submits that one of the components of maximum
selling price of cotton seeds is trait value itself. He submits that the
petitioner has already paid approximately Rs.14 crores under the said 2015 SLA
till June 2015\. The petitioner however started raising dispute regarding the
quantum of trait value thereafter and stopped making payments to the
respondent. The petitioner had also deposited TDS amount with the authorities
in favour of the respondent on 24th July, 2015 and 16th May, 2016 without
making the payment of the balance amount to the respondent. He submits that
the petitioner did not raise any dispute  ::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 :::
Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:29 ::: kvm  -: 36 :- CARBP-737-19.doc with
regard to the quantum/quantification of the amounts due by the petitioner to
the respondent before the arbitral tribunal and even before this court. The
contractual rate had been arrived at after extensive negotiations and under
legal advice as recorded in Article 11.10 of the 2015 SLA for almost 9 months,
with full knowledge of the State Government Notifications.

76\. It is submitted that the petitioner and its associate companies were
fully aware that the State Government Notifications did not fix the trait
value payable by them to the respondent but fixed only the maximum selling
price at which the seeds could be sold by the petitioner and its associate
companies to farmers. Neither the petitioner nor its associate companies had
during the relevant period attempted to avoid the 2015 SLA and had repeatedly
sought to avail the benefits thereunder. It is submitted that even before the
said CCI, the petitioner and its associate companies had never sought
avoidance of the 2015 SLA but had on the contrary, challenged the termination
of the 2015 SLA and sought stay of the termination of the 2015 SLA by the
respondent and in effect sought performance of the said agreement. He submits
that the petitioner and its associate companies were contesting the trait
value as being allegedly contrary to the price notifications and at the same
time challenged the validity of specific clause of the 2015 SLA before the CCI
as being violative of Competition Act, 2002 and sought stay on the termination
of the said agreement contrary to their contest to the trait value payable
under the said agreement to the respondent. The stand taken by the petitioner
is inconsistent and mutually destructive.

77\. It is submitted that the petitioner though had initially filed  :::
Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:29 ::: kvm  -:
37 :- CARBP-737-19.doc counter claim before the Delhi High Court in the said
infringement suit filed by the respondent, the petitioner withdrew the said
counter claim on 15th February, 2017 without leave before the Delhi High Court
and thereafter filed a frivolous application under section 16 of the
Arbitration Act before the arbitral tribunal alleging invalidity of the 2015
SLA on various grounds. It is submitted by the learned senior counsel that
sections 2 to 13 and 95 to 97 of the PPVFR Act were brought into effect on
11th November, 2005. On 19th October, 2006, sections 1, 14 to 94 of the said
PPVFR Act were brought into effect. If according to the petitioner, section 26
of the said Act was applicable to the said 2015 SLA, the petitioner was
required to register itself under sections 14 and 15 read with section 24 of
the said Act for section 26 to trigger. The petitioner as plant breeder, did
not obtain registration under section 24 of the said Act to receive the
benefits, if any, under the PPVFR Act.

78\. It is submitted by the learned senior counsel that on 25 th January,
2007, after detailed negotiations, the petitioner and the respondent agreed to
amend the 2004 SLA and fixed a trait value of Rs.150/- per packet of BG-I
cotton seeds costing Rs.750/- per packet for the period 2006-2008 onwards and
Rs.266/- per packet of BG-II cotton seeds costing Rs.950/- per packet for the
period 2007-2008 onwards. On 8 th May, 2007, in view of the settlement, the
State of Andhra Pradesh filed an additional affidavit before the MRTPC
bringing on record the (1) Settlement and Release of Claims Agreement and (2)
Supplementary and Amendment Agreement executed by and between the parties on
25th January, 2007 and prayed that the matter before the MRTPC had become
infructuous. He submits that on 25 th May, 2007, the second amendment
agreement was executed between the parties under the trait  ::: Uploaded on -
23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:29 ::: kvm  -: 38 :-
CARBP-737-19.doc value for BG-II further reducing the amount to Rs.225/- per
packet for a packet costing upto Rs.950/- per packet.

79\. It is submitted by the learned senior counsel that on 11 th June, 2008,
the Andhra Pradesh Cotton Seeds (Regulation of Supply, Distribution, Sale and
Fixation of Sale Price) Act, 2007 was enacted. Section 11 thereof provides for
fixation of the maximum sale price after taking into consideration various
factors including trait value of a cotton seed. The Maharashtra Cotton Seeds
(Regulation of Supply, Distribution, Sale and Fixation of Sale Price) Act,
2009 was enacted. Section 10 thereof provides for fixation of the maximum sale
price after taking into consideration various factors including trait value of
a cotton seed. He submits that section 11 of the Andhra Pradesh and section 10
of the Maharashtra Act do not empower the respective State Governments to fix
trait value. It only provides that the final maximum selling price of the
cotton seeds could be fixed under those provisions. Under the said Act, the
purpose of such maximum selling price fixation was to secure the interest of
famers only. The State did not have any intention/desire to determine/fix
trait value.

80\. It is submitted by the learned senior counsel that on 11 th August, 2009,
29th September, 2009 and 23rd November, 2009, the petitioner paid only a sum
of Rs.9 crores to the respondent instead of Rs.89.52 crores under the 2004 SLA
and the petitioner retained the said trait value on the ground that the agreed
contractual trait value was making its business less profitable. The
respondent accordingly issued a notice of termination of the said SLA 2004 by
notice dated 19 th November, 2009 and demanded the outstanding payment of
Rs.89.52 crores approximately under the said 2004 SLA. Learned senior counsel
::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:29 ::: kvm
-: 39 :- CARBP-737-19.doc submits that the respondent had filed a petition
under section 9 of the Arbitration Act on 23rd November, 2009 before the Delhi
High Court for interim reliefs against the petitioner. By an order dated 8 th
December, 2009, the MRTP proceedings between the parties were closed by the
Competition Appellate Tribunal directing that in view of the amended
agreements having been executed, nothing survived in the said reference.

81\. The petitioner had thereafter invoked the arbitration clause under the
said 2004 SLA on 3rd February, 2010 raising a dispute before the arbitral
tribunal concerning the payment of trait value for the Kharif 2009 seasons.
The petitioner has filed petition under section 9 of the Arbitration Act on
9th February, 2010 seeking stay of the termination notice dated 19th November,
2009 before Delhi High Court. On 11 th February, 2010, Delhi High Court
disposed of the said petition filed by the petitioner under section 9. Delhi
High Court recorded the statement made by the learned counsel for the
petitioner that the petitioner would pay on or before 16th February, 2010, the
amount claimed in the notice after deducting Rs.9,49,03,263/- already paid by
the petitioner to the respondent. Delhi High Court recorded in the said order
that the petitioner had agreed to pay the amount claimed in the termination
notice dated 19th November, 2009 within the time period stipulated in it.
Delhi High Court accordingly disposed of the said arbitration petition having
become infrutuous keeping all the rights and contentions of both the parties
left open.

82\. In the Writ Petition No.6802 of 2010 filed by the respondent before the
Andhra Pradesh High Court challenging the prospective action of the State
Government to fix trait value, the State of Andhra  ::: Uploaded on -
23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:29 ::: kvm  -: 40 :-
CARBP-737-19.doc Pradesh stated that neither the 1st nor 2nd respondent
expressed any intention/desire to determine/fix trait value. Andhra Pradesh
High Court in the said order dated 20th April, 2010 held that after coming
into force of the said legislation in terms of the legislative mandate under
section 11 of the said Act, the Government fixed the maximum sale price of the
several categories of cotton seeds at various rates in the year 2008-2009 duly
taking into account the trait value charged which in the opinion of the
Government is reasonable. The effort was not for fixing trait value but only
for fixing maximum sale price.

83\. It is submitted by the learned senior counsel that the said 2015 SLA was
executed after detailed negotiations held by the petitioner with full
independent legal advice received by the petitioner of its implications. The
State Government Price Notifications fixing maximum sale price at which the
petitioner could sell the seeds were already existing before the execution of
the said 2015 SLA between the parties. The petitioner had obligation to pay
license fee to the respondent under the said agreement notwithstanding the
existence of the State Government Price Notifications. The petitioner had
already made payment of Rs.14 crores under the said agreement to the
respondent, however refused payment of the balance contractual license fee on
the ground that the contractual amount was contrary to the Price Notifications
issued by the State Government.

84\. It is submitted that the arbitration clause was invoked in view of the
dispute between the parties by the respondent on 23 rd February, 2016 which
was responded by the petitioner by reply dated 9 th March, 2016\. The claim
made by the respondent before the arbitral tribunal were an "in personam'
contractual claim. The arbitral tribunal has  ::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 :::
Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:29 ::: kvm  -: 41 :- CARBP-737-19.doc
rendered various findings of fact on interpretation of the said 2015 SLA and
has held that the said agreement was contractually enforceable in law. The
claims made by the respondent against the petitioner were contractual and were
recoverable.

85\. It is submitted that the arbitral tribunal had jurisdiction to decide
those contractual claims. The agreement was not void under Section 23 of the
Contract Act, 1872 as being violative of the Patents Act, 1970 or the PPVFR
Act. It is also held by the arbitral tribunal that the State Government Price
Notifications did not and could not fix the trait value/license fee. The
claims made by the respondent for contractual license fee were not contrary to
the State Government Price Notifications. The said 2015 SLA is not vitiated
either by fraud or misrepresentation. It is submitted that the view taken by
the arbitral tribunal is a plausible view. Even if two views are possible
based on the interpretation of the contract, such possible interpretation or
such plausible interpretation cannot be substituted by another plausible view
or another possible interpretation by this Court under Section 34 of the
Arbitration Act.

86\. In support of this submission, learned senior counsel placed reliance on
the judgment of Supreme Court in case of McDermott International Inc v/s. Burn
Standard Co. Ltd., (2006) 11 SCC 181 and in particular paragraph 111 and
judgment of this Court in case of Fermenta Biotech Limited v/s. KR Patel in
Arbitration Petition No. 545 of 2017 and in particular paragraph 10. He also
placed reliance on the judgment of this Court in Arbitration Petition No. 1714
of 2014 in case of JSW Steel Limited v/s. ICICI Lombard General Insurance
Company Limited and in particular paragraphs 16 and 17. Learned  ::: Uploaded
on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:29 ::: kvm  -: 42 :-
CARBP-737-19.doc senior counsel also placed reliance on the judgment of the
Supreme Court in case of Associate Builders v/s. Delhi Development Authority,
(2015) 3 SCC 49 and in particular paragraphs 15, 22, 41 and 42 and in case of
Ssangyong Engineering & Construction Company Limited v/s. National Highways
Authority of India, (2019) SCC OnLine SC 677 and in particular paragraphs 33
to 41 in support of a submission that scope of interference with the Arbitral
Award under Section 34 of the Arbitration Act is extremely narrow.

87\. It is submitted by the learned senior counsel that even if there is a
jurisdictional challenge, it must be confined only under the grounds set out
under Section 34 of the Arbitration Act. A jurisdictional challenge is not
different from other challenges and are subject to the same limitations. It is
submitted that the judgment delivered by a learned single Judge of this Court
in case of M3NERGY Sdn. Bhd. v/s. Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited in
Arbitration Petition No. 548 of 2014 cited by the learned senior counsel for
the petitioner has been already overruled by the Division Bench of this Court
in the judgment reported in 2019 SCC OnLine Bom 2915 and in particular
paragraphs 17, 21 and 25 to 27. He submits that the Special Leave Petition
filed against the said judgment of Division Bench of this Court is dismissed
by an order dated 31st January, 2020 in Special Leave Petition No. 7583-7584
of 2019 in case of M3NERGY Sdn. Bhd. v/s. Hindustan Petroleum Corporation
Limited.

88\. It is submitted by the learned senior counsel that the majority award
rendered by the arbitral tribunal is well reasoned award delivered after
considering the provisions of the agreement entered into between the parties,
pleadings, documents and the evidence led by the  ::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020
::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:29 ::: kvm  -: 43 :- CARBP-737-19.doc
parties. None of the findings rendered by the Tribunal are perverse. The award
does not demonstrate any perversity or patent illegality and thus no
interference is warranted with the majority award under Section 34 of the
Arbitration Act. It is submitted that the issue raised by the petitioner that
the arbitral tribunal did not have jurisdiction on the ground that the said
2015 SLA was void under the Competition Act, 2002 was within the exclusive
jurisdiction of the Competition Commission and the jurisdiction of the
Arbitration Tribunal was ousted is totally misplaced.

89\. It is submitted that the petitioner had admitted during the course of
arguments that the monetary relief claimed by the respondent before the
arbitral tribunal could not be granted by the said CCI. Under Section 61 of
the Competition Act, jurisdiction of an arbitral tribunal is ousted only in
respect of the matters which the commission or the Appellate Tribunal is
empowered by or under the Competition Act to determine. He submits that since
the CCI or the Appellate Tribunal is not empowered to determine the monetary
claims made by the respondent, such claims made by the respondent before the
arbitral tribunal were within the jurisdiction of the arbitral tribunal and
could not be ousted. The petitioner had never challenged the said 2015 SLA as
void ab-initio before the said CCI. On the contrary, the petitioner had prayed
for specific performance of the said 2015 SLA before the said CCI. He submits
that the proceedings before the said CCI predominantly dealt with post-
termination obligations. The interim order passed by the said CCI on 13 th
April, 2016 also was confined itself only with post-termination obligations of
the parties.

90\. It is submitted by the learned senior counsel that for deciding the  :::
Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:29 ::: kvm  -:
44 :- CARBP-737-19.doc issue of jurisdiction, triple test under Section 16 of
the Arbitration Act applies only to three things: (1) whether there is in
existence a valid arbitration agreement, (2) whether the arbitral tribunal is
properly constituted and (3) whether the matters submitted to arbitration are
within the scope of the arbitration agreement. He submits that in this case
such triple test of initial jurisdiction is completely satisfied. The
petitioner has not disputed the existence of validity of arbitration
agreement. It is not the case of the petitioner that the arbitral tribunal is
not properly constituted. The monetary claim made by the respondent before the
arbitral tribunal is within the scope of and in accordance with the arbitral
clause contained in the 2015 SLA.

91\. It is submitted that since the arbitral tribunal had inherent
jurisdiction to decide the claims made by the respondent, the questions that
remains to be decided is whether the jurisdiction of the Tribunal was ousted
in view of Section 61 of the Competition Act, 2002. Learned Senior Counsel
placed reliance on the judgment of Supreme Court in case of Indian Farmers
Fertiziler Cooperative Limited v/s. Bhadra Products, (2018) 2 SCC 534 and in
particular paragraph 20.

92\. It is submitted by the learned senior counsel that since the provisions
of the said Competition Act did not afford any remedy to allow the monetary
claims and which were within the exclusive jurisdiction of the Civil Courts or
as the case may be, the jurisdiction of Civil Court or Arbitral Tribunal is
not ousted. He strongly placed reliance on the judgment of Supreme Court in
case of Dhulabhai v/s. State of Madhya Pradesh, (1960) 3 SCR 662 and in
particular paragraph 35 and would submit that the principles of law laid down
by the Supreme Court in the said judgment would squarely apply to an  :::
Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:29 ::: kvm  -:
45 :- CARBP-737-19.doc arbitral proceedings also. He also placed reliance on
the judgment of Supreme Court in case of Vimal Kishore Shah v/s. Jayesh Dinesh
Shah, (2016) 8 SCC 788 and in particular paragraphs 47 and 48.

93\. It is submitted by the learned senior counsel that the arbitral tribunal
rightly determined whether its jurisdiction was ousted by looking at the
arbitrability of the claim and therefore the averments contained in the
statement of claim. The claims made by the respondent were 'in personam' and
admittedly not capable of being adjudicated or being granted by the said CCI.
The non-arbitrable defence raised by the petitioner does not, in law,
determine or oust the jurisdiction of the arbitral tribunal. Learned senior
counsel placed reliance on the judgment of Supreme Court in case of Church of
North India v/s. Lavajibhai Ratanjibhai, (2005) 10 SCC 760 and in particular
paragraphs 38 and 39, judgment of Supreme Court in case of Abdulla v/s.
Galappa, (1985) 2 SCC 54 and in particular paragraphs 5, 7 and 9 and judgment
of Andhra Pradesh High Court in case of Sangnbhotla Venkatramaiah v/s. Kallu
Venkataswamy, (1976) 2 APLJ 28 and in particular paragraphs 1, 3 and 6.

94\. Learned senior counsel distinguished the judgments of the Supreme Court
in case of A. Ayyasamy (supra) and paragraphs of the judgment in case of Vimal
Kishore Shah (supra) relied upon by the petitioner and judgment of this Court
in case of Dinesh Jaya Poojary (supra) on the ground that the Supreme Court
and this Court in those judgments has held that the claims made by the
claimant himself were non-arbitrable in the fact situation of those matters.
He submits that those judgments are clearly distinguishable in the facts of
this case.

::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:29 :::

kvm  -: 46 :- CARBP-737-19.doc

95\. Learned senior counsel invited my attention to Section 61 of the
Competition Act and would submit that the jurisdiction of the arbitral
tribunal is ousted only in respect of any matter which the commission or the
appellate tribunal is empowered by or under the Competition Act to determine.
If any matter is incapable of being determined under the Competition Act, such
a matter is not excluded under Section 61 of the Competition Act to be ousted
by the arbitral tribunal. The petitioner has already conceded this position in
law during the course of the arguments.

96\. It is submitted by the learned senior counsel that there are several
instances where civil disputes have continued in tandem with statutory
remedies under specific laws. He relied upon the judgment of Delhi High Court
in case of Shoes East Limited v/s. Subhash Dalal, (2010) SCC OnLine Del 4292
and in particular paragraph 11 and would submit that in the said judgment the
provisions under SEBI Act which contains a provision similar to Section 61 of
the Competition Act were considered. Delhi High Court allowed the plaintiff to
proceed with the Civil Suit since that relief prayed in the said Civil Suit
could not be determined under the provisions of SEBI Act. He also relied upon
the judgment of this Court in case of Asha Kataria v/s. Ashok Kumar, 2007 (5)
Mah LJ 149 and in particular paragraphs 10 and 15 and would submit that the
said judgment also dealt with a provisions under the SEBI Act which provision
is similar to Section 61 of the Competition Act and allowed the Civil Suit to
continue. He also relied upon the judgment of Supreme Court in case of Ramesh
Gobindram v/ s. Sugra Humayun Mirza Wakf, (2010) 8 SCC 726 and in particular
paragraphs 24, 25, 28 and 35. He submits that in the said judgment, the
Supreme Court had considered a provision of Wakf Act, 1995 which  ::: Uploaded
on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:29 ::: kvm  -: 47 :-
CARBP-737-19.doc provision is similar to Section 61 of the Competition Act and
has allowed the suit for eviction under the Wakf Act to continue in view of
the fact that the said Wakf Act did not contain a provision for granting such
relief.

97\. It is submitted by the learned senior counsel that the Competition Act is
not a self-contained code. The scheme, object and the purpose of the
Competition Act, 2002 is to protect competition and not the rights inter se
amongst competitors. The Scheme of the Competition Act does not contemplate a
machinery for seeking relief under a contract. The scope/ purpose of
proceedings before the said CCI are different and distinct from recovery
proceedings. Since the respondent could not seek any relief from CCI and since
the said CCI does not provide a remedy to respondent, the jurisdiction of the
arbitral tribunal to determine the claims made by the respondent cannot be
ousted. He submits that since the respondent does not have a remedy under the
Competition Act for recovery of its contractual dues, the Competition Law can
never be regarded as a self-contained code qua such contractual claims.

98\. In support of the aforesaid submissions, learned senior counsel placed
reliance on the following Judgments :-

> (a) Judgment of Supreme Court in case of Saurabh Prakash v/s. DLF Universal
> Limited, (2007) 1 SCC 228 and in particular paragraphs 34 and 35.

> (b) Judgment of Supreme Court in case of Pawan Hans Limited v/s. Union of
> India, (2003) 5 SCC 71 and in particular paragraph 9.

::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:29 :::

kvm  -: 48 :- CARBP-737-19.doc

(c) Judgment of Delhi High Court in case of Telefonaktiebolaget LM Ericson
(PUBL) v/s. CCI, (2016) SCC OnLine Del 1951 and in particular paragraphs 153,
154, 168, 173, 175, 176 and 180 to

182\.

(d) Judgment of Supreme Court in case of Balawaa v/s. Hasanabi, (2000) 9 SCC
272 and in particular paragraphs 7 and 8.

(e) Judgment of Supreme Court in case of Girnar Traders v/s. State of
Maharashtra, (2011) 3 SCC 1 and in particular paragraphs 79 &d 80.

99\. It is submitted by the learned senior counsel that the said 2015 SLA has
not been admittedly declared to be void till date. The petitioner in the said
proceedings before the said CCI has sought a continuation of the said 2015 SLA
and not for declaration of the said agreement as void. In the infringement
proceedings filed by the respondent before the Delhi High Court for post
termination period, the petitioner had filed a counter claim seeking a
declaration that the termination of the said 2015 SLA was bad in law and that
the said 2015 SLA was valid and still subsisting. The petitioner is thus
estopped from contending that the said 2015 SLA is void. The petitioner cannot
be allowed to approbate and reprobate. Learned senior counsel submits that the
said 2015 SLA has to be treated and is presumed to be valid unless it is
declared to be void. Assumption of a future declaration that the said 2015 SLA
would be void cannot denude the jurisdiction of the arbitral tribunal to
adjudicate upon the monetary claims made by the respondent.

::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:29 :::

kvm  -: 49 :- CARBP-737-19.doc

100\. Learned senior counsel placed reliance on the judgment of Supreme Court
in case of Nathani Steels Limited v/s. Associated Constructions, (1995) Supp
(3) SCC 324 and in particular paragraph 3 thereof. The petitioner having paid
substantial amount to the respondent under the said 2015 SLA and having taken
benefit under the said agreement cannot be allowed to challenge the validity
of the said 2015 SLA which is pending before the said CCI and is within the
exclusive jurisdiction of the said authority.

101\. Learned senior counsel placed reliance on Section 27 of the Competition
Act and would submit that if the said CCI finds that there is contravention of
Sections 3 or 4, the said CCI has vide powers to pass various orders under the
said Section including an order for discontinuance of objectionable
agreements, imposition of penalties, modification of agreements etc. If the
contract is void ab-initio as canvassed by the petitioner, the question of its
discontinuance, modification etc. could never arise. The existence of such
possible remedies under Section 27 itself indicates that even where there is a
contravention of Section 3 or Section 4, the contract is not void ab- initio.
He submits that under the Competition Law, the concept of voidness has always
been considered to be "transient" and not absolute and, thus, curable. In
support of this submission, learned senior counsel placed reliance on the
judgment of Supreme Court in case of Mahindra and Mahindra Limited v/s. Union
of India, (1979) 2 SCC 529 and in particular paragraphs 10 and 14. He also
relied upon the judgment of Court of Appeal in case of David John Passmore
v/s. Morland, (1999) 1 CMLR 1129 and in particular paragraphs 7, 27, 28, 34
and 50.

::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:29 :::

kvm  -: 50 :- CARBP-737-19.doc

102\. In so far as the reliance placed by the learned senior counsel for the
petitioner on the order dated 10 th February, 2016 passed by the said CCI is
concerned, it is submitted by the learned senior counsel for the respondent
that the said order has been challenged by the respondent in Writ Petition No.
1776 of 2016. By an order dated 29 th February, 2016, the Delhi High Court has
directed that no final order should be passed by the said CCI and that any
interim order under Section 33 shall not be given effect to without the leave
of the Delhi High Court. The said Writ Petition filed by the respondent is
still pending before the High Court.

103\. It is submitted that the said order passed under Section 26(1) of the
Competition Act is merely an administrative direction which is internally
issued without any adjudicatory process and it does not effectively determine
any right or obligation of the parties. Such order does not entail any civil
consequences. In support of this submission, learned senior counsel placed
reliance on the judgment of Supreme Court in case of CCI v/s. SAIL, (2010) 10
SCC 744 and in particular paragraph 38. He also placed reliance on the
judgment of this Court in case of Vision Millenium Exports Private Limited v/s
Stride Multitrade Private Limited, (2017) SCC OnLine Bom 9307 and in
particular paragraphs16F and 25 to 27.

104\. It is submitted by the learned senior counsel that the order dated 13th
April, 2016 passed by the CCI cannot be given effect to in view of the order
dated 29th February, 2016 passed by the Delhi High Court. In any event, the
said order dated 13 th April, 2016 is merely an interim order and does not
determine the rights of parties and can never bind or prevent passing of
contrary order at the stage of final hearing much less  ::: Uploaded on -
23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:29 ::: kvm  -: 51 :-
CARBP-737-19.doc operate as res judicata or issue estoppel. He relied upon the
judgment of Supreme Court in case of Amrish Tewari v/s. Laltaprasad Dubey,
(2000) 4 SCC 440 and in particular paragraph 10 and the judgment of Supreme
Court in case of State of Assam v/s. Barak Upatyaka D.U. Karmachari Sanstha,
(2009) 5 SCC 694 and in particular paragraphs 21 and 22.

105\. In so far as the Issue Nos. 2 and 3 are concerned, it is submitted by
the learned senior counsel that those issue were framed because the petitioner
had raised Competition Law issue in the statement of defence. Each of those
issues are carefully prefaced by "as alleged in the defence". The arbitral
tribunal was not obliged to decide those issue nor would it mean that a
decision on those issues was necessary to decide other issues or to grant the
award in favour of the respondent. Learned senior counsel invited my attention
to the ground (A) raised by the petitioner at page 25 of the arbitration
petition and would submit that the petitioner itself has admitted that in the
said ground that the issue regarding the validity of the SLA under the
Competition Act was not capable of being adjudicated by the arbitral tribunal
and was to be exclusively adjudicated by the Competition Commission of India.

106\. Learned senior counsel invited my attention to ground (F) and would
submit that it was contended by the petitioner itself that the those issues
which the CCI was seized were only capable of being decided by the CCI
exclusively. He submits that the arbitral tribunal rightly has not decided
those issues and not expressed any opinion on those issues. Learned senior
counsel placed reliance on the judgment of Supreme Court in case of Harsha
Constructions v/s. Union of India, (2014) 9 SCC 246 and in particular
paragraphs 2 and 16 to 20. He  ::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on
- 24/07/2020 03:43:29 ::: kvm  -: 52 :- CARBP-737-19.doc submits that if the
arbitral tribunal would have rendered a decision on issue nos. 2 and 3, it
would have clearly exceeded its jurisdiction and such award would have been
set aside under Section 34(2)(b)(i) of the Arbitration Act. In support of this
submission, learned senior counsel placed reliance on the judgment of this
Court in case of Union of India v/s. Sarthi Enterprises, (2015) SCC OnLine Bom
1511 and in particular paragraph 27. The said judgment of learned Single Judge
has been upheld by the Division Bench in case of Sarthi Enterprises v/s. Union
of India, (2016) 6 MHLJ 598.

107\. It is submitted by the learned senior counsel that whilst deciding its
jurisdiction as well as whilst deciding on the exclusion of its jurisdiction,
the arbitral tribunal also considered the defence raised by the petitioner
that raises issue of competition law and rightly held that those issue cannot
be determined by the arbitral tribunal but can be determined by the said CCI
under the competition law. The arbitral tribunal rightly did not express any
opinion on issue nos. 2 and 3 and ensured that the proceedings of the
petitioner before the said CCI could be decided on its own merits. The
arbitral award did not operate as res- judicata against the petitioner in
those proceedings.

108\. It is submitted by the learned senior counsel that if the submissions of
the petitioner are correct and if the claims made by the respondent are
rejected on the ground that those claims are not arbitrable, the respondent
would be remediless. The respondent would have no forum to approach for its
contractual dues. If the respondent are required to wait till the outcome of
the CCI proceedings, its claim would be clearly barred under limitation. On
the other hand, if the said CCI were to declare the said 2015 SLA as void ab-
initio, the petitioner  ::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on -
24/07/2020 03:43:29 ::: kvm  -: 53 :- CARBP-737-19.doc in that event would
have multiple remedies. Learned senior counsel placed reliance on Section 53N
of the Competition Act, 2002 and would submit that amongst several remedies
the petitioner will invoke the provisions of Section 53N of the Competition
Act, 2002 and can seek refund of the amounts paid under the Award as
compensation to the respondent. Since, the petitioner is not rendered
remediless, principles of res-judicata are not attracted.

109\. Learned senior counsel invited my attention to some of the paragraphs of
the arbitral award and would submit that the arbitral tribunal has determined
all the issues that were within its jurisdiction and did not determine the
issues under the Competition Law and has kept open all the rights and remedies
available to the petitioner under the Competition Law. He submitted that even
if the said CCI were to hold that the said 2015 SLA is unenforceable, since
the petitioner has acted upon and received benefits under the said 2015 SLA,
it would be liable to pay the license fee to the respondent. He relied upon by
the judgment of Supreme Court in case of Piloo Dhuinshaw Sidhwa v/s. Municipal
Corporation of City of Poona, (1970) 1 SCC 213 and in particular paragraphs 6,
7, 9 and 10.

110\. During the course of the arguments advanced by the learned senior
counsel for the petitioner, this Court inquired as to the option if any
available to the arbitral tribunal to deal with the claims made by the
respondent on its own merit or whether the arbitral Tribunal could suspend the
arbitral proceedings and wait for outcome of the proceedings before CCI. The
learned senior counsel for the petitioner made three possible recourse which
according to him, the arbitral tribunal could have adopted i.e. (a) to dismiss
the entire claim of the  ::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on -
24/07/2020 03:43:29 ::: kvm  -: 54 :- CARBP-737-19.doc respondent. The
respondent in that event should initiate arbitration after a final order in
its favour under the Competition Act is passed by the said CCI or (b) to stay
the arbitral proceedings under Section 9 and/or Section 17 of the Arbitration
Act and (c) to seek a indefinite extension of time under Section 29A of the
Arbitration Act.

111\. It is submitted by the learned senior counsel for the respondent that
the option (a) suggested by the learned senior counsel for the petitioner is
untenable in law on the ground that the claim of the respondent was arbitrable
and was not capable of being granted by the said CCI, (ii) claim of the
respondent would be extinguished by the law of limitation if the respondent
were to await the final order of the CCI. In so far as the suggestion of the
learned senior counsel for the petitioner that the arbitral proceedings were
liable to be stayed under Section 9 and/or Section 17 of the Arbitration Act
is concerned, it is submitted by the learned senior counsel that the said
contention raised by the petitioner is untenable. There is no provision in the
Arbitration Act to stay the arbitral proceedings by the arbitral tribunal
itself. On the contrary, it is settled law that there is no jurisdiction under
Section 17 of the Arbitration Act to stay the arbitration proceedings. He
submits that the proposition of law canvassed by the learned senior counsel
for the petitioner that the Court has jurisdiction under Section 9 of the
Arbitration Act to grant stay of proceedings is also doubtful.

112\. Learned senior counsel placed reliance on the judgment of Delhi High
Court in case of Shree Tirupathi Udyog v/s. Indraprastha Gas Ltd., decided on
1st March, 2018 in Arbitration Application (Commercial) No. 8 of 2018. He
submits that in any case the petitioner did not file any proceedings either
under Section 9 or under Section 17 ::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 :::
Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:29 ::: kvm  -: 55 :- CARBP-737-19.doc of the
Arbitration Act seeking stay of the arbitral proceedings either in Court or
before the arbitral tribunal as the case may be. He submits that where
stay/suspension of proceeding was contemplated, the legislature has expressly
provided so in limited context i.e. under Section 38 of the Arbitration Act.

113\. In so far as the option (c) suggested by the learned senior counsel for
the petitioner i.e. to seek an indefinite extension of time under Section 29A
of the Arbitration Act is concerned, it is submitted by the learned senior
counsel that the legislative intent underlying Section 29A of the Arbitration
Act is to ensure timely disposal of arbitral proceedings. While a short
extension of time for making of the award is contemplated under the said
tribunal, the Court has no jurisdiction to grant an indefinite extension. He
submits that if indefinite extension is permitted, the purpose and object of
deciding the arbitral proceedings expeditiously would be frustrated.

114\. In so far as issue of jurisdiction raised by the petitioner on the
ground that the issue of patentability of the technology of the respondent is
pending adjudication before the Delhi High Court, the arbitral tribunal has no
jurisdiction to decide the claim of the respondent is concerned, it is
submitted by the learned senior counsel that the patent remains valid and
enforceable till the time it is revoked. On the date of the claim as well as
on the date of the award, the patents covering the technology of the
respondent were and even today are valid and enforceable. The award cannot be
challenged on the basis of alleged assumed invalidity of patents. It is
submitted that no other arguments regarding Patent Act was argued during the
course of arguments by the learned senior counsel for the petitioner and are
::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:29 ::: kvm
-: 56 :- CARBP-737-19.doc therefore deemed to have been given up. The
petitioner has simplicitor raised a plea that the said 2015 SLA is forbidden
by Section 3(j) of the Patents Act and thus is void under Section 23 of the
Indian Contract Act, 1872. He submits that this argument of the petitioner is
totally untenable. Section 3(j) of the Patents Act does not prohibit any type
of agreement or declare any type of agreement void.

115\. It is submitted that the claim of the respondent in the arbitral
proceedings were not for recovery of patent fees but was for recovery of
contractual payment of trait fees. Unless the patent of the respondent is set
aside, the respondent has right to claim under the said patent of the
respondent. Learned senior counsel invited my attention to the findings
rendered by the arbitral tribunal in paragraphs 159 and 161 of the arbitral
award and would submit that the arbitral tribunal has clearly recorded a
finding that the claims made by the respondent were not based on the patent
right. Such findings of fact in paragraph 161 of the arbitral award have not
been challenged by the petitioner in the arbitration petition.

116\. In so far as the submission of the learned senior counsel for the
petitioner that the said 2015 SLA is contrary to the Section 26 read with
Section 92 of the PPVFR Act is concerned, it is submitted by the learned
senior counsel for the respondent that the arbitral tribunal has given a
finding of fact that the petitioner did not possess any certificate of
registration under Section 24 of the PPVFR Act prior to the date of
termination of the said 2015 SLA, which is a mandatory pre-condition to
trigger Section 26 of the said PPVFR Act. He submits that since the provisions
of the said PPVFR Act are not triggered, the contention is academic, moot and
deserves to be rejected.

::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:29 :::

kvm  -: 57 :- CARBP-737-19.doc

117\. It is submitted that the petitioner is a commercial breeder with revenue
over Rs.1,000 crores and not a farmer. The respondent is also not a farmer. No
rights of farmers are being waived by virtue of 2015 SLA. The petitioner has
been exploiting the farmers and has recovered substantial amount from the
farmers with trait value and has retained such amount with themselves
illegally. The petitioner sells seeds etc to the farmers and has not been
espousing the cause of farmers. He relied upon the findings of the arbitral
tribunal on those issues in paragraph 212 of the arbitral award and would
submit that the said finding of fact cannot be interfered with by this Court
in this petition under Section 34 of the Arbitration Act.

118\. In so far as the challenge arising out of the notifications issued by
the State Government of Andhara Pradesh is concerned, it is submitted by the
learned senior counsel that the relevant State Legislation did not empower the
State Government to fix of trait value/ license fee. Under Section 11, the
Government has to fix maximum sale price after taking into consideration the
trait value. The Andhra Pradesh Government has fixed the maximum sale price
and not the trait value under the said notifications.

119\. Learned senior counsel also invited my attention to the notifications
issued by the State of Maharashtra and would submit that the State of
Maharashtra also has not fixed the trait value/license fee but has only fixed
the maximum sale price of cotton seeds. He submits that the State Government
of Andhra Pradesh has infact admitted before the Andhra Pradesh High Court in
a writ petition by filing an affidavit that it did not intent to fix the trait
value/license fee. State of  ::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on -
24/07/2020 03:43:29 ::: kvm  -: 58 :- CARBP-737-19.doc Telangana had also
fixed Maximum Sales Price under the AP Cotton Seeds Act. The Andhra Pradesh
High Court has stayed the Government notification issued by the State of
Andhra Pradesh. On 31 st March, 2016, the said notification issued by the
State of Andhra Pradesh has lapsed. On 20th April, 2016, a Division Bench of
the Andhra Pradesh High Court stayed the operation of the judgment delivered
by the learned single Judge but made it clear that stay order would not affect
the arbitrations.

120\. Learned senior counsel invited my attention to various findings rendered
by the arbitral tribunal in the majority award in paragraphs 204, 210, 211,
213 and 215 and would submit that these findings of fact being not perverse
cannot be interfered with by this Court. The arbitral tribunal has not
followed the orders passed by the Delhi High Court. The Delhi High Court has
considered the notifications issued by the Central Government on 1st April,
2016 whereas in this case the respondent had made a claim only upto 14th
October, 2015. The said judgment delivered by the Delhi High Court was not
relevant. The directions issued by the Delhi High Court were for the financial
year 2016-2017 whereas the transactions between the parties in this case were
prior to the financial year 2016-2017.

121\. It is submitted that the said infringement suit filed by the respondent
was initially dismissed by the Delhi High Court. The said judgment of the
learned single Judge was set aside by the Division Bench. The Supreme Court
passed an order thereby setting aside the order passed by the Delhi High Court
restored the judgment delivered by the learned single Judge of the Delhi High
Court dated 28 th March, 2017 and remanded the said suit back to the Delhi
High Court. The said  ::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on -
24/07/2020 03:43:29 ::: kvm  -: 59 :- CARBP-737-19.doc suit is pending before
a learned Single Judge of Delhi High Court.

122\. It is submitted by the learned senior counsel that the arbitral tribunal
has rendered a finding of fact in paragraphs 203 to 206 of the arbitral award
and has come to the conclusion that the said Price Notifications did not fix
the trait value but only the maximum sell price at which the petitioner could
sell the seeds. During the course of oral arguments, the petitioner did not
challenge those findings rendered by the arbitral tribunal in the majority
award. In support of this submission, learned senior counsel placed reliance
on the judgment of Supreme Court in case of Amrish Tewari v/s. Laltaprasad
Dubey, (2000) 4 SCC 440 and in particular paragraph 10. He also placed
reliance on the judgment of Supreme Court in case of State of Assam v/s. Barak
Upatyaka D.U. Karmachari Sanstha, (2009) 5 SCC 694 and in particular
paragraphs 21 and 22.

123\. It is submitted by the learned senior counsel that the order passed by
the Delhi High Court as well as by the Supreme Court was for a period post
termination when the Central Price Control regime under the Cotton Seeds
(Price Control) Order, 2015 was in place. Under the said Cotton Seeds (Price
Control) 2015, the Central Government was empowered to and had fixed the trait
value. He submits that even in the said judgment of Delhi High Court and more
particularly in paragraphs 131 and 134(8), this position was confirmed by
holding that the order will apply only to financial year 2016-2017.

124\. In so far as the issue as to whether the arbitral tribunal ought to have
given hearing to the petitioner to make submissions on the order dated 14th
January, 2019 passed by the Supreme Court or not is concerned, learned senior
counsel for the respondent invited my  ::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 :::
Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:29 ::: kvm  -: 60 :- CARBP-737-19.doc
attention to the minutes of meeting dated 16 th January, 2019 on page 531 of
the Convenient Compilation No.II of the documents. No prejudice of any nature
was caused to the petitioner. The arguments were already concluded between the
parties before the arbitral tribunal when such request was made by the
petitioner.

125\. In so far as the issue nos. 2 and 3 framed by the arbitral tribunal is
concerned, it is submitted that the arbitral tribunal could not have gone into
and decided whether the said 2015 SLA was void or not based on the provisions
of the Competition Act. He submits that the petitioner has not challenged the
amounts awarded by the arbitral tribunal on merits in the arbitration
petition. In so far as the alleged concession made by the respondent before
the Supreme Court recorded in paragraph 10 of the order dated 1st January,
2019 passed by the Supreme Court is concerned, it is submitted by the learned
senior counsel that the said alleged concession was specifically qualified by
the phrase 'at this stage' which demonstrates that it was a statement
applicable at the interim stage only. In any event, the said concession has to
be read in the context of the post termination period when the CSPCO was in
force and was being observed. During the arguments, the petitioner did not
question the award as regards the findings on the issues of
fraud/misrepresentation/coercion/undue influence and thus those findings are
deemed to be final and binding.

126\. It is submitted by the learned senior counsel that the petitioner had
entered into a valid contractual commitment in the form of the 2015 SLA and
had undertaken obligations thereunder. The petitioner has acted upon the said
agreement and has received benefits under the said agreement. The petitioner
had sold 7,39,818 seeds packets  ::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded
on - 24/07/2020 03:43:29 ::: kvm  -: 61 :- CARBP-737-19.doc containing the
technology of the respondent during the period 1 st April, 2015 to 14th
November, 2015 and received an aggregate amount of Rs.740 crores approximately
from the farmers/consumers. The arbitral tribunal however has only allowed the
claim of Rs.117.46 crores with interest which the petitioner had contractually
agreed to pay to the respondent. The retention of the said amount by the
petitioner amounts to unjust enrichment by the petitioner, which cannot be
permitted.

127\. Mr. Chagla, learned senior counsel for the respondent while
distinguishing the judgment of Delhi High Court in case of Jindal Steel &
Power Ltd. (supra) invited my attention to the paragraphs 1, 24 and 28 of the
said judgment and would submit that a MOU dated 1 st February, 2003 was
challenged before the Delhi High Court in a writ petition filed under Article
226 of the Constitution of India before the Competition Act came into force.
The same party had filed a parallel proceedings before the CCI after the said
Competition Act came into force for the same relief. Delhi High Court
adjourned the writ proceedings awaiting the decision of the CCI on the basis
that the writ petitioner could achieve full relief before the CCI. He submits
that the said judgment would not apply to the facts of this case. In this
case, the proceedings before the arbitral tribunal and before the CCI were
filed by the two opposite parties. The CCI has no power to grant monetary
relief in favour of the respondent. He submits that in any event, the said
judgment would assist the case of the respondent on the issue that parallel
proceedings are maintainable but unlike writ proceedings. There being no power
granted to the arbitral tribunal to adjourn the arbitral proceedings sine die.
The powers of Writ Court cannot be compared with the powers of the arbitral
tribunal.

::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:29 :::

kvm  -: 62 :- CARBP-737-19.doc

128\. Learned senior counsel for the respondent distinguished the judgment of
Supreme Court in case of Fuerst Day Lawson Ltd. (supra) on the ground that the
Supreme Court in that judgment had considered the issue whether the appeal was
maintainable under Section 50 of the Arbitration Act by exercising powers
under Letters Patent. In that context, the Supreme Court held that the
provisions of Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 being a self-contained
code the Letters Patent Appeal would be excluded. He submits that the said
judgment would infact support the case of the respondent and not the
petitioner on the issue that the Arbitration and Conciliation Act is a self-
contained code. He submits that the claim that cannot be entertained by the
Competition Act but only by the arbitral tribunal, the arbitral tribunal only
has exclusive jurisdiction to consider and grant monetary relief in favour of
the respondent. There is no provisions in the Competition Act provide for
adjudication of contractual disputes/civil action in personam.

129\. Learned senior counsel for the respondent distinguished the judgment of
Supreme Court in case of Vimal Kishor Shah (supra) by referring to the
paragraphs 4, 36, 46, 50 and 51 of the said judgment and would submit that the
said judgment dealt with the non-arbitrable claims and not arbitrable defence.
The Supreme Court in the said judgment held that Clause 20 of the Trust Deed
did not constitute an arbitration agreement under Section 7 of the Arbitration
Act. The Competition Act does not provide for any adequate and sufficient
remedies to the respondent to seek recovery of unpaid contractual
consideration.

130\. Learned senior counsel distinguished the judgment of Supreme  :::
Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:29 ::: kvm  -:
63 :- CARBP-737-19.doc Court in case of A. Ayyasamy (supra) by inviting my
attention to the paragraphs 6 to 9, 35, 38, 43 and 45 of the said judgment and
would submit that in the said matter, the plaintiff had filed a Civil Suit
regarding disputes with his partners pertaining to administration of a hotel.
There were allegations of fraud made by the defendant in the application filed
under Section 8 of the Arbitration Act and had contended that such allegations
of fraud could not be adjudicated by the arbitral tribunal. The Supreme Court
held that since the claims raised did not involve any serious allegations of
fraud, those claims were arbitrable. He submits that the said judgment would
support the case of the respondent and not the petitioner since the Supreme
Court has held that the jurisdiction of the arbitrator is akin to that of the
Civil Court. Mere allegations of statutory violation would not detract from
the jurisdiction of the arbitral tribunal to resolve a dispute arising out of
a civil or contractual relationship.

131\. Learned senior counsel for the respondent distinguished the judgment of
Supreme Court in case of Emaar MGF Land Ltd. (supra) by inviting my attention
to the paragraph 55 of the said judgment. It is submitted that the Supreme
Court in the said judgment did not hold that the consumer disputes are non-
arbitrable. It is held that the remedy under the Consumer Protection Act was
available to a consumer in addition to the general remedy and once he had
invoked that special remedy, he could not be relegated to arbitration. He
submits that in this case since the CCI has no jurisdiction to award any
monetary claim in favour of the respondent, the respondent had rightly invoked
the arbitration agreement.

132\. Learned senior counsel distinguished the judgment of this Court  :::
Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:29 ::: kvm  -:
64 :- CARBP-737-19.doc in case of Dinesh Jaya Poojary (supra). He invited my
attention to the paragraphs 3, 28, 33, 34, 37, 38 and 39 of the said judgment
and would submit that admittedly the CCI is not empowered to adjudicate upon
the contractual claim of the respondent for unpaid trait value. The claimant
in that case had approached the arbitral tribunal for a claim which should
have been filed before the Registrar under the Chit Funds Act. The dispute
raised and the relief claimed in the statement of claim fell exclusively
within four corners of the said Act as it was touching the management of a
chit business.

133\. Learned senior counsel distinguished the judgment of this Court in case
of Kingfisher Airlines Ltd. (supra) on the ground that this Court had dealt
with a claim for unpaid wages. The dispute for recovery of unclaimed wages was
an industrial dispute for which exclusive remedies were provided under the
Industrial Disputes Act and thus non-arbitrable. In this case, admittedly
monetary claim cannot be awarded by the CCI and could be dealt with and
considered exclusively by the arbitral tribunal.

134\. Learned senior counsel distinguished the judgment of Supreme Court in
case of Competition Commission of India (supra) and in particular paragraphs
100, 103, 104, 109, 113, 114 and 116 and would submit that the Supreme Court
had considered the jurisdiction of two regulatory bodies i.e. TRAI under the
Telecom Regulatory Authority of India Act, 1997and CCI under the Competition
Act, 2002 both containing exclusive jurisdiction provisions. In that context,
the Supreme Court held that telecom sector's primary jurisdiction was with the
TRAI/TDSAT. It was held that the claim of the respondent for breach of
contract and for recovery of unpaid license fees does not  ::: Uploaded on -
23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:29 ::: kvm  -: 65 :-
CARBP-737-19.doc involve any such jurisdictional aspects of violation of
Competition Act. He submits that in that case both the remedies under the TRAI
and the Competition Act were invoked by the same party. The said judgment
would assist the case of the respondent and not the petitioner since according
to the learned senior counsel, the Supreme Court found that while the CCI has
exclusive jurisdiction to determine whether there is violation of Competition
Act, it did not oust the jurisdiction of other forums/bodies on other matters
relegated to such forum/body, even if the issues are related. The Supreme
Court held that the both legislative schemes must be read in their context. He
submits that the contractual reliefs are within the domain of the arbitral
tribunal, whereas adjudication on violation of Competition Act are within the
domain of CCI. Both the schemes operate independently and parallelly.

135\. Learned senior counsel distinguished the judgment of Supreme Court in
case of Arun Kumar and Ors. (supra) on the ground that the said judgment is
not at all applicable to the facts of this case. He submits that the alleged
invalidity of a contract or violation of the Competition Act is not a
'jurisdictional fact' for the arbitral tribunal under Section 16 of the
Arbitration Act. Invalidity of a contract is a arbitral dispute by itself on
merits and is not a jurisdictional fact. Statutory remedies against validity
of contract provide a 'jurisdictional fact' but restricts itself to the
aspects mentioned in the statute. The question as to whether contract being
void or not is not a jurisdictional fact.

136\. Learned senior counsel for the respondent distinguished the judgment of
Supreme Court in case of Competition Commission of India (supra) relied upon
by the learned senior counsel on the ground  ::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 :::
Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:29 ::: kvm  -: 66 :- CARBP-737-19.doc that
the said judgment support the case of the respondent and not the petitioner.
It was held by the Supreme Court in the said judgment that an order under
Section 26(1) of the Competition Act is only akin to a departmental function
and does not affect rights and liabilities of parties. He submits that while
the Court has imposed restrictions on the CCI while passing interim orders
under Section 33 of the Competition Act, that would not convert an interim
order into an order of a final nature. The interim orders passed by the CCI
was even otherwise not binding on the arbitral tribunal and does not
constitute res-judicata in the arbitral proceedings.

137\. Learned senior counsel distinguished the judgment of Supreme Court in
case of Gangai Vinayagar Temple and Ors. (supra) on the ground that the
provisions of Order XLI Rule 1 of Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 does not apply
to arbitrations. Even if issues are framed by the arbitral tribunal, the
arbitral tribunal does not decide every such issues. If a particular issue is
incapable of decision, the arbitral tribunal will not decide such issue.

138\. Learned senior counsel distinguished the judgment of Supreme Court in
case of Inder Singh Rekhi (supra) on the ground that the said judgment is not
at all applicable to the facts of this case. The Supreme Court in the said
judgment had only held that the dispute requires denial/repudiation of the
claim i.e. difference from a 'defence' in a statement of defence. The term
'dispute' does not concern itself with the reasons/contentions in the denial/
repudiation of the claim. He submits that in this case, the 'dispute' that was
referred to the arbitral tribunal was the 'dispute' contained in the
invocation letter dated 23 rd February, 2016 which did not involve any issue
under the Competition  ::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on -
24/07/2020 03:43:29 ::: kvm  -: 67 :- CARBP-737-19.doc Law.

139\. Learned senior counsel distinguished the judgment of Supreme Court in
case of Booz Allen (supra) on the ground that the Supreme Court in the said
judgment had considered a claim relating to a mortgage which involved issues
in rem and therefore held that the said claim was not arbitrable. In the
present case, the claim for recovery of the amount under the said 2015 SLA was
arising out of the contractual rights and was an action in personam and not
touching any issue in rem. He strongly placed reliance on the paragraph 38 of
the said judgment and would submit that even in the said judgment, the Supreme
Court has made it clear that the disputes relating to subordinate rights in
personam arising from rights in rem have always been considered to be
arbitrable.

140\. Learned senior counsel distinguished the judgment of this Court in case
of Sundrabai Sitaram (supra) on the ground that in the said judgment this
Court came to a conclusion that the contract in question was void as it was
prohibited by the Bombay District Police Act. In this case, no Court or
Tribunal has declared the 2015 SLA to be void. The said agreement is not
forbidden by a law. It is not even the case of the petitioner before the said
CCI that the said 2015 SLA is forbidden by law. He submits that unless the
petitioner would have produced any order from the said CCI holding the 2015
SLA as void or forbidden by law, the arbitral tribunal was not bound to stay
its all proceedings and had jurisdiction to proceed on the premise that the
said 2015 SLA was valid and enforceable.

141\. In so far as the judgment of this Court in case of M3NERGY  ::: Uploaded
on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:29 ::: kvm  -: 68 :-
CARBP-737-19.doc SDN. BHD. (supra) is concerned, it is submitted by the
learned senior counsel that the said judgment has been set aside by the
Division Bench of this Court reported in 2019 SCC Online Bom 2915. The Special
Leave Petition filed against the said judgment of the Division Bench of this
Court has been dismissed. The judgment of the learned Single Judge thus cannot
be relied upon by the petitioner.

142\. Learned senior counsel distinguished the judgment of Delhi High Court in
case of Telefonaktiebola get LM Ericsson (supra) on the ground that the said
judgment is not applicable to the facts of this case since the claim of the
respondent was referred to arbitration and did not involve enforcement of
right or any obligation under the Patent Act. He submits that on the contrary,
the said judgment supports the case of the respondent since it holds that the
Competition Act does not oust the jurisdiction of other forum/bodies on other
matters relegated to other forum/body, even if the issues are related. He
submits that the provisions of Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 and the
Competition Act must be read in their respective context and both the schemes
must be given effect to. The said judgment was delivered by a learned Single
Judge of Delhi High Court is under challenge before the Division Bench of High
Court in LPA No. 246 of 2016. The Division Bench of Delhi High Court has
directed that no final report shall be filed by the Director General till the
next date of hearing.

143\. Learned senior counsel distinguished the judgment of Supreme Court in
case of Murlidhar Aggarwal (supra) on the ground that in this case, the
arbitral tribunal has rendered a finding that the conditions to trigger the
PPVFR Act did not arise in the relevant period and this finding has not been
challenged by the petitioner in the arbitration  ::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020
::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:29 ::: kvm  -: 69 :- CARBP-737-19.doc
petition. He submits that the said judgment is even applicable to the facts of
this case because even assuming the said PPVFR Act is to the benefit of
farmers as was contended by the petitioner, the agreement in this case is
between the technology provider and a commercial seed company. There is no
farmer in the equation and no rights/benefits of farmers are waived. The
petitioner has not even chosen to seek registration under the provisions of
the said Act and thus question of the petitioner receiving any benefits under
the said Act did not arise. The petitioner has not challenged the findings
rendered by the arbitral tribunal on waiver in the arbitration petition.
Learned senior counsel distinguished the judgment of Supreme Court in case of
Vishnu Pratap Sugar Works (supra) on the ground that the petitioner has not
challenged the finding of the arbitral tribunal on waiver in the arbitration
petition.

144\. Mr. Khambata, learned senior counsel for the petitioner appearing for
the petitioner in Commercial Arbitration Petition No. 737 of 2016 in rejoinder
submits that the Competition Act is a self- contained code. Till the issue of
validity of the said 2015 SLA was decided by the said CCI, the arbitral
tribunal could not have entertained the monetary reliefs claimed by the
respondent. The claim in monetary relief was depending upon the issue of
validity of the 2015 SLA. The issue of validity of the said 2015 SLA is a
jurisdictional fact. Learned senior counsel placed reliance on Section 2(4) of
the Contract Act, 1872 and Section 10 of the Specific Relief Act, 1963 and
would submit that the claims made by the respondent for recovery of the amount
was depending upon the validity and enforceability of the said 2015 SLA.

145\. It is submitted that since the validity of the said 2015 SLA which  :::
Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:29 ::: kvm  -:
70 :- CARBP-737-19.doc was challenged before the said CCI, the arbitral
tribunal could not have proceeded on the premise that there was a valid
agreement between the parties and based thereon could not have awarded any
reliefs in favour of the respondent. Learned senior counsel invited my
attention to the paragraph 5 of the judgment of Supreme Court in case of
Vallabhdas v/ s. Dr. Madanlal, (1970) 1 SCC 761 and submits that the arbitral
tribunal ought to have considered whether there was a jural relationship
between the petitioner and the respondent or not, before granting any relief
in favour of the respondent. In support of this submission, learned senior
counsel placed reliance on the judgment of Supreme Court in case of
Prabhakaran and Ors. v/s. M. Azhagiri Pillai (Dead) by LRs. and Ors., (2006) 4
SCC 484 and in particular paragraph 20.

146\. Learned senior counsel invited my attention to the findings rendered by
the arbitral tribunal in paragraph 51 of the arbitral award holding that the
jurisdiction of the arbitral tribunal has to be considered only on the basis
of the averments made in the statement of claim and not in the written
statement. He relied under Sections 21, 23(3), 34(2)

(iv) and 34(2)(b)(i) of the Arbitration Act and would submit that the dispute
arose and referred to the arbitral tribunal was not the averments made in the
statement of claim but the dispute between the parties which would include the
plea raised in the written statement by the respondent. If the Court finds
that the subject matter of dispute is not capable for settlement by arbitral
tribunal, the Court has ample power to set aside the said award under Section
34(2)(b)(i) of the Arbitration Act. The Court can apply its mind to the case
or parties before the arbitral tribunal i.e. case of both the parties raised
in their respective pleadings.

::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:29 :::

kvm  -: 71 :- CARBP-737-19.doc

147\. Learned senior counsel relied upon the explanation II to Section 34 and
would submit that the Court has to see the merits of the matter in context. He
relied upon the Section 16(1) of the Arbitration Act and would submit that the
claimant would not raise any issue of jurisdiction. Issue of jurisdiction can
be raised only by the respondent in so far as claims filed by the claimant is
concerned. Learned senior counsel placed reliance on the judgment of Supreme
Court in case of State of Goa v/s. Praveen Enterprises, 2012 (12) SCC 581 and
in particular paragraphs 11, 14, 18,19, 20, 26, 27 and 41 of the said judgment
and would submit that what is stated in the notice issued under Section 21 of
the Arbitration Act is not relevant for the purpose of deciding the
jurisdiction under the arbitration agreement. Such plea was specifically
raised by the petitioner in the written statement filed before the arbitral
tribunal. Section 21 has to be read with Section 43 of the Arbitration Act.
Once notice under Section 21 is received by the other side, limitation in
respect of such dispute stops.

148\. It is submitted that the dispute in arbitral proceedings would be raised
in the statement of claim and also in the written statement. Even under
Section 34(2)(b) of the Arbitration Act Court has to see the subject matter of
dispute while hearing of the application under Section 34 impugning the
arbitral award. Learned senior counsel placed reliance on the judgment of
Supreme Court in case of Prabhakaran and Ors. v/s. M. Azhagiri Pillai (Dead)
by LRs. and Ors., (2006) 4 SCC 484 and in particular paragraph 21 and would
submit that the arbitral tribunal cannot decide the issue of jurisdiction
purely on the averments made in the plaint but has to decide the said issue
based on the difference. The Competition Commission of India has already taken
a prima-facie view on the issue of validity of the said 2015 SLA  ::: Uploaded
on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:29 ::: kvm  -: 72 :-
CARBP-737-19.doc against the respondent and in favour of the petitioner
herein.

149\. Learned senior counsel placed reliance on the judgment of Supreme Court
in case of Man Roland Druckimachinen AG v/s. Multicolour Offset Ltd. and Anr.,
2004 (7) SCC 447 and in particular paragraphs 18 and 46, in support of
submission that issue of jurisdiction can be either taken by way of demurrer
or at the time of trial. The arbitral tribunal in this case had not decided
the issue of jurisdiction under Section 16 of the Arbitration Act immediately
on demurrer but had postponed the said issue and decided the same finally in
the impugned award only on the basis of the averments made in the statement of
claim.

150\. Learned senior counsel distinguished the judgment of Supreme Court in
case of Indian Farmers Fertiziler Cooperative Limited (supra) on the ground
that the jurisdictional issue under Section 10 has to be decided based on the
issues raised by both the parties and not only on the basis of the averments
made and the contentions raised in the statement of claim by the claimant. He
relied upon the paragraphs 20 of the said judgment and would submit that the
arbitrability in respect of a claim as to the subject matter dispute also fall
under Section 16.

151\. Learned senior counsel placed reliance on the judgment of Supreme Court
in case of Garware Wall Ropes Ltd. v/s. Coastal Marine Constructions and
Engineering Ltd., 2019 (9) SCC 209 and in particular paragraphs 16, 19, 20 and
22 on the issue of jurisdiction and would submit that the Supreme Court has
clearly held in the said judgment that if the document which require payment
of stamp duty  ::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020
03:43:29 ::: kvm  -: 73 :- CARBP-737-19.doc compulsory and is not stamped,
such documents comprising of arbitral agreement would not be enforceable in
law.

152\. Learned senior counsel invited my attention to Section 3(1), Section
3(2) and Section 27 of the Competition Act and would submit that in
appropriate cases, the CCI has power to modify the agreement. Under Section
3(2) of the Competition Act, an agreement would be void falling under the said
provision unless saved by modification. Learned senior counsel distinguished
the judgment of Supreme Court in case of Nathani Steels Limited (supra) cited
by the learned senior counsel for the respondent on the ground that the
Supreme Court in the said judgment had considered the issue of accord and
satisfaction and is thus not applicable to the facts of this case.

153\. Learned senior counsel for the petitioner distinguished the judgment of
Court of Appeal (Civil Division) in case of David John Passmore (supra) on the
ground that the provisions of law considered by the Court of Appeal in the
said judgment were totally different. Section 3(1) of the Competition Act
prohibits the entry itself and provides for permanent prohibition. Learned
senior counsel distinguished the judgment of Supreme Court in case of Mahindra
and Mahindra Limited (supra). He submits that Section 13(2) considered by the
Supreme Court in the said judgment is not similar to any of the provisions of
the Competition Act.

154\. Learned senior counsel distinguished the judgment of Supreme Court in
case of Pankaj Mehra (supra) and would submit that the powers of Companies
Court under Section 536 (3) of the Companies Act, 1956 to declare a
transaction as void ab-initio unless otherwise  ::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020
::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:29 ::: kvm  -: 74 :- CARBP-737-19.doc
rectified by the Companies Court is different then the powers of CCI under
Section 3(2) of the Competition Act.

155\. Learned senior counsel for the petitioner cited judgment of Supreme
court in case of Tarsem Singh v/s. Sukhminder Singh, 1998 (3) SCC 471 and in
particular paragraphs 30 to 33 and would submit that since the said 2015 SLA
itself was void since inception, no relief could have been granted by the
arbitral tribunal arising out of the said 2015 SLA. The arbitral tribunal
could not have awarded any monetary relief under the said 2015 SLA unless the
said agreement was found legally enforceable and valid agreement by the said
CCI.

156\. Learned senior counsel for the petitioner distinguished the judgment of
Supreme Court in case of Piloo Dhuinshaw Sidhwa (supra) on the ground that the
Supreme Court in the said judgment had considered a claim for compensation
under Section 70 of the Contract Act on the basis of quantum meruit. In this
case the arbitral tribunal has not allowed the claims made by the respondent
on the basis of quantum meruit under Section 70 of the Contract Act but has
allowed the said claim on the basis of the said 2015 SLA as enforceable in
law.

157\. Learned senior counsel for the petitioner distinguish the judgment of
Supreme Court in case of Hansraj Gupta & Co. vs. Union of India, 1973 (2) SCC
637 cited by Mr. Dwarkadas, learned senior counsel for the respondent in
Commercial Arbitration Petition No. 738 of 2019 on the ground that the Supreme
Court had awarded compensation to the party by exercising powers under Article
142 of the Constitution of India.

::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:29 :::

kvm  -: 75 :- CARBP-737-19.doc

158\. It is submitted by the learned senior counsel that even if the said CCI
could not have granted any monetary relief in favour of the respondent, the
arbitral tribunal would not have jurisdiction to grant such relief on that
ground. The arbitral tribunal in that situation either ought to have dismissed
the claim as premature or to grant stay of the arbitral proceedings. In
support of this submission, learned senior counsel placed reliance on the
judgment of this Court in case of Maharashtra State Electricity Board v/s.
Datar Switchgear Ltd., 2002 SCC OnLine Bom 983 and in particular paragraphs 59
and 61. He submits that in the said judgment, this Court had held that under
Section 9 of the Arbitration Act, Court has power to stay the arbitral
proceedings in limited circumstances. He submits that under Section 17(1)(e)
of the Arbitration Act, the arbitral tribunal also shall have similar powers
of Court and to grant stay of the proceedings before itself. If the arbitral
tribunal would not have decided the matter within the time prescribed under
Section 29(A)(1), the Court has ample power to grant extension of time to make
an award under Section 29(A)(iv) of the Arbitration Act.

159\. It is submitted by the learned senior counsel for the petitioner that
the petitioner has collected the trait value as per the price control order
and not as per the provisions of the said 2015 SLA. The petitioner has
deposited the amount in this Court pursuant to the order passed by this Court
in the arbitration petition filed by the respondent under Section 9 of the
Arbitration Act in this Court. The amount collected by the petitioner for the
subsequent period has been deposited before the Delhi High Court by the
petitioner. The petitioner has merely developed seeds by biological process
and has sold such seeds to large number of farmers. He submits that the
Arbitration Act is a  ::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on -
24/07/2020 03:43:29 ::: kvm  -: 76 :- CARBP-737-19.doc complete code.

160\. It is submitted that the claim made by the respondent before the
arbitral tribunal was based on such patent. These facts are admitted by the
respondent in the pleadings filed before the arbitral tribunal. The respondent
did not make any complaint against the petitioner for supply of seeds. The
petitioner did not apply for declaration of the said 2015 SLA as void before
the said CCI but had applied for modification of the said agreement. The said
CCI can still declare the said 2015 SLA as void. The petitioner had applied
for relief before the said CCI not to terminate the said 2015 SLA but had
prayed for stay of termination. Learned senior counsel did not dispute that
the petitioner is not register under the PPVFR Act. He submits that the
provisions of the said Act are also self-contained. The respondent had not
taken action against the petitioner for not registering itself under the said
Act.

161\. Learned senior counsel placed reliance on the judgment of Supreme Court
in case of Mahavir J. Patil vs. Director of Resettlement and others, 2009 (12)
SCC 625 and in particular paragraphs 6 and 9 and would submit that the
principles of law laid down by the Supreme Court in the said judgment would
apply to the facts of this case. Learned senior counsel invited my attention
to the averments made in paragraph 21 at page 119 of the convenient
compilation no.1 and would submit that the petitioner has not prayed for
restoration of the new SLA.

162\. Learned senior counsel invited my attention to the minutes of meeting
dated 16th January, 2019 issued by the arbitral tribunal and would submit that
the petitioner was not allowed to make any  ::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 :::
Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:29 ::: kvm  -: 77 :- CARBP-737-19.doc
submissions relating to the order passed by the Supreme Court regarding the
concession made by the learned senior counsel for the respondent in patent
case. Though respondent had applied for clarification of the order before the
Supreme Court, respondent did not seek clarification that notification
referred in the said order was only the notification issued by the Central
Government and not by the State Government.

163\. Mr. I.M.Chagla, learned senior counsel for the respondent distinguished
the judgment of this Court in case of Maharashtra State Electricity Board
(supra) on the ground that the issue in the said judgment whether till the
time the respondent therein complied with the order of the arbitral tribunal
under Section 17 of the Arbitration Act, the arbitration proceedings could be
suspended by the arbitral tribunal. The Court held while relying upon the
judgment of Supreme Court in case of Bhatia International vs. Bulk Trading
S.A., (2002) 4 SCC 105 held that under Section 17 of the Arbitration Act such
power existed with the arbitral tribunal, in order to direct the parties, in a
given situation, till the order of the arbitral tribunal was complied with not
to suspend the arbitral proceedings under Section 9 of the Arbitration Act.

164\. Learned senior counsel placed reliance on paragraphs 50 and 55 of the
said judgment. He submits that the facts before this Court in the said
judgment and in this matter are totally different. He relied upon Section
17(2) of the Arbitration Act and would submit that in view of the amendment to
Section 17, orders of arbitral tribunal under Section 17 are enforceable as a
decree of the Court and thus arbitral tribunal cannot exercise the powers to
suspend the proceedings before the  ::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 :::
Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:29 ::: kvm  -: 78 :- CARBP-737-19.doc
arbitral tribunal for non compliance of the order under Section 17.

165\. Learned senior counsel placed reliance on the judgment of Delhi High
Court in case of Shree Tirupathi Udyog v/s. Indraprastha Gas Ltd. in
Arb.(Comm.) No.8 of 2018 dated 1st March, 2018, it has been held that there is
no power/ provisions in the Arbitration Act empowering the arbitral tribunal
to stay the proceedings before it. Learned senior counsel distinguished the
judgment of Supreme Court in case of Prabhakaran and Ors. (supra) and would
submit that the said judgment explains the meaning of "jural relationship"
between the parties which would mean the rights and obligations of both
against each other in the context of Section 29 of the Limitation Act. The
jural relationship between the parties is undisputed and was subject matter of
the arbitral proceedings.

166\. Learned senior counsel distinguished the judgment of Supreme Court in
case of State of Goa v/s. Praveen Enterprises (supra) on the ground that the
said judgment lays down the proposition that the counter claim ought to be
considered by the arbitral tribunal if raised by the respondent in the
arbitration proceedings, even though the same does not form the part of notice
invoking arbitration agreement. The said judgment does not lay down a law that
the defence of the respondent is a part of the reference to the arbitral
tribunal.

167\. Learned senior counsel distinguished the judgment of Supreme Court in
case of Ram Singh and Ors. (supra) on the ground that the claim of the
plaintiff in that case itself pertained to "shamlet de" land. The Court in
paragraph 5 came to the conclusion that the plaintiff therein avoided to seek
a declaration that the suit land was not "shamlet  ::: Uploaded on -
23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:29 ::: kvm  -: 79 :-
CARBP-737-19.doc de" and by clever drafting sought to confer jurisdiction on
the civil court. He submits that in this case, the claim of the respondent is
a simplicitor contractual claim and does not pertain to or relate to the
Competition Act. In so far as the judgment of Supreme Court in case of Man
Roland Druckimachinen AG (supra) relied upon by the learned senior counsel for
the petitioner is concerned, it is submitted that the said judgment support
the case of the respondent and not the petitioner. He relied upon the
paragraph 10 of the said judgment and would submit that the Supreme Court in
the said judgment has clearly held that the proceedings under the MRTP Act
were in addition to the arbitration proceeding and the jurisdiction of two
forums is separate and distinct.

168\. In so far as the judgment of Supreme Court in case of Garware Wall Ropes
Ltd. (supra) relied upon by the learned senior counsel for the petitioner is
concerned, learned senior counsel for the respondent distinguished the said
judgment on the ground that the said judgment was dealing with the validity of
the arbitration agreement contained in an unstamped and unregistered contract.
The Supreme Court in that context held that in an unstamped contract, the
arbitration agreement would be void since stamping of arbitration agreement is
mandatory. However, in case of an unregistered contract, the arbitration
agreement would be valid and binding on the parties. In this case, no
determination has been made in relation to the said 2015 SLA that the
arbitration was unenforceable after adjudication. In that judgment before the
Supreme Court, the question was related to the existence and invalidity of the
arbitration agreement, which is a jurisdictional fact under Section 16 of the
Arbitration Act. In this case, existence and validity of the arbitration
agreement is not disputed by the petitioner.

::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:29 :::

kvm  -: 80 :- CARBP-737-19.doc

169\. Learned senior counsel distinguished the judgment of Supreme Court in
case of Tarsem Singh (supra) on the ground that the said judgment is not
applicable to the facts of this case since the said 2015 SLA has not been
declared void or discovered to be void as on date. Under Section 3 of the
Competition Act an agreement is not void per se on account of the various
reliefs possible under Section 27 of the Competition Act including
modification of the agreement. He relied upon paragraphs 32 of the said
judgment and would submit that the Supreme Court infact rejected the argument
that Section 65 of the Contract Act was not applicable to void contracts. He
relied upon the judgment of Supreme Court in case of Mahindra and Mahindra
Limited v/s. Union of India, (1979) 2 SCC 529 and judgment in case of Passmore
v/s. Morland, (1999) 1 CMLR 1129 holding that voidness under Competition Law
is transient or temporal and is therefore curable.

Facts and Submissions in Commercial Arbitration Petition No. 738 of 2019 :-

170\. The petitioner in this case has impugned the order dated 11 th May, 2017
passed by the arbitral tribunal dismissing the application filed by the
petitioner under Section 16 of the Arbitration Act and the impugned award
dated 16th January, 2019 allowing some of the claims made by the respondent.
Some of the relevant facts for the purpose of deciding this petition are as
under:-

171\. It is the case of the petitioner that on 9 th March, 2004, a Special
Licence Agreement (for short "2004 SLA") was executed between the petitioner
and the respondent wherein 50 cotton seeds transgenic  ::: Uploaded on -
23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:29 ::: kvm  -: 81 :-
CARBP-737-19.doc variety with Bt. Trait were given to the petitioner with a
right to respondent to develop new Bt. Cotton varieties and to sell cotton
hybrid seeds with Bt. Trait under applicable patent rights for a period for 10
years and on the terms and conditions more particularly set out therein. The
said 2004 SLA was extended from time to time until 10 March, 2015. On 10th
March, 2015, the parties entered into Bollguard Technology Licence Agreement
for continuation of the rights granted under 2004 SLA to develop and sell
cotton hybrid seeds with Bt. trait. It is the case of the petitioner that the
respondent purported to grant a patented technology as defined in the 2004 SLA
and 2015 SLA as "Monsanto Tecnology" by way of a licence.

172\. It is the case of the petitioner that under the said 2004 SLA, the
respondent did not transfer any technology, confidential information or know
how that would enable the petitioner to either manufacture the Bt. Genes or to
insert Bt. Genes into the hybrid cotton seeds of the petitioner in a
laboratory through any scientific procedure. The respondent was liable to pay
to the petitioner and has paid one time non refundable fee of Rs.50 lakhs. The
respondent was also to pay an amount as and by way of royalty fees/trait
fees/trait value on every 450 gm packet of Bt cotton seeds on properties
varieties of the petitioner sold every year.

173\. On 16th October, 2015, the petitioner issued a letter demanding a refund
of amount of Rs.74,24,00,000/- along with interest thereon @ 18% p.a. under
the "on account of" arrangement of the years 2010- 2014 in light of the
various State Government Price Control Notifications. The respondent by its
letter dated 28 th October, 2015 denied the demand for refund raised by the
petitioner. By notice dated  ::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on -
24/07/2020 03:43:29 ::: kvm  -: 82 :- CARBP-737-19.doc 14th November, 2015,
the respondent terminated the said 2015 SLA. By letter dated 23rd November,
2015, the petitioner called upon the respondent to withdraw the letter of
termination of the said 2015 SLA.

174\. On 2nd November, 2015, the Government of India filed a report before the
Competition Commission of India (hereinafter referred to as "the said CCI")
seeking investigation and action against the respondent and its group
companies for alleged contravention of the provisions of the Competition Act.
On 15th December, 2015, the petitioner in Commercial Arbitration Petition No.
737 of 2019 filed an Information before the said CCI against the respondent
and its group companies challenging several alleged anti-competing clauses and
alleged abusive conduct of the respondent including charge of high trait value
over the State Government Price Control Notifications. On 10 th February,
2016, the said CCI passed an order holding that there is then existed a prima-
facie case of contravention of the provisions of Section 3(4) and Section 4 of
the Competition Act by the respondent and its group of companies and directed
the Director General to investigate into the matter.

175\. The said CCI also passed an interim order on 13 th April, 2016 thereby
restraining the respondent from enforcing post termination obligation against
the petitioner in this Commercial Arbitration Petition and also against
others. The Director General thereafter submitted a report on 28th January,
2008 before the said CCI. The said CCI by a letter dated 12th March, 2019
directed the parties including 18 official of the respondent to collect the
non-confidential Investigation Report by filing undertaking that the
investigation report would not be used for any purpose other than those
provided under the Competition Act and  ::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 :::
Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:30 ::: kvm  -: 83 :- CARBP-737-19.doc Rules
thereunder.

176\. On 18th February, 2016, the respondent terminated the said 2015 SLA and
thereafter filed a suit before the Delhi High Court namely C.S. (Comm) No. 132
of 2016 on 18 th February, 2016 alleging that pursuant to the termination of
the said 2015 SLA, the sale of cotton seeds by the petitioner with Bt. trait
inter-alia infringed the patent rights of the respondent. The petitioner filed
a counter-claim for revocation of the patent of the respondent in the said
suit. The said suit is pending before the learned Single Judge of the Delhi
High Court.

177\. On 23rd February, 2016, the respondent invoked the arbitration agreement
and nominated a former Judge of the Supreme Court as its nominee arbitrator.
The petitioner appointed a former Chief Justice of this Court as its nominee
arbitrator. Learned arbitrators appointed by the parties, appointed a former
Judge of the Supreme Court as the presiding arbitrator. The parties thereafter
filed their respective pleadings before the arbitral tribunal. The petitioner
filed counter claim dated 11th July, 2017 before the arbitral tribunal. The
petitioner also filed an application under Section 16 of the Arbitration Act
raising various issues of the jurisdiction. Both the parties filed detailed
submissions before the arbitral tribunal.

178\. The arbitral tribunal rejected the said application filed by the
petitioner under Section 16 by an order dated 11th May, 2017 and allowed part
of the claims made by the respondent by an arbitral award dated 16th January,
2019. Majority of the arbitrators directed the petitioner to pay an amount of
Rs.117.46 crores trait value for sales between the 1st April, 2015 and 14th
November, 2015 under the said  ::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on
- 24/07/2020 03:43:30 ::: kvm  -: 84 :- CARBP-737-19.doc 2015 Special Licence
Agreement with interest at different rates from the date of invocation of the
arbitration till payment/realization and dismissed the counter claim made by
the petitioner for refund of Rs.19.51 crores. The 3rd arbitrator made a
dissenting award and dismissed the claims made by the respondent. Being
aggrieved by the said majority award, the petitioner has filed this Commercial
Arbitration Petition No. 738 of 2019.

179\. Mr. Rohan Kadam, learned counsel for the petitioner adopted the
submission made by Mr. Khambata, learned senior counsel for the petitioner in
Commercial Arbitration Petition No. 737 of 2019.

180\. Mr. Dwarkadas, learned senior counsel for the respondent on the other
hand adopted the submission made by Mr. I. M. Chagla, learned senior counsel
for the respondent in Commercial Arbitration Petition No. 737 of 2019 and made
additional submissions. He submitted that trait value claimed by the
respondent in the arbitration petition has already been collected by the
petitioner from the farmers and has been retained by the petitioner. The
petitioner did not seek any interim stay against the respondent from enforcing
any claim for money or stay of the trait value clause under Article 3.01 of
the said 2015 SLA. The claim for recovery of money under the said 2015 SLA
made by the respondent was for recovery of contractual dues in view of the
petitioner being in breach of the said 2015 SLA. There was no dispute with
regard to the quantum of dues under the invoices raised by the respondent on
the submission.

181\. Learned senior counsel invited my attention to paragraph 52 of the
statement of defence filed by the petitioner and would submit that it  :::
Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:30 ::: kvm  -:
85 :- CARBP-737-19.doc was the case of the petitioner that if the issue
"whether the agreement is violative of Sections 3 and 4 of the Competition Act
can only be decided by the CCI under the Competition Act, then the
jurisdiction of the arbitral tribunal to decide the same would stand ousted".
The Tribunal has to see the request for the dispute raised by the claimant
while determining the existence of jurisdiction to dispute is exercised by a
notice invoking arbitration agreement given by one party to another party and
does not depend upon the defence/response as given by the other party. The
findings rendered by the tribunal on this issues are consistent with the
principles laid down by the Supreme Court and this Court in catena of
decisions. He also placed reliance on Section 65 of the Contract Act and would
submit that the petitioner having recovered the entire trait value from the
farmers cannot be allowed to retain the such benefit under the said 2015 SLA
and is bound to restore it by making payment to the respondent. He strongly
placed reliance on Section 53N of the Competition Act and would submit that
even if the said 2015 SLA is subsequently held to be void, the petitioner
would have the contingent right of seeking remedies under the said provisions
of the Competition Act. On the other hand, in the event if the CCI decides in
the favour of the respondent and if the respondent is denied its claim at this
stage, it shall have no remedy under the Competition Act or the Contract Act.

182\. It is submitted by the learned senior counsel that the cause of action
of the respondent before the arbitral tribunal was arising out of sale and
delivery and the amount due thereon and under a case of specific performance.
Such cause of action has nothing to do with any possible defence that may be
raised by the petitioner. An agreement is presumed to be valid unless proved
otherwise. The burden of proving  ::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded
on - 24/07/2020 03:43:30 ::: kvm  -: 86 :- CARBP-737-19.doc the fact that an
agreement is void was on the petitioner. He submits that even if the said 2015
SLA is held unenforceable on account of the findings if any rendered by the
said CCI in future, the petitioner is nevertheless liable to pay the
undisputed invoice amount since it has obtained benefits under the said 2015
SLA.

183\. It is submitted by the learned senior counsel that in the interim
application filed by the petitioner before the said CCI, under Section 33 of
the Competition Act, the petitioner had prayed for an injunction against the
respondent not to terminate the said 2015 SLA and applied for enforcement of
the said 2015 SLA. The petitioner did not challenge the validity of the said
2015 SLA as void and prayed that the respondent shall not terminate the said
2015 SLA.

184\. It is submitted by the learned senior counsel that the arbitral tribunal
is not bound to wait for outcome of the proceedings under Section 3 of the
Competition Act and to stay the arbitral proceedings during the pendency of
the said proceedings under Section 3 of the Competition Act before the said
CCI.

Facts and Submissions in Commercial Arbitration Petition No. 892 of 2019 :-

185\. The petitioner has impugned the order dated 11 th October, 2017 passed
by the learned arbitrator rejecting his application filed under Section 16 of
the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 filed by the petitioner and also
has impugned the arbitral award dated 30 th March, 2011 passed by the learned
arbitrator allowing part of the claims made by the respondent. Some of the
relevant facts for the purpose of  ::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded
on - 24/07/2020 03:43:30 ::: kvm  -: 87 :- CARBP-737-19.doc deciding this
Commercial Arbitration Petition are as under :-

186\. On 9th March, 2004, the petitioner and the respondent entered into a
Special Licence Agreement ("2004 SLA") wherein the respondent gave 50 Cotton
seeds with Bt. trait to the petitioner with a right to develop and sale Cotton
Hybrid seeds with Bt. trait using the propriety varities of the petitioner and
to sale cotton hybrid seeds with Bt. trait under applicable patent rights for
a period of 10 years on the terms and conditions stated therein. The said 2004
SLA was extended from time to time until 10th March, 2015. On 10th March,
2015, the parties entered into Bollguard Technology Licence Agreement (the
said "2015 SLA") on the terms and conditions set out therein. It was the case
of the petitioner that the trait value charged and collected by the respondent
became the subject matter of various State Government Price Control
Notifications and since the year 2016 has been regulated by the Central
Government under the Cotton Seeds (Price Control) Order, 2015. By an order
dated 17th June, 2015, the Nagpur Bench of this Court upheld the power of the
State Government of Maharashtra to reduce the price of Bt. Cotton Seeds Kharif
for the season 2015-16 in the interest of farmers.

187\. The petitioner by their letters dated 19 th July, 2015, 23rd July, 2015
and 10th August, 2015 addressed to the respondent requested to consider the
lower trait value commensurate with the State Government Price Control
Notifications and opposed the contractual trait value under the said 2015 SLA
and asked to refund the excess of trait value collected during the period
2010-2014 over and above the rate prescribed under the State Government Price
Control Notifications. The respondent however unilaterally terminated the said
::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:30 ::: kvm
-: 88 :- CARBP-737-19.doc 2015 SLA by notice dated 14th November, 2015.

188\. On 23rd November, 2015, the petitioner issued a letter of demand seeking
refund amount of Rs.28.50 crores along with interest @ 18% p.a. under the "own
account" arrangement for the years 2010-2014 in light of various State
Government Price Control Notifications. On 27 th November, 2015, the
Government of India filed a reference before the said CCI seeking
investigation and action against the respondent and its group companies for
alleged contravention of the provisions of the Competition Act. On 15th
December, 2015, the petitioner along with its associate companies filed an
information before the said CCI against the respondent and its group companies
challenging several alleged anti-competitive clauses and alleged abusive
conduct of the respondent including charge of high trait value over the State
Government Price Control Notifications.

189\. It is the case of the petitioner that on 10th February, 2016, the said
CCI passed an order after hearing the parties holding that there existed a
prima-facie contravention of provisions of Section 3(4) and Section 4 of the
Competition Act by the respondent and its group companies and directed the
Director General to investigate into the matter. On 18th February, 2016, the
respondent and its group companies filed an infringement suit before the Delhi
High Court bearing No. 132 of 2016 inter-alia alleging that pursuant to the
termination of the said 2015 SLA, the petitioner's sale of all cotton seeds
with Bt. trait infringed its patent rights in the said proceedings.

190\. The petitioner filed a counter claim for revocation of the patent of the
respondent in the said suit. The said suit is still pending before  :::
Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:30 ::: kvm  -:
89 :- CARBP-737-19.doc the Delhi High Court. On 23rd February, 2016, the
respondent invoked the arbitration agreement recorded in the said 2015 SLA for
settling the dispute by way of arbitration. In the month of April, 2016, CCI
passed an order restraining the respondent from enforcing post termination
obligation against the petitioner and its group companies. On 11 th October,
2017, the learned arbitrator dismissed the said application filed under
Section 16 of the Arbitration Act filed by the petitioner. On 30th March,
2019, the learned arbitrator made a final award thereby allowing the claims
made by the respondent partly. The respondent did not challenge any part of
the arbitral award by filing a separate petition. Being aggrieved by the said
order dated 30 th March, 2019, the petitioner filed this petition under
Section 34 of the Arbitration Act.

191\. Mr. N.H. Seervai, learned senior counsel for the petitioner invited my
attention to the averments made in various paragraphs of the pleadings and
some of the findings rendered by the learned arbitrator in the impugned award.
He relied upon Article 3.01-3.03 of the said 2015 SLA providing for payment of
trait value based on sales of Bt. cotton seeds. He submits that the respondent
did not transfer any technology or know-how to enable the petitioner to either
manufacture the Bt. Genes or to insert Bt. genes into the Hybrid Cotton Seeds
of the petitioner in a laboratory through any scientific procedure.

192\. It is submitted by the learned senior counsel that the said 2015 SLA
relied upon by the respondent was void under Sections 3 and 4 of the
Competition Act, 2002 since the said agreement contravened the provisions of
the Competition Act and on the ground that the respondent was abusing its
dominant position by charging an excessive, unreasonable and discriminatory
trait fee. The issue  ::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on -
24/07/2020 03:43:30 ::: kvm  -: 90 :- CARBP-737-19.doc regarding the validity
of the said 2015 SLA was a subject matter of the proceedings before the said
CCI and was not capable of being adjudicated by the sole arbitrator. The
entire dispute between the parties was not arbitrable. The learned arbitrator
however allowed the claim of the respondent in the sum of Rs.13.23 crores with
interest towards trait fees demanded by the respondent under the said
agreement.

193\. It is submitted by the learned senior counsel that the impugned award is
in contravention of Section 34(2)(b)(i) of the Arbitration Act on the ground
that the validity of the said 2015 SLA was challenged before the said CCI and
the same is still pending. On 27 th November, 2015, the Ministry of
Agricultural and Farmer Welfare, Government of India filed a reference under
Section 19(1)(b) of the Competition Act with CCI regarding alleged
unreasonable high price of Bt. cotton seeds charged by the respondent and
others. The petitioner had filed an information under Section 19(1)(a) of the
Competition Act with the CCI against the respondent alleging violation of the
Competition Act on various grounds. The investigation officer submitted a
report and recorded that the CCI was of a view there exist a prima-facie case
of contravention under Sections 3 and 4 of the Competition Act by the
respondent and thus was a fit case for investigation by the Director General
to conduct the investigation.

194\. It is submitted that only after such investigation order was passed by
the CCI, the respondent invoked the arbitration agreement recorded under
Article 11.02 of the said 2015 SLA to recover the trait value allegedly due
from the petitioner to it. He relied upon the interim order passed by the said
CCI on 13th April, 2016 under Section 33 of the  ::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020
::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:30 ::: kvm  -: 91 :- CARBP-737-19.doc
Competition Act thereby restraining the respondent from enforcing certain post
termination obligation under the said 2015 SLA. The Director General submitted
its investigation report with the said CCI on 28th June, 2018.

195\. In support of his submission that the dispute pertaining to competition
are non arbitrable, learned senior counsel placed reliance on paragraph 14 of
the judgment of Supreme Court in case of A. Ayyaswamy v/s. Paramasivam & Ors,
(2016) 10 SCC 386. He submits that the Supreme Court in the said judgment had
observed that although the Arbitration Act does not make any provision
excluding any category of dispute treating them as non arbitrable, Court has
held that certain kinds of disputes in pursuant are capable of adjudication
through the means of arbitration.

196\. Learned senior counsel placed reliance on the judgment of Supreme Court
in case of Emaar MGF Land Ltd. v/s. Aftab Singh, (2018) SCC Online SC 2378 and
in particular paragraph 32 in support of the submission that the disputes
under Competition Law are non arbitrable. He submits that learned arbitrator
has erroneously proceeded to exercise its jurisdiction and pass the impugned
award on the basis that the proceedings before the CCI were not pending
proceedings. He submits that the learned arbitrator failed to appreciate that
the proceedings before the CCI and the arbitral tribunal proceedings before
the learned arbitrator were in respect of the same 2015 SLA entered into
between the parties and were pending proceedings before the CCI and at the
same time before the learned arbitrator. The finding of the learned arbitrator
that the proceedings before the CCI were not pending is ex-facie perverse and
shows patent illegality. He submits that the  ::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 :::
Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:30 ::: kvm  -: 92 :- CARBP-737-19.doc said
CCI having found that there exist a prima-facie case under Section 26(1) and
(2) of the Competition Act, it directed the Director General to pass an order
for investigation to be made. If there would not have been prima-facie case,
the tribunal ought to have closed the matter forthwith and to pass an
appropriate order in that behalf.

197\. Learned senior counsel placed reliance on Regulation 18(2) of the
Competition Commission of India (General) Regulation 2009 promulgated under
Section 64 of the Competition Act and would submit that under the said
Regulation, if the commission is of the opinion that a prima-facie case
exists, the Secretary of the commission shall convey the direction of the
commission within seven days to the Director General to investigate the
matter. Such direction for investigation to the Director General shall be the
deemed commencement of the enquiry under Section 26 of the Act.

198\. Learned senior counsel invited my attention to the findings rendered by
the learned arbitrator in paragraph 58 of the impugned award and would submit
that the finding of the learned arbitrator that the learned arbitrator did not
have jurisdiction is fallacious, erroneous and requires to be rejected.
Learned senior counsel placed reliance on Section 61 of the Competition Act
and would submit that the said provisions expressly oust the jurisdiction of
the Civil Court to entertain any proceedings in respect of any matter which
the CCI was empowered to determine. He relied upon the judgment of Supreme
Court in case of Dhulabhai v/s. State of Madhya Pradesh (supra) and in
particular paragraph 35 in support of the submission that since there was a
ouster of the jurisdiction of the Special Court to entertain any proceedings
in support of any matter which the CCI was empowered to  ::: Uploaded on -
23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:30 ::: kvm  -: 93 :-
CARBP-737-19.doc determine under Section 61, the Civil Court or the learned
arbitrator had no jurisdiction to decide the claims made by the respondent.

199\. Learned senior counsel placed reliance on the judgment of Supreme Court
in case of Booz Allen Hamilton Inc. v/s. SBI Home Finance Limited, (2011) 5
SCC 532 and in particular paragraphs 35, in support of his submission that the
adjudication of certain categories of proceedings are reserved by the
legislature exclusively for public fora as a matter of public policy. Learned
senior counsel placed reliance on an unreported the judgment of this Court in
case of Kingfisher Airlines Ltd. v/s. Capt. Prithvi Malhotra, in Writ Petition
No. 2585 of 2012 delivered on 20th November, 2012 and in particular paragraph
13. He submits that since the dispute arising out of the Competition Act, can
be decided only by the CCI, the claims for recovery of money by the respondent
before the learned arbitrator were not at all arbitrable. He submits that the
Competition Act itself is a complete code.

200\. It is submitted that the finding of the learned arbitrator that the
disputes that fell for determination before him and before the CCI did not
overlap is erroneous, perverse and discloses patent illegality on the face of
the impugned award. Similarly, the finding of the learned arbitrator that the
issues of the contravention of the Competition Act may be incidentally to the
claims raised by the respondent but does not form nucleus of the dispute is
also perverse and discloses patent illegality. The learned arbitrator ought to
have considered the provisions of the Competition Act to ascertain whether the
said Act creates any special rights and liabilities not found in the General
law. The finding of the learned arbitrator in paragraphs 58 of the impugned
award to decide on ouster of jurisdiction is itself patently erroneous.

::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:30 :::

kvm  -: 94 :- CARBP-737-19.doc The learned arbitrator had to determine the
said issue solely on the wording of the relevant provisions/provisions of the
concerned statute.

201\. It is submitted by the learned senior counsel that Sections 3 and 4 of
the Competition Act are to regulate the commercial dealings in the interest of
the general public and prohibit the execution and/or performance of agreement
that are likely to cause adverse effects of competition or an abusive of
dominance. Thus, prohibition of agreements effect the general public interest.
Statutory prosecution under Section 3 against anti-competitive agreement is
not prospective i.e. from the date the said CCI is seized all the matter. The
CCI has wide powers under Section 19(1) to enquire into any alleged
contravention of the provisions contained in Section 3(1) or 4(1) on its own
motion or upon receipt of information from any person or through their
association or trade association. Under Section 27(d) of the Competition Act,
CCI may even direct that the contract in question stands modified to the
extent and in the manner as may be specified by it.

202\. In support of the submission that the Competition Act is a complete
self-contained code providing the statutory right of protection and remedies
against anti-competitive conduct, learned senior counsel placed reliance on
the judgment of Delhi High Court in case of Jindal Steel & Power Ltd. v/s.
Union of India, 2012 (127) DRJ 285 and in particular paragraphs 24.

203\. Learned senior counsel for the petitioner placed reliance on Section
2(3) of the Competition Act which provides that the part 1 shall not affect
any other law for the time being in force by virtue of which  ::: Uploaded on
- 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:30 ::: kvm  -: 95 :-
CARBP-737-19.doc certain disputes may not be submitted to the arbitration. He
submits that if Sections 60 and 61 of the Competition Act and Section 2(3) of
the Competition Act are read together, it is clear that jurisdiction of the
arbitral tribunal is ousted while dispute pertaining to Competition Law
arising between the parties is concerned.

204\. Learned senior counsel for the petitioner submits that there can be no
bifurcation of causes of action. He submits that it is not permissible to
decide part of the issues as arbitrable and other part not arbitrable. Even if
some aspects of a disputes are arbitrable and some other aspects are non
arbitrable, all disputes become non arbitrable. In support of this submission,
learned senior counsel placed reliance on the judgment of this Court in case
of Kingfisher Airlines Ltd. v/s. Capt. Prithvi Malhotra, (2011) SCC Online BOM
1999 and in particular paragraph 24 and judgment of Supreme Court in case of
Booz Allen Hamilton Inc. (supra) and in particular paragraphs 52.

205\. Learned senior counsel placed reliance on the judgment of Supreme Court
in case of Competition Commission of India v/s. Bharti Airtel, (2019) 2 SCC
521 and in particular paragraphs 100 to

114\. He submits that in the said judgment, the Supreme Court held that it was
for Telecom Regulatory Authority of India in the first instance to decide
whether there had been any delay on denial of points of interconnection. He
submits that only when the jurisdictional fact was determined by the Telecom
Regulatory Authority of India, the CCI could decide whether the delay or
denial of points of interconnection was the violation of the Competition Act.
He submits that in this case also the adjudication of the said 2015 SLA's
enforceability as a contract under the Competition Act is pending before the
CCI which authority is  ::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on -
24/07/2020 03:43:30 ::: kvm  -: 96 :- CARBP-737-19.doc a statutory authority
vested with exclusive jurisdiction to determine the same. These issues were
raised prior to the date of commencement of arbitral proceedings and their
determination was pending prior thereto.

206\. It is submitted that the learned arbitrator lacked jurisdiction to
decide on the live controversy in issue between the parties. He invited my
attention to the paragraphs 78 and 109 of the impugned award and would submit
that the jurisdiction of the learned arbitrator to entertain the claim of the
respondent would only spring forth after a determination of the issue whether
the SLA's are valid under the Competition Act or not. It is only then the
arbitral tribunal would possess the jurisdiction to enforce the SLA as a
contract and grant relief thereon. He submits that if the sole arbitrator
would not exercise its jurisdiction in adjudicating the claims made by the
respondent, the respondent would not be remediless. Even if the CCI would have
decided in favour of the respondent, the respondent could have always invoked
arbitration after its final order would have been passed by the said CCI.

207\. Mr. Pravin Samdhani, learned senior counsel for the respondent on the
other hand adopts the submission made by the Mr. Chagla, learned senior
counsel for the respondent in Commercial Arbitration Petition No. 737 of 2019
and Mr. Dwarkadas, learned senior counsel for the respondent in Commercial
Arbitration Petition No. 738 of 2019 and made additional submissions. The
facts in Commercial Arbitration Petition No. 892 of 2019 are identical to the
facts in other two matters. The petitioner had not disputed the existence of
the 2015 SLA. The petitioner has also not raised any dispute about the quantum
and the trait value under the said 2015 SLA. He submits that the petitioner
had  ::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:30 :::
kvm  -: 97 :- CARBP-737-19.doc made a counter claim against the respondent
under 2004 SLA which was rejected by the arbitral tribunal. The petitioner has
challenged the said part of the award.

208\. It is submitted that the only remedy available to the respondent in law
for recovery of the amount payable under the said 2015 SLA was by invoking the
arbitration agreement and not by filing any application for recovery of amount
before the said CCI. The petitioner has not disputed that the said 2015 SLA
has been already terminated by the respondent on 14th November, 2015. The
petitioner has also not disputed that the said CCI cannot entertain the
monetary claim made by the respondent before the learned arbitrator. The
monetary claim made by the respondent before the learned arbitrator does not
fall under Section 61 of the Competition Act, 2002. The learned arbitrator has
not rendered any finding on the differences raised by the petitioner under
Section 3(4) of the Competition Act. The learned arbitrator only directed the
petitioner to pay the contractual trait value in terms of the said 2015 SLA
for the period of 1st April, 2015 to 14th November, 2015 and has specifically
left the assertions of the petitioner under the Competition Act untouched for
being decided by the CCI.

209\. It is submitted by the learned senior counsel that since the monetary
claim made by the respondent did not fall within the exclusive jurisdiction of
the said CCI under Section 61 of the Competition Act, the arbitrator has
rightly exercised its jurisdiction to entertain the monetary claims made by
the respondent. The jurisdiction of the learned arbitrator to decide such
monetary claims under the said 2015 SLA is not ousted. Since, the learned
arbitrator has not decided the issue which fall under the exclusive domain of
the said CCI under  ::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on -
24/07/2020 03:43:30 ::: kvm  -: 98 :- CARBP-737-19.doc the provisions of the
Competition Act, no grounds under Section 34(2)

(b)(i) of the Arbitration Act is made out by the petitioner. The learned
arbitrator has only directed the petitioner to pay the contractual dues of the
respondent arising out of the sale of seeds having technology of the
respondent, which amount has been already received by the petitioner from the
farmers/respective customers. The amount directed to be paid by the award is a
fraction from the sale price already received by the petitioner.

210\. It is submitted by the learned senior counsel that mere pendency of
proceedings before the CCI cannot oust the jurisdiction of the arbitral
tribunal. There is no final determination of the issue whether the said 2015
SLA or any clauses under the 2015 SLA is in breach of Section 3 or 4 of the
Competition Act. No final order under Section 27 of the Competition Act has
been passed by the said CCI till date. By filing or pendency of a complaint
before the said CCI by the petitioner cannot result in either a declaration of
voidness under Section 3 or the passing of an order under Section 27 of the
Competition Act, 2002. The said 2015 SLA is accordingly deemed to be valid and
enforceable unless expressly declared to be void.

211\. It is submitted by the learned senior counsel that the stand of the
petitioner that in view of the pendency of the complaint filed by the
petitioner against the respondent under the provisions of the Competition Act,
2002, such allegations cannot be looked into by the learned arbitrator and on
that ground itself the monetary claim made by the respondent ought to have
rejected is concerned, he submits that this stand is dishonest, absurd and
baseless. The entire defence of the petitioner is based on assumption that the
said 2015 SLA is void. No  ::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on -
24/07/2020 03:43:30 ::: kvm  -: 99 :- CARBP-737-19.doc such declaration has
been rendered by the said CCI till date.

212\. It is submitted by the learned senior counsel that the entire award must
be read as a whole and the exercise of cherry picking stray observation in one
of the paragraphs of the different context cannot be adopted to challenge an
arbitral award. He submits that it is clear that the arbitral tribunal has
concluded that no pendency of the CCI proceedings can divest, the arbitral
tribunal of its jurisdiction to entertain and try a contractual claim. The
arbitral tribunal recommended that in the event, the said CCI were to hold the
said 2015 SLA was void, the petitioner was having remedies, which would
determine based on the situation prevailing on such time. Learned senior
counsel placed reliance on the paragraphs 58, 59, 63, 64, 71, 74, 75, 76, 78
and 109 of the impugned award and would submit that the learned arbitrator has
clearly held that mere pendency of the CCI cannot divest the arbitral tribunal
of its jurisdiction to entertain and try a contractual claim.

213\. It is submitted by the learned senior counsel that it is not permissible
to grant stay of arbitral proceedings pending complaint before the CCI by the
learned arbitrator. In any event, such plea for seeking stay of the arbitral
proceedings was destructive of its contention that an arbitral tribunal had no
jurisdiction. There is no provision under the Arbitration Act empowering the
arbitral tribunal to stay its own proceedings. The tribunal is not conferred
with powers similar to Section 10 of Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. The said
provision is not attracted to proceedings initiated under other statutes.

214\. It is submitted by the learned senior counsel that even if the  :::
Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:30 ::: kvm  -:
100 :- CARBP-737-19.doc analogy of Section 10 of the Code of Civil Procedure
is attracted in the present case, under the said provision, subsequent
proceedings could be stayed only if the tribunal trying the earlier
proceedings was competent to try the subsequent proceedings. In this case,
admittedly the said CCI did not have jurisdiction to try the contractual
claims of the respondent which was the subject matter of the arbitral
proceedings. The learned arbitrator thus could not have granted any stay of
the proceedings before him by applying the analogy of the Section 10 of the
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. In any event, the decision whether or not to
stay the proceedings is a discretional decision and cannot be questioned under
Section 34 of the Arbitration Act.

215\. It is submitted by the learned senior counsel that the petitioner is
unjustly enriching itself of the amount recovered by the petitioner from the
farmers including the contractual trait value of Rs.13,23,39,225/-. He submits
that the view taken by the learned arbitrator is a plausible view on the facts
and in law and thus cannot be interfered with by this Court in this Commercial
Arbitration Petition filed under Section 34 of the Arbitration Act. Learned
senior counsel invited my attention to paragraphs 47, 48, 57, 59, 63, 68 to
71, 74, 78 and 190 of the impugned award and would submit that various
findings of fact rendered by the learned arbitrator being not perverse cannot
be interfered with by this Court. Learned senior counsel distinguished the
judgment of Supreme Court in case of A. Ayyasamy (supra). He relied upon the
judgment of Supreme Court in case of National Institute of Mental health and
Neuro Science v/s. C. Parameshwara, 2005 (2) SCC 256 and in particular
paragraphs 8 to 10. Learned senior counsel relied upon paragraph 48 of the
judgment of Supreme Court in case of Vimal Kishore Shah (supra) and would
submit that the Supreme Court has  ::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded
on - 24/07/2020 03:43:30 ::: kvm  -: 101 :- CARBP-737-19.doc considered the
principles of general applicability in the said judgment.

216\. Mr. N. H. Seervai, learned senior counsel for the petitioner in
rejoinder submits that the learned arbitrator ought to have dismissed the
claims made by the respondent in view of the pending enquiry before the said
CCI depending upon the outcome of the said complaint filed by the petitioner
and could have granted liberty to the petitioner to revise its claim if the
respondent would have succeeded in the said proceedings before the said CCI.
The remedy of the respondent to seek monetary claim was thus not taken away.

REASONS AND CONCLUSIONS :

217\. Some of the admitted facts are that by an agreement dated 21st February,
2004 entered into between the petitioner and the respondent, the petitioner
was granted a licence to use the monsanto technology and to sell the resultant
hybrid seeds on the terms and conditions setout in the said agreement. The
trait fee was to be calculated on the basis of the sale report submitted by
the petitioner for each month. The quantum of trait fee payable by the
petitioner to the respondent in respect of the said technology was from time
to time modified as mutually agreed. The said 2004 agreement was amended by
the supplementary and amended agreement dated 24th January,2007 and second
agreement dated 25th May, 2007. On 10th March, 2015, the parties entered into
a new Sub-Licence Agreement dated 10 th March,2015 effective from 1st April,
2015 (hereinafter referred to as '2015 SLA').

218\. It is the case of the respondent that the said 2015 SLA entered  :::
Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:30 ::: kvm  -:
102 :- CARBP-737-19.doc into on 10th March, 2015 was after extensive
negotiations between the parties. Clause 11.10 of the said agreement provided
that each of the parties acknowledge that they had read the said agreement and
understood all of its terms, and that, the said agreement was being executed
voluntarily without duress and with full knowledge of its legal significance.
The parties also acknowledged that they had received independent legal advice
from their respective attorneys with respect to the legal consequences of
entering into the said agreement. The said clause recorded the arbitration
agreement under Article 11.02.

219\. The dispute arose between the parties. It was the case of the respondent
that under the said 2015 SLA, the petitioner paid an amount of Rs. 9 crores
towards the trait value in or around June 2015. Out of the said amount of Rs.9
crores, the respondent on first in first out basis appropriated Rs.80,38,636/-
towards outstanding dues under 2004 SLA and Rs.8,19,61,637/- towards dues
under 2015 SLA. It was the case of the respondent that the petitioner failed
to make payment of the balance amount of trait value and raised frivolous
issues by letter dated 19th July, 2015 thereby refusing to make payment of the
trait value.

220\. It was contended by the petitioner that the petitioner was entitled to
challenge the trait fee recovered by the respondent from the petitioner as
specified under Article 3 of the respective SLA statutorily modified in the
light of the Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat and Maharashtra Cotton Seeds (Regulation
of Supply Distribution, Sale and Fixation of Sale Price) Act along with
notification thereunder and that the respondent should have challenged the
trait fee accordingly since 2010. Prior to issuance of the said letter dated
19 th July, 2015, several proceedings had been filed by various Seed
Associations of which the  ::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on -
24/07/2020 03:43:30 ::: kvm  -: 103 :- CARBP-737-19.doc petitioner or its
group companies were members challenging those Cotton Seeds Act and
notifications in various fora. It was the case of the respondent that various
seed companies including the petitioner and/or the NSL Group had unequivocably
accepted that the trait value payable by the seed companies including the
petitioner to the respondent was a matter of contract. After failing in their
challenge, the petitioner and the other seed companies addressed a letter
dated 19 th July, 2015.

221\. Prior to the said letter, the petitioner had made substantial payment of
trait fees to the respondent without demur, pending the challenge to those
notifications. There was further correspondence exchanged between the parties.
The respondent denied the contention raised by the petitioner in the said
letter dated 19th July, 2015 by various letters. The respondent thereafter by
its letter dated 14 th November, 2015 terminated the said 2015 SLA and also
terminated the said trade market SLA. The respondent thereafter invoked the
arbitration agreement by letter dated 23rd February, 2016 through its
advocate's letter.

222\. According to the respondent, on 30th January,2017, the outstanding
amounts which were payable by the petitioner to the respondent under the said
SLA was Rs.117,39,38,943/- for sales made between 1st April, 2015 and 31st
October, 2015 and Rs.6,90,249/- for the sales made in the month of November
2015. In response to the said notice dated 23rd February, 2016, the petitioner
through their advocate's reply dated 9th March, 2016, denied the contentions
raised by the respondent in the notice dated 23 rd February, 2016 and
contended that the dispute between the parties were not arbitrable.

::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:30 :::

kvm  -: 104 :- CARBP-737-19.doc However, without prejudice to their rights
that the disputes were not arbitrable and without prejudice to their rights to
challenge the jurisdiction of the arbitral tribunal, owing to the fact that
during the course of the hearing of the pending application under section 9 of
the Arbitration Act before this court, the respondent had suggested converting
the said application under section 9 to application under section 17 of the
Act, the petitioner was agreeable to refer the dispute between the parties to
the arbitral tribunal comprising of three arbitrators.

223\. The petitioner nominated a former Judge of the Supreme Court as its
nominee arbitrator. In the said reply, the petitioner reserved its right to
initiate appropriate legal proceedings against the respondent for recovery of
the claim against the petitioner in the sum of Rs.308.95 lacs and any
further/other claims as may be advised together with all damages, costs and
expenses.

224\. The respondent filed a detailed statement of claim before the arbitral
tribunal inter alia praying for an amount of Rs.117,39,38,943/- as and by way
of trait value against the petitioner for the sales between 1st April, 2015
and 31st October, 2015 and a sum of Rs.690,249/- as and by way of trait value
on 1st November, 2015 and 14th November, 2015 under the 2015 Sub-Licence
Agreement. The said claim was resisted by the petitioner by filing written
statement. Alongwith the said written statement, the petitioner had also filed
a counter claim against the respondent inter alia praying for refund of the
total amount of Rs.14,29,39,990/- paid by the petitioner to the respondent
from 1 st April, 2015 till the date of the filing of the said counter claim
alongwith a sum of Rs.52205858/- for interest.

::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:30 :::

kvm  -: 105 :- CARBP-737-19.doc

225\. The petitioner also filed an application under section 16 of the
Arbitration Act before the arbitral tribunal on 21st February, 2017 contending
that the arbitral tribunal did not have jurisdiction to determine the claim
and prayed for dismissal of the claim of the respondent for want of
jurisdiction. In prayer clause (b) of the said application, without prejudice
to and in the alternate to prayer (a) for the dismissal for want of
jurisdiction, the petitioner prayed for suspension of the arbitral proceedings
till the final adjudication of the competition commission proceedings before
the Competition Commission of India.

226\. In the said application filed under section 16, it was contended by the
petitioner that the Competition Act exclusively vest jurisdiction in the CCI
to entertain and try various issues including the issue regarding the validity
and legality of contractual provisions relating to the payment of trait fees
and/or the subject agreement had arisen under the provisions of the
Competition Act. The CCI was seized of those issues. It was contended that an
order to carry out an enquiry under the said Act was already passed by the
CCI. It was urged that the jurisdiction of the Civil Court is expressly barred
under section 61 of the Competition Act. The said application was opposed by
the respondent by filing a detailed affidavit in reply.

227\. By a separate order passed by the arbitral tribunal, the said
application under section 16 filed by the petitioner came to be rejected.
However, in the said order, the tribunal directed that the tribunal had not
expressed any opinion on one way or the other on the merits of the matter. As
and when the matter would come up for hearing, it would  ::: Uploaded on -
23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:30 ::: kvm  -: 106 :-
CARBP-737-19.doc be open for the parties to raise all objections available to
them and the tribunal will consider and decide such objections in accordance
with law without being influenced or inhabited by the observations made in the
said order. The arbitral tribunal accordingly decided the said issue of
jurisdiction again in the final award rendered in the matter.

228\. The arbitral tribunal framed 16 issues. Issue no.3 was divided in 6 sub-
parts. The first issue was 'whether present dispute was not arbitrable as
alleged in the statement of defence ?' The arbitral tribunal held that the
dispute was arbitrable. The arbitral tribunal has adverted to various
judgments of Supreme Court while dealing with the said issue of arbitrability
of the dispute. The arbitral tribunal interpreted the arbitration agreement
forming part of the said 2015 SLA and rightly held that the claims made by the
respondent were arbitrable. The arbitral tribunal also interpreted section 61
of the Competition Act which provides for exclusion of jurisdiction of Civil
Court in respect of any matter which the Commission or the Appellate Tribunal
is empowered by or under the Competition Act to determine and no injunction
shall be granted by any court or other authority in respect of any action
taken or to be taken in pursuance of any power conferred by or under the said
Act. Arbitral tribunal held that section 62 clarifies that the provisions of
the Act shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of, the provisions of
any other law for the time being in force.

229\. The arbitral tribunal rejected the contention of the learned counsel for
the petitioner that the CCI had found prima facie case in favour of the
petitioner and had directed enquiry under section 26 and that all those
questions can be decided by the CCI alone and not by any  ::: Uploaded on -
23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:30 ::: kvm  -: 107 :-
CARBP-737-19.doc authority or forum. The arbitral tribunal rightly held that
section 61 is expressly clear that it excludes the jurisdiction of the civil
Court in entertaining any suit or proceeding in respect of any matter which
the Commission or the Appellate Tribunal is empowered by or under the Act to
determine. It is held by the tribunal that insofar as the dispute before the
arbitral tribunal was concerned, it relates to right and liability of the
parties and performance of reciprocal promises under 2015 SLA.

230\. It is held that by resolving decision or adjudicating such dispute or
differences, the arbitral tribunal was not dealing with 'any matter which the
Commission is empowered or by under the Act to determine'. The tribunal has
clearly held that it was called upon to consider and adjudicate the disputes
and differences between the parties under 2015 SLA and not on any question
issued or whether covered or falling under Competition Act, 2002. Certain
issues relating to the Competition Act had been raised by the petitioner and
also by the other parties before the CCI and they are pending. The CCI will
adjudicate upon them.

231\. The respondent (original claimant) had approached the arbitral tribunal
merely for adjudication of the rights and liability under 2015 SLA which has
nothing to do with the Competition Act. The respondent had approached the
tribunal with limited ground that the petitioner had not acted as per the
terms and conditions laid down in 2015 SLA which agreement provides for
referring the disputes and differences between the parties to arbitration. The
dispute was only between the parties to the agreement and the tribunal was
called upon to decide whether the petitioner had failed to act in accordance
with the  ::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:30
::: kvm  -: 108 :- CARBP-737-19.doc various clauses of the agreement and
whether the respondent was entitled to any relief from the petitioner for
alleged breach of SLA or not.

232\. In my view, the tribunal rightly held that the adjudication by the
tribunal shall be in the nature of the right and liability of the parties to
the agreement and would relate to right in personam and not right in rem. If
the arbitral tribunal would have held that it had no jurisdiction in the
matter and would have dismissed the claim of the respondent, the respondent
would not have any remedy at all. In the proceedings before the CCI, whatever
may be the outcome, the respondent would not be able to get any effective
relief or decree or award directing the petitioner herein to pay the
particular amount to the respondent. The arbitral tribunal rightly held that
the respondent had certain rights under the 2015 SLA and thus it must also
have remedy for enforcement of such rights. If the challenge to the
jurisdiction of the tribunal by the respondent is upheld, it would result in
dismissal of the claim without adjudication of the merits and without granting
any relief to him. The tribunal accordingly rightly held that wherever there
is right, there is a remedy or where there is no wrong without remedy.

233\. In paragraph 85 of the impugned award, the arbitral tribunal rightly
held that the tribunal has jurisdiction to entirely deal with and decide the
dispute raised by the respondent against the petitioner. In paragraph 86 of
the impugned award, the arbitral tribunal rightly held that apart from the
dispute by the respondent against the petitioner under 2015 SLA, the
petitioner had also raised some disputes against the respondent arising out or
in connection with 2015 SLA by challenging the termination thereof Agreement
by the respondent by  ::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on -
24/07/2020 03:43:30 ::: kvm  -: 109 :- CARBP-737-19.doc letter dated 14th
November, 2015 and has claimed the damages in the counter claim to the tune of
Rs.2,500 crores, subsequently reduced to Rs.56.90 crores.

234\. The petitioner has also claimed refund of trait value of Rs.19.59 crores
paid by the petitioner to the respondent under the said 2015 SLA. Those
counter claims also could not have been decided by the CCI and were rightly
filed before the arbitral tribunal. The arbitral tribunal interpreted the said
SLA and has rightly held that the said SLA contained the arbitration clause of
wide amplitude which required the aggrieved party to refer its dispute to the
arbitral tribunal.

235\. The jurisdiction of CCI under Competition Act and jurisdiction of the
arbitral tribunal under the 2015 SLA are altogether different and distinct and
are not overlapping. The parties to the contract having considered business
efficacy and practicability of implementation and enforceability of the rights
and liabilities under the agreement which included arbitration clause for
resolving such disputes and differences. It is the duty of the tribunal to
allow the parties to invoke such remedy and adjudicate upon such disputes and
differences in accordance with law.

236\. Insofar as issue nos. 2 and 3 are concerned, the arbitral tribunal has
dealt with these two issues together in paragraphs 88 to 96. Issue nos. 2 and
3A to 3F which are also relevant for the purpose of deciding contentious
issues raised by the petitioner are extracted as under :- "Issue No.2 - Does
the Competition Act apply to the 2015 Sub- license Agreement ?

::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:30 :::

kvm  -: 110 :- CARBP-737-19.doc Issue No.3(a) - Whether the claimant is in a
dominant position in the market as alleged in the Defence reas with Paragraphs
9.1 to 9.23 of the Information dated 15th December 2015 (the Information) ?

Issue No.3(b)- Whether the claimant has overcharged and/or claimed excess
trait value under the Subject Agreement in violation of Section 4(2)(a)(ii) of
the Competition Act, 2002 as alleged in the Defence read with Paragraphs 9.25
to 9.38 of the Information ?

Issue No.3(c)- Whether the Claimant has imposed unfair conditions under the
Subject Agreement in violation of Section 4(2)(a)(i) of the Competition Act,
2002 as alleged in the Defence read with Paragraphs 9.39 to 9.48 of the
Information ?

Issue No.3(d)- Whether the Claimant has discriminated in favour of Affiliates
in contravention of Section 4(2)(a)(ii) and 4(2)(i) of the Competition Act,
2002 as alleged in the Defence read with Paragraphs 9.49 of the Information ?

Issue No.3(e)- Whether the Claimant via the Subject Agreement has leveraged
its dominant position in violation of Section 4(2)(e) of the Competition Act,
2002 as alleged in the Defence read with Paragraphs 9.54 to 9.56 of the
Information ?

Issue No.3(f)-Whether the Subject Agreement is violative of Section 3(1) and
3(4) of the Competition Act, 2002 as alleged in the Defence read with the
Information ?"

237\. Insofar as issue no.2 is concerned, arbitral tribunal held that it  :::
Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:30 ::: kvm  -:
111 :- CARBP-737-19.doc was clear that the question whether or not Competition
Act, 2002 applies to 2015 SLA can and is to be decided only by the CCI. It is
rightly held that once the CCI is empowered to determine the said question,
section 61 of the Competition Act bars the arbitral tribunal from considering
the said question and also the supplemental or consequential question is
embedded in issue nos. 3(A) to 3(F) which also the CCI is empowered to
determine. After adverting to section 61 of the Competition Act and after
noticing the admitted facts that the CCI is still investigating the matter and
no orders have yet been passed by the CCI under Section 26 or under Section
27, the arbitral tribunal rightly held that that issue will be decided by the
CCI. Accordingly, insofar as the issue nos. 3A to 3F are concerned, in view of
the findings rendered by the arbitral tribunal on issue no.2, the arbitral
tribunal rightly did not express any opinion on those issues.

238\. I shall first deal with the rival submissions made by the learned senior
counsel for the parties on issue nos. 1 to 3 together. Mr. Darius Khambata,
learned senior counsel for the petitioner could not dispute that the CCI does
not have jurisdiction to allow any monetary claim under the arbitration
agreement entered into between the parties under the provisions of the
Competition Act, 2002. The question thus arises for the consideration of this
Court is whether the arbitral tribunal did have jurisdiction to consider the
monetary claim made by the respondent for recovery of the payment of the trait
fee payable under the provisions of 2015 SLA on not.

239\. The petitioner in the application filed under section 16 of the
Arbitration Act had not only prayed for dismissal of the claim made by the
respondent on the ground that the arbitral tribunal did not have  ::: Uploaded
on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:30 ::: kvm  -: 112 :-
CARBP-737-19.doc jurisdiction to entertain such claim in view of the pendency
of the complaint filed by the Central Government and also by the petitioner
against the respondent before the CCI under the provisions of Competition Act,
2002 but had also in the alternate had prayed for suspension of the arbitral
proceedings. Learned senior counsel for the parties addressed this court also
on the issue whether during the pendency of the proceedings filed by the
petitioner before the CCI under the provisions of Competition Act against the
respondent, the arbitral tribunal ought to have dismissed the claim or in the
alternate ought to have suspended the arbitral proceedings filed by the
petitioner and the authority before the CCI under the provisions of
Competition Act was disposed of on one way or the other.

240\. It is not in dispute that the petitioner had also filed a counter claim
against the respondent for recovery of the substantial amount before the same
arbitral tribunal under the same 2015 SLA. Substantial part of the counter
claim was subsequently withdrawn by the petitioner before the arbitral
tribunal. The arbitral tribunal rejected the counter claim of Rs.19.51 crores
which was for the refund claimed by the petitioner against the respondent
under the said 2015 SLA.

241\. Learned senior counsel for the parties also addressed before this court
on the issue whether the Competition Commission of India would be empowered to
direct the respondent to refund the amount if paid by the petitioner to the
respondent under the impugned award in the event of the Competition Commission
of India rendering any finding against the respondent and in favour of the
petitioner about the validity of the 2015 SLA or not. Section 2(e) defines
"Commission" i.e. Commission means the Competition Commission of India
established under sub-

::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:30 :::

kvm  -: 113 :- CARBP-737-19.doc section(1) of section 7. Section (3) deals
with 'anti-competitive agreements.' The said provision prohibits any
enterprise or association of enterprises or person or association of persons
from entering into any agreement in respect of production, supply,
distribution, storage, acquisition or control of goods or provision of
services, which causes or is likely to cause an appreciable adverse effect on
competition within India.

242\. Section 3(2) provides that any agreement entered into in contravention
of the provisions contained in sub-section (1) shall be void. Section 7
provides for establishment of commission. Section 19 of the Act empowers the
commission to enquire into any alleged contravention of the provisions of
section 3(1) or section 4(1) either on its own motion or on receipt of any
information or a reference made to it by the Central Government or a State
Government or a statutory authority. It further provides for various other
powers of the commission while dealing with the issues whether there was any
alleged contravention of the provisions of the section 3(1) or 4(1) of the
Act.

243\. Section 26 of the Competition Act provides that on receipt of a
reference from the Central Government or a State Government or a statutory
authority or on its own knowledge or information received under section 19, if
the Commission is of the opinion that there exists a prima facie case, it
shall direct the Director General to cause an investigation to be made into
the matter. Based on such report to be submitted by the Director General,
further action can be taken by the Commission including conducting an enquiry
into such contravention in accordance with the provisions of the Act.

::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:30 :::

kvm  -: 114 :- CARBP-737-19.doc

244\. Under section 27 of the Competition Act, if after inquiry the Commission
finds that any agreement referred to in section 3 or an action of an
enterprise in a dominant position, is in contravention of section 3 or section
4, as the case may be, it may pass all or any of the order as may setout
therein. The Commission has power to direct that the agreements shall stand
modified to the extent and in the manner as may be specified in the order by
the Commission. The Commission may direct such enterprises to discontinue and
not re-enter such agreement or discontinue such views of dominant position as
the case may be, can impose the penalty upon such enterprises as the
Commission may deem fit. Section 61 of the Commission Act provides that no
civil court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit or proceeding in
respect of any matter which the Commission or the Appellate Tribunal is
empowered by or under the said Act to determine and no injunction shall be
granted by any court or other authority in respect of any action taken or to
be taken in pursuance of any power conferred by or under the said Act.

245\. The question that arises for consideration of this court is whether
section 61 of the Competition Act would exclude the jurisdiction of the
Arbitral Tribunal in entertaining monetary claim arising out of the 2015 SLA
though CCI has no jurisdiction to entertain any such monetary claim made by
one party against another party to the SLA under the provisions of the
Competition Act or not.

246\. A perusal of the record clearly indicates that it is not in dispute that
the parties had agreed to amend 2004 SLA after detailed negotiations and fixed
a trait value of Rs.150/- per packet of BG-I  ::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 :::
Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:30 ::: kvm  -: 115 :- CARBP-737-19.doc cotton
seeds costing Rs.750/- per packet for the period 2006-08 onwards and Rs.266/-
per packet of BG-II cotton seeds costing Rs.950/- per packet for the period
2007-08 onwards. There are proceedings filed before the different High Courts
including MRTPC wherein the State of Andhra Pradesh filed an additional
affidavit bringing on record (i) Settlement and Release of Claims Agreement
and (ii) Supplementary and Amendment Agreement executed by and between the
parties on 25th January, 2007. The second Amendment Agreement was executed
between the parties under the trait value for BG-II further reducing the
amount to Rs.225/- per packet for a packet costing upto Rs.950/- per packet.

247\. It is not in dispute that the respondent had issued a notice of
termination of SLA 2004 by notice dated 19 th November, 2009 and demanded the
outstanding payment of Rs.89.52 crores approximately under the said 2004 SLA.
A dispute had arisen between the parties also under the said agreement.
However, in view of the Amendment Agreement having been executed, nothing
survived in the reference made before the Competition Appellate Tribunal.

248\. The petitioner did not dispute before this Court that the said 2015 SLA
was executed after detailed negotiations held by the petitioner with full
independent legal advice received by the petitioner of its implications. There
is also no dispute that various State Government Price Notifications relied
upon by the petitioner before this Court fixing maximum sale price at which
the petitioner could sell the seeds were already existing before the execution
of the said 2015 SLA between the parties. No objection about the rate was
however raised by the petitioner at that stage. The trait value in respect of
::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:30 ::: kvm
-: 116 :- CARBP-737-19.doc which the dispute between the parties arose was one
of the components of maximum selling price of cotton seeds prescribed under
those State Government Price notifications referred to and relied upon by the
petitioner.

249\. The petitioner had already made payment of Rs.14 crores under the said
2015 SLA to the respondent, however refused payment of the balance contractual
license fee on the ground that the contractual amount was contrary to the
Price Notifications issued by the State Government. It is not in dispute that
those State Government Price Notifications were already issued prior to the
date of execution of 2015 SLA between the parties.

250\. In so far as the submission of Mr.Khambata, learned senior counsel for
the petitioner that under the provision of the 2015 SLA, any of the parties
could apply for modification of any part of the SLA on the ground that the
same was contrary to any of the provisions of law is concerned, there is no
dispute about such provisions of the said agreement. The petitioner however
did not invoke the said provisions before making payment of Rs.14 crores to
the respondent under the said 2015 SLA. Be that as it may, issue as to whether
the said SLA is in violation of the provisions of the Competition Act or not
and requires any modification or not is the issue pending before the CCI.

251\. In my view, Mr.Chagla, learned senior counsel for the respondent is
right in his submission that Section 11 of the Andhra Pradesh Cotton Seeds
(Regulation pf Supply Distribution, Sale and Fixation of Sale Price) Act, 2007
and Section 10 of the Maharashtra  ::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded
on - 24/07/2020 03:43:30 ::: kvm  -: 117 :- CARBP-737-19.doc Cotton Seeds
(Regulation of Supply, Distribution, Sale and Fixation of Sale Price) Act,
2009 does not empower the respective State Governments to fix trait value but
empower to fix maximum sale price of the cotton planting seeds. There is no
dispute between the parties that the purpose of such maximum selling price
fixation was to secure the interest of farmers only.

252\. Mr.Khambata, learned senior counsel for the petitioner did not dispute
that one year prior to the claim period, the Bt. cotton seeds business of the
petitioner was 69.73% i.e. approximately 70% of their total business. The
total revenue of the petitioner for the Financial Year 2015-16 was Rs.1054
crores as is apparent from the affidavit in reply dated 20th February,2019
filed by the petitioner in the petition filed by the respondent under Section
9 of the Arbitration Act in this Court. The net profit of the petitioner for
the Financial Year 2015-16 even according to the petitioner was Rs.1054 crores
as reflected in the said affidavit.

253\. Learned senior counsel also did not dispute that under the said 2015
SLA, on the sale of seed packets worth upto Rs.930/-, the petitioner was
liable to pay to the respondent approximately Rs.163.28/- per packet exclusive
of taxes. Learned senior counsel could not dispute that the petitioner and its
associate companies have already collected the amount claimed by the
respondent from the farmers on the sale of those seeds. The averments made by
the petitioner in paragraph 5.4 of the affidavit in reply dated 20 th
February, 2019 filed by the petitioner in Commercial Arbitration Petition (L)
No.151 of 2019 would support the case of the respondent in this respect.

::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:30 :::

kvm  -: 118 :- CARBP-737-19.doc

254\. A perusal of the record clearly indicates that neither the petitioner
nor its associate companies had during the relevant period even made any
attempt to avoid the said 2015 SLA and had availed off the benefits under the
said agreement. Even before the CCI, the petitioner and its associate
companies had never sought avoidance of 2015 SLA but had challenged the
termination of notice issued by the respondent thereby terminating the 2015
SLA and had prayed for the stay of termination of 2015 SLA. However, contrary
to this position taken by the respondent before the CCI, the petitioner has
raised self-destructive arguments before the arbitral tribunal and before this
Court that the said SLA was violating the provisions of the Competition Act
and has raised a plea of jurisdiction of the arbitral tribunal to entertain
the claims made by the respondent. In my view, the stand taken by the
petitioner is totally inconsistent with each other and is mutually
destructive. Even during the course of the arguments, none of the counsel
appearing for the petitioner addressed this Court on the issue of
quantification of the amount awarded by the arbitral tribunal or on the merit
of the claim decided by the arbitral tribunal in the impugned award but
addressed only on the issue of jurisdiction of the arbitral tribunal.

255\. It was vehemently urged by the learned senior counsel for the petitioner
that the monetary claims made by the respondent before the arbitral tribunal
were not arbitrable. By a detailed order passed by the arbitral tribunal in
the application filed by the petitioner under Section 16 of the Arbitration
Act, the arbitral tribunal rightly rejected the said application. On the issue
of arbitrability, the arbitral tribunal has recorded a detailed reason while
dealing with Issue No.1 in the  ::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on
- 24/07/2020 03:43:30 ::: kvm  -: 119 :- CARBP-737-19.doc impugned arbitral
award. Mr.Khambata, learned senior counsel for the petitioner could not
dispute the existence of the arbitration agreement recorded in the said 2015
SLA. He also could not dispute that the arbitral tribunal was properly
constituted. For deciding the issue of jurisdiction of the arbitral tribunal
under Section 16 of the Arbitration Act, the arbitral tribunal has rightly
applied the triple test : (1) whether there is in existence a valid
arbitration agreement, (2) whether the arbitral tribunal is properly
constituted or not and (3) whether the matters submitted to arbitration are
submitted within the scope of the arbitration agreement or not. The only
question thus remains for consideration of this Court is whether the monetary
claims made by the respondent before the arbitral tribunal were arbitrable or
not.

256\. The submission of the learned senior counsel for the petitioner before
this Court is that though CCI has no jurisdiction to award any monetary claim
under the provisions of the Competition Act, the monetary claims made by the
respondent before the arbitral tribunal however, could not have been granted
in violation of the provisions of the Competition Act. In my view, since CCI
did not have jurisdiction to grant any monetary claim for the sale of seeds
under the 2015 SLA in favour of the respondent, the claims made by the
respondent before the arbitral tribunal being an action in personam, exclusive
jurisdiction to entertain such claim in the nature of an action in personam
would vest only with the Civil Court or with the arbitral tribunal, as the
case may be. There being an existence of arbitration agreement between the
parties, such claim could be granted only by the arbitral tribunal.

257\. Merely because the issue of validity of 2015 SLA having been  :::
Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:30 ::: kvm  -:
120 :- CARBP-737-19.doc raised by the petitioner before the CCI in the
information filed by it or the complaint filed by the Central Government under
the provisions of the Competition Act, the arbitral tribunal was not obliged
to proceed on the premise that the provisions of the said 2015 SLA were void
or were contrary to any of the provisions of the Competition Act. Admittedly,
no such declaration was rendered by the CCI declaring that the said 2015 SLA
entered into between the parties was void being anti-competitive or required
modification.

258\. During the course of the arguments, Mr. Khambata, learned senior counsel
for the petitioner gave three options which according to the learned senior
counsel, the arbitral tribunal could have exercised in the proceedings before
them. In my view, there is no merit in the submission of the learned senior
counsel for the petitioner that in view of pendency of the complaint filed by
the Central Government or the information filed by the petitioner before the
CCI alleging various breaches on the part of the respondent under the
provisions of the 2015 SLA on such grounds, the arbitral tribunal ought to
have dismissed the claims made by the respondent. There was no dispute about
the existence of arbitration agreement or that the constitution of the
arbitral tribunal was proper and there being no dispute on the quantification
of the claim.

259\. There is also no merit in the submission of the learned senior counsel
for the petitioner that the arbitral tribunal ought to have suspended the
arbitral proceedings in view of the pendency of the proceedings regarding
validity of the said 2015 SLA before the CCI. The only provision which
empowers the arbitral tribunal to suspend or to terminate the arbitral
proceedings on the ground that none of the  ::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 :::
Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:30 ::: kvm  -: 121 :- CARBP-737-19.doc party
paid his share in respect of his claim or counter claim, as the case may be,
is found in Section 38(2) of the Arbitration Act. The legislative intent is
thus clear that where the powers for suspension was to be provided, it was
specifically inserted in the Act. No other provision for termination or
suspension of the arbitral proceedings due to the situation contemplated
therein, can be exercised.

260\. In so far as reliance placed by the learned senior counsel on Section 9
of the Arbitration Act in support of the submission that the Court has ample
power to suspend the arbitral proceedings under the said provision is
concerned, under the said provision, the arbitral tribunal empowers to grant
interim measures on various grounds and circumstances specifically set out
therein. None of those grounds and circumstances set out therein would include
the power to suspend the arbitral proceedings by the Court under Section 9.
There is thus no merit in this submission of the learned senior counsel for
the petitioner.

261\. Reliance placed on Section 17 of the Arbitration Act in support of the
submission that the arbitral tribunal is empowered to suspend the arbitral
proceedings is misplaced. Under Section 17, the arbitral tribunal is empowered
to grant interim measures on the grounds and the circumstances set out in the
said provision. In my view, Section 17 does not empower the arbitral tribunal
to suspend the arbitral proceedings.

262\. In my view, there is no merit in the submission of the learned senior
counsel for the petitioner that the arbitral tribunal after dismissal of the
monetary claim made by the respondent in view of  ::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020
::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:30 ::: kvm  -: 122 :- CARBP-737-19.doc
pendency of the proceedings before the CCI, at the most could have granted
liberty to the respondent to file fresh arbitral proceedings depending upon
the outcome of the proceedings before the CCI. If the arbitral tribunal would
have dismissed the proceedings for recovery of the monetary claim in view of
pendency of the proceedings before the CCI, if the respondent would have
succeeded in those proceedings and if the respondent would have filed the
arbitral proceedings again, the claims then it made by the respondent would
have been barred by law of limitation.

263\. The answer to all these submissions made by the learned senior counsel
for the petitioner on the issues of jurisdiction and arbitrability is also
found in Section 53(N) of the Competition Act, 2002 which reads thus :-

"53N ---- Awarding compensation.

(1) Without prejudice to any other provisions contained in this Act, the
Central Government or a State Government or a local authority or any
enterprise or any person may make an application to the Appellate Tribunal to
adjudicate on claim for compensation that may arise from the findings of the
Commission or the orders of the Appellate Tribunal in an appeal against any
finding of the Commission or under section 42A or under sub-section (2) of
section 53Q of the Act, and to pass an order for the recovery of compensation
from any enterprise for any loss or damage shown to have been suffered, by the
Central Government or a State Government or a local authority or any
enterprise or any person as a result of any contravention of the provisions of
Chapter II, having been committed by the enterprise.

::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:30 :::

kvm  -: 123 :- CARBP-737-19.doc (2) Every application made under sub-section
(1) shall be accompanied by the findings of the Commission, if any, and also
be accompanied with such fees as may be prescribed.

(3) The Appellate Tribunal may, after an inquiry made into the allegations
mentioned in the application made under sub-section (1), pass an order
directing the enterprise to make payment to the applicant, of the amount
determined by it as realisable from the enterprise as compensation for the
loss or damage caused to the applicant as a result of any contravention of the
provisions of Chapter II having been committed by such enterprise: Provided
that the Appellate Tribunal may obtain the recommendations of the Commission
before passing an order of compensation. (4) Where any loss or damage referred
to in sub-section (1) is caused to numerous persons having the same interest,
one or more of such persons may, with the permission of the Appellate
Tribunal, make an application under that sub-section for and on behalf of, or
for the benefit of, the persons so interested, and thereupon, the provisions
of rule 8 of Order 1 of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure,
1908 (5 of 1908), shall apply subject to the modification that every reference
therein to a suit or decree shall be construed as a reference to the
application before the Appellate Tribunal and the order of the Appellate
Tribunal thereon.

Explanation. - For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that -

(a) an application may be made for compensation before the Appellate Tribunal
only after either the Commission or the Appellate Tribunal on appeal under
clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 53A of the Act, has determined in a
proceeding before it that violation of the provisions of the Act has taken
place, or if provisions of section 42A or sub-section (2) of section 53Q of
the Act are attracted.

::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:30 :::

kvm  -: 124 :- CARBP-737-19.doc

(b) Enquiry to be conducted under sub-section (3) shall be for the purpose of
determining the eligibility and quantum of compensation due to a person
applying for the same, and not for examining afresh the findings of the
Commission or the Appellate Tribunal on whether any violation of the Act has
taken place."

264\. A perusal of the said provision clearly indicates that an application
can be made for compensation before the Appellate tribunal only after either
the Commission or the Appellate Tribunal on appeal under clause (a) of sub-
section (1) of section 53A of the Act, has determined in a proceeding before
it that violation of the provisions of the Act has taken place, or if
provisions of section 42A or sub-section (2) of section 53Q of the Act are
attracted. The Appellate Tribunal, in that event, is empowered to conduct an
enquiry under clause (b) of sub- section (4) of Section 53N for the purpose of
determining the eligibility and quantum of compensation due to a person
applying for the same, and not for examining afresh the findings of the
Commission or the Appellate Tribunal on whether any violation of the Act has
taken place or not.

265\. In my view, it is thus clear beyond reasonable doubt that the arbitral
tribunal could neither terminate nor suspend the arbitral proceedings before
the CCI under the provisions of the Competition Act nor could refuse to deal
with the monetary claims arising out of the 2015 SLA merely on the ground that
the issue of validity of the 2015 SLA by the Central Government by filing a
reference or in view of the information filed by the petitioner before the CCI
under provisions of the Competition Act is pending before the CCI. Even if the
amount awarded by the arbitral tribunal in the impugned award is  ::: Uploaded
on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:30 ::: kvm  -: 125 :-
CARBP-737-19.doc paid by the petitioner to the respondent thereby implementing
the impugned arbitral award, if the CCI comes to the conclusion in the pending
proceedings that the said 2015 SLA is in violation of the provisions of the
Competition Act, 2002, based on such finding of the CCI or the order of the
Appellate Tribunal in an appeal against any finding of the CCI or under
Section 42 A or Section 53Q (2) of the Act, the petitioner in that event,
would entitled to seek claim for compensation against the respondent including
the amount paid, if any, by the petitioner by implementing the impugned
arbitral award.

266\. Mr. Khambata, learned senior counsel for the petitioner in Commercial
Arbitration Petition No.737 of 2019, Mr. Seervai, learned senior counsel for
the petitioner in Commercial Arbitration Petition No.892 of 2019 and Mr.Rohan
Kadam, learned counsel for the petitioner in Commercial Arbitration Petition
No.738 of 2019 could not demonstrate before this Court that even if the amount
awarded by the arbitral tribunal if paid by the petitioner to the respondent
and if the petitioner ultimately succeeds in the proceedings before the CCI,
the petitioner would not be able to seek any compensation by filing an
application under Sections 53N(3) and 53N(4) of the Competition Act read with
explanation thereto.

267\. In my view, there is no substance in the submission made by the learned
senior counsel for the petitioner that the arbitral tribunal ought to have
awaited for the outcome of the pending proceedings before the CCI and could
not have made an arbitral award though admittedly there was no dispute on the
merits of the claim. There is no substance in the submission that the issues
in the arbitral proceedings being related to the issues pending before the CCI
and thus even if the part of  ::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on -
24/07/2020 03:43:30 ::: kvm  -: 126 :- CARBP-737-19.doc the claims were
arbitrable and other part was not arbitrable, the entire proceedings before
the arbitral tribunal became non-arbitrable. Since the CCI has no power to
grant any monetary claim arising out the said 2015 SLA for the seeds supplied
by the petitioner to the respondent simplicitor, powers of the arbitral
tribunal and CCI are not overlapping. The respondent has no remedy to seek any
monetary claim under 2015 SLA by filing any application under any of the
provision of the Competition Act though the petitioner has a remedy available
under Sections 53N(3) and 53N(4) of the Competition Act read with explanation
thereto and seek compensation against the respondent based on the findings
rendered by the CCI or the Appellate Tribunal, as the case may be.

268\. There is no merit in the submission of the learned senior counsel for
the petitioner that the respondent could have applied for extension of time
for indefinite period for making an arbitral award or for some period beyond
the date of disposal of proceedings before CCI under Section 29A(4) of the
Arbitration Act. This submission is in the teeth of Section 29A(4). Court has
no power to grant such extension for indefinite period or to indirectly
suspend the arbitral proceedings under Section 29A (4) of the Arbitration Act.

269\. In so far as the reliance placed by the learned senior counsel on
Section 61 of the Competition Act in support of the submission that the powers
of the Civil Court or the arbitral tribunal, as the case may be, are excluded
under the said provision to determine any matter which the CCI or the
Appellate Tribunal is empowered to determine under the provision of the
Competition Act is concerned, in my view, reliance placed on the said
provision to exclude the powers of the  ::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 :::
Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:30 ::: kvm  -: 127 :- CARBP-737-19.doc
arbitral tribunal to decide the monetary claim in this case is totally
misplaced. The arbitral tribunal cannot decide the issue whether the said 2015
SLA was anti-competitive or was in violation of Section 3 of the Competition
Act or not and deserves to be declared as void or required modification but
has power to award monetary claim under such agreement.

270\. The powers of the arbitral tribunal and the powers of the CCI are
different and are not overlapping. In this case, the arbitral tribunal has not
decided the issue as to whether the said 2015 SLA entered into between the
parties was anti-competitive or not or whether the said 2015 SLA is in breach
of any of the provision of the Competition Act or not or the respondent was in
a dominant position or had committed the abuse of dominant position
contemplated under Section 27 of the Competition Act. The arbitral tribunal in
the impugned award has recorded a finding that the arbitral tribunal has
jurisdiction in the matter, Subject-Agreement is neither void nor voidable
under the Contract Act, 1872 and on the facts of the case, the respondent had
not avoided the agreement. It is held that the petitioner was not entitled to
withhold or refuse payment of the trait value payable under the Subject-
Agreement and was liable to make such payment. The respondent was entitled to
demand the trait value from the petitioner.

271\. While dealing with issue nos.3(a) to 3(f) which deal with the issue of
alleged violation of various provisions of the Competition Act alleged to have
been committed by the respondent which were framed on the basis of the
pleadings filed by the petitioner, the arbiral tribunal has clarified that the
question whether or not the Competition Act applies to the 2015 SLA is to be
decided by the CCI. The arbitral  ::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded
on - 24/07/2020 03:43:30 ::: kvm  -: 128 :- CARBP-737-19.doc tribunal has thus
rightly held that once the CCI empowers to decide that question, Section 61 of
the Competition Act bars the arbitral tribunal from considering the said
question and also the supplementary and consequential question embodied the
issue nos.3(a) to 3(f) which also the CCI is empowered to determine. The
arbitral tribunal accordingly expressed no opinion on issue nos.3(a) to 3(f).

272\. It is thus clear beyond reasonable doubt that the arbitral tribunal has
not determined any of the issues which are determinable exclusively by the CCI
under the provisions of the Competition Act, 2002 and has not exceeded its
jurisdiction to deal with any issue which would be an action in rem. The
arbitral tribunal has only interpreted the terms of the agreement and based on
the evidence led by both the parties found that there was no dispute about the
amount payable under that agreement on merit and has directed the petitioner
to pay the amount found due and payable to the respondent under the said SLA.
Various powers of the CCI prescribed under the provisions of the Competition
Act are not disputed by the respondent. I am not inclined to accept the
submission of Mr.Khambata, learned senior counsel for the petitioner that the
arbitral tribunal has conferred jurisdiction by itself by assuming the
existence of jurisdictional facts.

273\. The arbitral tribunal in this case has not encroached upon the powers of
the CCI though such issues were raised by the petitioner. In my view, if the
arbitral tribunal would have rendered a finding one way or the other on the
issue nos.3(a) to 3(f) as formulated based on the pleadings filed by the
respondent, that would have amounted to the arbitral tribunal exceeding its
jurisdiction and would have been in  ::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 :::
Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:30 ::: kvm  -: 129 :- CARBP-737-19.doc
violation of Section 61 of the Competition Act and not otherwise. The decision
of the arbitral tribunal awarding the monetary claims made by the respondent
under the said 2015 SLA would not amount to the arbitral tribunal wrongly
assuming the existence of jurisdictional facts. The arbitral tribunal is
empowered to exercise powers in view of the existence of arbitration agreement
and to find out whether the claims made before it are arbitrable or not. Such
exercise would not amount to assuming the existence of the jurisdiction facts.

274\. Reliance placed by the learned senior counsel on Section 10 of the
Specific Relief Act, 1963 in support of the submission that the said 2015 SLA
itself being not enforceable in law could not have been relied upon by the
respondent for seeking enforcement thereof while seeking monetary claim is
misplaced in the facts of this case. The issue as to whether any part of 2015
SLA is void or not or is contrary to any of the provisions of the Competition
Act or not, is the issue pending before the CCI. The petitioner will have a
remedy under Section 53N of the Competition Act, if the petitioner succeeds in
those proceedings before the CCI to seek adequate compensation based on such
findings if rendered by the CCI or the Appellate Tribunal, as the case may be.

275\. In so far as the submission of Mr.Khambata, learned senior counsel for
the petitioner that the arbitral tribunal has decided the issue nos.2 and 3
ignoring the statement of defence filed by the petitioner and has considered
only the averments made in the statement of claim is concerned, in my view the
arbitral tribunal has not only considered the statement of claim but has also
dealt with the objection raised by the petitioner in the statement of defence
as well  ::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:30
::: kvm  -: 130 :- CARBP-737-19.doc as the application filed under Section 16
of the Arbitration Act in the impugned award as well as in the order passed
under Section 16. However, in paragraphs 51 and 54 of the impugned award, the
arbitral tribunal has observed that for deciding jurisdiction of a court
(Tribunal), what is relevant is the averments made in the plaint (statement of
claim) by the plaintiff (claimant) and not what is pleaded by the defendant
(respondent) in the written statement (statement of defence). The petitioner
had itself filed counter claim relying upon the same arbitration agreement
recorded in Article 11.02 of the said 2015 SLA.

276\. Be that as it may, in my view, the arbitral tribunal has considered the
plea of jurisdiction raised in the application filed under Section 16 and also
in the statement of defence as a plea challenging the jurisdiction of the
arbitral tribunal. In any event, the Court has to read the entire arbitral
award to appreciate the reasons recorded and the conclusion drawn by the
arbitral tribunal and cannot set aside the arbitral award based on an isolated
observation made in the context in one of the paragraphs of the arbitral
award.

277\. The petitioner had also filed a petition under Section 9 of the
Arbitration Act on 9th February, 2010 seeking stay of the termination notice
dated 19th November, 2009 before Delhi High Court. The said petition was
disposed of by the Delhi High Court in view of the said arbitration petition
having become infructuous by recording a statement made by the petitioner that
the petitioner had agreed to pay the amount claimed in the termination notice
dated 19 th November, 2009\.

::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:30 :::

kvm  -: 131 :- CARBP-737-19.doc

278\. Supreme Court in case of Indian Farmers Fertiziler Cooperative Limited
(supra) has held that the arbitral tribunal may rule on its own jurisdiction
under Section 16(1) which makes it clear that it refers to whether the
arbitral tribunal may embark upon an enquiry into the issues raised by the
parties to the dispute. The Supreme Court held that kompetenz principle, which
is also followed by the English Arbitration Act, 1996 is that the
"jurisdiction" mentioned in Section 16 refers to three things (i) as to
whether there is an existence of a valid arbitration agreement, (ii) whether
the arbitral tribunal is properly constituted and (iii) matters submitted to
arbitration should be in accordance with the arbitration agreement. In the
said judgment, Supreme Court held that the Court having jurisdiction over the
subject matter of the suit and over the parties thereto, though bound to
decide right may decide wrong, and that even though it decided wrong it would
not be doing something which it had no jurisdiction to do. It had jurisdiction
over the subject matter, it had the jurisdiction over the party and therefore
merely because it made an error in deciding a vital issue in the suit, it
cannot be said that it had acted beyond its jurisdiction. It is held that the
Courts have jurisdiction to decide right or to decide wrong even tough they
decide wrong, the decree is rendered by them cannot be treated as nullities.

279\. Supreme Court has adverted to the judgment of privy council in case of
Maqbul Ahmad v/s. Onkar Pratap Narain Singh, AIR 1935 PC 85 which did not say
that where the Court fails to perform its duty, it acts without jurisdiction.
If it fails to do its duty, it makes an error of law and an error of law can
be corrected only in the manner laid down in the Civil Procedure Code. In my
view, principles of law laid down by the Supreme Court in the case of Indian
Farmers Fertiziler  ::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on -
24/07/2020 03:43:30 ::: kvm  -: 132 :- CARBP-737-19.doc Cooperative Limited
(supra) applies to the facts of this case. The respondent has clearly
satisfied all the ingredients of kompetenz principles in this case. I am
respectfully bound by the said judgment. Merely because the arbitral tribunal
has held that it does not express any opinion on issue nos. 3A to 3F, it
cannot be urged by the petitioner that the arbitral tribunal has neither
exhausted its jurisdiction by forming such opinion nor has decided the plea of
jurisdiction raised by the petitioner in the statement of defence or in the
application made under Section 16 of the Act before the arbitral tribunal. In
my view, Mr.Chagla, learned senior counsel has rightly relied upon the
judgment of Supreme Court in case of Dhulabhai (supra) on this issue.

280\. The arbitral tribunal has rightly decided whether its jurisdiction was
ousted by looking at the pleadings filed by the parties. Non- arbitrable
defence raised by the petitioner did not determine or oust the jurisdiction of
the arbitral tribunal. Supreme Court in case of Church of North India (supra)
has held that a plea of bar to jurisdiction of a Civil Court must be
considered having regard to the contentions raised in the plaint. In the said
judgment, the Supreme Court adverted to the earlier judgment in case of
Dhulabhai (supra) in which it is held that where there is an express bar of
the jurisdiction of the Court, an examination of the scheme of the Particular
Act to find the adequacy or the sufficiency of the remedies provided may be
relevant but is not decisive to sustain the jurisdiction of the Civil Court.
An exclusion of the jurisdiction of the Civil Court is not readily to be
inferred unless the conditions set out in the said judgment would apply.

281\. Supreme Court in case of Abdulla Bin Ali and Ors. (supra) has held that
there is no denying the fact that the allegations made in the  ::: Uploaded on
- 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:30 ::: kvm  -: 133 :-
CARBP-737-19.doc plaint decide the forum. The jurisdiction does not dependent
upon the defence taken by the defendants in the written statement. It is
evident that the Supreme Court by reading of the plaint as a whole came to the
conclusion that the plaintiffs had filed a suit giving rise to the appeal
treating the defendants as tresspassers as they had denied the title of the
plaintiff. It is held that a suit against the tresspasser would lie only in
the Civil Court and not in the Revenue Court. In paragraph 7 of the said
judgment, it is held that on the allegations made in the plaint the suit was
cognizable by the Civil Court and that the High Court had erred in law in non-
suiting the plaintiffs on the ground that the Civil Court had no jurisdiction.

282\. A full Bench of Andhra Pradesh High Court in case of Sangnbhotla
Venkatramaiah (supra) has held that where the subject matter of the suit falls
outside the exclusive jurisdiction of the special tribunal or where the
reliefs sought in the suit is one which the special tribunal is incapable of
granting, the jurisdiction of the Civil Court is not ousted merely because the
question which has to be incidentally but necessarily decided is a question
within the competence of the special tribunal. The forum has to be determined
by the plaint. If the allegations in the plaint and the reliefs sought did not
bring the action within the jurisdiction of the special tribunal, there is no
reason to exclude the Civil Court from taking the action merely because the
defence putforth involves the adjudication of matters within the competence of
special tribunal.

283\. In my view, merely because the petitioner had raised an issue that the
2015 SLA was void or anti-competitive or that the respondent no.1 had abused
the dominant position and those issues could be  ::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020
::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:30 ::: kvm  -: 134 :- CARBP-737-19.doc
decided only by the CCI, it would not preclude the arbitral tribunal from
deciding the monetary claims made before it which were not within the
jurisdiction of the CCI. In my view, the jurisdiction of the arbitral tribunal
to grant monetary claim is not excluded merely because the defence putforth by
the petitioner involves the adjudication of matters within the competence of
CCI. It is also held by the Andhra Pradesh High Court in the said judgment
that where the Court is satisfied that the plaint is but a trick to invoke the
jurisdiction of the Civil Court and to oust the jurisdiction of the special
tribunal, the Civil Court will naturally dismiss the suit. No such case is
made out by the petitioner in this case before the arbitral tribunal to
dismiss the monetary claims made by the respondent. The principles of law laid
down by the Andhra Pradesh High Court in case of Sangnbhotla Venkatramaiah
(supra) squarely apply to this case. I am in respectful agreement with the
views expressed by the Andhra Pradesh High Court in the said judgment.

284\. In so far as the reliance placed by the learned senior counsel for the
petitioner on the judgment of Supreme Court in case of A. Ayyaswamy (supra),
in case of Vimal Kishore Shah (supra) and the judgment of this Court in case
of Dinesh Jaya Poojary (supra) relied upon by the learned senior counsel for
the petitioner is concerned, in the facts of those judgments, it was held that
the claims made by the claimant were not arbitrable. In this case, the learned
senior counsel for the petitioner could not satisfy this Court as to how the
monetary claims made by the respondent under 2015 SLA were not arbitrable.
Learned Senior Counsel could not dispute that the monetary claims made by the
respondent could not have been considered by the CCI. The aforesaid three
judgments thus relied upon by the learned senior  ::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020
::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:30 ::: kvm  -: 135 :- CARBP-737-19.doc
counsel for the petitioner would not assist the case of the petitioner and are
clearly distinguishable in the facts of this case.

285\. Delhi High Court in case of M/s. Shoes East Limited (supra) while
dealing with the provisions of Securities and Exchange Board of India Act,
1992 held that there was no question of bar of jurisdiction of Civil Court in
a suit for recovery where the company seeks to invoke a contractual obligation
against the person who promises to bring a particular amount of subscription
but fails to do so. It is held that there is no provision in the SEBI Act or
its regulation for an adjudicating officer of the board or the Appellate Court
to pass a decree for recovery in case at hand before the Delhi High Court.
Delhi High Court rejected the contention of the respondent that there was bar
under the provisions of SEBI Act against the Civil Court from dealing with a
monetary claim by enforcing a contractual obligation. The principles laid down
by the Delhi High Court in case of M/s. Shoes East Limited (supra) apply to
the facts of this case. I am in respectful agreement with the views expressed
by the Delhi High Court in the said judgment.

286\. In this case also since the respondent had filed the claim before the
arbitral tribunal for recovery of monetary claim by seeking enforcement of
contractual obligation under the said 2015 SLA, the jurisdiction of the
arbitral tribunal was not ousted to decide such monetary claim under Section
61 of the Competition Act. This Court in case of Asha Kataria (supra) after
considering the provisions of Section 20A and 15Y of SEBI Act and Section 22E
of the Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act held that none of those
provisions would enable either of the authorities such as adjudicating
officers, securities Appellate Tribunal and the Board to resolve the dispute
regarding non  ::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020
03:43:30 ::: kvm  -: 136 :- CARBP-737-19.doc payment between the client and
sub-broker (much less unregistered sub-broker). In my view, the principles
laid down by this Court in the said judgment would clearly apply to the fact
of this case. I am respectfully bound by the said judgment.

287\. Supreme Court in case of Ramesh Gobindram (supra) has considered the
issue whether the Wakf tribunal constituted under Section 83 of the said Wakf
Act, 1995 was competent to entertain and adjudicate the dispute regarding the
eviction of the appellants who were occupying Wakf properties. Supreme Court
held that Section 85 of the said Act bars jurisdiction of Civil Court to
entertain any suit or proceedings in relation to orders passed by the Wakf
Tribunal or proceedings that may be commenced before the Wakf Tribunal. It is
held that the exclusion of jurisdiction of Civil Court even under Section 85
was not absolute but was limited only to matters that are required by the said
Act to be determined by the Wakf tribunal. So long as the dispute or question
raised before the Civil Court does not fall within the four corners of the
powers vested in the Wakf Tribunal, the jurisdiction of the Civil Court to
entertain a suit or proceedings in relation to any such question cannot be
said to be barred. The principles of law laid down by the Supreme Court in
case of Ramesh Gobindram (supra) squarely applies to the facts of this case. I
am respectfully bound by the said judgment.

288\. Arbitral Tribunal in this case has only allowed the monetary claim made
by the respondent by seeking enforcement of a contractual obligation which
claim could not have been entertained or adjudicated upon by the CCI. The
powers of CCI as well as the arbitral tribunal are different and not
overlapping. A perusal of the provisions of the  ::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020
::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:30 ::: kvm  -: 137 :- CARBP-737-19.doc
Competition Act clearly indicates that the scheme of the said Act does not
contemplate a machinery for seeking relief under a contract. The purpose of
the proceedings filed by the parties before the CCI is different and distinct
from the recovery proceedings filed by a party to agreement for seeking
enforcement of a contractual obligation. The CCI cannot decide the monetary
claim made by the respondent and at the same time, the arbitral tribunal
cannot decide the issue whether the 2015 SLA was void being allegedly
violative of Section 3 and other provisions of the Competition Act. Both the
proceedings can be conducted parallelly and does not oust the jurisdiction of
each other in respect of the issues which can be exclusively decided by each
of this forum.

289\. In that context, in my view, Mr. Chagla, learned senior counsel for the
respondent is right in his submission that the Competition Act is not a self-
contained code. Supreme Court in case of Saurabh Prakash (supra) dealt with
the issue of jurisdiction of Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices
Commission and held that the power of MRTP Commission to award compensation is
restricted to a case where a loss or damage had been caused as a result of the
monopolistic or unfair trade practices. It had no jurisdiction where damages
was claimed for mere breach of contract. It is held that the power of the
commission is not in addition to the power of the Civil Court. The principles
laid down by the Supreme Court in case of Saurabh Prakash (supra) applies to
the facts of this case. The monetary claim filed by the respondent before the
arbitral tribunal alleging the breach of the contract committed by the
petitioner by refusing to pay the contractual dues under the said 2015 SLA
could not have been gone into by the CCI. I am respectfully bound by the
principles laid down by  ::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on -
24/07/2020 03:43:30 ::: kvm  -: 138 :- CARBP-737-19.doc the Supreme Court in
the said judgment. Similar view is taken by the Supreme Court in case of Pawan
Hans Limited (supra).

290\. Delhi High Court in case of Telefonaktiebolaget Lm Ericsson (Publ) has
interpreted Sections 60 and 62 of the Competition Act and has held that the
provisions of any statute must be read in the context of the statute as a
whole. Section 60 is enacted only to reinstate and emphasize that
notwithstanding agreements, arrangements, practices and conduct which may
otherwise be legitimate under the general laws would nonetheless be subject to
rigors of the Competition Act. Section 60 cannot be read to curtail or whittle
down the full scope of other law. Those interpretation would also be in sync
with the provisions of Section 62 of the Competition Act.

291\. Supreme Court in case of Balawaa and Ors. (supra) has considered the
provisions of the Karnataka Land Reforms Act and has held that the Civil Court
cannot be said to be ousted of the jurisdiction in granting the reliefs sought
for. When a special tribunal is created under a special statute and the
jurisdiction of the Civil Court is sought to be ousted under the said statute,
it is only in respect of those reliefs which could be granted by the special
tribunal under the special statute, a jurisdiction of the Civil Court can be
said to be ousted. Supreme Court accordingly held that already the Civil Court
had jurisdiction to entertain the suit for partition and not the authorities
under the Karnataka Land Reforms Act. The principles of law laid down by the
Supreme Court would applies to the facts of this case. I am respectfully bound
by the said judgment.

292\. Supreme Court in case of Girnar Traders (supra) has held that  :::
Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:30 ::: kvm  -:
139 :- CARBP-737-19.doc for an Act to be "self contained code" it is required
to be shown that it is a complete legislation for the purpose for which it is
enacted. The provisions of the enactment in question should provide for a
complete machinery to deal with various promises that may arise during its
execution. Sufficient powers should be vested in the authority/forum created
under the Act to ensure effectual and complete implementation of the Act.
There should be complete and coherent scheme of the statutory provisions for
attainment of the object and purpose of the Act. It essentially should also
provide for adjucatory scheme to deal with the grievance/claims of the persons
affected by enforcement of the provisions of the Act, preferably, including an
appellate forum within the frame work of the Act. In another words, the Act in
itself should be a panacea to all facets arising from the implementation of
the Act itself. The principles of law laid down by the Supreme Court in case
of Girnar Traders (supra) applies to the facts of this case.

293\. Learned senior counsel for the petitioner could not point out any
provision under the Competition Act providing for a remedy to recover monetary
claim arising out of a contractual obligation under an agreement. Thus, the
provisions of the Competition Act cannot be considered as a self-contained
code in so far as the remedy of recovery of monetary claim for enforcement of
contractual obligation is concerned. In my view, the arbitral tribunal was
thus not bound to suspend the proceedings or could not have rejected the
monetary claim merely on the ground that the complaint filed by the Central
Government as well as the information filed by the petitioner were pending
before the CCI.

294\. In my view Mr. Chagla, learned senior counsel for the  ::: Uploaded on -
23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:30 ::: kvm  -: 140 :-
CARBP-737-19.doc respondent is right in his submission that even if the CCI
finds that there is contravention of Sections 3 or 4 of the Competition Act,
the CCI has vide powers to pass various orders under the Competition Act
including an order for discontinuance of objectionable agreements, imposition
of penalties, modification of agreement etc. If the contract is void ab-initio
as canvassed by the petitioner, the question of its discontinuance,
modification etc. could never arise. Learned senior counsel rightly placed
reliance on section 27 of the Competition Act in support of his submission
that under the provisions of the Competition Law, the concept of voidness has
always been considered to be "transient" and not absolute and is curable. The
judgment of Supreme Court in case of Mahindra and Mahindra Limited (supra) and
also the judgment of Court of Appeal in case of David John Passmore (supra)
would assist the case of the respondent.

295\. Learned senior counsel for the petitioner did not dispute that the
interim order dated 10th February, 2016 passed by the CCI was impugned by the
respondent in the writ petition bearing no. 1776 of 2016 before the Delhi High
Court. The Delhi High Court by order dated 29th February, 2016 directed that
no final order shall be passed by the CCI in that matter and any interim order
under section 33 shall not be given effect to without the leave of the Delhi
High Court. The said writ petition is still pending before the Delhi High
Court.

296\. A perusal of section 26(1) of the Competition Act clearly indicates that
the directions issued by the CCI under the said provision while conducting an
enquiry under section 19 to the Director General to cause an investigation
into the matter is an administrative direction and is not an order on
adjudication. Any such order passed under  ::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 :::
Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:30 ::: kvm  -: 141 :- CARBP-737-19.doc
section 26(1) does not determine any right or obligation of the party or does
not entail any civil consequences. The judgment of Supreme Court in case of
CCI v/s. SAIL, (supra) and the judgment of this Court in case of Vision
Millenium Exports Private Limited (supra) would clearly assist the case of the
respondent. The principles of law laid down by the Supreme Court and this
court in these cases are applicable to the facts of this case. I am
respectfully bound by the said judgments.

297\. In my view the order dated 13th April, 2016 passed by the CCI even
otherwise cannot be given effect in view of the order dated 29 th February,
2016 passed by the Delhi High Court and is even otherwise an interim order and
did not determine the rights of the parties and would not operate as res-
judicata or issue estopple in the matter. Supreme Court in case of Amrish
Tewari (supra) has held that interim orders were passed before any order or
statements had been recorded and were passed only on the basis of the
contentions of the parties. It is held that the interim orders even though
they may have been confirmed by the higher Courts, never bind and do not
prevent passing of contrary order at the stage of final hearing. In my view,
the principles laid down by the Supreme Court in the said case clearly applies
to the facts of this case. The reliance placed by the learned senior counsel
for the petitioner on various interim orders thus passed by the CCI were
neither binding on the arbitral tribunal nor are binding on this court as the
same were subject to the final orders as may be passed by the CCI.

298\. The Supreme Court in case of State of Assam v/s. Barak Upatyaka D.U.
Karmachari Sanstha, (supra) has held that an interim order which does not
finally and conclusively decide an issue cannot be  ::: Uploaded on -
23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:30 ::: kvm  -: 142 :-
CARBP-737-19.doc a precedent. Any reasons assigned in support of such non-
final interim order containing prima facie findings, are only tentative. Any
interim directions issued on the basis of such prima facie findings are
temporary arrangements to preserve the status quo till the matter is finally
decided, to ensure that the matter does not become either infructuous or a
fait accompli before the final hearing. The principles laid down by the
Supreme Court in the said judgment clearly applies to the facts of this case.
I am respectfully bound by the principles laid down in the said judgment.
Neither the arbitral tribunal nor this court thus can take any cognizance of
the interim order passed by the CCI being a prima facie view taken and being
not conclusive and final.

299\. The Division Bench of this court in case of Vision Millenium Exports
Private Limited (supra) has held that the report of the Director General, CCI
submitted after enquiry under section 27 of the Competition Act is preliminary
fact finding enquiry and is not by way of quasi judicial order. In the said
fact finding enquiry, there is no opportunity given to the concerned parties
to make submission, but only statements are recorded and materials considered.
No evidentiary value could be attached to the said report of the Director
General of CCI. In my view, the reliance placed by the learned senior counsel
for the petitioner on the preliminary report submitted by the Director General
under section 26 of the Competition Act before the CCI cannot be relied upon
as a piece of evidence before the arbitral tribunal or this Court.

300\. A perusal of the ground (A) raised by the petitioner in the said
arbitration petition clearly indicates that the petitioner itself has admitted
that the issue regarding the validity of the 2015 SLA under  ::: Uploaded on -
23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:30 ::: kvm  -: 143 :-
CARBP-737-19.doc the Competition Act was not capable of being adjudicated upon
by the arbitral tribunal and was to be exclusively adjudicated upon by the
CCI. Similar ground is also raised by the petitioner in ground (F) of the
petition. In my view, the petitioner thus cannot be allowed to now urge across
the bar that the arbitral tribunal ought to have rendered decision/conclusion
of those issues framed under paragraphs 3(A) to 3(F). This submission made by
the learned senior counsel for the petitioner across the bar is contrary to
the grounds raised by the petitioner itself in the arbitration petition.

301\. The Supreme Court in case of Harsha Constructions (supra) has held that
if a non-arbitrable dispute is referred to an arbitrator and even if an issue
is framed by the arbitrator in relation to such a dispute, there cannot be a
presumption or a conclusion to the effect that the parties had agreed to refer
the issue to the arbitrator. In that matter, the respondent had raised an
objection relating to the arbitrability of the issue before the arbitrator and
yet the arbitrator has rendered his decision on the said "excepted" dispute.
It is held by the Supreme Court that the arbitrator could not have decided the
said "excepted" dispute. It was not open to the arbitrator to decide the
issues which were not arbitrable and the award, so far as it relates to
disputes relating to the arbitrability is bad in law and is accordingly
quashed.

302\. A perusal of the impugned award clearly indicates that the arbitral
tribunal has not rendered any finding on the non-arbitrable issue i.e. issue
nos. 3(A) to 3(F). It is not the case of the arbitral tribunal deciding those
issues but is clear case of the arbitral tribunal not deciding those issues in
view of those issues being capable of being adjudicated upon only by the CCI.
No grievance thus can be made by  ::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded
on - 24/07/2020 03:43:30 ::: kvm  -: 144 :- CARBP-737-19.doc the petitioner
about this part of the arbitral award. The principles of law laid down by the
Supreme Court in case of Harsha Constructions (supra) clearly applies to the
facts of this case. I am respectfully bound by the said judgment. This court
in case of Union of India v/s. Sarthi Enterprises, (supra) would also assist
the case of the respondent. In my view, Mr.Chagla, learned senior counsel for
the respondent is right in his submission that the decision of the arbitral
tribunal in not expressing any opinion on the issue nos. 2 and 3 on the ground
that the proceedings filed by the petitioner challenging the validity of the
2015 SLA are pending before the CCI and that those issues could be decided by
the CCI exclusively on its own merits, would not operate as res- judicata
against the petitioner in those proceedings pending before the CCI.

303\. If the arbitral tribunal would have rejected the claim of the respondent
on the ground that those claims were not arbitrable, the respondent would be
without any remedy in law and would not have any forum to approach for
recovery of its contractual dues. The respondent is not required to wait till
the outcome of the CCI proceedings and if would have waited, the claim of the
respondent would have become barred by law of limitation. In my view,
Mr.Chagla, Mr.Dwarkadas and Mr. Samdhani, learned senior counsels for the
respondent are right in their submission that amongst several remedies
available to the petitioner, the petitioner would be able to invoke the
provisions of section 53N of the Competition Act and can seek refund of the
amount paid under the award as compensation to the respondent if the CCI holds
the said 2015 SLA as void. Since the petitioner is not rendered without any
remedy even if payment of the awarded amount by the arbitral tribunal to the
respondent is made and  ::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on -
24/07/2020 03:43:30 ::: kvm  -: 145 :- CARBP-737-19.doc thus the principles of
res-judicata cannot stand in this situation. The arbitral tribunal has
determined all the issues which could be exclusively determined only by the
arbitral tribunal and within its jurisdiction and rightly did not determine
the issues under the Competition Act and has kept all those issues and rights
and remedies available to the petitioner under the Competition Act open. The
judgment of Supreme Court in case of Piloo Dhuinshaw Sidhwa (supra) which
deals with the right of the party to claim compensation in case of breach of
the contract under section 70 of the Contract Act applies to the fats of this
case.

304\. In my view, there is no substance in the submission of the learned
senior counsel for the petitioner that the parties to the arbitral proceedings
also could have sought an indefinite extension of time under section 29A of
the Arbitration Act during the pendency of the complaint filed by the Central
Government and the information filed by the petitioner before the CCI. The
legislative intent for inserting section 29A clearly mandates that the
arbitral proceedings have to be disposed of expeditiously and if for any
reason set out in the said provision the proceedings are not disposed of
within the time prescribed, the application for extension of time can be made
under section 29A(4). The court in that event is empowered to grant further
extension of time to complete the arbitral proceedings subject to various
safeguards provided therein.

305\. The court is also empowered to order the reduction of fees of the
arbitrator(s) in the event of the court finding that the proceedings have been
delayed for the reasons attributable to the arbitral tribunal by not by not
exceeding five percent for each month of such delay. The court  ::: Uploaded
on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:30 ::: kvm  -: 146 :-
CARBP-737-19.doc has power to substitute one or all of the arbitrators in such
a situation and to terminate the mandate of the arbitrators. The submission of
the learned senior counsel that the parties could have applied for an
indefinite extension of time by invoking the provisions of section 29A(4) of
the Arbitration Act is totally untenable in the teeth of the said provision
and contrary to the legislative intent for inserting section 29A for the
purpose of conclusion of arbitral proceedings expeditiously and within the
time prescribed.

306\. In my view, Mr.Chagla, learned senior counsel for the respondent has
rightly placed reliance on the judgment of Delhi High Court in case of Shree
Tirupathi Udyog (supra) in support of the submission that in this case, the
petitioner did not file any proceedings either under section 9 or section 17
of the Arbitration Act seeking stay of the arbitral proceedings either in
court or before the arbitral tribunal as the case may be. A perusal of section
14 of the Arbitration Act clearly provides for the circumstances in which the
mandate of the arbitrator shall stand terminated. Section 25 of the Act
provides as to when the arbitral tribunal shall terminate the proceedings.
Section 32 of the Act also provides as to when the arbitral proceedings shall
be terminated by the arbitral tribunal. None of the circumstances set out in
the aforesaid three provisions were applicable to the facts of this case nor
it was the case of the petitioner that the arbitral tribunal could have
terminated the proceedings under any of those provisions.

307\. Insofar as the submission of the learned senior counsel for the
petitioner that the proceedings could have been suspended by the arbitral
tribunal is concerned, a perusal of 2 nd proviso of section 38(2) of the
Arbitration Act clearly indicates the legislative intent that the  :::
Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:30 ::: kvm  -:
147 :- CARBP-737-19.doc arbitral tribunal may suspend or terminate the
arbitral proceedings if one party does not pay the share of deposit of the
other party with the arbitral tribunal in respect of the claim or the counter
claim as the case may be. It is clear that only in the specific circumstances
set out under the provisions of the said Act, the legislature wanted to
empower the arbitral tribunal to terminate the proceedings or to suspend the
proceedings. The powers are specifically prescribed under one of those
provisions set out aforesaid.

308\. In view of the limited judicial intervention prescribed under section 5
of the Arbitration Act, the arbitral tribunal or this Court could not have
either terminate or suspend the arbitral proceedings in view of there being no
such power available or prescribed under the Arbitration Act for either
termination of the arbitral proceedings or for suspension thereof in view of
the pendency of the complaint filed by the Central Government or the
information filed by the petitioner before the CCI.

309\. Insofar as the submission of the learned senior counsel for the
petitioner that the arbitral tribunal did not have jurisdiction to decide the
claim of the respondent on the ground that the issue of patentability of the
technology of the respondent is pending adjudication before the Delhi High
Court is concerned, it is not in dispute that the patent of the respondent
which is subject matter of the said suit before the Delhi High Court is not
revoked in the said proceedings or in any of the proceedings so far and is
valid and enforceable. The arbitral tribunal thus even otherwise could not
have assumed the alleged invalidity of the patent of the respondent and could
not have refused to entertain the monetary claim made by the respondent on
that ground. The petitioner cannot be allowed to challenge the arbitral award
on the basis of the  ::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on -
24/07/2020 03:43:30 ::: kvm  -: 148 :- CARBP-737-19.doc alleged assumed
invalidity of the patents.

310\. A perusal of the statement of defence filed by the petitioner before the
arbitral tribunal indicates that the petitioner has raised a simplicitor plea
that the said 2015 SLA is forbidden by Section 3(j) of the Patents Act and
thus was void under Section 23 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872. In my view,
section 3(j) of the Patents Act does not prescribe any prohibition in respect
of any type of agreement or does not empower to declare any provision of
agreement as void. A perusal of the statement of claim filed by the respondent
before the arbitral tribunal clearly indicates that the respondent had not
filed the statement of claim for recovery of any patent fees but had only
filed the claim for recovery of the contractual payment of the trait fees and
for enforcement of contractual obligation under 2015 SLA on the part of the
petitioner. A perusal of the findings rendered by the arbitral tribunal in
paragraphs 159 and 161 of the impugned award clearly indicates that it has
been rightly recorded by the arbitral tribunal that the claims made by the
respondent were not based on the patent right. The petitioner has not even
challenged the said finding recorded in paragraph 161 of the arbitral award in
this petition.

311\. Insofar as the submission of the learned senior counsel for the
petitioner that the said 2015 SLA is contrary to section 26 read with section
92 of the PPVFR Act is concerned, a perusal of the impugned award clearly
indicates that the arbitral tribunal has rendered a finding of fact that the
petitioner did not possess any certificate of registration under section 24 of
the said PPVFR Act prior to the date of termination of the said 2015 SLA which
is a mandatory precondition for invoking section 26 of the said Act. In my
view, since the provision of the said  ::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 :::
Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:30 ::: kvm  -: 149 :- CARBP-737-19.doc PPVFR
Act is not triggered, the submission of the learned senior counsel for the
petitioner is academic and thus deserves to be rejected on that ground itself.

312\. Be that as it may, it is an undisputed position that the petitioner is a
commercial breeder with revenue over Rs.1,000 crores and is not a farmer.
Learned senior counsel for the petitioner also could not dispute before this
court that the entire amount claimed by the respondent before the arbitral
tribunal for recovery of trait fees which amount was part of the maximum sales
price was already recovered by the petitioner from the farmers who were sold
the seeds and other items. The finding rendered by the arbitral tribunal on
this issue in paragraph 212 of the arbitral award being not perverse and not
showing any patent illegality, cannot be interferred with by this court.
Similar findings rendered by the arbitral tribunal in paragraphs 204, 210,
211, 213 and 215 also being not perverse and do not disclose any patent
illegality, cannot be interfered with by this court.

313\. A perusal of the record further indicates that the said suit filed by
the respondent against the petitioner before Delhi High Court alleging
infringement of the patents right of the respondent was initially dismissed by
the Delhi High Court. The said judgment of the Delhi High Court was set aside
by the Division Bench of the Delhi High Court. Supreme Court by a judgment has
set aside the order passed by the Division Bench of the Delhi High Court and
restored the judgment delivered by the Delhi High Court on 28 th March, 2017
and remanded the said suit back to the learned Single Judge of the Delhi High
Court. The said suit is still pending before the Delhi High Court. A perusal
of the record further indicates that the order passed by the Delhi High  :::
Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:30 ::: kvm  -:
150 :- CARBP-737-19.doc Court which was subject matter of the civil appeal
before the Supreme Court and also the order passed by the Supreme Court was
for a period post termination of 2015 SLA when the Central Price Control
regime under the Cotton Seeds (Price Control) Order, 2015 was in place. The
Central Government was empowered to and had fixed the trait value under the
said provision. The said order would apply only to financial year 2016-17.

314\. Insofar as the submission of the learned senior counsel for the
petitioner that the arbitral tribunal ought to have given further hearing to
the petitioner to make submissions on the order dated 14th January, 2019
passed by the Supreme Court is concerned, a perusal of the minutes of the
meeting dated 16th January, 2019 issued by the arbitral tribunal would clearly
indicate that the arguments advanced by the parties were already concluded
between the parties before the arbitral tribunal. The arbitral tribunal thus
rightly did not fix the matter again for hearing. Be that as it may, no
prejudice of any nature is caused to the petitioner on that ground. The
alleged concession made by the learned senior counsel on behalf of the
respondent before the Supreme Court will have to be read in context and was
specifically qualified by the phrase "at this stage" which would mean at
'interim stage' only. The said concession has to be read in the context of the
post termination period when the CSPCO was in force and was being observed by
the parties. The petitioner had sold 7,39,818 seeds packets containing the
technology of the respondent during the period 1 st April, 2015 to 14th
November, 2015 and received an aggregate amount of Rs.740 crores approximately
from the farmers/consumers. The arbitral tribunal however has allowed only the
claim of Rs.117.46 crores with interest which the petitioner had contractually
agreed to pay to the  ::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on -
24/07/2020 03:43:30 ::: kvm  -: 151 :- CARBP-737-19.doc respondent under the
said 2015 SLA. In my view, Mr.Chagla, learned senior counsel for the
respondent is right in his submission the retention of the unjust and
undisputed amount was rightly not permitted by the arbitral tribunal.

315\. In my view, the judgment of Delhi High Court in case of Jindal Steel &
Power Ltd. (supra) would not assist the case of the petitioner on the ground
that the MOU which was challenged before the Delhi High Court in the writ
petition was executed before the Competition Act came into force. The said
party had also filed a parallel proceedings before the CCI after the said
Competition Act came into force for the same relief. Delhi High Court
accordingly adjourned the writ proceedings awaiting the decision of the CCI on
the basis that the writ petitioner could achieve full relief before the CCI.
It is clear that however in this case, the proceedings filed before the
arbitral tribunal and before the CCI have been filed by two opposite parties.
The CCI has no power to grant monetary relief in favour of the respondent
admittedly. In my view, there is no power granted to the arbitral tribunal to
adjourn the arbitral proceedings sine-die. The powers of Writ Court cannot be
compared with the powers of the arbitral tribunal. The judgment of Delhi High
Court in case of Jindal Steel & Power Ltd. (supra) thus is clearly
distinguishable in the facts of this case and would not assist the case of the
petitioner.

316\. In my view, the learned senior counsel for the respondent has rightly
distinguished the judgment of Supreme Court in case of Fuerst Day Lawson Ltd.
(supra) on the ground that the Supreme Court in that judgment had considered
the issue whether the appeal was maintainable under Section 50 of the
Arbitration Act by exercising  ::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on
- 24/07/2020 03:43:30 ::: kvm  -: 152 :- CARBP-737-19.doc powers under Letter
Patent or not. In that context, the Supreme Court had held that the provisions
of Arbitration Act being self-contained code, the Letters Patent appeal would
be excluded. Learned senior counsel for the respondent also rightly
distinguished the judgment of Supreme Court in case of Vimal Kishor Shah
(supra) on the ground that the said judgment dealt with the issue of the non-
arbitrable claims and not dealt with 'non-arbitrable defence'. In the said
judgment, the Supreme Court considered a clause of the Trust Deed and
interpreted that the said clause did not constitute an Arbitration Agreement
under Section 7 of the Arbitration Act. The said judgment is not at all
applicable to the facts of this case and would not assist the case of the
petitioner.

317\. Similarly, judgment of Supreme Court in case of A. Ayyaswamy (supra) is
also not applicable to the facts of this case. There were no serious
allegations of fraud made by the defendant in that matter against the
applicant in the application filed under Section 8 of the Arbitration Act and
had contended that such allegations of fraud could not be adjudicated by the
arbitral tribunal. In that context, the Supreme Court held that since the
claims raised by the claimant did not involve serious allegations of fraud,
those claims were arbitrable. In my view, the said judgment would not assist
the case of the petitioner but would assist the case of the respondent.

318\. In so far as the judgment of Supreme Court in case of Emaar MGF Land
Ltd. (supra) relied upon by the learned senior counsel for the petitioner is
concerned, a perusal of the said judgment clearly indicates that the Supreme
Court in the said judgment did not hold that the consumer disputes are non-
arbitrable. It is held by the Supreme  ::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 :::
Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:30 ::: kvm  -: 153 :- CARBP-737-19.doc Court
in the said judgment that Section 3(2) of the Consumer Protection Act does not
contain any definition but contain a general provision which clarifies that
"this part shall not affect any other law for the time being in force by
virtue of which certain disputes may not be submitted to arbitration." It is
held that complaints filed under Consumer Protection Act can also be proceeded
with despite there being an arbitration agreement between the parties.

319\. The judgment of this Court in case of Dinesh Jaya Poojary (supra) also
would not assist the case of the petitioner on the ground that the CCI before
whom a complaint filed by the Central Government and the information filed by
the petitioner is pending, is not empowered to adjudicate upon the contractual
claims made by the respondent for unpaid trait value. In my view, the disputes
raised by the respondent in the statement of claim before the arbitral
tribunal were exclusively within the four corners of the Arbitration Act and
did not seek any adjudication of the issues which are subject matter of the
said complaint and the information filed by the Central Government and the
petitioner respectively before the CCI.

320\. The judgment of this Court in case of Kingfisher Airlines Ltd. (supra)
is also distinguishable on the ground that the issue before this Court in the
said judgment was in respect of a claim for unpaid wages and whether such
unclaimed wages dispute was an industrial dispute or not, which could be
adjudicated upon under the provisions of the Industrial Dispute Act and thus
non-arbitrable or not.

321\. The judgment of Supreme Court in case of Competition Commission of India
(supra) relied upon by the learned senior counsel  ::: Uploaded on -
23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:30 ::: kvm  -: 154 :-
CARBP-737-19.doc for the petitioner is distinguishable in the facts of this
case. The Supreme Court in the said judgment had considered the jurisdiction
of two regulatory bodies i.e. TRAI under the Telecom Regulatory Authority of
India Act, 1997 and CCI under the provisions of Competition Act, both
containing exclusive jurisdiction provisions. The Supreme Court in the said
judgment held that Telecom Sector's primary jurisdiction was with the
TRAI/TDSAT. It is held that the claim of the respondent for breach of contract
and for recovery of unpaid licence fees does not involve any such
jurisdictional aspects of violation of Competition Act. In the said judgment,
the Supreme Court had considered that both the remedies under the TRAI and the
Competition Act were invoked by the same party. However, in this case, the
respondent has invoked the arbitration agreement for recovery of its monetary
claim whereas the petitioner has filed information before the CCI for various
other reliefs.

322\. I am not inclined to accept the submission of the learned senior counsel
for the petitioner that the respondent ought to have waited for indefinite
period till those proceedings before CCI were first disposed of and only
depending upon the outcome of those proceedings, the respondent could have
filed arbitral proceedings for recovery of monetary claim. In my view, the
contractual reliefs are within the domain of the arbitral tribunal and on the
other hand issue whether any violation of the provisions of Competition Act
including Section 3 thereof has been committed or not are within the exclusive
domain of CCI.

323\. The judgment of Supreme Court in case of Arun Kumar and Ors. (supra)
relied upon by the learned senior counsel for the petitioner  ::: Uploaded on
- 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:30 ::: kvm  -: 155 :-
CARBP-737-19.doc is distinguishable on the ground that the facts before the
Supreme Court in the said judgment were totally different and are not
applicable to the facts of this case at all. In my view, the issue of the
alleged invalidity of a contract or violation of Competition Act is not a
jurisdictional fact for the arbitral tribunal under Section 16 of the
Arbitration Act. Invalidity of a contract is an arbitrable dispute by itself
on merits and is not a jurisdictional fact. The question as to whether a
contract is void or not is not a jurisdictional fact.

324\. The judgment of Supreme Court in case of Competition Commissioner of
India (supra) relied upon by the learned senior counsel for the petitioner is
clearly distinguishable in the facts of this case on the ground that in that
judgment an order under Section 26(1) of the Competition Act was held akin to
a departmental function and did not affect the rights and liabilities of
parties. The interim order passed by the CCI under Section 33 of the
Competition Act cannot be converted into an order of a final nature by this
Court.

325\. Judgment of Supreme Court in case of Gangai Vinayagar Temple and Ors.
(supra) is distinguishable on the ground that the provisions considered by the
Supreme Court in the said judgment under Order XLI Rule 1 of the Code of Civil
Procedure does not apply to arbitration proceedings even though the issues
were framed by the arbitral tribunal. Arbitral tribunal has no jurisdiction to
decide every such issue itself if such issues were not within the jurisdiction
of arbitral tribunal or such issues could be decided by some other judicial
authority or Court. In this case, the arbitral tribunal has clearly held that
it did not express any opinion on issues nos. 3A to 3F though framed in view
of the pleadings filed by the parties in that regard.

::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:30 :::

kvm  -: 156 :- CARBP-737-19.doc

326\. The judgment of Supreme Court in case of Inder Singh Rekhi (supra)
relied upon by the learned senior counsel for the petitioner is not applicable
to the facts of this case. The Supreme Court in the said judgment had
considered the issue as to when the dispute arises for the purposes of filing
of an application under Section 20 of the Arbitration Act, 1940. The scheme of
Section 16 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 is totally different.
The said judgment thus would not assist the case of the petitioner.

327\. The judgment of Supreme Court in case of Booz Allen Hamilton Inc.
(supra) relied upon by the learned senior counsel for the petitioner also
would not assist the case of the petitioner on the ground that the Supreme
Court in the said judgment had considered a claim relating to a mortgage which
was an action in rem and accordingly had held that the said claim was not
arbitrable. However, in this case, the claim for recovery of the balance
amount of trait fees filed by the respondent was for enforcement of the
contractual rights and was an action in personam and not action in rem.
Paragraph 38 of the said judgment on the contrary holds that the disputes
relating to subordinate rights in personam arising from rights in rem have
always been considered to be arbitrable.

328\. In my view, judgment of this Court in case of Sundrabai Sitaram (supra)
is distinguishable on the ground that in the said judgment this Court had held
that the contract in question was void as it was prohibited by the Bombay
District Police Act. In this case, the CCI has not declared the said 2015 SLA
to be void so far. It is also not held by the CCI till date that the said 2015
SLA is forbidden by any  ::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on -
24/07/2020 03:43:30 ::: kvm  -: 157 :- CARBP-737-19.doc law. It is also not
the case of the petitioner before the said CCI that the said 2015 SLA is
forbidden by law.

329\. The judgment of this Court in case of M3NERGY SDN. BHD. (supra) relied
upon by the learned senior counsel for the petitioner has been already set
aside by a Division Bench of this Court in a judgment reported in 2019 SCC
OnLine Bom 2915. Learned senior counsel for the petitioner did not dispute
that the Special Leave Petition filed against the said judgment of Division
Bench of this Court has been already dismissed. Judgment of Delhi High Court
in case of Telefonaktiebola get LM Ericsson (supra) is also distinguishable on
the ground that in this case the respondent had applied for recovery of
monetary claim and such dispute did not involve enforcement of right or
obligation under the Patents Act. Delhi High Court in the said judgment has
clearly held that the Competition Act does not oust the jurisdiction of other
forum/body on other matters relegated to other forum/body even if the issues
are related. The view taken by the Delhi High Court about the jurisdiction of
CCI and the jurisdiction of other forum/body to deal with the issue of
enforcement of a right or other obligation under the Patents Act would support
the case of the respondent and not the petitioner.

330\. In my view, Mr. Chagla, learned senior counsel for the respondent is
right in his submission that the provisions of the Arbitration and
Conciliation Act, 1996 and the Competition Act must be read in their
respective context and both the schemes must be given effect to accordingly. A
Division Bench of Delhi High Court while hearing the appeal against the order
of a Single Judge in case of Telefonaktiebola get LM Ericsson (supra) in LPA
No. 246 of 2016 has  ::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on -
24/07/2020 03:43:30 ::: kvm  -: 158 :- CARBP-737-19.doc directed that no final
report shall be filed by the Director General appointed under the provisions
of Competition Act by the CCI till the next date of hearing.

331\. Judgment of Supreme Court in case of Murlidhar Aggarwal (supra) is
distinguishable on the ground that in this case the arbitral tribunal has
clearly held that the conditions to trigger the PPVFR Act. did not arise in
the relevant period. The said finding rendered by the arbitral tribunal has
not been challenged by the petitioner in the arbitration petition. Be that as
it may, the said PPVFR Act is for the benefit of farmers. The 2015 SLA was
entered into between the technology provider and a commercial seed company. No
benefit of frarmer was waived in this case. The learned senior counsel for the
petitioner could not dispute that the petitioner was not even registered under
the provisions of the said PPVFR Act. Thus, the question of the petitioner
receiving no benefit under the said Act did not arise. The judgment of Supreme
Court in case of Vishnu Pratap Sugar Works (supra) relied upon by the learned
senior counsel for the petitioner is also distinguishable on the ground that
the petitioner has not challenged the findings of the arbitral tribunal on
waiver in arbitration petition.

332\. In so far as the reliance placed on Section 2(4) of the Contract Act and
Section 10 of the Specific Relief Act, 1963 by the learned senior counsel for
the petitioner in support of the submission that the claims made by the
respondent for recovery of the amount was depending upon the validity and
enforceability of the said 2015 SLA is concerned, in my view there is no merit
in this submission. CCI was admittedly not empowered to consider and grant any
monetary claim  ::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020
03:43:30 ::: kvm  -: 159 :- CARBP-737-19.doc filed for enforcement of
contractual dues. In so far as the judgment of Supreme Court in case of
Vallabhdas (supra) relied upon by the Mr. Khambata, learned senior counsel for
the petitioner in his rejoinder arguments is concerned, learned senior counsel
could not demonstrate even before this Court as to how there was no jural
relationship between the petitioner and the respondent which has not been
allegedly considered by the arbitral tribunal before granting any relief in
favour of the respondent.

333\. The judgment of Supreme Court in case of Prabhakaran and Ors. (supra)
relied upon by the learned senior counsel for the petitioner is
distinguishable on the ground that the facts before the Supreme Court in the
said judgment were totally different. No such plea of lack of jural
relationship between the parties was raised by the petitioner before the
arbitral tribunal nor was demonstrated by the petitioner either before the
arbitral tribunal even before this Court. The learned senior counsel could not
dispute the existence of the arbitration agreement, existence of the said 2015
SLA between the parties and the fact that under the same agreement substantial
amount of the payment of trait fees was already paid by the petitioner to the
respondent. The petitioner itself had made counter claim under the same
agreement. In my view, there is thus no substance in the submission of the
learned senior counsel for the petitioner that there was no jural relationship
between the petitioner and the respondent.

334\. The judgment of Supreme Court in case of State of Goa v/s. Praveen
Enterprises (supra) relied upon by the learned senior counsel for the
petitioner would not assist the case of the petitioner. The issue before the
Supreme Court in that judgment was whether in arbitration  ::: Uploaded on -
23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:30 ::: kvm  -: 160 :-
CARBP-737-19.doc agreement referred to specific disputes, both i.e. claimant
and the respondent were entitled to make any claims or counter-claims and
rather also entitled to add or amend claims and counter-claims or not. In my
view, the said judgment would not assist the case of the petitioner. The
arbitral tribunal in this case has not only referred to the statement of claim
but also statement of defence/written statement and also the plea raised in
the application filed by the petitioner under Section 16 of the Arbitration
Act and has rightly taken a view that no opinion was expressed on issues nos.
3A and 3F.

335\. In my view, the arbitral tribunal not expressing any opinion on those
issue on the ground that the same would be exclusively within the domain of
the CCI being not perverse and not showing any patent illegality, no
interference under Section 34 of the Arbitration Act is warranted with such
decision of the arbitral tribunal under Section 34(2)(a) of the Arbitration
Act or any other ground under Section 34 of the Act.

336\. In so far as the reliance placed by the learned senior counsel for the
petitioner on the judgment of Supreme Court in case of Man Roland
Druckimachinen AG (supra) in support of the submission that the issue of
jurisdiction can be taken away by way of demurrer or at the time of trial is
concerned, a perusal of the record clearly indicates that the arbitral
tribunal in this case has not decided the issue of jurisdiction under Section
16 of the Arbitration Act immediately on demurrer but had postponed the said
issue and decided the same finally in the impugned award on the basis of the
averments made in the statement of claim and the written statement as well as
in application under Section 16 of the Arbitration Act. Learned senior counsel
could not distinguish  ::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on -
24/07/2020 03:43:30 ::: kvm  -: 161 :- CARBP-737-19.doc the judgment of
Supreme Court in case of Indian Farmers Fertiziler Cooperative Limited
(supra). The principles laid down by the Supreme Court in the said judgment
applies to the facts of this case.

337\. In so far as the reliance placed by the learned senior counsel for the
petitioner on the judgment of Supreme Court in case of Garware Wall Ropes Ltd.
(supra) is concerned, Supreme Court in the said judgment has held that if the
documents which requires payment of stamp duty compulsorily is not stamped,
such document comprising of arbitral agreement would not be enforceable in
law. In my view, this judgment of the Supreme Court would not apply to the
facts of this case at all. The arbitral tribunal has not decided any issue
which were exclusively within the domain of the CCI.

338\. In so far as the reliance placed by the learned senior counsel on
Section 3(2) and Section 27 of the Competition Act is concerned, there is no
dispute that in appropriate cases, the CCI has power to modify the agreement
and that under Section 3(2) of the Competition Act, an agreement would be void
falling under the said provisions unless saved by modification. It is however
not in dispute that so far the said 2015 SLA has not been declared as void
under Section 3(2) or under any other provisions of the said Competition Act
nor has been modified till date.

339\. Learned senior counsel for the petitioner could not distinguish the
principles of law laid down by the Court of Appeal (Civil Division) in case of
David John Passmore (supra). The principles laid down by the Court of Appeal
in the said judgment would assist the case of the respondent. Learned senior
counsel also could not distinguish the  ::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 :::
Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:30 ::: kvm  -: 162 :- CARBP-737-19.doc
judgment of Supreme Court in case of Mahindra and Mahindra Limited (supra)
relied upon by the learned senior counsel for the respondent.

340\. In so far as the judgment of Supreme Court in case of Tarsem Singh
(supra) relied upon by the learned senior counsel for the petitioner is
concerned, Supreme Court in the said judgment has considered the Section 65 of
the Contract Act and held that Section 65 of the Contract Act is based on
equitable doctrine which provides for the restitution of any benefit received
under a void agreement or contract and therefore mandates that any "person"
which obviously would include a party to the agreement, who has received any
advantage under an agreement which is discovered to be void or not a contract
which becomes void, has to restore such advantage or to pay compensation for
it, to the person from whom he received that advantage or benefit. It is held
that the words "discovered to be void" comprehend a situation in which the
parties were suffering from a mistake of fact from the very beginning but had
not realized, at the time of entering into the agreement or signing of the
document, that they were suffering from any such mistake and had, acted
bonafide on such agreement.

341\. It is held by the Supreme Court that the agreement in such a case would
be void from its inception though discovered to be so at a much later stage.
It is not the case of the petitioner that it was suffering from a mistake of
fact from the very beginning and realized such mistake of fact at the later
stage. Learned senior counsel could not distinguish the judgment of Supreme
Court in case of Piloo Dhuinshaw Sidhwa (supra). Supreme Court in the said
judgment has considered the issue  ::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded
on - 24/07/2020 03:43:30 ::: kvm  -: 163 :- CARBP-737-19.doc whether the party
who has carried out the work and when no terms and conditions of contract were
arrived at was entitled to recover the amount on the basis of quantum meruit.

342\. The judgment of Supreme Court in case of Hansraj Gupta & Co. (supra) has
held that Section 70 of the Contract Act enables the person who actually
supplies goods or renders some services, not intending to do so gratuitously,
to claim compensation from the person who enjoys the benefit of supply made or
services rendered. It is a liability which arises on equitable ground even
though express agreement on a contract may not be proved. In my view, the
principles laid down by the Supreme Court in the said judgment would squarely
apply to the facts of this case. The petitioner had availed of various
benefits under the said 2015 SLA and had recovered the amount from its
customers i.e. farmers for supply of seeds. The arbitral tribunal rightly
rejected the counter claims made by the petitioner for refund of various
amounts. Mr. Khambata, learned senior counsel for the petitioner could not
distinguish the said judgment in case of Hansraj Gupta & Co. (supra).

343\. In so far as the judgment of this Court in case of Maharashtra State
Electricity Board (supra) relied upon by the learned senior counsel for the
petitioner in support of the submission that the Court has ample power under
Section 9 of the Arbitration Act to suspend the arbitral proceedings is
concerned, the said judgment would not assist the case of the petitioner. The
order passed by the arbitral tribunal under Section 17 of the Arbitration Act
was not complied with by the respondent in the arbitral proceedings before the
arbitral tribunal. In paragraph 50 of the said judgment, it is held by this
Court that the  ::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020
03:43:30 ::: kvm  -: 164 :- CARBP-737-19.doc arbitral tribunal does not have
the power to suspend the arbitral proceedings before it as a step in add of an
execution of an interim order passed by the arbitral tribunal. In view of the
fact that the CCI had no jurisdiction to grant any monetary claim in favour of
the respondent, neither the arbitral tribunal nor this Court under Sections 9
or 17 respectively could suspend the proceedings.

344\. Under Section 17(2) of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 and
more particularly in view of the amendment to the said provisions inserted
w.e.f. 23rd October, 2015, the orders passed by the arbitral tribunal under
Section 17 are enforceable as a decree of the Court. In my view, the arbitral
tribunal thus cannot exercise any power to suspend the arbitral proceedings
for non-compliance of any order passed by it under Section 17. The party who
has succeeded before the arbitral tribunal in the application under Section 17
for seeking interim measures can always apply for the enforcement of the said
order passed under Section 17 if the same has attained the finality. In my
view, Mr. Chagla, learned senior counsel for the respondent right in his
submission that arbitral tribunal cannot exercise powers to suspend the
proceedings for non-compliance of the order passed under Section 17.

345\. Delhi High Court in case of Shree Tirupathi Udyog (supra) has held that
a reading of Section 17 of the Arbitration Act will clearly show that the
interim measures provided for in Section 17 of the Act relates to the
protection of the property or the amount in dispute in the arbitration
proceedings and not to the arbitration proceedings itself. There is no
provision in the Arbitration Act which provides for the stay of the
arbitration proceedings upon its commencement. Delhi High Court in the said
judgment has held that the sole arbitrator was right in  ::: Uploaded on -
23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:30 ::: kvm  -: 165 :-
CARBP-737-19.doc dismissing the application filed by the appellant seeking
stay of the arbitral proceedings till the final disposal of the arbitral
proceedings between the respondent and the another party was pending before
another arbitrator and the criminal investigation that had been lodged against
the petitioner was disposed off. In my view, the principles laid down by the
Delhi High Court in the said judgment which has considered the amendment to
Section 17 inserted by Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) Act, 2015
applies to the facts of this case. I am in respectful agreement with the view
expressed by the Delhi High Court in the said judgment in case of Shree
Tirupathi Udyog (supra).

346\. In so far as the issue raised by the learned senior counsel for the
petitioner that the claims made by the respondent before the arbitral tribunal
was based on the patent rights of the respondent or that such facts are
allegedly admitted by the respondent in the pleading filed before the arbitral
tribunal is concerned, there is no merit in this submission of the learned
senior counsel. A perusal of the pleadings filed by the respondent before the
arbitral tribunal clearly indicates that the respondent had not filed a
monetary claim for enforcement of any patent rights. The respondent has
already filed a separate proceedings before Delhi High Court which are
pending. Learned senior counsel urged across the bar at the stage of rejoinder
that the petitioner did not apply for declaration of 2015 SLA as void before
the CCI but had applied for modification of the said agreement. In my view,
the submission made by the learned senior counsel on behalf of the petitioner
across the bar as well as before the arbitral tribunal and his client before
the CCI are inconsistent, contradictory and are self- destructive.

::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:30 :::

kvm  -: 166 :- CARBP-737-19.doc

347\. In my view, the judgment of Supreme Court in case of Mahavir J. Patil
(supra) relied upon by the learned senior counsel for the petitioner is
clearly distinguishable in the facts of this case. Supreme Court in the said
judgment had considered Section 12 of the Resettlement Act, 1976 and held that
it was the clear legislative intent as Section 12 of the Resettlement Act
clearly stipulated that any transfer by way of sale, partition, etc after the
date of notification under Section 11 would be void. It is held that where the
statue itself is against a transfer, it is the statue which will pre-dominate
vis-a-vis the other consideration. In my view, the said judgment would not
apply to the facts of this case even remotedly.

348\. The judgment of Supreme Court in case of Ram Singh and Ors. (supra) is
distinguishable on the ground that the claim of the plaintiff in that case
itself pertained to "shamlet de" land. The Supreme Court in the said judgment
came to the conclusion that the plaintiff had avoided to seek a declaration
that the suit land was not "shamlet de" and by clever drafting had sought to
confer jurisdiction on the Civil Court. In this case, the claim of the
respondent was for enforcement of the contractual obligation and for recovery
of the balance amount of trait fees.

349\. A perusal of the award clearly indicates that the arbitral tribunal has
rightly allowed the monetary claims made by the respondent after considering
the pleadings, evidence, oral and written arguments advanced by the parties.
In so far as the merit of the claim is concerned, the petitioner did not raise
any dispute on the quantification nor agitated any submission across the bar
while arguing the arbitration petition at length before this Court. None of
the findings rendered by  ::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on -
24/07/2020 03:43:30 ::: kvm  -: 167 :- CARBP-737-19.doc the arbitral tribunal
shows any perversity or any patent illegality in the impugned award. Mr.
Chagla, learned senior counsel for the respondent rightly placed reliance on
the judgment of Supreme Court in case of Ssangyong Engineering & Construction
Co. Ltd. (supra), in case of McDermott International Inc (supra) in support of
his submission that the scope of challenge of an arbitral award under Section
34 of the Arbitration Act is limited. The principles of law laid down by the
Supreme Court in case of Ssangyong Engineering & Construction Co. Ltd. (supra)
and in case of McDermott International Inc (supra) applies to the facts of
this case. I am respectfully bound by the said judgments. In my view, no case
is thus made out by the petitioner for intervention with the impugned award in
Commercial Arbitration Petition No. 737 of 2019 and thus the said petition
deserves to be dismissed.

REASONS AND CONCLUSIONS IN COMMERCIAL ARBITRATION PETITION NO. 738 OF 2019 :-

350\. The facts and the legal submissions made by the parties in this0 case
are identical to the facts to the facts and submission in Commercial
Arbitration Petition No. 737 of 2019. Mr. Rohan Kadam, learned counsel for the
petitioner adopted all the submissions made by Mr.Khambata, learned senior
counsel for the petitioner in Commercial Arbitration Petition No. 737 of 2019
such submissions are already dealt with by this Court at length in the earlier
paragraphs of this judgment. The reasons recorded by this Court while
dismissing the Commercial Arbitration Petition No. 737 of 2019 would apply to
the Commercial Arbitration Petition No. 738 of 2019.

351\. Mr. Dwarkadas, learned senior counsel for the respondent  ::: Uploaded
on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:30 ::: kvm  -: 168 :-
CARBP-737-19.doc adopted the submissions made by Mr. Chagla, learned senior
counsel for the respondent in Commercial Arbitration Petition No. 737 o 2019
and made additional submissions. In my view, Mr. Dwarkadas, learned senior
counsel for the respondent is right in his submissions that the petitioner
already having collected the trait value from the farmers which was claimed by
the respondent and had been retained by the petitioner was estopped from
defending the monetary claim made by the respondent. Under Section 65 of the
Contract Act, the petitioner having recovered entire trait value from the
farmers could not be allowed to retain such benefits under the said 2015 SLA
and was bound to restore it by making payment to the respondent.

352\. Learned senior counsel rightly placed reliance on Section 53N of the
Competition Act in support of his submission that even if the said 2015 SLA is
subsequently held to be void, the petitioner would have contingent right of
seeking remedy under the provisions of the Competition Act. In the event of
the said CCI deciding in favour of the respondent and if the respondent is
denied its claim at this stage, it shall have no remedy under the provisions
of the Competition Act or the Contract Act. In view of the fact that CCI has
not declared the said 2015 SLA as void or anti-competitive or that the
respondent had abused its dominant position, the said 2015 SLA was presumed to
be valid.

353\. Learned senior counsel for the petitioner could not dispute that the
petitioner had filed an interim application before CCI under Section 33 of the
Competition Act inter-alia praying for an injunction against the respondent
not to terminate the said 2015 SLA and had infact applied for enforcement of
the said 2015 SLA. The petitioner did not  ::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 :::
Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:30 ::: kvm  -: 169 :- CARBP-737-19.doc
challenge the validity of the said 2015 SLA as void and prayed that the
respondent shall not terminate the said 2015 SLA. Learned counsel for the
petitioner could not dispute the correctness of this argument advanced by the
learned senior counsel for the respondent. The Commercial Arbitration Petition
No. 738 of 2019 thus deserves to be dismissed.

REASONS AND CONCLUSIONS IN COMMERCIAL ARBITRATION PETITION NO. 892 OF 2019 :-

354\. The facts and the legal submissions made by the parties in this case are
also identical to the facts and legal submissions in Commercial Arbitration
Petition No. 737 of 2019 except few additional legal submissions advanced by
Mr. Seervai, learned senior counsel for the petitioner which are being dealt
with in the later part of this judgment. The issue as to whether the said 2015
SLA was void under Sections 3 and 4 of the Competition Act or not or that
whether the said agreement contravened the provisions of the Competition Act
or not is pending before the CCI. In this case, the arbitral award is rendered
by the sole arbitrator.

355\. The claim made by the respondent was for an amount of Rs.13,20,79,537/-
towards trait value for sales between 1st April, 2015 and 31st October, 2015
and the sum of Rs.2,89,688/- for the period between 1st Novembers, 2015 and
14th November, 2015 under the said 2015 SLA. The arbitral tribunal has awarded
a sum of Rs.13,23,39,225/- in favour of the respondent with interest @ 18%
p.a. from the date of termination of contract till date of payment. The
arbitral tribunal had framed about 18 issues for determination. In that matter
also the petitioner had filed an application under Section 16 of  ::: Uploaded
on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:30 ::: kvm  -: 170 :-
CARBP-737-19.doc the Arbitration Act and had also filed counter claim before
the learned arbitrator.

356\. The learned arbitrator by an order dated 11th October, 2017 dismissed
the application filed by the petitioner under Section 16 by recording detail
reasons, however kept all the objections available to the parties during final
arguments open in accordance with the law. The learned arbitrator held that
the tribunal was duly vested with powers to decide the claims raised before it
by the claimant. He held that there was no pending proceeding as postulated in
Section 26(1) of the Competition Act, which would require the arbitral
tribunal not to exercise jurisdiction, assuming for the sake of argument that
CCI proceedings possess pre-eminence and exclusivity.

357\. The learned arbitrator relied upon the judgment of Supreme Court in case
of Competition Commission of India v/s. Steel Authority of India (supra) and
held that mere fact that an investigation has been ordered by the CCI does
not, ipso facto, inexorably lead to the conclusion that the CCI has formed
even a prima-facie opinion as to the existence of any contravention of the
provisions of the Competition Act, such an order is akin to a departmental
proceedings and thus, the only tenable assumption is that at this juncture no
definite conclusion or finality had been presently arrived at. The pendency of
the proceedings before CCI thus would not oust the jurisdiction of the
arbitral tribunal. It is rightly held that the issues before the CCI and
before the arbitral tribunal were substantially disparate and different,
operating in different fields and orbits. The purpose of two Acts are
different.

358\. Mr. Seervai, learned senior counsel for the petitioner strenuously  :::
Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:30 ::: kvm  -:
171 :- CARBP-737-19.doc urged that the finding of the arbitral tribunal that
there were no pending proceedings before the CCI was factually incorrect. In
my view, the said observation of the learned arbitrator cannot be read in
isolation. The Court has to read the entire award and to find out whether the
petitioner has made out any ground for setting aside the award under Section
34 of the Arbitration Act. An isolated observation in the award even if based
on a factual error which has ultimate no barring on the outcome of the
impugned award has to be ignored.

359\. The learned arbitrator in this case also has rightly held that he was
not considering or adjudicating any dispute relating to competition laws, all
disputes relating to rights in personam are amenable to arbitration while all
disputes relating to right in rem can only be adjudicated by Courts or
statutorily constituted Fora. In my view, the learned arbitrator rightly held
that the claims made by the respondent emanated from a commercial contract
between the two parties and concerning rights in personam and not in rem and
thus arbitrable. Section 61 does not prohibit an arbitral tribunal from
determining contractual disputes under an arbitration agreement. In my view,
learned arbitrator rightly held that in any event the disputes fell for
determination by the arbitral tribunal and the CCI were distinct and did not
overlap. The respondent had made its claims based on the contract in the
arbitral proceedings whereas the petitioner has alleged abuse of dominance
against the respondent before the CCI.

360\. In the operative part of the award, the learned arbitrator clarified
that in the event the CCI has views disparate or irreconcilable to that of the
arbitral tribunal, it will create a legal nodus which the appropriate forum
will have to unravel. In my view, this clarification and safeguard  :::
Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:30 ::: kvm  -:
172 :- CARBP-737-19.doc provided by the learned arbitrator would sufficiently
protect the interest of the petitioner. As already held by this Court in the
earlier paragraphs of this judgment that petitioner would have a right to
claim compensation under Section 53N of the Competition Act, in the event of
the petitioner succeeding in the proceedings before the CCI. In my view, the
learned tribunal was right in not dismissing the claim of the respondent and
not suspending the arbitral proceedings.

361\. In so far as the submission of the learned senior counsel for the
petitioner that the CCI having found prima-facie violation of the provisions
of Competition Act which led to an investigation by the Director of General is
concerned, in my view the said order passed by the CCI directing the Director
of General to make an investigation and to submit report under Section 26(1)
and (2) of the Competition Act is administrative in nature and would not
declare the said 2015 SLA as void or anti-competitive or that the respondent
had abused its alleged dominant position against the petitioner. The judgment
of Supreme Court in case of Dhulabhai (supra) would not assist the case of the
petitioner in view of the fact that the jurisdiction of the arbitral tribunal
to decide the monetary claim in absence of any declaration of the 2015 SLA as
void being not barred. Similarly, judgment of Supreme Court in case of Booz
Allen Hamilton Inc. (supra) pressed in service by the learned senior counsel
for the petitioner also would not assist the case of the petitioner.

362\. In so far as the judgment of this Court in case of Kingfisher Airlines
Ltd. (supra) relied upon by the learned senior counsel for the petitioner is
concerned, the said judgment would not assist the case of the petitioner.
There is no merit in the submission of the learned senior  ::: Uploaded on -
23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:30 ::: kvm  -: 173 :-
CARBP-737-19.doc counsel for the petitioner that the finding of the learned
arbitrator in paragraph 58 of the impugned award or in any other paragraph
shows any patent illegality or perversity. The powers of CCI under Sections
19(1), 27(d) or under various other provisions of the Competition Act are not
in dispute. At the same time, the fact that the CCI does not have power or
jurisdiction to award monetary claims as made by the respondent before the
arbitral tribunal for enforcement of the contractual obligation under 2015 SLA
also has to be kept in mind. In so far as the submission of the learned senior
counsel for the petitioner that the cause of action could not be bifurcated in
two parts is concerned, there is no dispute about this proposition of law
However, in this case, the arbitral tribunal has decided only the monetary
claims which were within its jurisdiction exclusively and has not decided any
issues which would fall exclusively within the domain of the CCI.

363\. In so far as the judgment of Supreme Court in case of Competition
Commission of India v/s. Bharti Airtel Ltd. (supra) relied upon by the learned
senior counsel for the petitioner is concerned, the said judgment is clearly
distinguishable in the facts of this case. The petitioner in this case had
already raised an issue of arbitrability even in the correspondence at the
stage of the respondent invoking arbitration agreement. It is not the case of
the petitioner that the learned arbitrator has decided the issues which would
exclusively fall within the domain of the CCI in the impugned award.

364\. In my view, Mr. Samdani, learned senior counsel for the respondent is
right in his submission that the monetary claim made by the respondent does
not fall within the jurisdiction of the CCI under  ::: Uploaded on -
23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:30 ::: kvm  -: 174 :-
CARBP-737-19.doc Section 61 of the Competition Act. The learned arbitrator has
rightly exercised its jurisdiction to entertain the monetary claims made by
the respondent and has not exceeded his jurisdiction. The learned arbitrator
has only directed the petitioner to pay the contractual dues of the respondent
arising out of the sale of seeds.

365\. Mr. Samdani, learned senior counsel for the respondent is right in his
submission that the Court has to read the entire award as a whole. An exercise
of cherry picking stray observations in one of the paragraphs cannot be
permitted for setting aside an arbitral award. Mr.Samdani, learned senior
counsel rightly invited my attention to various findings of fact rendered by
the learned arbitrator in the impugned award in support of the submission that
those findings not being perverse and not showing any patent illegality, no
interference of this Court is warranted under Section 34 of the Arbitration
Act with the impugned award.

366\. In my view, the powers vested in Civil Court under Section 10 of the
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 are not vested in the arbitral tribunal for stay
of the earlier proceedings. As already observed in the earlier paragraphs of
this judgment, stay of the arbitral proceedings is permissible only in a
limited circumstances set out in Section 38 of the Arbitration Act and not
otherwise. The legislative intent in this regard is absolutely clear and does
not admit any other interpretation. Mr.Samdani, is rightly distinguished the
judgment of Supreme Court in case of A. Ayyasamy (supra).

367\. The learned arbitrator has considered the pleadings, evidence, oral and
written arguments advanced by the parties and have rightly  ::: Uploaded on -
23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:30 ::: kvm  -: 175 :-
CARBP-737-19.doc allowed the monetary claims made by the respondent. The
learned arbitrator has interpreted various provisions of the 2015 SLA. The
interpretation of the learned arbitrator being a possible interpretation
cannot be substituted by another possible interpretation under Section 34 of
the Arbitration Act. This Court does not find any infirmity with the impugned
award nor any patent illegality in the impugned award. The petition is totally
devoid of merit and deserves to be dismissed.

368\. I therefore pass the following order :-

> (a) Commercial Arbitration Petition Nos. 737 of 2019, 738 of 2019 and 892 of
> 2019 are dismissed.

> (b) In view of the dismissal of the aforesaid commercial arbitration
> petitions, pending Notice of Motions do not survive and are according
> dismissed.

> (c) There shall be no order as to costs.

> (d) The parties to act on the authenticated copy of this judgment.

(R.D. DHANUKA, J.) At this stage, Mr. Khambata, learned senior counsel
appearing for the petitioner in Commercial Arbitration Petition No. 737 of
2019, Mr. Seervai, learned senior counsel appearing for the petitioner in
Commercial Arbitration Petition No.892 of 2019 and Mr. Kadam, learned counsel
appearing for the petitioner in Commercial Arbitration Petition No. 738 of
2019,  ::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on - 24/07/2020 03:43:30
::: kvm  -: 176 :- CARBP-737-19.doc jointly pray for continuation of the
interim protection granted by this Court on 16th April, 2019 clarified by
order dated 18th April, 2019 and modified by the order dated 3rd June, 2019.

Interim protection granted by this Court to continue for a period of six weeks
from today.

(R.D. DHANUKA, J.)  ::: Uploaded on - 23/07/2020 ::: Downloaded on -
24/07/2020 03:43:30 :::

