

Supreme Court of India

S.B.P. & Co vs Patel Engineering Ltd. & Anr on 26 October, 2005

Author: P.K.Balasubramanyan

Bench: Lahoti, R.C. (Cji), Agrawal, B.N. (J), Kumar, Arun (J), Mathur, G.P.
(J) Mathur, A.K. (J), Balasubramanyan P.K.I.(J) Thakker, C.K.(J)

    
    
               CASE NO.:
    Appeal (civil)  4168 of 2003
    
    PETITIONER:
    S.B.P. & CO.
    
    RESPONDENT:
    PATEL ENGINEERING LTD. & ANR
    
    DATE OF JUDGMENT: 26/10/2005
    
    BENCH:
    R.C.LAHOTI CJI & B.N.AGRAWAL & ARUN KUMAR & G.P.MATHUR & A.K.MATHUR &
    P.K.BALASUBRAMANYAN & C.K.THAKKER
    
    JUDGMENT:
    

JUDGMENT DELIVERED BY:

P.K.BALASUBRAMANYAN, J.

C.K.THAKKER,J.

WITH CIVIL APPEAL NOs.4169/2003, 4170-4173/2003, 4076/2004, 3777/2003 and
CIVIL APPEAL NOs.6562,6563-6564,6565-6566 of 2005 of 2005 arising out of
S.L.P. (CIVIL) NOs.3205/2004, 14033- 14034/2004, 21272-21273/2002, P.K.
Balasubramanyan, J.

Leave granted in SLP(C) Nos. 3205/2004, 14033-14034/2004, 21272-273/2002.

1\. What is the nature of the function of the Chief Justice or his designate
under Section 11 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 is the question
that is posed before us. The three judges bench decision in Konkan Rly.
Corporation Ltd. v. Mehul Construction Co. as approved by the Constitution
Bench in Konkan Railway Corporation Ltd. and Anr. v. Rani Construction Pvt.
Ltd. has taken the view that it is purely an administrative function, that it
is neither judicial nor quasi-judicial and the Chief Justice or his nominee
performing the function under Section 11(6) of the Act, cannot decide any
contentious issue between the parties. The correctness of the said view is
questioned in these appeals. Page 1799

2\. Arbitration in India was earlier governed by the Indian Arbitration Act,
1859 with limited application and the Second Schedule to the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908. Then came the Arbitration Act, 1940. Section 8 of that Act
conferred power on the Court to appoint an arbitrator on an application made
in that behalf. Section 20 conferred a wider jurisdiction on the Court for
directing the filing of the arbitration agreement and the appointment of an
arbitrator. Section 21 conferred a power on the Court in a pending suit, on
the agreement of parties, to refer the differences between them for
arbitration in terms of the Act. The Act provided for the filing of the award
in court, for the making of a motion by either of the parties to make the
award a rule of court, a right to have the award set aside on the grounds
specified in the Act and for an appeal against the decision on such a motion.
This Act was replaced by the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 which, by
virtue of Section 85, repealed the earlier enactment.

3\. The Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (hereinafter referred to as
'the Act') was intended to comprehensively cover international and commercial
arbitrations and conciliations as also domestic arbitrations and
conciliations. It envisages the making of an arbitral procedure which is fair,
efficient and capable of meeting the needs of the concerned arbitration and
for other matters set out in the objects and reasons for the Bill. The Act was
intended to be one to consolidate and amend the law relating to domestic
arbitrations, international commercial arbitrations and enforcement of foreign
arbitral awards, as also to define the law relating to conciliation and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. The preamble indicates that
since the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL) has
adopted a Model Law for International Commercial Arbitration and the General
Assembly of the United Nations has recommended that all countries give due
consideration to the Model Law and whereas the Model Law and the Rules make
significant contribution to the establishment of a unified legal framework for
a fair and efficient settlement of disputes arising in international
commercial relations and since it was expedient to make a law respecting
arbitration and conciliation taking into account the Model Law and the Rules,
the enactment was being brought forward. The Act replaces the procedure laid
down in Sections 8 and 20 of the Arbitration Act, 1940. Part I of the Act
deals with arbitration. It contains Sections 2 to 43. Part II deals with
enforcement of certain foreign awards, and Part III deals with conciliation
and Part IV contains supplementary provisions. In this case, we are not
concerned with Part III, and Parts II and IV have only incidental relevance.
We are concerned with the provisions in Part I dealing with arbitration.

4\. Section 7 of the Act read with Section 2 (b) defines an arbitration
agreement. Section 2(h) defines 'party' to mean a party to an arbitration
agreement. Section 4 deals with waiver of objections on the part of the party
who has proceeded with an arbitration, without stating his objections referred
to in the section, without undue delay. Section 5 indicates the extent of
judicial intervention. It says that notwithstanding anything contained in any
other law for the time being in force, in matters governed by Part I, no
judicial authority shall intervene except where so provided in Part I. The
expression 'judicial authority' is not defined. So, it has to be Page 1800
understood as taking in the courts or any other judicial fora. Section 7
defines an arbitration agreement and insists that it must be in writing and
also explains when an arbitration agreement could be said to be in writing.
Section 8 confers power on a judicial authority before whom an action is
brought in a matter which is the subject of an arbitration agreement, to refer
the dispute to arbitration, if a party applies for the same. Section 9 deals
with the power of the Court to pass interim orders and the power to give
interim protection in appropriate cases. It gives a right to a party, before
or during arbitral proceedings or at any time after the making of the arbitral
arbitral award but before its enforcement in terms of Section 36 of the Act,
to apply to a court for any one of the orders specified therein. Chapter III
of Part I deals with composition of arbitral tribunals. Section 10 gives
freedom to the parties to determine the number of arbitrators but imposes a
restriction that it shall not be an even number. Then comes Section 11 with
which we are really concerned in these appeals.

5\. The marginal heading of Section 11 is 'Appointment of arbitrators'. Sub-
Section (1) indicates that a person of any nationality may be an arbitrator,
unless otherwise agreed to by the parties. Under sub-Section (2), subject to
sub-Section (6),the parties are free to agree on a procedure for appointing
the arbitrator or arbitrators. Under sub- Section (3), failing any agreement
in terms of sub-Section (2), in an arbitration with three arbitrators, each
party could appoint one arbitrator, and the two arbitrators so appointed,
could appoint the third arbitrator, who would act as the presiding arbitrator.
Under sub- Section (4), the Chief Justice or any person or institution
designated by him could make the appointment, in a case where sub-Section (3)
has application and where either the party or parties had failed to nominate
their arbitrator or arbitrators or the two nominated arbitrators had failed to
agree on the presiding arbitrator. In the case of a sole arbitrator, sub-
Section (5) provides for the Chief Justice or any person or institution
designated by him, appointing an arbitrator on a request being made by one of
the parties, on fulfilment of the conditions laid down therein. Then comes
sub-Section (6), which may be quoted hereunder with advantage:

"(6) Where, under an appointment procedure agreed upon by the parties,-

(a) a party fails to act as required under that procedure; or

(b) the parties, or the two appointed arbitrators, fail to reach an agreement
expected of them under that procedure; or

(c) a person, including an institution, fails to perform any function
entrusted to him or it under that procedure, a party may request the Chief
Justice or any person or institution designated by him to take the necessary
measure, unless the agreement on the appointment procedure provides other
means for securing the appointment."

Sub-Section (7) gives a finality to the decision rendered by the Chief Justice
or the person or institution designated by him when moved under sub-Section
(4), or sub-Section (5), or sub-Section (6) of Section 11. Sub- Section (8)
enjoins the Chief Justice or the person or institution designated by Page 1801
him to keep in mind the qualifications required for an arbitrator by the
agreement of the parties, and other considerations as are likely to secure the
appointment of an independent and impartial arbitrator. Sub-Section (9) deals
with the power of the Chief Justice of India or a person or institution
designated by him to appoint the sole or the third arbitrator in an
international commercial arbitration. Sub- Section (10) deals with Chief
Justice's power to make a scheme for dealing with matters entrusted to him by
sub-Section (4) or sub-Section (5) or sub- Section (6) of Section 11. Sub-
Section (11) deals with the respective jurisdiction of Chief Justices of
different High Courts who are approached with requests regarding the same
dispute and specifies as to who should entertain such a request. Sub-Section
12 clause (a) clarifies that in relation to international arbitration, the
reference in the relevant sub- sections to the 'Chief Justice' would mean the
'Chief Justice of India'. Clause (b) indicates that otherwise the expression
'Chief Justice' shall be construed as a reference to the Chief Justice of the
High Court within whose local limits the principal Court is situated. 'Court'
is defined under Section 2(e) as the principal Civil Court of original
jurisdiction in a district.

6\. Section 12 sets out the grounds of challenge to the person appointed as
arbitrator and the duty of an arbitrator appointed, to disclose any
disqualification he may have. Sub-Section (3) of Section 12 gives a right to
the parties to challenge an arbitrator. Section 13 lays down the procedure for
such a challenge. Section 14 takes care of the failure of or impossibility for
an arbitrator to act and Section 15 deals with the termination of the mandate
of the arbitrator and the substitution of another arbitrator. Chapter IV deals
with the jurisdiction of arbitral tribunals. Section 16 deals with the
competence of an arbitral tribunal, to rule on its jurisdiction. The arbitral
tribunal may rule on its own jurisdiction, including ruling on any objection
with respect to the existence or validity of the arbitration agreement. A
person aggrieved by the rejection of his objection by the tribunal on its
jurisdiction or the other matters referred to in that Section, has to wait
until the award is made to challenge that decision in an appeal against the
arbitral award itself in accordance with Section 34 of the Act. But an
acceptance of the objection to jurisdiction or authority, could be challenged
then and there, under Section 37 of the Act. Section 17 confers powers on the
arbitral tribunal to make interim orders. Chapter V comprising of Sections 18
to 27 deals with the conduct of arbitral proceedings. Chapter VI containing
Sections 28 to 33 deals with making of the arbitral award and termination of
the proceedings. Chapter VII deals with recourse against an arbitral award.
Section 34 contemplates the filing of an application for setting aside an
arbitral award by making an application to the Court as defined in Section
2(e) of the Act. Chapter VIII deals with finality and enforcement of arbitral
awards. Section 35 makes the award final and Section 36 provides for its
enforcement under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 in the same manner as if
it were a decree of court. Chapter IX deals with appeals and Section 37
enumerates the orders that are open to appeal. We have already referred to the
right of appeal available under Section 37(2) of the Act, on the Tribunal
accepting a plea that it does not have jurisdiction or when the arbitral
tribunal accepts a plea that it is exceeding the scope of its authority. Page
1802 No second appeal is contemplated, but right to approach the Supreme Court
is saved. Chapter X deals with miscellaneous matters. Section 43 makes the
Limitation Act, 1963 applicable to proceedings under the Act as it applies to
proceedings in Court.

7\. We will first consider the question, as we see it. On a plain
understanding of the relevant provisions of the Act, it is seen that in a case
where there is an arbitration agreement, a dispute has arisen and one of the
parties had invoked the agreed procedure for appointment of an arbitrator and
the other party has not cooperated, the party seeking an arbitration, could
approach the Chief Justice of the High Court if it is an internal arbitration
or of the Supreme Court if it is an international arbitration to have an
arbitrator or arbitral tribunal appointed. The Chief Justice, when so
requested, could appoint an arbitrator or arbitral tribunal depending on the
nature of the agreement between the parties and after satisfying himself that
the conditions for appointment of an arbitrator under sub-Section (6) of
Section 11 do exist. The Chief Justice could designate another person or
institution to take the necessary measures. The Chief Justice has also to have
the qualification of the arbitrators in mind before choosing the arbitrator.
An arbitral tribunal so constituted, in terms of Section 16 of the Act, has
the right to decide whether it has jurisdiction to proceed with the
arbitration, whether there was any agreement between the parties and the other
matters referred to therein.

8\. Normally, any tribunal or authority conferred with a power to act under a
statute, has the jurisdiction to satisfy itself that the conditions for the
exercise of that power existed and that the case calls for the exercise of
that power. Such an adjudication relating to its own jurisdiction which could
be called a decision on jurisdictional facts, is not generally final, unless
it is made so by the Act constituting the tribunal. Here, sub- Section (7) of
Section 11 has given a finality to the decisions taken by the Chief Justice or
any person or institution designated by him in respect of matters falling
under sub-Sections (4), (5) and (6) of Section 11. Once a statute creates an
authority, confers on it power to adjudicate and makes its decision final on
matters to be decided by it, normally, that decision cannot be said to be a
purely administrative decision. It is really a decision on its own
jurisdiction for the exercise of the power conferred by the statute or to
perform the duties imposed by the statute. Unless, the authority satisfies
itself that the conditions for exercise of its power exist, it could not
accede to a request made to it for the exercise of the conferred power. While
exercising the power or performing the duty under Section 11(6) of the Act,
the Chief Justice has to consider whether the conditions laid down by the
section for the exercise of that power or the performance of that duty, exist.
Therefore, unaided by authorities and going by general principals, it appears
to us that while functioning under Section 11(6) of the Act, a Chief Justice
or the person or institution designated by him, is bound to decide whether he
has jurisdiction, whether there is an arbitration agreement, whether the
applicant before him, is a party, whether the conditions for exercise of the
power have been fulfilled and if an arbitrator is to be appointed, who is the
fit person, in terms of the provision. Section 11(7) makes his decision on the
matters entrusted to him, final.

9\. The very scheme, if it involves an adjudicatory process, restricts the
power of the Chief Justice to designate, by excluding the designation of a
non-judicial institution or a non-judicial authority to perform the functions.
For, under our dispensation, no judicial or quasi-judicial decision can be
rendered by an institution if it is not a judicial authority, court or a
quasi-judicial tribunal. This aspect is dealt with later while dealing with
the right to designate under Section 11(6) and the scope of that designation.

10\. The appointment of an arbitrator against the opposition of one of the
parties on the ground that the Chief Justice had no jurisdiction or on the
ground that there was no arbitration agreement, or on the ground that there
was no dispute subsisting which was capable of being arbitrated upon or that
the conditions for exercise of power under Section 11(6) of the Act do not
exist or that the qualification contemplated for the arbitrator by the parties
cannot be ignored and has to be borne in mind, are all adjudications which
affect the rights of parties. It cannot be said that when the Chief Justice
decides that he has jurisdiction to proceed with the matter, that there is an
arbitration agreement and that one of the parties to it has failed to act
according to the procedure agreed upon, he is not adjudicating on the rights
of the party who is raising these objections. The duty to decide the
preliminary facts enabling the exercise of jurisdiction or power, gets all the
more emphasized, when sub-Section (7) designates the order under sub-sections
(4), (5) or (6) a 'decision' and makes the decision of the Chief Justice final
on the matters referred to in that sub-Section. Thus, going by the general
principles of law and the scheme of Section 11, it is difficult to call the
order of the Chief Justice merely an administrative order and to say that the
opposite side need not even be heard before the Chief Justice exercises his
power of appointing an arbitrator. Even otherwise, when a statute confers a
power or imposes a duty on the highest judicial authority in the State or in
the country, that authority, unless shown otherwise, has to act judicially and
has necessarily to consider whether his power has been rightly invoked or the
conditions for the performance of his duty are shown to exist.

11\. Section 16 of the Act only makes explicit what is even otherwise
implicit, namely, that the arbitral tribunal constituted under the Act has the
jurisdiction to rule on its own jurisdiction, including ruling on objections
with respect to the existence or validity of the arbitration agreement. Sub-
section (1) also directs that an arbitration clause which forms part of a
contract shall be treated as an agreement independent of the other terms of
the contract. It also clarifies that a decision by the arbitral tribunal that
the contract is null and void shall not entail ipso jure the invalidity of the
arbitration clause. Sub-section (2) of Section 16 enjoins that a party wanting
to raise a plea that the arbitral tribunal does not have jurisdiction, has to
raise that objection not later than the submission of the statement of
defence, and that the party shall not be precluded from raising the plea of
jurisdiction merely because he has appointed or participated in the
appointment of an arbitrator. Sub-section (3) lays down that a plea that the
arbitral tribunal is exceeding the scope of its authority, shall be raised as
soon as the matter alleged to be beyond the scope of its authority is raised
during the arbitral proceedings. When the Tribunal decides these two
questions, namely, the question of jurisdiction and the question of exceeding
the scope of Page 1804 authority or either of them, the same is open to
immediate challenge in an appeal, when the objection is upheld and only in an
appeal against the final award, when the objection is overruled. Sub-section
(5) enjoins that if the arbitral tribunal overrules the objections under sub-
section (2) or sub-section (3), it should continue with the arbitral
proceedings and make an arbitral award. Sub-section (6) provides that a party
aggrieved by such an arbitral award overruling the plea on lack of
jurisdiction and the exceeding of the scope of authority, may make an
application on these grounds for setting aside the award in accordance with
Section 34 of the Act. The question, in the context of Sub-Section (7) of
Section 11 is, what is the scope of the right conferred on the arbitral
tribunal to rule upon its own jurisdiction and the existence of the
arbitration clause, envisaged by Section 16(1), once the Chief Justice or the
person designated by him had appointed an arbitrator after satisfying himself
that the conditions for the exercise of power to appoint an arbitrator are
present in the case. Prima facie, it would be difficult to say that in spite
of the finality conferred by sub-Section (7) of Section 11 of the Act, to such
a decision of the Chief Justice, the arbitral tribunal can still go behind
that decision and rule on its own jurisdiction or on the existence of an
arbitration clause. It also appears to us to be incongruous to say that after
the Chief Justice had appointed an arbitral tribunal, the arbitral tribunal
can turn round and say that the Chief Justice had no jurisdiction or authority
to appoint the tribunal, the very creature brought into existence by the
exercise of power by its creator, the Chief Justice. The argument of learned
Senior Counsel, Mr. K.K. Venugopal that Section 16 has full play only when an
arbitral tribunal is constituted without intervention under Section 11(6) of
the Act, is one way of reconciling that provision with Section 11 of the Act,
especially in the context of sub- section (7) thereof. We are inclined to the
view that the decision of the Chief Justice on the issue of jurisdiction and
the existence of a valid arbitration agreement would be binding on the parties
when the matter goes to the arbitral tribunal and at subsequent stages of the
proceeding except in an appeal in the Supreme Court in the case of the
decision being by the Chief Justice of the High Court or by a Judge of the
High Court designated by him.

12\. It is common ground that the Act has adopted the UNCITRAL Model Law on
International Commercial Arbitration. But at the same time, it has made some
departures from the model law. Section 11 is in the place of Article 11 of the
Model Law. The Model Law provides for the making of a request under Article 11
to "the court or other authority specified in Article 6 to take the necessary
measure". The words in Section 11 of the Act, are "the Chief Justice or the
person or institution designated by him". The fact that instead of the court,
the powers are conferred on the Chief Justice, has to be appreciated in the
context of the statute. 'Court' is defined in the Act to be the principal
civil court of original jurisdiction of the district and includes the High
Court in exercise of its ordinary original civil jurisdiction. The principal
civil court of original jurisdiction is normally the District Court. The High
Courts in India exercising ordinary original civil jurisdiction are not too
many. So in most of the States the concerned court would be the District
Court. Obviously, the Parliament did not want to confer the power on the
District Court, to entertain a request for appointing an arbitrator or for
constituting an arbitral tribunal under Section 11 of the Act. It has to be
noted that under Section 9 of the Act, the District Court or the High Page
1805 Court exercising original jurisdiction, has the power to make interim
orders prior to, during or even post arbitration. It has also the power to
entertain a challenge to the award that may ultimately be made. The framers of
the statute must certainly be taken to have been conscious of the definition
of 'court' in the Act. It is easily possible to contemplate that they did not
want the power under Section 11 to be conferred on the District Court or the
High Court exercising original jurisdiction. The intention apparently was to
confer the power on the highest judicial authority in the State and in the
country, on Chief Justices of High Courts and on the Chief Justice of India.
Such a provision is necessarily intended to add the greatest credibility to
the arbitral process. The argument that the power thus conferred on the Chief
Justice could not even be delegated to any other Judge of the High Court or of
the Supreme Court, stands negatived only because of the power given to
designate another. The intention of the legislature appears to be clear that
it wanted to ensure that the power under Section 11(6) of the Act was
exercised by the highest judicial authority in the concerned State or in the
country. This is to ensure the utmost authority to the process of constituting
the arbitral tribunal.

13\. Normally, when a power is conferred on the highest judicial authority who
normally performs judicial functions and is the head of the judiciary of the
State or of the country, it is difficult to assume that the power is conferred
on the Chief Justice as persona designata. Under Section 11(6), the Chief
Justice is given a power to designate another to perform the functions under
that provision. That power has generally been designated to a Judge of the
High Court or of the Supreme Court respectively. Persona designata, according
to Black's Law Dictionary, means "A person considered as an individual rather
than as a member of a class". When the power is conferred on the Chief
Justices of the High Courts, the power is conferred on a class and not
considering that person as an individual. In the Central Talkies Ltd., Kanpur
v. Dwarka Prasad while considering the status in which the power was to be
exercised by the District Magistrate under the United Provinces (Temporary)
Control of Rent and Eviction Act, 1947, this Court held:

"a persona designata is "a person who is pointed out or described as an
individual, as opposed to a person ascertained as a member of a class, or as
filling a particular character." (See Osborn's Concise Law Dictionary, 4th
Edition., p.253). In the words of Schwabe, C.J., in Parthasardhi Naidu v.
Koteswara Rao, [I.L.R. 47 Mad 369 F.B.] personae designatae are, "persons
selected to act in their private capacity and not in their capacity as
Judges." The same consideration applies also to a well-known officer like the
District Magistrate named by virtue of his office, and whose powers the
Additional District Magistrate can also exercise and who can create other
officers equal to himself for the purpose of the Eviction Act."

In Mukri Gopalan v. Cheppilat Puthanpurayil Aboobacker this Court after
quoting the above passage from the Central Talkies Ltd., Kanpur v. Dwarka
Prasad, Page 1806 applied the test to come to the conclusion that when Section
18 of the Kerala Buildings (Lease and Rent Control) Act, 1965 constituted the
District Judge as an appellate authority under that Act, it was a case where
the authority was being conferred on District Judges who constituted a class
and, therefore, the appellate authority could not be considered to be persona
designata. What can be gathered from P. Ramanatha Aiyar's Advanced Law
Lexicon, 3rd Edition, 2005, is that "persona designata" is a person selected
to act in his private capacity and not in his capacity as a judge. He is a
person pointed out or described as an individual as opposed to a person
ascertained as a member of a class or as filling a particular character. It is
also seen that one of the tests to be applied is to see whether the person
concerned could exercise the power only so long as he holds office or could
exercise the power even subsequently. Obviously, on ceasing to be a Chief
Justice, the person referred to in Section 11(6) of the Act could not exercise
the power. Thus, it is clear that the power is conferred on the Chief Justice
under Section 11(6) of the Act not as persona designata.

14\. Normally a persona designata cannot delegate his power to another. Here,
the Chef Justice of the High Court or the Chief Justice of India is given the
power to designate another to exercise the power conferred on him under
Section 11(6) of the Act. If the power is a judicial power, it is obvious that
the power could be conferred only on a judicial authority and in this case,
logically on another Judge of the High Court or on a Judge of the Supreme
Court. It is logical to consider the conferment of the power on the Chief
Justice of the High Court and on the Chief Justice of India as presiding
Judges of the High Court and the Supreme Court and the exercise of the power
so conferred, is exercise of judicial power/authority as presiding Judges of
the respective courts. Replacing of the word 'court' in the Model Law with the
expression "Chief Justice" in the Act, appears to be more for excluding the
exercise of power by the District Court and by the court as an entity leading
to obvious consequences in the matter of the procedure to be followed and the
rights of appeal governing the matter. The departure from Article 11 of the
Model Law and the use of the expression "Chief Justice" cannot be taken to
exclude the theory of its being an adjudication under Section 11 of the Act by
a judicial authority.

15\. We may at this stage notice the complementary nature of Sections 8 and

11\. Where there is an arbitration agreement between the parties and one of
the parties, ignoring it, files an action before a judicial authority and the
other party raises the objection that there is an arbitration clause, the
judicial authority has to consider that objection and if the objection is
found sustainable to refer the parties to arbitration. The expression used in
this Section is 'shall' and this Court in P. Anand Gajapathi Raju v. P.V. G.
Raju and in Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Ltd. v. Pink City Midway Petroleum
Page 1807 has held that the judicial authority is bound to refer the matter to
arbitration once the existence of a valid arbitration clause is established.
Thus, the judicial authority is entitled to, has to and bound to decide the
jurisdictional issue raised before it, before making or declining to make a
reference. Section 11 only covers another situation. Where one of the parties
has refused to act in terms of the arbitration agreement, the other party
moves the Chief Justice under Section 11 of the Act to have an arbitrator
appointed and the first party objects, it would be incongruous to hold that
the Chief Justice cannot decide the question of his own jurisdiction to
appoint an arbitrator when in a parallel situation, the judicial authority can
do so. Obviously, the highest judicial authority has to decide that question
and his competence to decide cannot be questioned. If it is held that the
Chief Justice has no right or duty to decide the question or cannot decide the
question, it will lead to an anomalous situation in that a judicial authority
under Section 8 can decide, but not a Chief Justice under Section 11, though
the nature of the objection is the same and the consequence of accepting the
objection in one case and rejecting it in the other, is also the same, namely,
sending the parties to arbitration. The interpretation of Section 11 that we
have adopted would not give room for such an anomaly.

16\. Section 11(6) does enable the Chief Justice to designate any person or
institution to take the necessary measures on an application made under
Section 11(6) of the Act. This power to designate recognized in the Chief
Justice, has led to an argument that a judicial decision making is negatived,
in taking the necessary measures on an application, under Section 11(6) of the
Act. It is pointed out that the Chief Justice may designate even an
institution like the Chamber of Commerce or the Institute of Engineers and
they are not judicial authorities. Here, we find substance in the argument of
Mr. F.S.Nariman, learned senior counsel that in the context of Section 5 of
the Act excluding judicial intervention except as provided in the Act, the
designation contemplated is not for the purpose of deciding the preliminary
facts justifying the exercise of power to appoint an arbitrator, but only for
the purpose of nominating to the Chief Justice a suitable person to be
appointed as arbitrator, especially, in the context of Section 11(8) of the
Act. One of the objects of conferring power on the highest judicial authority
in the State or in the country for constituting the arbitral tribunal, is to
ensure credibility in the entire arbitration process and looked at from that
point of view, it is difficult to accept the contention that the Chief Justice
could designate a non- judicial body like the Chamber of Commerce to decide on
the existence of an arbitration agreement and so on, which are decisions,
normally, judicial or quasi judicial in nature. Where a Chief Justice
designates not a Judge, but another person or an institution to nominate an
arbitral tribunal, that can be done only after questions as to jurisdiction,
existence of the agreement and the like, are decided first by him or his
nominee Judge and what is to be Page 1808 left to be done is only to nominate
the members for constituting the arbitral tribunal. Looking at the scheme of
the Act as a whole and the object with which it was enacted, replacing the
Arbitration Act of 1940, it seems to be proper to view the conferment of power
on the Chief Justice as the conferment of a judicial power to decide on the
existence of the conditions justifying the constitution of an arbitral
tribunal. The departure from the UNCITRAL model regarding the conferment of
the power cannot be said to be conclusive or significant in the circumstances.
Observations of this Court in paragraphs 389 and 391 in Supreme Court
Advocates on Record Association v. Union of India support the argument that
the expression chief justice is used in the sense of collectivity of judges of
the Supreme Court and the High Courts respectively.

17\. It is true that the power under Section 11(6) of the Act is not conferred
on the Supreme Court or on the High Court, but it is conferred on the Chief
Justice of India or the Chief Justice of the High Court. One possible reason
for specifying the authority as the Chief Justice, could be that if it were
merely the conferment of the power on the High Court, or the Supreme Court,
the matter would be governed by the normal procedure of that Court, including
the right of appeal and the Parliament obviously wanted to avoid that
situation, since one of the objects was to restrict the interference by Courts
in the arbitral process. Therefore, the power was conferred on the highest
judicial authority in the country and in the State in their capacities as
Chief Justices. They have been conferred the power or the right to pass an
order contemplated by Section 11 of the Act. We have already seen that it is
not possible to envisage that the power is conferred on the Chief Justice as
persona designata. Therefore, the fact that the power is conferred on the
Chief Justice, and not on the court presided over by him is not sufficient to
hold that the power thus conferred is merely an administrative power and is
not a judicial power.

18\. It is also not possible to accept the argument that there is an exclusive
conferment of jurisdiction on the arbitral tribunal, to decide on the
existence or validity of the arbitration agreement. Section 8 of the Act
contemplates a judicial authority before which an action is brought in a
matter which is the subject of an arbitration agreement, on the terms
specified therein, to refer the dispute to arbitration. A judicial authority
as such is not defined in the Act. It would certainly include the court as
defined in Section 2(e) of the Act and would also, in our opinion, include
other courts and may even include a special tribunal like the Consumer Forum
(See Fair Air Engineers (P) Ltd. and Anr. v. N.K. Modi . When the defendant to
an action before a judicial authority raises the plea that there is an
arbitration agreement and the subject matter of the claim is covered by the
agreement and the plaintiff or the person who has approached the judicial
authority for relief, Page 1809 disputes the same, the judicial authority, in
the absence of any restriction in the Act, has necessarily to decide whether,
in fact, there is in existence a valid arbitration agreement and whether the
dispute that is sought to be raised before it, is covered by the arbitration
clause. It is difficult to contemplate that the judicial authority has also to
act mechanically or has merely to see the original arbitration agreement
produced before it, and mechanically refer the parties to an arbitration.
Similarly, Section 9 enables a Court, obviously, as defined in the Act, when
approached by a party before the commencement of an arbitral proceeding, to
grant interim relief as contemplated by the Section. When a party seeks an
interim relief asserting that there was a dispute liable to be arbitrated upon
in terms of the Act, and the opposite party disputes the existence of an
arbitration agreement as defined in the Act or raises a plea that the dispute
involved was not covered by the arbitration clause, or that the Court which
was approached had no jurisdiction to pass any order in terms of Section 9 of
the Act, that Court has necessarily to decide whether it has jurisdiction,
whether there is an arbitration agreement which is valid in law and whether
the dispute sought to be raised is covered by that agreement. There is no
indication in the Act that the powers of the Court are curtailed on these
aspects. On the other hand, Section 9 insists that once approached in that
behalf, "the Court shall have the same power for making orders as it has for
the purpose of and in relation to any proceeding before it". Surely, when a
matter is entrusted to a Civil Court in the ordinary hierarchy of Courts
without anything more, the procedure of that Court would govern the
adjudication [See R.M.A.R.A. Adaikappa Chettiar and Anr. v. R. Chandrasekhara
Thevar (AIR 1948 P.C. 12)]

19\. Section 16 is said to be the recognition of the principle of Kompetenz

\- Kompetenz. The fact that the arbitral tribunal has the competence to rule
on its own jurisdiction and to define the contours of its jurisdiction, only
means that when such issues arise before it, the Tribunal can and possibly,
ought to decide them. This can happen when the parties have gone to the
arbitral tribunal without recourse to Section 8 or 11 of the Act. But where
the jurisdictional issues are decided under these Sections, before a reference
is made, Section 16 cannot be held to empower the arbitral tribunal to ignore
the decision given by the judicial authority or the Chief Justice before the
reference to it was made. The competence to decide does not enable the
arbitral tribunal to get over the finality conferred on an order passed prior
to its entering upon the reference by the very statute that creates it. That
is the position arising out of Section 11(7) of the Act read with Section 16
thereof. The finality given to the order of the Chief Justice on the matters
within his competence under Section 11 of the Act, are incapable of being
reopened before the arbitral tribunal. In Konkan Railway (Supra) what is
considered is only the fact that under Section 16, the arbitral tribunal has
the right to rule on its own jurisdiction and any objection, with respect to
the existence or validity of the arbitration agreement. What is the impact of
Section 11(7) of the Act on the arbitral tribunal constituted by an order
under Section 11(6) of the Act, was not considered. Obviously, this was
because of the view taken in that decision that the Chief Justice is not
expected to decide anything while entertaining a request under Section 11(6)
of the Act and is only performing an administrative function in appointing an
arbitral tribunal. Once it is held that there is an Page 1810 adjudicatory
function entrusted to the Chief Justice by the Act, obviously, the right of
the arbitral tribunal to go behind the order passed by the Chief Justice would
take another hue and would be controlled by Section 11(7) of the Act.

20\. We will now consider the prior decisions of this Court. In Sundaram
Finance Ltd. v. NEPC India Ltd. this Court held that the provisions of the Act
must be interpreted and construed independently of the interpretation placed
on the Arbitration Act, 1940 and it will be more relevant to refer to the
UNCITRAL model law while called upon to interpret the provisions of the Act.
This Court further held that under the 1996 Act, appointment of arbitrator(s)
is made as per the provision of Section 11 which does not require the Court to
pass a judicial order appointing an arbitrator or arbitrators. It is seen that
the question was not discussed as such, since the court in that case was not
concerned with the interpretation of Section 11 of the Act. The view as above
was quoted with approval in Ador Samia Private Limited v. Peekay Holdings
Limited and Ors. and nothing further was said about the question. In other
words, the question as to the nature of the order to be passed by the Chief
Justice when moved under Section 11(6) of the Act, was not discussed or
decided upon.

21\. In Wellington Associates Ltd. v. Kirit Mehta it was contended before the
designated Judge that what was relied on by the applicant was not an
arbitration clause. The applicant contended that the Chief Justice of India or
the designate Judge cannot decide that question and only the arbitrator can
decide the question in view of Section 16 of the Act. The designated Judge
held that Section 16 did not exclude the jurisdiction of the Chief Justice of
India or the designated Judge to decide the question of the existence of an
arbitration clause. After considering the relevant aspects, the learned Judge
held:

"I am of the view that in cases where --- to start with - there is a dispute
raised at the stage of the application under Section 11 that there is no
arbitration clause at all, then it will be absurd to refer the very issue to
an arbitrator without deciding whether there is an arbitration clause at all
between the parties to start with. In my view, in the present situation, the
jurisdiction of the Chief Justice of India or his designate to decide the
question as to the "existence" of the arbitration clause cannot be doubted and
cannot be said to be excluded by Section 16."

22\. Then came Konkan Railway Corporation Ltd. v. Mehul Construction Co. in
which the first question framed was, what Page 1811 was the nature of the
order passed by the Chief Justice or his nominee in exercise of his power
under Section 11(6) of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996? After
noticing the Statement of Objects and Reasons for the Act and after comparing
the language of Section 11 of the Act and the corresponding article of the
model law, it was stated that the Act has designated the Chief Justice of the
High Court in cases of domestic arbitration and the Chief Justice of India in
cases of international commercial arbitration, to be the authority to perform
the function of appointment of an arbitrator, whereas under the model law, the
said power was vested with the court. When the matter is placed before the
Chief Justice or his nominee under Section 11 of the Act it was imperative for
the Chief Justice or his nominee to bear in mind the legislative intent that
the arbitral process should be set in motion without any delay whatsoever and
all contentious issues left to be raised before the arbitral tribunal itself.
It was further held that at that stage, it would not be appropriate for the
Chief Justice or his nominee, to entertain any contention or decide the same
between the parties. It was also held that in view of the conferment of power
on the arbitral tribunal under Section 16 of the Act, the intention of the
legislature and its anxiety to see that the arbitral process is set in motion
at the earliest, it will be appropriate for the Chief Justice to appoint an
arbitrator without wasting any time or without entertaining any contentious
issue by a party objecting to the appointment of an arbitrator. The Court
stated:

"Bearing in mind the purpose of legislation, the language used in Section
11(6) conferring power on the Chief Justice or his nominee to appoint an
arbitrator, the curtailment of the power of the court in the matter of
interference, the expanding jurisdiction of the arbitrator in course of the
arbitral proceeding, and above all the main objective, namely, the confidence
of the international market for speedy disposal of their disputes, the
character and status of an order appointing an arbitrator by the Chief Justice
or his nominee under Section 11(6) has to be decided upon. If it is held that
an order under Section 11(6) is a judicial or quasi-judicial order then the
said order would be amenable to judicial intervention and any reluctant party
may frustrate the entire purpose of the Act by adopting dilatory tactics in
approaching a court of law even against an order of appointment of an
arbitrator. Such an interpretation has to be avoided in order to achieve the
basic objective for which the country has enacted the Act of 1996 adopting the
UNCITRAL Model."

23\. The Court proceeded to say that if it were to be held that the order
passed was purely administrative in nature, that would facilitate the
achieving of the object of the Act, namely, quickly setting in motion the
process of arbitration. Great emphasis was placed on the conferment of power
on the Chief Justice in preference to a court as was obtaining in the model
law. It was concluded " The nature of the function performed by the Chief
Justice being essentially to aid the constitution of the arbitral tribunal
immediately and the legislature having consciously chosen to confer the power
on the Chief Justice and not a court, it is apparent that the order passed by
the Chief Justice or his nominee is an administrative Page 1812 order as has
been held by this Court in Ador Samia case (supra) and the observations of
this Court in Sundaram Finance Ltd. case (supra) also are quite appropriate
and neither of those decisions require any reconsideration."

24\. It was thus held that an order passed under Section 11(6) of the Act, by
the Chief Justice of the High Court or his nominee, was an administrative
order, its purpose being the speedy disposal of commercial disputes and that
such an order could not be subjected to judicial review under Article 136 of
the Constitution of India. Even an order refusing to appoint an arbitrator
would not be amenable to the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court under Article
136 of the Constitution. A petition under Article 32 of the Constitution was
also not maintainable. But, an order refusing to appoint an arbitrator made by
the Chief Justice could be challenged before the High Court under Article 226
of the Constitution. What seems to have persuaded this Court was the fact that
the statement of objects and reasons of the Act clearly enunciated that the
main object of the legislature was to minimize the supervisory role of courts
in arbitral process. Since Section 16 empowers the arbitral tribunal to rule
on its own jurisdiction including ruling on objections with respect to the
existence or validity of an arbitration agreement, a party would have the
opportunity to raise his grievance against that decision either immediately or
while challenging the award after it was pronounced. Since it was not proper
to encourage a party to an arbitration, to frustrate the entire purpose of the
Act by adopting dilatory tactics by approaching the court even against the
order of appointment of an arbitrator, it was necessary to take the view that
the order was administrative in nature. This was all the more so, since the
nature of the function performed by the Chief Justice was essentially to aid
the constitution of the arbitral tribunal immediately and the legislature
having consciously chosen to confer the power on the Chief Justice and not on
the court, it was apparent that the order was an administrative order. With
respect, it has to be pointed out that this Court did not discus or consider
the nature of the power that the Chief Justice is called upon to exercise.
Merely because the main purpose was the constitution of an arbitral tribunal,
it could not be taken that the exercise of power is an administrative power.
While constituting an arbitral tribunal, on the scheme of the Act, the Chief
Justice has to consider whether he as the Chief Justice has jurisdiction in
relation to the contract, whether there was an arbitration agreement in terms
of Section 7 of the Act and whether the person before him with the request, is
a party to the arbitration agreement. On coming to a conclusion on these
aspects, he has to enquire whether the conditions for exercise of his power
under Section 11(6) of the Act exist in the case and only on being satisfied
in that behalf, he could appoint an arbitrator or an arbitral tribunal on the
basis of the request. It is difficult to say that when one of the parties
raises an objection that there is no arbitration Page 1813 agreement, raises
an objection that the person who has come forward with a request is not a
party to the arbitration agreement, the Chief Justice can come to a conclusion
on those objections without following an adjudicatory process. Can he
constitute an arbitrary tribunal, without considering these questions? If he
can do so, why should such a function be entrusted to a high judicial
authority like the Chief Justice. Similarly, when the party raises an
objection that the conditions for exercise of the power under Section 11(6) of
the Act are not fulfilled and the Chief Justice comes to the conclusion that
they have been fulfilled, it is difficult to say that he was not adjudicating
on a dispute between the parties and was merely passing an administrative
order. It is also not correct to say that by the mere constitution of an
arbitral tribunal the rights of parties are not affected. Dragging a party to
an arbitration when there existed no arbitration agreement or when there
existed no arbitrable dispute, can certainly affect the right of that party
and even on monetary terms, impose on him a serious liability for meeting the
expenses of the arbitration, even if it be preliminary expenses and his
objection is upheld by the arbitral tribunal. Therefore, it is not possible to
accept the position that no adjudication is involved in the constitution of an
arbitral tribunal.

25\. It is also somewhat incongruous to permit the order of the Chief Justice
under Section 11(6) of the Act being subjected to scrutiny under Article 226
of the Constitution at the hands of another Judge of the High Court. In the
absence of any conferment of an appellate power, it may not be possible to say
that a certiorari would lie against the decision of the High Court in the very
same High Court. Even in the case of an international arbitration, the
decision of the Chief Justice of India would be amenable to challenge under
Article 226 of the Constitution before a High Court. While construing the
scope of the power under Section 11(6), it will not be out of place for the
court to bear this aspect in mind, since after all, courts follow or attempt
to follow certain judicial norms and that precludes such challenges (see
Naresh Shridhar Mirajkar and Ors. v. State of Maharashtra and Anr. and Rupa
Ashok Hurra v. Ashok Hurra and Anr..

26\. In Nimet Resourcs Inc. and Anr. v. Essar Steels Ltd. the question of
existence or otherwise of an arbitration agreement between the parties was
itself held to be referable to the arbitrator since the order proceeded on the
basis that the power under Section 11(6) was merely administrative.

27\. The correctness of the decision in Konkan Railway Corporation Ltd. v.
Mehul Construction Co. (supra) was doubted in Konkan Railway Cooperation Ltd.
v. Rani Construction Pvt. Ltd. The reconsideration was recommended on the
ground that the Act did not take away the power of the Court to decide
preliminary issues notwithstanding the arbitrator's competence to decide such
issues including whether particular matters were "excepted matters", or
whether an arbitration agreement existed or whether there was a dispute in
terms of the agreement. It was noticed that in other countries where UNCITRAL
model was being followed, the court could decide such issues judicially and
need not mechanically appoint an arbitrator. There were situations where
preliminary issues would have to be decided by the court rather than by the
arbitrator. If the order of the Chief Justice or his nominees were to be
treated as an administrative one, it could be challenged before the single
Judge of the High Court, then before a Division Bench and then the Supreme
Court under Article 136 of the Constitution, a result that would cause further
delay in arbitral proceedings, something sought to be prevented by the Act. An
order under Section 11 of the Act did not relate to the administrative
functions of the Chief Justice or of the Chief Justice of India.

28\. The reference came up before a Constitution Bench. In Konkan Railway
Construction Ltd. v. Rani Construction Pvt. Ltd., the Constitution Bench
reiterated the view taken in Mehul Construction Co.'s case (supra), if we may
say so with respect, without really answering the questions posed by the order
of reference. It was stated that there is nothing in Section 11 of the Act
that requires the party other than the party making the request, to be given
notice of the proceedings before the Chief Justice. The Court went on to say
that Section 11 did not contemplate a response from the other party. The
approach was to say that none of the requirements referred to in Section 11(6)
of the Act contemplated or amounted to an adjudication by the Chief Justice
while appointing an arbitrator. The scheme framed under the Arbitration Act by
the Chief Justice of India was held to be not mandatory. It was stated that
the UNCITRAL model law was only taken into account and hence the model law, or
judgments and literature thereon, was not a guide to the interpretation of the
Act and especially of Section 11.

29\. With respect, what was the effect of the Chief Justice having to decide
his own jurisdiction in a given case was not considered by the Bench. Surely,
the question whether the Chief Justice could entertain the application under
Section 11(6) of the Act could not be left to the decision of the arbitral
tribunal constituted by him on entertaining such an application. We also feel
that adequate attention was not paid to the requirement of the Chief Justice
having to decide that there is an arbitration agreement in terms of Section 7
of the Act before he could exercise his power under Section 11(6) of the Act
and its implication. The aspect, whether there was an arbitration agreement,
was not merely a jurisdictional fact for commencing the arbitration itself,
but it Page 1815 was also a jurisdictional fact for appointing an arbitrator
on a motion under Section 11(6) of the Act, was not kept in view. A Chief
Justice could appoint an arbitrator in exercise of his power only if there
existed an arbitration agreement and without holding that there was an
agreement, it would not be open to him to appoint an arbitrator saying that he
was appointing an arbitrator since he has been moved in that behalf and the
applicant before him asserts that there is an arbitration agreement.
Acceptance of such an argument, with great respect, would reduce the high
judicial authority entrusted with the power to appoint an arbitrator, an
automaton and sub-servient to the arbitral tribunal which he himself brings
into existence. Our system of law does not contemplate such a situation.

30\. With great respect, it is seen that the court did not really consider the
nature of the rights of the parties involved when the Chief Justice exercised
the power of constituting the arbitral tribunal. The court also did not
consider whether it was not necessary for the Chief Justice to satisfy himself
of the existence of the facts which alone would entitle him or enable him to
accede to the request for appointment of an arbitrator and what was the nature
of that process by which he came to the conclusion that an arbitral tribunal
was liable to be constituted. When, for example, a dispute which no more
survives as a dispute, was referred to an arbitral tribunal or when an
arbitral tribunal was constituted even in the absence of an arbitration
agreement as understood by the Act, how could the rights of the objecting
party be said to be not affected, was not considered in that perspective. In
other words, the Constitution Bench proceeded on the basis that while
exercising power under Section 11(6) of the Act there was nothing for the
Chief Justice to decide. With respect, the very question that fell for
decision was whether there had to be an adjudication on the preliminary
matters involved and when the result had to depend on that adjudication, what
was the nature of that adjudication. It is in that context that a
reconsideration of the said decision is sought for in this case. The ground of
ensuring minimum judicial intervention by itself is not a ground to hold that
the power exercised by the Chief Justice is only an administrative function.
As pointed out in the order of reference to that Bench, the conclusion that it
is only an administrative act is the opening of the gates for an approach to
the High Court under Article 226 of the Constitution, for an appeal under the
Letters Patent or the concerned High Court Act to a Division Bench and a
further appeal to this Court under Article 136 of the Constitution of India.

31\. Moreover, in a case where the objection to jurisdiction or the existence
of an arbitration agreement is overruled by the arbitral tribunal, the party
has to participate in the arbitration proceedings extending over a period of
time by incurring substantial expenditure and then to come to court with an
application under Section 34 of the Arbitration Act seeking the setting aside
of the award on the ground that there was no arbitration agreement or that
there was nothing to be arbitrated upon when the tribunal was constituted.
Though this may avoid intervention by court until the award is pronounced, it
does mean considerable expenditure and time spent by the party before the
arbitral tribunal. On the other hand, if even at the initial stage, the Chief
Justice judicially pronounces that he has jurisdiction to appoint an
arbitrator, Page 1816 that there is an arbitration agreement between the
parties, that there was a live and subsisting dispute for being referred to
arbitration and constitutes the tribunal as envisaged, on being satisfied of
the existence of the conditions for the exercise of his power, ensuring that
the arbitrator is a qualified arbitrator, that will put an end to a host of
disputes between the parties, leaving the party aggrieved with a remedy of
approaching this Court under Article 136 of the Constitution. That would give
this Court, an opportunity of scrutinizing the decision of the Chief Justice
on merits and deciding whether it calls for interference in exercise of its
plenary power. Once this Court declines to interfere with the adjudication of
the Chief Justice to the extent it is made, it becomes final. This reasoning
is also supported by sub-section (7) of Section 11, making final, the decision
of the Chief Justice on the matters decided by him while constituting the
arbitral tribunal. This will leave the arbitral tribunal to decide the dispute
on merits unhampered by preliminary and technical objections. In the long run,
especially in the context of the judicial system in our country, this would be
more conducive to minimising judicial intervention in matters coming under the
Act. This will also avert the situation where even the order of the Chief
Justice of India could be challenged before a single judge of the High Court
invoking the Article 226 of the Constitution of India or before an arbitral
tribunal, consisting not necessarily of legally trained persons and their
coming to a conclusion that their constitution by the Chief Justice was not
warranted in the absence of an arbitration agreement or in the absence of a
dispute in terms of the agreement.

32\. Section 8 of the Arbitration Act, 1940 enabled the court when approached
in that behalf to supply an omission. Section 20 of that Act enabled the court
to compel the parties to produce the arbitration agreement and then to appoint
an arbitrator for adjudicating on the disputes. It may be possible to say that
Section 11(6) of the Act combines both the powers. May be, it is more in
consonance with Section 8 of the Old Act. But to call the power merely as an
administrative one, does not appear to be warranted in the context of the
relevant provisions of the Act. First of all, the power is conferred not on an
administrative authority, but on a judicial authority, the highest judicial
authority in the State or in the country. No doubt, such authorities also
perform administrative functions. An appointment of an arbitral tribunal in
terms of Section 11 of the Act, is based on a power derived from a statute and
the statute itself prescribes the conditions that should exist for the
exercise of that power. In the process of exercise of that power, obviously
the parties would have the right of being heard and when the existence of the
conditions for the exercise of the power are found on accepting or overruling
the contentions of one of the parties it necessarily amounts to an order,
judicial in nature, having finality subject to any available judicial
challenge as envisaged by the Act or any other statute or the Constitution.
Looked at from that point of view also, it seems to be appropriate to hold
that the Chief Justice exercises a judicial power while appointing an
arbitrator.

33\. In Attorney Geenral of the Gambia v. Pierre Sarr N'jie (1961 Appeal Cases
617) the question arose whether the power to judge an alleged professional
misconduct could be delegated to a Deputy Judge by the Chief Justice who Page
1817 had the power to suspend any barrister or solicitor from practicing
within the jurisdiction of the court. Under Section 7 of the Supreme Court
Ordinance of the Gambia, the Deputy Judge could exercise "all the judicial
powers of the Judge of the Supreme Court". The question was, whether the
taking of disciplinary action for professional misconduct; was a judicial
power or an administrative power. The Judicial Committee of the Privy Council
held that a judge exercises judicial powers not only when he is deciding suits
between the parties but also when he exercises disciplinary powers which are
properly appurtenant to the office of a judge. By way of illustration, Lord
Dening stated "Suppose, for instance, that a judge finding that a legal
practitioner had been guilty of professional misconduct in the course of a
case, orders him to pay the costs, as he has undoubtedly power to do (see
Myers v. Elman, per Lord Wright). That would be an exercise of the judicial
powers of the judge just as much as if he committed him for contempt of court.
Yet there is no difference in quality between the power to order him to pay
costs and the power to suspend him or strike him off."

34\. The above example gives an indication that it is the nature of the power
that is relevant and not the mode of exercise. In Shankarlal Aggarwal and Ors.
v. Shankar Lal Poddar and Ors. this Court was dealing with the question
whether the order of the Company Judge confirming a sale was merely an
administrative order passed in the course of the administration of the assets
of the company under liquidation and, therefore, not a judicial order subject
to appeal. This Court held that the order of the Company Judge confirming the
sale was not an administrative but a judicial order. Their Lordships stated
thus:

"It is not correct to say that every order of the Court, merely for the reason
that it is passed in the course of the realization of the assets of the
Company, must always be treated merely as an administrative one. The question
ultimately depends upon the nature of the order that is passed. An order
according sanction to a sale undoubtedly involves a discretion and cannot be
termed merely an administrative order, for before confirming the sale the
court has to be satisfied, particularly where the confirmation is opposed,
that the sale has been held in accordance with the conditions subject to which
alone the liquidator has been permitted to effect it, and that even otherwise
the sale has been fair and has not resulted in any loss to the parties who
would ultimately have to share the realization. It is not possible to
formulate a definition which would satisfactorily distinguish between an
administrative and a judicial order. That the power is entrusted to or wielded
by a person who functions as a court is not decisive of the question whether
the act or decision is administrative or judicial. An administrative order
would be one which is directed to the regulation or supervision of matters as
distinguished from an order which decides the rights of parties or confers or
refuses to confer rights to property which are the subject of adjudication
before the court. One of the tests would be whether a matter which involves
the exercise of discretion is left for the decision of the authority,
particularly if that authority were a court, Page 1818 and if the discretion
has to be exercised on objective, as distinguished from a purely subjective
consideration, it would be a judicial decision. It has sometimes been said
that the essence of a judicial proceeding or of a judicial order is that there
would be two parties and a lis between them which is the subject of
adjudication, as a result of that order or a decision on an issue between a
proposal and an opposition. No doubt it would not be possible to describe an
order passed deciding a lis between the authority that is not a judicial order
but it does not follow that the absence of a lis necessarily negatives the
order being judicial. Even viewed from this narrow standpoint, it is possible
to hold that there was a lis before the Company Judge which he decided by
passing the order. On the one hand were the claims of the highest bidder who
put forward the contention that he had satisfied the requirements laid down
for the acceptance of his bid and was consequently entitled to have the sale
in his favour confirmed, particularly so as he was supported in this behalf by
the Official Liquidators. On the other hand, there was the first respondent
and the large body of unsecured creditors whose interests, even if they were
not represented by the first respondent, the court was bound to protect. If
the sale of which confirmation was sought was characterized by any deviation
subject to which the sale was directed to be held or even otherwise was for a
gross undervalue in the sense that very much more could reasonably be expected
to be obtained if the sale were properly held, in view of the figure of Rs.
3,37,000/- which had been bid by Nandlal Agarwalla it would be duty of the
court to refuse the confirmation in the interests of the general body of
creditors, and this was the submission made by the first respondent. There
were thus two points of view presented to the court by two contending parties
or interests and the court was called upon to decide between them, and the
decision vitally affected the rights of the parties to property. Under the
circumstances, the order of the Company Judge was a judicial order and not
administrative one, and was therefore not inherently incapable of being
brought up in appeal."

35\. Going by the above test it is seen that at least in the matter of
deciding his own jurisdiction and in the matter of deciding on the existence
of an arbitration agreement, the Chief Justice when confronted with two points
of view presented by the rival parties, is called upon to decide between them
and the decision vitally affects the rights of the parties in that, either the
claim for appointing an arbitral tribunal leading to an award is denied to a
party or the claim to have an arbitration proceeding set in motion for
entertaining a claim is facilitated by the Chief Justice. In this context, it
is not possible to say that the Chief Justice is merely exercising an
administrative function when called upon to appoint an arbitrator and that he
need not even issue notice to opposite side before appointing an arbitrator.

36\. It is fundamental to our procedural jurisprudence, that the right of no
person shall be affected without he being heard. This necessarily imposes an
obligation on the Chief Justice to issue notice to the opposite party when he
is moved under Section 11 of the Act. The notice to the opposite party cannot
be considered to be merely an intimation to that party of the filing of the
arbitration application and the passing of an administrative order Page 1819
appointing an arbitrator or an arbitral tribunal. It is really the giving of
an opportunity of being heard. There have been cases where claims for
appointment of an arbitrator based on an arbitration agreement are made ten or
twenty years after the period of the contract has come to an end. There have
been cases where the appointment of an arbitrator has been sought, after the
parties had settled the accounts and the concerned party had certified that he
had no further claims against the other contracting party. In other words,
there have been occasions when dead claims are sought to be resurrected. There
have been cases where assertions are made of the existence of arbitration
agreements when, in fact, such existence is strongly disputed by the other
side who appears on issuance of notice. Controversies are also raised as to
whether the claim that is sought to be put forward comes within the purview of
the concerned arbitration clause at all. The Chief Justice has necessarily to
apply his mind to these aspects before coming to a conclusion one way or the
other and before proceeding to appoint an arbitrator or declining to appoint
an arbitrator. Obviously, this is an adjudicatory process. An opportunity of
hearing to both parties is a must. Even in administrative functions if rights
are affected, rules of natural justice step in. The principles settled by
Ridge v. Baldwin [(1963) 2 ALL ER 66] are well known, therefore, to the
extent, Konkan Railway (supra) states that no notice need be issued to the
opposite party to give him an opportunity of being heard before appointing an
arbitrator, with respect, the same has to be held to be not sustainable.

37\. It is true that finality under Section 11 (7) of the Act is attached only
to a decision of the Chief Justice on a matter entrusted by sub- Section (4)
or sub-Section (5) or sub-Section (6) of that Section. Sub- Section (4) deals
with the existence of an appointment procedure and the failure of a party to
appoint the arbitrator within 30 days from the receipt of a request to do so
from the other party or when the two appointed arbitrators fail to agree on
the presiding arbitrator within 30 days of their appointment. Sub-Section (5)
deals with the parties failing to agree in nominating a sole arbitrator within
30 days of the request in that behalf made by one of the parties to the
arbitration agreement and sub-Section (6) deals with the Chief Justice
appointing an arbitrator or an arbitral tribunal when the party or the two
arbitrators or a person including an institution entrusted with the function,
fails to perform the same. The finality, at first blush, could be said to be
only on the decision on these matters. But the basic requirement for
exercising his power under Section 11(6), is the existence of an arbitration
agreement in terms of Section 7 of the Act and the applicant before the Chief
Justice being shown to be a party to such an agreement. It would also include
the question of the existence of jurisdiction in him to entertain the request
and an enquiry whether at least a part of the cause of action has arisen
within the concerned State. Therefore, a decision on jurisdiction and on the
existence of the arbitration agreement and of the person making the request
being a party to that agreement and the subsistence of an arbitrable dispute
require to be decided and the decision on these aspects is a prelude to the
Chief Justice considering whether the requirements of sub-Section (4), sub-
Section (5) or sub-Section (6) of Section 11 are satisfied when approached
with the request for appointment of an arbitrator. It is difficult to
understand the finality to referred to in Section 11(7) as excluding the
decision Page 1820 on his competence and the locus standi of the party who
seeks to invoke his jurisdiction to appoint an arbitrator. Viewed from that
angle, the decision on all these aspects rendered by the Chief Justice would
attain finality and it is obvious that the decision on these aspects could be
taken only after notice to the parties and after hearing them.

38\. It is necessary to define what exactly the Chief Justice, approached with
an application under Section 11 of the Act, is to decide at that stage.
Obviously, he has to decide his own jurisdiction in the sense, whether the
party making the motion has approached the right High Court. He has to decide
whether there is an arbitration agreement, as defined in the Act and whether
the person who has made the request before him, is a party to such an
agreement. It is necessary to indicate that he can also decide the question
whether the claim was a dead one; or a long barred claim that was sought to be
resurrected and whether the parties have concluded the transaction by
recording satisfaction of their mutual rights and obligations or by receiving
the final payment without objection. It may not be possible at that stage, to
decide whether a live claim made, is one which comes within the purview of the
arbitration clause. It will be appropriate to leave that question to be
decided by the arbitral tribunal on taking evidence, along with the merits of
the claims involved in the arbitration. The Chief Justice has to decide
whether the applicant has satisfied the conditions for appointing an
arbitrator under Section 11(6) of the Act. For the purpose of taking a
decision on these aspects, the Chief Justice can either proceed on the basis
of affidavits and the documents produced or take such evidence or get such
evidence recorded, as may be necessary. We think that adoption of this
procedure in the context of the Act would best serve the purpose sought to be
achieved by the Act of expediting the process of arbitration, without too many
approaches to the court at various stages of the proceedings before the
Arbitral tribunal.

39\. An aspect that requires to be considered at this stage is the question
whether the Chief Justice of the High Court or the Chief Justice of India can
designate a non-judicial body or authority to exercise the power under Section
11(6) of the Act. We have already held that, obviously, the legislature did
not want to confer the power on the Court as defined in the Act, namely, the
District Court, and wanted to confer the power on the Chief Justices of the
High Courts and on the Chief Justice of India. Taking note of Section 5 of the
Act and the finality attached by Section 11 (7) of the Act to his order and
the conclusion we have arrived at that the adjudication is judicial in nature,
it is obvious that no person other than a Judge and no non-judicial body can
be designated for entertaining an application for appointing an arbitrator
under Section 11(6) of the Act or for appointing an arbitrator. In our
dispensation, judicial powers are to be exercised by the judicial authorities
and not by non-judicial authorities. This scheme cannot be taken to have been
given the go-by by the provisions in the Act in the light of what we have
discussed earlier. Therefore, what the Chief Justice can do under Section
11(6) of the Act is to seek the help of a non-judicial body to point out a
suitable person as an arbitrator in the context of Section 11(8) of the Act
and on getting the necessary information, if it is acceptable, to name that
person as the arbitrator or the set of persons as the arbitral tribunal.

40\. Then the question is whether the Chief Justice of the High Court can
designate a district judge to perform the functions under Section 11(6) of the
Act. We have seen the definition of 'Court' in the Act. We have reasoned that
the intention of the legislature was not to entrust the duty of appointing an
arbitrator to the District Court. Since the intention of the statute was to
entrust the power to the highest judicial authorities in the State and in the
country, we have no hesitation in holding that the Chief Justice cannot
designate a district judge to perform the functions under Section 11(6) of the
Act. This restriction on the power of the Chief Justice on designating a
district judge or a non-judicial authority flows from the scheme of the Act.

41\. In our dispensation of justice, especially in respect of matters
entrusted to the ordinary hierarchy of courts or judicial authorities, the
duty would normally be performed by a judicial authority according to the
normal procedure of that court or of that authority. When the Chief Justice of
the High Court is entrusted with the power, he would be entitled to designate
another judge of the High Court for exercising that power. Similarly, the
Chief Justice of India would be in a position to designate another judge of
the Supreme Court to exercise the power under Section 11(6) of the Act. When
so entrusted with the right to exercise such a power, the judge of the High
Court and the judge of the Supreme Court would be exercising the power vested
in the Chief Justice of the High Court or in the Chief Justice of India.
Therefore, we clarify that the Chief Justice of a High Court can delegate the
function under Section 11(6) of the Act to a judge of that court and he would
actually exercise the power of the Chief Justice conferred under Section 11(6)
of the Act. The position would be the same when the Chief Justice of India
delegates the power to another judge of the Supreme Court and he exercises
that power as designated by the Chief Justice of India.

42\. In this context, it has also to be noticed that there is an ocean of
difference between an institution which has no judicial functions and an
authority or person who is already exercising judicial power in his capacity
as a judicial authority. Therefore, only a judge of the Supreme Court or a
judge of the High Court could respectively be equated with the Chief Justice
of India or the Chief Justice of the High Court while exercising power under
Section 11(6) of the Act as designated by the Chief Justice. A non-judicial
body or institution cannot be equated with a Judge of the High Court or a
Judge of the Supreme Court and it has to be held that the designation
contemplated by Section 11(6) of the Act is not a designation to an
institution that is incompetent to perform judicial functions. Under our
dispensation a non-judicial authority cannot exercise judicial powers.

43\. Once we arrive at the conclusion that the proceeding before the Chief
Justice while entertaining an application under Section 11(6) of the Act is
adjudicatory, then obviously, the outcome of that adjudication is a judicial
order. Once it is a judicial order, the same, as far as the High Court is
concerned would be final and the only avenue open to a party feeling aggrieved
by the order of the Chief Justice would be to approach to the Supreme Court
under Article 136 of the Constitution of India. If it were an order by the
Chief Justice of India, the party will not have any further remedy in respect
of the matters covered by the order of the Chief Justice of India or the Judge
of the Page 1822 Supreme Court designated by him and he will have to
participate in the arbitration before the Tribunal only on the merits of the
claim. Obviously, the dispensation in our country, does not contemplate any
further appeal from the decision of the Supreme Court and there appears to be
nothing objectionable in taking the view that the order of the Chief Justice
of India would be final on the matters which are within his purview, while
called upon to exercise his jurisdiction under Section 11 of the Act. It is
also necessary to notice in this context that this conclusion of ours would
really be in aid of quick disposal of arbitration claims and would avoid
considerable delay in the process, an object that is sought to be achieved by
the Act.

44\. It is seen that some High Courts have proceeded on the basis that any
order passed by an arbitral tribunal during arbitration, would be capable of
being challenged under Article 226 or 227 of the Constitution of India. We see
no warrant for such an approach. Section 37 makes certain orders of the
arbitral tribunal appealable. Under Section 34, the aggrieved party has an
avenue for ventilating his grievances against the award including any in-
between orders that might have been passed by the arbitral tribunal acting
under Section 16 of the Act. The party aggrieved by any order of the arbitral
tribunal, unless has a right of appeal under Section 37 of the Act, has to
wait until the award is passed by the Tribunal. This appears to be the scheme
of the Act. The arbitral tribunal is after all, the creature of a contract
between the parties, the arbitration agreement, even though if the occasion
arises, the Chief Justice may constitute it based on the contract between the
parties. But that would not alter the status of the arbitral tribunal. It will
still be a forum chosen by the parties by agreement. We, therefore, disapprove
of the stand adopted by some of the High Courts that any order passed by the
arbitral tribunal is capable of being corrected by the High Court under
Article 226 or 227 of the Constitution of India. Such an intervention by the
High Courts is not permissible.

45\. The object of minimizing judicial intervention while the matter is in the
process of being arbitrated upon, will certainly be defeated if the High Court
could be approached under Article 227 of the Constitution of India or under
Article 226 of the Constitution of India against every order made by the
arbitral tribunal. Therefore, it is necessary to indicate that once the
arbitration has commenced in the arbitral tribunal, parties have to wait until
the award is pronounced unless, of course, a right of appeal is available to
them under Section 37 of the Act even at an earlier stage.

46\. We, therefore, sum up our conclusions as follows:

i) The power exercised by the Chief Justice of the High Court or the Chief
Justice of India under Section 11(6) of the Act is not an administrative
power. It is a judicial power.

ii) The power under Section 11(6) of the Act, in its entirety, could be
delegated, by the Chief Justice of the High Court only to another judge of
that court and by the Chief Justice of India to another judge of the Supreme
Court.

(iii) In case of designation of a judge of the High Court or of the Supreme
Court, the power that is exercised by the designated, judge would be that of
the Chief Justice as conferred by the statute.

(iv) The Chief Justice or the designated judge will have the right to decide
the preliminary aspects as indicated in the earlier part of this judgment.
These will be, his own jurisdiction, to entertain the request, the existence
of a valid arbitration agreement, the existence or otherwise of a live claim,
the existence of the condition for the exercise of his power and on the
qualifications of the arbitrator or arbitrators. The Chief Justice or the
judge designated would be entitled to seek the opinion of an institution in
the matter of nominating an arbitrator qualified in terms of Section 11(8) of
the Act if the need arises but the order appointing the arbitrator could only
be that of the Chief Justice or the judge designate.

(v) Designation of a district judge as the authority under Section 11(6) of
the Act by the Chief Justice of the High Court is not warranted on the scheme
of the Act.

(vi) Once the matter reaches the arbitral tribunal or the sole arbitrator, the
High Court would not interfere with orders passed by the arbitrator or the
arbitral tribunal during the course of the arbitration proceedings and the
parties could approach the court only in terms of Section 37 of the Act or in
terms of Section 34 of the Act.

(vii) Since an order passed by the Chief Justice of the High Court or by the
designated judge of that court is a judicial order, an appeal will lie against
that order only under Article 136 of the Constitution of India to the Supreme
Court.

(viii) There can be no appeal against an order of the Chief Justice of India
or a judge of the Supreme Court designated by him while entertaining an
application under Section 11(6) of the Act.

(ix) In a case where an arbitral tribunal has been constituted by the parties
without having recourse to Section 11(6) of the Act, the arbitral tribunal
will have the jurisdiction to decide all matters as contemplated by Section 16
of the Act.

(x) Since all were guided by the decision of this Court in Konkan Railway
Corporation Ltd. and Anr. v. Rani Construction Pvt. Ltd. and orders under
Section 11(6) of the Act have been made based on the position adopted in that
decision, we clarify that appointments of arbitrators or arbitral tribunals
thus far made, are to be treated as valid, all objections being left to be
decided under Section 16 of the Act. As and from this date, the position as
adopted in this judgment will govern even pending applications under Section
11(6) of the Act.

(xi) Where District Judges had been designated by the Chief Justice of the
High Court under Section 11(6) of the Act, the appointment orders thus far
made by them will be treated as valid; but applications if any pending Page
1824 before them as on this date will stand transferred, to be dealt with by
the Chief Justice of the concerned High Court or a Judge of that court
designated by the Chief Justice.

(xii) The decision in Konkan Railway Corporation Ltd. and Anr. v. Rani
Construction Pvt. Ltd. is overruled.

44\. The individual appeals will be posted before the appropriate bench for
being disposed of in the light of the principles settled by this decision.

_________________________________________________________________________ C.K.
Thakker, J.

1\. I have had the benefit of going through the judgment prepared by my
learned brother P.K. Balasubramanyan ('majority judgment' for short). I,
however, express my inability to agree with the majority judgment on the
question as to the nature of function performed by the Chief Justice of the
High Court/Chief Justice of India or 'any person or institution designated by
him' under Sub-section (6) of Section 11 of the Arbitration and Conciliation
Act, 1996.

2\. The concept of arbitration is not unknown to India. In good old days,
disputes between private individuals used to be placed before Panchas and
Panchayats. Likewise, commercial matters were decided by Mahajans and
Chambers. Formal arbitration proceedings, however, came into existence after
Britishers started commercial activities in India. The provisions relating to
arbitration were found in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1859 (Act VIII of 1859)
which was repealed by Act X of 1877. A full-fledged law pertaining to
arbitration in India was the Arbitration Act, 1899. A consolidated and amended
law relating to arbitration was passed in 1940, known as the Arbitration Act,
1940 (Act X 1940).

As has been said, protracted, time consuming, atrociously expensive and
complex court procedure impelled the commercial-world to an alternative, less
formal, more effective and speedy mode of resolution of disputes by a Judge of
choice of the parties which culminated into passing of an Arbitration Act.
Experience, however, belied expectations. Proceedings became highly technical
and thoroughly complicated. The provisions of the Act made 'lawyers laugh and
litigants weep'. Representations were made from all quarters of the society to
amend the law by making it more responsive to contemporary requirements.
Moreover, apart from arbitration, conciliation has been getting momentum and
worldwide recognition as an effective instrument of settlement of disputes.
There was no composite statute dealing with all matters relating to
arbitration and conciliation.

3\. The United Nations Commission on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL)
adopted a Model Law in 1985 on International Commercial Arbitration. The Page
1825 General Assembly of the United Nations recommended member - States to
give due consideration to the Model Law to have uniformity in arbitration
procedure which resulted in passing of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act,
1996. The Act is a complete Code in itself and consolidates and amends the law
relating to domestic arbitration, international commercial arbitration and
enforcement of foreign arbitral awards. The Preamble expressly refers to
UNCITRAL Model Law on International Commercial Arbitration and UNCITRAL
Conciliation Rules.

4\. Over and above 'Preliminary' (Section 1), the Act is in four parts. Part I
(Sections 2 to 43) deals with Arbitration. Part II (Sections 44 to 60)
contains provisions relating to Enforcement of Foreign Awards. While Part III
(Section 61 to 81) provides for Conciliation, Part IV (Sections 82 to

86) relates to Supplementary Provisions. In these cases, we are mainly
concerned with Part I.

General provisions are found in Chapter I (Sections 2 to 6). Section 2(b)
defines 'arbitration agreement' as referred to in Section 7. 'Arbitral
tribunal' means a sole arbitrator or a panel of arbitrators - Section 2

(d). Clause (h) defines 'party' as a party to arbitration agreement. Section 5
restricts judicial intervention. The said section is material and reads thus ;

"5. Extent of judicial intervention. -Notwithstanding anything contained in
any other law for the time being in force, in matters governed by this Part,
no judicial authority shall intervene except where so provided in this Part."

Chapter II deals with 'Arbitration agreement'. Section 7 declares that by an
arbitration agreement, the parties may submit to arbitration all or certain
disputes between them. Such agreement must be in writing. Section 8 confers
power on a judicial authority to refer the dispute to arbitration in certain
cases. Section 9 enables the court to make interim orders. Chapter III
provides for composition of Arbitral Tribunal. Section 10 allows parties to
determine the number of arbitrators but declares that 'such number shall not
be an even number'. Section 11 relates to appointment of arbitrators. It is
relevant and material and may be quoted in extenso;

"11. Appointment of arbitrators. - (1) A person of any nationality may be an
arbitrator, unless otherwise agreed by the parties. (2) Subject to Sub-section
(6), the parties are free to agree on a procedure for appointing the
arbitrator or arbitrators. (3) Failing any agreement referred to in Sub-
section (2), in an arbitration with three arbitrators, each party shall
appoint one arbitrator, and the two appointed arbitrators shall appoint the
third arbitrator who shall act as the presiding arbitrator.

(4) If the appointment procedure in Sub-section (3) applies and-

(a) a party fails to appoint an arbitrator within thirty days from the receipt
of a request to do so from the other party; or

(b) the two appointed arbitrators fail to agree on the third arbitrator within
thirty days from the date of their appointment; Page 1826 the appointment
shall be made, upon request of a party, by the Chief Justice or any person or
institution designated by him.

(5) Failing any agreement referred to in Sub-section (2), in an arbitration
with a sole arbitrator, if the parties fail to agree the appointment shall be
made, upon request of a party, by the Chief Justice or any person or
institution designated by him.

(6) Where, under an appointment procedure agreed upon by the parties, -

(a) a party fails to act as required under that procedure; or

(b) the parties, or the two appointed arbitrators, fail to reach an agreement
expected of them under that procedure; or

(c) a person, including an institution, fails to perform any function
entrusted to him or it under that procedure, a party may request the Chief
Justice or any person or institution designated by him to take the necessary
measure, unless the agreement on the appointment procedure provides other
means for securing the appointment.

(7) A decision on a matter entrusted by Sub-section (4) or Sub-section (5) or
Sub-section (6) to the Chief Justice or the person or institution designated
by him is final.

(8) The Chief Justice or the person or institution designated by him, in
appointing an arbitrator, shall have due regard to -

(a) any qualification required for the arbitrator by the agreement of the
parties, and

(b) other considerations as are likely to secure the appointment of an
independent and impartial arbitrator.

(9) In the case of appointment of sole or third arbitrator in an international
commercial arbitration, the Chief Justice of India or the person or
institution designated by him may appoint an arbitrator of a nationality other
than the nationalities of the parties where the parties belong to different
nationalities.

(10) The Chief Justice may make such scheme as he may deem appropriate for
dealing with matters entrusted by Sub-section (4) or Sub-section (5) or Sub-
section (6) to him.

(11) Where more than one request has been made under Sub-section (4) or Sub-
section (5) or Sub-section (6) to the Chief Justices of different High Courts
or their designates, the Chief Justice or his designate to whom the request
has been first made under the relevant sub-section shall alone be competent to
decide on the request.

(12)(a) Where the matters referred to in Sub-sections (4), (5), (6), (7), (8)
and (10) arise in an international commercial arbitration the reference to
"Chief Justice" in those sub-sections shall be construed as a reference to the
"Chief Justice of India".

(b) Where the matters referred to in Sub-sections (4), (5), (6), (7), (8) and
(10) arise in any other arbitration, the reference to "Chief Justice" in those
sub-sections shall be construed as a reference to the Chief Justice of the
Page 1827 High Court within whose local limits the principal Civil Court
referred to, in Clause (e) of Sub-section (1) of Section 2 is situate and,
where the High Court itself is the Court referred to in that clause, to the
Chief Justice of that High Court."

Section 12 requires the arbitrator to disclose the disqualification, if any.
It also permits parties to challenge such arbitrator. Whereas Section 13 lays
down procedure for challenge, Sections 14 and 15 deal with special situations.

Chapter IV relates to jurisdiction of Arbitral Tribunals. Section 16 is
another important provision and confers power on the Arbitral Tribunal to rule
on its own jurisdiction. It reads thus ;

"16. Competence of arbitral tribunal to rule on its jurisdiction.-(1) The
arbitral tribunal may rule on its own jurisdiction, including ruling on any
objections with respect to the existence or validity of the arbitration
agreement, and for that purpose. -

(a) an arbitration clause which forms part of a contract shall be treated as
an agreement independent of the other terms of the contract; and

(b) a decision by the arbitral tribunal that the contract is null and void
shall not entail ipso jure the invalidity of the submission clause. (2) A plea
that the arbitral tribunal does not have jurisdiction shall be raised not
later than the submission of the statement of defence; however, a party shall
not be precluded from raising such a plea merely because that he has
appointed, or participated in the appointment of an arbitrator. (3) A plea
that the arbitral tribunal is exceeding the scope of its authority shall be
raised as soon as the matter alleged to be beyond the scope of its authority
is raised during the arbitral proceedings. (4) The arbitral tribunal may, in
either of the cases referred to in Sub- section (2) or Sub-section (3) admit a
later plea if it considers the delay justified.

(5) The arbitral tribunal shall decide on a plea referred to in Sub-section
(2) or Sub-section (3) and, where the arbitral tribunal takes a decision
rejecting the plea, continue with the arbitral proceedings and make an
arbitral award.

(6) A party aggrieved by such an arbitral award may make an application for
setting aside such an arbitral award in accordance with Section 34." Chapters
V and VI relate to 'Conduct of Arbitral Proceedings' and 'Making of Arbitral
Award and Termination of Proceedings'. Chapters VII, VIII and IX provide for
'Recourse Against Arbitral Award', 'Finality and Enforcement of Arbitral
Awards' and 'Appeals' respectively. Chapter X covers 'Miscellaneous' matters.

5\. The controversy in the present group of matters centres round
interpretation of Section 11 and the nature of function performed by the Chief
Justice under Sub-section (6) thereof. According to one view, it is
administrative, while according to the other view, it is judicial or quasi-
judicial.

6\. I have already quoted Section 11. It provides for appointment of
arbitrators. Sub-sections (1) to (3) which confer power on parties to
arbitration agreement to appoint arbitrators present no difficulty. Sub-
sections (4) to (6) deal with cases where there is failure by the parties to
appoint an arbitrator or arbitrators or default by two arbitrators in
appointing the third arbitrator. The Act in such eventuality empowers the
Chief Justice or any person or institution designated by him to take necessary
steps for securing the appointment. Sub-section (7) of Section 11 makes the
'decision' of the Chief Justice 'final'. Sub-section (8) requires the Chief
Justice or the person or institution designated by him in appointing an
arbitrator to have due regard to qualifications required of the arbitrator by
the agreement of the parties as also other considerations as are likely to
secure the appointment of independent and impartial arbitrator. Sub-section
(10) enables the Chief Justice to frame a scheme dealing with matters
entrusted to him by Sub-sections (4) to (6). Section 11 came to be interpreted
by this Court in few cases. In Sundaram Finance Ltd. v. NEPC India Ltd., a two
Judge Bench was called upon to consider whether under Section 9 of the Act,
the 'court' had jurisdiction to pass interim orders before arbitral
proceedings commenced and before an arbitrator was appointed. Considering the
scope of the said provision, this Court held that the 'court' had no
jurisdiction to entertain application under Section 9 before initiation of
arbitration proceedings.

7\. The Court, however, taking note of UNCITRAL Model Law, observed: "Under
the 1996 Act, appointment of Arbitrator(s) is made as per the provision of
Section 11 which does not require the Court to pass a judicial order
appointing Arbitrator(s)".

(emphasis supplied) It is, no doubt, true that the question about nature of
function to be performed by the Chief Justice under Section 11 did not
strictly arise in that case and, hence, the above observation could not be
termed as 'ratio'. As I will presently show, in a subsequent case, it was
submitted that the statement was in the nature of 'passing observation' or
'obiter'.

8\. In Ador Sami Private Ltd. v. Peekay Holdings Ltd. and Ors., a direct
question arose before a two-Judge Bench. There, an order passed by the Chief
Justice under Sub-section (6) of Section 11 of the Act was challenged in this
Court under Article 136 of the Constitution. The question before the Court was
whether a special leave petition was maintainable. Reproducing the observation
in Sundaram Finance Ltd., the Court held that Page 1829 the order passed by
the Chief Justice under Section 11 of the Act was administrative in nature.
Referring to a decision of the Constitution Bench in Indo-China Steam
Navigation Co. Ltd. v. Jasjit Singh, Additional Collector of Customs and Ors.,
, the Court observed that it is well settled that a petition under Article 136
of the Constitution would lie against an order made by a Court or Tribunal.
Since the Chief Justice or his designate acts under Section 11(6) of the Act
in administrative capacity, the order could not be said to have been passed by
a court or by a tribunal having trappings of a court. Special leave petition
was hence held not maintainable.

In Konkan Railway Corporation Ltd. v. Mehul Construction Co. (Konkan Railway
Corporation Ltd. I), the point was again considered by a three- Judge Bench.
It was observed that an important question had arisen for consideration of the
Court as to the nature of the order passed by the Chief Justice under Section
11(6) of the Act and the remedy available to the aggrieved party against such
order. Referring to Sundaram Finance Ltd. and Ador Samia Private Ltd., the
Court held that the function performed by the Chief Justice was essentially to
aid the constitution of Arbitral Tribunal. The Legislature had consciously
chosen to confer the power on the 'Chief Justice' and not on the 'Court'. The
order passed by the Chief Justice or his nominee was administrative order. The
Court considered UNCITRAL Model Law of International Commercial Arbitration,
the old Act of 1940 and the relevant provisions of 1996 Act and observed that
the sole objective was to resolve disputes as expeditiously as possible so
that trade and commerce are not adversely affected on account of litigation.
The Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Act clearly enunciated the object
of the legislation that it was intended to minimize the supervisory role of
the court in arbitral process.

According to the Court, when the matter is placed before the Chief Justice or
his nominee under Section 11 of the Act, it is imperative for the Chief
Justice or his nominee to bear in mind the legislative intent. The Chief
Justice or his nominee is not expected to entertain contentious issues between
the parties and decide them. Section 16 of the Act empowers the Arbitral
Tribunal to rule on its own jurisdiction. Combined reading of Sections 11 and
16 make it crystal clear that questions as to qualifications, independence and
impartiality of Arbitral Tribunal as also of the jurisdiction of the tribunal
can be raised before the arbitrator who will decide them. The function of the
Chief Justice or his nominee is just to appoint an arbitrator without wasting
time. The nature of the function to be performed by the Chief Justice is
essentially to aid the constitution of the tribunal and is administrative. If
the function is held to be judicial or quasi-judicial, the order passed by the
Chief Justice or his nominee would be amenable to judicial intervention and a
Page 1830 reluctant litigant would attempt to frustrate the object of the Act
by adopting dilatory tactics by approaching a court of law against an
appointment of arbitrator. Such an interpretation should be avoided to achieve
the basic objective for which the Act has been enacted. In Konkan Railway
Corporation Ltd. v. Rani Construction Pvt. Ltd. (Konkan Railway Corporation
Ltd. II), a similar question had come for consideration before a two-Judge
Bench. The attention of the Court was invited to earlier decisions including a
three-Judge Bench decision in Konkan Railway Corporation Ltd. I. It was,
however, argued by the learned Solicitor General that once a contention is
raised that the matter cannot be referred to arbitration, the issue has to be
decided by the Chief Justice or his nominee and such an order cannot be
characterized as administrative. When the attention of the learned Solicitor
General was invited to Sundarm Finance Ltd., submitted that the question about
nature of the order under Section 11 was never raised before the Court and the
observation that the order passed by the Chief Justice or his nominee under
Section 11 was administrative was merely 'passing observation' or 'obiter'. In
Ador Samia, special leave petition under Article 136 of the Constitution was
dismissed merely relying upon observation in Sundaram Finance Ltd. It was no
doubt true that in Konkan Railway Corporation Ltd.I, a three-Judge Bench held
that an order passed under Section 11 of the Act by the Chief Justice or his
nominee was administrative in nature but it required reconsideration in view
of several factors. It was submitted that the Act did not take away the power
of the court to decide preliminary issues; the Chief Justice or his nominee
was bound to consider whether there was an arbitration agreement, or whether
an arbitration clause existed or the matters were 'excepted matters'. Again,
if the order of the Chief Justice or his nominee would be treated as
administrative, it could be challenged before a High Court under Article 226
of the Constitution, then before a Division Bench in Letters Patent
Appeal/Intra-court Appeal and then before the Supreme Court under Article 136
of the Constitution which would further delay arbitration proceedings. It was,
therefore, necessary to reconsider the law laid down in Konkan Railway
Corporation Ltd. I.

9\. In view of the contentions raised before a two-Judge Bench, an order was
passed directing the Registry to place the papers before Hon. the Chief
Justice for passing appropriate orders. Konkan Railway Corporation Ltd. I was
thus placed before a Constitution Bench of five Judges. The Constitution
Bench, Page 1831 considered the relevant provisions of the Act and the scheme
framed by the Chief Justice of India known as "The Appointment of Arbitrators
by the Chief Justice of India Scheme, 1996". Discussing the Statement of
Objects and Reasons and considering the relevant provisions of the Act, the
Court held that the only function the Chief Justice or his designate was
required to perform was to fill the gap left by a party to the arbitration
agreement or two arbitrators appointed by the parties and nominate an
arbitrator or umpire so that Arbitral Tribunal is expeditiously constituted
and arbitration proceedings commenced. According to the Constitution Bench,
the order passed by the Chief Justice or his designate under Section 11
nominating an arbitrator could not be said to be 'adjudicatory order' and the
Chief Justice or his designate could not be described as 'Tribunal'. Such an
order, therefore, could not be challenged under Article 136 of the
Constitution. The decision of three-Judge Bench in Konkan Railway Corporation
Ltd. I was thus affirmed.

The Court observed:

"Section 11 of the Act deals with the appointment of arbitrators. It provides
that the parties are free to agree on a procedure for appointing an arbitrator
or arbitrators. In the event of there being no agreement in regard to such
procedure, in an arbitration by three arbitrators each party is required to
appoint one arbitrator and the two arbitrators so appointed must appoint the
third arbitrator. If a party fails to appoint an arbitrator within thirty days
from the request to do so by the other party or the two arbitrators appointed
by the parties fail to agree on a third arbitrator within thirty days of their
appointment, a party may request the Chief Justice to nominate an arbitrator
and the nomination shall be made by the Chief Justice or any person or
institution designated by him. If the parties have not agreed on a procedure
for appointing an arbitrator in an arbitration with a sole arbitrator and the
parties fail to agree on an arbitrator within thirty days from receipt of a
request to one party by the other party, the nomination shall be made on the
request of a party by the Chief Justice or his designate. Where an appointment
procedure has been agreed upon by the parties but a party fails to act as
required by that procedure or the parties, or the two arbitrators appointed by
them, fail to reach the agreement expected of them under that procedure or a
person or institution fails to perform the function entrusted to him or it
under that procedure, a party may request the Chief Justice or his designate
to nominate an arbitrator, unless the appointment procedure provides other
means in this behalf. The decision of the Chief Justice or his designate is
final. In nominating an arbitrator the Chief Justice or his designate must
have regard to the qualifications required of the arbitrator in the agreement
between the parties and to other considerations that will secure the
nomination of an independent and impartial arbitrator. There is nothing in
Section 11 that requires the party other than the party making the request to
be noticed. It does not contemplate a response from that other party. It does
not contemplate a decision by the Chief Justice or his designate on any
controversy that the other party may raise, even in Page 1832 regard to its
failure to appoint an arbitrator within the period of thirty days. That the
Chief Justice or his designate has to make the nomination of an arbitrator
only if the period of thirty days is over does not lead to the conclusion that
the decision to nominate is adjudicatory. In its request to the Chief Justice
to make the appointment the party would aver that this period has passed and,
ordinarily, correspondence between the parties would be annexed to bear this
out. This is all that the Chief Justice or his designate has to see. That the
Chief Justice or his designate has to take into account the qualifications
required of the arbitrator by the agreement between the parties (which,
ordinarily, would also be annexed to the request) and other considerations
likely to secure the nomination of an independent and impartial arbitrator
also cannot lead to the conclusion that the Chief Justice or his designate is
required to perform an adjudicatory function. That the word 'decision' is used
in the matter of the request by a party to nominate an arbitrator does not of
itself mean that an adjudicatory decision is contemplated. As we see it, the
only function of the Chief Justice or his designate under Section 11 is to
fill the gap left by a party to the arbitration agreement or by the two
arbitrators appointed by the parties and nominate an arbitrator. This is to
enable the arbitral tribunal to be expeditiously constituted and the
arbitration proceedings to commence. The function has been left to the Chief
Justice or his designate advisedly, with a view to ensure that the nomination
of the arbitrator is made by a person occupying high judicial office or his
designate, who would take due care to see that a competent, independent and
impartial arbitrator is nominated. It might be that though the Chief Justice
or his designate might have taken all due care to nominate an independent and
impartial arbitrator, a party in a given case may have justifiable doubts
about that arbitrator's independence or impartiality. In that event it would
be open to that party to challenge the arbitrator under Section 12, adopting
the procedure under Section 13. There is no reason whatever to conclude that
the grounds for challenge under Section 13 are not available only because the
arbitrator has been nominated by the Chief Justice or his designate under
Section 11. It might also be that in a given case the Chief Justice or his
designate may have nominated an arbitrator although the period of thirty days
had not expired. If so, the arbitral tribunal would have been improperly
constituted and be without jurisdiction. It would then be open to the
aggrieved party to require the arbitral tribunal to rule on its jurisdiction.
Section 16 provides for this. It states that the arbitral tribunal may rule on
its own jurisdiction. That the arbitral tribunal may rule "on any objections
with respect to the existence or validity of the arbitration agreement" shows
that the arbitral tribunal's authority under Section 16 is not confined to the
width of its jurisdiction, as was submitted by learned Counsel for the
appellants, but goes to the very root of its jurisdiction. There would,
therefore, be no impediment in contending before the arbitral tribunal that it
had been wrongly constituted by reason of the fact that the Chief Justice or
his designate had nominated an arbitrator although the period of thirty days
had not expired and that, therefore, it had no jurisdiction."

Regarding the scheme, the Court observed that such scheme could not govern the
Act. Since Section 11 did not contain any element of 'adjudication' and the
function of the Chief Justice or his designate was purely administrative,
there was no question of issuing notice to affected persons or to afford
opportunity of hearing. The scheme, however, contained Clause 7 (Notice to
affected persons) and expressly provided for issuance of notice to persons
likely to be affected thereby. It thus went 'beyond terms of Section 11' and
was, therefore, bad.

The Court, in this connection, observed ;

"The schemes made by the Chief Justices under Section 11 cannot govern the
interpretation of Section 11. If the schemes, as drawn, go beyond the terms of
Section 11 they are bad and have to be amended. To the extent that The
Appointment of Arbitrators by the Chief Justice of India Scheme, 1996, goes
beyond Section 11 by requiring, in Clause 7, the service of a notice upon the
other party to the arbitration agreement to show cause why the nomination of
an arbitrator, as requested, should not be made, it is bad and must be
amended. The other party needs to be given notice of the request only so that
it may know of it and it may, if it so chooses, assist the Chief Justice or
his designate in the nomination of an arbitrator." The point was thus
concluded by a Constitution Bench of five Judges wherein it was held that the
function performed by the Chief Justice or his designate was administrative
and did not contain any adjudicatory process. The order passed by the Chief
Justice or his designate could not be challenged before this Court under
Article 136 of the Constitution.

10\. In the light of the above legal position, when these matters were placed
before a Constitution Bench of five Judges on July 19, 2005, the following
order was passed :

"After hearing the learned Counsel for the parties, we are of the opinion that
the cases may call for re-consideration of the decision of this Court in
Konkan Railway Corporation Ltd. and Anr. v. Rani Construction Pvt. Ltd., , in
particular the view taken in paras 18 to 21 thereof, which is by a
Constitution Bench.

Be placed before a seven-Judge Bench."

11\. That is how, the matters have been placed before us. We have heard the
learned Counsel for the parties at considerable length. It was urged by Mr.
Venugopal, Senior Advocate that when the Chief Justice is requested to make an
appointment of an arbitrator under Sub-section (6) of Section 11 of the Act,
the Chief Justice must apply his mind and satisfy himself about the
fulfillment of conditions for the exercise of power for appointment of an
arbitrator. The Chief Justice for that purpose, is bound to Page 1834 decide
certain preliminary or 'jurisdictional' facts before taking a decision of
appointment of arbitrator. He must be convinced that there is an 'arbitration
agreement' under Section 7 of the Act, the other party has refused to make an
appointment, or parties or two arbitrators have failed to reach an agreement
or a person or institution has failed to perform the function entrusted to him
or it. Moreover, the Chief Justice in appointing an arbitrator 'shall have
regard to' qualifications, independence and impartiality of the arbitrator.
The Chief Justice, after considering all those factors will come to a
conclusion whether the provisions of law have been complied with and only then
he may make such order. The issues arise before the Chief Justice are thus
contentious issues and require adjudication. Such adjudication affects rights
of parties. The 'duty to act judicially' is, therefore, implicit and the
decision is judicial or quasi-judicial.

I am unable to uphold the argument. In my view, it is based on the
misconception that wherever a statute requires certain matters to be taken
into account and the authority is obliged to apply its mind to those
considerations, the action, decision or adjudication must be held judicial or
quasi-judicial. With respect, this is not the legal position.

12\. It is settled law that in several cases, an appropriate authority may
have to consider the circumstances laid down in the Act, apply its mind and
then to take a decision. Such decision may affect one or the other party and
may have far reaching consequences. But from that it cannot be concluded that
the decision is judicial or quasi-judicial and not administrative.

Before more than fifty years, in State of Madras v. C.P. Sarthy, the
Constitution Bench of this Court, while interpreting the provisions of Section
10 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 held that the action of the Government
of referring or refusing to refer the matter for an adjudication to Labour
Court or Industrial Tribunal is administrative. The Court stated:

This is, however, not to say that the Government will be justified in making a
reference under Section 10(1) without satisfying itself on the facts and
circumstances brought to its notice that an industrial dispute exists or is
apprehended in relation to an establishment or a definite group of
establishments engaged in a particular industry. It is also desirable that the
Government should, wherever possible, indicate the nature of the dispute in
the order of reference. But it must be remembered that in making a reference
under Section 10(1) the Government is doing an administrative act and the fact
that it has to form an opinion as to the factual existence of an industrial
dispute as a preliminary step to the discharge of its function does not make
it any the less administrative in character. The Court cannot, therefore,
canvass the order of reference closely to see if there was any material before
the Government to support its conclusion, as if it was a judicial or quasi-
judicial determination. No doubt, it will be open to a party seeking to impugn
the resulting award to show that what was referred Page 1835 by the Government
was not an industrial dispute within the meaning of the Act, and that,
therefore, the Tribunal had no jurisdiction to make the award. But, if the
dispute was an industrial dispute as defined in the Act, its factual existence
and the expediency of making a reference in the circumstances of a particular
case are matters entirely for the Government to decide upon, and it will not
be competent for the Court to hold the reference bad and quash the proceedings
for want of jurisdiction merely because there was, in its opinion, no material
before the Government on which it could have come to an affirmative conclusion
on those matters.

(emphasis supplied)

13\. Now, it cannot be disputed that the action of the Government (of
referring the dispute or refusing to refer it) certainly affects one party or
the other. Still an action which is otherwise administrative in nature does
not change its character and remains as it is irrespective of the consequences
likely to ensue or the effect of decision on parties to such dispute. [See
also Prem Kakar v. State of Haryana, Sultan Singh v. State of Haryana,
Secretary Indian Tea Association v. Ajit Kumar Barat,] Several similar actions
having far reaching consequences have been held administrative, for instance,
an order of acquisition or requisition of property; an order making an
appointment to a civil post, an order granting sanction to prosecute a public
servant; etc. It cannot be gainsaid that there must be an 'arbitration
agreement' between the parties. It also cannot be denied that there must be
default or failure on the part of one party to appoint an arbitrator. But that
will not make the function performed by the Chief Justice as judicial or
quasi-judicial. Chapter II (Arbitration Agreement) precedes Chapter III
(Composition of Arbitral Tribunal). Therefore, when the question as to
composition of Arbitral Tribunal and appointment of an arbitrator comes up for
consideration, it can safely be assumed that there is an arbitration
agreement, inasmuch as it is in consonance with the legislative scheme and the
question as to the appointment of arbitrator arises only in view of such
agreement. Moreover, before exercising the power to appoint an arbitrator, the
Chief Justice must peruse the relevant record relating to an agreement and
failure by one party in making an appointment which would enable him to act.
There is, however, no doubt in my mind that at that stage, the satisfaction
required is merely of prima facie nature and the Chief Justice does not decide
lis nor contentious issues between the parties. Section 11 neither
contemplates detailed inquiry, nor trial nor findings on controversial or
contested matters.

14\. The Law Commission, in 176th Report on Arbitration and Conciliation
(Amendment) Bill, 2001, after referring to the relevant Rules and legal
opinion, stated:

It is, therefore, clear that the ICC Rules and the opinion of jurists support
the view that at the stage of Section 11, it is permissible to decide
preliminary issues. There are considerable advantages if such issues are
decided at that stage, inasmuch as a decision at that stage saves time and
expense for the parties. As pointed out by Fouchard and others, there is no
question of an 'automatic appointment' of arbitrators, whenever an application
is made for an appointment of arbitrators. The appointing authority normally
considers if a case is made out for appointment of arbitrators and such a
decision can be taken on undisputed facts available at that stage.

(emphasis supplied)

15\. As Fouchard, Gaillard, Goldman on International Commercial Arbitration
(1994 edn.); (para 854) pithily put it; "the Court should only verity that the
clause is not patently void, as it would be unreasonable to require it to
appoint an arbitrator where there is no indication that an arbitration clause
exists. The Court should not be seen to automatically appoint arbitrators in
cases where the arbitration clearly has no contractual basis and the award has
no chance of being recognized in any jurisdiction". (emphasis supplied)

16\. At the stage of exercising powers under Sub-section (6) of Section 11,
the Chief Justice is bound to apply his mind to allegations and counter-
allegations of the parties and will form an opinion on the available material.
Thus, in Wellington Associates Ltd. v. Kirit Mehta, at the stage of Section
11, it was argued that the relevant clause relied upon by the applicant was
not an 'arbitration clause'. It merely permitted parties to agree, in future,
to go to arbitration.

Upholding the objection, the Court observed that the clause was not an
arbitration clause and the application was not maintainable. It held that
Section 16 did not take away the jurisdiction of the Chief Justice to decide
the question of 'existence' of the arbitration agreement. The said section did
not declare that except the Arbitral Tribunal, none else could determine such
question. "Merely because the new Act permits the arbitrator to decide this
question, it does not necessarily follow that at the stage of Section 11, the
Chief Justice of India or his designate cannot decide the question as to the
existence of the arbitration clause." [See also Malaysian Airlines System v.
Stic Travels (P) Ltd., (2001) 1 SCC 509; Nimeet Resources INC v. Essar Steels
Ltd.; (2000) SCC 497; Shin Etsu Chemical Co. Ltd. v. Aksh Optifibre Ltd. and
Anr.].

Page 1837

17\. It was then argued that Sub-section (7) of Section 11 empowers the Chief
Justice to decide the question and uses the expression 'decision' which is
significant. Whenever a statute confers power on an authority to pass an order
or to take a decision, it must be held that the function is judicial or quasi-
judicial and duty to act judicially must be inferred. Even this contention is
not well founded. Sub-section (7), no doubt, uses the term 'decision'. But as
I have already observed earlier, the Chief Justice forms prima facie opinion
as to the fulfillment of conditions specified in Sub-section (6). The decision
neither contemplates adjudication of lis between two or more parties nor
resolves controversial and contentious issues. It merely requires the Chief
Justice to take an appropriate action keeping in view the provisions of Part
II and Sub- sections (1), (4) and (5) of Section 11. Regarding matters which
the Chief Justice is expected to consider, such as qualification, independence
and impartiality of arbitrator, they are statutory provisions and the Chief
Justice is obliged to keep them in view as per mandate of the Legislature. The
said fact, however, does not make the function of the Chief Justice judicial
or quasi-judicial.

18\. It was also submitted that there is an important provision which cannot
be lost sight of and it is the finality of decision rendered by the Chief
Justice. Sub-section (7) expressly declares that the decision of the Chief
Justice under Sub-section (6) of Section 11 is 'final'. It was submitted that
in view of finality attached to the order passed by the Chief Justice, the
order passed by him cannot be made subject-matter of dispute under the Act and
all provisions, including Section 16 must be read in conformity with 'finality
clause'. For that reason also, the action must be held judicial or quasi-
judicial.

19\. As to the ambit and scope of Section 16, I will refer to little later,
but in my view, finality of an order has nothing to do with the nature of
function to be performed by the Chief Justice. Several statutes declare an
order passed, decision taken or declaration made by the competent authority
'final' or 'final and conclusive' or 'final and conclusive and is not open to
challenge in any court'. This is known as 'statutory finality' and such
clauses require to be interpreted in juxta-position of constitutional
provisions. As a general rule, no appeal, revision or review lies against an
order which has been treated by a statute as 'final'. It may not be challenged
by instituting a civil suit in certain cases. But such finality cannot take
away the jurisdiction of High Courts or the Supreme Court and judicial review
is available against 'final' orders albeit on limited grounds. [Vide Somvanti
v. State of Punjab; Neelima Misra v. Harvinder Kaur Paintal and Ors.]

20\. But there is another important reason why the function of the Chief
Justice under Section 11 should be considered administrative. All the three
Sub-sections, (4), (5) and (6) of the said section empower the Chief Justice
or 'any person or institution designated by him' to exercise the power of the
Chief Page 1838 Justice. No provision similar to the one in hand was present
in 1940 Act. Parliament, therefore, has consciously and intentionally made the
present arrangement for the first time allowing exercise of the power by the
Chief Justice himself or through 'any person or institution designated by
him', since the function is administrative in character and is required to be
performed on prima facie satisfaction under Sub-section (6) of Section 11 of
the Act.

21\. Now, let us consider Section 16 of the Act. This section is new and did
not find place in the old Act of 1940. Sub-section (1) of that section enables
the Arbitral Tribunal to rule on its own jurisdiction. It further provides
that the jurisdiction of the tribunal includes ruling on any objections with
respect to existence or validity of the arbitration agreement. Sub-sections
(2), (3) and (4) lay down procedure of raising plea as to the jurisdiction of
the Arbitral Tribunal and entertaining such plea. Sub-section (5) mandates
that the Arbitral Tribunal 'shall decide' such plea and, 'where the arbitral
tribunal takes a decision rejecting the plea, continue with the arbitration
proceedings and make an arbitral award'. Sub- section (6) is equally important
and expressly enacts that a party aggrieved by arbitral award may invoke
Section 34 of the Act for setting aside such award. The provision appears to
have been made to prevent dilatory tactics and abuse of immediate right to
approach the court. If an aggrieved party has right to move the court, it
would not have been possible to preclude the court from granting stay or
interim relief which would bring the arbitration proceedings to a grinding
halt. The provisions of Section 16 (6) read with Section 5 now make the legal
position clear, unambiguous and free from doubt.

22\. Section 16 (1) incorporates the well-known doctrine of Kompetenz -
Kompetenz or competence de la competence. It recognizes and enshrines an
important principle that initially and primarily, it is for the Arbitral
Tribunal itself to determine whether it has jurisdiction in the matter,
subject of course, to ultimate court-control. It is thus a rule of
chronological priority. Kompetenz -Kompetenz is a widely accepted feature of
modern international arbitration, and allows the Arbitral Tribunal to decide
its own jurisdiction including ruling on any objections with respect to the
existence or validity of the arbitration-agreement, subject to final review by
a competent court of law; i.e. subject to Section 34 of the Act.

23\. Chitty on Contract (1999 edn.; p. 802) explains the principle thus:
English law has always taken the view that the arbitral tribunal cannot be the
final adjudication of its own jurisdiction. The final decision as per the
substantive jurisdiction of the tribunal rests with the Court. However, there
is no reason why the tribunal should not have the power, subject to review by
the Court, to rule on its own jurisdiction. Indeed such a power (often
referred to as the principle of "Kompetenz - Kompetenz" has been generally
recognized in other legal systems. It had also been recognized by English Law
before the 1986 Act, but Section 30 of the Act put this on a statutory basis.
Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, the arbitral tribunal Page 1839 may
rule on its substantive jurisdiction that is, as to

(a) whether there is valid arbitration agreement; (b) whether the tribunal is
properly constituted; and (c) what matters have been submitted to arbitration
in accordance with the arbitration agreement. Any such ruling may be
challenged by any arbitral process of appeal or review or in accordance with
the provisions of Part I of the Act, notably by an application under Section
32 or by a challenge to the award under Section

67\. (emphasis supplied) Alan Redfern and Martin Hunter in their work on "Law
and Practice of International Commercial Arbitration", (4th edn.), (para 5-34)
also said:

When any question is raised as to the jurisdiction of the Arbitral Tribunal, a
two stage procedure is followed. At the first stage, if one of the parties
raises 'one or more pleas concerning the existence, validity or scope of the
agreement to arbitrate', the ICC's Court must satisfy itself of the prima
facie existence of such an agreement [ICC Arbitration Rules 6(2)]. If it is
satisfied that such an agreement exists, the ICC's Court must allow the
arbitration to proceed so that, at the second stage, any decision as to the
jurisdiction of the Arbitral Tribunal shall be taken by the Arbitral Tribunal
itself.

24\. To cite Fouchard, Gaillard, Goldman again:

658\. - More fundamentally, although the arbitrators' jurisdiction to rule on
their own jurisdiction is indeed one of the effects of the arbitration
agreement (or even of a prima facie arbitration agreement, since the question
would not arise in the absence of a prima facie arbitration agreement), the
basis of that power is neither the arbitration agreement itself, nor the
principle of pacta sunt servanda under which the arbitration agreement is
Binding.

The competence-competence principle enables the arbitral tribunal to continue
with the proceedings even where the existence or validity of the arbitration
agreement has been challenged by one of the parties for reasons directly
affecting the arbitration agreement, and not simply on the basis of
allegations that the main contract is void or otherwise ineffective. The
principle that the arbitration agreement is autonomous of the main contract is
sufficient to resist a claim that the arbitration agreement is void because
the contract containing it is invalid, but it does not enable the arbitrators
to proceed with the arbitration where the alleged invalidity directly concerns
the arbitration agreement. That is a consequence of the competence-competence
principle alone. The competence-competence principle also allows arbitrators
to determine that an arbitration agreement is invalid and to make an award
declaring that they lack jurisdiction without contradicting themselves.

Of course, neither of those effects results from the arbitration agreement. If
that were the case, one would immediately be confronted with the "vicious
circle" argument put forward by authors opposed to the competence- competence
principle: how can an arbitrator, solely on the basis of an arbitration
agreement, declare that agreement to be void or even hear a claim to that
effect? The answer is simple: the basis for the competence- competence Page
1840 principle lies not in the arbitration agreement, but in the arbitration
laws of the country where the arbitration is held and, more generally, in the
laws of all countries liable to recognize an award made by arbitrators
concerning their own jurisdiction. For example, an international arbitral
tribunal sitting in France can properly make an award declaring that it lacks
jurisdiction for want of a valid arbitration agreement, because it does so on
the basis of French arbitration law, and not on the basis of the arbitration
agreement held to be non-existent or invalid. Similarly, it is perfectly
logical for the interested party to rely on that award in other jurisdictions,
provided that those other jurisdictions also recognize the competence-
competence principle. As we shall now see, the legal basis for the principle
does not prejudice the subsequent review by the courts, in France or in the
country where recognition is sought, of the arbitrators' finding that the
arbitration agreement is non-existent or invalid.

659\. - Even today, the competence-competence principle is all too often
interpreted as empowering the arbitrators to be the sole judges of their
jurisdiction. That would be neither logical nor acceptable. In fact, the real
purpose of the rule is in no way to leave the question of the arbitrators'
jurisdiction in the hands of the arbitrators alone. Their jurisdiction must
instead be reviewed by the courts if an action is brought to set aside or to
enforce the award. Nevertheless, the competence- competence rule ties in with
the idea that there are no grounds for the prima facie suspicion that the
arbitrators themselves will not be able to reach decisions which are fair and
protect the interests of society as well as those of the parties to the
dispute. This same philosophy is also found in the context of arbitrability,
where it serves as the basis for the case law which entrusts arbitrators with
the task of applying rules of public policy (in areas such as antitrust law
and the prevention of corruption), subject to subsequent review by the courts.

660\. - However, it is important to recognize that the competence-competence
rule has a dual function. Like the arbitration agreement, it has or may have
both positive and negative effects, even if the latter have not yet been fully
accepted in a number of jurisdictions. The positive effect of the competence-
competence principle is to enable the arbitrators to rule on their own
jurisdiction, as is widely recognized by international conventions and by
recent statutes on international arbitration. However, the negative effect is
equally important. It is to allow the arbitrators to be not the sole judges,
but the first judges of their jurisdiction. In other words, it is to allow
them to come to a decision on their jurisdiction prior to any court or other
judicial authority, and thereby to limit the role of the courts to the review
of the award. The principle of competence-competence thus obliges any court
hearing a claim concerning the jurisdiction of an arbitral tribunal -
regarding, for example, the constitution of the tribunal or the validity of
the arbitration agreement - to refrain from hearing substantive argument as to
the arbitrators' jurisdiction until such time as the arbitrators themselves
have had the opportunity to do so. In that sense, the competence-competence
principle is a rule of chronological priority. Taking both of its facets into
account, the competence-competence principle can be defined as the rule
whereby arbitrators must have the first Page 1841 opportunity to hear
challenges relating to their jurisdiction, subject to subsequent review by the
courts. From a practical standpoint, the rule is intended to ensure that a
party cannot succeed in delaying the arbitral proceedings by alleging that the
arbitration agreement is invalid or non-existent. Such delay is avoided by
allowing the arbitrators to rule on this issue themselves, subject to
subsequent review by the courts, and by inviting the courts to refrain from
intervening until the award has been made. Nevertheless, the interests of
parties with legitimate claims concerning the invalidity of the arbitration
agreement are not unduly prejudiced, because they will be able to bring those
claims before the arbitrators themselves and, should the arbitrators choose to
reject them, before the courts thereafter.

The competence-competence rule thus concerns not only the positive, but also
the negative effects of the arbitration agreement.

25\. In Renusagar Power Co. Ltd. v. General Electric Co. and Anr., considering
the relevant provisions of the Foreign Awards (Recognition and Enforcement)
Act, 1961, this Court held that the arbitrator or umpire is competent to
provisionally decide his own jurisdiction, if the arbitration agreement so
provides, however, subject to final determination by a competent court.

The Court stated:

"As explained earlier the scheme that emerges on a combined reading of
Sections 3 and 7 of the Foreign Awards Act clearly contemplates that questions
of existence, validity or effect (scope) of the arbitration agreement itself,
in cases where such agreement is wide enough to include within its ambit such
questions, may be decided by the arbitrators initially but their determination
is subject to the decision of the Court and such decision of the Court can be
had either before the arbitration proceedings commence or during their
pendency, if the matter is decided in a Section 3 petition or can be had under
Section 7 after the award is mane and filed in the Court and is sought to be
enforce by a party thereto. In the face of such schemes envisaged by the
Foreign Awards Act which governs this case it will be difficult to accept the
contention that the arbitrators will have no jurisdiction to decide questions
regarding the existence, validity or effect (scope) of the arbitration
agreement. In fact the scheme makes for avoidance of dilatory tactics on the
part of any party to such agreement by merely raising a plea of lack of
arbitrator's competence -and a frivolous plea at that - and enables the
arbitrator to determine the plea one way or the other and if negatived to
proceed to make his award with the further safeguard that the Court would be
in a position to entertain and decide the same plea finally when the award is
sought to be enforced."

(emphasis supplied) In the instant case, according to the majority, Section
16(1) only makes explicit what is even otherwise implicit, namely, that the
tribunal has the jurisdiction to rule its own jurisdiction, 'including ruling
on any objections with respect to the existence or validity of the arbitration
agreement.' So far, so good and I am in respectful agreement with these
observations. The matter, however, does not rest there. Over and above Sub-
section (1), Section 16 contains other sub-sections and in particular, Sub-
sections (5) and (6). The former requires the tribunal to continue the
proceedings in case it decides that the tribunal has jurisdiction in the
matter and the latter provides remedy to the aggrieved party.

26\. In my opinion, conjoint reading of Sub-sections (1), (4), (5) and (6)
makes it abundantly clear that the provision is 'self-contained' and deals
with all cases, even those wherein the plea as to want of jurisdiction has
been rejected. As a general rule, such orders are subject to certiorari
jurisdiction since a court of limited jurisdiction or an inferior tribunal by
wrongly interpreting a statutory provision cannot invest itself with the
jurisdiction which it otherwise does not possess. But it is always open to a
competent Legislature to invest a tribunal of limited jurisdiction with the
power to decide or determine finally the preliminary or jurisdictional facts
on which exercise of its jurisdiction depends. In such cases, the finding
recorded by the tribunal cannot be challenged by certiorari. (Vide Ujjam Bai
v. State of U.P.

27\. As a general rule, neither in England, nor in India, such jurisdiction is
granted on a court of limited jurisdiction or on an inferior tribunal. In
Halsbury's Laws of England, (4th edn. vol. 1; para 56); it has been stated;

It is possible for an inferior tribunal to be vested with power to determine
conclusively questions demarcating the limits of its own jurisdiction. Such a
grant of power must now be regarded as exceptional, in view of the very
restrictive interpretation placed by the courts on statutory formulae
purporting to exclude their inherent supervisory jurisdiction, and their
reluctance to be precluded by subjectively worded grants of power from
determining judicially ascertainable matters delimiting the area of competence
of inferior tribunals, especially where the relevant question is one of law.

(emphasis supplied) In fact, one of the points of differentiation between a
Crown's Court and a statutory tribunal is that whereas a court has inherent
power to decide the question of its own jurisdiction, although as a result of
inquiry, it may turn out that it has no jurisdiction to try the suit, the
jurisdiction of a tribunal constituted under a statute is strictly confined to
the terms of the statute creating it. The existence of preliminary or
'jurisdictional' fact is a sine qua non to the assumption of jurisdiction by a
tribunal of limited jurisdiction. If the jurisdictional fact does not exist,
the tribunal cannot act. But a Legislature Page 1843 may confer such power on
a court of limited jurisdiction or on an inferior tribunal (vide Ebrahim
Aboobaker v. Custodian General; Ujjam Bai v. State of U.P.,; Raja Anand v.
State of U.P.,; Naresh Shridhar Mirazkar v. State of Maharashtra, ; Raza
Textiles Ltd. v. I.T.O.,; Shiv Chander v. Amar Bose,; Shrisht Dhawan v. Shaw
Brothers,; Vatticherubura Village Panchayat v. Nari Venkatarama Deekshithulu,;
Executive Officer, Arthanareswarar Temple v. R. Sathyamoorthy and Ors.].

28\. Let us consider the principle in the light of case-law on the point:
Keeping in view, the distinction referred to hereinabove, before more than
hundred years, in Queen v. Commissioner of Income Tax (1888) 21 QB 313: 33 WR
776, Lord Esher, M.R. made the following observations: "When an inferior court
or tribunal or body, which has to exercise the power of deciding facts, is
first established by Act of Parliament, the legislature has to consider, what
powers it will give that tribunal or body. It may in effect say that, if a
certain state of facts exists and is shown to such tribunal or body before it
proceeds to do certain things, it shall have jurisdiction to do such things,
but not otherwise. There it is not for them conclusively to decide whether
that state of facts exists, and, if they exercise the jurisdiction without its
existence, what they do may be questioned, and it will be held that they have
acted without jurisdiction. But there is another state of things which may
exist. The legislature may intrust the tribunal or body with a jurisdiction,
which includes the jurisdiction to determine whether the preliminary state of
facts exists as well as the jurisdiction, on finding that it does exist, to
proceed further or do something more. When the legislature are establishing
such a tribunal or body with limited jurisdiction, they also have to consider,
whatever jurisdiction they give them, whether there shall be any appeal from
their decision, for otherwise there will be none. In the second of the two
cases I have mentioned it is an erroneous application of the formula to say
that the tribunal cannot give themselves jurisdiction by wrongly deciding
certain facts to exist, because the legislature gave them jurisdiction to Page
1844 determine all the facts, including the existence of the preliminary facts
on which the further exercise of their jurisdiction depends; and if they were
given jurisdiction so to decide, without any appeal being given, there is no
appeal from such exercise of their jurisdiction."

(emphasis supplied)

29\. The above statement of law has been quoted with approval by this Court in
several cases. In Chaube Jagdish Prasad and Anr. v. Ganga Prasad Chaturvedi
the Court stated:

"These observations which relate to inferior courts or tribunals with limited
jurisdiction show that there are two classes of cases dealing with the power
of such a tribunal (1) where the legislature entrusts a tribunal with the
jurisdiction including the jurisdiction to determine whether the preliminary
state of facts on which the exercise of its jurisdiction depends exists and
(2) where the legislature confers jurisdiction on such tribunals to proceed in
a case where a certain state of facts exists or is shown to exist. The
difference is that in the former case the tribunal has power to determine the
facts giving it jurisdiction and in the latter case it has only to see that a
certain state of facts exists." (emphasis supplied) Again, in Addanki
Tiruvenkata Thata Desika Charyulu v. State of Andhra Pradesh and Anr., the
Settlement Officer was empowered to decide finally as to whether inam village
was an 'inam estate'. It also barred jurisdiction of Civil Court from
questioning the correctness of the decision.

30\. Considering the question as to extent to which the powers of statutory
tribunals are 'exclusive', the Constitution Bench after referring to
Commissioner of Income Tax, stated:

"It is manifest that the answer to the question as to whether any particular
case falls under the first or the second of the above categories would depend
on the purpose of the statute and its general scheme, taken in conjunction
with the scope of the enquiry entrusted to the tribunal set up and other
relevant factors."

31\. As already indicated by me earlier, Sub-section (1) of Section 16 does
not merely enable the Arbitral Tribunal to rule on its own jurisdiction, but
requires it to continue arbitral proceedings and pass an arbitral award. [Sub-
section (5)] It allows the aggrieved party to make an application for setting
aside the award in accordance with Section 34. [Sub-section (6)]. Thus, in my
judgment, Section 16 can be described as 'self-contained Code' as regards the
challenge to the jurisdiction of Arbitral Tribunal. As per the scheme
envisaged by Parliament, once the Arbitral Tribunal rules that it has
jurisdiction, it will proceed to decide the matter on merits and make an
award. Parliament has also provided the remedy to the aggrieved party by
enacting that he may make an application under Section 34 of the Act. In the
circumstances, the proceedings cannot be allowed to be arrested or
interference permitted during the pendency of arbitration proceedings.

Page 1845 It was submitted by Mr. Venugopal that once the Chief Justice is
satisfied as to fulfillment of conditions for the exercise of power to appoint
an arbitrator and his decision is 'final', it would be impossible to hold that
the Arbitral Tribunal can go behind the decision of the Chief Justice and hold
otherwise.

Mr. Venugopal suggested that Section 16 should be so construed that it would
apply only to the cases covered by Sub-sections (2) and (3) of Section 11 and
not to Sub-section (6) of Section 11 and the appointment of an arbitrator made
by the Chief Justice. By such interpretation, submitted the counsel, both the
provisions can be harmoniously interpreted and properly applied.

Though the majority observed it to be 'one of the ways of reconciliation', I
have my own reservation in accepting it. Firstly, the function of the Court is
to interpret the provision as it is and not to amend, alter or substitute by
interpretative process. Secondly, it is for the Legislature to make a law
applicable to certain situations contemplated by it and the judiciary has no
power in entering into 'legislative wisdom'. Thirdly, as held by me, the
'decision' of the Chief Justice is merely prima facie decision and Sub-section
(1) of Section 16 confers express power on the Arbitral Tribunal to rule on
its own jurisdiction. Fourthly, it provides remedy to deal with situations
created by the order passed by the Arbitral Tribunal. Finally and importantly,
the situation envisaged by Mr. Venugopal would seldom arise. Normally, when
parties agree on the appointment of an arbitrator or arbitrators, there would
hardly be any dispute between them on such appointment which may call for
intervention by Arbitral Tribunal under Section 16 of the Act. For all these
reasons, I am unable to persuade myself to hold that Section 16 has limited
application to cases covered by Sub-sections (2) and (3) and not to Sub-
section (6) of Section 11 of the Act. The phraseology used by the Legislature
does not warrant interpretation sought to be suggested by Mr. Venugopal.

32\. It was also submitted that in case of failure on the part of the party to
the arbitration agreement in appointing an arbitrator, an application can be
made under Section 11 of the Act and arbitrator can be appointed by the Chief
Justice or any person or institution designated by him. It was urged that it
is settled law that judicial or quasi-judicial power has to be exercised by
the authority to whom it is granted and cannot be delegated. As the intention
of Parliament was to confer the power on the highest judicial authority in the
State and in the country, it cannot be allowed to be exercised by 'any person'
or 'institution'.

33\. In my view, the submission is ill-conceived and has been made by looking
at the matter from an incorrect angle. It first assumes that the function
performed by the Chief Justice is judicial or quasi-judicial and then proceeds
to examine legal position on that basis and attempts to salvage the situation
by urging that the power must be exercised by the Chief Justice. In that case,
however, the subsequent part "or any person or institution designated by him"
(Chief Justice) would become redundant. Realising the difficulty and keeping
in view the principles relating to interpretation of statutes, Mr. Nariman,
Senior Advocate submitted that Section 11 provides for dichotomy of functions.
It contemplates two situations, and deals with two stages. The first stage
consists of consideration of preliminary facts and taking of decision Page
1846 as to whether an arbitrator can be appointed. The second stage allows
nomination of an arbitrator. According to Mr. Nariman, the first part is
essentially a judicial function, which cannot be delegated to 'any person or
institution' and at the most, it can be delegated to any Judge of the court.
The second stage, however, is more or less ministerial and at that stage, the
Chief Justice may, if he thinks fit, take help of any person or institution so
that proper and fit person is appointed as arbitrator. Though the submission
weighed with the majority, I express my inability to agree with it for several
reasons. Firstly, as earlier noted, it proceeds on the basis that the function
of the Chief Justice is judicial or quasi- judicial, which is not correct. In
my view, it is administrative which is apparent from the language of Section
11 and strengthened by Section 16 which enables the Arbitral Tribunal to rule
on its own jurisdiction. Secondly, a court of law must give credit to
Parliament that it is aware of settled legal position that judicial or quasi-
judicial function cannot be delegated and if the function performed by the
Chief Justice is judicial or quasi-judicial in nature, keeping in view legal
position, it would not have allowed delegation of such function to 'any person
or authority'. Thirdly, the majority held, and I am in respectful agreement
with it, that the conferment of power on the Chief Justice is not as 'persona
designata'. Hence, the power can be delegated. Finally, if the legislative
intent is the exercise of power by the Chief Justice alone, one fails to
understand as to how it can be exercised by a 'colleague' of the Chief Justice
as well.

In my opinion, acceptance of the submission of Mr. Nariman would result in
rewriting of a statute. The scheme of the legislation does not warrant such
construction. No court much less the highest court of the country would
interpret one provision (Section 11) of an Act of Parliament which would make
another provision (Section 16) totally redundant, otiose and nugatory. The
Legislature has conferred power on the Chief Justice to appoint an arbitrator
in certain contingencies. By the same pen and ink, it allowed the Chief
Justice to get that power exercised through 'any person or institution'. It is
not open to a court to ignore the legislative mandate by making artificial
distinction between the power to be exercised by the Chief Justice or by his
'colleague' and the power to be exercised by other organs though Legislature
was quite clear on the exercise of power by the persons and authorities
specified therein. I accordingly reject the argument.

34\. It was then urged that the principal ground for holding the function of
the Chief Justice under Sub-section (6) of Section 11 as administrative was to
ensure immediate commencement of arbitration proceedings and speedy disposal
of cases. In reality, however, it is likely to cause delay for the simple
reason that if the order passed by the Chief Justice of the High Court is
treated as judicial or quasi judicial, it can only be challenged in the
Supreme Court under Article 136 of the Constitution. So far as the order of
the Chief Justice of India is concerned, it is 'final' as no
appeal/application/writ petition lies against it. But if such decision is held
to be administrative, initially, it can be challenged on the judicial side of
the High Court under Article 226 of the Constitution. Normally, under the High
Court Rules, such petitions are dealt with and decided by a Single Judge.
Hence, the decision of a single Page 1847 Judge can further be challenged by
filing a Letters Patent Appeal or Intra-court Appeal under the relevant clause
of the Letters Patent applicable to the High Court concerned. Finally, an
order passed by the Division Bench can always be made subject-matter of
challenge before this Court under Article 136 of the Constitution. Thus, an
interpretation sought to be adopted for the purpose of reducing litigation and
speedy disposal of proceedings would really result in increase of litigation
and delay in disposal of cases. I must admit that once it is held that the
order passed by the Chief Justice is administrative, it can be challenged in
Writ Petition, Letters Patent Appeal and in Special Leave Petition. But in my
opinion, while exercising extraordinary jurisdiction under Article 226 of the
Constitution, the High Court would consider the provisions of the Act, such
as, limited judicial intervention of Court (Section 5); power of Arbitral
Tribunal to rule on its own jurisdiction and the effect of such decision
(Section 16). It will also keep in mind the legislative intent of expeditious
disposal of proceedings and may not interfere at that stage. Ultimately,
having jurisdiction or power to entertain a cause and interference with the
order are two different and distinct matters. One does not necessarily result
into the other. Hence, in spite of jurisdiction of the High Court, it may not
stall arbitration proceedings by allowing the party to raise all objections
before the Arbitral Tribunal.

35\. In Laxmikant Revchand Bhojwani and Anr. v. Pratapsingh Mohansingh
Pardeshi, the relevant Rent Act did not provide for further appeal or revision
against an order assed by the appellate authority. The aggrieved party,
therefore, invoked supervisory jurisdiction of the High Court. The High Court
allowed the petition and set aside the order passed by the appellate court.

Quashing the order of the High Court and keeping in view the legislative
scheme, this Court said;

"Before parting with this judgment we would like to say that the High Court
was not justified in extending its jurisdiction under Article 227 of the
Constitution of India in the present case. The Act is a special legislation
governing landlord-tenant relationship and disputes. The legislature has, in
its wisdom, not provided second appeal or revision to the High Court. The
object is to give finality to the decision of the appellate authority. The
High Court under Article 227 of the Constitution of India cannot assume
unlimited prerogative to correct all species of hardship or wrong decisions.
It must be restricted to cases of grave dereliction of duty and flagrant abuse
of fundamental principles of law or justice, where grave injustice would be
done unless the High Court interferes." [See also Koyilerian Janaki and Ors.
v. Rent Controller (Munsiff), Cannore and Ors.; Ouseph Mathai and Ors. v. M.
Abdul Khadir;] In State of Orissa and Ors. v. Gokulananda Jena, (2003) 6 SCC
456, relying upon Konkan Railway Corporation Ltd. II, the High Court of Orissa
held that since the order passed by the Chief Justice was administrative, it
was not amenable to writ jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution.
Holding that the High Court was wrong and the writ petition under Article 226
was maintainable, a two-Judge Bench stated;

"However, we must notice that in view of Section 16 read with Sections 12 and
13 of the Act as interpreted by the Constitution Bench of this Court in the
M/s. Konkan Railway (supra) almost all disputes which could be presently
contemplated can be raised and agitated before the Arbitrator appointed by the
Designated Judge under Section 11(6) of the Act. From the perusal of the said
provisions of the Act, it is clear that there is hardly any area of dispute
which cannot be decided by the Arbitrator appointed by the Designated Judge.
If that be so, since an alternative efficacious remedy is available before the
Arbitrator, writ court normally would not entertain a challenge to an order of
the Designated Judge made under Section 11(6) of the Act which includes
considering the question of jurisdiction of the Arbitrator himself. Therefore,
in our view even though a writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution
is available to an aggrieved party, ground available for challenge in such a
petition is limited because of the alternative remedy available under the Act
itself." (emphasis supplied) The above observations clearly go to show that
though the constitutional remedy cannot be taken away and an aggrieved party
can invoke the jurisdiction of the High Court against an order passed by the
Chief Justice, the Writ Court will be circumspect in entertaining a petition
and in exercising extraordinary jurisdiction in such cases.

36\. As has been held in earlier decisions as also in the majority judgment,
the paramount consideration of Parliament in selecting the Chief Justice and
in conferring upon him the power to appoint an arbitrator is to ensure
complete independence, total impartiality and highest degree of credibility in
arbitral process. The Chief Justice of India and Chief Justices of High Courts
have been specially chosen considering their constitutional status as Judges
of superior courts and their rich experience in dealing with such matters. The
office occupied by them would infuse greater confidence in the procedure in
appointing an arbitrator and in ensuring fairness, integrity and impartiality.

But that does not mean that the Chief Justice is exercising judicial or quasi-
judicial power. On the contrary, the Chief Justice, acting in administrative
capacity, as distinguished from judicial capacity, is expected to act quickly
and expeditiously without being inhibited by procedural requirements and
'technical tortures'. In undertaking the task to appoint an Arbitral Tribunal,
he is neither required to consult parties nor arbitrators. The Chief Justice
would thus uphold, preserve and protect solemnity of agreement between the
parties to arbitration. This practice is prevalent in England and in other
countries since several years.

37\. I intend to conclude the discussion on this point by quoting the
following pertinent observations of Lord Hobhouse in Palgrave Gold Mining Co.
v. McMillan, 1892 AC 460 : 61 LJ PC 85. Dealing with a similar situation and
repelling an identical contention, before more than hundred years, the Law
Lord rightly declared;

It is very common in England to invest responsible public officials with the
duty of appointing Arbitrators under given circumstances. Such appointment
should be made with integrity and impartiality, but it is new to their
Lordships to hear them called judicial acts..." (emphasis supplied)

38\. The last question relates to issuance of notice to the party likely to be
affected and affording an opportunity of hearing before making an order of
composition of Arbitral Tribunal. Section 8 of the old Act of 1940 expressly
provided written notice and opportunity of hearing in case of appointment of
an arbitrator or umpire. The present Act of 1996 neither provides for issuance
of notice nor for opportunity of being heard. In exercise of power under Sub-
section (10) of Section 11 of the Act, the Chief Justice of India had framed a
scheme, known as "The Appointment of Arbitrators by the Chief Justice of India
Scheme. 1996". Clause 7 provided for issuing notice to affected persons and
read thus;

"Notice to affected persons.- Subject to the provisions of paragraph 6, the
Chief Justice or the person or the institution designated by him shall direct
that a notice of the request be given to all the parties to the arbitration
agreement and such other person or persons as may seem to him or is likely to
be affected by such request to show cause, within the time specified in the
notice, why the appointment of the arbitrator or the measure proposed to be
taken should not be made or taken and such notice shall be accompanied by
copies of all documents referred to in paragraph 2 or, as the case may be, by
information or clarification, if any, sought under paragraph 5."

39\. In Konkan Railway Corporation Ltd. II, the Constitution Bench held the
function of the Chief Justice of appointment of an arbitrator under Sub-
section (6) of Section 11 as administrative and not judicial. In the light of
the said finding, the Court proceeded to state that it was not necessary to
issue notice to the parties likely to be affected. Section 11 did not provide
for such notice. The Court, however, did not stop there. It held that by
making a provision for issuance of notice, the scheme went 'beyond the terms
of Section 11' and was bad on that ground. A direction was, therefore, issued
to amend it.

Since the majority judgment has held the function of the Chief Justice as
judicial, it ruled that such notice ought to be issued and opportunity of
hearing ought to be afforded by the Chief Justice to the person or persons
likely to be affected thereby in an appointment of arbitrator. I have, on the
other hand, held that the function of the Chief Justice under Sub-section (6)
of Section 11 is neither judicial nor quasi-judicial but administrative. It is
also true that unlike Section 8 of the 1940 Act, 1996 Act does not envisage
issuance of notice to the party likely to be affected by the order of the
Chief Justice.

40\. The question, however, is : Can such clause in the scheme prepared by the
Chief Justice of India be held bad as going 'beyond the terms of Section 11'?
The Constitution Bench so held in Konkan Railway Corporation Ltd. II. With
great respect to the Constitution Bench, such provision cannot be held
inconsistent with the parent Act or otherwise bad in law. The Constitution
Bench did not assign any reason as to why it was of the view that Clause 7
could not stand or how it violated Section 11. But reference to Jaswant Sugar
Mills Ltd v. Lakshmi Chand,; Engineering Mazdoor Sabha v. Hind Cycles Ltd.,
and Associated Cement Companies Ltd. v. P.N. Sharma, clearly shows that since
the Constitution Bench was of the view that while performing function of
appointing an Arbitral Tribunal the Chief Justice was not acting as a Court or
Tribunal, he was not expected to issue notice or afford an opportunity of
hearing to the parties likely to be affected by such decision.

Once the function of the Chief Justice is held to be administrative, there may
not be 'duty to act judicially' on the part of the Chief Justice. Nevertheless
in such cases, an administrative authority is required to act 'fairly'. Basic
procedural fairness requires such notice to the opposite party. The principle
in R. v. Electricity Commissioners, or Ridge v. Baldwin, may not apply to
administrative functions, but another concept which developed at a later stage
and accepted in public law field and found place in Administrative Law of
'duty to act fairly' would apply to administrative actions as well.

41\. By now, it is well settled that when an administrative action is likely
to affect rights of subjects, there would be a duty on the part of the
authority to act fairly.

In Pearlberg v. Varty (Inspector of Taxes), Lord Pearson said; "A tribunal to
whom judicial or quasi-judicial functions are entrusted is held to be required
to apply those principles (i.e. the rules of natural justice) in performing
those functions unless there is a provision to title contrary. But where some
person or body is entrusted by Parliament that administrative or executive
functions there is no presumption that compliance with the principles of
natural justice is required although, as 'Parliament is not to be presumed to
act unfairly', the courts may be able in suitable cases (perhaps always) to
imply an obligation to act with fairness." 5 (emphasis supplied) In R. v.
Commissioner for Racial Equality, Lord Diplock stated; "Where an act of
Parliament confers upon an administrative body functions which involve its
making decisions which affect to their detriment the rights Page 1851 of other
persons or curtail their liberty to do as they please, there is a presumption
that Parliament intended that the administrative body should act fairly
towards those persons who will be affected by their decisions."

The above principles have been accepted and applied in India also. In the
leading case of Keshav Mills Co. Ltd. v. Union of India, a textile mill was
closed down. A Committee was appointed by the Government of India to
investigate into the affairs of the mill-company under the Industries
(Development and Regulation) Act, 1951. After affording opportunity to the
Company, a report was prepared by the Committee and submitted to the
Government. A copy of the report, however, was not supplied to the Company. On
the basis of the report, the Government took over the management of the
Company. The said action was challenged by the company inter alia on the
ground of violation of principles of natural justice inasmuch as no copy of
the report submitted by the Committed to the Government was supplied to the
Company nor was hearing afforded before finally deciding to take over the
management.

Rejecting the contention and observing that no prejudice had been caused to
the mill-company, this Court did not interfere with the order. Speaking for
the Court, A.K. Mukherjea, J. stated:

"The second question, however, as to what are the principles of natural
justice that should regulate an administrative act or order is a much more
difficult one to answer. We do not think it either feasible or even desirable
to lay down any fixed or rigorous yardstick in this manner. The concept of
natural justice cannot be put into a straitjacket. It is futile, therefore, to
look for definitions or standards of natural justice from various decisions
and then try to apply them to the facts of any given case. The only essential
point that has to be kept in mind in all cases is that the person concerned
should have a reasonable opportunity of presenting his case and that the
administrative authority concerned should act fairly, impartially and
reasonably. Where administrative officers are concerned, the duty is not so
much to act judicially as to act fairly. (emphasis supplied) In Mohinder Singh
Gill v. Chief Election Commission after considering several cases, Krishna
Iyer, J. stated :

"Once we understand the soul of the rule as fairplay in action -and it is so -
we must hold that it extends to both the fields. After all, administrative
power in a democratic set-up is not allergic to fairness in action and
discretionary executive justice cannot degenerate into unilateral injustice.
Nor is there ground to be frightened of delay, inconvenience and expense, if
natural justice gains access. For fairness itself is a flexible, pragmatic and
relative concept, not a rigid, ritualistic or sophisticated abstraction. It is
not a bull in a china shop, nor a bee in one's bonnet: Its essence is good
conscience in a given situation; nothing more - but nothing less."

(emphasis supplied) In Nally Bharat Engineering Co. Ltd. v. State of Bihar,
the Government, on an application by a dismissed workman transferred his case
from one Labour Court to another Labour Court without issuing a notice or
giving opportunity to the employer.

Setting aside the order and referring to several cases, the Supreme Court
invoked the 'acting fairly' doctrine. The Court stated: "Fairness, in our
opinion, is a fundamental principle of good administration. It is a rule to
ensure the vast power in the modern State is not abused but properly
exercised. The State power is used for proper and not for improper purposes.
The authority is not misguided by extraneous or irrelevant considerations.
Fairness, is also a principle to ensure that statutory authority arrives at a
just decision either in promoting the interest or affecting the rights of
persons. To use the timehallowed phrase that 'justice should not only be done
but be seen to be done' is the essence of fairness equally applicable to
administrative authorities. Fairness is thus a prime test for proper and good
administration. It has no set form or procedure. It depends upon the facts of
each case."

(emphasis supplied) Quoting the observations of Paul Jackson, the Court said:
"It may be noted that the terms 'fairness of procedure', 'fair play in
action', 'duty to act fairly' are perhaps used as alternatives to 'natural
justice' without drawing any distinction. But Prof Paul Jackson points out
that 'such phrases may sometimes be used to refer not to the obligation to
observe the principles of natural justice but, on the contrary, to refer to a
standard of behavior which increasingly, the courts require to be followed
even in circumstances where the duty to observe natural justice is
inapplicable'."

(emphasis supplied) de Smith states:

"The principal value of the introduction of the 'duty to act fairly' into the
courts' vocabulary has been to assist them to extend the benefit of basic
procedural protections to situations where it would be both confusing to
characterize as judicial or even quasi-judicial, the decision-makers'
functions, and inappropriate to insist on a procedure analogous to a trial."

['Judicial Review of Administrative Action'; (1995); p. 399]

42\. It is thus clear that the doctrine of 'fairness' has become all
pervasive. As has been said, the 'acting fairly' doctrine proved useful as a
device for evading confusion which prevailed in the past. "The courts now have
two strings to their bow." An administrative act may be held to be subject to
the requirement and observance of natural justice either because it affects
rights or interests and hence would involve a 'duty to act judicially' or it
may be administrative, pure and simple, and yet, may require basic procedural
Page 1853 protection which would involve 'duty to act fairly'. [Wade &
Forsyth; 'Administrative Law'; (2005); pp. 492-94; de Smith; "Judicial Review
of Administrative Action", (1995); pp. 397-98] 'Acting fairly' is thus an
additional weapon in the armoury of the court. It is not intended to be
substituted for another much more powerful weapon 'acting judicially'. Where,
however, the former ('acting judicially') cannot be wielded, the court will
try to reach injustice by taking resort to the latter - less powerful weapon
('acting fairly'). [See C.K. Thakker : "From Duty to Act Judicially to Duty to
Act Fairly",].

43\. As the Chief Justice is performing administrative function under Sub-
section (6) of Section 11 in appointing an arbitrator, mere is no 'duty to act
judicially' on his part, nonetheless there is 'duty to act fairly' which
requires him to issue notice to the other side before taking a decision to
appoint an arbitrator. I am, therefore, of the view that Clause 7 of the
scheme as stood prior to the amendment, could neither be held bad in law nor
inconsistent with Section 11 of the Act. I am, therefore, in respectful
agreement with the majority judgment on that point.

44\. On the basis of the above findings, my conclusions are as under;

(i) The function performed by the Chief Justice of the High Court or the Chief
Justice of India under Sub-section (6) of Section 11 of the Act (i.e.
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996) is administrative, - pure and simple
-, and neither judicial nor quasi-judicial.

(ii) The function to be performed by the Chief Justice under Sub-section (6)
of Section 11 of the Act may be performed by him or by 'any person or
institution designated by him'.

(iii) While performing the function under Sub-section (6) of Section 11 of the
Act, the Chief Justice should be prima facie satisfied that the conditions
laid down in Section 11 are satisfied.

(iv) The Arbitral Tribunal has power and jurisdiction to rule 'on its own
jurisdiction' under Sub-section (1) of Section 16 of the Act.

(v) Where the Arbitral Tribunal holds that it has jurisdiction, it shall
continue with the arbitral proceedings and make an arbitral award.

(vi) A remedy available to the party aggrieved is to challenge the award in
accordance with Section 34 or Section 37 of the Act.

(vii) Since the order passed by the Chief Justice under Sub-section (6) of
Section 11 of the Act is administrative, a Writ Petition under Article 226 of
the Constitution is maintainable. A Letters Patent Appeal/Intra-court Appeal
is competent. A Special Leave Petition under Article 136 of the Constitution
also lies to this Court.

(viii) While exercising extraordinary jurisdiction under Article 226 of the
Constitution, however, the High Court will be conscious and mindful of the
relevant provisions of the Act, including Sections 5, 16, 34 to 37 as also the
object of the legislation and exercise its power with utmost care, caution and
circumspection.

(ix) The decision of the Constitution Bench in Konkan Railway Corporation Ltd.
II, to the extent that it held the function of the Chief Justice under Sub-
section (6) of Section 11 of the Act as administrative is in consonance Page
1854 with settled legal position and lays down correct law on the point.

(x) The decision of the Constitution Bench in Konkan Railway Corporation Ltd.
II, to the extent that it held Clause 7 of "The Appointment of Arbitrators by
the Chief Justice of India Scheme, 1996" providing for issuance of notice to
affected parties as 'beyond the term of Section 11' and bad on that ground is
not in accordance with law and does not state the legal position correctly.

(xi) Since the Chief Justice is performing administrative function in
appointing an Arbitral Tribunal, there is no 'duty to act judicially' on his
part. The doctrine of 'duty to act fairly', however, applies and the Chief
Justice must issue notice to the person or persons likely to be affected by
the decision under Sub-section (6) of Section 11 of the Act.

(xii) All appointments of Arbitral Tribunals so far made without issuing
notice to the parties affected are held legal and valid. Henceforth, however,
every appointment will be made after issuing notice to such person or persons.
In other words, this judgment will have prospective operation and it will not
affect past appointments or concluded proceedings.

