

Calcutta High Court

Union Of India (Uoi) vs Kamal Kumar Goswami And Ors. on 22 May, 1973

Equivalent citations: AIR 1974 Cal 231, 78 CWN 154

Author: Deb

Bench: B Mitra, S Deb

JUDGMENT Deb, J.

1\. This appeal is directed against the decree for Rs. 1,44.549.87 passed in
Suit No. 2566 of 1947 of this Court. The Trial Court directed the appellant,
who was the third defendant, to pay the full costs of the suit to the
respondent Mr. Goswami who brought that action and half cost to the
respondents 2 and 3 who were the other defendants in the Court below.

2\. The Indian Tea Association is an incorporated association of members. The
respondents 2 and 3 are the members of this Association. Mr. Goswami used to
act as a contractor under the Association.

3\. On September 3, 1947. Mr. Goswami filed the above suit against the
Dominion of India and the other respondents on these averments made in ihe
plaint. In 1944. the Association appointed him as a contractor to do
excavation and earthwork for an aerodrome including the construction of drains
in connection with Project known as Misamary Project in Assam. The Association
agreed to pay him for those works at the rate which he was getting from the
Association in connection with the work done by him at Derpoan in Assam. In
January 1944 he commenced the said work and completed it in July 1944. The
Association have refused to pay him the balance sum of Rs. 1,97,715-6-9 pics
inclusive of interests for those works done by him.

4\. Mr. Gossami claimed the above sum on the basis of a contract between him
and the Association and alternatively under Section 70 of the Indian Contract
Act. He added the Dominion of India as a defendant on the allegation that
before filing the suit he came to know that the Assocation was alleging that
the Association had acted as the agents of (he Government of India and if the
Court found that fact to be true he would claim the above sum from the
Dominion of India. He served notice under Section 80 of the Code of Civil
Procedure on the Dominion of India and then filed the suit.

5\. The respondents 2 and 3, in their written statement, denied the contract
pleaded by Mr. Goswami including their liability by pleading that the
Association had acted as the agents of the Government of India as stated in
the plaint. The Dominion of India, however, denied that fact and, inter alia,
pleaded: "The plaintiff's alleged cause of action, if any, against this
defendant is barred by the provision of Section 175 of the Government of India
Act 1935". The appellant was substituted in place of the Dominion of India
after the Constitution came into force and contested the suit.

6\. The trial Court held that there was no contract between Mr. Goswami and
the Association as pleaded in the plaint. The learned Judge found that the
Association acted as the agents of the Government of India. He also found that
Mr. Goswami lawfully did the said work not intending to do so gratuitously and
the Government of India had enjoyed the benefit of the said Work.

7\. In these circumstances the aforesaid decree was passed against the
appellant and the suit was dismissed against the respondents Nos. 2 and 3.
Hence, this appeal is directed against that decree and the judgment of the
trial Court and the respondents 2 and 3 have filed cros-objcction claiming
full costs of this suit.

8\. It is not necessary for us to go into the issues framed by the trial Court
for the Counsel Mr. H. M. Dhar, appearing for the appellant, confined his
contentions only to the following points:

1) The Association did not act as the agents of the appellant;

(2) The plaint does not disclose any cause of action against the appellant
under Section 70 of the Indian Contract Act;

(3) The appellant did not enjoy any benefit of the said work done by Mr.
Goswami;

(4) Mr. Goswami has firled to prove the compensation claimed by him under
Section 70 of the Contract Act;

(5) The claim of Mr. Goswami is barred by the law of limitation:

    
    
     
    
     (6) This Court has no jurisdiction to try this suit; and  
     
    
     
    (7) The   appellant,   in     any event, is not liable to pay half costs of the suit to those two respondents. Mr. Goswami gave evidence and he called a   few  witnesses in the trial Court.     The respondents   2   and   3   called   many   witnesses and  most of them  were examined   on   Commission  in  England.     The appellant   did   not call any witness.  
     
    
    

9\. It is necessary for us to record here that Mr. Dhar did not dispute that
the Association appointed Mr. Goswami to do the work mentioned in the plaint.
He also did not dispute that Mr. Goswami faithfully and efficiently executed
those work as found by the trial Judge. Mr. Dhar further accepted the finding
of the trial Court on the quantum of work done by Mr. Goswami and thereby
relieved us from going into the mass of evidence adduced on these points.

Point No. 1:

10\. We are not impressed by the contention of Mr. Dhar to the effect that the
witnesses called by the respondents 2 and 3 have given untrue evidence on the
question of agency. These witnesses were all respectable gentlemen. Some of
them were the members of the Association at the relevant time. They held very
high position in life. They said that the Association acted as "honorary"
agents of the Government of India and yet the appellant did not call any
witness to contradict their oral testimony. Further, the documents exhibited
in the suit fully support their evidence.

11\. India was threatened with Japanese invasion with the fall nf Burma in the
last World War. The Japanese took their position on the borders of Assam.
Supply to China was also threatened. There was hardly any good road and
aerodrome in Assam. The Government of India was unable to meet this grave
emergency and was moving heaven and earth to find out the ways and means in
the matter of construction of roads and aerodromes in Assam to meet the
threatened invasion.

12\. The Tea-estates in Assam were mostly owned by the membrs of the
Association. They knew this part of the country very well. They had also the
resources and many contractors used to work under them.

13\. In these circumstances, two Army Officers came down from Delhi to
Calcutta and met two influential members of the Association. Those two membrs
were Sir .lames Jones and Mr. Earnest James Nicholls. It was arranged between
them in that meeting that the Association would help the War Department during
that grave emergency. Then these two gentlemen, representing the Asso-ciation,
went to Delhi where it was arranped between the Government of India and the
Association that the Association who would act as the "honorary" agents of the
Government of India who would finance the Association for constructing roads
and aerodromes in Asssm for and on behalf of the Government of India.

14\. Sir James Jones is no longer alive and the aforesaid facts were stated by
Mr. NichoIIs and also amongst other witnesses by Sir Percival Joseph
Griffiths. These two respectable gentlemen were examined on Commission and
they were not cross-examined on this aspect of the case by the counsel for the
appellant. The learned Judge accepted (heir evidence and we do not find any
reason to say anything against his findings.

15\. The Association also appointed other contractors to do other work in
connection with the other Projects in Assam for the Government of India. Those
contractors were pressing for payment in connection with the work done by them
from time to time. In these circumstances, Sir Percival Griffiths went to
Delhi and met Sir Eric Coates who was the Military Adviser to the War
Department of the Government of India. Cir Percival requested Sir Eric to make
arrangements for payment to which Sir Eric agreed. Then, Sir Eric wrote a
letter dated March 1, 1942 to the Association material portion of which is set
out below:

"I am directed by the Govern or-General-in-Council to delegate to the
committee of the Indian Tea Association authority to incur miscellaneous
expenditure on behalf of the Government.

A credit of one Lac in the first instance in their name will be opened
immediately with the Imperial Bank of India Clive Street Branch, Calcutta
against which the committee may draw. This credit will be replenished when
exhausted if necessary on application by the committee to this department.

The Commitee will render monthly accounts of expenditure incurred to the
Controller of Military Accounts, Eastern Command. Mecrut with a copy to this
department."

Copies of this letter were sent by Mr. R. L. Chamber, Deputy Finance Adviser
of the appellant, to the Director of Audit, Defence Services and to the
Military Accountant-General wilh a direction to the latter, inter alia, to
this effect; "take immediate steps to open the credit with the Imperial Bank,
and should the Controller of Military Accounts wish to raise any comments on
the monthly accounts as he receives he should do so only through this
Department."

16\. It is an admitted fact that in terms of the above letter an account was
opened by the Government of India with the Imperial Bank of India at Clive
Street in Calcutta and it was operated by the Association. It is also an
admitted fact that this account was replenished from time to time by the
Government of India in terms of that letter. Further, the Association from
time to time sent monthly statement of account as to the disbursements made by
them from the said accounts to the Departments concerned of the Government of
India and the Gov-

ernment of India accepted those statements as correct. These facts, in our
opinion, conclusively show that the Association had acted as the agents of the
Government of India.

17\. Moreover, the statements made in the aforesaid letter dated March 1,
1942, conclusively show that the Governor-Gencral-in-Council authorised the
Association to incur miscellaneous expenditure on behalf of the Government of
India. This authority to incur expenditure on behalf of the Government, in our
opinion, conferred a further authority on the Association to do all reasonable
acts that were required to be done by the Association on behalf of the
Government of India in connection with such expenditure. In other words, this
power on its face empowered the Association to do all work for and on behalf
of the Government of India and hence, in our opinion, it further establishes
the fact that the Association had acted as the agents of the Government of
India.

18\. In this connection it is also necessary for us to refer to a letter dated
April 26, 1946, written to the Association by Mr. S. N. Russell who was the
Joint Secretary to the War Department. Mr. Russell admitted in that letter
that the Association had acted as the agents of the Government of India on
honorary basis. Mr. Russell gave evidence on Commission and he proved that
letter. He was not cross-examined on this aspect of the case by the Counsel
for the appellant. Further, the appellant did not call any witness to get rid
of the aforesaid admission made by the Government of India through Mr.
Russell.

19\. The contention of Mr. Dhar namely that the relationship between the
Association and the Government of India was that of principal and principal,
in our opinion, has no substance. No principal is liable to render any account
to another principal. The above letter dated March 1, 1942, militates against
this contention of Mr. Dhar. No such case was even made out in the written
statement of the Dominion of India. No fact was also pleaded to constitute
such relationship.

20\. It was then contended by Mr. Dhar that the said agency was void due to
the non-compliance with the provisions of Section 175(3) of the Government of
India Act, 1935. We have already quoted the pleading in this behalf and, in
our opinion, that pleading is not sufficient enough to enable Mr. Dhar to
raise this question. No claim can be barred under that Section for its
language does not say so. The Dominion of India did not take the plea that
there was such an agreement and it did not comply with the provision of
Section 175(3) of the said Act. Further, the decision of the Supreme Court in
the case of Kalyanpur Lime Works Ltd. v. State of Bihar, , is directly on this
point and it is against the contention of Mr. Dhar.

21\. Moreover, the said letter dated March 1, 1942, was written under the
direction of the Governor-General-m-Council and it shows that the Govern or-
General-in-Coun-cil had already appointed the Association as its agents. The
materials on the record conclusively show that the Government of India had
acted upon that letter throughout. In these circumstances and in view of the
decisions of the Supreme Court in the case of Union of India v. A. L. Rallia
Ram, , and in the case of Davecos Garments Factory v. State of Rajasthan, , we
overrule the contention of Mr. Dhar.

22\. It does not matter in the least even if that agency was void for the
appellant having received the benefit of the said work done by Mr. Goswami
must pay him compensation under Section 70 of the Indian Contract Act as
stated later on. In these circumstances it is not necessary for us to go into
other evidence on the record for the purpose of showing that the Association
acted as the agents of the Government of India. In this view of the matter we
accept the finding of the trial Judge and overrule this point of Mr. Dhar.
Point No. 2 :

23\. Though it was pleaded in the written statement of the Dominion of India
that the plaint does not disclose any cause of action against the Dominion of
India but its Counsel did not raise any issue on it and accordingly the Trial
Court did not frame an issue in this behalf. Be that as it may, we have
allowed Mr. Dhar to make his submission on it and hence to appreciate his
contentions it is necessary to set out paragraphs 7 and 10 of the plaint
below: Paragraph 7:

"The plaintiff did the said work at the request of the defendants not
intending to do so gratuitously. The defendants received the benefit of the
said work and are bound to make a reasonable compensation therefor." Paragraph
10:

"It is now alleged that the defendants acted as the agents of the Government
of India in ordering and getting the work hereinbefore mentioned done which
was in connection with construction of Aerodromes. In the event of it
transpiring that the defendants acted as agents as now alleged, the plaintiff
will claim the relief asked for herein against the Union of India also on the
basis aforesaid."

24\. Now, the cause title of the plaint said that the first two defendants
were sued for selves and as representing the other members of the Association
and in para-graph 1 of the plaint it is said that the Association would
hereinafter be called as the "defendants". In these circumstances Mr. Dhar
contended that statements made in paragraph 7 solely relate to the Association
and therefore the plaint does not disclose any cause of action against the
appellant but we are not impressed by it.

25\. The statements made in paragraphs 7 and 10 of the plaint should be read
together. The words "on the basis aforesaid" used in paragraph 10 are of
pivotal importance on this question. They brought the statements made in
paragraph 7 into paragraph 10 and hence the pleading is that the appellant had
received the benefit of the said work. Further, paragraph 1 of the plaint is
to be read subject to the cause title of the plaint where the appellant has
also been described as the defendant. Hence, in our opinion, the plaint
discloses a cause of action under Section 70 of the Indian Contract Act
against the appellant. Moreover, the word "defendants" means all parties
against whom the suit is filed and the meaning of this word does not depend on
the volition of the draftsman.

26\. Furthermore, an alternative construction of the plaint is also possible
and the substance of it is that the appellant through its agents having
received the benefit of the said work is liable to pay the compensation to Mr.
Goswami who lawfully did the said work not intending to do so gratuitously and
therefore the contention of Mr. Dhar is without any merits.

Point No. 3:

27\. Mr. Dhar urged that the Association and not the appellant had received
the benefit of construction of the said aerodrome but many witnesses including
Sir Percival Griffiths and Mr. Norman Dawson have said that the benefit of the
construction of that aerodrome was received solely by the appellant. In this
connection it is to be noticed here that Mr. Dawson supervised all those works
including the construction of that aerodrome. Many witnesses have said that
after its construction this aerodrome remained under the exclusive control of
the Indian Army and, in our opinion, it must be so. They have said that it was
a protected place and we cannot disregard their evidence in view of the said
grave emergency.

28\. Sir Percival Griffiths and Mr. Dawson specifically said that the
appellant enjoyed the benefit of all those works done by Mr. Goswami and these
two gentlemen were not even cross-examined on this aspect of the case and,
further, the appellant did not even call any witness to disprove their
statements.

29\. The plan for this Project was prepared by the Army Officers in
consultation with Mr. Nicholls and all those works were done by Mr. Goswami in
accordance with the said plan to the complete satisfaction of the Government
of India. Mr. Russell, in his said letter of April 26, 1946, said: "it is
recognised that the Government is finally responsible for the said work" and
yet he was not cross-examined on it by the Counsel for the appellant.

30\. Mr. Goswami was paid Rs. 1 lakh by the Association out of the funds
placed at their disposal by the Government of India. It is impossible for us
to believe that the Government of India would have paid the sum of Rs. 1 lakh
to Mr. Goswami through the Association without receiving any benefit of the
said work done by him. The Military Accounlant-General and the Controller of
Accounts would not have sanctioned this payment had the appellant enjoyed no
benefit and the appellant would have demanded back this money from the
Association. It is on the record that even after the institution of the suit
the appellant did not write a single letter to the Association making any such
claim though the Association went on submitting statements of account each and
every month to the appellant.

31\. Mr. Dhar was in the trial Court and he failed to give us any explanation
as to why the appellant did not adduce any evidence in rebuttal to show that
the benefit of the said work was not received or enjoyed by the appellant in
spite of all these materials on the record. The only conclusion that can be
reached from the materials on the record is that the finding of the trial
Judge is correct in this behalf and hence we overrule the contention of Mr.
Dhar.

32\. The law of Section 70 of the Contract Act is well settled by the majority
decision of the Supreme Court in the case of State of West Bengal v. B. K.
Mondal & Sons, , and yet it was contended by Mr. Dhar that this section has no
application for the Government of India did not directly make any request to
Mr. Goswami to do those works but this very contention was overruled by
Gajendra-gadkar, J.. (as he then was), in that majority decision of the
Supreme Court.

33\. A request when accepted constitutes an agreement but Section 70 of the
Act docs not postulate any agreement between the parties. A request may be
made by a wholly unauthorised person or such request may be wholly invalid in
law and yet it does not lie in the mouth of a defendant to say that he is not
liable to pay compensation under Section 70 of the Act in the absence of a
request where he has received the benefit of the work lawfully done by the
plaintiff not intending to do so gratuitously. Hence, there is no merits in
the contention of Mr. Dhar. Point No. 4:

34\. Mr. Goswami claimed compensation at the rate of Rs. 20/- per 1000 eft.
for the earth work and at the rate of Rs. 40/- per 1000 eft. for the drain
work whereas the Association offered to pay him at the rate of Rs. 15/- for
the earth work and Rs. 30/-for the drain work. The trial Judge accepted the
rates of Mr. Goswami and awarded compensation on those rates.

35\. It was contended by Mr. Dhar that there is no material on the record to
show that those rates were the reasonable rates for Misamary Project. He
further contended that Mr. Goswami did not adduce any evidence to prove that
those rates were the market rates for that Project but we should record here
that when Mr. Bagchi told us that Dargoan rates were the rates for Misamary
Project and on that basis evidence was adduced. Mr. Dhar did not dispute those
statements of Mr. Bagchi. Be that as it may, it was admitted before us by the
Counsel for all parties that Misamary is situated within the District of
Lakimpur. The rates proved by the respondents 2 and 3 show that Lakimpur rate
for earth work per 1000 cft. was Rs. 22-8 as. They further show that the drain
work rate of Lakimpur was Rs. 30/-per 1000 cft. provided that the depth of the
trenches did not go below 3 ft. and the condition of the soil was not wet and
provided further that the deposits were to be made by the side of the
trenches.

36\. It is also on the record that Mr. Dawson asked Mr. Milburne. a member of
the Association, to take into consideration of all rates for eath work
available to the Association for striking a mean rate for the purpose of
making payment at that mean rate to Mr. Goswami. Our attention was drawn to
those rates and they show that the said mean rate was Rs. 20.32 P. per 1000
cft for the said earth work. The trial Judge also took into consideration
those rates and, in our opinion, he rightly held that Rs. 20/-per 1000 cft.
was a reasonable rate for the said earth work done by Mr. Goswami.

37\. These facts are relevant on the question of rate regarding the drain
work. Mr. Goswami executed those works during the rainy season when the
condition of the soil was set. The depth of the trenches excavated by his
workmen was between 6 feet to 11 feet. The deposits were made by those workmen
at a distance of about 70 ft. from those trenches. These facts lead to an
irresistible conclusion that Mr. Goswami claimed a lower rate for those drain
works. The trial Court, after considering all relevant materials on the
record, came to the conclusion that Rs. 41/- per 1000 cft. was the reasonable
rate for the said drain work. We have also gone through the records and in our
opinion the learned Judge rightly came to the said conclusion.

38\. Further, the appellant did not adduce any evidence to show that the rates
claimed by Mr. Goswami were not the reasonable or market rates for those
works. Those works were done by Mr. Goswami under a precarious condition
during the said emergency. He had to bring specialized workmen from the
Province of Bihar to the work-site for doing those works.

Mr. Goswami made out his bills on those rates claimed by him and submitted
those bills to the Association during the progress of the work. The
Association paid him Rs. l lakh against those bills without questioning those
rates. It was only after the completion of those works that the Association
raised a dispute on those rates at the instance of Mr. Nicholls.

39\. It is true that the rates were not settled before the work was started as
found by the learned Judge but the fact that the payment was made at the bill
rates, in our opinion, conclusively establishes the fact that the Association
accepted those rates as reasonable market rates for those works for Misamary
Project otherwise the Association would not have paid such a large sum of
money to Mr. Goswami.

40\. Those bills were exhibited in the trial Court without any objection. No
cross-examination was directed on those rates mentioned in those bills. The
appellant did not even call any witness to contradict those rales and one lakh
of rupees was paid to Mr. Goswami in, terms of those bills.

41\. In these circumstances, the learned Counsel Mr. Bagchi for Mr. Goswami,
placed strong reliance on the decision of the Supreme Court in the case of
Pillo Dhunji Shaw v. Municipal Corporation of the City of Poona, . In that
case, on the question of compensation payable under Section 70 of the Contract
Act, the Supreme Court, at pp. 1204-1205, said as follows:

"The trial Court awarded to the plaintiff the invoice value of the goods
delivered by him. The learned Judge was of the view that the plaintiff, as the
sole selling agent of "motor spare parts" for the manufacturers in the Bombay
State, was entitled to the listed price with 12 1/2% thereon because of the
increase notified by the manufacturer. In the view of the learned Judge the
price lor which the plaintiff made out an invoice was "reasonable and proper".
The High Court held that the plaintiff may recover compensation equal to the
"fair price" of the goods.

In our view the High Court was in error in holding that the plaintiff is
entitled not to the invoice value of the goods, but only to "the fair price"
of the goods. Under Section 70 of the Contract Act, a person lawfully
delivering goods to another, and not intending to do so gratuitously, is
entitled to demand that the goods delivered shall be relumed, or that
compensation for the goods shall be made. Compensation would normally be the
market price of the goods. By refusing to return the goods, the person, to
whom the goods have been delivered cannot improve his position and seek to pay
less than the market value of the goods. The High Court of Lahore in Secy, of
State v. G. T. Sarin and Co., ILR 11 Lah 375 = (AIR 1930 Lah 364) held that a
person without an enforceable contract in his favour supplying goods to a
Government Department is entitled to a money equivalent of the goods delivered
assessed at the market rate pre-

vailing on the date on whict the supplier were made.

The plaintiff had made out an inovice in respect of the goods delivered. The
Transport Manager accepted the goods on behalf of the Corporation and
appropriated them. He had satisfied himself that the rates quoted were "proper
rates". The plaintiff wai ' paid in respect of other goods supplied at the
rates quoted in the price-list together with incidental charges. The plaintiff
was the sole selling agent in the Bombay State anu the additional 12 1/2%
which the plaintiff claimed on the listed price was by reason of the increase
in the price made by the manufacturers. There is no reason to hold that the
invoice price was more than the market value of the goods. If it was the
contention of the Corporation that the market rate was less than the invoice
price it was open to the Corporation to lead evidence about the ruling rates
at which the spare parts were sold in India by other agents of the
manufacturers. But no such attempt was made. The, plaintiff, in our judgment,
was entitled to the market value of the goods at the date of supply, and, in
our judgment, the invoice value was the prevailing market value of the goods".

42\. Mr. Bagchi also placed strong reliance on the case of Great Eastern
Shipping Co. Ltd. v. Union of India, , where the defendant adduced no evidence
to contradict the rate of freight proved by the Company for carrying a cargo
of coal from Calcutta to Cochin and following the above decision of the
Supreme Court it was held that the defendant was liable to pay compensation
under Section 70 read with the third paragraph of Section 73 of the Contract
Act to the Company at that rate which was held to be. the market rate in that
case.

43\. In Appeal No. 215 of 1971. Union of India v. Satish Chandra, of this
Court there was an arrangement between the Land Customs Authorities and the
Railway Administration under which the Station Master of Bongaon used to
handle the railway wagons for the purpose of checking by the Customs Officers
for preventing the smuggling of goods to the then East Pakistan and for that
extra work the Railway Administration used to pay those Station Masters at the
rate of Rs. 7.50 per wagon. While that arrangement was subsisting Mr. Gho.se
became the Station Master of Bongaon and he did the said work and his bills
upto July, 1958 were duly paid at that rate by the Union of India who however
refused to pay his subsequent bills and that refusal was made after his
retirement from the service. In these circumstances, the trial Judge decreed
the suit under Section 70 of the Contract Act by allowing him compensation at
the said rate and therefore in the Court of Appeal it was urged before me and
A. N. Sen, J., for the Union of India that the said rate was not the market
rate for that work but we overruled it by following the said decision of the
Supreme Court in our un-reported judgment dated September 14, 1972. Hence, the
law is well settled on this point.

44\. Mr. Goswami and the respondents 2 and 3 adduced evidence on the market
rates for those works. The appellant did not adduce any evidence to show that
those rates were not the market rates. The Association paid Rs. 1 lakh to Mr.
Goswami at the said rates. The appellant knew about that payment from the
monthly statements of account submitted by the Association to the appellant
and in spite thereof the appellant did not raise any dispute on those rates
even after receiving the notice under Section 80 of the Code of Civil
Procedure.

45\. In this view of the matter it must be held that the trial Judge rightly
awarded the said compensation against the appellant. Further, it is well
established by the decision of this Court in the case of Justin Hull v. Arthur
Francis Paull, reported in 24 Cal WN 352 = (AIR 1920 Cal 1009) that the Court
of Appeal should not ordinarily interfere with the assessment of compensation
made by the trial Court. We do not find any justification in holding that the
trial Court erred in any way in awarding the said compensation and moreover on
a review of all relevant materials on the record we have also come to the
conclusion that Mr. Goswami is entitled to receive compensation at the rates
claimed by him for those works for in our opinion those rates were the market
rates for the said work done by Mr, Goswami and hence we overrule the
contention of Mr. Dhar. Point No. 5:

46\. It is an admitted fact that Mr. Goswnmi started those works on January
27, 1944 and completed them on July 10, 1944. This suit was filed on September
3, 1947 and Mr. Dhar contended that it was time-barred under Article 115 of
the Limitation Act 1908\. But that Article has no application for there is no
contract between the appellant and Mr. Goswami whose claim is based on Section
70 of the Contract Act and therefore it is governed by Article 120 of the
Limitation Act, 1908. Hence, the suit was filed well within time. Further, the
decision of this Court in the case of Upendra Krishna v. Naba Kishore,
reported in 25 Cal WN 813 = (AIR 1921 Cal 93) is directly against the
contention of Mr. Dhar and hence it is without any merits. Point No. 6:

47\. It was contended by Mr. Dhar that there is nothing on the record to show
that leave under Clause 12 of the Letters Patent was granted for instituting
this suit but in our opinion there is no substance in this contention. The
materials on the record conclusively show that the learned Master, after
receiving the plaint, went to a learned Judge of this Court who granted such
leave but his Lordship inadvertently forgot to put his signature below the
endorsement made in that behalf. The Writ of Summons served on the defendants
also show that leave under Clause 12 was granted by the learned Judge. It was
the mistake of said learned Judge and also the mistake of the learned Master
whose duty was to see that it was signed by his Lordship.

48\. No litigant should ever suffer due to any mistake or fault of the Court
is the law laid down in the cases of Rodger v. Comtoir d' Escompte de Paris,
LR 3 PC 465 at p. 475; Jai Berham v. Kedarnath Marwari, 49 Ind App 351 at pp.
355, 356 = (AIR 1922 PC 269); Jagat Dhish Bhargava v. Jawahar Lal Bhargava, .
Further, in the case of Jang Singh v. Brijlal , Hidayatullah, J., (as he then
was) says this:

"There is no higher principle for the guidance of the Court than the one that
no act of Courts should harm a litigant and it is the bounden duty of Courts
to see that if a person is harmed by a mistake of the Court he should be
restored to the position he would have occupied but for that mistake. This is
aptly summed up in the maxim, 'Actus curiae neminem gravabit'".

In this view of the matter we overrule this contention of Mr. Dhar "who then
contended that Mr. Goswami having obtained leave to institute this suit under
Clause 12 of the Letters Patent by pleading that the contract in suit was
entered into in Calcutta within the jurisdiction of this Court and having
failed to prove this contract we should hold that this Court has no
jurisdiction to try this suit for, according to him, no part of the cause of
action had arisen within its jurisdiction but again we overrule this
objection.

49\. The Government of India opened the said account with the Imperial Bank of
India of Clive Street which was and still is situated in Calcutta within the
jurisdiction of this Court. The Association acted as the agents of the
Government of India in Calcutta within the jurisdiction of this Court. Mr.
Goswami was to be paid from this account by the Association. Mr. Goswami went
to the office of the Association which was and still is situated within the
jurisdiction of this Court and he demanded payment of the balance sum but the
Association refused to pay him. This demand and refusal took place in Calcutta
within the jurisdiction of this Court. All these facts constituted a part of
the cause of action for this suit. Leave under Clause 12 of the Letters Patent
was duly granted and therefore this Court has jurisdiction to try this suit.
We also do not find any justification in holding that such leave should be
confined solely to the averments made in the plaint as contended by Mr. Dhar.

50\. It was lastly contended by Mr. Dhar that this Court has no jurisdiction
to try this suit for the appellant does not carry on any business within the
meaning of that expression used in Clause 12 of the Letters Patent as held in
the case of Doya Narain Tewary v. Secy. of State for India in Council,
reported in (1887) ILR 14 Cal 256, and in the case of Govindarajulu Naidu v.
Secy. of State, reported in AIR 1927 Mad 689.

51\. The case of Doya Narain Tewary v. Secy. of State for India in Council,
(1887) ILR 14 Cal 256 (supra) was decided in the year 1866. It appears from
pages 273-274 of the report of that case that the Secretary of State for India
in Council used to carry on business at that time within the jurisdiction of
this Court. In spite of this fact a Division Bench of this Court, by giving a
restricted meaning to the words "carrying on business" used in Clause 12 of
the Charter, came to the conclusion that this Court had no jurisdiction to try
that suit. In our opinion, no reliance can any longer be placed on that
decision for it is contrary to the decision of the Supreme Court in the case
of Union of India v. Ladulal lain .

52\. The case of Govindarajulu Naidu v. Secy. of State. AIR 1927 Mad 689
(supra) was decided in the year 1927 by the Madras High Court by following the
decision in Doya Narain Tewary's case (1887) ILR 14 Cal 256 and for the same
reason we are unable to place any reliance on that decision.

53\. We do not find any justification in giving a restricted meaning to the
expression "carry on business" used in Clause 12 of the Charter. The learned
Judges who delivered judgments in those two cases cited by Mr. Dhar followed
the earlier decision but when those earlier cases were decided the Government
of India did not carry on any business and this vital fact was overlooked by
their Lordships. In our opinion, these two decisions in any event ceased to be
good law the moment the Government of India entered the field of commerce for
the law changes with the changing Society.

54\. It has been held by the Supreme Court in (supra) that the Government of
India carries on business in its Railway undertakings and the Court concerned
had jurisdiction to try that suit against the Union of India for the head
office of that Railway undertaking was situated within the territorial limits
of that Court. It was admitted by Mr. Dhar before us that the head office of
one of the Railway undertakings of the Government of India was situated at
Fairlie Place in Calcutta within the jurisdiction of this Court at the time of
institution of this suit and that head office is still situated therein. He,
however, contended that this Court has no jurisdiction to try this suit for
the cause of action for the suit did not arise out of any transaction between
Mr. Goswami and the said Railway undertaking of the Government of India.

55\. Apart from the aforesaid admission of Mr. Dhar we should also take
judicial notice of the facts namely that the head office of one of the Railway
undertakings of the Government of India was situated within the jurisdiction
of this Court at the time of institution of the suit and it is still situated
there as was pointed out by my learned brother to Mr. Dhar in course of
hearing of this appeal. In these circumstances, Mr. Bagchi argued that the
contention of Mr. Dhar was without any substance for it is covered by my two
decisions in (supra) and in the case of Union of India v. Khemchand Rajkumar,
reported in ILR (1972) 2 Cal 154.

56-57. In (supra) at pages 157 and 158 of the report I said as follows:

"No leave under Clause 12 is necessary if at the commencement of a suit the
defendant carries on business within the jurisdiction of this Court. It does
not matter in the least that leave under Clause 12 of the Letters Patent was
obtained on the averments that a part of the cause of action had arisen within
the jurisdiction of this Court. The defendant in its Eastern Railway
Administration carried on and still carries on business from Fairlie Place
which was and is still situate within the territorial limits of this Court and
this Court having jurisdiction over the defendant to entertain the suit, no
leave under Clause 12 of the Letters Patent was at all necessary.

It was further contended that as the said cargo was delivered to Southern
Railway Administration, benefit under Section 70 of the Contract Act was
enjoyed not by the Eastern Railway Administration but by the Southern Railway
Administration and so this Court had no jurisdiction to try this suit. This
argument is wholly misconceived and fallacious. It is true that the goods were
delivered to Southern Railway Administration but the benefit of the works for
carrying the said cargo wa.s received by the Eastern Railway who was to send
those goods to Southern Railway from Calcutta. Moreover, the suit is for
realisation of compensation for services rendered by the plaintiff to the
defendant and not for delivery of any goods belonging to the plaintiff.

Apart from what is said just now. this suit is against the defendant and not
against any of the Railway Administrations. The defendant is the owner of all
these Railway Administrations including the properties and assets of these
Railways. These Railway Administrations have no legal entity and they cannot
sue nor be sued in their names. Those Railway Administrations cannot have any
right nor they can incur any liability and it is the Union of India who can
incur any liability and can enforce its rights in connection with its Railway
undertakings. The defendant does carry on business within the jurisdiction of
this Court as said before and the Court has jurisdiction to try this suit
irrespective of the question whether any part of the cause of action had
arisen within the jurisdiction or not and I overrule the contentions of the
learned Counsel for the defendant."

And in the case of Union of India v. Khem-chand Rajkumar, ILR (1972) 2 Cal 154
(supra) at pages 189 and 190 of the report I said this:

"Under Clause 12 of the Letters Patent a suit can be filed in this Court if at
the time of commencement of an action the defendant shall carry on business
within its territorial limits. Jurisdiction of this Court in this case does
not depend on the cause of action. Similarly when the cause of action has
wholly or partly arisen within its territorial limits this Court has
jurisdiction to try the suit notwithstanding the fact that the defendant does
not carry on any business within its territorial limits. In other words,
jurisdiction based on the cause of action and the jurisdiction based on the
person of the defendant are two independent categories and they have no
relation with each other. Two illustrations will make the position clear.
Suppose A carries on business within the jurisdiction of this Court and he has
obtained a loan which is wholly unconnected with his business from B at Patna.
In this case, B can file a suit for recovery of this loan in this Court as A
carries on business within its jurisdiction and though the loan is wholly
unconnected with the business of A, still this Court has jurisdiction to
receive, try and determine the suit as A is carrying on business within its
jurisdiction. Coming now to the next illustration, suppose X carries on
business at Patna and he comes down to Calcutta and obtains a loan from Y at
Calcutta to meet his personal expenses wholly unconnected with the business
and then goes back to Patna without repaying the loan. Y can file a suit in
this Court as the cause of action has arisen within its jurisdiction though X
is no longer staying within the jurisdiction of this Court and this cause of
action of Y has no connection with the business of X.

When under Clause 12 of the Letters Patent this Court has jurisdiction over a
private individual who carries on business within its jurisdiction at the
commencement of the action, it cannot be said this Court has no jurisdiction
over the Government when it carries on business within its jurisdiction. The
States and the Central Government have various departments for administrative
purposes, but those departments have no legal entity. No department of the
Government can sue nor be sued. No department can hold any property nor can
have any legal right. Government is the owner of the properties and
undertakings managed and run through its departments. All rights in relation
to those properties and undertakings are the rights of the Union of India or
the States concerned. Similarly, all obligations incurred by the respective
departments in relation to those properties and undertakings are the
obligations of the respective Governments. It is true that every department is
provided with separate funds, but that does not mean that the right of an
outsider to receive payment from the Government is confined to the funds
allocated to a particular department with whom he has dealt with. The decree-
holder is entitled to execute a decree against any property of the Government
including any funds of the Government irrespective of the fact that a
particular property or a fund is utilised by a particular department of the
Government.

Under the Constitution all properties belonging to the Central Government
belong to the Union of India. Similarly the Constitution has empowered the
Central Government to carry on business and to enter into contracts with the
third parties. Under the Constitution all suits by or against the Central
Government must be filed by or against the Union of India and not by or
against any department of the Central Government. A suit can be filed against
the Union of India for breach of a contract and for incurring other
obligations under a contract. The cause of action for such a suit may either
be a breach of contract or for not discharging the obligations incurred by the
Government under the contract. But the Union of India and not a department is
the defendant in such a suit. If the Union of India does not carry on any
business within the territorial limits of a particular Court, such a Court
cannot have any jurisdiction over the Union of India unless the cause of
action, either wholly or partly, arises within its jurisdiction. In this case
the jurisdiction of the Court is invoked on the basis of a cause of action
having arisen either partly or wholly within the jurisdiction of the Court.
But, if the Union of India carries on business within the jurisdiction of a
court it becomes wholly irrelevant to consider where the cause of action for
such a suit has arisen as that Court shall have the jurisdiction over the
Union of India. In this connection it should also be remembered that the
jurisdiction over the defendant and the jurisdiction over the subject-matter
of the litigations are two independent matters.

In my opinion, this Court under Clause 12 of the Letters Patent has
jurisdiction to receive, try and determine a suit against the Union of India
if the Union of India carries on any business within its jurisdiction at the
time of commencement of a suit against it irrespective of the question as to
where the cause of action relating to such a suit has arisen. ....."

58\. Hence, we overrule the contention of Mr. Dhar and hold that this Court
has jurisdiction to try this suit for the Government of India used to carry on
business at the time of institution of the suit within the jurisdiction of
this Court and it was wholly unnecessary for Mr. Goswami even to ask for leave
under Clause 12 of the Letters Patent to institute this suit. Point No. 7.

59\. It was contended by Mr. Dhar that the trial Judge has passed an
extraordinary Order by directing the appellant to pay half costs of the suit
to the respondents 2 and 3 and Mr. Dhar argued this point without making any
attempt even to distinguish the cases relied on by the Trial Court. He urged
that Mr. Goswami and not the appellant should pay them their half costs of the
suit for Mr. Goswami had lost the action against them.

60\. Mr. Goswami did not know that the Association had. acted as the agents of
the appellant, A few days before sending the notice under Section 80 of the
Code of Civil Procedure Mr. Goswami came to know from his brother that the
Association was repudiating the liability on the allegation that they have
acted as the agents of the appellant. In these circumstances Mr. Goswami
caused the Notice under Section 80 of the Code to be served on the appellant
so that the appellant could come out with the truth by admitting the said
agency. The appellant did not give any reply to that notice and Mr. Goswami
had to file the suit against those respondents who admitted in their written
statement, that the Association had acted as the agents of the appellant who
however wrongly denied the truth of this fact in its written statement.

61\. In view of the wrongful denial those respondents had to call a number of
witnesses and they were cross-examined at length on behalf of the appellant
for shifting its liability on the Association who acted as the agents, on
honorary basis, of the appellant. The Trial Court had to frame an issue in
this behalf at the instance of the appellant and considerable costs had to be
incurred in view of this attitude of the appellant who lost on that issue.

62\. No doubt the suit has been dismissed against those respondents but, in
our opinion, the trial Judge did nothing extraordinary in directing the
appellant to pay half costs of the suit to them. We have looked into those
authorities relied on by the Trial Court and they support its order. In this
view of the matter the learned Judge rightly exercised his discretion in
making that order and hence the contention of Mr. Dhar is without any merits.

63\. Having disposed of all the points of Mr. Dhar we will now take up the
question raised by Mr. Bagchi namely that this appeal is time barred. The
decree was passed on June 29, 1967 and on the same day the solicitors for the
respondents 2 and 3 put in the requisition for drawing up of the decree and
simultaneously with it the appellant's solicitor also put in the requisition
for the certified copy of the judgment and the decree. The judgment was filed
on November 13, 1967 and the Department sent the folios to the appellant's
Solicitor on March 26, 1968 and on the same day the appellant's solicitor
furnished the stamps for its certified copy. The draft decree was settled on
August 8, 1968 and it was signed by the trial Judge on September 18. 1968 and
then it was filed on January 2, 1969. The Department furnished folios on March
26, 1969 to the appellant's Solicitor who on the same day furnished the stamps
and the certified copies of the judgment and the decree were delivered to him
on May 2, 1969 and this appeal was filed on May 28, 1969.

64\. Mr. Bagchi placed strong reliance on the decision of the Judicial
Committee in the case of Pramathanath Roy v. Lee, reported in 49 Ind App 307 =
(AIR 1922 PC 352) and on the decisions of the Supreme Court in , and in the
case of State of U. P. v. Maharaja Narain, . in support of his contention that
the appellant was not entitled to any deductions of time from September 18,
1968 for filing this appeal in view of the duel system prevailing on the
Original Side of this Court. He argued that it was the duty of the appellant's
solicitor to make "tadbirs" to the Department so that the Department could
file the decree the moment it was signed on September 18, 1968.

65\. In Pramathanath's case 49 Ind App 307 = (AIR 1922 PC 352) it was found by
the Judicial Committee that the appd-lant was guilty of laches and therefore
that case does not assist Mr. Bagchi. The law laid down by the Supreme Court
in those two decisions is that the time stops running the moment the
requisition for drawing up of the decree and for the certified copies are put
in. Further, the solicitors have no duty to gq to the Department for making
'Tadbirs" for the Rules of the Original Side of this Court do not cast any
such duty on them. Hence, we overrule his contention and hold that this appeal
is not time barred.

66\. Now in support of the cross objection the learned Counsel Mr. Chowdhury,
for those respondents, contended that they are entitled to the full costs of
the suit either from the appellant or from Mr. Goswami. He cited several
decisions but in the view we have taken in this matter it is not necessary for
us to discuss them.

67\. No leave under Order 1, Rule 8 of the Code of Civil Procedure was
obtained for instituting the suit against them as representing all other
members of the Association and therefore the other members of the Association
are not parties to the suit. Hence, the Trial Court by disallowing the other
half costs of the suit made these respondents personally liable to bear those
costs of the suit which they cannot realise from the other members of the
Association. This fact was overlooked by the Trial Court and therefore in our
opinion, their cross objection should be allowed.

68\. Mr, Dhar contended that Mr. Goswami should pay those costs but Mr. Bagehi
contended otherwise and said that appellant should pay them. We are unable to
accept the contention of Mr. Bagehi because Mr. Goswami has put these
respondents to this loss by not obtaining leave under Order 1, Rule 8 of the
Code. Further, in the absence of these two respondents it would have been
impossible for Mr. Goswami to prove his case against the appellant on the
question of agency. He had taken full ad-vanlage of their presence and at the
same time by not suing them in their representative capacity has put them into
that loss.

In this view of the matter we allow the cross objection and direct Mr. Goswami
to pay the other half costs of the suit to these two respondents. This appeal
is dismissed with costs. Certified for two counsel.

B.C. Mitra, J.

69\. I agree.

