

Delhi High Court

Intas Pharmaceuticals Limited vs Allergan Inc. on 24 July, 2006

Equivalent citations: AIR 2007 Delhi 108, 132 (2006) DLT 641, 2006 (32) PTC
272 Del

Author: M Sharma

Bench: M Sharma, H Kohli

JUDGMENT Mukundakam Sharma, J.

1\. The issue that arises for consideration in this appeal is whether this
Court has the territorial jurisdiction to try and entertain the suit, which
was filed by the respondent herein.

2.The respondent as plaintiff filed a suit on the Original Side of this Court,
praying inter alia for a decree of mandatory injunction and damages, as also
for infringement of trade mark, passing off and unfair competition against the
appellant/defendant in the suit. In the said suit, the respondent / plaintiff
claimed that the plaintiff No. 1 is a registered proprietor of the trademarks
BOTOX and BTX-A in India. It was also stated by the respondent/plaintiff that
this Court has the territorial jurisdiction to try and entertain the suit as
the offending product of the appellant/defendant is sold by the
appellant/defendant in and around Delhi, within the jurisdiction of this
Court.

3\. The appellant, however, filed an application dated 23rd January, 2006,
under Order VII Rule 11 of the Code of Civil Procedure, praying inter alia for
rejection of the plaint for want of territorial jurisdiction. In support of
the aforesaid contention and submission, the appellant heavily relied upon the
judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Dhodha House v. S.K. Maingi
reported as 2005 (10) SCALE 267.

4\. The learned Single Judge considered the aforesaid plea raised by the
appellant in its application and vide order dated 28th April, 2006 rejected
the same holding that a part of the cause of action having arisen within the
territorial jurisdiction of this Court, the suit filed by the respondent
cannot be dismissed for want of territorial jurisdiction. The aforesaid
findings and the conclusions arrived at by the learned Single Judge are under
challenge in this appeal.

5\. Mr. Bishwajit Bhattacharya, learned Counsel appearing for the appellant
vehemently submitted before us that while enacting the Trade Marks Act, 1999,
a specific Section, namely, Section 134 has been enacted, which provides that
a suit for infringement of a registered trade mark or for passing off cannot
not be instituted in any court inferior to a District Court having
jurisdiction to try and entertain the suit.

6\. In order to properly appreciate the aforesaid submissions made by the
learned Counsel for the appellant, it would be appropriate to extract
hereinbelow, the provisions of Section 20 CPC as also the provisions of
Section 134 of the Trade Marks Act, 1999 on which reliance was placed by the
counsel appearing for the appellant:

Section 20 CPC: Other suits to be instituted where defendants reside or cause
of action arises:- Subject to the limitations aforesaid, every suit shall be
instituted in a Court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction -

(a)the defendant, or each of the defendants where there are more than one, at
the time of the commencement of the suit, actually and voluntarily resides, or
carries on business, or personally works for gain; or

(b)any of the defendants, where there are more than one, at the time of the
commencement of the suit, actually and voluntarily resides, or carries on
business, or personally works for gain, provided that in such case either the
leave of the Court is given, or the defendants who do not reside, or carry on
business, or personally work for gain, as aforesaid, acquiesce in such
institution; or

(c)the cause of action, wholly or in part, arises.

Explanation: - A corporation shall be deemed to carry on business at its sole
or principal office in India or, in respect of any cause of action arising at
any place where it has also a subordinate office, at such place.

    
    
     ...      ...        ...
     ...        ...          ...
     
    
    Section 134 of Trade Marks Act: Suit for infringement, etc., to be instituted before District Court. - (1) No suit -
      
    
    (a) for the infringement of a registered trade mark; or
     
    
    (b) relating to any right in a registered trade mark; or
     
    
    (c) for passing off arising out of the use by the defendant of any trade mark which is identical with or deceptively similar to the plaintiff's trade mark, whether registered or unregistered,
     
    
    shall be instituted in any court inferior to a District Court having jurisdiction to try the suit.
     
    
    

(2) For the purpose of Clauses (a) and (b) of Sub-section (1), a "District
Court having jurisdiction" shall, notwithstanding anything contained in the
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) or any other law for the time being
in force, include a District Court within the local limits of whose
jurisdiction, at the time of the institution of the suit or other proceedings,
the person instituting the suit or proceedings, or, where there are more than
one such persons any of them, actually and voluntarily resides or carries on
business or personally works for gain.

7\. Referring to the aforesaid two provisions, counsel for the appellant
submitted before us that Section 20 of the Code of Civil Procedure is a
general provision contained in the Code of Civil Procedure, which gives a
guideline of the courts which would have the territorial jurisdiction to try
and entertain a suit. It specifically provides that every suit will be
instituted in a court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the
defendant resides, carries on business or personally works for gain or where
the cause of action has arisen, either wholly or in part. There is also an
explanation provided to Section 20 CPC, which lays down that a corporation
shall be deemed to carry on business at its sole or principal office in India
or, in respect of any cause of action arising at any place where it also has a
subordinate office, at such place. Same would be the position in respect of a
company.

8\. According to the learned Counsel for the appellant, aforesaid provision of
Section 20 Civil Procedure Code is a general provision and since a special
provision has been made in the Trade Marks Act, 1999 by way of Section 134,
which again provides the forum and the place where a suit for infringement of
trade mark etc. is to be instituted, the provisions of Section 134 shall have
an overriding effect over the provisions of Section 20 CPC and, therefore, the
provisions of Section 20 CPC shall stand impliedly repealed. It was also
submitted by the counsel appearing for the appellant, that in any case, no
cause of action has arisen within the territorial jurisdiction of this Court
and, therefore, the impugned order dated 28th April, 2006, passed by the
learned Single Judge is required to be set aside and quashed. The counsel
further submitted that assuming that the appellant/defendant had in its
written statement admitted that this Court has the territorial jurisdiction to
try and entertain the suit, yet such admission shall not and cannot confer
jurisdiction on the Delhi Court, if such jurisdiction is otherwise not
available. In support of the said contention, the counsel relied upon the
ratio of the decision of the Supreme Court in Harshad Chiman Lal Modi v. DLF
Universal Ltd. and Anr. reported as .

9\. In the light of the aforesaid submissions, we have heard the learned
Counsel for the respondent and have also perused the entire records placed
before us. A perusal of the plaint, which is annexed with the memorandum of
appeal, as Annexure-A, indicates that the aforesaid suit was a suit for
injunction and damages, infringement of registered trade mark, passing off and
unfair competition. There is no denial to the fact that as of date the
trademark of the respondent is registered in India. In paragraph 36 of the
plaint, it was stated by the respondent as plaintiff that this Court will have
the territorial jurisdiction to try and entertain the present suit as the
offending product is sold by the defendant in and around Delhi within the
jurisdiction of this Court. It is, therefore, obvious and established that the
respondent as plaintiff is placing reliance upon the provisions of Section 20
of the Code of Civil Procedure. As per the aforesaid submission made in the
plaint and the submissions made by the learned Counsel for the respondent, the
provisions of Section 134 of the Trade Marks Act, 1999 have no application at
all to the facts and circumstances of the present case.

10\. When an effort is being made to derive support from the provisions of
Section 20 CPC for claiming right and entitlement to institute a case in this
Court, we have to examine as to whether or not the provisions of Section 20
CPC are applicable to the facts of the present case. There are several
decisions rendered by this Court, dealing with the issue of territorial
jurisdiction in such matters which are relevant in the context of whether or
not the provisions of Section 20 CPC are at all applicable to the facts of
this case or whether the said provision stood impliedly repealed by the
provisions of Section 134 of the Trade Marks Act. Such decisions were rendered
not only in the context of the Trade Marks Act, of 1958 but also in the
context of Copyright Act, which contains a specific provision with regard to
territorial jurisdiction, namely, Section 62 of the Copyright Act. In this
connection, we may appropriately refer to the Division Bench decision of this
Court in Jawahar Engineering Company and Ors. Ghaziabad v. Jawahar Engineers
Pvt. Ltd. Sri Rampur, Distt. Ahmednagar, Maharashtra reported as 1983 PTC 207
and the decision in P.M. Diesels Ltd. v. Patel Field Marshal Industries
reported as 1998 PTC (18) (DB). However, recently, the Supreme Court has
delivered a judgment in the case of Dhodha House (supra). There is no Supreme
Court decision discussing the law as provided for under Section 20 CPC read
with the provisions of Section 62 of the Copyright Act.

11\. Before embarking upon a discussion on the legal position regarding the
issue at hand at this stage we may refer to the defense taken by the appellant
in its written statement. As against the aforesaid statement made in paragraph
36 of the plaint pertaining to averments relating to the territorial
jurisdiction of this Court, the appellant/defendant filed a written statement
categorically stating inter alia that the territorial jurisdiction of this
Court is not denied. The fact that the appellant is selling goods in and
around Delhi is not denied even evasively. Therefore, the fact that the
appellant/defendant is selling its goods in Delhi and that this Court has the
territorial jurisdiction to try and entertain the suit instituted by the
respondent as plaintiff stood admitted in the aforesaid written statement.
Subsequently, an amended written statement was filed by the appellant wherein
also the territorial jurisdiction of this Court was not denied. The fact that
the appellant is and has been selling the offending product in Delhi is also
not denied. Therefore, when the aforesaid issue was argued before the learned
Single Judge, it was an admitted position that the appellant / defendant
admitted that this Court has the territorial jurisdiction to try and entertain
the suit. However, there is no denial of the fact that the said statement,
which is in the nature of an admission cannot vest jurisdiction in this Court
unless it can be shown that this Court otherwise has the territorial
jurisdiction to entertain the suit. There can also be no dispute with regard
to the proposition laid down by the Supreme Court that no amount of concession
or admission by the defendant shall confer jurisdiction on a court, if it does
not otherwise possess such a jurisdiction to entertain a suit. The ratio of
the decision of the Supreme Court in the case of Harshad Chiman Lal Modi
(supra) is an authority in this regard and there can be no dispute with regard
to the said proposition of law as laid down and settled by the Supreme Court.

12\. Now, coming to Section 20 of the Code of Civil Procedure, a perusal of
the same make it manifest that it is possible to invoke the jurisdiction of a
particular court if the defendants or any of the defendants resides or carries
on business or personally works for gain within the jurisdiction of the said
court. When the Trade Marks Act was enacted, the Legislature was fully
conscious of the fact that Section 20 of the Code of Civil Procedure provides
for a forum and the place in which a suit is required to be instituted.
Despite the said fact, Section 134 of the Trade Marks Act, 1999 was enacted
and while enacting the said provision, which was in addition to the provisions
of the Code of Civil Procedure, the Legislature specifically included the non
obstante clause, which states "notwithstanding anything contained in the Code
of Civil Procedure".

13\. Therefore, in our opinion, in view of the inclusion of the aforesaid
expression in the statutory provision "notwithstanding anything contained in
the Code of Civil Procedure" the provisions of Section 134 of the Trade Marks
Act, 1999 shall have to be read in addition to the provisions of Section 20 of
the Code of Civil Procedure. The aforesaid position is also made clear and
reiterated by the Supreme Court in the case of Dhodha House (supra). In
paragraph 19 of the said judgment, the Supreme Court held thus:

19\. Cause of action, as is well-settled, is a bundle of facts which are
necessary to be proved in a given case. Cause of action, it is trite, if
arises within the jurisdiction of the court concerned empowers the court to
entertain the matter. Determination of territorial jurisdiction of a civil
court is governed by the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure....

20\. The jurisdiction of the District Court to determine a lis under the 1957
Act as also the 1958 Act must, thus, be instituted where the whole or a part
of cause of action arises. Sub-section (2) of Section 62 of the 1957 Act
provides for an additional forum....

21\. Admittedly, no such additional forum had been created in terms of the
provisions of the 1958 Act.

14\. For the aforesaid conclusion that we have arrived at after scrutinizing
the provisions of Section 20 of the Code of Civil Procedure and Section 134 of
the Trade Marks Act, 1999 and particularly, the non obstante clause, we derive
support from the decision of the Supreme Court in Dhodha House (supra).
Therefore, what is provided under Section 134 of the Trade Marks Act is an
additional forum over and above the one provided for by the provisions of
Section 20 of the CPC. This is also made clear when the provisions enacted
under Sub-section (2) of Section 134 of Trade Marks Act are passed. It is also
to be noted that the provisions of Section 62 of Copyright Act are almost pari
materia with the provisions of Section 134 of Trade Marks Act. Sub-section (2)
of Section 134 clearly stipulates that the provisions made therein are in
addition to what is provided for under Section 20 CPC.

15\. In this view of the matter, and in terms of the aforesaid discussion, we
are of the considered opinion, that the submissions of the learned Counsel for
the appellant that Section 134 of Trade Marks Act overrides the provisions of
Section 20 of Code of Civil Procedure and that it impliedly repeals the said
provision, is found to be devoid of merit and is rejected. We hold that the
provisions of Section 134 of the Trade Marks Act, 1999 do not whittle down the
provisions of Section 20 of the CPC but only provide an additional forum and
place for filing a suit in the case of any trade mark violation.

16\. In any event, in the present case, it is not the intention of the
respondent/plaintiff to invoke the provisions of Section 134 of the Trade
Marks Act. It is categorically submitted before us by the learned Counsel for
the respondent for the purpose of proving and establishing that this Court has
territorial jurisdiction that what is sought to be invoked, is only the
provisions of Section 20 of the Code of Civil Procedure and not the provisions
of Section 134 of Trade Marks Act. Therefore, we are required to scrutinize
the plaint filed by the respondent/plaintiff and come to a definite conclusion
as to whether or not this Court will have the territorial jurisdiction, in
terms of the provisions of Section 20 CPC.

17\. When the aforesaid provision is examined in the light of the facts of the
present case, it is crystal clear that in fact, the provisions of Section
20(a) and 20(b) will not be applicable to the facts of the present case.
Therefore, the only provisions which could be attracted in the present case
are the provisions of Section 20(c) of the CPC. The said provisions enable a
plaintiff to file a suit in all such places where the cause of action arises
either wholly or in part. In the present case, the specific plea of the
respondent/plaintiff herein is that this Court has the territorial
jurisdiction to try and entertain the suit as the defendant is selling the
offending products in Delhi, which statement is also admitted by the appellant
/ defendant in its written statement. In view of the aforesaid position, the
learned Single Judge rightly held that this Court will have the territorial
jurisdiction to try and entertain the present suit.

18\. We find no reason to take a different view particularly also in the light
of the decision of the Supreme Court in Dhodha House (supra). In the said
decision, the Supreme Court has categorically stated that for the purpose of
deciding the case in Dhodha House (supra), the question as to whether the
defendant had been selling its products in Delhi or not was wholly irrelevant.
One of the grounds on which the Division Bench of this Court in P.M. Diesels
Ltd. v. Patel Field Marshal Industries (supra) held that the Delhi Court has
territorial jurisdiction as the defendant was selling the goods under the
impugned trade mark at Delhi and thus the plaintiff's right thereof had been
violated at Delhi. In the said decision, the Division Bench of this Court,
however, did not advert to the said contention raised therein saying that the
question as to whether the defendant has been selling its products on a
commercial scale at Delhi was a question of fact and was required to be
properly determined in the case only after evidence was led by the parties. It
is in that context that the Supreme Court has held that the question as to
whether the defendant had been selling its products in Delhi is wholly
irrelevant.

19\. In this view of the matter, the ratio of the decision of the Supreme
Court in Dhodha House (supra) is not at all applicable to the facts and
circumstances of the present case, to the aforesaid extent, as it had no
occasion to deal with the issue regarding selling of the goods by the
defendant in Delhi due to part of the cause of action had arisen within the
territorial jurisdiction of this Court. Two decisions rendered by the Single
Judges of this Court and the present impugned order passed by another learned
Single Judge have held that since the offending goods are being sold by the
appellant / defendant at a particular place, it shall definitely give
jurisdiction to the court of such a place, which is also what was held in M/s
Jawahar Engineering Company (supra). It is necessary to mention at this stage
that in view of the decision rendered in Dhodha House (supra), the Supreme
Court held that the decision in M/s Jawahar Engineering Company (supra) will
not be applicable to the facts of the case before it. Since the application
for registration of trademark in the cases before it had not been made within
the territory of Delhi, the Supreme Court in the case of Dhodha House (supra)
found and held that the decision in the case of Jawahar Engineering Company
(supra) would be inapplicable to the facts of the said case before it. In the
said case, the Division Bench of this Court also held that such court will
have jurisdiction where the trade mark is sought to be sold and if such trade
mark is being sought for sale in Delhi amongst other places, Delhi shall also
have jurisdiction to entertain such a suit.

20\. In the light of the aforesaid discussion, we are of the considered
opinion that the order dated 28th April, 2006, passed by the learned Single
Judge does not suffer from any infirmity. We find no merit in this appeal and
the same is dismissed. No order as to costs.

