

Custom, Excise & Service Tax Tribunal

M/S Ahuja Furnishers Pvt. Ltd vs Cst, Delhi on 17 March, 2016

    
    
            
    
     
    IN THE CUSTOMS, EXCISE & SERVICE TAX
    
    APPELLATE TRIBUNAL
    
    West Block No. 2, R.K. Puram, New Delhi  110 066.
    
    Principal Bench, New Delhi
    
    
    
    COURT NO. IV
    
    
    
    DATE OF HEARING  : 17/03/2016.
    
    DATE OF DECISION : 17/03/2016.
    
    
    
    Service Tax Appeal No. 490 of 2009 
    
    
    
    [Arising out of the Order-in-Original No. 30/VKG/2009 dated 01/04/2009 passed by The Commissioner, Service Tax Commissionerate, New Delhi.]
    
    
    
    For Approval and signature :
    
    Honble Ms. Archana Wadhwa, Member (Judicial) 
    
    Honble Shri B. Ravichandran, Member (Technical)
    
    1.	Whether Press Reporters may be allowed to see	:
    
    	the Order for publication as per Rule 27 of the
    
    	CESTAT (Procedure) Rules, 1982?
    
    
    
    2.	Whether it would be released under Rule 27 of 		:
    
    	the CESTAT (Procedure) Rules, 1982 for 
    
    	publication in any authoritative report or not?
    
    
    
    3.	Whether their Lordships wish to see the fair		:
    
    	copy of the order?
    
    
    
    4.	Whether order is to be circulated to the 			:
    
    	Department Authorities?
    
    Shri Nitin Ahuja, Director of	]
    
    M/s Ahuja Furnishers Pvt. Ltd.]                                    Appellant
    
    
    
    	Versus
    
    
    
    CST, Delhi                                                              Respondent

Appearance Shri Akhil Gupta, C.A.  for the appellant.

Shri K. Poddar, Authorized Representative (DR)  for the Respondent.

CORAM : Honble Ms. Archana Wadhwa, Member (Judicial) Honble Shri B.
Ravichandran, Member (Technical) Final Order No. 51062/2016 Dated : 17/03/2016
Per. B. Ravichandran :-

The present appeal is against order dated 01/4/2009 of Commissioner of Service
Tax, New Delhi. The appellant are engaged in completion and finishing services
in relation to building or civil structure. Certain proceedings were initiated
against the appellant by the Service Tax Authorities to demand differential
amount of service tax arising out of denial of benefit under Notification No.
15/2004-ST and 1/2006-ST. On completion of the adjudication process the
Commissioner vide the impugned order confirmed the service tax demand of Rs.
22,94,668/- and imposed equal amount of penalty.

2\. The appellants challenged the original order mainly on the ground that
they have executed composite works contract and as such are liable to service
tax only w.e.f. 01/6/2007 in view of the law laid down by Honble Supreme
Court in the case of CCE & CUS, Kerala vs. M/s Larsen and Toubro Ltd. reported
in 2015  TIOL  187  SC  ST. The learned Counsel for the appellant also
relied on the decision of Larger Bench of the Tribunal in Bhayana Builders (P)
Ltd. vs. CST, Delhi vide interim order No. 394-417/2013  CU (DB) dated
06/09/2013 to support his case regarding the applicability of Notification No.
14/2004. The learned Counsel also relied on copies of invoices, stock transfer
note, copy of VAT and WCT returns filed with the State Authorities to support
his claim that they have clearly established the transfer of goods and their
value. It is their case that major component of the contract deals with
materials used. They are eligible for benefit of Notification No. 12/2003-ST,
which was also taken note of by the Original Authority.

3\. We have heard both the sides and examined the appeal records. We find the
decided cases relied upon by the appellants were not available for the
Original Authority when he decided the case. Further, the appellants have made
out a strong case with documentary evidences regarding transfer of materials
during the provision of service by them. Prima facie, the work executed by
them will be covered under works contract service. The applicability of
decided cases relied upon by the appellant and also the documents submitted by
the appellants require verification for a fresh decision by the Original
Authority. We find this as a fit case for remanding to the Original Authority
for a denovo decision, in view of the above observations. The impugned order
is set aside. Due opportunity will be provided to the appellants to submit
their side of the case alongwith supporting evidences. The appeal is disposed
of by way of remand.

(Operative part of the order pronounced in the open court.) (Archana Wadhwa)
Member (Judicial) (B. Ravichandran) Member (Technical) PK ??

??

??

??

3

