

Supreme Court of India

Shalini Shyam Shetty & Anr vs Rajendra Shankar Patil on 23 July, 2010

Author: .....................J.

Bench: G.S. Singhvi, Asok Kumar Ganguly

    
    
                                                                    REPORTABLE
    
    
                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                   CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
    
    
                 CIVIL APPEAL NO.5896 OF 2010
         (Arising out of SLP (Civil) No.7445 of 2009)
    
    
    
    
    Shalini Shyam Shetty and another                ..Appellant(s)
    
    
    
                                 Versus
    
    
    
    Rajendra Shankar Patil                          ..Respondent(s)
    
    
    
                           J U D G M E N T
    

GANGULY, J.

1\. Leave granted.

2\. This appeal has been filed by the original defendant challenging the
judgment and order dated 09.02.2009 of the Bombay High Court rendered in the
Writ Petition filed under  1 Article 226 of the Constitution of India. The
High Court dismissed the writ petition in view of concurrent finding of two
lower courts and High Court thought that no interference in exercise of its
writ jurisdiction is warranted.

3\. The facts of the case are that the respondent/plaintiff filed a suit for
eviction on the grounds of breach of terms of tenancy, damage to the property
as well as causing nuisance and annoyance to the plaintiff and the other
occupants. As per the plaintiff the original defendant was the tenant in
respect of Room No.3 (hereinafter as suit premises) and was paying monthly
rent of Rs.20/- including the water charges and excluding the electricity
charges. The case of the plaintiff is that only the suit premises was let out
though the original tenant was allowed to use a covered space of 10'x 4', but
the same was for common usage and for access to W.C and water tap along with
the other tenants.

2

4\. Plaintiff claims that somewhere in January 2000, the defendant had
requested the plaintiff to give keys of the two doors to clean the `Sherry'
portion. But the said keys were not returned even after 2-3 days and the
plaintiff became suspicious and requested the defendant for returning the
keys, but in vain. Suspecting some foul play, the plaintiff entered the
`sherry' to find that the defendant had placed his items over there and
removed the drainage cover which was there in the Sherry. A police complaint
was made with regard to the unauthorized possession but nothing happened. The
plaintiff then requested the defendant to remove those articles but the
request of the plaintiff was not heeded.

5\. The defendant/appellant's father is said to have filed a suit for relief
of declaration as tenant in the premises and to further restrain the landlord
from interfering in the tenanted premises. In the said suit injunction was
granted. Thereafter, the plaintiff had  3 demolished a wall that was there in
the Sherry and put up a new door.

6\. The original defendant expired during the pendency of the suit and his LRs
were brought on record and they, in their written statement, admitted the
relationship between the parties, but they denied all the allegations against
them. They made a claim that the space measuring about 10'x4' abutting the
entrance door of suit premises was in their exclusive use. As regards the suit
filed by the appellant's father it was submitted that the same was settled
outside the court with the understanding that the defendant would withdraw his
suit, whereas the plaintiff will withdraw his suit simultaneously. An
affidavit dated 16.03.01 was filed to that effect.

7\. The learned Court of Small Causes at Mumbai, Bandra Branch vide its
judgment dated 30.10.07 decreed the suit of the plaintiff/respondent and
directed the defendantS to hand over the vacant  4 and peaceful possession of
the suit premises to the plaintiff within a period of four months from the
date of the order. It was held that at the time of filing of the present suit,
as per evidence on record, the defendants were in unlawful occupation of the
sherry portion of the suit property, which was admittedly not let out. As
regards the settlement outside court it was held that the affidavit, Exhibit
`E', relied on by the defendants merely speaks of withdrawal of the suit of
defendants and settlement of dispute. There is no mention about the present
suit being settled. It was noted that admittedly the plaintiff has no
documentary evidence to prove that the defendants had encroached and occupied
the sherry portion of the suit property. But it was observed that there is
corroborative evidence in this behalf in the form of NC Slip Exhibit `G' which
shows that the complaint was filed immediately after the plaintiff learnt
about this unlawful possession. Reliance was also placed on paragraph 10 of
the examination-in-chief of the D.W.1 which supports  5 the plaintiff's
version.

8\. It was held that the defendants admit that at some point prior to the
filing of the present suit the `sherry portion' was in the occupation of the
deceased defendant. This has to be read in the light of the fact that the
aforesaid portion was never let out to the deceased defendant. As such the
occupation of the deceased defendant over the said portion was unlawful as he
had no right to occupy the same.

9\. Further reference was made to the suit filed by the appellant's father
wherein an injunction order was passed in his favour. It was after the said
injunction order that the defendants had demolished the wall in the sherry and
constructed a door. They had also removed chamber covers and replaced it with
tiles. As such it was held that the conduct of the defendants resulted in
unhygienic conditions as it was impossible to clean the drains. On behalf  6
of the defendants there was no whisper or challenge to the entire testimony on
this point anywhere in the cross-examination. The result of this was nuisance
and annoyance to the plaintiff as well as to other occupants of the suit
property and this testimony has also not been challenged.

10\. An appeal was filed against this order. The First Appellate Court vide
its order dated 11.09.08 partly allowed the appeal. The trial Court's judgment
was confirmed on the ground of causing waste and damage as contemplated under
Section 16 (1) (a) of the Maharashtra Rent Control Act, but the findings of
the trial Court on the ground of nuisance and annoyance were set aside.

11\. The Appellate Court noticed that in the suit filed by the defendants
against the plaintiff, the defendants have specifically come out with the case
that the dispute between the deceased defendant and the plaintiff with regard
to the  7 alleged Sherry premises, was settled and an affidavit to this effect
dated 16.03.01 was executed by the defendant. The Appellate Court thought it
would be just and proper to take on record the certified copy of the order of
dismissal of suit filed by the defendants dated 03.03.07 under provisions of
Order 41 Rule 27

(b) CPC. On perusal of the same it was found that the same was dismissed for
default.

12\. The Appellate Court placing reliance on para 10 of the affidavit of
examination-in-chief of the defendants came to a conclusion that it was
mentioned therein that the possession of the Sherry was with him and the said
defendants handed over the possession to the plaintiff, as per affidavit dated
16.03.01. As such it was for the defendants to explain how they were occupying
the said premises, to which there has been no reasonable explanation offered.
It was concluded that the defendants had encroached upon the Sherry premises
which was not let out to them and the said act definitely amounted to  8
causing waste and damage to plaintiff's property.

13\. With respect to the finding of nuisance it was observed by the Appellate
Court that admittedly, none of the neighbouring occupier was examined by the
plaintiff, which was necessary. As such under such circumstances, just because
version of plaintiff is not challenged seriously it cannot be concluded that
the plaintiff has established his case. The Appellate Court set aside the
finding of the trial Court on this ground only but confirmed the finding on
other grounds of eviction.

14\. The appellants then moved to the High Court with a prayer to issue a writ
of certiorari and/or any other writ, order or command and call for the papers
and proceedings from the lower courts. The High Court dismissed the Writ
Petition only on the ground that against concurrent finding of facts by the
Courts below  9 the exercise of writ jurisdiction is not warranted.

15\. The facts of the case have been discussed in detail in order to show that
in a pure dispute of landlord and tenant between private parties, a writ
petition was entertained by the High Court. It did not pass any order on the
writ petition, inter alia, on the ground that there are concurrent findings of
fact. If the findings have not been concurrent, the High Court might have
interfered. In any event High Court did not hold that a writ petition is not
maintainable in a dispute between landlord and tenant in which both are
private parties and the dispute is of civil nature.

16\. It was urged before this Court that petitions under Article 227 of the
Constitution are filed against orders of Civil Court and even in disputes
between landlord and tenant. Under the Bombay High Court Rules, such petitions
are called writ petitions.

1

17\. This Court is unable to appreciate this submission. First of all this
Court finds that the petition which was filed before the High Court was a pure
and simple writ petition. It was labeled as Writ Petition No.7926 of 2008
(page 75 of the SLP paper book).

18\. In paragraph 6 of the writ petition it had been categorically stated:

"That no efficacious remedy is available to the petitioners than the present
petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India. (page 89 of SLP paper
book)"

19\. In the prayer portion also a writ of certiorari has been prayed for in
the following terms:

"(a) That this Hon'ble Court be pleased to issue a writ of certiorari and/or
any other writ, order or command and call upon the papers and proceedings of
Appeal No.314 of 2007 together with Exh.8 in RAE Suit No.146 of 2001 and also
R.A.D. Suit Stamp No.61 of 2001 (Suit No.6/8 of 2001)  1 and after going
through the legality, validity and propriety of the said Appeal and the said
other matters, this Hon'ble Court be pleased to quash and/or set aside the
judgment and decree dated 11th September, 2008 passed by the Hon'ble Appeal
Court in Appeal No.314 of 2007 of the Petitioners and allow the same in toto".

20\. Therefore, the petition filed before the High Court was a writ petition.

21\. Now coming to the Bombay High Court Rules, this Court finds that in
Chapter I Rule 2B of the Bombay High Court (Appellate Side) Rules, 1960
(hereinafter referred to as rules) it is provided:

"2B. Petitions/applications under Article 226 an/or 227 of the Constitution of
India, arising out of/or relating to an order of penalty or confiscation etc.
passed under any special statute All petitions/applications under Article 226
an/or 227 of the Constitution of India, arising out of or relating to an order
of penalty or confiscation or an order in the nature thereof an order
otherwise of a penal character and passed under any special statute shall be
heard and decided by a Division Bench hearing Writ Petitions."  1

22\. It does not appear from the said Rules that petitions under Article 227
are called writ petitions. What has been provided under the said Rules is that
petitions under Article 227 filed in respect of certain category of cases will
be heard by a Division Bench hearing writ petitions. That is merely indicative
of the forum where such petitions will be heard.

23\. Chapter XVII of the Rules deals petitions under Articles 226 and 227 and
applications under Article 228 and rules for issue of writs and orders under
those Articles. In Chapter XVII, Rules 1 to 16 deal with petitions under
Article 226 of the Constitution.

24\. Rule 17 deals with application under Articles 227 and 228. If a
comparison is made between Rule 1 of Chapter XVII and Rule 17 of the same
Chapter it will be clear that petitions under Article 226 and those under
Article 227 are  1 treated differently. Both these Rules are set out one after
the other:

"1. (i) Applications for issue of writs, directions, etc. under Article 226 of
the Constitution Every application for the issue of a direction, order or writ
under Article 226 of the Constitution shall, if the matter in dispute is or
has arisen substantially outside Greater Bombay, be heard and disposed of by a
Division Bench to be appointed by the Chief Justice. The application shall set
out therein the relief sought and the grounds on which it is sought, it shall
he solemnly affirmed or supported by an affidavit In every such application,
the applicant shall state whether he has made any other application to the
Supreme Court or the High Court in respect of the same matter and how that
application has been disposed of.

(ii) Applicant to inform Court, if during pendency of an application, the
Supreme Court has been approached.

If the applicant makes an application to the Supreme Court in respect of the
same matter during the pendency of the application in the High Court, he shall
forthwith bring this fact to the notice of the High Court filing an affidavit
in the case and shall furnish a copy of such affidavit to the other side.

(iii) Hearing may be adjourned pending decision by Supreme Court.

The Court may adjourn the hearing of the application made to it pending the
decision of the Supreme Court in the matter."  1 "17. (i) Applications under
Article 227 and 228 An application invoking the jurisdiction of the High Court
under Article 227 of the Constitution or under Article 228 of the
Constitution, shall be filed on the Appellate Side of the High Court and be
heard and disposed of by a Division bench to be appointed by the Chief
Justice. The application shall set out therein the relief sought and the
grounds on which it is sought. It shall be solemnly affirmed or supported by
an affidavit. In every such application, the applicant shall state whether he
has made any other application to the Supreme Court or the High Court in
respect of the same matter and how that application is disposed of.

(ii) Application to inform Court, if, during pendency of an application, the
Supreme Court is approached.

If the applicant makes an application to the Supreme Court in respect of the
same matter during the pendency of the application in the High Court, he shall
forthwith bring this fact to the notice of the High Court by filing an
affidavit in the case and shall furnish a copy of such affidavit to the other
side.

(iii) Hearing may be adjourned pending decision by Supreme Court The Court may
adjourn the hearing of the application made to it pending the decision of the
Supreme Court in the matter.

(iv) Rule 2 to 16 to apply mutatis mutandis Provision of Rules 2 to 16 above
shall apply mutatis mutandis to all such applications.

1

25\. The distinction between the two proceedings also came up for
consideration before the Bombay High Court and in the case of Jhaman
Karamsingh Dadlani vs. Ramanlal Maneklal Kantawala (AIR 1975 Bombay 182) the
Bombay High Court held: "2. This High Court since its establishment in 1862
under the Letters Patent has been exercising original as well as appellate
jurisdiction and its functioning is regulated by 'the Bombay High Court
(Original Side) Rules, 1957' and 'Rules of the High Court of Judicature at
Bombay, Appellate Side, 1960' (hereinafter referred to respectively as 'O. S.
Rules' and 'A. S. Rules'). Rules also provide for disposal of petitions under
Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution. Supervisory jurisdiction of the High
Court under Article 227 of the Constitution is exclusively vested in a Bench
on the Appellate Side and jurisdiction of either of the two wings of this
Court under Article 226, however, depends upon whether "the matter in dispute"
arises substantially in Greater Bombay or beyond it, the same being
exercisable by the original Side in the former case and by the Appellate Side
in the latter case. This is not made dependent on the matter being in fact of
an original or appellate nature. The contention of the learned Advocate
General and Mr. Desai is that the matter in dispute, on averments in the
petition, must be said to have arisen at any rate, substantially within the
limits of Greater Bombay and the petitioner cannot be permitted to avoid the
impact of these Rules and choose his own forum by merely quoting Article 227
of the title and prayer clause of the petition, when it is not attracted or by
merely making  1 a pretence of the dispute having arisen beyond Greater Bombay
by referring to non- existing facts to attract the Appellate Side jurisdiction
under Article 226"

26\. In paragraph 4 of Jhaman (supra), the High Court further distinguished
the nature of proceeding under Article 226 of the Constitution to which,
depending upon the situs of the cause of action, Rule 623 of Bombay High Court
original Side Rules will apply. The said rule is set out below:

"623. Every application for the issue of a direction, order or writ under
Article 226 of the Constitution other than an application for a writ of Habeas
Corpus shall, if the matter in dispute is or has arisen substantially within
Greater Bombay, be heard and disposed of by such one of the Judges sitting on
the Original Side or any specially constituted Bench as the Chief Justice may
appoint. The application shall be by petition setting out therein the relief
sought and the grounds on which it is sought. The petition shall be supported
by an affidavit. In every such petition the petitioner shall state whether he
has made any other application to the Supreme Court or the High Court in
respect of the same matter and how that application has been disposed of. The
petitioner shall move for a Rule Nisi in open Court.

If the Petitioner makes an application to the Supreme Court in respect of the
same  1 matter during the pendency of the petition in the High Court, he shall
forthwith bring this fact to the notice of the High Court by filing an
affidavit in the case and shall furnish a copy of such affidavit to the other
side.

The Court may adjourn the hearing of the application made to it pending the
decision of the Supreme Court in the matter."

27\. From a perusal of paragraph 4 of Jhaman (supra) it is clear that to a
proceeding under Article 227 of the Constitution of India only the appellate
side rules of the High Court apply. But to a proceeding under Article 226,
either the original side or the appellate side rules, depending on the situs
of the cause of action, will apply.

28\. Therefore High Court rules treat the two proceedings differently in as
much as a proceeding under Article 226, being an original proceeding, can be
governed under Original Side Rules of the High Court, depending on the situs
of the cause of action. A proceeding under  1 Article 227 of the Constitution
is never an original proceeding and can never be governed under Original Side
Rules of the High Court.

29\. Apart from that, writ proceeding by its very nature is a different
species of proceeding.

30\. Before the coming of the Constitution on 26th January, 1950, no Court in
India except three High Courts of Calcutta, Bombay and Madras could issue the
writs, that too within their original jurisdiction. Prior to Article 226 of
the Constitution, under Section 45 of the Specific Relief Act, the power to
issue an order in the nature of mandamus was there. This power of Courts to
issue writs was very truncated and the position has been summarized in the law
of writs by V.G. Ramchandran, Volume 1 (Easter Book Company). At page 12, the
learned author observed:

"...The power to issue writs was limited to three High courts. The other High
Courts in India, however, were created by the Crown  1 under Section 16 of the
High Courts Act, 1861 but they had no such power. It is necessary to mention
that under Section 45 of the Specific Relief Act, 1877, even the High Courts
of Madras, Calcutta and Bombay could not issue the writs of prohibition and
certiorari or an order outside the local limits of their original civil
jurisdiction."

31\. The power to issue writs underwent a sea-change with the coming of the
Constitution from 26th January, 1950. Now writs can be issued by High Courts
only under Article 226 of the Constitution and by the Supreme Court only under
Article 32 of the Constitution.

32\. No writ petition can be moved under Article 227 of the Constitution nor
can a writ be issued under Article 227 of the Constitution. Therefore, a
petition filed under Article 227 of the Constitution cannot be called a writ
petition. This is clearly the Constitutional position. No rule of any High
Court can amend or alter this clear Constitutional scheme. In fact the rules
of Bombay High Court have not done that and proceedings under Articles 226 and
227  2 have been separately dealt with under the said rules.

33\. The High Court's power of superintendence under Article 227 of the
Constitution has its origin as early as in Indian High Courts Act of 1861.
This concept of superintendence has been borrowed from English Law.

34\. The power of superintendence owes its origin to the supervisory
jurisdiction of King's Bench in England. In the Presidency towns of the then
Calcutta, Bombay, Madras initially Supreme Court was established under the
Regulating Act of 1793\. Those Courts were endowed with the power of
superintendence, similar to the powers of Kings Bench under the English Law.
Then the Indian High Courts in three Presidency towns were endowed with
similar jurisdiction of superintendence. Such power was conferred on them
under Section 15 of the Indian High Courts Act, 1861.

2

35\. Section 15 of the Indian High Courts Act of 1861 runs as under:

"15. Each of the High Courts established under this Act shall have
superintendence over all Courts which may be subject to its Appellate
Jurisdiction, and shall have Power to call for Returns, and to direct the
Transfer of any Suit or Appeal for any such Court to any other Court of equal
or superior Jurisdiction, and shall have Power to make and issue General Rules
for regulating the Practice and Proceedings of such Courts, and also to
prescribe Forms for every Proceeding in the said Courts for which it shall
think necessary that a form be provided, and also for keeping all Books,
Entries, and Accounts to be kept by the officers, and also to settle Tables of
Fees to be allowed to the Sheriff, Attorneys, and all Clerks and Officers of
Courts, and from Time to Time to alter any such Rule or Form or Table; and the
Rules so made, and the Forms so framed, and the Tables so settled, shall be
used and observed in the said Courts, provided that such General Rules and
Forms and Tables be not inconsistent with the Provisions of any law in force,
and shall before they are issued have received the Sanction, in the Presidency
of Fort William of the Governor-General in Council, and in Madras or Bombay of
the Governor in Council of the respective Presidencies."

36\. Then in the Government of India Act, 1915 Section 107 continued this
power of  2 superintendence with the High Court. Section 107 of the Government
of India Act, 1915 was structured as follows:

"107. Powers of High Court with respect to subordinate Courts. - Each of the
High courts has superintendence over all High Courts for the time being
subject to its appellate jurisdiction, and may do any of the following things,
that is to say:-

(a) call for returns;

(b) direct the transfer of any suit or appeal from any such court any other
court of equal or superior jurisdiction;

(c) make and issue general rules and prescribe forms for regulating the
practice and proceedings of such courts;

(d) prescribe forms in which books, entries and accounts shall be kept by the
officers of any such courts; and

(e) settle tables of fees to be allowed to the sheriff, attorneys and all
clerks and officers of courts:

Provided that such rules, forms and tables shall not be inconsistent with the
provisions of any law for the time being in force, and shall require the
previous approval, in the case of the high court at Calcutta, of the Governor-
General in council, and in other cases of the local government."

2

37\. In the Government of India Act, 1935 the said Section 107 was continued
with slight changes in Section 224 of the Act, which is as follows: "224.
Administrative functions of High Courts.- (1) Every High Court shall have
superintendence over all Courts in India for the time being subject to its
appellate jurisdiction, and may do any of the following things, that is to
say,-

(a) call for returns;

(b) make and issue general rules and prescribe forms for regulating the
practice and proceedings of such courts;

(c) prescribe forms in which books, entries and accounts shall be kept by the
officers of any such courts; and

(d) settle tables of fees to be allowed to the sheriff, attorneys and all
clerks and officers of courts:

Provided that such rules, forms and tables shall not be inconsistent with the
provisions of any law for the time being in force, and shall require the
previous approval of the Governor.

(2) Nothing in this Section shall be construed as giving to a High Court any
jurisdiction to question any judgment of any inferior Court which is not
otherwise subject to appeal or revision."

38\. The history of this power has been elaborately traced by a Division Bench
of Calcutta High  2 Court in the case of Jahnabi Prosad Banerjee and another
vs. Basudeb Paul & others, reported in AIR 1950 Calcutta 536 and that was
followed in a Division Bench Judgment of Allahabad High Court in Sukhdeo
Baiswar vs. Brij Bhushan Misra and others in AIR 1951 Allahabad 667.

39\. The history of Article 227 has also been traced by this Court in its
Constitutional Bench judgment in Waryam Singh and another vs. Amarnath and
another [AIR 1954 SC 215]. In paragraph 13 at page 217 of the report this
Court observed:

"...The only question raised is as to the nature of the power of
superintendence conferred by the article".

40\. About the nature of the power of superintendence this Court relied on the
Special Bench judgment delivered by Chief Justice Harries in Dalmia Jain
Airways Limited vs. Sukumar Mukherjee (AIR 1951 Calcutta 193).

2

41\. In paragraph 14 page 217 of Waryam Singh (supra) this Court neatly
formulated the ambit of High Court's power under Article 227 in the following
words:

"This power of superintendence conferred by article 227 is, as pointed out by
Harries C.J., in `Dalmia Jain Airways Ltd. v. Sukumar Mukherjee', AIR 1951 Cal
193 (SB) (B), to be exercised most sparingly and only in appropriate cases in
order to keep the Subordinate Courts within the bounds of their authority and
not for correcting mere errors."

42\. Chief justice Harries in the Full Bench decision in Dalmia (supra) stated
the principles on which the High Court can exercise its power under Article
227 very succinctly which, we would better, quote:

"6. Though this Court has a right to interfere with decisions of Courts and
tribunals under its power of superintendence, it appears to me that that right
must be exercised most sparingly and only in appropriate cases. The matter was
considered by a Bench of this Court in Manmathanath v. Emperor, AIR 1933 Cal
132. In that case a Bench over which Sir George Rankin C. J. presided held
that Section 107, Government of India Act (which roughly  2 corresponds to
Article 227 of the Constitution), does not vest the High Court with limitless
power which may be exercised at the Court's discretion to remove the hardship
of particular decisions. The power of superintendence it confers is a power of
a known and well-recognised character and should be exercised on those
judicial principles which give it its character. In general words, the High
Court's power of superintendence is a power to keep subordinate Courts within
the bounds of their authority, to see that they do what their duty requires
and that they do it in a legal manner."

(page 193-194 of the report)

43\. In stating the aforesaid principles, Chief Justice Harries relied on what
was said by Chief Justice George Rankin in Manmatha Nath Biswas vs. Emperor
reported in AIR 1933 Calcutta 132. At page 134, the learned Chief Justice
held: "...superintendence is not a legal fiction whereby a High Court Judge is
vested with omnipotence but is as Norman, J., had said a term having a legal
force and signification. The general superintendence which this Court has over
all jurisdiction subject to appeal is a duty to keep them within the bounds of
their authority, to see that they do what their duty requires and that they do
it in a legal manner. It does not involve responsibility for the correctness
of their decisions, either in fact or law.  2

44\. Justice Nasir Ullah Beg of Allahabad High Court in a very well considered
judgment rendered in the case of Jodhey and others vs. State through Ram
Sahai, reported in AIR 1952 Allahabad 788, discussed the provisions of Section
15 of the Indian High Courts Act of 1861, Section 107 of the Government of
India Act 1915 and Section 224 of the Government of India Act 1935 and
compared them with almost similar provisions of Article 227 of the
Constitution.

45\. The learned judge considered the power of the High Court under Article
227 to be plenary and unfettered but at the same time, in paragraph 15 at page
792 of the report, the learned judge held that High Court should be cautious
in its exercise. It was made clear, and rightly so, that the power of
superintendence is not to be exercised unless there has been an (a)
unwarranted assumption of jurisdiction, not vested in Court or tribunal, or
(b) gross abuse of jurisdiction or (c) an unjustifiable refusal  2 to exercise
jurisdiction vested in Courts or tribunals. The learned judge clarified if
only there is a flagrant abuse of the elementary principles of justice or a
manifest error of law patent on the face of the record or an outrageous
miscarriage of justice, power of superintendence can be exercised. This is a
discretionary power to be exercised by Court and cannot be claimed as a matter
or right by a party.

46\. This Court in its Constitution Bench decision in the case of Nagendra
Nath Bora & another vs. Commissioner of Hills Division and Appeals, Assam &
others (AIR 1958 SC 398) followed the ratio of the earlier Constitution Bench
in Waryam Singh (supra) about the ambit of High Court's power of
superintendence and quoted in Nagendra Nath (supra) the same passage, which
has been excerpted above (See paragraph 30, page 413 of the report).

2

47\. The Constitution Bench in Nagendra Nath (supra), unanimously speaking
through Justice B.P. Sinha, (as his Lordship then was) pointed out that High
Court's power of interference under Article 227 is not greater than its power
under Article 226 and the power of interference under Article 227 of the
Constitution is limited to ensure that the tribunals function within the
limits of its authority.

(emphasis supplied)

48\. The subsequent Constitution Bench decision of this Court on Article 227
of the Constitution, rendered in the case of State of Gujarat etc. vs.
Vakhatsinghji Vajesinghji Vaghela (dead) his legal representatives and others
reported in AIR 1968 SC 1481 also expressed identical views. Justice Bachawat
speaking for the unanimous Constitution Bench opined that the power under
Article 227 cannot be fettered by State Legislature but this supervisory
jurisdiction is meant to keep the subordinate tribunal within  3 the limits of
their authority and to ensure that they obey law.

49\. So the same expression namely to keep the Courts and Tribunals
subordinate to the High Court `within the bounds of their authority' used in
Manmatha Nath Biswas (supra), to indicate the ambit of High Court's power of
superintendence has been repeated over again and again by this Court in its
Constitution Bench decisions.

50\. Same principles have been followed by this Court in the case of Mani
Nariman Daruwala @ Bharucha (deceased) through Lrs. & others vs. Phiroz N.
Bhatena and others etc. reported in (1991) 3 SCC 141, wherein it has been held
that in exercise of its jurisdiction under Article 227, the High Court can set
aside or reverse finding of an inferior Court or tribunal only in a case where
there is no evidence or where no reasonable person could possibly have come to
the conclusion which the Court or tribunal has come to. This Court made it
clear that except to this  3 `limited extent' the High Court has no
jurisdiction to interfere with the findings of fact (see para 18, page
149-150).

51\. In coming to the above finding, this Court relied on its previous
decision rendered in the case of Chandavarkar Sita Ratna Rao vs. Ashalata S.
Guram reported in (1986) 4 SCC 447. The decision in Chandavarkar (supra) is
based on the principle of the Constitution Bench judgments in Waryam Singh
(supra) and Nagendra Nath (supra) discussed above.

52\. To the same effect is the judgment rendered in the case of Laxmikant
Revchand Bhojwani and another vs. Pratapsingh Mohansingh Pardeshi reported in
(1995) 6 SCC 576. In paragraph 9, page 579 of the report, this Court clearly
reminded the High Court that under Article 227 that it cannot assume unlimited
prerogative to correct all species of hardship or wrong decisions. Its
exercise must be restricted to grave dereliction of duty and flagrant abuse of
3 fundamental principle of law and justice (see page 579-580 of the report).

53\. Same views have been taken by this Court in respect of the ambit of High
Court's power under Article 227 in the case of Sarpanch, Lonand Grampanchayat
vs. Ramgiri Gosavi and another, reported in AIR 1968 SC 222, (see para 5 page
222-234 of the report) and the decision of this Court in Jijabai Vithalrao
Gajre vs. Pathankhan and others reported in (1970) 2 SCC 717. The Constitution
Bench ratio in Waryam Singh (supra) about the scope of Article 227 was again
followed in Ahmedabad Manufacturing & Calico Ptg. Co. Ltd. vs. Ram Tahel
Ramnand and others reported in (1972) 1 SCC 898.

54\. In a rather recent decision of the Supreme Court in case of Surya Dev Rai
vs. Ram Chander Rai and others, reported in (2003) 6 SCC 675, a two judge
Bench of this Court discussed the principles of interference by High Court
under Article 227. Of course in Surya Dev Rai (supra)  3 this Court held that
a writ of Certiorari is maintainable against the order of a civil Court,
subordinate to the High Court (para 19, page 668 of the report). The
correctness of that ratio was doubted by another Division Bench of this Court
in Radhey Shyam and another vs. Chhabi Nath and others [(2009) 5 SCC 616] and
a request to the Hon'ble Chief Justice for a reference to a larger Bench is
pending. But in so far as the formulation of the principles on the scope of
interference by the High Court under Article 227 is concerned, there is no
divergence of views.

55\. In paragraph 38, sub-paragraph (4) at page 695 of the report, the
following principles have been laid down in Surya Dev Rai (supra) and they are
set out:

"38 (4) Supervisory jurisdiction under Article 227 of the Constitution is
exercised for keeping the subordinate courts within the bounds of their
jurisdiction. When a subordinate Court has assumed a jurisdiction which it
does not have or has failed to exercise a jurisdiction which it does have or
the jurisdiction though available is  3 being exercised by the Court in a
manner not permitted by law and failure of justice or grave injustice has
occasioned thereby, the High Court may step in to exercise its supervisory
jurisdiction."

56\. Sub-paras (5), (7) and (8) of para 38 are also on the same lines and
extracted below: "(5) Be it a writ of certiorari or the exercise of
supervisory jurisdiction, none is available to correct mere errors of fact or
of law unless the following requirements are satisfied: (i) the error is
manifest and apparent on the face of the proceedings such as when it is based
on clear ignorance or utter disregard of the provisions of law, and (ii) a
grave injustice or gross failure of justice has occasioned thereby. (6) xxx
xxx (7) The power to issue a writ of certiorari and the supervisory
jurisdiction are to be exercised sparingly and only in appropriate cases where
the judicial conscience of the High Court dictates it to act lest a gross
failure of justice or grave injustice should occasion. Care, caution and
circumspection need to be exercised, when any of the abovesaid two
jurisdictions is sought to be invoked during the pendency of any suit or
proceedings in a subordinate court and the error though calling for correction
is yet capable of being corrected at the conclusion of the proceedings in an
appeal or revision preferred thereagainst and entertaining a petition invoking
certiorari or supervisory  3 jurisdiction of the High Court would obstruct the
smooth flow and/or early disposal of the suit or proceedings. The High Court
may feel inclined to intervene where the error is such, as, if not corrected
at that very moment, may become incapable of correction at a later stage and
refusal to intervene would result in travesty of justice or where such refusal
itself would result in prolonging of the lis.

(8) The High Court in exercise of certiorari or supervisory jurisdiction will
not covert itself into a Court of Appeal and indulge in re-appreciation or
evaluation of evidence or correct errors in drawing inferences or correct
errors of mere formal or technical character."

57\. Articles 226 and 227 stand on substantially different footing. As noted
above, prior to the Constitution, the Chartered High Courts as also the
Judicial Committee of the Privy Council could issue prerogative writs in
exercise of their original jurisdiction. [See 1986 (suppl.) SCC 401 at page
469)].

58\. However, after the Constitution every High Court has been conferred with
the power to issue writs under Article 226 and these are original proceeding.
[State of U.P. and others vs. Dr.  3 Vijay Anand Maharaj \- AIR 1963 SC 946,
page 951].

59\. The jurisdiction under Article 227 on the other hand is not original nor
is it appellate. This jurisdiction of superintendence under Article 227 is for
both administrative and judicial superintendence. Therefore, the powers
conferred under Articles 226 and 227 are separate and distinct and operate in
different fields.

60\. Another distinction between these two jurisdictions is that under Article
226, High Court normally annuls or quashes an order or proceeding but in
exercise of its jurisdiction under Article 227, the High Court, apart from
annulling the proceeding, can also substitute the impugned order by the order
which the inferior tribunal should have made. {See Surya Dev Rai (supra), para
25 page 690 and also the decision of the Constitution Bench of this Court in
Hari Vishnu Kamath vs. Ahmad Ishaque and others \- [AIR 1955 SC 233, para 20
page 243]}.  3

61\. Jurisdiction under Article 226 normally is exercised where a party is
affected but power under Article 227 can be exercised by the High Court suo
motu as a custodian of justice. In fact, the power under Article 226 is
exercised in favour of persons or citizens for vindication of their
fundamental rights or other statutory rights. Jurisdiction under Article 227
is exercised by the High Court for vindication of its position as the highest
judicial authority in the State. In certain cases where there is infringement
of fundamental right, the relief under Article 226 of the Constitution can be
claimed ex-debito justicia or as a matter of right. But in cases where the
High Court exercises its jurisdiction under Article 227, such exercise is
entirely discretionary and no person can claim it as a matter of right. From
an order of a Single Judge passed under Article 226, a Letters Patent Appeal
or an intra Court Appeal is maintainable. But no such appeal is maintainable
from an order  3 passed by a Single Judge of a High Court in exercise of power
under Article 227. In almost all High Courts, rules have been framed for
regulating the exercise of jurisdiction under Article 226. No such rule
appears to have been framed for exercise of High Court's power under Article
227 possibly to keep such exercise entirely in the domain of the discretion of
High Court.

62\. On an analysis of the aforesaid decisions of this Court, the following
principles on the exercise of High Court's jurisdiction under Article 227 of
the Constitution may be formulated:

(a) A petition under Article 226 of the Constitution is different from a
petition under Article 227. The mode of exercise of power by High Court under
these two Articles is also different.

(b) In any event, a petition under Article 227 cannot be called a writ
petition. The history of the conferment of writ  3 jurisdiction on High Courts
is substantially different from the history of conferment of the power of
Superintendence on the High Courts under Article 227 and have been discussed
above.

(c) High Courts cannot, on the drop of a hat, in exercise of its power of
superintendence under Article 227 of the Constitution, interfere with the
orders of tribunals or Courts inferior to it. Nor can it, in exercise of this
power, act as a Court of appeal over the orders of Court or tribunal
subordinate to it. In cases where an alternative statutory mode of redressal
has been provided, that would also operate as a restrain on the exercise of
this power by the High Court.

(d) The parameters of interference by High Courts in exercise of its power of
superintendence have been repeatedly laid down by this Court. In this regard
the High Court must be guided by the principles laid down by the Constitution
Bench of this  4 Court in Waryam Singh (supra) and the principles in Waryam
Singh (supra) have been repeatedly followed by subsequent Constitution Benches
and various other decisions of this Court.

(e) According to the ratio in Waryam Singh (supra), followed in subsequent
cases, the High Court in exercise of its jurisdiction of superintendence can
interfere in order only to keep the tribunals and Courts subordinate to it,
`within the bounds of their authority'.

(f) In order to ensure that law is followed by such tribunals and Courts by
exercising jurisdiction which is vested in them and by not declining to
exercise the jurisdiction which is vested in them.

(g) Apart from the situations pointed in (e) and (f), High Court can interfere
in exercise of its power of superintendence when there has been a patent
perversity in the orders of tribunals and Courts subordinate to it or where
there has been a  4 gross and manifest failure of justice or the basic
principles of natural justice have been flouted.

(h) In exercise of its power of superintendence High Court cannot interfere to
correct mere errors of law or fact or just because another view than the one
taken by the tribunals or Courts subordinate to it, is a possible view. In
other words the jurisdiction has to be very sparingly exercised.

(i) High Court's power of superintendence under Article 227 cannot be
curtailed by any statute. It has been declared a part of the basic structure
of the Constitution by the Constitution Bench of this Court in the case of L.
Chandra Kumar vs. Union of India & others, reported in (1997) 3 SCC 261 and
therefore abridgement by a Constitutional amendment is also very doubtful.

(j) It may be true that a statutory amendment of a rather cognate provision,
like Section 115 of the Civil Procedure Code by the  4 Civil Procedure Code
(Amendment) Act, 1999 does not and cannot cut down the ambit of High Court's
power under Article 227. At the same time, it must be remembered that such
statutory amendment does not correspondingly expand the High Court's
jurisdiction of superintendence under Article 227.

(k) The power is discretionary and has to be exercised on equitable principle.
In an appropriate case, the power can be exercised suo motu.

(l) On a proper appreciation of the wide and unfettered power of the High
Court under Article 227, it transpires that the main object of this Article is
to keep strict administrative and judicial control by the High Court on the
administration of justice within its territory.

(m) The object of superintendence, both administrative and judicial, is to
maintain efficiency, smooth and orderly functioning of the entire machinery of
justice in such  4 a way as it does not bring it into any disrepute. The power
of interference under this Article is to be kept to the minimum to ensure that
the wheel of justice does not come to a halt and the fountain of justice
remains pure and unpolluted in order to maintain public confidence in the
functioning of the tribunals and Courts subordinate to High Court.

(n) This reserve and exceptional power of judicial intervention is not to be
exercised just for grant of relief in individual cases but should be directed
for promotion of public confidence in the administration of justice in the
larger public interest whereas Article 226 is meant for protection of
individual grievance. Therefore, the power under Article 227 may be unfettered
but its exercise is subject to high degree of judicial discipline pointed out
above.

(o) An improper and a frequent exercise of this power will be counter-
productive and will  4 divest this extraordinary power of its strength and
vitality.

63\. In the facts of the present case we find that the petition has been
entertained as a writ petition in a dispute between landlord and tenant
amongst private parties.

64\. It is well settled that a writ petition is a remedy in public law which
may be filed by any person but the main respondent should be either
Government, Governmental agencies or a State or instrumentalities of a State
within the meaning of Article 12. Private individuals cannot be equated with
State or instrumentalities of the State. All the respondents in a writ
petition cannot be private parties. But private parties acting in collusion
with State can be respondents in a writ petition. Under the phraseology of
Article 226, High Court can issue writ to any person, but the person against
whom writ will be issued must have some statutory or public duty to perform.

4

65\. Reference in this connection may be made to the Constitution Bench
decision of this Court in the case of Sohan Lal vs. Union of India and
another, reported in AIR 1957 SC 529.

66\. The facts in Sohan Lal (supra) are that Jagan Nath, a refugee from
Pakistan, filed a writ petition in the High Court of Punjab against Union of
India and Sohan Lal alleging unauthorized eviction from his residence and
praying for a direction for restoration of possession. The High Court directed
Sohan Lal to restore possession to Jagan Nath. Challenging that order, Sohan
Lal approached this Court. The Constitution Bench of this Court accepted the
appeal and overturned the verdict of the High Court.

67\. In paragraph 7, page 532 of the judgment, the unanimous Constitution
Bench speaking though Justice Imam, laid down a few salutary  4 principles
which are worth remembering and are set out:

"7. The eviction of Jagan Nath was in contravention of the express provisions
of Section 3 of the Public Premises (Eviction) Act. His eviction, therefore,
was illegal. He was entitled to be evicted in due course of law and a writ of
mandamus could issue to or an order in the nature of mandamus could be made
against the Union of India to restore possession of the property to Jagan Nath
from which he had been evicted if the property was still in the possession of
the Union of India. The property in dispute, however, is in possession of the
appellant. There is no evidence and no finding of the High Court that the
appellant was in collusion with the Union of India or that he had knowledge
that the eviction of Jagan Nath was illegal. Normally, a writ of mandamus does
not issue to or an order in the nature of mandamus is not made against a
private individual. Such an order is made against a person directing him to do
some particular thing, specified in the order, which appertains to his office
and is in the nature of a public duty (Halsbury's Laws of England Vol. 11,
Lord Simonds Edition, p.

84). If it had been proved that the Union of India and the appellant had
colluded, and the transaction between them was merely colourable, entered into
with a view to deprive Jagan Nath of his rights, jurisdiction to issue a writ
to or make an order in the nature of mandamus against the appellant might be
said to exist in a Court..."

4

68\. These principles laid down by the Constitution Bench in Sohan Lal (supra)
have not been doubted so far.

69\. Subsequently in some other cases question arose whether writ will lie
against a private person. In Engineering Mazdoor Sabha & another vs. Hind
Cycles Ltd., reported in AIR 1963 SC 874, it was held that an arbitrator
appointed under Section 10A of Industrial Disputes Act is not a private
arbitrator even though he cannot be equated with a tribunal to be amenable
under Article 136 of the Constitution of India. The Court held that in
discharging his duties as an arbitrator, the arbitrator is clothed with some
trappings of a Court and a writ of certiorari would be maintainable against
him. So even though an arbitrator, acting under Section 10A of the Industrial
Disputes Act, is a private individual, he discharges public function. So the
ratio in the Constitution Bench decision in Engineering Mazdoor Sabha (supra)
is consistent with the decision in Sohan Lal (supra).  4

70\. It is only a writ of Habeas Corpus which can be directed not only against
the State but also against private person. Justice Hidaytullah (as his
Lordship then was) on behalf of a Bench of this Court stated the principle as
"the writ of Habeas Corpus issues not only for release from detention by the
State but also for release from private detention." (see AIR 1964 SC 1625 at
1630).

71\. In Rohtas Industries Ltd., & another vs. Rohtas Industries Staff Union &
others [(1976) 2 SCC 82] this Court held that in view of the amendment of the
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, by amendment Act 36 of 1964 and in view of
provisions like Section 27 of the Act, an arbitrator under Section 10A of the
Industrial Disputes Act is virtually a part of State's sovereign dispensation
of justice and his award is amenable to review under Articles 226 & 227 of the
Constitution. In Rohtas (supra), the  4 ratio of Engineering Mazdoor Sabha
(supra) was followed.

72\. Therefore, a private person becomes amenable to writ jurisdiction only if
he is connected with a statutory authority or only if he/she discharges any
official duty.

73\. In the instant case none of the above features are present, even then a
writ petition was filed in a pure dispute between landlord and tenant and
where the only respondent is the plaintiff landlord. Therefore, High Court
erred by entertaining the writ petition. However, the petition was dismissed
on merits by a rather cryptic order.

74\. It has repeatedly been held by this Court that a proceeding under Article
226 of the Constitution is not the appropriate forum for adjudication of
property disputes or disputes relating to title. In Mohammed Hanif vs. The
State of Assam [1969 (2) SCC 782] a three Judge Bench of this Court,  5
explaining the general principles governing writ jurisdiction under Article
226, held that this jurisdiction is extraordinary in nature and is not meant
for declaring the private rights of the parties. [See para 5, page 786 of the
report].

75\. In coming to the aforesaid conclusion in Hanif (supra), this Court
referred to the Constitution Bench decision in T.C. Basappa vs. T. Nagappa and
another [AIR 1954 SC 440].

76\. Following the aforesaid principles in Hanif (supra), this Court in M/s.
Hindustan Steel Limited, Rourkela vs. Smt. Kalyani Banerjee and others [(1973)
1 SCC 273] held that serious questions about title and possession of land
cannot be dealt with by writ court. In formulating these principles in Kalyani
Banerjee (supra), this Court relied on Constitution Bench decision in Sohan
Lal (supra) [See paragraph 16 page 282 of the report). Again in State of
Rajasthan vs. Bhawani Singh & others [1993 Supp.  5 (1) SCC 306] this Court
held that a writ petition is not the appropriate forum to declare a person's
title to property. [see para 7, page 309 of the report]. Subsequently, again
in the case of Mohan Pandey & another vs. Usha Rani Rajgaria & others reported
in (1992) 4 SCC 61, this Court held that a regular suit is the appropriate
remedy for deciding property disputes between private persons and remedy under
Article 226 is not available to decide such disputes unless there is violation
of some statutory duty on the part of a statutory authority. [See para 6, page
63 of the report].

77\. Following the aforesaid ratio in Mohan Pandey (supra), this Court again
in Prasanna Kumar Roy Karmakar vs. State of W.B and others [(1996) 3 SCC 403],
held that in a dispute between the landlord and tenant, a tenant cannot be
evicted from his possession by a writ court. Again in the case of P.R.
Murlidharan & others vs. Swami Dharmananda Theertha Padar & others [(2006) 4
SCC 501], this Court held that it would be an  5 abuse of the process to
approach a writ court in connection with dispute on questions of title for
deciding which civil court is the appropriate forum.

78\. However, this Court unfortunately discerns that of late there is a
growing trend amongst several High Courts to entertain writ petition in cases
of pure property disputes. Disputes relating to partition suits, matters
relating to execution of a decree, in cases of dispute between landlord and
tenant and also in a case of money decree and in various other cases where
disputed questions of property are involved, writ courts are entertaining such
disputes. In some cases High Courts, in a routine manner, entertain petition
under Article 227 over such disputes and such petitions are treated as writ
petitions.

79\. We would like to make it clear that in view of the law referred to above
in cases of property rights and in disputes between private individuals writ
5 court should not interfere unless there is any infraction of statute or it
can be shown, that a private individual is acting in collusion with a
statutory authority.

80\. We may also observe that in some High Courts there is tendency of
entertaining petitions under Article 227 of the Constitution by terming them
as writ petitions. This is sought to be justified on an erroneous appreciation
of the ratio in Surya Dev (supra) and in view of the recent amendment to
Section 115 of the Civil Procedure Code by Civil Procedure Code (Amendment)
Act, 1999. It is urged that as a result of the amendment, scope of Section 115
of CPC has been curtailed. In our view, even if the scope of Section 115 CPC
is curtailed that has not resulted in expanding High Court's power of
superintendence. It is too well known to be reiterated that in exercising its
jurisdiction, High Court must follow the regime of law.

81\. As a result of frequent interference by Hon'ble High Court either under
Article 226 or 227 of the  5 Constitution with pending civil and at times
criminal cases, the disposal of cases by the civil and criminal courts gets
further impeded and thus causing serious problems in the administration of
justice.

82\. This Court hopes and trusts that in exercising its power either under
Article 226 or 227, Hon'ble High Court will follow the time honoured
principles discussed above. Those principles have been formulated by this
Court for ends of justice and the High Courts as the highest Courts of justice
within their jurisdiction will adhere to them strictly.

83\. For the reasons aforesaid, it is held that the High Court committed an
error in entertaining the writ petition in a dispute between landlord and
tenant and where the only respondent is a private landlord. The course adopted
by the High Court cannot be approved. Of course, High Court's order of non-
interference in view of concurrent findings of facts is unexceptionable.
Consequently, the appeal is dismissed. However, there shall be no order as to
costs.

5 .....................J.

(G.S. SINGHVI) .....................J.

(ASOK KUMAR GANGULY) New Delhi July 23, 2010  5

