

Delhi High Court

Glaxo Smithkline Consumer ... vs Anchor Health And Beautycare ... on 15 April,
2004

Equivalent citations: 2004 (29) PTC 72 Del

Author: R Chopra

Bench: R Chopra

JUDGMENT R.C. Chopra, J.

1\. In IA No. 10928/2002, under Order 39 Rules 1 & 2 of Code of Civil
Procedure, plaintiffs seek an ad-interim injunction restraining the defendant
from manufacturing, selling or offering for sale the tooth brushes which
infringe the plaintiffs registered design No. 170554. Vide IAs No. 4541/2003
and 6572/2003 under Order 39 Rule 4, CPC the defendant seeks vacation of the
ex-parte ad interim injunction issued vide orders dated 26th November 2002.

2\. The plaintiffs have filed a suit for injunction and accounts regarding
profits on account of infringement of its registered design No. 170554 in
respect of their tooth brush Annexure B. The plaintiff No. 1 is a Company
organized under the laws of Germany and was earlier known as Linger + Fischer
GmbH. Pursuant to a change in its name, it became Smithkline Beecham Consumer
Healthcare GmbH and thereafter in pursuance of a merger its name was
challenged to Glaxo Smithkline Consumer Healthcare GmbH & Co. KG, i.e. the
plaintiff No. 1.

3\. The plaintiffs have alleged that the present action concerns the design of
its tooth brush registered vide registration No. 170554 dated 7th July 1995. A
copy of the registration certificate is filed as (Annexure 'A'). A sample of
the plaintiffs brush of the aforesaid design is attached as (Annexure 'B'). In
paragraph 3 of the plaint, it is pleaded that plaintiffs design in the tooth
brush is in regard to its aesthetic distinctive handle. The plaintiffs
copyright in the design was up to 7th July, 2000 but was extendable for
further two terms of five years each. The plaintiffs have filed an application
for the renewal of the registration which is pending. (During the pendency of
this suit, however, the renewal is stated to have been granted.) The
plaintiffs have claimed that they have obtained registrations of the said
design in several parts of the world as mentioned in paragraph 6 of the plaint
but the tooth brush Annexure B has not been so far manufactured or sold in
India. They have pleaded that it has come to their notice that the defendant
is offering for sale the tooth brushes under the brand name 'Anchor Flexi
Grip' with a design which infringes the plaintiff's aforesaid registered
design. A sample of the defendant's brush is attached as (Annexure 'C').
Another offending model statedly offered for sale by the defendant under the
name 'Anchor Flexi Kids' is attached as (Annexure 'D'). According to the
plaintiffs, in view of fraudulent similarity between the design registered in
their favor and the tooth brushes being produced by the defendant, the
defendant is liable to be restrained from manufacturing, selling or offering
for sale the tooth brushes which are fraudulent and obvious imitation of their
registered design. An ex parte ad interim injunction was issued in favor of
the plaintiffs and against the defendant vide orders dated 26th November,
2002.

4\. The defendant has filed a written statement as well as applications under
Order 39 Rule 4, CPC challenging the plaintiffs plea for grant of permanent or
ad interim injunction. The defendant asserts that the suit filed by the
plaintiffs is an abuse of the process of law and the plaintiffs have not only
made malicious, fraudulent, dishonest and false representations in the suit
but have also concealed material facts from the Court with a view to obtain an
exparte ad interim injunction.

5\. It is denied that the registered design No. 170554 is a new or original
design. It is asserted that the shape and configuration of this brush was pre-
known and pre-published in India as well as other countries. It is pointed out
that the tooth brushes having 'S' shaped zigzag angular neck and curved handle
with identical shape and configuration are being manufactured and marketed by
a large number of companies in India and abroad and the design No. 170554
which the plaintiffs have got registered is an obvious imitation thereof. It
is asserted that no novely resides in the shape and configuration of the newly
registered design. The defendant specifically refers to Suit No. 2515 of 1996
filed by the plaintiffs against Hindustan Lever Limited on the basis of their
earlier registered designs bearing Nos. 166434 and 167936 in which the
plaintiffs application for an ad interim injunction under Order 39 Rules 1 &
2, CPC was dismissed. The order is reported in 1999 PTC page 775. It is
pointed out that in the said suit the plaintiffs relied upon the designs
similar in features, shape and configurations which were named 'Aquafresh
Flexi' and 'Aquafresh Flex-N-Direct'. The samples of these tooth brushes are
placed on record as (Annexure D-1 & D-2). Copy of the plaint is placed on
record as (Annexure D-3). In the said suit, the Court held that the registered
designs of the plaintiffs brushes were bad on the ground of being prior
published, lack of novely and certain features which were purely functional
and utilitarian. In the said suit, the plaintiffs gave up their claim of
infringement of registered designs and admitted prior publication. The
defendant pleads that the filing of the aforesaid suit and orders passed
therein was not disclosed in the present plaint which was concealment of
material facts from the Court with a view to obtain an ex-pane injunction.

6\. It is pleaded that since the plaintiffs in the aforesaid suit had admitted
prior publication of design 'Aquafresh Flex' and 'Aquafresh Flex-N-Direct' and
gave up their claim of infrigement in respect of designs of the said tooth
brushes, they have no right to monopolise the use of those designs by
obtaining fresh registration in respect of the same features, shape and
configuration again vide registration No. 170554. It is also pointed out that
Hon'ble Justice Dr. M.K. Sharma, while passing orders in the aforesaid suit,
had clearly held that the functional and utilitarian aspects of the tooth
brushes were not capable of protection under the Designs Act. It is also
submitted that the plaintiffs had filed the application dated 5th January,
1996, regarding present design registration No. 170554 and the certificate was
issued by the Controller of Patents & Designs on 4th April, 1997, but still
during the pendency of aforesaid suit and till the orders were passed by
Hon'ble Justice Dr. M.K. Sharma on 26th November, 1999, the plaintiffs did not
disclose or produce the design registration certificate No. 170554 before the
Court and kept it as a guarded secret for the obvious reason that they were
trying to get a similar design registered surreptitiously. Further reason for
not disclosing the said design registration in those proceedings was that the
plaintiffs had admitted prior publication of designs Nos. 166434 and 167936
and the design No. 170554 was nothing but an imitation of the same designs and
the plaintiffs fully knew that in case they disclose about their application
regarding this design, their application for registration of design would be
challenged and defeated.

7\. The defendant further points out that after failing to get an injunction
from Delhi High Court in Suit No. 2515 of 1996, the plaintiffs filed a suit in
Bombay High Court (Suit No. 6556 of 1999), alleging infringement of copyrights
in the moulds and drawings used for the manufacture of the same two tooth
brushes so as to prevent the manufacturing of the said tooth brushes by
Hindustan Lever Limited and others. The Bombay High Court declined to grant an
ad interim injunction to the plaintiffs. Thereafter, the plaintiffs filed a
Suit No. 2771 of 1998 in Delhi High Court against Cello Oral Hygiene Products
alleging copyright infringement in the moulds and designs of the same tooth
brushes. In the said suit also, their application under Order XXXIX Rules 1 &
2, CPC was dismissed on 16th January, 2000. It was reported in 2002 (25) PTC
page 243. In the said order also scathing observations were made by Court
against the plaintiffs and it was held that they had not come to the Court
with clean hands. The defendant points out that the 'S' Bend flexible neck
tooth brushes were subject-matter of the various registrations in India in
1991 and 1994 which consistuted prior publication of design No. 170554 also.

8\. The defendant has submitted that the plaintiffs had applied for
cancellation of the registered designs of similar tooth brushes, in favor of
M/s. Kewal Raj & Co. Private Ltd., which subsequently assigned the same to
Hindustan Lever Limited, in Calcutta High Court but the said petitions were
withdrawn as prior to the registrations obtained by the plaintiffs there were
other registrations. In view of the plaintiffs surrendering the said design
registrations, the High Court of Calcutta ordered removal of the registrations
in favor of plaintiffs from the Register of Designs vide orders dated 10th
July, 1998. The plaintiffs, thus, not only gave up challenge to the designs of
Hindustan Lever Limited but also admitted that their registered designs were
bad in law. Referring to various registrations in regard to 'S' shaped zigzag
angular neck and curved head tooth brushes, the defendant has pleaded that the
design No. 170554 was got registered fraudulently as a new and original design
and there was nothing new in the said design. It is pleaded that the 'S'
shaped flexi neck was registered as a patent by the plaintiffs under the US
Patent Laws which establishes the utilitarian aspect thereof and as such it is
not registerable as a design. It is thus asserted that 'S' shaped flexible
neck in the design No. 170554 is not only a pre-publish-ed design but a
functional and utilitarian part also and as such the registration in respect
thereof is illegal and bad. The design of handle also has nothing new as it is
already in vogue and pre-published. Regarding other features like rubber
cushioning between 'S' bend-gaps, rubber line running on the handle and small
rubber patches on the neck, it is stated that these trade variations have no
novelty whatsoever over the already known and registered designs. It is
submitted that not only that the plain-tiffs have obtained registration of
design No. 170554 illegally and fraudulently, but they have played a fraud
upon the Court also by concealing material facts regarding earlier suits,
orders passed by Courts and have raised false and frivolous pleas to get an
exparte ad interim injunction.

9\. Learned counsel for the plaintiffs has vehemently argued that a prima
facie case in regard to the infringement of the plaintiffs registered design
No. 170554 is made out. Initially, learned Counsel for plaintiff did not press
for any relief in regard to the "S" shaped zigzag neck or other parts of the
brush except the rubber cushioning in the gaps of the "S" shaped zigzag
angular neck, rubber patches on the front and back side of the neck and the
line running on the front and back side of the handle of the brush registered
vide registration No. 170554. According to him, other features as to the shape
and configuration of this brush had already gone into public domain in view of
the prior publication of designs No. 166434 and 167936 and earlier designs.
However, after the arguments of defendant's counsel, learned counsel for the
plaintiffs started asserting that he was not admitting that the design in
question in respect of any part had gone into public domain. According to
learned counsel for the plaintiffs, the novelty in the registered design in
question resides in the rubber cushioning in the "S" bend gaps, rubber line
running on the handle and small rubber patches on the neck which the defendant
is contemplating to infringe by introducing its brushes in the market.
According to learned counsel for the plaintiff, these variations, in spite of
being small introduce a new design, the registration of which subsists in
favor of the plaintiffs. He contends that even small variations which
introduce novelty, give rise to a new design which, after its registration,
belongs to the registered owner and none else has a right to copy the same. He
also argues that a new design may be created by a combination of an old and
new design or by a combination of two old designs so as to create a new
design. In support of his submissions, he relies upon judgments in 'Castrol
India Ltd. v. Tide Water Oil Co. Ltd.', 1996 (16) PTC 202, 'Polson Ltd. v.
Polson Diary Ltd., 1996 (16) PTC 709, 'Avis International Ltd. v. Avi Footwear
Industries and Anr.', 1990 (2) Arb.LR 352, 'Alert India v. Naveeen Plastics',
1997 (17) PTC 15, 'Metro Plastic Industries (Regd.) v. Galaxy Footwear, New
Delhi, 2000 (20) PTC 1 (FB), 'Mrs Rachna Maheshwari v. State and Ors.'
(unreported), 'A. Fulton Co. Ltd. v. Grant Barnett Co. Ltd.' 2001 (16) RPC
257, 'J. Harper & Co. Ltd. v. The Wright & Butler Lays Manufacturing Co., 1895
RPC (Vol. XII) 483, 'Cartwright v. Coventry Radiator Company', 1925 (42) RPC
351, 'Charles Henry Nevill and Ors. v. John Bennett & Sons', 1898 (15) RPC
412, 'Heinrichs v. Bastendorft', 1893 (10) RPC 160, 'Walker & Co. v. A.G.
Scott & Co. Ltd., 1892 RPC 482, 'Sherwood & Cotton v. Decorative Art Tile Co.,
1887 (4) RPC 207, Smithkline Beecham Plc. and Ors. v. Hindustan Lever Limited
and Ors., 1999 PTC 775, 'Lacy v. Foggins', 56 IPR 436 and 'Heela Foundry & Co.
v. Walker, Hunter & Co., 1889 (VI No. 43) RPC 554. It is asserted by learned
counsel for the plaintiffs that the aforesaid registered design of the
plaintiff is a new design and the defendant has failed to even prima facie
establish that it is hit by the defenses available under Sections 4 and 19 of
the Act.

10\. Learned counsel for the plaintiffs has also argued that in case there is
no novelty in the design registered in favor of the plaintiffs and especially
the aforesaid three improvements, the defendants may carry on the production
of their brushes on the basis of the rest of the design of the brushes except
the aforesaid three novelties introduced by way of rubber cushion in Zig Zag
"S" bend, line on the handle and rubber pads on the neck. He contends that the
mere fact that the defendant is keen to imitate these three improvements made
by the plaintiffs prima facie establishes that these constitute a novelty and
a new design. He denies that any concealment of facts was made from the Court
or any mis-representations were made and argues that only relevant and
material facts were to be pleaded in the plaint. He also submits that the
registration of design No. 170554 in favor of the plaintiffs is prima facie
evidence of its novelty.

11\. Learned counsel for the defendant on the other hand, has vehemently
argued that in view of the plaintiffs own admission that the earlier Resigns
No. 166434 and 167936 with "S" bend have gone into public domain, the Court
has to examine as to whether prima facie the plaintiffs' newly registered
design No. 170554 has any novelty and as to whether it is hit by the
provisions of Sections 4 and 19 of the Act. He submits that in the present
case, the newly registered design in favor of the plaintiffs is hit by all the
ground provided under Sections 4 and 19 of the Act and as such, the design has
to be held a bad design which was not at all capable of registration.
According to the learned counsel for the defendant, the plaintiffs have played
a fraud upon the Controller of Designs by getting this design registered
without disclosing that the shape and configuration thereof is already pre-
published. It is submitted that the Controller of Designs was not at all
informed that this design was being registered in respect of the aforesaid
three novelties only. Thus this registration was nothing but a fraudulent
attempt to monopolies the earlier designs which had gone into public domain
and regarding which the plaintiffs were being rebuffed by different Courts. By
referring to the orders passed by Delhi High Court in two suits filed by the
plaintiffs, orders passed by the Calcutta High Court and the suit filed by the
plaintiffs in Bombay High Court, it is argued that the plaintiffs have been
fraudulently attempting to hold over a design which had already gone in public
domain to keep other competitors out of market.

12\. In order to find out as to whether the plaintiffs are entitled or not to
an ad interim injunction so as to restrain the defendant from manufacturing or
selling the tooth brushes, design of which is identical or similar to the
design No. 170554 registered in favor of the plaintiffs, this Court has to
find out as to whether the design registered vide registration No. 170554 in
favor of the plaintiff suffers or not from any of the vices enumerated in
Sections 4 and 19 of the Designs Act, 2000. It is also to be seen as to
whether the aforesaid design is a "new design" and the three novelties pointed
therein by learned counsel for the plaintiffs are novelties or mere trade
variants upon the earlier designs which have gone into public domain. It is
further to be seen as to whether the plaintiffs have come to the Court with
clean hands or not and as to whether they are guilty or not of suppressing
material facts. It is also to be seen as to whether the refusal of an ad
interim injunction to the plaintiffs would result in irreparable loss/injury
to the plaintiffs and the balance of convenience also is more in their favor.

13\. Coming to the question as to whether the plaintiffs has succeeded or not
in making out a prima facie case in regard to the infringement of their
registered design No. 170554, this Court finds that the said design registered
in favor of the plaintiffs is a virtual reproduction of the plaintiffs earlier
designs No. 166434 and 167936 which appear to have already gone into public
domain. The plaintiffs have been refused injunctions in respect of the
infringement of the said two designs by different Courts. Learned counsel for
the plaintiffs, however, has tried to impress upon this Court that the instant
design No. 170554 is a new design and is not at all hit by Sections 4 and 19
of the Design Act inasmuch as there are three variations/novelties in the new
design. He submits that the rubber cushioning in zig-zag S-bend rubber patches
on neck and a rubber line running from the handle to neck are novelties and
the defendant has no right to infringe the same. The plea of learned counsel
for the defendant on the other hand is that these three variations do not
constitute a new design in respect of the shape and configuration of the tooth
brush and are merely trade variations which have been introduced with the sole
object of holding over a design which had gone into public domain.

14\. After examining the design of the plaintiff's earlier two tooth brushes
and the tooth brush in question which was registered vide design No. 170554,
this Court prima facie finds that the three changes as pointed out by learned
Counsel for the plaintiffs do not constitute a new design and are merely trade
variations which are neither inventive nor innovative. It is true that in
certain cases even a small novelty may introduce a new design but the bottom
line is that a really new design should come into existence which is not a
copy or trade variation of the earlier design introduced mala fide to continue
to have a hold on the old design. Novelty should be capable of making a design
different and distinctive at first sight of the consumer, should be new and
should not require lot of effort to find out the novelty. If this yardstick is
not applied then by introducing minor and insignificant changes here and
there, one may try to monopolise an old and already known design which cannot
be protected even by Designs Act. The judgments cited by learned counsel for
the plaintiffs do say that even a small novelty may create a new design but
the novelty should not be a mere trade variation. Enough material has been
placed on record to show that the brushes with similar shape and configuration
having similar zig-zag S-bend have been in the market for years together and
the plaintiffs themselves have been conceding in different litigations that
they have gone into public domain. Therefore, even the registration of the
design in question appears to have been obtained fraudulently without
disclosing to the registering authority the earlier designs and earlier
litigations between various parties including the plaintiffs.

15\. This Court further is of the view that Zig Zag S bend is a utilitarian
and functional part regarding which the plaintiffs had even obtained a patent
on the ground that this zig-zag bend introduces mere flexibility in the tooth
brush. By merely putting some rubber cushions in the gaps this part does not
become a design so as to preclude others from using it. These rubber cushions
may enhance the flexibility and as such are utilitarian components. The handle
also is a utilitarian part and introduction of certain patches thereon does
not introduce any design therein. Points A shown in the registered design are
prima facie trade variants having no novelty of design and as such were not
even capable of registration. Even Hon'ble Dr. Justice M.K. Sharma in S. No.
2515/1996 while dealing with the plaintiffs designs No. 1,66434 and 167936
held that S bend neck was a utilitarian and functional part and as such
incapable of registration as a design. In the said suit the plaintiffs
admitted prior publication of the aforesaid two designs and gave up their
claim of infringement of designs. Since the plaintiffs earlier two designs
were already in public domain and there is nothing new in the present design
the plaintiffs have no prima fade case to show that the defendant is
infringing their design. It is also worth mentioning that in Suit No.
2771/1998 also filed by the plaintiffs a learned Single Judge of this Court
had made seathing comments against them which read as under:-

"15. It is no doubt true that in the present suit the plaintiffs' have claimed
relief on the ground that they have a copyright in the moulds from which the
tooth brushes are manufactured, however, the fact remains that in the plaint
the plaintiff has claimed relief of injunction restraining the defendants from
manufacturing, selling and/or offering for sale toothbrushes which are
identical in appearance to the CELLO FLEXY toothbrushes of the defendants or
any other toothbrush allegedly similar in appearance to the plaintiffs DR.
BEST, AQUAFRESH FLEX and AQUAFRESH FLEX 'N' DIRECT and from manufacturing
toothbrushes under or by reference to the mark FLEXY or any other mark
confusingly similar to the plaintiffs mark FLEX. Though the plaintiff has also
claimed an injunction for restraining the defendants from infringing the
plaintiffs alleged copyright in the moulds and mould drawings, however, once
the plaintiff is seeking relief of an injunction for restraining the
defendants from manufacturing and/or offering for sale toothbrushes which are
allegedly similar in appearance to the plaintiffs toothbrushes, in my opinion,
plaintiffs were required to disclose, not only the pendency of the earlier
suit in which similar relief was claimed against the Hindustan Lever Limited
and Kewal Raj & Company but they should have also disclosed the proceedings
which were pending in the Calcutta High Court in which their applications for
cancellation of design of Hindustan Lever Limited and Kewal Raj & Company were
dismissed. Plaintiffs ought to have disclosed to this Court that certain other
parties were manufacturing similar toothbrushes since 1991 when design were
registered in their name and non-disclosure of these facts has, in my opinion,
clearly misled the Court in granting ex-parte injunction in favor of the
plaintiffs. It is now well settled that a party who approaches the Court to
seek the discretionary relief must come with clean hands. If an information
which has a bearing on the question of exercise of discretion is withheld from
the Court, the Court would be justified in refusing to exercise the discretion
in favor of such a party.

19\. It is thus clear that in case the plaintiff has approached this Court
with unclean hands and had suppressed material facts from the Court, it will
not be entitled to. an order of injunction ad the injunction granted in favor
of the plaintiffs will be liable to be revoked. When the plaintiffs filed this
suit, the suit filed by them against the Hindustan Lever Limited and Kewal Raj
& Company was still pending. It was a fact that reliefs claimed in the earlier
suit against Hindustan Lever Limited were almost similar to the relief claimed
in the present suit except that in the present suit copyright in the moulds
has also been claimed. It is also a fact that in the earlier suit, the Court
had not granted injunction in favor of the plaintiffs and the arguments on the
injunction application were being heard at the time when the present suit was
filed. It is also a fact that design in respect of toothbrushes in favor of
the plaintiffs were cancelled and the application of the plaintiff for
cancellation of designs of the Hindustan Lever Limited and Kewal Raj & Company
were dismissed by the High Court of Calcutta. In my considered opinion, it was
the abundant duty of the plaintiffs to disclose to this Court about the
pendency of the aforesaid earlier proceedings. If such facts had been
disclosed to the Court in this suit, may be the Court would not have granted
exparte injunction in favor of the plaintiffs. Suppression of the aforesaid
facts has clearly misled the Court in granting exparte injunction on 16th
December, 1998. I am, therefore, of the view that the plaintiffs have not come
to this Court with clean hands and have also suppressed material facts from
the Court with a view to gain advantage in this suit. Ex pane injunction in
favor of the plaintiffs is liable to be vacated on this ground alone."

16\. After considering the pleadings, documents on record and the submissions
made by learned counsel for the parties, this Court is prima facie of the view
that the plaintiffs design in question is hit by Section 19(1)(b)(c) read with
Section 4(c) of the Act in as much as there is nothing new in this design and
the so called new or innovative steps as pointed out by the plaintiffs are
only trade variants and an attempt to continue its hold over old design of the
tooth brush which has gone into public domain and regarding which the
plaintiffs have been repeatedly rebuffed by the Courts. The registration was
obtained by the plaintiffs without pointing out the so-called novelties which
created a new design. It is true that even a small incentive step may create a
new design but in the case in hand, the three improvements in the earlier
design as pointed out by learned counsel for the plaintiffs are neither
inventive nor introduced new features in the design. A comparison between the
plaintiffs new brush Annexure B shown as brush No. 4 on the board with
plaintiffs' earlier brushes shown as brush Nos. 1 & 2 prima facie shows that
there is no novelty in the design. Only by introducing few insignificant
changes, the plaintiffs have succeeded in getting the new design registered
which was already in public domain. It tantamounts to playing fraud on the
statute which contemplates to put registered designs in public domain after
the expiry of the statutory period. The time now has come when the Courts
should be more circumspect in such matters as cut throat competition between
industrial and commercial houses is prompting them to throttle their
competitors/opponents and they do not even hesitate to abuse the process of
law so as to disable their competitor from exploiting the market. Plaintiffs'
effort also appears to be in the same direction and to some extent they have
succeeded even by obtaining an ex pane ad interim injunction and debar the
defendant from selling its tooth brushes with a design which is already in
public domain and over which none has any proprietory right. This Court is of
the considered view that novelty or newness may be very small but this novelty
should be really novel and not a mere pretext of novelty. Adding something
here and there to raise a plea of new design without actually introducing a
new design has to be spurned.

17\. This Court also finds that the plaintiffs have failed to make out a prima
facie case in their favor further for the reason that in the plaint filed by
them neither so called novelties giving rise to a new design were pointed out
nor it was specifically pleaded that, the plaintiffs were not claiming any
proprietory rights in the shape and configuration of the tooth brush in
question. In para 3 of the plaint the right in the design as claimed was in
respect of its aesthetic handle but the exparte injunction was obtained in
regard to the design of entire brush. This was a cleverly designed move to
mis-lead the Court so as to obtain an ex-parte injunction. It is not at all
understandable as to why in the plaint the plaintiffs merely referred to the
distinctive aesthetic handle of the brush in question and did not give details
of the novelties which are being pointed out now to the Court by learned
counsel for the plaintiffs. Had the plaintiffs been fair to the Court, they
would have specifically pleaded that the design of the brush in question
including Zig Zag 'S' bend had already gone into public domain but their new
registered design was on the basis of the novelties introduced therein by way
of rubber cushion in the gaps in the Zig Zag 'S' bend, rubber patch on the
neck of the brush and the rubber line going from the handle towards neck. It
appears that before the registering authority even, these facts were not
clarified and the design of the entire brush was got registered as if the
entire brush was a new design.

18\. It was also concealed by the plaintiffs that in earlier suits their plea
for injunction in regard to designs No. 166434 and 167936 had been rejected by
the Courts holding that those had gone into public domain and the plaintiffs
had not succeeded in establishing a case for injunction. It was deliberately
done for the reason that had the earlier litigation been disclosed the Court
while considering the question of grant of ex pane injunction to the
plaintiffs would have examined the designs of earlier tooth brushes and the
present design and could have easily come to the conclusion that there was
nothing new in the design in question. This conduct of the plaintiffs is
reprehensible and disentitles them to the grant of equitable relief of
injunction. Not only this the plaintiffs concealed from the Court the history
of the registration of the designs of the brushes in their favor and their
debacle in Calcutta High Court where the plaintiffs effort to challenge the
designs registered in favor of Kewal Raj and Company failed and the plaintiffs
had to give up their registration of designs in regard to the similar tooth
brushes which were being manufactured and sold all over world since year 1991
or so. It clearly shows that the plaintiffs have not acted as a fair litigant.
They are capable of making mis-representations, misleading the Court and
making mis-statements with a view to abuse the process of law.

19\. It is also shown an record that after dismissal of their prayer for
injunction in Delhi in regard to designs No. 166434 and 167936, the plaintiffs
approached Bombay High Court for getting an injunction in regard to the moulds
used for manufacturing those brushes which was nothing but an effort to
achieve indirectly which the plaintiffs could not achieve directly in Delhi.
They failed in this effort also.

20\. The contention of learned counsel for the plaintiffs that in November,
2000, the defendant itself had applied for the registration of the same design
of the toothbrush pleading that it was a new design which shows that this
design was never in public domain cannot be accepted for the reason that this
Court has to examine the plaintiffs' right in the registered design on the
basis of which the plaintiffs have come to the Court for an injunction. The
attempt on the part of the defendant to get the said design registered in its
favor does not ipso facto establish that the design registered in favor of the
plaintiffs was not hit by Sections 4 & 19 of the Designs Act.

21\. The plea that in case there is nothing new in the plaintiffs' design why
the defendant is keen to imitate it, cannot be accepted as it is for the
plaintiffs to establish at least prima facie that the design registered in
their favor does not suffer from any of the vices enumerated in Sections 4 &
19 of the Act.

22\. A perusal of the plaint shows that the plaintiffs deliberately claimed
novelty in the aesthetic handle of the toothbrush without giving the details
of the other so called novelties. It cannot be said that this move was
innocent or without any motive. In earlier Suit No. 2551/96 the plaintiffs had
given minute details of the features of their design. The absence of such
details in the present suit was, therefore, with the object of misleading the
Court and obtaining an exparte ad interim injunction without committing
themselves to any firm position. If the plaintiffs had been clean and fair
they ought to have categorically pleaded in the suit that they were not
claiming any right in the shape and configuration of the tooth brush and
should have also clarified that they had come to the Court for protection only
in regard to the rubber cushion in the Zig Zag S bend, patches on the neck and
the rubber line from handle towards neck. The plaintiffs mala fides further
stand exposed by the fact that during the pendency of, the earlier suit before
Dr. Justice M.K. Sharma the plaintiffs had obtained the registration of the
present design but it was never disclosed. The obvious reason was that the
plaintiffs were afraid that in case they disclosed this fact before the Court
and brought it to the notice of the opposite party steps would be taken to
challenge the registration of the design and it would become difficult for
them to obtain registration of the said design which was already in public
domain. This Court therefore, is satisfied that by not making detailed
pleadings and disclosing material facts to the Court the plaintiffs succeeded
in misleading Court. Therefore, not only that the plaintiffs have failed to
establish a prima facie case it is also shown on record that the plaintiffs
had not come to the Court with clean hands and as such, are not entitled to
any ad interim injunction as prayed.

23\. This: Court is of prima facie view that the plaintiffs after surrender of
earlier designs which had gone into public domains are only trying to overcome
their disability by dubious means. They have managed to get, design No. 170445
registered in their favor by introducing insignificant and small changes which
do not introduce any novelty or a new design in their toothbrush and the new
design is a mere fraudulent imitation of the old designs. The distinctive
features of the design in question and earlier designs which are in public
domain are almost identical and obvious imitation. The plaintiffs would not
suffer any irreparable loss/injury if the defendant also manufactures the
brushes with similar features as both have a healthy competition in the
market. The defendant would rather suffer irreparably if the plaintiffs
succeed in ousting it from the market on the basis of a registered design
which is already in public domain and was not prima facie registerable even.

24\. In the result, this Court has no hesitation in holding that the
plaintiffs have failed to make out a prima facie case for the grant of ad
interim injunction on the basis of registered design No. 170554. Their
application is therefore, dismissed with costs of Rs. 25,000/-.

25\. The ex-parte ad interim order is vacated.

26\. Nothing stated herein shall be taken as an expression of opinion on the
merits of the suit pending before this Court.

(CS) (OS) No. 1908/2002 Vide separate orders, IA Nos. 10928/2002, 4541/2003
and 6572/2003 have been disposed of.

List before Joint Registrar on 25th May, 2004, for admission/denial of
documents.

Counsel for plaintiff prays for suspension of the orders for a period of four
weeks. In view of the observations made by this Court in the orders, there are
no good grounds for suspension of the orders and, thereby revive the interim
injunction.

