

Delhi High Court

Pfizer Enterprises Sarl vs Cipta Ltd. on 24 October, 2008

Author: Vikramajit Sen

    
    
    *     IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
    
    +     FAO(OS)356/2008 & CM No.11752/2008
    #     PFIZER ENTERPRISES SARL ....Appellant through
    !                            Mr. Saikrishan Rajgopal with
                                 Mr. Sidharth Chopra and
                                 Mr.   Saurabh     Srivastava,
                                 Advs.
                   -versus-
    $     CIPLA LTD.                     ...Respondent through
    ^                                    Mr. Ajay Sahni with
                                         Ms. Vrinda Bajaj, Advs.
    
                                  WITH
    
          FAO(OS)428/2008 & CM No.14785/2008
    
          P.M. DIESELS LTD.              ....Appellant through
                                         Mr. Valmiki Mehta, Sr. Adv.
                                         with Mr. R.K. Aggarwal,
                                         Mr. Natwar Rai & Mr. Amit
                                         Gaurav Singh, Advs.
                       -versus-
          PATEL FIELD MARSHAL INDUSTRIES...Respondent
                                            through
                                 Mr. Shailen Bhatia with
                                 Ms. Ekta Nayal Saini, Advs.
    
    %                        Date of Decision : October 24, 2008
    
         CORAM:
    *    HON‟BLE MR. JUSTICE VIKRAMAJIT SEN
         HON‟BLE MR. JUSTICE S.L. BHAYANA
    
         1. Whether reporters of local papers may
            be allowed to see the Judgment?               Yes
         2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?        Yes
         3. Whether the Judgment should be
            reported in the Digest?                       Yes
    
    
    
    
    FAO(OS)356/2008                                          Page 1 of 20
     VIKRAMAJIT SEN, J.
    
                            JUDGMENT
    

1\. In the Pfizer Appeal the Plaintiffs have assailed the Order dated
16.7.2008 of the learned Single Judge holding that the High Court of Delhi
lacks territorial jurisdiction. The impugned Order returns the Plaint for
filing in the appropriate court. The dispute centres upon the averments made
in the Plaint and the response thereto contained in the Written Statement.

2\. P.M. Diesels litigation has remarkable annals. For the present purposes
the relevant pleadings are found in paragraph 30 of the Plaint wherein it has,
inter alia, been asserted that "the goods of the parties bearing the impugned
trade marks are also sold in the Union Territory of Delhi". The interim
injunction had been declined on 10.3.1998 principally for the reason that the
Plaintiff/Appellant had failed to establish the territorial jurisdiction of
the courts in Delhi. In the Appeal the Division Bench set aside the Order and
the lis was carried further to the Supreme Court. Their Lordships noted that
one of the three contentions raised was that the Defendants were selling the
offending goods in Delhi, and that the Delhi High Court did not advert to it.
Indeed, the Supreme Court remanded the matter to the Delhi High Court for it
to answer this aspect of the dispute opining that questions of fact "required
to be properly FAO(OS)356/2008 Page 2 of 20 determined in case evidence is led
by the parties". Eventually, the Defendant filed the application under Order
VII Rule 11 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (CPC for short) for dismissal
of the Suit which was allowed but after treating it under Order VII Rule 10
(return of the Plaint). It is this Order dated 20.8.2008 which has been
assailed before us.

3\. The respective pleadings in the Pfizer Enterprises action relevant for the
present purposes are produced in juxtaposition:-

    
    
           Plaint                        Written Statement
    17. This Hon‟ble       17. That the contents of para 17 of the
    Court has              plaint are wrong and emphatically denied
    necessary              and the plaintiffs are put to strict proof of
    jurisdiction to        their said averments. It is submitted that
    entertain and try      this Hon‟ble Court has no territorial
    the present Suit,      jurisdiction to entertain and try the present
    by virtue of           suit in as much as none of the plaintiffs are
    Section 134(1) of      the „registered proprietor‟ of the
    the Trade Marks        aforementioned trade marks in terms of
    Act, 1999 as the       Section 2(1)(v) of the Trade Marks Act,
    

Plaintiffs‟ products 1999 and the present suit for an alleged including
infringement is liable to be dismissed on DALACIN C, are this account alone.
Even an alleged action available for sale of passing off is not maintainable
in as & distribution much as the trade marks, get-up, within the placement,
design, prices, packaging, etc. jurisdiction of this of the two competing
products is Hon‟ble Court. completely different and one can by no Further, the
stretch of imagination be confused/passed FAO(OS)356/2008 Page 3 of 20
Defendants‟ off as the other particularly in view of the products under fact
that both the medicines are scheduled the impugned drugs and there is neither
any possibility mark are available nor even any remote probability of one for
sale in Delhi being mistaken for the other. From the and therefore, the array
of parties as disclosed in the plaint it cause of action is clear that the
both the plaintiff and the has also arisen defendant carry on their business
in within the Mumbai and therefore this Hon‟ble Court jurisdiction of this
would have no territorial jurisdiction to Hon‟ble Court. entertain and try the
present suit. Reply to the preceding paragraph may be read as a reply to this
paragraph also.

4\. It would be of advantage to recall Order VI Rule 2 of the CPC which
mandates that the evidence by which the material facts are to be proved ought
not to be pleaded. Rule 4 prescribes that in all cases in which the party
pleading relies on any misrepresentation, fraud, breach of trust, wilful
default, or undue influence, and in all other cases in which particulars may
be necessary beyond such as are exemplified in the forms contained in
Appendix-I, particulars shall be stated in the pleading. Order VII Rule 1 of
the CPC spells out the particulars that should be contained in the Plaint and
inter alia requires that facts showing that the Court has jurisdiction must be
contained therein. Rule 10 contemplates the return of the Plaint
FAO(OS)356/2008 Page 4 of 20 at any stage of the suit if the Court is of the
opinion that it should be presented in some other Court.

5\. Order VIII of the CPC places substantially similar obligations on the
Defendant. Rule 2 thereof specifically states that the Defendant must raise by
his pleadings all matters which show the suit not to be maintainable. It
further requires to be pleaded all grounds of defence as, if not raised, would
be likely to take the plaintiff by surprise, or would raise issues of fact not
arising out of the Plaint. Rule 3 clarifies that it would not be sufficient
for a Defendant in his Written Statement to deny generally the grounds alleged
by the Plaintiff; the Defendant must deal specifically with each allegation of
fact and of which he does not admit the truth. Rule 4 prescribes that where a
Defendant denies an allegation of fact in the Plaint, he must not do so
evasively, but must answer the point of substance. An illustration is
contained in the Rule itself which is poignant to the point before us. It is
that if it is alleged by the Plaintiff that the Defendant had received a
certain sum of money, it shall not be sufficient for the Defendant to deny
that he received that particular amount, but the Defendant must deny that he
received that sum or any part thereof, or else set out how much he received.
The Defendant must categorically refute the averments in the Plaint on the
strength of which territorial FAO(OS)356/2008 Page 5 of 20 jurisdiction is
claimed. Rule 5 further goes on to state that every allegation of fact in the
Plaint, if not denied specifically or by necessary implication, or stated to
be not admitted in the pleading of the Defendant, shall be taken to be
admitted. Indeed, the CPC takes pains to stipulate that the assertions in the
Plaint must be categorical and unambiguously answered. If the Defendant fails
to effectively respond to the pleadings in the Plaint and instead sets out
extraneous reasons why the Court does not possess jurisdiction, the non
traversed pleadings will be deemed to be correct.

6\. By an amendment introduced with effect from 1.7.2002 Rule 14 of Order VII
requires, where a plaintiff sues upon a document or relies upon document in
his possession or power in support of his claim, that he shall enter such
documents in a list, and shall produce it in Court when the Plaint is
presented by him and shall, at the same time deliver the document and copies
thereof, to be filed with the Plaint. Order XXXIX of the CPC makes the
existence of documents critical at the pre-trial stages of the suit, inasmuch
as it mandates service of documents on which the Plaintiff relies on the
opposite party. That, however, will be relevant to the aspect of whether the
applicant has succeeded in making out a case for the issuance of an
injunction, ex parte or after hearing the adversaries. FAO(OS)356/2008 Page 6
of 20

7\. Returning to the pleadings in the case in hand, it is worthwhile to
underscore that the Plaint states that „DALACIN C‟ is "available for sale and
distribution within the jurisdiction of this Court. Further, the Defendant‟s
products under the impugned mark are available for sale in Delhi". In response
to these categorical pleadings, no doubt the Defendant has commenced his
response by generally stating that contents of the corresponding paragraph of
the Plaint are wrong and emphatically denied, and that this Court has no
territorial jurisdiction to entertain and to try the Suit. However, this
objection has been predicated on three grounds - firstly that none of the
Plaintiffs are the registered proprietors of the trade mark; secondly that the
claim of passing off is not maintainable since the trademark, getup, placement
etc. are completely different and both the medicines are scheduled drugs and
there is no possibility of a customer being mistaken; lastly and most
importantly that both the Plaintiffs and the Defendant carry on business in
Mumbai and, therefore, Courts in Delhi have no territorial jurisdiction. There
is not even a whisper with regard to the Plaintiff‟s assertion that „DALACIN
C‟ is available for sale and distribution in Delhi and that the Defendant‟s
offending products are also available for sale in Delhi. As has been
graphically stated by the Apex Court, the cause of action FAO(OS)356/2008 Page
7 of 20 constitutes a bundle of facts any of which, and not collectively all
of which, may constitute the cause of action necessary for filing of a lis in
a particular Court.

8\. In Trade Connection -vs- International Building Products(P) Ltd., 2002 III
AD (Delhi) 344, a learned Single Judge of this Court had transformed a failure
to reply to paragraphs in the Plaint into unequivocal admissions of fact. In
H.S.E.B. -vs- Ram Nath, (2004) 5 SCC 793 their Lordships noted that there was
no denial to the categoric averments to the effect that electrical wires were
loose and were drooping and touching the roof of houses and, therefore, a
deemed admission must be drawn against the Defendant. In Ram Singh -vs- Col.
Ram Singh, 1985 (Supp.) SCC 611 the Supreme Court again applied Order VIII
Rule 5 of the CPC in concluding that the Respondent must be deemed to have
admitted that two persons named in the Petition were the relatives of the
Respondent because of his failure to specifically deny this assertion. Badat
and Co. -vs- East India Trading Co., AIR 1964 SC 538 is extremely important.
After briefly considering the provisions of Orders VII and VIII of the CPC and
specifically Rules 3 to 5 thereof, it was observed as follows -"These three
Rules form an integrated code dealing with the manner in which allegations of
fact in the plaint should be traversed and the legal consequences flowing from
its FAO(OS)356/2008 Page 8 of 20 non-compliance. The written statement must
deal specifically with each allegation of fact in the plaint and when a
defendant denies any such fact, he must not do so evasively but answer the
point of substance. If his denial of a fact is not specific but evasive, the
said fact shall be taken to be admitted. In such an event, the admission
itself being proof, no other proof is necessary." Without adverting to Badat
and Co. a Three-Judge Bench in Biswanath Prasad -vs- Dwarka Prasad, AIR 1974
SC 117 opined that an admission by a party is substantive evidence in respect
of which it is not a necessary requirement that the statement containing the
admission would not be put to the concerned party because it is evidence pro
prio vigore. In Nagindas Ramdas -vs- Dalpatram Iccharam, AIR 1974 SC 471 a
Coordinate Bench had observed that - "admissions in pleadings or judicial
admissions admissible under Section 58 of the Evidence Act made by the parties
or their agents at or before the hearing of the case, stand on a higher
footing than evidentiary admissions. The former class of admissions are fully
binding on the party that makes them and constitute a waiver of proof. They by
themselves can be made the foundation of the rights of the parties. On the
other hand evidentiary admissions which are receivable at the trial as
evidence are by themselves not conclusive. They can be shown to be wrong".

FAO(OS)356/2008 Page 9 of 20

9\. The significance attached to an admission in pleadings is also evident
from the string of precedents dealing with the amendments of pleadings
calculated to withdraw or nullify or dilute an admission. Justice Yogeshwar
Dayal, his Lordship as then was, held in Neera Graver -vs- Narinder Jaggi, 21
(1982) DLT 33 that since the tenant had not denied the specific averment in
the eviction petition to the effect that the premises were for residential
purposes, this position must be treated to have been admitted by the tenant.
An admission to plead, by way of an amendment, that the premises were let out
for both residential and commercial purposes, was rejected as it would
tantamount to withdrawing an admission already made. To the same effect the
Supreme Court had in Sangramsinh P. Gaekwad

-vs- Shantadevi P. Gaekwad, AIR 2005 SC 809 held that an admission made by the petitioner in a petition under Sections 397/398 could not be permitted to be withdrawn through the device of an amendment. After analysing the above-mentioned case, their Lordships opined in paragraph 29 that "judicial admissions by themselves can be made the foundations of the rights of the parties". 

10\. In this analysis, there is no alternative but to conclude that the
Defendant Cipla Ltd. must be deemed to have admitted that the Plaintiffs‟
products, including "DALACIN C" are FAO(OS)356/2008 Page 10 of 20 available
for sale and distribution in Delhi and furthermore that the Defendant‟s
products under the impugned mark are also available for sale in Delhi. As
categorically pleaded in the Plaint itself, the cause of action has,
therefore, undeniably arisen in Delhi. Documents become unnecessary. Even in
the absence of an admission facts can be proved by means of Parol and/or
documentary evidence. The Division Bench in Intas Pharmaceuticals Ltd. -vs-
Allergan Inc., AIR 2007 Delhi 108 opined that Section 134 of the Trade Marks
Act does not override Section 20 of the CPC; rather it provides an additional
forum and place for filing the suit. Keeping in view the fact that Defendant
in that case had been selling the offending products in Delhi, the Division
Bench upheld the view of the learned Single Judge holding that courts in Delhi
possessed territorial jurisdiction to entertain the suit. The Division Bench
analysed and applied Dhodha House -vs- S.K. Maingi, (2006) 9 SCC 41 and
thereupon concludes firstly that since the Plaintiff had pleaded in the plaint
that the Defendant was selling the offending product in Delhi, Delhi Courts
possessed territorial jurisdiction; secondly that Section 20(c) of the CPC
makes available, in addition to Section 134 of the Trade Marks Act, another
forum of adjudication. We are in entire agreement with the views expressed by
our Coordinate Bench. These apply on FAO(OS)356/2008 Page 11 of 20 all fours
to the case in hand since the Defendant Cipla Ltd. before us must be deemed to
have admitted that the Plaintiffs‟ products are available for sale in Delhi
and that their products are also available for sale in Delhi. No further
evidence, oral or documentary, has to be produced by the Plaintiff to
substantiate these facts.

11\. The exposition of law to be found in Exphar SA -vs- Eupharma Laboratories
Ltd., 2004 (28) PTC 251(SC) is apposite. Even if a deemed admission is not
drawn against the Defendant, the averments made in the Plaint must, in
interlocutory proceedings, be treated as true. The Supreme Court has observed
that when an objection to jurisdiction is raised by way of demurrer and not at
the trial, the objection must proceed on the basis that the facts as pleaded
by the initiator of the impugned proceedings are true. The submission in order
to succeed must show that granted those facts the Court does not have
jurisdiction as a matter of law. Unlike the case in hand, the Defendant before
the Supreme Court had denied the assertion that the Plaintiffs goods were not
sold in Delhi. A fortiori, when relevant pleadings are not denied, the Court
would be falling in error in not accepting as correct the factual version
expressed in the Plaint. A similar enunciation of the law is to be found in
Laxman Prasad -vs- Prodigy Electronics Ltd., FAO(OS)356/2008 Page 12 of 20
2008 (37)PTC 209 (SC) : (2008) 1 SCC 618. A reading of Laxman Prasad will
unquestionably disclose that the Intas opinion now has the imprimatur of the
Supreme Court. Learned counsel for the Appellants has elaborately quoted from
Dhodha House but in our view this case does not help the resolution of the
conundrum before us.

12\. The Preliminary Question which arose in Dhodha House was whether the
existence of jurisdiction under Copyright Act, 1957 would also enable the
clubbing of the dispute arising from the Trade and Merchandise Act, 1958. The
Supreme Court explained that existence of territorial jurisdiction by virtue
of one Act would not clothe that very Court with a determination of a dispute
under another Act only because of the provisions of Order II of the CPC (The
parties in the P.M. Diesel were also one of the Appellants in the Dhodha House
matter). Secondly, it had been observed that this Court had not adverted to
the third contention that had arisen in the matter, viz. whether the Defendant
had been selling its products on a commercial scale in Delhi. We think it
necessary to at once clarify that in P.M. Diesel averments made in the Plaint
have not been admitted in the Written Statement as is the case in the Pfizer
Appeal. Our attention has also been drawn to the observations made by their
Lordships in Dabur India -vs- K.R. Industries, 2008 (37) PTC FAO(OS)356/2008
Page 13 of 20 332(SC) where it was reiterated that since the primary ground
upon which jurisdiction of the Delhi High Court had been invoked was violation
of the Trade and Merchandise Marks Act, 1958 the provisions of Section 62(2)
of the Copyright Act, 1957 could not be invoked. This was also the ratio of
Dhodha House. It was also observed that the Plaintiff in Dhodha House was not
a resident of Delhi; that he had not been able to establish that it carried on
any business at Delhi; for this purpose the question as to whether the
Defendant had been selling its produce in Delhi or not was wholly irrelevant.
The last of the three observations clarifies the position pertaining to the
place where the Plaintiff transacts business. Section 134(2) of the Trade
Marks Act, 1999 enables the Plaintiff to institute any suit or proceedings in
the District Court having jurisdiction over the territories where it "actually
and voluntarily resides or carries business or personally works for gain".
This is also what is postulated by Section 62(2) of the Copyright Act, 1957.
It was for this reason that their Lordships clarified that it was wholly
irrelevant whether the Defendant was selling its products in the place where
the suit had been filed. However, if the territorial jurisdiction is invoked
by the Plaintiff on the ground of the cause of action having arisen in the
form of sale of offending goods within the territories of that Court, the
question of Defendant‟s FAO(OS)356/2008 Page 14 of 20 activity would become
relevant and the Plaintiffs activity would become irrelevant. If the Plaint
discloses that the Defendant has violated the Plaintiff‟s Trademark or
Copyright in a particular place, the cause of action would arise therein and
the observations in Laxman Prasad would clothe that Court with jurisdiction.

13\. We approve the approach adopted in Pfizer Products Inc. - vs- Rajesh
Chopra, 2006 (32) PTC 301 and in Boston Scientific International B.V. -vs-
Metro Hospital, 2007 (136) DLT 278.

14\. We are unable to appreciate the argument of learned Counsel for the
Defendant which found favour before the learned Single Judge that Liverpool &
London S.P. & I Association Ltd. -vs- M.V. Sea Success I, (2004) 9 SCC 512
supports the Defendant‟s case. Their Lordships had succinctly and
perspicuously covered the conundrum before us in these words:-

> Rejection of plaint

> 139.Whether a plaint discloses a cause of action or not is essentially a
> question of fact. But whether it does or does not must be found out from
> reading the plaint itself. For the said purpose the averments made in the
> plaint in their entirety must be held to be correct. The test is as to
> whether if the averments made in the plaint are taken to be correct in their
> entirety, a decree would be passed.

FAO(OS)356/2008 Page 15 of 20

Dealing with the merits of the case their Lordships noted that so far as the
existence of a cause of action was concerned the documents filed along with
the pleadings should be looked into. This was in addition to the pleadings, in
order to explain or support them. Their Lordships did not enunciate that
documents are necessary even if facts stand admitted. This is an altogether
different situation from the "return" of the Plaint, which is onerous only to
the extent that the same Plaint has to be filed in the Court which is
competent to entertain it. So far as the rejection of a Plaint is concerned,
it is tantamount to a dismissal of the Plaint and, therefore, the CPC
justifiably enumerates the circumstances in which such an order can be passed.
It is trite that if a cause of action has not arisen, a suit has to be
dismissed. Secondly, if the proper Court Fee has not been paid, and despite
the opportunity the Plaintiff remains recalcitrant in making up the
deficiency, there is every justification for dismissing the suit. Furthermore,
if on a plain reading of the Plaint itself its entertainment appears to be
barred by any law, it would be reasonable for it to be dismissed. Because of
these implications, there is every reason that a Judge must be fully satisfied
before passing an order which would have serious repercussions; therefore, it
would be in the fitness of things for the Court to also look at documents
which are available on the FAO(OS)356/2008 Page 16 of 20 records before
passing an order which virtually dismisses the suit, the only saving being
that a fresh suit is not barred.

15\. We have already noted the provisions of the CPC which enable documents to
be filed at different stages of an adjudication of the plaint. Let us take the
case of a plaint which merely asseverates certain facts and does not
substantiate it by filing documents which may be available. In case the
Plaintiff is desirous of obtaining interim relief, it would be reasonable for
the Court not to act only on the pleadings. When the Court is called upon to
decide an application under Order XXXIX documents become relevant and,
therefore, they are required to be served on the opposite party for fear that
on failure the interim order would stand recalled. However, if an ex parte
order is not passed and a statement made in the plaint is admitted in the
Written Statement, documents or oral evidence would become superfluous. At no
point had their Lordships indicated that if documents have not been filed
substantiating the averments made in a Plaint, the suit is liable to be
dismissed. Myriad problems will arise if documents are to be looked at for the
purposes of rejection of a plaint. At what stage of the proceedings must this
exercise be carried out? Certainly, it is not possible to rely or take note of
documents which are yet to be proved. Therefore, apart from very unlikely
event where a FAO(OS)356/2008 Page 17 of 20 document stands admitted by the
Defendant at the earliest stages of the litigation, it would be of little or
no use to act upon them. However, if the Court is of the view that the suit is
vexatious or has palpably been filed in a Court which does not possess
jurisdiction, it is fully empowered to proceed under Order X of the CPC. Rule
1 thereof enables the Court to ascertain from the either parties before it
whether it admits allegations of fact made in the Plaint or the Written
Statement. Rule 2 thereof also postulates the Court examining any party to the
lis with a view to elucidating matters in controversy in the suit or in answer
to any material question relating to the suit. Obviously, this course could
also be adopted by Courts to decide an issue which requires evidence to be
adduced. Of course, the Court will take recourse to this provision only if it
has, of its own, come to the conclusion that the litigation is an abuse of the
process of Court. Otherwise, the provisions of Order XIV Rule 2 enjoin that
Issues both of law and of fact would be decided at the end of suit. The said
Rule envisages that if an Issue relating to the jurisdiction of the Court is
an Issue of law only, in contradistinction to an Issue both of law and of
fact, it may try such an Issue first. Seen from all perspectives, therefore,
it would be in very rare cases (such as an admission of fact by the adversary)
that a plaint can be returned or rejected, as the case FAO(OS)356/2008 Page 18
of 20 may be. Otherwise, as applies to both the Plaint and the Written
Statement, the pleadings at the initial stages must be approached as if they
are correct either for rejecting the plaint or decreeing the suit. This is
what Liverpool holds as it reiterates the established position that pleadings
at the initial stages must be taken as a true and correct narration of events.

16\. For the manifold reasons mentioned above, FAO(OS) 356/2008 is accepted.
Since the Defendant has not specifically traversed the pleadings pertaining to
the territorial jurisdiction of this Court, the position is that the
Plaintiffs would not be required to lead any evidence on this aspect of the
case. That being so, it is beyond cavil that the Plaint ought not to have been
returned. The distinction between the return of a Plaint to facilitate its
filing in a Court possessing territorial jurisdiction and the rejection of a
Plaint on the ground that a cause of action has not been made out, is
extremely poignant and important.

17\. So far as FAO(OS) 428/2008 (P.M. Diesels) is concerned, the position is
very clear, as their Lordships have remanded the matter to this Court to
decide the third contention raised therein, namely, whether the Defendant was
selling the offending goods in Delhi, which could be decided only after
evidence has been brought on record. Additional to this undebatable position,
since P.M. Diesels had pleaded that the FAO(OS)356/2008 Page 19 of 20
Defendant was selling offending goods in Delhi, the Court had perforce to
proceed at the present stage of the lis on the assumption that the averment to
this effect was verily true. Therefore, the Plaint could not have been
returned. This Appeal is also allowed. However, we take note of the statement
pleaded in the Appeal to the effect that before the Learned Single Judge, the
learned Senior Advocate for the Plaintiff/Appellant had "offered that he had
no objection if the present suit along with the pending applications and the
injunction granted by this Hon‟ble Court, is transferred to the Court at
Rajkot and proceedings start at Rajkot from the stage as at present before
this Hon‟ble Court" (paragraph 22). In view of the submission we return the
Plaint along with all the other pleadings to the Plaintiff for filing in the
Courts in Rajkot. Certified copies of the entire Paper-Book be retained and
dispatched to Record Room.

18\. We set aside the impugned Order but there shall be no order as to costs.

    
    
    
    
                                               ( VIKRAMAJIT SEN )
                                                     JUDGE
    
    
    October 24, 2008                           ( S. L. BHAYANA )
    tp                                                JUDGE
    
    
    
    
    FAO(OS)356/2008                                           Page 20 of 20
     

