

Andhra High Court

Ampro Food Products vs Ashoka Biscuit Works And Ors. on 26 September, 1972

Equivalent citations: AIR 1973 AP 17

Bench: C Reddy

JUDGMENT

1\. The appellant makes biscuits. So does the respondent. The appellant's
biscuits have embossed on them a certain design in the centre of which appear
the letters " AF". The design is registered under the Design act, 1911. The
respondent's biscuits also have embossed on them an identical design except
that the letters " AB" appear instead of the letters "AF". The appellant
complaints that the respondent has committed piracy of his design. He has
filed a suit in the city Civil Court, for a permanent injunction to restrain
the respondent from using the design on his biscuit. Pending disposal of the
suit he sought a temporary injunction. An ad interim injunction was granted on
20.6.1972 but after notice the interim injunction was vacated on 10.7.1972.
the present appeal was filed and an interim injunction was granted on
31.7.1972 by my brother Mukthadar, J. The appeal has now come up for final
hearing. The learned additional Judge of the City Civil court refused the
temporary injunction on two grounds; (1) the appellant's design, though
registered was not a new and original design since the affidavit filed on
behalf of the respondent showed that they had been using the same design even
before it was registered by the appellant. (2) the design gave no right to the
appellant to us, it as a trade mark. The respondent's application for the
registration of a trade mark was pending before the Registrar of Trade marks
and was likely to be granted. I will consider the correctness of both the
grounds.

2\. Under the Designs Act, a design is required to be a new or original design
not previously published in India in order that it may be registered. An
application for registration of design must be made to the Controller who may
refuse to register any design presented to him for registration in which case
an appeal against such refusal shall lie to the Central Government. Where a
design is registered, the Controller shall grant a certificate of registration
to the proprietor of the design and suitable entries shall be made in the
Register of Designs. On registration the registered Proprietor of the design
shall have a copy right in the design for a period of five years from the date
of registration. Any person interested may present a petition for the
cancellation of the registration of design on any of the following grounds (1)
the design has been previously registered in India. (Ii) It has been published
in India prior to the date of Registration (iii) The Design is not a new or
original design. The petition may be presented in the High Court without any
limitation of time or where the cancellation is sought on the first two
grounds it may be presented to the controller within a year from the date of
registration. Where the petition is presented to the controller an appeal to
the High court is provided against the decision of the Controller. The
provision for the cancellation of the registration of design is found in
Section 51-A of the Designs Act. Section 53 prohibits all acts of piracy of a
registered design. Section 53 (2) provides that a person acting in
controvention of the Section shall be liable " (a) to pay a sum not exceeding
Rs. 500/- recoverable as a contract debt, or (b) if the proprietor elects to
bring a suit for the recovery of the damages for any such contravention; and
for an injunction against the repetition thereof to pay such damages as may be
awarded and to be restrained by an injunction accordingly." In the present
case, it is admitted that the respondent has not taken any steps for the
cancellation of the registration of the design. The question for consideration
is whether it is open to the respondent to claim that the design is not a new
or original design in defence to a suit for an injunction based on a
registered design, he having taken no action to have the registration
cancelled on that ground. To my mind, such a defence is not open to the
respondent. If such a defence is open to the respondent, then the elaborate
provisions made for the registration of a design and the cancellation of
registration become practically meaningless. The learned counsel urged that
the Civil Court's jurisdiction to decide the question cannot be taken away
except by an express provision in that regard. I do not see why not. An
express provision is made for the presentation of a petition to the High court
for the cancellation of the registration of design on the ground that the
design is not a new or an original design. When there is an express remedy
provided under the act and that by way of a petition to the High court, I do
not see why another civil Court should have concurrent jurisdiction over the
same question and that in defence to an action based on a registered design. I
am of the view that the provision for the cancellation of the registration of
a design by the High court excludes by necessary implication the jurisdiction
of the ordinary Civil Court from going into the questions which may be decided
by the High court when a application is presented to it under Section 51-A of
the Act. The learned counsel for the respondent relied on the decision of a
Single Judge of the Bombay High court in Dwarakadas v. Chootalal, AIR 1941 Bom
188. To meet the argument that there was no advantage to be gained by having a
certificate of registration it if was not be final and conclusive the learned
Bombay Judge said :

"The advantage is that if no evidence is led by the defendants to the
contrary, the certificate is sufficient evidence that the plaintiffs are the
proprietors, i.e., proprietors of a new or original design. If evidence is
led, it is for the court to come to its finding on the question. A further
advance is that as the register is prima facie evidence of the matters
contained in it, the onus ordinarily will be on the defendants to show that
the plaintiffs are not the proprietors of the registered design in question."

3\. With great respect to the learned Judge I am not prepared to agree. I do
not think that the Legislature made the elaborate provision for the
registration of a design and the cancellation of the registration merely with
a view to raise a flimsy presumption in favour of the proprietor of the
registered design. The learned judge referred to Section 46 (3) of the act in
support of his conclusion. Section 46 (3) of the act merely provides that the
Register of Designs shall be a prima facie evidence of any matters by the act
directed or authorised to be entered therein. The matters which are directed
or authorised to be entered in the register are mentioned in Section 46 (1).
They are the names and address of proprietors of registered designs,
notifications of assignments and all transmissions of register designs, and
such other matters as may be prescribed. The register of Designs will,
therefore, be prima facie evidence of the ownership or assignment of a
registered designs. That is all. The register of Designs cannot be prima facie
evidence of the fact that a design is a new or original design. In my view,
the learned judge was not correct in thinking that an entry in the Register of
Designs would be prima facie evidence that the registered design was a new or
original design. When the learned judge's attention was drawn to the fact that
the case of patents it was expressly provided by Section 29 (2) of the Patents
and Designs act, 1911 that every ground on which a patent might be revoked
shall be available by way of defence to a suit for infringement of a patent
and that there was no similar provision in the case of a design the learned
judge observed that the absence of a similar provision in the case of a design
did not exclude such a defence. The absence of an express provision, such as
the one contained in Section 29 (2) in regard to a patent, in the case of a
design, it, in my view, a ground for coming to the conclusion that such a
defence is precluded in a suit based on the infringement of a design. I,
therefore, hold that the defence that the design is not a new or original
design is not open to the respondent in this action.

4\. The respondent, it seems has applied for the registration of a trade mark
and Mr. Babulu Reddy, learned counsel for the respondent submitted that the
application will be granted as a matter of course. Assuming so, I do not see
how that will entitle the respondent to commit an act of piracy in regard to
the appellant's registered design. It should be remembered that a trade mark
is different from design. A design is necessarily part and parcel of the
article manufactured while a trade mark is not necessarily so. In fact, the
definition of " design" in Section 2 (5) of the Designs Act expressly states
that it does not include any trade mark as defined in Section 2 (1) (v) of the
Trade and Merchandise Marks act, 1958. That is why the certificate of
registration of the design contains a note which recites " the novelty in the
design resides in the ornamental source pattern which appears only on the side
of the biscuit as illustrated. No claim is made by virtue of this registration
to any right to the use as a trade mark of what is shown in the
representations or to the exclusive use of the letters appearing in the
design". This note does not give any right to the respondent or other biscuit
manufacturer to commit an act of piracy of the design as defined in the
designs act under the guise of using it as a trade mark. The respondent, or
other biscuit manufacturers may perhaps use the design as a trade mark on a
wrapper or a label or otherwise but not so as to make it part and parcel of
the biscuit in which case he could be committing an act of piracy of the
design as defined in the Designs Act.

5\. I am, therefore, of the view that the learned Additional Chief judge ,
City Civil Court was in error in refusing to grant a temporary injunction. The
appeal is allowed and a temporary injunction will issue restraining the
respondent from using the registered design of the appellant and from selling
biscuits bearing that design. I understand that the suit is posted for trial
in the first week of October. The learned Additional Chief Judge is directed
to dispose of the suit expeditiously,. There will be no order regarding costs.

6\. Appeal allowed.

