

Delhi High Court

Automatic Electric Limited vs R.K. Dgawan & Anr. on 6 January, 1999

Equivalent citations: 1999 IAD Delhi 603, 77 (1999) DLT 292

Author: . M Sharma

Bench: . M Sharma

ORDER Dr. M.K. Sharma, J.

1\. This order shall dispose of the applications registered as I.A. Nos.
8609/1994 and 10285/1994 under Order 39 of the Code of Civil Procedure
connected with grant of temporary injunctions in favour of the plaintiff and
against the defendants seeking to restrain the defendants from infringing and
passingoff the trade mark "DIMMERSTAT" of the plaintiff.

2\. The plaintiff adopted the trade mark "DIMMERSTAT" in relation to variable
voltage auto transformers of their manufacture and sale. The plaintiff is
stated to have adopted the trade mark "DIMMERSTAT" in the year 1945 and claims
to have been using the said trade mark for the last fifty years. In support of
the aforesaid contention, the plaintiff has placed on record sales invoices
for the period from 19761982 and then again from 19851994. The plaintiff has
also placed on record its advertisement and catalogues as also the
correspondences exchanged inter se parties. The plaintiff has also placed on
record the trade mark certificate which appears at pages 29 and 30 of the
plaintiff documents which indicates that the trade mark "DIMMERSTAT" of the
plaintiff is registered in `PARTA' under Trade Mark Registration No. 178464
dated 14.2.1957 in class `9' for variable auto transformers.

3\. It is stated in the plaint that the plaintiff's goods under the trade mark
"DIMMERSTAT" has been extensively advertised since 1945 and the same has
acquired formidable goodwill and reputation which according to the plaintiff
is evident from the sale figures set out in paragraph 3 of the plaint.

4\. The plaintiff has alleged that the defendants adopted the trade mark
"DIMMER DOT" in relation to variable voltage auto transformers of their
manufacture and sale which is likely to cause confusion or deception amongst
the members of the public which is deceptively similar with the trade mark
"DIMMERSTAT" of the plaintiff. Accordingly, the present suit was filed by the
plaintiff seeking for a decree of permanent injunction restraining the
defendants from manufacturing, selling, advertising, directly or indirectly
and/or dealing in voltage auto transformers under the impugned trade mark
"DIMMER DOT" or any other trade mark as may be identical to or deceptively
similar with the trade mark "DIMMERSTAT" amounting to infringement of the
trade mark of the plaintiff as also for a decree of permanent injunction
restraining the defendants from passingoff their goods as that of the
plaintiff and also for rendition of account of profits etc.

5\. Along with the plaint an application under Order 39 Rules 1 & 2 of the
Code of Civil Procedure was filed which was registered as I.A. No.8609/1994 on
which an ad interim ex parte injunction was granted by this Court restraining
the defendants from selling, offering for sale, advertising or dealing in
voltage auto transformers under the trade mark "DIMMER DOT" or any other mark
which is identical or deceptively similar with the trade mark "DIMMER DOT".
The said order was passed on 9.11.1994. Immediately thereafter, the defendants
entered appearance and filed an application registered under Order 39 Rule 4
of the Code of Civil Procedure which was registered as I.A. No.10285/1994.

6\. Mr. Hemant Singh, counsel appearing for the plaintiff submitted that use
of the trade mark "DIMMER DOT" by the defendants in relation to variable auto
transformers amounts to infringement of the registered trade mark "DIMMERSTAT"
of the plaintiff as the registration of the trade mark "DIMMERSTAT" was
granted in favour of the plaintiff without any disclaimer to the word "DIMMER"
and the said registration was done in respect of `PARTA'. He draw my attention
to the provisions of Sections 28 and 29 of the Trade and Merchandise Marks Act
and on the basis thereof submitted that the provisions of Section 28(1) of the
Trade and Merchandise Marks Act confers right of exclusive use of the
registered trade mark and such a user is in respect of the whole of trade mark
unless there is a disclaimer imposed by the Registrar under Section 17 of the
'Act. He also submitted that Section 29(1) grants a right of exclusive user
and such right is infringed when there is a user of identical or deceptively
similar trade mark which is likely to deceive or cause confusion. He submitted
that the trade mark "DIMMERSTAT" and "DIMMER DOT" have identical prefix,
thereby leaving similar overall idea and impression on the consumers mind and
the same is likely to mislead a consumer usually dealing with one to accept
the other if offered by a retailer.

7\. In support of his submissions, the learned counsel relied upon the
decisions in Kaviraj Pandit Durga Dutt Sharma Vs. Navratna Pharmaceutical
Laboratories; , and the decision in Amritdhara Pharmacy Vs. Satya Deo Gupta; .
He also relied upon some other decisions such as Accurist Vs. Accutron;
reported in 1966 RPC 152, Alka Seltzer Vs. Alka Vescent; reported in (1950) 67
RPC 113,209, Pill bond Vs. Plyopher; reported in (1951) 69 RPC 40, Star mist
Vs. Stardust; reported in (1951) 69 RPC 40, Marie Elizabeth Vs. Maria Lisette;
reported in (1937) 54 RPC 193, Turbo torch Vs. Turbogaz; reported in 1978 RPC
206 and Univocal Vs. Unimac; reported in 1979 RPC 469 in order to support his
contention that in case of similarity of prefix, trade marks should be held to
be deceptively similar.

8\. Mr. Sai Krishna, counsel appearing on behalf of the defendants, on the
other hand, submitted that the word "DIMMER" being a generic word is incapable
of serving a trade mark function. According to him, the product in question is
an auto variable transformer which is also called in trade a "DIMMER" as it
serves the function of dimming or regulating various parameters like heat,
light, motor speed etc. In order to support his contention that the word
"DIMMER" is entirely generic and descriptive when used in relation to auto
variable transformers, he relied upon the documents filed by the defendants on
30.11.1998. He submitted that since the word "DIMMER" signifies and connotes
an auto variable transformer, therefore, no trader could monopolise the use of
this word in relation to auto variable transformer and registration of such
word having a direct reference to the character or quality of the goods is
prohibited under Section 9(1)(d) of the Trade and Merchandise Marks Act. He
refuted the contention of the counsel for the plaintiff that auto variable
transformers are not called DIMMERS.

9\. In support of his submission, the learned counsel relied upon the decision
in Abercrombie & Fitch Company Vs. Hunting World, Incorporated; reported in
189 USPQ 759, J.R. Kapoor Vs. M/s. Micronix India; reported in 1994(3) SCALE
732. He further submitted that the trade marks of the plaintiff and the
defendants being dissimilar, the present cannot be a case of infringement and
at best it could be a case of passingoff and "DIMMERSTAT" and "DIMMER DOT"
being not deceptively similar could not create any confusion and deception. He
further submitted that the products in question are extremely sophisticated
electrical instruments which are applied in industrial projects and thus the
buyers of these products are extremely discerning and would not be confused
between the plaintiff's and defendant's brand names.

10\. He also submitted that the packing of the two products are also entirely
different and that also ensures that there is no confusion or deception
between the two products of the plaintiff's and the defendant's. Mr. Sai
Krishna further submitted that there is a honest concurrent user by the
defendants of its trade mark "DIMMER DOT" which according to him is apparent
from the fact that the defendants have been using the said trade mark from the
year 1980 and in view of such honest concurrent use of the trade mark "DIMMER
DOT" no injunction could be passed against the defendants. He also submitted
that there is delay, laches and acquiescence on the part of the plaintiff in
approaching this Court, inasmuch as the defendants adopted the trade mark in
the year 1980 and that there has been extensive sales and advertising of the
defendants of their trade mark "DIMMER DOT" which is established from the
invoices and advertisement placed on record. He submitted that the plaintiff
was aware of the defendant's trade mark since their advertisements featured in
the same trade magazines and, therefore, the plaintiff having sat by and
allowing the defendant's business to grow for about 15 years consequently
acquiesced use of the trade mark "DIMMER DOT" by the defendants and thus the
plaintiff is not entitled to any injunction as prayed for.

11\. In the light of the aforesaid submissions and contentions raised, let me
consider the issue as to whether the ad interim injunction granted in favour
of the plaintiff by this Court should be made absolute or is required to be
vacated.

12\. There is no dispute to the fact that the trade mark "DIMMERSTAT" of the
plaintiff is registered in `PARTA' as is evident from the registration
certificate dated 14.2.1957 in class `9' for variable auto transformers. The
said trade mark exists in the registration book from the year 1957. The sale
invoices placed on record indicate that the plaintiff has been carrying on the
business of manufacturing and marketing and selling variable voltage auto
transformers of their manufacture and sale in the trade name "DIMMERSTAT",
immediately after obtaining registration thereto.

13\. Section 28(1) of the Trade and Merchandise Marks Act provides that the
registration of a trade mark in PartA or PartB of the register shall, if
valid, give to the registered proprietor of the trade mark the exclusive right
to the use of the trade mark in relation to the goods in respect of which the
trade mark is registered. Section 29(1) provides that a registered trade mark
is infringed by a person who, not being the registered proprietor of the trade
mark or a registered user thereof uses in the course of a trade mark which is
identical with or deceptively similar to the trade mark in relation to any
goods in respect of which the trade mark is registered.. Thus, the right of
exclusive use of the registered trade mark which is conferred under Section
28(1) of the Trade and Merchandise Marks Act shall stand infringed by use of
an identical or deceptively similar trade mark also.

14\. The trade mark "DIMMER DOT" of the defendants is admittedly not a
registered trade mark although the own documents of the defendants placed on
record indicates that they are using the trade mark "DIMMER DOT" as a
registered trade mark in advertisements, invoices and pamphlets. Such act on
the part of the defendants of indicating that their product under the trade
mark "DIMMER DOT" as registered amounts to commission of offence under Section
81 of the Act. No application has also been filed by the defendants before the
Registrar for cancellation of the registration of the trade mark "DIMMERSTAT"
adopted by the plaintiff and granted as far back as 1957. These two are very
vital issues and speak volume against the defendants. Counsel for the
defendants, however, tried to overcome the aforesaid shortcomings by
submitting that the word "DIMMER" being a generic and descriptive word in the
context of auto variable transformers, no trader could monopolise the use of
the said word in relation to auto variable transformers. The aforesaid
submission, therefore, is to be scrutinised in the context of the facts and
circumstances of the case.

15\. The trade mark "DIMMERSTAT" is registered without any disclaimer to the
exclusive use of the word "DIMMER" which is part of the composite trade mark
"DIMMERSTAT". The whole of the trade mark as registered including the word
DIMMER is subject matter of monopolistic right of exclusive use conferred by
the Statute upon the plaintiff under Section 28(1). The validity of the
registration of "DIMMERSTAT" cannot be challenged by the defendants in a
proceeding like this for the defendants have a remedy to file cancellation of
the registration in an appropriate forum. But, the said remedy has not been
resorted to by the defendants till date. The object or the good involved
herein is a variable auto transformer. The word "DIMMER" as is understood in
the common parlance and as stated in dictionary is connected with an
arrangement for regulating the supply of the electricity, but, the product
here is not a DIMMER, but, a variable transformer. Auto transformers have
several applications including voltage and current control in experimental and
development work in laboratories and R&D departments testing and calibration
of indicating instruments etc. Thus variable auto transformers cannot be
strictly called a "DIMMER" and both are not interchangeable for auto
transformer has many other functions. The decision of the Supreme Court in
J.R. Kapoor (supra) is also thus distinguishable on facts, for in that case
microchip technology was the base for both the products which is not the case
of the goods in hand.

16\. The defendants got their trade mark "DIMMER DOT" registered in Australia.
The fact that the defendant itself has sought to claim trade proprietary right
and monopoly in "DIMMER DOT", it does not lie in their mouth to say that the
word "DIMMER" is a generic expression. User of the word "DIMMER" by others
cannot be a defense available to the defendants, if it could be shown that the
same is being used in violation of the statutory right of the plaintiff. In
this connection, reference may be made to the decision of this Court in
Prakash Road line Ltd. Vs. Prakash Parcel Service (P) Ltd.; reported in
1992(2) Arbitration Law Reporter page 174. Reference may also be made to the
decision in P.M. Diesels Ltd. Vs. S.M. Diesels; reported in 53 (1994) Delhi
Law Times 742. It was held in those decision that if the plaintiff is a
proprietor of the registered trade mark, the same gives to the proprietor of
the registered trade mark the exclusive right to use the trade mark with
relation to goods in respect of which the trade mark is registered under the
provisions of Section 28 of the Trade and Merchandise Marks Act. It was also
held that such statutory right cannot be lost merely on the question of
principles of delay, laches or acquiescence. It was also held that in general
mere delay after knowledge of infringement does not deprive the registered
proprietor of a trade mark of his statutory rights or of the appropriate
remedy for the enforcement of those rights so long as the said delay is not an
inordinate delay. In my considered opinion, the ratio of the aforesaid
decisions are squarely applicable to the facts of the present case.

17\. In the present case also the defendants had raised plea of delay, laches
and acquiescence. The plaintiff has stated that it had knowledge about the
infringement of the trade mark only in the month of April, 1994. The
defendants have brought to my notice the document filed at pages 153 and 154
of the documents filed by the defendants on 30.11.1998 which is an
advertisement of the defendants featured in the same trade magazine wherein
advertisement of the plaintiff was also published. In the said magazine the
defendant's advertisement appears on the cover page of "Instruments and
Electronics" while the plaintiff's advertisement appears inside the magazine
and on the basis thereof the defendants submitted that it is inconceivable
that the plaintiff was not aware of the defendant's use of the trade mark
"DIMMER DOT".

18\. The plaintiff is a Bombay based company. Merely because in a particular
magazine advertisement of the defendants was published on the cover page,
cannot by itself be a case of deduction that the plaintiff was aware of the
advertisement of the defendant's trade mark in the said magazine. However,
even if such a presumption could be made, the same cannot deprive the
registered owner of a trade mark from getting his rights established in a
Court of Law, particularly, when the same cannot amount to a case of
inordinate delay. The plaintiff has definitely established a prima facie case
in its favour to go to trial. The plaintiff has got its trade mark registered
in the year 1957 and has been carrying on business on the said trade mark
"DIMMERSTAT" almost from the same time whereas, the defendants admittedly came
to the trade much later by adopting a trade mark prefix of which is common to
the trade mark of the plaintiff.

19\. It is undoubtedly true that the first syllable of a work mark is
generally the most important and thus, when the defendants are using a similar
prefix with that of the plaintiff with a little variation in the suffix part
of it, in my considered opinion, the trade marks are deceptively similar and
cause of action for prima facie infringement is complete. The submission of
the learned counsel for the defendants that the word "DIMMER" is a generic and
descriptive word also cannot be accepted for the trade mark is "DIMMERSTAT"
and not "DIMMER" and the Court in a case of infringement of trade mark has to
look into the whole of the trade mark as registered including the word
"DIMMER". Since the plaintiff has been using the said trade mark for a long
period of time, user of deceptively similar trade mark by the defendants would
necessarily cause irreparable loss and injury to the plaintiff. In my
considered opinion, balance of convenience is also in favour of the plaintiff
and against the defendants.

20\. After this Court passed a restraint order on the defendants in the year
1994, the defendants have been using a different trade mark for their product
by the name "GREEN DOT" and has been using the said trade mark "GREEN DOT" for
the last four years and has achieved goodwill and reputation under the said
trade mark and has been carrying on business under the said trade mark.

21\. Taking note of the aforesaid factors into consideration, I am of the
considered opinion, that the plaintiff has been able to make out a prima facie
case for grant of temporary injunction in its favour and against the
defendants pending disposal of the suit and accordingly the order dated
9.11.1994 passed by this Court granting ad interim temporary injunction is
made absolute. Consequently the application registered as I.A. No. 8609/1994
stands allowed and the application registered as I.A. No. 10285/1994 stands
dismissed.

Suit No. 2136/1994.

22\. Let the suit be renotified before the Joint Registrar on 26.2.1999 for
admission/denial of documents. The parties may file additional/original
documents, if any, within four weeks from today.

