

Bombay High Court

Minoo Framroze Balsara vs The Union Of India And Others on 1 February, 1991

Equivalent citations: AIR 1992 Bom 375

Author: Bharucha

Bench: S Bharucha, B Srikrishna

ORDER Bharucha, J.

1\. The definition of "public premises" in S. 2(e) of the Public Premises
(Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1971 (hereinafter called "the
Eviction Act, 1971") was extended by Act 61 of 1980 (with effect from 22nd
December, 1980) to cover "(2) Any premises belonging to, or taken on lease by,
or on behalf of,--(i) any company as defined in S. 3 of the Companies Act,
1956, in which not less than fifty-one per cent, of the paid up share capital
is held by the Central Government or any company which is a subsidiary within
the meaning of that Act of the first mentioned company, (ii) any corporation
(not being a company as defined in S. 3 of the Companies Act, 1956, or a local
authority) established by or under a Central Act and owned or controlled by
the Central Government....."

These writ petitions and appeal challenge the vires of the Eviction Act, 1971,
in so far as it is made applicable to premises belonging to what we shall call
"Government companies and corporations". The challenge is based upon Arts. 14
and 19(1)(f) and (g) of the Constitution of India. It is also contended that,
having regard to Art, 254(2), the provisions of the Bombay Rents, Hotel and
Lodging House Rates Control Act, 1947 (hereinafter clled "the Bombay Rent
Act") prevail over those of the Eviction Act, 1971.

2\. It may be mentioned that it was also contended that Parliament had no
legislative competence to pass the Eviction Act, 1971. That challenge already
stands rejected.

3\. The relevant provisions of the Eviction Act, 1971, are these : It extends
to the whole of India. "Premises", as defined by S. 2(c) mean any land or any
building or part of a building.

4\. "Unauthorised occupation" is defined by S. 2(g) to mean "the occupation by
any person of the public premises without authority for such occupation, and
includes the continuance in occupation by any person of public premises after
the authority..... under which he was allowed to occupy the same has expired
or has been determined for any reason whatsoever."

5\. Sections 4 and 5 read thus :

"Section 4.(1) If the estate officer is of opinion that any persons are in
unauthorised occupation of any public premises and that they should be
evicted, the estate officer shall issue in the manner hereinafter provided a
notice in writing calling upon all persons concerned to show cause why an
order of eviction should not be made.

(2) The notice shall -

(a) specify the grounds on which the order of eviction is proposed to be made;
and

(b) require all persons concerned, that is to say, all persons who are, or may
be, in occupation of, or claim interest in, the public premises,--

(i) to show cause, if any, against the proposed order on or before such date
as is specified in the notice, being a date not earlier than seven days from
the date of issue thereof, and

(ii) to appear before the estate officer on the date specified in the notice
along with the evidence which they intend to produce in support of the cause
shown, and also for personal hearing, if such hearing is desired.

(3) The estate officer shall cause the notice to be served by having it
affixed on the outer door or some other conspicuous part of the public
premises, and in such other manner as may be prescribed, whereupon the notice
shall be deemed to have been duly given to all persons.

(4) Where the estate officer knows or has reasons to believe that any persons
are in occupation of the public premises, then, without prejudice to the
provisions of sub-sec. (3), he shall cause a copy of the notice to be served
on every such person by post or by delivering or tendering it to that person
or in such other manner as may be prescribed.

Section 5 (1) If, after considering the cause, if any, shown by any person in
pursuance of a notice under S. 4 and any evidence produced by him in support
of the same and after personal hearing, if any, given under Cl. (b) of sub-
sec. (2) of S. 4, the estate officer is satisfied, that the public premises
arc in unauthorised occupation, the estate officer may make an order of
eviction, for reasons to be recorded therein, directing that the public
premises shall be vacated, on such date as may be specified in the order, by
all persons who may be in occupation thereof or any part thereof, and cause a
copy of the order to be affixed on the outer door or some other conspicuous
part of the public premises.

(2) If any person refuses or fails to comply with the order of eviction on or
before the date specified in the said order or within fifteen days of the dale
of its publication under sub-sec. (1), which is later, the estate officer or
any other officer duly authorised by the estate officer in his behalf may,
after the date so specified or after the expiry of the period aforesaid,
whichever is later, evict that person from, and take possession of, the public
premises and may, for that purpose, use such force as may be necessary."

6\. Section 8 vests in the Estate Officer, for the purpose of holding an
inquiry under the Eviction Act, 1971, the same powers as are vested in civil
courts under the Code of Civil Procedure when trying a suit in respect of the
summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person, of examining him on oath
and of requiring the discovery and production of documents. Under the
provisions of S. 9 an appeal lies from every order of the Estate Officer in
respect of any public premises. The appellate officer "shall be the district
Judge of the district in which the public premises are situate or such other
judicial officer in that district of not less than ten years standing as the
district Judge may designate in this behalf." Under S. 10 the orders of the
Estate Officer and the appellate officer are made final and cannot be called
in question in a suit.

7\. The contention based upon Art. 14 is that the Eviction Act, 1971,
discriminates between two classes of tenants in that it makes a distinction
between tenants of private landlords, which tenants are protected by the
provisions of the Bombay Rent Act, and the tenants of Government companies and
corporations who are deprived of such protection. Even amongst the tenants of
Government companies and corporations unguided discretion is given to pick and
choose. Further, an arbitrary procedure is sanctioned and arbitrary powers
conferred upon the adjudicating authority, viz., the Estate Officer.

8\. The application of Art. 14 to the Eviction Act, 1971, and to similar
earlier statutes has been considered by the Supreme Court in several
judgments. In Northern India Caterers (Private) Ltd. v. State of Punjab, , the
challenge was directed to the Punjab Public Premises and Land (Eviction and
Rent Recovery) Act, XXXI of 1959, whose terms are similar to those of the
Eviction Act, 1971. It was contended that the Act XXXI of 1959 infringed the
guarantee of Art. 14. The majority judgment of the Supreme Court held that it
had been passed to provide for the eviction of unauthorised occupants from
public properties and premises and to keep such properties free from
encroachment and unlawful possession and to provide a speedier machinery for
that purpose as against the lengthy proceedings under the ordinary law
involving delay. The said Act no doubt differentiated between occupiers of
public property and premises from other occupiers. Nevertheless, it was
possible to say there was an intelligible differentia between the two classes
of occupiers, that they were not similarly situated in that in the case of
public properties and premises the members of the public had a vital interest
and were interested in seeing that such properties and premises were freed
from encroachment and unauthorised occupation as speedily as possible. It was
also possible to contend that such classification was justified in that it was
in the interest of the public that speedy recovery of rents and speedy
eviction of unauthorised occupiers was made possible through the
instrumentality of a speedier procedure instead of the elaborate procedure by
way of suit involving both expense and delay. On these considerations, it
could be contended that the segregation of tenants of private property was
based on justifiable reason and that such segregation had a rational nexus
with the object and policy of the said Act. The majority judgment held
"Assuming that persons in occupation of Government properties and premises
form a class by themselves as against tenants and occupiers of private owned
properties and that such classification was justified on the ground that they
require a differential treatment in public interest, those who fall under that
classification are entitled to equal treatment among themselves. If the
ordinary law of the land and the special law provide two different and
alternative procedures, one more prejudicial than the other, discrimination
must result if it is left to the will of the authority to exercise the more
prejudicial against some and not against the rest." In the minority judgment
it was noted that the class of public premises to which the benefit of the
said Act extended included premises belonging to the District Board, Municipal
Committee, Notified Area Committee and Panchayat. It was there said, "The
classification had reasonable relation to the object of the Act and does not
offend An. 14." Asimilar classification, it was noted, had been upheld for the
purposes of several other Acts. The minority judgment did not, however, agree
with the majority view that the said Act violated Art. 14 because it gave a
free choice of remedies and proceedings for the redress of the grievance.

9\. In Maganlal Chagganlal (P) Ltd. v. Municipal Corporation of Greater Bombay
, the decision in Northern India Caterers case was reversed by the majority of
a 7-Judge Bench and the view taken by the earlier minority judgment was
affirmed. Bhagwati, J., speaking for himself and Khanna, J., came, however, to
the conclusion that sufficient ground had not been shown for overruling the
view expressed by the majority in the Northern India Caterers case. What is
relevant for our purpose is to note that it had been "faintly argued" in
Maganlal Chagganlal's case that the impugned provisions of the statutes under
consideration, viz., the Bombay Municipal Corporation Act and the Bombay
Government Premises (Eviction) Act had, by providing a special procedure for
the eviction of occupants of Municipal and Government premises, made unjust
discrimination as between them and occupants of other premises and were on
that ground violative of Art. 14. It was noted that in respect of several
similar statutes the Court had upheld special treatment to the premises of
Government or other public bodies. The concerned provisions had been enacted
to provide a speedier remedy for the eviction of unauthorised occupants from
Municipal and Government premises as against the ordinary remedy of a Civil
suit involving expenses and delay. The element of public interest in speedy
and expeditious recovery of possession from unauthorised occupants was absent
in case of premises belonging to private parties. There was a valid basis for
differentiation between occupiers of Municipal and Government premises and
those of other premises, and there was a rational relation and nexus between
the basis of the classification and the object of the legislation. The
constitutional validity of the concerned provisions could not, in the
circumstances, as assailed on the ground that they made unjust discrimination
between occupiers of Municipal and Government premises and occupiers of other
premises.

10\. In M/s. Jain Ink Manufacturing Company v. Life Insurance Corporation of
India, , the Eviction Act, 1971, was itself under consideration. Its
provisions were considered in the light of those of the Delhi Rent Control
Act, 1958, and the Slum Areas (Improvement) and Clearance Act, 1956. The
Supreme Court said, "So far as the Premises Act is concerned it operated in a
very limited field in that it applies only to a limited nature of premises
belonging only to particular sets of individuals, a particular set of juristic
persons like companies, corporations or the Central Government. Thus, the
Premises Act has a,very limited application. Secondly, the object of the
Premises Act is to provide for eviction of unauthorised occupants from public
premises by a summary procedure so that the premises may be available to the
authorities mentioned in the Premises Act which constitute a class by
themselves. That the authorities to which the Premises Act applies are a class
by themselves is not disputed by the counsel for the appellant as even in the
case of Northern India Caterers Pvt. Ltd. v. State of Punjab, such authorities
were held to form a class and, therefore, immune from challenge on Art. 14 of
the Constitution. Similarly, the summary procedure prescribed by the Premises
Act is also not violative of Art. 14 as held by this Court in Maganlal
Chagganlal (P) Ltd. v. Municipal Corporation of Greater Bombay, ."

11\. Reference may now be made to the latest judgment of the Supreme Court
that touches the issue. In Ashoka Marketing Ltd. v. Punjab National Bank, ,
the provisions of the Eviction Act, 1971, were considered and it was held that
they over-rode the provisions of the Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958. It was
argued on behalf of the appellants before the Supreme Court that "public
premises" as defined in S. 2(e) of the Eviction Act, 1971, must be confined to
premises let out for residential purposes and that if premises let out for
commercial purposes were included, S. 2(e) would be rendered unconstitutional
as being violative of the provisions of Arts. 14, 19(1)(g) and 21 read with
Articles 39 and 41. The submission was that a construction which would sustain
the constitutionality of the provisions of S. 2(e) should be preferred to a
construction which would render them unconstitutional. The Supreme Court said
that it found no force in this contention. It was unable to hold that the
inclusion of premises used for commercial purposes within the ambit of the
definition of "public premises" would render the Eviction Act, 1971, violative
of the right to equality guaranteed under Article 14 or the right to freedom
to carry on any occupation, trade or business guaranteed under Article
19(1)(g). As indicated in the Statement of Objects and Reasons, the Eviction
Act, 1971, had been enacted to provide a speedy machinery for the eviction of
unauthorised occupants of public premises. It served a public purpose, viz.,
making available for use all public premises after eviction of persons in
unauthorised occupation. The need to provide for speedy machinery for eviction
of persons in unauthorised occupation could not be confined to premises used
for residential purposes. There was no reason to assume that such a need would
not exist in respect of premises used for commercial purposes. No distinction
could, therefore, be made between premises used for residential purposes and
premises used for commercial purposes in the matter of eviction of
unauthorised occupants of public premises and the considerations which
necessitated providing a speedy machinery for eviction of persons in
unauthorised occupation of public premises applied equally to both types of
public premises.

12\. Mr. H. M. Seervai, who led the arguments on behalf of the petitioners and
appellant in these matters, submitted that in the Northern India Caterers case
the Act had not been challenged on the ground that tenants of Government
companies and corporations were being discriminated against by being denied
the protection of a Rent Act available to the tenants of private landlords. In
Maganlal Chagganlal's case the Supreme Court reconsidered its judgment in the
Northern India Caterers' case. It was also relevant to note here that the
authorities concerned in Maganlal ChagganlaPs case, viz., the Municipal
Corporation and the Government, were exempt from the provisions of the Bombay
Rent Act. Consequently, there was no question of sustaining a challenge such
as that made here. In the Jain Ink case the contentions related to two Central
Statutes and the conflict between them had been resolved on that basis. The
statement that the object of the Eviction Act, 1971, was to provide for
eviction of unauthorised occupants of public premises by summary procedure so
that the premises may be available to the parties mentioned therein "which
constitute a class by themselves" was not a finding by the court but a
recognition of legislative intent. Secondly, that the authorities to which the
Eviction Act, 1971, applied were a class by themselves was not disputed by
counsel for the appellants because, according to him, even in the case of
Northern India Caterers, such authorities had been held to form a class.
Thirdly, and in any event, the statement was based on a factual error viz., of
assuming, wrongly, that the authorities which were held to form a class in the
Northern India Caterers case included Government companies and corporations.
In Ashoka Marketing the challenge based on Article 14 was that if premises let
out for commercial purposes were included in the definition of "public
premises" that article would be infringed, and this was summarily rejected. No
ratio was laid down in rejecting this limited challenge under Article 14.

13\. Mr. Seervai drew attention to the judgment of the Supreme Court in M/s.
Ranchhoddas Atmaram v. Union of India, . The Supreme Court there observed in
respect of a particular question which had been treated as decided by several
High Courts that "the question was never required to be decided in any of
these cases and could not, therefore, have been, or be treated as decided by
this Court." He submitted that the challenge under Article 14 as made in these
matters had not been made in the cases of Northern India Caterers, Maganlal
Chagganlal, Jain Ink and Ashoka Marketing. It could not, therefore, have been
or be treated as decided by the Supreme Court.

14\. We must now refer to the judgment of the Supreme Court in Smt. Somawanti
v. Slate of Punjab, . The Supreme Court found that in an earlier case, State
of Bombay v. Bhanji Munji, , it had held that for a right under Article
19(1)(f) to hold property to be available to a person, he must have the
property with respect to which he could assert such right. If the right to the
possession of the property was taken away by a law protected by Article
31(5)(a), Article 19(1)(f) was not attracted. The decision of the Supreme
Court had been followed in two other cases. In Somawanti's case the Supreme
Court said, "All the decisions are binding upon us. It is contended that none
of the decisions has considered the argument advanced before us that a law may
be protected from an attack under Article 31(2) but it will still be invalid
under Article 13(2) if the restriction placed by it on the right of a person
to hold property was unreasonable. In other words, for the law before us to be
regarded as valid it must also satisfy the requirements of Article 19(5) and
that only thereafter can the property of a person be taken away. It is
sufficient to say that though this Court may not have pronounced on this
aspect of the matter we are bound by the actual decisions which categorically
negative an attack based on the right guaranteed by Article 19(1)(f). The
binding effect of a decision does not depend upon whether_a particular
argument was considered therein or not, provided that the point with reference
to which an argument was subsequently advanced was_ actually decided. That
point has been specifically decided in the three decisions referred to above."
The same principle was set out again by the Supreme Court in Delhi Cloth and
General Mills Co. Ltd. v. Shambhu Nath Mukherji, . Counsel there submitted
that in ah earlier decision in regard to the vires of S. 10 of the Industrial
Disputes Act the Supreme Court had been required to consider the objection
raised on the score of Article 14 on a ground which was different from the one
he took. The Supreme Court was unable to accept this submission and said, "If
this Court held S. 10 as intra vires and repelled the objection under Article
14 of the Constitution it would not be permissible to raise the question again
by submitting that a new ground could be raised to sustain the objection. It
is certainly easy to discover fresli grounds of attack to sustain the same
objection, but that cannot be permitted once the law has been laid down by
this Court holding that S. 10 of the Act does not violate Article 14 of the
Constitution. The ratio decidendi of Niemla Textile Finishing Mills (supra)
will apply while dealtng with the objection under Article 14 of the
Constitution in respect of the present reference under S. 10(1)(c) of the Act.
The submission of the learned counsel is, therefore, devoid of substance." The
same point was made yet again by the Supreme Court in Anil Kumar Neotia v.
Union of India, . The Supreme Court was of the view that the law declared by
it in an earlier case was binding on the petitioners and was no longer res
integra in view of Article 141 of the Constitution. The question was no longer
open for agitation. It was no longer open to the petitioners to contend that
certain points had not been urged. In Shri Krishna Investment v. Union of
India, , it was observed "According to Mr. Ghosh the ground on which he
contends the provision to be ultra vires was not raised before or considered
by the Supreme Court in the case of Hari Singh and as such that decision
cannot conclude the points sought to be raised by him. We are, however, unable
to accept such a contention. The Supreme Court held the material provisions of
the Act to be intra vires Article 14 of the Constitution and it is not
permissible for Mr, Ghosh to contend or suggest that though the provision is
ultra vires for reasons suggested by him, the Supreme Court overlooked the
said aspect in declaring the provision to be intra vires." The provision,
incidentally, was the Eviction Act, 1971.

15\. The Supreme Court in the cases of Northern India Caterers, Maganlal
Chhaganlal and particularly, Jain Ink and Ashoka Marketing was called upon to
decide and did decide that the provisions of the Eviction Act, 1971, were not
ultra vires Article 14. In the Northern India Caterers' case the majority
judgment held that the classification between tenants of public properties and
tenants of private properties was justifiable and had a rational nexus to the
object of the statute. It then proceeded to hold that if the ordinary law of
the land and the special law provided two different and alternative
procedures, one more prejudicial than the other, discrimination must result if
it was left to the will of the authority to exercise the more prejudicial '
against some and not against the rest. The minority judgment expressly held
that Article 14 was not infringed. The majority judgment in Maganlal
Chhaganlal's case overruled the view of the majority in the Northern India
Caterers' case in so far as it held that there was hostile discrimination in
the matter of adopting one of two available procedures of eviction. It read
the majority judgment in the Northern India Caterers' case as having accepted
the position that there was an intelligible differentia between the two
classes of occupants, viz., the occupiers of public property and the occupiers
of private property, and that it was in the interest of the public that speedy
and expeditious recovery of possession from unauthorised occupiers was made
possible through the instrumentality of a speedier procedure and this was not
overruled. The minority judgment in Maganlal Chagganlal's case also held that
there was no violation of Article 14. Paragraph 8 of the judgment in Jain Ink,
the greater part of which we have quoted, found that the classification made
by the Eviction Act, 1971, was valid. Thereafter it noted that counsel . had
not disputed this. It then stated that even in the Northern India Caterers'
case, such public authorities had been held to form a class and, therefore,
the statute was immune from challenge under Article 14, The finding to the
same effect in the Ashoka Marketing judgment is equally unambiguous (see
paragraphs 26 and 28).

16\. These decisions of the Supreme Court holding that the provisions of the
Eviction Act, 1971, are not ultra vires Article 14 are, having regard to
Article 141, binding upon this court. That these decisions were reached ' upon
consideration of arguments other than the argument which is put before us does
not make any difference to the position. It is true, as Mr. Seervai submitted,
that the Supreme Court has entertained challenges to the vires of legislation
though it had already held such legislation to be intra vires, but then the
judgments of the Supreme Court are not binding upon the Supreme Court itself.
In the case of Bengal Immunity Co. v. State of Bihar, , the Supreme Court
said, "Article 141, which lays down that the law declared by this Court shall
be binding on all Courts within the territory of India, quite obviously refers
to Courts other than this Court." We are, therefore, bound not to entertain
the challenge to the provisions of the Eviction Act, 1971.

17\. As will be seen from the quotation from the Ashoka Marketing case, the
challenge to the Eviction Act, 1971, based upon Article 19(1)(g) was also
negatived. For the reasons we have just stated in regard to Article 14, this
is also a challenge that we are bound not to take note of.

18\. This brings us to consider the challenge under Art. 19(1)(f). Put
succinctly, it is this: The Bombay Rent Act conferred protection against
eviction, except in limited cases, upon the tenants of Government companies
and corporations. This conferral created in the tenants a fundamental right to
property under Art. 19(1)(f). The Eviction Act, 1971, took away the protection
and, iherefore, infringed to that extent Article 19(1)(f).

19\. It was contended on behalf of the respondents that there was no
fundamental right in the petitioners under Article 19(1)(f) which the Eviction
Act, 1971, could violate. The Bombay Rent Act placed restrictions upon the
landlords' right to recover possession; put conversely, it protected tenants
against eviction except in restricted cases. This protection could not be
equated to a fundamental right to property, particularly when the Bombay Rent
Act was only a temporary statute, the duration of which had been extended from
time to time, and also because, while it remained in force, there was power
therein both to give exemptions as also to direct that the statute would apply
or cease to apply to stated areas of the State of Maharashtra.

20\. The Supreme Court has, as we read its judgment in Bombay Corporation v.
Pancham, , held (in paragraph 18) that the rights conferred on tenants by the
Bombay Rent Act are fundamental rights and there, as far as we are concerned,
the matter must rest. This was an appeal from this court and the question
which fell for decision was whether a suit instituted by the plaintiffs (the
respondents before the Supreme Court) in the City Civil Court at Bombay was
maintainable. The plaintiffs were tenants of rooms in the Colaba Land Mill
Chawls. The Municipal Corporation had made a clearance order in respect of the
area on which the chawls stood, which had been confirmed by the State
Government. The plaintiffs contended that the provisions of the Bombay
Municipal Corporation Act, which entitled the Municipal Corporation to make
the clearance order, were ultra vires Article 19(1)(f). The Bombay Rent Act
had placed restrictions on the right of the landlord to evict a tenant by
enacting in S. 12 that the tenant would not ordinarily be evicted so long as
he paid the standard rent and permitted increases, whatever may have been the
duration of his tenancy under his original agreement. The right conferred by
this provision on the tenant existed independently of the landlord's right to
own and possess property and it could not be interfered with or derogated from
by the Municipal Corporation by making a clearance order behind the back of
the tenants. In regard to this submission, the Supreme Court held that it had
"no doubt that a tenant has both under the Transfer of Property Act and under
S. 10 of the Bombay Rents, Hotel and Lodging House Rates Control Act, 1947, an
interest in the demised premises which squarely falls within the expression
property occurring in sub-clause (f) of clause (1) of Article 19 of the
Constitution."

21\. The contention that the protection given by the Bombay Rent Act was an
interest in property within the meaning of Article 19(1)(f) squarely arose for
determination in the Pancham case and it was squarely decided by the Supreme
Court. It is, therefore, not a judgment rendered, as it was contended on
behalf of the respondents, per incuriam or sub-silentio. It is not open to us
to hold, as it was suggested on behalf of the respondents that we hold, that
the Supreme Court had failed to consider the most relevant sections of the
Bombay Rent Act, i.e., to say, Ss. 2, 3, 4 and 4A, and that, therefore, this
could not be considered to be a binding judgment.

22\. On behalf of the respondents it was contended that, in any event, the
doctrine of eclipse applied and the petitioners could not be heard to invoke
the guarantee of Article 19(1)(f). In this behalf reliance was placed upon the
judgment of the Supreme Court in P.Rami Reddy v. State of A.P., . It was
contended before a two-Judge Bench of the Supreme Court that certain
provisions of the Andhra Pradesh Scheduled Area Land Transfer Regulation,
1959, were unconstitutional, being violative of Article 19(1)(f), in that they
imposed unreasonable restrictions on "non-tribal" holders of properties in
scheduled areas. It was held that "the challenge rooted in Article 19(1)(f)
cannot survive after the repeal of the said Article with effect from June 20,
1979 by virtue of the 44th Amendment. It cannot survive inasmuch as the
doctrine of eclipse would come into play." It was contended that, on a parity
of reasoning, the challenge rooted in Article 19(1)(f) to the provisions of
the Eviction Act, 1971, could not survive after the repeal of Article 19(1)(f)
with effect from 20th June 1979 inasmuch as the doctrine of eclipse would come
into play.

23\. Mr. Seervai countered the contention by reference to the Constitution
Bench judgment of the Supreme Court in Mahendra Lal Jaini v. State of U.P., .
It was there held, after a review of authorities, that the doctrine of eclipse
would apply to pre-Constitution laws which were governed by Article 13(1) and
would not apply to post-Constitution laws which were governed by Article
13(2).

24\. A discussion is clearly called for.

25\. Article 13 of the Constitution reads thus:

"13. Laws inconsistent with or in derogation of the fundamental rights.-

(1) All laws in force in the territory of India immediately before the
commencement of this Constitution, in so far as they are inconsistent with the
provisions of this Part, -shall, to the extent of such inconsistency, be void.

(2) The State shall not make any law which takes away or abridges the rights
conferred by this Part and any law made in contravention of this clause shall,
to the extent of the contravention, be void.

(3) In this article, unless the context otherwise requires,--

(a) 'law' includes any ordinance, order, bye-law, rule, regulation,
notification, custom or usage having in the territory of India the force of
law;

(b) 'laws in force' includes law passed or made by a Legislature or other
competent authority in the territory of India before the commencement of this
Constitution and not previously repealed, notwithstanding that any such law or
any part thereof may not be then in operation cither all or in particular
areas.

(4) Nothing in this article shall apply to any amendment of this Constitution
made under Article 368." . ,

26\. The first of the cases that should be noted is Behram Khurshed Pesikaka
v. State of Bombay, . The Supreme Court there held that when a statute or a
part thereof was declared by a court to be invalid the result of the
pronouncement was that it was not law and was null and void and should be
"notionally taken to be obliterated .... though it may remain written on the
statute book and be a good law when a question arises for determination of
rights and obligations incurred prior to 26th January, 1950, and also for the
determination of rights of persons who have not been given fundamental rights
by the Constitution." In Sagir Ahmad v. State of U.P., AIR 1954 SC 128, the U.
P. Road Transport Act, 1951, was held to be void under Article 13(2) as it
violated Article 19(1)(g) and it was held that it was "dead and cannot be
vitalized by a subsequent amendment of the Constitution removing the
constitutional objection but must be re enacted." Bhikaji Narain Dhakras v.
State of M.P., , reconsidered the question and enunciated the doctrine of
eclipse in the context of an existing law. It was said, "The true position is
that the impugned law became, as it were, eclipsed, for the time being, by the
fundamental right. The effect of the Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1951,
was to remove the shadow and to make the impugned Act free from all blemish or
infirmity.....All laws, existing or future, which are inconsistent with the
provisions of Part III of our Constitution are, by the express provision of
Article 13, rendered void to the extent of such inconsistency. Such laws were
not dead for all purposes. They existed for the purposes of pre-Constitution
rights and liabilities and they remained operative, even after the
Constitution, as against non-citizens. It is only as against the citizens that
they remained in a dormant or moribund condition." The question was considered
yet again in M. P. V. Sundararamier v. State of A.P., . The majority judgment
was delivered By Venkatarama Aiyar, J. This case related to a post-
Constitution law. The learned Judge, speaking for a majority of the
Constitution Bench held that a law made without legislative competence and a
law violating constitutional limitations on the power to legislate were
equally unconstitutional and unenforceable but they did not stand on the same
footing for all purposes. A law which was void for lack of legislative
competence was absolutely null and void. Though the Legislature was
subsequently given the power to legislate, which it earlier lacked, that law
would not be revived but would have to be re-enacted, for it had been still-
born. A law within legislative competence but which was violative of
limitations imposed by the Constitution was unenforceable but became
enforceable once the limitations were removed. Venkatarama Aiyar, J. said,
"Where an enactment is unconstitutional in part but valid as to the rest,
assuming of course that the two portions are severable, it cannot be held to
have been wiped out of the statute book as it admittedly must remain there for
the purpose of enforcement of the valid portion thereof, and being on the
statute book, even that portion which is unenlorceable on the ground that it
is unconstitutional will operate proprio vigore when the constitutional bar is
removed, and there is no need for afresh legislation....."

The judgment upon which Mr. Seervai placed reliance, namely, Mahendra Lal
Jaini's case, was decided without reference to Sundara-ramier's case, and it
was held: ".....Therefore, where there is a question of a post-Constitution
law, there is a prohibition against the State from taking away or abridging
fundamental rights and there is a further provision that if the prohibition is
contravened the law shall be void to the extent of the contravention. In view
of this clear provision, it must be held that unlike a law covered by Art.
13(1) which was valid when made, the law made in contravention of the
prohibition contained in Art. 13(2) is a stillborn law either wholly or
partially depending upon the extent of the contravention. Such a law is dead
from the beginning and there can be no question of its revival under the
doctrine of eclipse. A plain reading, therefore, of the words in Art. 13(1)
and Art. 13(2) brings out a clear distinction between the two. Article 13(1)
declares such pre-Constitution laws as are inconsistent with fundamental
rightsvoid. Article 13(2) consists of two parts; the first part imposes an
inhibition on the power of the State to make a law contravening fundamental
rights, and the second part, which is merely a consequential one, mentions the
effect of the breach. Now what the doctrine of eclipse can revive is the
operation of a law which was operative until the Constitution came into force
and had since then become inoperative either wholly or partially; it cannot
confer power on the State to enact a law in breach of Art. 13(2) which would
be the effect of the application of the doctrine of eclipse to post-
Constitution laws. Therefore, in the case of Art. 13(1) which applies to
existing law, the doctrine of eclipse is applicable as laid down in Bhikaji
Narain's case, ; but in the case of a law made after the Constitution came
into force, it is Art. 13(2) which applies and the effect of that is what we
have already indicated and which was indicated by this Court as far back as
Saghir Admad's case, ." A Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court reviewed all
the aforementioned judgments in State of Gujarat v. Shri Ambica Mills, . The
question before the court was whether a post-Constitutional law which took
away rights conferred by Article 19 on citizens was effective against non-
citizens. Mathew, J., speaking for the court, said that it was difficult to
understand why, if the meaning of the word 'void' in Article 13(1) was the
same as its meaning in Article 13(2), a pre-Constitution law which took away
or abridged rights under Article 19 should remain operative even after the
Constitution came into force as regards non-citizens and a post-Constitution
law which took away or abridged them should not be operative as respects non-
citizens. The fact that a pre-Constitution law was valid when enacted could
afford no reason why it should remain operative as respects non-citizens after
the Constitution came into force as it became void on account of its
inconsistency with the provisions of Part III of the Constitution. Therefore,
the real reason why it remained operative as against non-citizens was that it
was void only to the extent of the inconsistency with the rights conferred
under Art. 19 and its voidness, therefore, was confined to citizens, because,
ex hypothesi, it was inconsistent only with their fundamental rights. If that
were so, there was no reason why a post-Constitution law which took away or
abridged rights conferred by Art. 19 should not be operative in regard to non-
citizens as it was void only to the extent of the contravention of the rights
conferred by Art. 19 on citizens. Just as a pre-Constitution law taking away
or abridged fundamental rights under Art. 19 remained operative after the
Constitution came into force as against non-citizens as it was not
inconsistent with their fundamental rights, so also a post-Constitution law
offending Art. 19 remained operative as against non-citizens as it was not in
contra-

vention of their fundamental rights. The same scheme permeated both the sub-
articles of Article 13. In other words, the voidness was not in rem but to the
extent only of the contravention of rights conferred under Part III.
"Therefore", it was said, "when Article 13(2) uses the expression 'void' it
can only mean void as against persons whose fundamental rights are taken away
or abridged by a law. The law might be 'stillborn' so far as the persons,
entities or denominations whose fundamental rights are taken away or abridged,
but there is no reason why the law should be void or 'still-born' as against
those who have no fundamental rights." A law was void under Article 13(2)
because it took away or abridged a fundamental right. There were many
fundamental rights and they inhered in diverse types of persons, minorities or
denominations. There was no conceivable reason why a law which took away the
fundamental right of one class of persons or minorities or denominations
should be void as against others who had no such fundamental right as the law
did not contravene their right. There was nothing strange in the notion of a
Legislature having no inherent legislative capacity or power to take away or
abridge by a law the fundamental right conferred on citizens and yet having
legislative power to pass the same law in respect of non-citizens who had no
such fundamental rights. Mathew, J. referred to an authority of the Supreme
Court to which we have not adverted, namely, Jagannath v. Authorised Officer,
Land Reforms, , which held that a post-Constitution law which had been struck
down for violating fundamental rights and was, therefore, stillborn had still
an existence without re-enactment for being put in the Ninth Schedule of the
Constitution. Mathew, J. said that this illustrated "that any statement that a
law which takes away or abridged fundamental rights conferred under Part III
is still-born or null and void requires qualifications in certain situations.
Although the general rule is that a statute declared unconstitutional is void
at all times and that its invalidity must be recognised and acknowledged for
all purposes and is no law and a nullity, this is neither universal nor
absolutely true, and there are many exceptions to it." Upon this reasoning it
was held that if a law was otherwise good and did not contravene any of their
fundamental rights, non-citizens could not take advantage of the voidness of
the law for the reason that it contravened the fundamental right of citizens
and claim that there was no law at all.

27\. The next authority of the Supreme Court is the judgment of the two-Judge
Bench in Rami Reddy's case (ibid). All that it says in regard to the doctrine
of eclipse is what we have quoted.

28\. A pre-Constitution law which violates a fundamental right under Art. 19
remains on the statute book because, while it is not enforceable against
citizens, it is enforceable against non-citizens and its pre-Constitu-tional
operation remains valid. The Constitution in so far as it embodies the
fundamental right eclipses the pre-Constitutional law to the extent that it
operates against citizens. When the Constitution stands amended so as to
delete the fundamental right, the shadow cast by the fundamental right upon
the pre-Constitutional law moves away and the pre-Constitutional law becomes
effective. This is the theory of eclipse. Mahendra Lal Jain's case, which was
decided without reference to Sundararamier's case, held that the theory of
eclipse could not apply to a post-Constitution law which contravened the
guarantee to a fundamental right because that post-Constitution law was
'still-born' and did not stand revived upon the fundamental right being
removed from the Constitution. But the later Ambica judgment held, upon a
consideration of all relevant authorities, that such a law was not 'still-
born' in the sense that it was not erased from the statute book. It remained
operative against those who did not enjoy the fundamental right, for example,
non-citizens. While the Ambica judgment did not in terms deal with the theory
of eclipse, it has great impact upon it. The conclusion that logically flows
from the Ambica judgment is that both pre-Constitution and post-Constitution
laws that contravene the guarantee to fundamental rights under, say, Art. 19
are not enforceable against citizens but arc enforceable against non-citizens.
For that purpose they stand on the statute book and just as an amendment of
the Constitution to delete the concerned fundamental right removes the shadow
upon the pre-Constitution law and makes it effective once more, so also an
amendment of the Constitution to delete the concerned fundamental right
removes the shadow upon the post-Constitutional law and makes it effective
once more. This, as we see it, is the basis of the finding in Rami Reddy's
case.

29\. We are unable to accept Mr. Seervai's submission that Ambica's judgment
inters the theory of eclipse or that the finding in Rami Reddy's case is
contrary to that in the Ambica case. In fact, the Ambica case suggests that
the law laid down in Sundararamier's case is the operative law.

30\. Assuming, therefore, that the provisions of the Eviction Act, 1971,
contravened Article 19(1)(f) to the extent suggested, they were not
enforceable so long as Article 19(1)(f) remained a part of the Constitution.
Its deletion with effect from 20th June, 1979 made the Eviction Act, 1971,
wholly enforceable. The challenge to the Eviction Act, 1971, rooted in Article
19(1)(f) cannot survive after the repeal of Article 19(1)(f).

31\. Having so held, we must point out what appears to us to be a lacuna in
the contention rooted in Article 19(1)(f). The argument is that the Eviction
Act, 1971, when it was enacted, contravened Article 19(1)(f); it did so
because it impinged upon the protection given by the Bombay Rent Act to
tenants of Government Companies and Corporations. Now, the provisions of
Eviction Act, 1971, were extended to cover premises belonging to Government
companies and corporations only after Article 19(1)(f) stood deleted. This
argument cannot, therefore, support the contention that the Eviction Act,
1971, contravened Article 19(1)(f) when it was enacted, and there is, so far
as we can discern, no other argument in support of that contention.

32\. Bearing in mind the principle that the constitutionality of a statutory
provision should not be adjudicated upon except when necessary, we refrain
from further consideration of the challenge to the constitutionality of the
Eviction Act, 1971, in so far as it operates against the tenants of Government
Companies and Corporations, based upon Article 19(1)(f).

33\. Grave apprehensions were expressed on behalf of the petitioners, that the
powers given by the Eviction Act, 1971, would be abused by Government
companies and corporations to evict existing tenants and induct new tenants
only with a view to securing higher rents. Reference was made to the 12th
Report, of July, 1979, of the Maharashtra State Law Commission on the subject
of unification of Rent Restriction Laws in the State. The Report notes that a
claim for total exemption from rent restriction laws was advanced before the
commission on behalf of the Life Insurance Corporation of India Ltd., which is
one of the Government corporations involved in these matters. The exemption
was sought by the LIC so that it might be able to make more and greater
investments in socially oriented projects. It was stated on behalf of the LIC
that the immovable property owned by it in Bombay was a liability, "there
being no possibility of augmenting the earnings from the buildings on account
of stringent position of rent restriction law. The net result is that the
policy holders, who by and large, are the common masses of the country, are
the ultimate sufferers." Having regard to these apprehensions, and having
heard counsel at length on the point, we deem it proper to set out the
interpretation we place upon the relevant provisions of the Eviction Act,
1971.

34\. The provisions of the Eviction Act, 1971, can be applied to persons who
are in unauthorised occupation of public premises A person, by reason of
Section 2(g), is in unauthorised occupation if his occupation is without
authority. He is in unauthorised occupation if he continues to occupy public
premises after the authority under which he was allowed to occupy the same has
expired or has been determined for any reason whatsoever. The provisions of
the Eviction Act, 1971, therefore, entitle the Governnent company or
corporation which is the owner of the public premises to terminate for any
reason whatsoever the authority of the occupant to occupy the same and, by so
doing, place the Government company or corporation and the occupant in the
position of landlord and tenant governed by the provisions of the Transfer of
Property Act. The provisions of Sections 4 and 5 of the Eviction Act, 1971,
deal with the procedure for the eviction of an unauthorised occupant and must
be read together. Section 4 prescribes that the unauthorised occupant must be
issued with a notice in writing to show cause why an order of eviction should
not be passed against him. That notice has to be issued by the Estate Officer
provided he is of the opinion that the addressee of the notice is in
unauthorised occupation of public premises and that he should be evicted.
Prima facie satisfaction of the Estate Officer is a sine qua non of the
issuance of the show cause notice. The prima facie satisfaction must be two-
fold; firstly, that the addressee is in unauthorised occupation of public
premises, and, secondly, that, he should be evicted. The notice must set out
the grounds on which the order of eviction is proposed to be made. It must,
therefore, state not only why the addressee is thought to be in authorised
occupation but also why it is thought that he should be evicted. It must
inform the addressee that he is entitled to show cause against the proposed
order of eviction. The addressee cannot effectively show cause unless he knows
why the Estate Officer is of the opinion that he is in unauthorised
occupation. He also cannot show effective cause unless he knows why his
eviction is proposed. The provisions of Section 4 make it clear that the
addressee may seek a personal hearing from the Estate Officer and may lead
evidence for the purposes of showing cause against the proposed order of
eviction. This is clear also from the provisions of Section 8 which vest in
the Estate Officer the powers of a Civil Court in regard to the summoning of
witnesses and examining them on oath and the discovery and production of
documents.

35\. Under Section 5 the Estate Officer must consider the cause that is shown
by the addressee. Plainly, he must consider the addressee's case on both
grounds, viz. whether he is in unauthorised occupation of public premises and
whether he should be evicted. Even if he finds that the addressee is in
unauthorised occupation, the Estate Officer is not obliged to make an order of
eviction; he 'may' make it. It is, therefore, that he has to consider whether
the addressee should be evicted. He is obliged, if he makes an order of
eviction, to record his reasons. The Estate Officer's order must, therefore,
state why he is satisfied that the addressee is in unauthorised occupation of
public premises and why he should be evicted therefrom. The validity of the
Estate Officer's conclusions would be tested in appeal, which is before a
District Judge or equivalent judicial officer.

36\. In the case of Ashoka Marketing Ltd. (supra), the Supreme Court said, "It
has been urged by the learned counsel for the petitioners that many of the
corporations referred to in Section 2(e)(2)(ii) of the Public Premises Act,
like the nationalised Banks and the Life Insurance Corporation, arc trading
corporations and under the provisions of the enactments whereby they are
constituted these corporations are required to carry on their business with a
view to earn profit, and that there is nothing to preclude these corporations
to buy property in possession of tenants at a low price and after buying such
property evict the tenants after terminating the tenancy and thereafter sell
the said property at a much higher value because the value of property in
possession of tenants is much less as compared to vacant property. We are
unable to cut down the scope of the provisions of the Public Premises Act on
the basis of such an apprehension because as pointed out by this Court in M/s.
Dwarkadas Marfatia and Sons v. Board of Trustees of the Port of Bombay :
"Every activity of a public authority especially in the background of the
assumption on which such authority enjoys immunity from the rigour of the Rent
Act, must be informed by reason and guided by the public interest. All
exercise of discretion or power by public authorities as the respondent, in
respect of dealing with tenants in respect of which they have been treated
separately and distinctly from other landlords on the assumption that they
would not act as private landlords, must be judged by that standard." These
observations were made in the context of the provisions of the Bombay Rents,
Hotel and Lodging House Rates ' Control Act, 1947 whereby exemption from the
provisions of the Act has been granted to premises belonging to the Bombay
Port Trust. The consequence of giving overriding effect to the provisions of
the Public Premises Act is that premises belonging to companies and statutory
bodies referred to in Clauses (2) and (3) of Section 2(e) of the Public
Premises Act would be exempted from the provisions of the Rent Control Act.
The provisions of the companies and statutory bodies mentioned in Clauses (2)
and (3) of Section 2(e) of the Public Premises Act while dealing with their
properties under the Public Premises Act will, therefore, have to be judged by
the same standard." It may, therefore, be concluded that the Government
company or corporation must so act not only when terminating the authority of
an occupant of public premises of its ownership to occupy the same but also
when, thereafter, it seeks his eviction therefrom. The Estate Officer, in
making the inquiry under Section 5, would, therefore, have to consider whether
or not the termination of the authority was informed by reason and guided by
public interest and also whether his eviction satisfied the same tests. This,
necessarily, would also apply in appeal.

37\. We cannot accept Mr. Seervai's submission that, in so construing Sections
4 and 5, we would be reading them down or reading words into them; we read
them as they stand. Nor are we reading the standards laid down in the Marfatia
and Ashoka Marketing cases into Sections 4 and 5. These cases set out the
norms by which the actions of Government companies and corporations in respect
of their tenants have to be judged. Government companies and corporations arc
obliged to conform to such norms and their actions must be judged by the
Estate Officer and in appeal accordingly.

38\. It was Mr. Seervai's submission that the Eviction Act, 1971, conferred
unfettered power and unguided discretion. He referred in support of this
submission to the judgment of a Division Bench of the Karnataka High Court in
The Indian Bank Ltd. v. M/s. Blaze and Central (P.) Ltd., AIR 1986 Kar 258.
Interpreting Section 5 of the Eviction Act, 1971, the Division Bench held that
the only point for enquiry under Section 5 was whether or not a person was an
unauthorised occupant of public premises and nothing more. If a person to whom
notice was issued under Section 4 calling upon him to show cause why he should
not be evicted were to plead that he was not in unauthorised occuaption, it
became necessary for the Estate Officer to enquire whether such a plea was
valid. But if he did not dispute that he had become an unauthorised occupant
or, having raised a dispute, failed to prove that he was not an unauthorised
occupant, the Estate Officer was empowered to pass an order of eviction under
Section 5. The jurisdiction of the Estate Officer under Section 5 was "only to
he satisfied as to the unauthorised occupation of the person concerned and not
about the bona fide requirements of the public authority or about comparative
hardship just because the respondent chose to raise the pleas as they were not
relevant to the inquiry under S. 5 of the Act."

39\. With great respect to the learned Judges of the Karnataka High Court, we
are unable to agree. Their judgment takes no account of Section 4. In our
view, it is imperative that Sections 4 and 5 be read together and
harmoniously. Further, no account is taken of the use of the word 'may' in
Section 5. Thereunder, even if the Estate Officer is satisfied that the public
premises are in unauthorised occupation he 'may' make an order of eviction.
The judgment does not hold that the word 'may' should be construed to mean
'shall'. We have stated above that when Sections 4 and 5 are read together and
harmoniously, it becomes dear that the word 'may' in Section 5 does in fact
mean 'may' and that though the Estate Officer may be satisfied that the public
premises are in unauthorised occupation, he is not obliged tc make an order of
eviction unless he is satisfied that the person in unauthorised occupation
should be evicted.

40\. We are also unable to accept Mr. Seervai's submission that Section 4 does
not contemplates two pre-conditions to ihe issuance of a show cause notice and
that the only pre-condition is the opinion of the Estate Officer that the
person to whom he addresses the notice is in unauthorised occupation of public
premises. Nor can we accept the submission that the word 'therefore' has to be
read into Section 4, that is to say that Section 4 has to be read so: "If the
Estate Officer is of the opinion that any persons are in unauthorised
occupation of any public premises and therefore that they should be evicted,
the Estate Officer shall issue....." As we have stated, the Estate Officer
must, before he issues the notice under Section 4, be of opinion that "persons
are in unauthorised occupation of public premises and that they should be
evicted....." It is of significance that the words "and that" emphasised above
have been used and not just the word "and". They leave us in doubt that the
Estate Officer must have formed the opinion on both counts before he issues
the notice.

41\. Support may be drawn from the judgment of this Court in Union of India v.
V. D. Tulzapurkar (ILR 1967 Bom 671). The Division Bench analysing Section 4
of the Eviction Act, 1971, said: "..... before commencing any inquiry against
unauthorised occupation of public premises the Estate Officer is required to
form an opinion that there are persons in unauthorised occupation of such
premises and that it is necessary that they should be evicted from the
premises unauthorisedly occupied by them. There is thus an indication in
Section 4 of the Act that the Tribunal constituted under the Act has to
initially form an opinion in respect of the matters to be decided finally by
him after giving an opportunity to show cause and recording evidence."

42\. It is important to note that the Division Bench was of the view that the
Estate Officer had finally to decide under Section 5 'matters' in respect of
which he had initially formed an opinion under Section 4, viz., that "there
are persons in unauthorised occupa-

tion of such premises and that it is necessary that they should be evicted".
The judgment, therefore, supports also the interpretation that we have placed
uppn Section 5 viz., that the Estate Officer must thereunder decide both
whether the person to whom he has addressed the notice under Section 4 is in
unauthorised occupation of public premises and whether he should be evicted
therefrom.

43\. Reference was made by Mr. Seervai to the judgment of the Calcutta High
Court in Standard Literature Co. v. Union of India, . In this judgment, it was
held by a Special Bench of the Calcutta High Court that all that sub-section
(2) of Section 4 of the Eviction Act, 1958, required, was that the notice
under sub-section (1) should specify the grounds on which order of eviction
was proposed to be made. If notice to quit had been validly served and the
period specified therein had expired, then the person served was in
unauthorised occupation. This was sufficient ground for an order of eviction.
The person concerned had no defence because the West Bengal Premises Tenancy
Act, 1956, did not apply to premises belonging to Government and, therefore,
where the tenancy of a person had been properly determined under the Transfer
of Property Act, then, in the case of premises belonging to Government, there
was no defence to eviction.

44\. With respect, this finding appears to have been reached only on the
consideration that a tenant of property belonging to Government was in a
"somewhat worse position than a person holding private land." The finding
appears to have been given without construing the terms of Section 4 and
without harmoniously reading the provisions of Sections 4 and 5.

45\. It may also be noted that these and Karnataka and Calcutta High Court
judgments were delivered before the judgments of the Supreme Court in the
Marfatia and Ashoka Marketing cases.

46\. The third limb of Mr. Seervai's argument rests upon Article 254(2) which
reads:

"(2). Where a law made by the Legislature of a State with respect to one of
the matters enumerated in the Concurrent List contains any provision repugnant
to the provisions of an earlier law made by Parliament or an existing law with
respect to that matter, then, the law so made by the Legislature of such State
shall, if it has been reserved for the consideration of the President and has
received his assent, prevail in that State:

Provided that nothing in this clause shall prevent parliament from enacting at
any time any law with respect to the same matter including a law adding to,
amending, varying or repealing the law so made by the Legislature of the
State."

47\. The Eviction Act, 1971 is a Central statute. It was amended by Act 61 of
1980 with effect from 22nd December, 1980 to cover premises belonging to
Government companies and corporations. The Bombay Rent Act is a State statute.
It is a statute of temporary duration. Its duration has been extended by
Extension Acts from time to time. Each of the Extension Acts has received the
assent of the President. The Bombay Rent Act was extended twice after 22nd
December, 1980 and these Extension Acts also received Presidential assent. It
was contended on behalf of the petitioners that by reason of such Presidential
assent, and having regard to the provisions of Article 254(2), the provisions
of the Bombay Rent Act prevailed over the provisions of the Eviction Act,
1971, to the extent that there is repugnancy between them.

48\. That there is repugnancy between the provisions of the Bombay Rent Act
and the Eviction Act, 1971, is not disputed.

49\. It was argued on behalf of the respondents that the Eviction Act, 1971,
was not an earlier law within the meaning of Article 254(2) so that the assent
of the President to the Extension Acts did not make the Bombay Rent Act a new
law which, by reason of the assent, prevailed over the Eviction Act, 1971, to
the extent of the repugnancy between them. Emphasis was laid in this behalf
upon the Division Bench judgment of this Court in The State of Bombay v. Heman
Santlal Alreja, . Chagla, C. J., speaking on behalf of the Division Bench,
said, "when an Act is passed extending the duration of some law, it cannot be
said that some new law was created. The old law already on the statute book
continues..... Even temporary statutes which are made perpetual by subsequent
Acts become perpetual not from the date of the subsequent Act but ab initio.
...

Therefore, to the extent that the Legislature enacted Section 2 of Act II (2)
of 1950, it did not put on the statute book any new legislation. The old
instead of expiring on 31-3-1950, continued till 31-3-1952." This judgment of
the Division Bench of the Bombay High Court was followed by a Division Bench
of the Allahabad High Court in State of Uttar Pradesh v. The Benaras Electric
Light and Power Co. Ltd., ; the dictum enunciated by Chagla, C.J., was applied
to the question: was an Extension Act new law for the purposes of Article
254(2). A Full Bench of the (sic) however, (sic) with the view taken by this
Court in Heman Alreja's case.

50\. There is a judgment of the Supreme Court, cited by Mr. Seervai, which,
though it does not refer to any of the aforementioned judgments, appears to us
to set the controversy at rest. This is the judgment in Kerala State
Electricity Board v. Indian Aluminium Co. Ltd., . The Kerala .' Essential
Articles Control (Temporary Powers) Act, 1961, was operative for 5 years. In
1967 it was amended and the words '5 years' were substituted by the words '7
years'. This was done by an Extension Act to which the President granted
assent. The Supreme Court said, "We agree that the assent should be deemed not
merely to the substitution of the words "five years" by the words "seven
years" in the Kerala Act, but to the Act as a whole, that is, as amended by
the 1967 Act and any repugnance between the Kerala Act and the Electricity
(Supply) Act, 1948 should be deemed to have been cured by such assent. When
assenting to the 1967 Act the President should naturally have looked into the
whole Act, that is, the 1961 Act as amended by the 1967 Act."

51\. Having regard to the decision in the Kerala State Electricity Board's
case, we are of the view that the Extension Acts having received the assent of
the President, the Bombay Rent Act must be considered to be the new iaw and
the Eviction Act, 1971, the earlier law for the purposes of Article 254(2).
The contention of the respondents in this behalf cannot, therefore, be
accepted.

52\. Mr. Seervai submitted that having regard to the fact that the extensions
to the Bombay Rent Act had received Presidential assent, the Bombay Rent Act
prevailed in the State of Maharashtra over the Eviction Act, 1971, to the
extent of the repugnancy between them. On behalf of the respondents it was
contended that the terms in which the assent was sought and given should have
to be seen.

53\. Letters of request were issued by this Court at the instance of the Life
Insurance Corporation of India, which is a respondent in some of the matters
before us, to various Central and State authorities to produce the documents
by which the assent of the President to the Extension Acts extending the
duration of the Bombay Rent Act was sought and given. The authorities placed
all the files in this behalf before the Court; therefrom, counsel culled out
documents which have been tendered (Ex. F, Collectively). We are concerned
with the Extension Acts subsequent to the amendment of the Eviction Act, 1971,
with effect from 22nd December, 1980. The documents that were tendered show
that a letter was written on 3rd January, 1981 by the Secretary to the
Governor of the State of Maharashtra to the Secretary to the Government of
India, Ministry of Home Affairs, forwarding a Bill extending the life of the
Bombay Rent Act for a period of 5 years from 31st March, 1981 which had been
passed by the Maharashtra Legislative Assembly and the Maharashtra Legislative
Council. The relevant portion of the letter stated: "As the provisions of the
Bombay Rents, Hotel and Lodging House Rates Control Act, 1947 are repugnant to
the provisions of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 and the Presidency Small
Cause Courts Act, 1881, which are existing laws relating to entries 6, 13 and
46 in the Concurrent Legislative List, and as Clause 2 of the Bill is intended
to extend the life of the principal Act for a period of five years, it is
necessary to reserve the Bill for the consideration of the President with
reference to Article 254(2) of the Constitution of India. The Governor has
accordingly reserved the Bill for the consideration of the President under
Article 200 of the Constitution of India." That the President had assented to
this Bill on 4th March, 1981 was communicated by the Secretary to the Governor
of the State of Maharashtra to the Secretary to the Government of Maharashtra,
Law and Judiciary Department, on 7th March, 1981. Again, on 30th January,
1986, a letter similar to that dated 3rd January, 1981 was written by the
Secretary to the Governor of the State of Maharashtra to the Secretary to the
Government of India, Ministry of Home Affairs. This letter referred to the
Bill passed by the Maharashtra Legislative Council and the Maharashtra
Legislative Assembly extending the duration of the Bombay Rent Act for 5 years
from 1st April, 1986. The letter stated: "As the provisions of the Bombay
Rents, Hotel and Lodging House Rates Control Act, 1947 arc repugnant to the
provisions of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 and the Presidency Small
Cause Courts Act, 1882, which are the existing laws relating to entries 6, 13
and 46 in the Concurrent Legislative List, and as Clause 2 of the Bill is
intended to extend the life of the principal Act for a period of five years,
it is necessary to reserve the Bill for the consideration and assent of the
President with reference to Article 254(2) of the Constitution of India. The
Governor has reserved the Bill for the consideration of the President under
Article 200 of the Constitution of India." A telegraphic message dated 25th
February, 1986 sent by the Special Commissioner, New Delhi, addressed to two
Secretaries of the State of Maharashtra and the Secretary to the Governor of
the State of Maharashtra shows that the President accorded his assent to this
Bill on 23rd February, 1986.

54\. Counsel on behalf of the respondents placed reliance upon the judgment of
the Supreme Court in Jamalpur Gram Panchayat v. Malwinder Singh, , and
submitted that, inasmuch as the assent of the President had not been sought
with specific reference to the Eviction Act, 1971, the Bombay Rent Act did not
prevail over the Eviction Act, 1971. In the Jamalpur Gram Panchayat's case the
question before the Supreme Court was whether the Punjab Village Common Lands
(Regulation) Act, 1953, prevailed over the provisions of a Central Act called
the Administration of Evacuee Property Act, 1950. Proceeding upon the basis
that there was a repugnancy between the two statutes, the question was
considered. The following extract from the Supreme Court's judgment is
relevant:

"..... The judgment of the High Court shows that the hearing of the writ
petitions was adjourned to enable the State Government to place material
before the Court showing the purpose for which the Punjab Act of 1953 was
forwarded to the President for his assent. The record shows, and it was not
disputed either before us or in the High Court, that the Act was not reserved
for the assent of the President on the ground that it was repugnant to an
earlier Act passed by the Parliament, namely, the Central Act of 1950. In
these circumstances, we agree with the High Court that the Punjab Act of 1953
cannot be said to have been reserved for the assent of the President within
the meaning of Clause(2) of Article 254 of the Constitution in so far as its
repugnancy with the Central Act of 1950 is concerned. The assent of the
President under Article 254(2) of the Constitution is not a matter of idle
formality. The President has, at least, to be apprised of the reason why his
assent is sought if, there is any special reason for doing so. If the assent
is sought and given in general terms so as to be effective for all purposes,
different consideration may legitimately arise. But if, as in the instant
case, the assent of the President is sought to the law for a specific purpose,
the efficacy of the assent would be limited to that purpose and cannot be
extended beyond it. Not only was the President not apprised in the instant
case that his assent was sought because of the repugnancy between the State
Act and the pre-existing Central Act in the vesting of evacuee properties but,
his assent was sought for a different, specific purpose altogether. Therefore,
that assent, cannot avail the State Government for the purpose of according
precedence to the law made by the State Legislature, namely, the Punjab Act of
1953, over the law made by the Parliament, even within the jurisdiction of the
State."

55\. It was argued on behalf of the respondents that the assent of the
President was sought for the specific purpose of providing for the repugnancy
between the Bombay Rent Act on the one hand and the Transfer of Property Act
and the Presidency Small Cause Courts Act on the other so that the Bombay Rent
Act prevailed over the Transfer of Property Act and the Presidency Small Cause
Courts Act to the extent of the repugnancy between them, but that the assent
could not avail the petitioner for the purposes of contending that the Bombay
Rent Act prevailed over the Eviction Act, 1971, in respect of the repugnancy
between them.

56\. It was submitted by Mr. Seervai that the clear language of Article 254(2)
established that if a State law in respect of any matter in the Concurrent
List had been reserved for the consideration of the President and had received
his assent that State law prevailed notwithstanding any earlier law made by
Parliament. The Article did not envisage an assent being sought or given vis a
vis particular Central statutes. That a State law to which the President had
assented under Article 254(2) prevailed over an earlier law made by Parliament
was clear from the judgment in U.P. Electric Supply Co. Ltd. v. R. K. Shukla,
. The Supreme Court there said: "Act 1 of 1957 received the assent of the
President and by virtue of Article 254(2) of the Constitution Section 6-R(2)
of the U. P. Act prevails notwithstanding any prior law made by the
Parliament." In the Jamalpur Gram Pan-chayat case there was no finding or
obiter dictum or even a casual observation that the President's assent under
Article 254(2) could be limited to specified Central statutes. The word
"purpose" used in the judgment (as extracted above) referred to a
constitutional purpose, that is to say that the assent was obtained either for
the purpose of Article 31 or Article 31-A or Article 254(2) or such other
Articles as contemplated the President's assent. The Supreme Court in M/s.
Hoechst Pharmaceuticals Ltd. v. State of Bihar, , had held that the consent of
the President given under Article 254 was not justiciable. This meant that the
Court could not entertain an enquiry into considerations which led the
President to give his assent.

57\. We have no doubt about the meaning to be assigned to the Jamalpur Gram
Pan-chayat judgment, the relevant portion whereof we have quoted. It turned
out from the record that was placed before the High Court that the Punjab Act
"was not reserved for the assent of the President on the ground that it was
repugnant to an earlier Act passed by the Parliament, namely, the Central Act
of 1950." This is first indication that the Supreme Court was of the view that
a State Act which was reserved for the assent of the President under Article
254(2) should be reserved on the ground that it was repugnant to a specified
Central Act. "In these circumstances", the Supreme Court went on to say, "we
agree with the High Court that the Punjab Act of 1953 cannot be said to have
been reserved for the assent of the President within the meaning of Clause (2)
of Article 254 of the Constitution in so far as its repugnancy with the
Central Act of 1950 is concerned." The words emphasised again clearly indicate
the thinking of the Supreme Court, namely, that the reservation of the Bill
for the assent of the President within the meaning of Article 254(2) had to be
made with reference to its repugnancy to some specified Central statute. The
Supreme Court then noted that the "assent of the President under Article
254(2) of the Constitution is not a matter of idle formality." The most
important words from our point of view follow "But, if, as in the instant
case, the assent of the President is sought to the law for a specific purpose,
the efficacy of the assent would be limited to that purpose and cannot be
extended beyond it." Applying this to the case before us, the assent of the
President was sought to the Extension Acts for the purpose of overcoming its
repugnancy between the Bombay Rent Act on the one hand and the Transfer of
Property Act and the Presidency Small Cause Courts Act on the other. The
efficacy of the President's assent must, therefore, be limited to that
purpose, namely, that the Bombay Rent Act prevailed over the Transfer
of'Property Act and the Presidency Small Cause Courts Act and cannot be
extended beyond that. The Supreme Court wenton to say, "Not only was the
President not apprised in the instant case that his assent was sought because
of the repugnancy between the State Act and the pre-existing Central Act.....
but his assent was sought for a different, specific purpose altogether."
Applying these words to the, instant case, not only was the President not
apprised that his assent was sought because of the repugnancy between the
Bombay Rent Act and the Eviction Act, 1971, but his assent was sought for a
different, specific purpose, namely, to overcome the repugnancy between the
Bombay Rent Act on the one hand and the Transfer of Property Act and the
Presidency Small Cause Courts Act on the other. The President's assent cannot,
therefore, be the basis for according precedence to the Bombay Rent Act over
the Eviction Act, 1971.

58\. The U. P. Electric Supply Co. Etd.'s case did not consider an argument
relating to the ambit of the President's assent under Article 254(2) when it
was asked for specified reasons. In any event, the Jamalpur Gram Panchayat
judgment is a later judgment and of a Constitution Bench. In the case of
Hoechst Pharmaceutical Ltd., a State Act to which the President had assented
was challenged on the ground that it had not been necessary to reserve it for
the assent of the President under Article 254(2) so that the assent of the
President did not make it law and, since it had also not received the assent
of the Governor of the State, it was not law at all. In this context it ,was
held, "Even if it ultimately turns out that there was no necessity for the
Governor to have reserved a Bill for the consideration of the President, still
he having done so an.d obtained the assent of the President, the -Act so
passed cannot be held to be unconstitutional on the ground of want of proper
assent; This aspect of the matter, as the law now stands, is not open to
scrutiny by the Courts." The validity of the President's assent is not under
challenge; had it been we would have held that it was not justiciable. To
ascertain the purpose for which the assent was given is not to make it
justiciable.

59\. Mr. Seervai made a reference to the letter dated 5th December 1980
written by the Deputy Secretary to the Government of Maharashtra to the
Secretary to the Government of India in the Ministry of Home Affairs with
reference to the Bill extending the duration of the Bombay Rent Act up to 30th
March 1986 (This letter is also a part of the compilation, Ex. F Colly.).
While the letter did state that "the provisions of the Principal Act are
repugnant to the provisions of some of the existing laws relating to entries
6, 13 and 46 in the Concurrent Legislative List such as Transfer of Property
Act, 1882 and the Presidency Small Cause Courts Act, 1882", it was written to
request the Secretary to the Government of India to move it "to kindly accord
their administrative approval to the proposed Bill" which was intended to be
introduced in the State Legislature. It was submitted that this letter showed
that the State authorities were conscious of the fact that the Bombay Rent Act
was repugnant to the provisions of existing Central laws other than the
Transfer of Property Act and the Presidency Small Cause Courts Act and that
the request for grant of the President's assent should, therefore, be
construed as being in general terms. This letter was written to seek the
administrative approval of the Government of India to the proposed Extension
Bill. It was not written to seek the assent of the President under Article
254(2) to an Extension Bill which had been passed by the State Legislatures.
It is, therefore, not possible to take any account of this letter in this
context.

60\. In the result, we cannot hold that the provisions of the Bombay Rent Act
prevail in the State of Maharashtra over those of the Eviction Act, 1971.

61\. We must now note that no arguments have been advanced before us in regard
to the facts of the petitions and appeal before us,

62\. Lastly, we record our appreciation of the industry and assistance of
counsel.

63\. Each of the writ petitions is dismissed.

64\. In the appeal before us (Appeal No. 83 of 1989), the writ petition (OOCJ
Writ Petition No. 3511 of 1988) was summarily dismissed by a learned single
Judge by an order dated 11th January 1989. The order of summary dismissal is
set aside, the appeal is allowed and the writ petition admitted. Having
already been heard as aforementioned, the writ petition is now dismissed. This
petitioner has preferred an appeal against the order passed against him by him
Estate Officer which is pending before the City Civil Court at Bombay. The
appeal shall now be heard and disposed of expeditiously. In so doing, no
regard shall be had to the observations of the learned single Judge made in
the aforementioned order of summary dismissal. We make it clear that we have
not gone into facts and must not be taken to have made any observation in that
behalf. Pending the decision of the appeal by the City Civil Court and for a
period of 10 days thereafter, status quo in respect of the premises concerned
shall be maintained.

65\. We certify that substantial questions of law relating to the
interpretation of the Constitution arise in these petitions and appeal.

65\. Each party to these petitions and appeal shall bear and pay its own
costs.

67\. We make it clear that each of the writ petitioners will be entitled, in
proceedings before the Estate Officer and in appeal therefrom, to contend that
the notices served upon them under Section 4 and the orders passed thereon are
not valid having regard to the interpretation placed by us upon those
provisions.

68\. Upon the application of the petitioners, we stay our order in the writ
petitions and appeal for a period of eight weeks from today. During that
period of eight weeks no action shall be taken either by the respondents or by
their Estate Officers in regard to any eviction proceedings under the Eviction
Act, 1971.

69\. Order accordingly.

