

Calcutta High Court

State Of West Bengal & Ors. vs R.C. Banerjee on 28 August, 1998

Equivalent citations: (1999) 1 CALLT 52 HC

Author: V Gupta

Bench: V K Gupta, B Bhattacharya

JUDGMENT V.K. Gupta, J.

1\. This appeal is directed against the judgment/order dated 16.9.97 passed by
the learned single Judge of this court (Sujit Kumar Sinha. J) whereby a decree
in terms of an arbitration award has been passed. Facts leading to the filing
of the appeal arc that the respondent R.C. Banerjee had lodged claims with the
arbitrator Shri R.M. Moitra in respect of Contract No. 57 of 1983-84 from the
office of the Superintendent Engineer, public Works Department, Northern
Circle, Govt of West Bengal, Jalpalgurl. In a detailed speaking Award the said
arbitrator awarded an amount of Rs. 25.04.520/- in favour of the respondent by
allowing his various claims against the appellants. The arbitrator however had
rejected all the counter claims of the appellants. The award was passed along
with interest. Including pendentellte Interest. Whereas the principal sum
award was Rs. 25.04.520/- the interest calculated was Rs. 34,25,360/-. In the
award the arbitrator had also awarded costs of Rs. 60,000/-. Under the three
heads therefore the following break-up of the amounts can be shown as having
been awarded by the arbitrator in favour of the appellants;

Rs. 25,04,520/-

Rs. 34,25,360/-

Rs. 60,000/-

2\. This award was filed in the court and, as observed above, on 16th
September. 1997 Sujit Kumar Sinha, J. directed that a decree in terras of the
award be passed. He also directed levy of simple interest @ 6% per annum from
the date of the decree untlll realisation. Costs assessed at 100 gms were also
awarded in favour of the respondent. Award was made and published by the
Arbitrator on 28th May, 1997 and was filed in the count on 23rd June. 1997.
Notices of the filing of the award in the court were admittedly received by
the appellants on 8th July, 1997. It is therefore admitted case of the parties
that until 16th September, 1997 when the matter was taken up by Sujlt Kumar
Slnha, J and the decree in terms of the award was passed, the appellants had
not filed any application for setting aside the award either under section 30
or section 33 of the Arbitration Act 1940 nor had the appellants taken any
other steps to object to the award or to ask the court in any other manner
that the award be set aside. In other words when the matter came up before the
court on 16th September, 1997, there was no request or prayer on behalf of the
appellants that the award be set aside. Actually it also appears that on 16th
September, 1997 when the Impugned Judgment was passed by the learned single
Judge, no one had in fact appeared before him on behalf of the appellants.

3\. The first and the foremost point which has been raised by the learned
Advocate appearing for the appellants is that judgment/order dated 16th
September, 1997 is without Jurisdiction because the award ought to have been
filed before the Division Bench of the High Court because the order of
reference to Arbitration originally was passed by the Division Bench on
5.7.1991. We are not Impressed at all with the submission because undoubtedly
on 16th September, 1997 when the Judgment/order under challenged in this
appeal was passed by the learned single Judge (Sujlt Kumar Slnha, J), he had
the jurisdiction to hear Arbitration matters. Including the matters relating
to the filing of the awards and passing judgments upon the arbitration awards
under section 17 of the Arbitration Act. It is nobody's case that the learned
single Judge on 16th September, 1997 did not have the Jurisdiction to deal
with the matter. If therefore, merely because the order of reference as
originally made was passed by a Division Bench of this court, it does not mean
that the award also should have been filed before the Division Bench. Actually
the award was filed before the Registrar, original side of this court as was
required to be done by the original Side Rules and the Registrar, original
side had sent the notices of the filing of the award to the parties and
thereafter the matter was put up by him before the learned single Judge who
undoubtedly had the Jurisdiction in the matter.

4\. 'Court' has been defined in section 2(c) of the Arbitration Act section
2(c) reads as under:

Section 2(c): 'court' means a Civil Court having jurisdiction to decide the
question forming the subject-matter of the reference If the same has been the
subject-matter of a suit but does not, except for the purpose of Arbitration
proceedings under section 21, include a Small Cause Court.

5\. Undoubtedly the learned single Judge (S.K. Slnha, J.J had the Jurisdiction
to deal with all Arbitration matters and therefore it cannot be said that he
in any manner lacked the Jurisdiction in passing the Judgment Impugned in this
appeal. When the original order of reference was passed by the Division Bench,
even at that time the arbitration matters were being dealt with by a single
Bench of this court. Since this matter had been remanded to this court from
the Supreme Court, for some unknown reason the matter being remanded by the
Supreme Court was taken up by the Division Bench presided over by the Hon'ble
Chief Justice and the order of reference to arbitration was passed by the
Division Bench. If, therefore, because of some peculiarity of circumstances a
Division Bench passed an order of reference, even though at that time itself
the single Bench had the Jurisdiction to do so, it cannot be said that the
arbitration award when passed pursuant to such an order of reference should
have been placed before the Division Bench, even though at the relevant time
itself the single Bench had the Jurisdiction to deal with the matters relating
to the award under section 17 of the Arbitration Act 1940. The fact remains
that the order of reference was passed by the High Court of Calcutta where
also the award was filed and the Judgment in terms of the award pronounced.
There is no lack of Jurisdiction. This plea accordingly is rejected.

6\. Mr. Mitra, learned Senior Advocate appearing for the respondents has
raised a preliminary objection with regard to the maintainability of the
appeal, as according to him this appeal in view of section 39 of the Act
against the judgment/order dated 16th September, 1997 is not at all
maintainable. Section 39 of the Arbitration Act 1940 reads as under:

Section 39 Applicable orders (1) An appeal shall lie from the following orders
passeed under this Act (and from no others) to court authorised by law to hear
appeals from original decress of the court passing the order:

An orden

(i) superseding an arbitration;

ii) on an award stated in the form of a special case;

(iii) modifyingor correcting an award;

(iv) filing or refusing to file an arbitration agreement;

(v) under section 20, making to refusing a reference;

(vi) staying or refusing to stay legal proceedings where there is an
arbitration agreement;

(vii) setting aside or refusing to set aside an award:

Provided that the provisions of this section shall not apply to any order
passed by a Small Cause Court (2) No second appeal shall lie from an order
passed in appeal under this section, but nothing in this section shall affect
to take away any right to appeal to the Supreme Court.

Section 17 of the Arbitration Act 1940 is also reproduced herein below for
ready reference:

Section 17 Judgment in terms of award Where the court sees no cause to remit
the award or any of the matter referred to arbitration for reconsideration or
to set aside the award, the court shall, after the time for making an
application to set aside the award has expired or such application having been
made, after refusing it proceed to pronounce Judgment according to the award,
and upon the Judgment so pronounced a decree shall follow the judgment so
pronounced a decree shall follow and no appeal shall lie upon such decree
except on the ground that it is in excess of or not otherwise in accordance
with the award.

7\. A plain reading of the aforesaid two sections of the Arbitration Act 1940
therefore clearly suggests that only such orders as are mentioned in section
39 are appealable. Because a specific provision has been made about the
maintainability of the appeals against only particular types of orders
mentioned in section 39, it can safely be said that no appeals are
maintainable against other orders passed lie there under the Act. Similarly
under section 17 of the Act it has clearly been provided that once a decree is
passed in terms of the award on the basis of the Judgment pronounced under
section 17 of the Act, no appeal shall lie against such a decree accept when
it is alleged that the decree is either in excess of the award or not in
accordance with the same. A combined reading of sections 17 and 39 therefore
leaves no one in any manner of doubt that the judgment passed on and award in
terms of section 17 can be appealed against, under section 39 of the Act only
if the court has either set aside the award or refused to set aside the award.
Appeal under section 17 of the Act in any case is not presently maintainable
because it is not the case of the appellants before us that the decree as
passed is either in excess of the award or not in acordance thereto. For
maintaning an appeal under section 17 it is a necessary requirement of law
that the appellant must urge that, the decree as passed is either in excess of
the award or not in accordance thereto. A perusal of the memorandum of appeal
does not suggest any such case of the appellants. Similarly the decree passed
in terms of the award, based upon the said Judgment passed under section 17 of
the Act is also not appealable except to the extent indicated above. As will
thus be noticed the Judgment passed under section 17 of the Act resulting in
the passing of the decree in terms of the award is appealable only because
section 39 of the Act provides for such an appeal, subject to the condition,
expressly and specifically mentioned that the appeal shall be against either
the setting aside of the award or the refusal to set aside the award. In other
words if the judgment merely directs the passing of the Decree in terms of the
Award, either setting aside the Award or refusing to set aside the Award, no
appeal would lie against such a Judgment in the present case however we
clearly notice that the learned single Judge had merely passed the decree in
terms of the award and the Judgment therefore, by which the said decree was
passed had neither set aside the award not refused to set aside the award. We
are saying so because the question of the court below setting aside the award
of refusing to set aside the award would only arise if either of the parties
to the proceedings in the court below would want, request or pray to the court
for setting aside the award. Only if a request for setting aside the award is
pending before the court, the court can either set aside the award, thus
accepting the request for setting aside the award or refuse to set aside the
award, thus rejecting such a prayer. A narration of the events indicated
earlier however clearly suggests that as on 16th September, 1997 when the
Judgment was pronounced by the learned single Judge passing decree in terms of
the award, no such requestor prayer was pending before the learned single
Judge since admitted by the appellants had not filed any application till then
for setting aside the award. Since admittedly the appellants had been served
the notice of the filing of the award in the court on 6th July, 1997, the time
for making any application for setting aside the award had expired by 16th
September. 1997 and therefore. In terms of action 17 of the Act the learned,
trial court had no option but to pronounce judgment upon the award and pass
decree in terms thereof.

8\. Mr. Kundu, learned Advocate appearing for the appellants referred to a
Judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Shah Babutal Khimji v. Jayaben D.
Kanta & Ors. to contend that even though the appeal may not be maintainable
under section 39 of the Arbitration Act, clause 15 of the Letters Patent
permits the appellant to maintain such an appeal. We do not agree with his
contention because what we clearly find from a careful reading of this
judgment is that their Lordships did not at all say that when a statute
specifically prohibits an appeal in a particular situation, the provision in
the letters patent for such an appeal can be invoked. On the other hand in the
case of Union of india v. Mohindra Supply Co. , their Lordships clearly were
of the opinion that an appeal under the Letters Patent cannot be held to be
maintainable it the filing of such an appeal is prohibited under a specific
law, such as the Arbitration Act. The following observations may be quoted
with advantage:

"Section 39(2) expressly prohibits a second appeal from an order passed in
appeal under section 39(1) except an appeal to this court. There is clear
indication inherent in sub-section (2) that the expression "second appeal"
does not mean an appeal under section 100 of the Code of Civil Procedure. To
the interdict of a "second appeal", there is an exception in favour of an
appeal to this court; but an appeal to this court is not a second appeal. If
the legislature intended by enacting section 39(2) merely to prohibit appeals
under section 100 of the Code of Civil Procedure, it was plainly unnecessary
to enact an express provision saving appeals to this court Again an appeal
under section 39(1) lies against an order superseding an award or modifying or
correcting an award, or filing or refusing to file an arbitration agreement or
staying or refusing to stay legal proceedings where there is an arbitration
agreement or setting aside or refusing to set aside an award or on an award
stated in the form of a special case. These orders are not decrees within the
meaning of the Code of Civil procedure and have not the effect of decrees
under the Arbitration Act. Section 100 of the Code of Civil Procedure deals
with appeals from appellate decrees and not with appeals from appellate
orders.

The problem to which attention must then be directed is whether the right to
appear under the Letters Patent is at all restricted by section 39, sub-
section (1) and (2). Clause 10 of the Letters Patent of the High Court, in so
far as it is material, provides:

'And we do further ordain that an appeal shall lie to the said High Court
.................. from the judgment (not being a Judgment passed in exercise
of appellate jurisdiction in respect of a decree or order made in the exercise
of appellate Jurisdiction by a court subject to the superintendence of the
said High Court and not being an order made in the exercise of revlslonal
Jurisdiction ..............) of one Judge of the High Court..............."

By this clause, a right to appeal except in the cases specified, from one
Judge of the High Court to a Division Bench is expressly granted. But the
Letters Patent are declared by CL. 37 subject to the legislative power of the
Governor-General in Council and also of the Govern or-fn-Council under the
Government of india Act, 1915, and may in all respects be amended or altered
in exercise of legislative authority. Under section 39(1), an appeal lies from
the orders specified in that sub-section and from no others. The legislature
has plainly expressed itself that the right of appeal against orders passed
under the Arbitration Act may be exercised only in respect of certain orders.
The right to appeal against other orders is expressly taken away."

9\. The judgment in Union of india v, Mohindra Supply Co. came to be
considered in the case of State of West Bengal v. M/s Courangalal Chatterjee
where it was observed as under:

"Section 39 of the Arbitration Act came up for consideration in Union of india
v. Mohtndra Supply Co. The court after going into detail and examining various
authorities given by different High Courts held that no second appeal bay
under section 39(2) against a decision given by a learned single Judge under
section 39(1). In respect of the Jurisdiction under Letters Patent the court
observed that since Arbitration Act was a consolidating and amending Act
relating to arbitration it must be construed without any assumption that it
was not intended to alter the law relating to appeals. The court held that in
view of bar created by sub-section (2) of section 39 debarring any second
appeal from an order passed in appeal under sub section! 1) the 'conclusion
was inevitable that it was so done with a view to restrict the right of appeal
within strict limits defined by section 39'. Therefore, so far the second part
is concerned, namely, the maintainability of the appeal under letters Patent
it stands concluded by this decision."

10\. Regarding the specific applicability of sub-section (1) of section 39, in
Contradistinction to sub-section (2) thereof, their Lordships observed as
under:

The learned counsel for the appeallant vehemently argued that since the
decision by the Supreme Court was in respect of an appeal directed against an
order passed by a learned single Judge in exercise of appellate Jurisdiction
no second appeal lay but that principle could not. be applied where the order
of learned Single Judge was passed not in exercise of appellate Jurisdiction
but original jurisdiction. The argument appears to be without any substance as
sub-section (1) of section 39 which is extracted below:

........................................................................................................

........................................................................................................

........................................................................................................

........................................................................................................

provides that an appeal could He only from the orders mentioned in the sub-
section itself. Since the order passed by learned single Judge revoking the
authority of the Chief Engineer on his failure to act as an arbitrator was not
covered in either of the six clauses mentioned in section 39 it is obvious
that no appeal could be filed against the order of the learned single Judge."
-

11\. Under the circumstances therefore, and in view of the clear bar contained
in the Arbitration Act against preferring the present appeal, as also in the
light of the ratio laid down by their Lordships of the Supreme Court in the
aforesaid judgments, we are convinced that the preliminary objection raised by
Mr. Mitra, learned Senior Advocate appearing for the respondents deserves to
be upheld. We accordingly hold that the appeal filed by the appellants is not
maintainable. The Judgment under appeal accordingly is upheld and the appeal
is dismissed, but without any order as to costs.

12\. All parties are to act on a signed copy of the operative part of this
Judgment on the usual undertaking.

13\. Appeal dismissed.

