

Delhi High Court

Satish Khosla vs M/S Eli Lilly Ranbaxy Ltd. & ... on 12 December, 1997

Equivalent citations: 1998 IAD Delhi 927, 1 (1998) CLT 1, 71 (1998) DLT 1,
1998 (44) DRJ 109, 1998 RLR 180

Author: S Mahajan

Bench: M Narain, S Mahajan

JUDGMENT S.K. Mahajan, J.

1\. By this Order, we propose to dispose of both the appeals being FAO (OS)
50/97 as well as Criminal Contempt Petition No. 8/97. Before we deal with the
merits of the matter, a few facts which are relevant for deciding these cases
may briefly be stated as under:

2\. That the appellant is the owner of the premises being Cottage No.6
situated within the complex of Shanti Sports Club, Vasant Kunj, New Delhi. The
Sports Club is alleged to have membership of more than 1500 and is said to
have the facilities like cricket ground, tennis courts, swimming pool, squash
courts etc., and is allegedly visited by more than 200 members every day.
Within the sports complex, there are a few residential cottages. One of such
cottages being Cottage No. 6 is at the back of the complex. Between Cottage
No. 6 and Cottage No. 7 there is a big lawn. The dispute between the parties
is about the letting out and use and enjoyment of the said lawn by the
occupants of Cottage No.6, namely, the respondent.

3\. By a lease deed entered into between the parties on 2nd September, 1996,
Cottage No. 6 at the Shanti Sports Club Complex, Vasant Kunj, New Delhi
consisting of six bedrooms, one drawing-cum-dining room, one entrance lounge,
kitchen, seven bathrooms and servant room was let to the respondent by the
appellant for the residence of its Managing Director Mr. Christopher J. Shaw
and his family members. Simultaneously with the execution of the lease deed,
certain other documents, namely, the Hire Agreement for hiring of the
furniture, fittings, carpets, rugs, geysers, air-conditioners, refrigerators,
etc., Agreement for Security Services and Maintenance and Service Agreement
for providing maintenance for the house, furniture, electrical equipments,
lawn and plants etc. were also entered into between the parties.

4\. It appears that the lawn between Cottage Nos. 6 and 7 was being given on
hire for marriages and private parties by the appellant which allegedly caused
disturbance to the Managing Director of the respondent and a suit being Suit
No. 3064/96 was thereupon filed by the respondents on or about 11th December,
1996. It was alleged in the plaint in the said suit that the appellant had
represented to the respondents that the lawn between Cottages 6 and 7 would
always remain vacant and was meant to be used for the fami- lies of the
occupants of the said cottages; and their guests. However, due to the said
lawn being given on hire for marriages and other parties, there was hardly any
moment when respondent No. 2 and his family had been able to have free and
unobstructed access to the premises and enjoy its quiet and peaceful
possession.

5\. The said suit came up for hearing before the Hon'ble Single Judge on 17th
December, 1996 when the Court directed summons of the suit as well as notice
of the application to be issued to the appellant. Ex-parte stay was not
granted in favour of the respondents 1 & 2\. The matter came up for hearing on
20th December 1996 on which date it was adjourned to 13th Janu- ary, 1997 and
again no stay was granted in favour of the respondents. On 13th January, 1997,
the case was adjourned to 20th January, 1997. The Hon'ble Single Judge was on
leave on 20th January, 1997 and the case was, therefore, adjourned to 22nd
May, 1997. In the said suit no stay had been granted in favour of the
respondents.

6\. The lease of the demised premises, entered into between the parties, was
for a period of two years, however, it appears that by notice dated 10th
January, 1997 the appellant terminated the lease and called upon the
respondents to vacate the premises on or before 28th February, 1997.

7\. On or about 4th February, 1997, respondents filed the suit being Suit No.
261/97 for specific performance of the agreement to register the lease deed
and for a direction to get the lease agreement dated 2nd September, 1996
registered with the Sub-Registrar of Assurances, New Delhi. Alongwith the
suit, the said respondent had also filed an application for the grant of an
injunction restraining the appellant, his agents, employees and servants from
in any manner disturbing or interfering with the quiet and peaceful
possession, use and occupation of the demised premises being Cottage No. 6 and
its appurtenant lawn and from in any manner hindering or obstructing free and
unrestricted access and approach to the said cottage.

8\. On 6th February, 1997, the Hon'ble Single Judge passed the order of
injunction in favour of the respondent No. 1 and against the appellant, in the
following terms:

> "IA.1124/97 Issue notice to the defendant for 13th May, 1997.

> I have perused the plaint, the application, the affidavit and the documents
> produced. Having regard to the contentions in the plaint and the averments
> in the application, and also in the light of the documents produced, I am
> satisfied that the plain- tiff has made out a strong, prima facie, case for
> an ex-parte interim order. Delay in passing the order will defeat the object
> of granting the injunction. Hence, there will be an ex-parte interim order
> of injunction restraining the defendant, his agents, employees and servants,
> from in any manner disturbing or interfering with the quiet and peaceful
> possession,use and occupation of the demised premises, Cottage No.6, Shanti
> Sports Club, Vasant Kunj, New Delhi and the appurtenant lawn and also from
> in any manner hindering, or obstructing free and unrestricted access and
> approach to the said cottage.

> Provisions of Order 39, Rule 3 of the Code of Civil Procedure be complied
> with within three days.

> Copy of the order be given dasti."

Aggrieved by the said order, the appellant has filed this appeal and has also
filed a contempt petition for initiating criminal contempt proceedings against
the respondents for their having intentionally and deliberately filed the
proceedings and applications being Suit Nos. 261/97 and IA 1124/97 which
amounted to abuse of the process of the Court and an attempt to circumvent the
orders of the Court passed in Suit No. 3064/96. The action on the part of the
respondents was also alleged to be a deliberate, intentional and calculated
act to hamper and obstruct-the due course of judicial proceedings and
administration of justice and a fraud upon the Court.

While issuing notice to the respondents in appeal, this Court on February 27,
1997 passed the following order:

> CM. 810/97 Notice for 1.4.97.

> Dasti We would not have entertained the appeal preferred against the order
> by which ex parte ad interim order of injunction has been issued by the
> learned Single Judge but for the circumstances which have been brought to
> our notice that the efforts of respondent in obtaining similar ad-interim
> order of injunction in the earlier Suit No. 3064/96 did not materialise and
> in the suit (No. 261/97) now filed ex parte ad-interim order for injunction
> has been obtained by the respondents which is beyond the scope of the suit.

> We are satisfied that till the next date, the operation of the impugned
> order deserves to be suspended. Ordered accordingly.

> Dasti"

> We have heard the Counsel for the parties at length on both the ap-

peals as well as the contempt application and we propose to dispose of the
same at the stage of admission itself.

9\. It is the contention of the respondent that it had in the second suit
disclosed the filing of the first suit and there was, therefore, neither any
attempt on its part to mislead the Court nor it had in any way tried to
obstruct the administration of justice or play fraud upon the Court. It is
also its contention that the respondent was entitled to bring the second suit
for specific performance of the agreement to register the lease deed and the
cause of action had accrued to it only on the receipt of notice dated 10th
January, 1997 from the appellant when the tenancy was allegedly terminated.

10\. To appreciate the contentions of the appellant whether filing of the
second suit by the respondent is an abuse of the process of the Court, and an
attempt has been made to obstruct the administration of justice, and whether
in the facts and circumstances of the case the said respondent was at all
entitled to the grant of injunction, it will be proper to compare the
pleadings in both the suits and to also see whether the respondent had
disclosed the pendency of the earlier suit while filing the second suit and
whether it was also informed to the court that in the earlier suit the Court
had not granted any stay in favour of the respondents.

11\. The paragraphs 5 to 8 of the plaint in Suit No. 3064/96 and paragraphs 8
to 11 of the plaint in Suit No. 261/97 are almost identical. The follow- ing
table will show the respective contentions.

    
    
           Paragraphs 5 to 8 of               Paragraphs 8 to 11 of 
         Suit No. 3064/96                   Suit No. 261/97          
    5. "It is stated that appurtenant       is a lawn and at the end of the         
    to the Demised Premises, there is       lawn there is another Cottage 
    a garden and at the end of the          identical to that of the 
    garden there is another Cottage         plaintiffs. At the time of 
    identical to that the, plaintiffs.      the lease, the defendant had 
    At the time of the lease, the           represented to the plaintiffs that 
    defendant had represented to the        the lawn would always remain vacant
    plaintiffs that the garden would        and is meant to be used for the
    always remain vacant and is meant       families and their guests of the
    to be used for the families and the     said two cottages being
    guests of the said two cottages         adjacent and appurtenant
    being adjacent being adjacent and       to them and only in the
    appurtenant to them and only in the     evening sometimes some children
    evening, sometimes some children may    may come to play there.
    come to play in the garden. It may      It may be noted that the other
    be noted that the cottage at the        cottage at the end of the 
    end of the garden is lying vacant       lawn is lying not vacant and 
    and is not occupied. A copy of the      is not occupied. A copy of
    site plan of the Demised Premises,      the vacant cottage is
    the garden and the vacant cottage       the site plan of the Demised 
    is annexed hereto and marked            Premises, the lawn and
    as Annexure-A                           annexed hereto and marked as 
                                            Annexure 'A'. In terms of the
                                            maintenance and service 
                                            agreement, the defendant had 
                                            represented, assured and 
                                            agreed with the plaintiff to 
                                            provide maintenance for the 
                                            entire house as well as 
                                            providing adequate staff 
                                            for the maintenance of the 
                                            lawns and plant and providing 
                                            raw-materials for proper 
                                            maintenance of plants and trees.
    6. Despite the verbal                   9. In total disregard and
    assurances and the terms                violation of the
    of the Lease Deed dated                 representations, assurances,
    September 2, 1996 to the                understandings and agreements
    shock and surprise of the               and the express and/or 
    plaintiff immediately                   implied terms of the lease 
    after plaintiff No. 2                   the defendant started
    occupied the Demised                    permitting use of the 
    Premises in terms of the                appurtenant lawn to third 
    said lease agreement                    parties for marriages and other 
    dated September 2, 1996,                functions. This also resulted 
    the defendant started                   obstruction to the free and 
    giving on hire the garden               unrestricted access and approach
    for marriages and private               to the Cottage as well as
    parties etc."                           amounted to and interference 
                                            with the quiet and peaceful 
                                            enjoyment and privacy of the
                                            occupants, the Managing Director 
                                            and the members of the family of the 
                                            plaintiff. Besides the use of the 
                                            lawn for such purposes as 
                                            aforesaid constituted a nuisance 
                                            and interfered with the rights 
                                            assured to the plaintiff.
    7. As a consequence of                  10. As a consequence of
    this, there is hardly any               this, there is hardly any
    moment when plaintiff                   moment when plaintiff's
    No. 2 Mr. Christopher                   Managing Director Mr.
    J. Shaw and his family                  Christopher J. Shaw and his
    have been able to have                  family have been able to have
    free and unobstructed                   free and unobstructed access 
    access to the leased                    to the leased premises or
    premises or enjoy quite                 enjoy quiet and peaceful 
    and peaceful possession                 possession of the 
    of the Demised Premises.                Demised Premises.
            
    8. It is stated that 30-40 people       11. It is stated that 30-40
    

come during the day either to install people come during the day either or
remove temporary structures for to install or remove temporary the functions
and in the evening structures for the functions and there are more than
400-500 people in the evening there are more attending the functions. All
these than 400-500 people attending parties and functions go on until the
functions. All these 5 O'Clock in the morning. Further, parties and functions
go on it is stated that the band and loud until 5 O'clock in the morning.
music on the loudspeakers is played Further, it is stated that the at these
functions and despite the band and loud music on the loud requests of the
plaintiff No. 2, speakers is played at these func- nothing has been done to
stop tions and despite the requests of these functions top being held the
plaintiff's Managing Director adjoining the Demised Premises. nothing has been
done to stop these As a result of this, the said functions being held
adjoining Mr. Christopher J.Shaw is unable the Demised Premises.

to use his study, room or watch As a result of this, the said TV or invite any
guest since it is Mr. Christopher J.Shaw is unable not possible to converse in
the to use his study room or watch loud blaring music played outside TV or
invite any guest since the house. The plaintiff further it is not possible to
converse states that the privacy of the in the loud blaring music plaintiff
No. 2, Mr. Christopher J. played outside the house. The Shaw is, completely
lost defeating plaintiff further states that the very purpose of renting the
privacy of the plaintiff's the premises. It, is further stated Managing
Director Mr. Christopher that the said Mr. Christopher J.Shaw is completely
lost." J. Shaw's family has to draw the curtains even in the day as someone or
the other is always peeping inside the house. On two occasions, the said Mr.
Christopher J. Shaw was not able to have access from his car to his house
because of these functions.

In paragraph 12 of the plaint in the second suit, the respondent did mention
about its having filed a suit on about 11th December, 1996 against the
appellant for injunction, however, no mention had been made therein as to what
was the stage of the suit nor about the Court having not granted any stay in
favour of the respondents. Paragraph 12 of the plaint in Suit No. 261/97 reads
as under:

> 12\. "Therefore, on or about 11.12.1996, the plaintiff and Mr. Christopher
> J. Shaw filed a suit for permanent injunction against the defendant for
> restraining the defendant, his servants, agents, successors and employees
> etc. from holding functions on the lawn as shown Red in the site plan and
> restraining them from causing unobstructed ingress and egress to the Demised
> Premises during the period of lease agreement dated 2.9.1996. The said suit
> is pending in this Hon'ble Court."

In the application for ad-interim injunction filed alongwith the said suit the
respondent, after making a grievance about the appellant having permitted use
of the lawn to the outsiders for marriages and other functions which resulted
in obstructions to the free and unrestricted access and approach to the
cottage, did not mention anything about the Court having not granted any stay
in favour of the respondent.

12\. At this stage, we may also compare the reliefs claimed by the
plaintiff/respondents in the respective applications for injunction in Suit
No.3064/96 as well as in Suit No. 261/97:

    
    
           Relief claimed in                  Relief claimed in
         Suit No. 3064/96                   Suit No. 261/97 
    

Restrain the defendant, his employees, In the circumstances, the plain-
servants, agents, successors, assigns tiff submits that this Hon'ble etc. from
holding functions on the Court may be pleased to order gardens as shown in the
site plan and direct and restrain the (Annexure-A hereto)during the period
Defendant, his agents, employees of the said lease agreement dated disturbing
or, interfering with September 2, 1996 and further the quiet and peaceful
possession, restrain the defendant, his use and occupation of the employees
etc., from causing demised premises, Cottage No.6 any obstruction in the
ingress and Shanti Sports Club, Vasant egress of the plaintiffs to the Kunj,
New Delhi and the demised premises Cottage No.6, appurtenant Lawn and also
Shanti Sports Club, Vasant Kunj, restrain the defendant his New Delhi.
employees, servants and agents from in any manner hindering or obstructing
free and unrestricted access and approach to the said cottage.

13\. It is apparent that in the application in Suit No. 261/97, the respondent
is seeking the same relief of temporary injunction as had been sought for in
Suit No. 3064/96.

14\. Was it not obligatory on the part of the respondent to disclose to the
Court that in an earlier suit filed by it, the Court had not granted any stay
in its favour and if on such a disclosure having been made the Court still
granted stay in favour of the respondent, it could be said that the respondent
had not concealed any material fact from the Court? But not mentioning
anything about the Court having not granted any stay in similar circumstances
in favour of the respondent in the earlier suit, it appears to us that the
respondent had not only concealed material facts from the Court but had also
tried to over reach the Court. Being unsuccessful in obtaining stay in Suit
No. 3064/96, it was not permissible to the respond- ent to file the subsequent
suit and seek the same relief which had not been granted to it in the earlier
suit.

15\. In S.P.Chengalvaraya Naidu Vs. Jagannath and Others, it was held that the
Courts of Law are meant for imparting justice between the parties. One who
comes to the Court, must come with clean hands. "It can be said without
hesitation that a person whose case is based on false- hood has no right to
approach the Court. He can be summarily thrown out at any stage of the
litigation. A litigant, who approaches the Court, is bound to produce all the
documents executed by him which are relevant to the litigation. If he
withholds a vital document in order to gain advantage on the other side then
he would be guilty of playing fraud on the Court as well as on the opposite
party."

16\. We are informed that in Suit No. 261/97 the plaintiff had not even filed
the plaint of the earlier suit being Suit No. 3604/96 nor the Court had an
opportunity to go through the allegations made in the said plaint. We are,
therefore, of the opinion that by withholding the plaint and the application
in the earlier suit from the court and by not disclosing to the Court about
the proceedings in the earlier suit and the stay having not been granted to
it, the plaintiff/respondent had tried to get an advantage from the Court and
was, therefore, guilty of playing fraud on the Court as well as on the
respondent. The following observations of the Supreme Court in the aforesaid
case are relevant for purposes of present case :

The High Court in our view, fell into patent error. The short question before
the High Court was whether in the facts and circumstances of this case,
Jagannath obtained the preliminary decree by playing fraud on the Court. The
High Court however, went haywire and made observations which are wholly
perverse. We do not agree with the High Court that there is no legal duty cast
upon the plaintiff to come to Court with a true case and prove it by true
evidence". The principle of "finality of litigation" cannot be pressed to the
extent of such an absurdity that it becomes an engine of fraud in the hands of
dishonest litigants. The Courts of Law are meant for imparting justice between
the parties. One who comes to the Court, must come with clean hands. We are
constrained to say that more often than not, process of the Court is being
abused. Property-grabbers, tax-evaders, bank- loan-dodgers and other
unscrupulous persons from all walks of life find the Court process a
convenient lever to retain the illegal-gains indefinitely. We have no
hesitation to say that a person whose case is based on false- hood, has no
right to approach the Court. He can be summarily thrown out at any stage of
the litigation.

A litigant, who approaches the Court, is bound to produce all the documents
executed by him which are relevant to the litigation. If he withholds a vital
document in order to gain advantage on the other side than he would be guilty
of playing fraud on the Court as well as on the opposite party."

It is contended by Mr. Oberoi, appearing on behalf of the respondent, that the
respondent had no intention or motive to suppress the pendency of the earlier
application in which the stay was not granted and having dis- closed in the
plaint that a suit between the parties was pending, it was not relevant or
necessary to mention that in the said suit the Court had not granted any stay
in its favour. In our view, the arguments are wholly fallacious. A party must
come to the Court with clean hands and must dis- close all the relevant facts
which may result in appreciating the rival contentions of the parties. In our
view, a litigant, who approaches the Court, must produce all the documents
which are relevant to the litigation and he must also disclose to the court
about the pendency of any earlier litigation between the part is and the
result thereof. In the present case after Suit No. 3064/96 had been first
listed before the Court on 17th December, 1996 no stay had been granted to it
till 20th January, 1997 inspite of three hearings having taken place before
the Court. It was only after 20th January, 1997 when the case was adjourned to
May, 1997 that the respondent filed the second suit and though in one of the
paragraphs it is mentioned that it had filed an earlier suit for injunction,
however, it did not disclose to the Court either in the plaint or in the
application as to what had transpired in the Court on the dates when the said
suit was fixed nor it was disclosed to the Court that injunction has not been
granted in its favour by the Court and the relief claimed in the application
in the earlier suit was almost similar to the relief which had been claimed in
the subsequent suit. In our opinion, it was obligatory upon the respondent to
disclose to the Court that in the application filed in the earlier suit a
similar relief had been claimed, however, the Court had not granted the said
relief. In our view, if these facts were before the Court on February 6,1997
when the second suit came up for hearing before it, may be Hon'ble the Single
Judge was persuaded not to grant any exparte stay in favour of the respondent.
Moreover, in a suit for specific performance of an agreement to register the
agreement of lease, it appears to us that the plaintiff could not claim an
injunction which had already been claimed in Suit No. 3064/96. We are,
therefore, of the opinion that the respondent has not come to the Court with
clean hands and has also suppressed material facts from the Court with a view
to gain advantage in the second suit. This in our view is clearly over-
reaching the Court.

17\. As held by the Supreme Court in Advocate-General, State of Bihar Vs. M/s.
Madhya Pradesh Khair Industries and another, , every abuse of the process of
the Court may not necessarily amount to Contempt of Court, Abuse of the
process of the Court calculated to hamper the due course of a judicial
proceeding or the orderly administration of justice is a Contempt of Court. It
may be that certain minor abuses of the process of the Court may be suitably
dealt with as between the parties, by striking out pleadings under the
provisions of Order 6, Rule 16 or in some other manner. But it may be
necessary to punish as a contempt, a course of con- duct which abuses and
makes a mockery of the judicial process and which thus extends it pernicious
influence beyond the parties to the action and affects the interest of the
public in the administration of justice.

18\. In our view, by withholding the plaint of the earlier suit from the Court
and by not disclosing that in the earlier suit the respondent has not been
able to get the injunction, the respondent is guilty of playing fraud on the
Court a well as on the opposite party and such acts had been done only in
order to gain advantage on the other side and to get a stay in the second
suit.

19\. As held by the Supreme Court in T. Arivandandam Vs. T.V. Satyapat and
Another, AIR 1977 SC 2421, the pathology of litigative andiron ruins the poor
of this country and the Bar has a role to cure this deleterious tendency of
parties to launch frivolous and vexatious cases. "It may be a valuable
contribution to the cause of justice if Counsel screen wholly fraudulent and
frivolous litigation refusing to be beguiled by dubious clients. And
remembering that an Advocate is an officer of justice he owes it to society
not to collaborate in shady actions. The Bar Council of India, we hope will
activate this obligation. We are constrained to make these observations and
hope that the co-operation of the Bar will be readily forthcoming to the beach
for spending judicial time on worth while disputes and avoiding the
distraction of sham litigation such as the one we are disposing of. Another
moral of this unrighteous chain litigation is the gullible grant of ex-parte
orders tempts gamblers in litigation into easy Courts. A Judge who succumbs to
ex-parte pressure in unmerited cases helps devalue the judicial process."

20\. We are of the opinion that the above noted passage of the aforesaid
judgment in T. Arivandandam Vs. T.V. Satyapal's case is fully applicable to
the facts and circumstances of the present case. Having not succeeded in
getting stay in Suit No. 3064/96, in our view, the Lawyer should have refused
to move an application for stay in the second suit.

21\. We are of the view that an attempt has been made by the respondent to
over-reach the court and the respondents have played fraud upon the Court as
well as upon the opposite party and is thus clearly guilty of contempt.
Respondents cannot be heard in the case unless it purges itself of the
contempt so committed and in our view it can only be if we non-suit the
respondents in Suit No. 261/97. While, therefore, we do not propose to take
action against the respondent for contempt except to issue a warning to
respondent No. 2 to be more careful in future, we direct the dismissal of the
suit (being Suit No. 261/97) itself. While, therefore, allowing this appeal,
we dismiss Suit No. 261/97 and dispose of the contempt petition in the above
terms.

